D1057 R29350 11077091 46276
The Ruine of Rome. OR, An Exposition upon the whole REVELATION. VVherein is plainly shewed and proved, that the Popish Religion, together with all the power and authority of Rome shall ebbe and decay more and more throughout all the Churches of Europe, and come to an utter overthrow even in this life, before the end of the World. Written especially for the comfort of Protestants, and the dancing of Papsts, Sminary Priests, Jesutes, and all that cursed rabble. Published by Arthur Dent, Preacher of the word of God at South-Shoobury in Essex. To which is added an Epitome of Reverend Mr. Brightman his Exposition upon the Revelation. LONDON, Printed by T. H. and I. Y. for Jo. Waterson, and are to be sold by Charles Greene at his shop in Ivie Lane. 1644.
TO THE RIGHT Honourable his very good Lord, ROBERT Lord RICH everlasting consolation, and good hope through Grace. TO be a father to the father∣lesse, is properly the vertue of the most high, and therefore meet for those who beare his name and office upon earth. Among whom (Right Ho∣nourable) seeing it hath pleased his Majesty to count your Lordship faithfull, and to put you in so high a service, it shall (I assure my selfe) be matter of rejoycing unto your Lord∣ship, to take the Patronage of this poore Or∣phane, which knoweth not whither to flye for succour, but to you, who did so many waies commend your favour to his late deceased Father, that if he had lived to the birth of this his last off-spring it was his full purpose (as
many can witnesse) to have committed it unto your Lordships protection, as most meete among many to take this Patronage upon you, that this young Infant growing up under your roofe, may in time effect that indeed, whereof it beares the name, to be The ruine of Rome, To speake of the excel∣lent parts thereof, and of what hope it is like to be in the Church of Christ, I thinke need∣lesse, and I feare the note of partiality: it shall speake for it selfe, (I doubt) will commend to all posterity his worthy fathers memory. Now for my selfe (right Hono∣rable) being so straightly bound to this du∣ty, in regard of my neere conjunction with my late Brother Master Dent, and great im∣portunity of his poore Widdow, was the more willingly drawne hereunto in two re∣spects. The one to give some publike testi∣mony of my love towards him, and reve∣rence of the rare grace which we all (who injoyed his sweete society) did continually in our comfort behold in him. Whose lear∣ning his labours do shew: whose diligence, yea extreme and unwearied paines in his mi∣nistery publikely, privately, at home, and a∣broade, for foure and twenty yeares at least, all our Countrey can testifie. All which being
adorned with so speciall humility, do make his name the greater, and our losse the more grievous. I may not leave out this, which I avow to be as certaine, as it is singular, that besides all other his great labours, he had (with the Apostle) a speciall care of all the Churches night and day, by study and fervent Prayer, procuring the prosperity of Syon, and the ruine of Rome. And to end with his blessed end, his life was not more profi∣table to others, then his death is peaceable to himself; scarce a grone to be heard, though his Fever must needes be violent which dis∣patched him in three dayes. And having made a pithy confession of his Faith, this Faith said he, have I Preached, this Faith have I lived in, this Faith I do live in, and this Faith would I have sealed with my blood, if God had so thought it good, and tell my brethren so; and drawing neere his end, he sayd: I have fought the good Fight, I have fi∣nished my course, I have kept the faith: and now is that Crowne of righteousnesse layd up for mee, the which the Lord that righteous Judge shall give me in that day; and so gave up his last breath with these words, I have seene an end of all perfection, but thy Law is exceeding large.
The other respect (my speciall good Lord) for the which I am the more willing to come thus upon the Stage (though my part be small, full sutable to my ability) is, that I might be as the mouth of many, to publish to posterity, what high account all that know the truth (among us at least) do make of your Lordship, that I dare say not the loynes onely, but the soules of thousands do blesse you, and God for you: praying for a rih reward to be given you of the Lord, and that with your ancient predecessor ho∣nourable Nhemiah, the Lord would re∣member you herein, and wipe not out all the kindnesse you have shewed on the house of you God, and on the Ministers thereof. For in the zeale of God, and uprightnesse of my heart, not to give titles unto men (which is not my wont) but to provoke all of like honorable condition to follow your Godly practice: this I say, that as your pure Religi∣on is the Crowne of your nobility, so this is the Crowne of your Religion, that besides your ordinary presence in the publicke assem∣blies of the Church, your zeale to God, and lov to his people, hath herein especially bin manifested to the world, in your continuall cr to plant faithfull Preachers in all those
livings which have been in your Lordships gift, or which by all your friends you could procure. What is the worthy fruite thereof cannot indeede be valued, much lesse by me now uttered: yet this I say with common consent of all found-hearted Protestants, that if the true Prophets of God be the chariots and horsemen of Israel, then may we refer to this honourable practice of your Lordship, and of other like Christian Patrones (as to a chiefe meanes under God, and under the Re∣ligious regiment of our gracious Soveraigne) the safety of his Highnesse person, this admi∣rable tranquility of the Realme, that notable ruine of Rome, which is so worthily with us effected, and shall be assuredly elsewhere in due time accomplished. And to say all in few words, to this may we referre the safety of soule and body of many thousands in the Land, who though they doe and shall live by faith, yet doth their righteousnesse farre exceed the righteousnesse of all Popish hypocrites both in duty to God, and to their dread Soveraigne our noble King. Whereupon I may conclude, that I scarce thinke of any service more honourable to God, and profitable to his Church, then this care to bring into the Lords Temple such
painefull Labourers as both by life and Do∣ctrine do faithfully build up the same. Goe on therefore (Right Honourable) and cease not to shine out in this darke World with such light of good example: And withall rest upon his word, who cannot lye, that you shall shine in the Kingdome of light, where into shall enter no uncleane thing: neyther whatsoever worketh abomination or lies, but they which are written in the Lambs Booke of life. To which blessed inheritance immortall, undefiled, and that fadeth not, that God of his mercy would bring you, my hearts desire and prayer is, and shall be: and in the meane season, that the yeeres of your life being multiplied, your life may be full of honour to God, profit to his Church, and comfort to your owne soule. Your Honours most deeply bound, Ezekiel Culverwell.
The Epistle to the Christian READER. BEing often requested (Gentle Rea∣der) and much importuned by sun∣dry, both learned, and godly, to pub∣lish that Doctrine of the Apoca∣lyps, which divers of them with lively voyce heard publickely delivered, I did at last, upon my most mature deliberation, yeeld un∣to their reasonable request; I meane the reasons of their request. Indeed I doe ingeniously con∣fesse, that I am the unmeetest of many, which this age, (God be thanked) doth afford, to deale in a matter of so great importance, or any wise to be imployed in so great and honourable a service as this is. But if I doe industriously use my small talent, and be found faithfull in a little: I hope it shall have both cheerefull and comfortable acceptation with the Church of God. For this I presume will be granted of all, that he which hath but a little strength, and yet putteth it forth to the uttermost to do good
withall, is more to bee commended, then hee which hath thrice his strength, and useth it not to the helpe and benefit of others. And true it is indeed, that sundry worthy labours of divers excellent men upon the Apocalyps, are already extant: so as hee may seeme to powre water into the Sea, or goe about to mend the Crowes eyes, that will attempt to adde any thing to that which is already published. But know this (O Christian Reader) that the Lords garden is so large and plentifull of all most sweet and pleasant flowers, that where any one hath gathered a Nosegay most fragrant and delectable, another may come after, and gather another not to bee contemned. For the wis∣dome of God is such an undraineable Foun∣taine and head-spring, that where one hath drawne much before, another may come hap∣pily, and draw as much afterward: yea though thousand doe succeede, yet can this fountaine never be drawne dry. Be it farre from me to arrogate any thing to my selfe, above others: for I am privy inough to mine owne meanes, and doe freely confesse, that in this worke, I have received much light from others: and therefore doe not as a Judge, give sentence up∣on other mens workes: but as one that would furnish the same feast, bring in my dish among
them. Or as one that in the same cause would come in as a third or a fourth witnesse to testi∣fie and confirme the same thing. And verily through the gratious assistance of Gods Spi∣rit, my simple purpose and indeavour is to give a lift to the uttermost of my power, to further that which is already happily begun, and to provoke others of greater gifts, to come after with their great lights and lanthornes in their hands, to discry and discover whatsoever in this Prophesie is not yet fully seene into. I am not ignorant that some would not have this booke meddled withall, nor in any wise to be ex∣pounded among the common people, because (say they) it is so darke and hard to under∣stand. But let all such leave their owne opi∣nions, and hearken what the Holy Ghost saith. Blessed is he that readeth, and they that heare the words of this Prophesie, &c. What can be sayd more? or more effectually to stirre us up to heare and reade, and with all gladnes to imbrace this Booke, then to tell us, that in so doing wee shall bee blessed? For the things contayned in this booke, be no trifles: they be not things only for a shew to moove wonder∣ment, or to delight the curious minde of men: but such as indeede doe give true blessednesse unto all those that are well instructed in them.
What thing is greater, then to be blessed for evermore? If we be not exceeding dull, yea, even like stockes and stones, it must needs move us and stirre us up. For who will wittingly and willingly lose his owne blessednesse, or suffer it to bee taken from him, when as he may have it? If any will object that a man may be blessed well inough without the know∣ledge of this booke, and that there be Bookes inough in the Scripture, to procure our blessed∣nesse without this. And that thousands are now in Heaven, which never knew what this Booke meant: I answer, that all this doth not take away the necessary use of this Booke: for the holy Ghost doth pronounce a blessing upon the heads of those that Reade and Study this Booke, not because a man cannot be saved without it: But because of the great comfort which it ministereth unto us of this age, and hath ministred unto all the Churches since the Apostles times. For it is the Prophesie of this age, and the Prophesie of all the ages since Christ: Wherein is fully shewed what shall be the estate and condition of the Church in the severall Ages thereof, unto the end of the World. For God according to his admirable wisdome and mercy, hath never from the be∣ginning left his Church without a Prophesie,
for the great comfort thereof. For we know that immediately after the fall of our first pa∣rents, God himselfe, for the great comfort of his Church did foretell and fore-prophesie long before of that restauration which should be made by the Mssias his Sonne, according as it came to passe in the fulnesse of time. After∣ward he did fore-tell his people of Isael,Genesis 3 Gen. 15 of their great servitude, and intollerable bon∣dage in Aegypt, and also of the end and full determination therefore, after foure hundred and thirty yeeres. After all this he foretold by his servants the Prophets of the Captivity in Babylon, and the full expiration thereof at the end and tearme of seventy yeeres.Ieremy 2 And yet further for the comfort and consolation of his people, he fore-told by Daniel,Daniel 7 Ezech. 3 and Eze∣chiel, of the great afflictions and troubles which his Church should endure by the Per∣secutions of the dvided Greeke Empire; (I meane Alexanders Posterity, especially the Kings of Aegypt, and Syria, which descended of Ptolomeus and Seleucus,Daniel 8 Daniel 9 Daniel 1 whom the Scrip∣ture calleth the Kings of the North, and of the South) by the space of 194. yeeres, and of the precise determination thereof at the com∣ming of the Mssias.  then what care God hath had of his Church in all ages before the
comming of his sonne in the flesh, so to fore∣tell both of the affliction it selfe, and also of the just period and determination thereof. And shall we not thinke that God hath the like care now for his Church, which then he had: or hath he not as great and provident care for the good of his Church since the promised Messias was actually exhibited as before? Yes assuredly, and much more too: for if his care and providence was so great for his Church being in her ward-shippe and minority: then much more now being come to her ripenesse, and full age. If then it was lesse glorious, then much more now, being farre more glori∣ous. Therefore now unto us he foretelleth by his servant John what shall be the estate of the Church unto the end of the world: and therefore Blessed is he that heareth and rea∣deth this booke: sith it foretelleth of the Churches affliction in this age by the whoore of Babylon, and of the full end and determi∣nation thereof. It sheweth justly and pre∣cisely what the Church hath suffered since the Apostles time in severall ages, and what it shall suffer: and also how all the enemies thereof shall shortly bee troden under foote. What can be more joyfull or comfortable to all the people of God, then to know afore-hand
that Babylon shall fall: Rome shall downe. Antichrist the great persecutor of the Church shall bee utterly confounded and consumed in this world: notwithstanding all plots and po∣licies, crafts and devices to the contray; not∣withstanding all forces and armes cunningly contrived and raised up against the Chuch by Seminary Priests, Jesuites, Pope, Cardiall and King of Spaine? For all these in this age do very busily bestirre them, and ransacke all corners of their wits to repaire the ruines of Rome, and to make up the breaches which are made in the walles of Babylon their great City. But alas, all in vaine, for it shall fall: It shall fall, it shall as Dagon before the presence of the Arke, doe what they can, spite of their hearts, maugre their beards, it shall without all hope of recovery: For hath the Lord spoken it, and shall it not come to passe? or any word of his ever fall to the ground? Sith therefore the Jesuites and Secular Prists do so fiske a∣bout, and croake in every corner, as greatly fearing the fall of their Babylon, and the dry∣ing up of their Euphrates, it stands us all in hand to bee of resolute for Christ, as they are for Antichrist: and as studious to uphold the Kingdome of God, as they are to uphold the kingdome of the divell. And for this purpose
it is very requisite and necessary, that all the Lords people should bee acquainted with this Booke, and armed against them with the things revealed in this Prophesie. For this booke is a most precious Jewell which God hath bestowed upon his Church in this last age, and it is great pitty that all the servants of God are not better acquainted with it; especially in these times; for now in this age is and shall bee the very heat of the warre, and brunt of the battle betwixt Pa∣pists and Protestants, betwixt God and Beli∣al: betwixt the armies of Christ, and the ar∣mies of Antichrist. Now this Prophesie lay∣eth all open, and plainly telleth us what shall be the issue and successe in the day of battell: which side shall have the victory, and which side shall goo downe. And therefore very need∣full it is, that it should be expounded againe and againe, and all the Lords people made through∣ly acquainted with it. For in this age wherein we live, this Prophesie can never be enough o∣pened and beaten upon, that all good Protestants may bee armed with it against future times, even as it were with an armour of proofe. Saint John plainely telleth the people of his time, even the Churches of Asia, that they should be bles∣sed by reading and studying this Booke, because they should thereby bee fore-warned and fore-armed
against many eminent troubles and future dangers. For saith he, The time is at hand: that is to say, some things were even then to bee fulfilled, For some matters foretold in this booke, did begin to bee fulfilled, even presently after they were shewed unto John: for the Mystery of iniquity did even then begin to worke. The Church in the Apostles time had her conflictes. The Tenne great persecutions began even then to bee raised up. Heresies shortly after began to spring and sprout. Afterwards by degrees, the great Antichrist did aproach toward his cursed seat. And after all this, Saint John foretelleth how hee should take possession of his abhominable and most execrable seat and sea of Rome: How hee should raigne and rule for a time as the Monarchy of the world: How hee should prevaile against the Church, and make warre against the Saints: How he should raigne but a short time, and afterward come tum∣bling downe, as fast as ever he rose up, and de∣crease as fast as ever he increased. Therefore Bles∣sed is he (saith S. John) that diligently rea∣deth and peruseth this booke, that thereby he may foresee all these things, and be armed against them. For as the heathen man saith, Levius lae∣dit quicquid previderis ante. Foreseeing dan∣gers doe least hurt. Now to apply all this to our
times I say they are twice happy that are stu∣dious and painefull in searching out the true sense and meaning of this Prophesie, that thereby they may be strengthned against all the assaults of the Papists our professed enemies, and the ene∣mies of Gods Church, and sticke fast to the everlasting truth of God, knowing for a cer∣tainty that the sonnes of Belial shall not long prevaile.Apo. 9.11 The date of their raigne is almost out, and the time draweth on apace, wherein both they and their King Abbadon shall bee laid in the dust. But I will now proceed to a new reason, to prove that this Booke of the Re∣velation ought not to be concealed: but openly preached and published to the whole Church of God in this age. My reason is taken out of the 22. Chapter of this Booke, verse 10. in these words, Seale not the words of the Prophesie of this Booke, for the time is at hand. Here is a flat commandement from God, that this Booke and Doctrine of it may not bee sealed up, that is to say, kept close from the knowledge of Gods people: but it must lie alwaies unsea∣led, that all men may open it, reade it and see what is in it: for it is a borrowed speech taken from sealing of Letters. For we all know, that wooing Letters are sealed, none may open them, or reade them, but onely those whom it doth con∣cerne:
but if they bee of purpose left unsealed, then any man may reade them without danger: So the Lord willeth and commandeth that this Booke of the Revelation should of purpose bee left unsealed, that all the people of God might reade it, study it, and know it. If any man doubt whether the Metaphor of sealing be thus taken in the Scripture, let him reade the places quoted in the Margent, and in all those places hee shall finde it taken in this sense. Whereby it doth evidently appeare, that the mind and meaning of God is, that this Booke should bee proclaimed and published in all the Churches. And upon this ground,Esa. 29.11 Dan. 1.9 Apoc 4 1. Apo. 10.4. I hold that every Minister of the Gospell standeth bound as much as in him lyeth, to preach the Doctrine of the Apocalyps to his particular charge and congregation: for every Minister of the Gos∣pell must shew unto his people all the counsll of God, and keepe backe nothing: as Paul testi∣fieth that he did, to the great comfort of his con∣science. But the doctrine of the Revelation is a part and parcell of the Counsell and Will of God: therefore it must not be concealed or kept backe from the knowledge of the people of God. And in these daies I thinke it not onely meete and conve∣nient that it should be so, but in truth absolutely necessary.
But now me thinketh I heare some men say, What? must this booke of the Apocalyps bee preached and made knowne to the common people? alas, what should they doe with it? It is not for them to meddle with all: It is not for their diet. I answer, and yet not I, but the holy Ghost: that this booke must be made knowne to all the servants of God. For Saint John calleth it the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him to shew unto all his servants. It is plaine therefore, that all the servants of God both men and women, young and old, rich and poore, must be made ac∣quainted with this Booke. Moreover, John is commanded by the God of Heaven, to set downe all the visions which the Angell shewed him: and to write them all in a booke, and send them to the seven Churches of Asia: that is, to people of all sorts, and conditions: And therefore this Booke doth not onely concerne Preachers and deepe Divines, but even all the Lords peo∣ple whatsoever: for it doth minister great comfort and strength of faith to all the people of God that live in this age. But here the Papists object that this booke is full of darke∣nesse and obscurity, and therefore not for the common people to meddle withall: nay (say they) there are as many mysteries as words in it, and therefore what should men trouble their
heads about it. But no marvaile though the Papists say so much, for it is the wound of their Kingdome, and the battery of their Babylon. As for others both learned and Godly, which in this point are almost of the same mind, that they will not meddle with this Booke of the Revelation, I cannot but marvell at it. The modesty and humility of some very rare and re∣verend men for learning, and great variety of gifts (which notwithstanding scotch much at this Booke) is greatly to be commended: But if I were worthy to give them advice, I would wish them in this behalfe to change their minde, and to bee of another resolution: for I dare avouch it, that there is nothng in this Prophesie which study and diligence, with prayer and humility, may not overcome. True it is indeed, that the shell is thick and hard to break: but being broken the kirnell is most sweet and pleasant. If any be discouraged with the darkenes and obscurity of it, let him harken to these reasons following. First it is called a Revelation, which is as much to say, as an uncovering of things which did lie hid: if it be an uncovering, and revealing of things, no doubt it may be knowne and seene in∣to. For revealed things are for us and our chil∣dren. If it be a Revelation, how say some that it cannot be understood? For it is contrary to
the nature of a Revelation, to be so darke that none can understand it. But shall we say that the holy Ghost which is the spirit of truth hath given a wrong name unto it? God forbid. For if it hide matters, or set them forth that it cannot be understood, then it is not rightly cal∣led a Revelation. If this Booke be so mysticall that it cannot be understood: If the interpre∣tation of it be uncertaine: If the common peo∣ple cannot bee taught to understand it: How then should the holy Ghost,Apoc. 1.3. Apo. 12.7. Blessed is he hat readeth the words of this Prophesie, &c. Let any man judge that hath common sense: Can any man be blessed by hearing and reading those things which hee understandth not? I trow no. Then it followeth that this Booke may be un∣derstood, and no doubt is understood of many, and might be better understood of many moe: if they would bend their wits and studies unto it.Apoc. 22.10. The hly Ghost, as is said before, willeth and commandeth that the words of this Prophesie should not bee sealed up. Whereby it is evident that hee would have them reade and made knowne to all. Then I reason thus: that which is open and unsealed may bee read and knowne: But this booke is open and unsealed: There∣fore it may be read and knowne. If men say the matters of this Prophesie are sealed and hid,
and God say they bee unsealed and open, whe∣ther shall we beleeve men or God? If any will reply and say, wee feele and finde by experence, that the words of this booke are hard to bee un∣derstood: I answer that the fault is in our selves, because we are so negligent in the search and study thereof. For if we did wth that hu∣mility, and reverend care that ought to be in us, search after the things revealed in this booke, wee should finde that they bee not sealed up, but lie open to be read and knowne. True it is indeed, that if any man light upon some pece, and take it by it selfe, hee shall finde it ve∣ry darke: But if he looke upon the whole course of matters through the booke, and marke and observe diligently how things be iterated, hee shall finde no such darkenesse as he feareth, for there is a notable coherence of matters, and course of times observed in this booke, even from the first Chapter unto the last, as God willing shall more fully and plainely appeare in the particular opening and interpretation there∣of. One great objection against this Prophesie is, that the Fathers profesie it is full of myste∣ries, and that they could not understand it. If they could not understand it say some, how shall wee understand it? Is it not great arrogancy for for us to say wee understand it better then they
did. I answer noe: For a man of meane learning in comparison, may now in these daies more easi∣ly understand and expound this booke, than the learned doctor, and Fathers in ancient time. The reason is this, wee live in an age, wherein the most of the things Prophesied in this booke are fulfilled. Now the fulfilling of a Prophesie is the best exposition of it. But as for the fathers, they lived in a time wherein many of these things were not come to passe nor fulfilled, and therefore more hard for them to interpret and understand, for these things in this prophesie which are not yet fulfilled, are hardest for us of this age to understand and resolve of. But when a Prophesie is fulfilled, it is an easie matter to say, this was the meaning of the Prophet. Some things in this booke were fulfilled before the dayes of the Fathers, and some things in the dayes wherein they lived: and both those they did cleerely understand. Some things were ful∣filled after their dayes, as the rising and raigning of the great Antichrist: which they did not so cleerely see into. Hereupon it commeth to passe that many things, which unto them were ve∣ry obscure, are unto us most cleere and mani∣fest,  beeing already fulfilled: insomuch that all which are not wilfully blinded may see and understand them, yea the most unlearned.
Bee not therefore discouraged (gentle Reader) at the darknesse and difficulty of this booke. Doe not prejudicially resolve and set downe with thy selfe, that the naturall sense of this booke cannot be given, nor the tute meaning found out, but that we must be faine when we have done all that we can, to rest in uncertaine con∣jectures, some following one sense, and some another, as seemeth most like and profitable. But no man can say confidently and precisely, this is the meaning of the holy Ghost. Oh be not of that minde good Christian brother: for if we have not an undoubted certainety for the sense and meaning of this Prophesie, we are ne∣ver the neerer: and that is it which the Pa∣pists would drive us unto. But know for a certainty, that the naturall sense of this booke, is to be found out, as well as of other bookes of the Scripture. And that wee might not be left to our selves in the darke, and to our uncertaine conjectures, and doubtfull interpretations, Be∣hold the mercifull goodnesse of God to his Church, who himselfe doth expound the dar∣kest, and most mysticall things in this Prophesie, or at least so many of them, and so far, as the rest are thereby layd open and made manifest. The Lord himselfe expoundeth some things in chap. 1. which give cleare light to the first vision.
The Angell expoundeth divers other things. In the 17. Chapter which is the key of this Prophesie, the Angell doth of purpose, open and interpret all the greatest doubts of this booke: as who is the whore of Babylon? who is the Beast? what be his seven heads? what be his ten Hornes? what be the waters which the woman, that is, the Whoore of Rome sitteth upon? Moreover, for the better understan∣ding of this Prophesie, we must note, that the writings of Moses and the Prophets, unto which there bee sundry allusions, and from the which sundry things are drawne, doe cleere di∣vers things in this Revelation. The knowledge of antiquities ministreth much aide to the un∣derstanding of this Prophesie. The knowledge of the Histories of the Church, and the parti∣cular state thereof in divers ages, bringeth great light. The observation of the phrases and manner of speech, used by the old Pro∣phets, doth helpe also not a little. The serious and deepe weighing of all the circumstances of the Text, and conferring one thing with ano∣ther, the consequents with the antecedents, and the antecedents with the consequents, furthe∣reth greatly for the bolting out of the true and naturall sense. And furthermore, as the spirit of God is the Author of the Prophesie, so the
same spirit is the best interpreter of it, and doth open and reveale it to all such, as using all other good meanes are earnest and humble suiters unto God, for the illumination thereof: whereby they may all understand both this, and other the my∣steries of his will: which the Apostle saith, God hath revealed unto us by his spirit: For the spi∣rit searcheth all things, yea, the deepe things of God. To all this may be added the knowledge of Arts, Tongues, and the learned writings and interpretations of sundry excellent men, which all doe bring great furtherance to the understanding of this Prophesie. Sith then there bee so many helpes for the opening and expounding of this Revelation, why should any bee discouraged from the reading and study thereof? But if any man demand a reason, why Saint John writeth this Revelation in such mysticall and allegoricall manner: I an∣swere, that there may be divers reasons yeelded hereof. First, that the world being blinded might fulfill the things herein specfied. Secondly, be∣cause John was to publish this Revelation in such manner and forme as he had received it from Jesus Christ, which was figurative and allegoricall. Thirdly, because it was much more wisedome to foretell the destruction of the Romane Empire, which all that time bare the
sway almost over all the world, under covert and figurative speeches, then in plaine tearmes, lest the Romane Princes should rage more a∣gainst the Christians, even in that respect. The like also may bee sayd: for Daniels darke manner of delivering his Prophesie. For if hee had uttered those things in plaine tearmes, which hee spake darkely and allegorically, it might have cost him his life. For the Heathen enemies would never have endured to heare that all their Empyres glory and renowne should fall one after another, and one by ano∣ther: and that the Jewes were the only holy people whom God did defend, and to whom in the end God would not onely give a quiet posses∣sion of their owne Land and Kingdome, but also a Kingdome everlasting, and that through their Messias and great deliverer. But to grow to a conclusion (gentle Reader) thou shalt find in this poore travell: First, an Exposition of the first thirteene Chapters unto the twenti∣eth, reduced all to one head, which is to prove the five points propounded: and last of all, the three Chapters following briefely and plainely expounded. If any through lazinesse will not, or through want of leasure cannot reade over this short travell: yet for his comfort, let him read chose things onely which are written upon
the fourteenth Chapter. And thus (Christian Reader) hoping that thou wilt not neglect that which may be for thine owne good, I commend theee to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build further, and to give thee an inheritance among all them that are san∣ctified. Thine in the Lord, Arthur Dent.
Ʋpon the 14. Chapter of this Booke These five points are handled. FIrst, that Babylon in this Booke of the Revelation is called Rome. Secondly, that Rome shall fall, and how. Thirdly, that Rome shall fall finally, and come to utter desolation in this life, before the last Judgement. Fourthly, by whom, and when it shall be overthrowne. Fiftly, the causes of the utter ruine and o∣verthrow thereof. APOC. 18. verse 4. I heard a voice from Heaven say: Goe out of he my People, that ye be not partakers of her sinnes, and that ye receive not of her Plagues.
THE RVINE of Rome, or an Exposition upon the Revelation. Wherein is plainely shewed and proved, that the Popish Religion, together with all the power and authority of Rome, shall ebbe and decay still more and more, throughout all the Churches of Europe and come to an utter overthrow, even in this life. BEfore I enter into the exposi∣tion of this Prophesie, I thinke it not amisse to handle sixe circumstantiall points, which may give some light to the whole matter following, and they be these.
First, the instrument that writ this booke. Secondly, the time when he writ it. Thirdly, the place where he received it. Fourthly, the person to whom he writ it. Fiftly, the end and use of his writing this Prophesie. Lastly, the authority of it. As touching the first, it is agreed upon amongst the soundest Divines, that John the Apostle, or Evangelist; John the Disciple, whom Jesus loved, was the Author and In∣strument of penning this Prophesie: as hee himselfe testifieth,Apo. 22.8. Apo. 1.19. saying: I am John which saw these things and heard them. And hee re∣ceived a commandement from Jesus Christ which hath the keyes of hell and death, that hee should write the things which hee had seene and heard, and set them all down toge∣ther in a booke. Now we all know that the testimony of John is of great weight,Apo. 1.11. though he be but a man: for he is such a man as is firmely to be beleeved in all that he speak∣eth. He is an Apostle, an Instrument of the holy Ghost, and so guided by the Spirit of God, that he speaketh and uttreth nothing that is his owne. He was well known and approved. For we must consider, that what an Apostle did utter, he did utter it as the in∣strument
of the Spirit, which cannot erre. For the Prophets and Apostles did not write the holy Scriptures as they were men onely, but as they were the immediate and certaine instruments of the holy Ghost, of purpose chosen and set apart to pen and publish the holy bookes of God. This Saint Peter con∣firmeth saying:2 Pe. 1 Verse 21. Prophesie came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spake as they mere moued by the holy Ghost. The Apo∣stle Paul also affirmeth the same touching his Gospell, which saith,Gal. 1.12. Hee was not after man, neither received hee it of man, but by the revelation of Iesus Christ. Therefore when his our Apostle saith, I am Iohn which saw these things, and heard them, he gives us to understand, that he was both an eye and an care-witnesse. He bringeth not matters which he hath heard by uncertain report: hee deli∣vereth this Booke to the Churches: they which received it at his hands did know him to bee a most faithfull servant of the Lord, even a great Apostle, which delivereth not any thing but that which hee had recei∣ved of the Lord, and therefore he testifieth, hat he saw and heard all the things which e hath written in this booke. Moreover he estifieth of himselfe, that he was called and
authority by Iesus Christ, to write this Prophesie, and did nothing herein of his owne braine. For saith hee, I John heard be∣hind me a great voice, as it had been of a trum∣pet, saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; and that which thou seest write in a booke and send it unto the Churches. Heere we see how Iohn is called by Alpha and Ome∣ga, that is, Jesus Christ to write this doctrine of the Apocalyps. But may some man say, was not John cald before? was he not one of the Lambs 12. Apostles? had he not many years executed the office of the Apostleship? must he now have a new calling, and a se∣cond calling? what needs he being an Apo∣stle to bee called and authorised againe? To this I answere, that this matter now in hand was a new worke, and therefore requires a new and speciall calling. It is a strange reve∣lation, and therefore requires a new autho∣rity to meddle in it. For in this Prophesie God dealeth with John, as hee did with the old Prophets. For when he would foreshew unto any of them especiall matters, he called them by glorious visions, as wee may reade what a goodly vision Esay had: what a visi∣on full of glory Ezechiel and Daniel had, even in majesty like unto this of John. Thus
then it is to bee considered. Iohn now is as one of the old Prophets, to foreshew things to come: therefore the Lord appeareth un∣to him in a vision, and calleth him thereunto as he appeared unto them, and called them. Let this then suffice for a reason of Johns now calling to his new Worke and office. And thus much touching the first circum∣stance. Now followeth the second circumstance, which is the time when Iohn received this Prophesie, which is noted to bee upon the Lords day. It is the day which S. Paul to the Corinthians calleth the first day of the weeke: in which the Churches did meete for the holy exercises in Religion: which is also evident, because he sayth they came to∣gether to breake bread. Now the observa∣tion of a seventh day is of divine institution,Acts 20.7. even from the beginning. It is naturall, mo∣rall, and perpetuall: for God blessed the se∣venth day, and sanctified it. We are there∣fore to thinke, that although Iohn now in his exile was absent in body from the Church assemblies, yet he was present with them in spirit, commending them most ear∣nestly unto God in his holy prayers, and me∣ditations: and therefore it is sayd, that he
was ravished in the Spirit upon the Lords day. So we read, that the like befell unto Da∣niel, when he was prisoner in Babylon: the like befell unto Ezechiel, who was taken by the Spirit in the visions of God,Act. 10.10 and carried to Ierusalem: the like to Peter, the like to Paul. But the speciall reason of Iohns ra∣vishment in the spirit at this time was, that thereby he might be made more fit and ca∣pable to receive and understand all those great mysteries and heavenly visions, which now should be shewed unto him. And withall let us observe, that all men are alwaies most capable of heavenly things, when they are most in the Spirit: For God doth evermore most reveale himselfe to such as are most in prayer, reading and meditation: and to such as make greatest conscience to spend his Sa∣baoths Christianly, and religiously, accor∣ding to his great commandement. And let us alwayes be sure of this, that the more fer∣vent and zealous we are in religious duties, the more familier acquaintaince wee shall find with God, and he will at all times be the more open-harted unto us, and will hide nothing from us that may be for his glory, and our good. For such as are much in heavenly contemplation, he doth reckon not
amongst his servants,Ioh. 15.15 but amongst his dearest friends, to whom he will make known all things that he hath heard of his Father. But now let us proceed to the third cir∣cumstance. The third circumstance is the place where Iohn received this Prophesie, and that is set downe to bee the Isle of Path∣mos, which (as the Geographers write) is a little desart Island lying in the Aegean Sea, wherein it is reported that Iohn the Apo∣stle was banished by the Emperour Domi∣tian, about the yeare of our Lord 96. and there received, and writ this Booke of the Apocalyps: where note by the way, that there is no place so obscure or vast, wherein a Godly minde may not aspire up vnto hea∣ven, and receive a greater largnesse of super∣naturall things: for Daniel in prison, Peter in a Tanners house, Paul in a broken ship recei∣ved a superabundant measure of grace more to bee esteemed then all the Gold of India. Some write, that this Isle of Pathmos, is ac∣counted amongst the Islands called Sporados, which lie over against Asia, and the City of Ephesus, and was in the sight both of Europe, and Affrica: so that it semed to bee as it were a middle seat or Holy chaire, out of the which CHRIST preached by
John from heaven to the whole world. And indeed the counsels of God are wonderfull, and his goodnesse unspeakeable, which re∣vealeth so great mysteries to his faithfull, as it were out of the Romish prison, and Baby∣lonicall captivity. Moreover, John declareth the cause of his comming into the same Iland; for he sayth, he was there for the word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ: that is, for the preaching and constant profession of the Gospell of Christ. Histories do report, that John was appre∣hended in Asia, and by Souldiers led to Rome, that he might pleade his cause before the Emperour Domitian, who most savage∣ly and cruelly condemned the innocent, and caused him to be put into a cauldron of hot boyling Oyle, out of the which when he by miraculous providence escaped without harme, he was carried and conveied into the Isle of Pathmos. But immediatly after Johns banishment, God met well enough with this persecu∣ting Emperor Domitian. For in the fifteenth yeare of his raigne he was cruelly and most shamefully murdered by his owne Servants. And thus much for the third circumstance.
Now it followeth to speake of the fourth circumstance, which is, the persons to whom this prophesie is written, and that is set down in the first Chapter and first verse, to be all the servants of God. As many therefore as be the servants of God, must attend unto this booke, heare it, reade it, and remember it, for to all such it is dedicated by the holy Ghost, to all such it belongeth, for all such it is written and recorded. Some do falsely and foolishly imagine, that it was given onely to John, and that it might likewise bee given to some speciall men, as to some great Scholers or deepe Divines, which could tell how to use it, and how to weild it. But wee see how grossely they erre: for the holy Ghost saith, it belon∣geth to all the Servants of God. And more∣over, John is willed and commanded to write all the things which hee saw in sundry visions in a booke together,Cha. 1.11. and to send it to the seven Churches which is in Asia, be∣because the Lord would have it remaine in perfect record unto the use of the whole Church, both that the Church might have the custody of this booke, and allso that it might be a faithfull witnesse unto the end of the world, that this booke was written and
penned by Iohn the Apostle, of whose truth & sincerity the church had sufficient experience. True it is indeed that there are but seven Churches named, but under these 7. Chur∣ches all others are comprehended. It had bin an infinite matter to reckon up all the particular Churches which were then in the world & to have opened their severall estates: therefore under these seven Churches of A∣sia, and their particular & severall estates, the state of the universall Church militant is layd open. I conclude therefore that the whole doctrine of Saint Iohns Revelation, apper∣taineth to the Universall Church of Christ throughout all the World, and in all times and ages, since it was written and recorded. And that as all Scripture is written for our instruction and comfort:Rom. 15.4 2 Ti. 3.16 and as all Scripture given by divine inspiration, is profitable to teach and convince &c. so this booke of the Apocalyps is written for the speciall com∣fort and instruction of the Church in these last dayes. And so I doe conclude this fourth point. The fift circumstantiall point is, the end and use of this prophesie,Chap. 1.1. which is to publish and blaze abroad the things which must shortly come to passe, that is, all things prophesied in this booke, and to be fulfilled
even to the end of the World, and where∣as hee saith, that these things must come to passe, he doth us to understand how great the stablenesse, and assurednesse of Gods de∣termination is. For looke what things are fore-appointed by Gods determinate pur∣pose, they are altogether unchangeable: for the Lord is God, and hee is not changed. And he saith: My determination shall stand.Mal. 3.6. Esay 45.1 Ma. 24.35 And Christ sayth: Heaven and earth shall passe away, &c. It is therefore most certaine, that every particular thing contained in this prophesie, shall be fulfilled in Gods appoin∣ted time. For GOD hath disclosed these things to hs Sonne CHRIST, not to the end he should shut then up againe in him∣selfe, but that he should shew them forth to the Godly, that the whole Church might fare the better by them. It doth then stand us all upon to enquire and search into these things which must so shortly come to passe, that thereby we may be strengthned and comforted against all future dangers. And Christ saith: Behold I come shortly. Blessed is he that keepeth the words of the Prophesie, &c.Apo. 22.7. But how shall wee keepe them except wee know them? And how shall we know them except we reade them, and studdy them?
If therefore wee meane bee partakers of this blessednesse, we must not onely esteeme this booke to bee very profitable, but abso∣lutely necessary for all the servants of God to be exercised in. And if ever there were a∣ny time wherein it behoved to set forth, to urge and to beare in this Doctrine to all the people of God, then it is chiefly necessary to be done in this our time. For this age of ours hath in the Popes Kingdome many sharpe and quicke wits, which commend with marvellous praises both the Pope and the popish Church, and buzze into the eares of the common people, and unlearned sort, many things cleane contrary to the Doctrine of the Scriptures. The Jesuites and Priests are growne exceeding crafty and cunning. The Papists are rich, wealthy, and full of armour and munition, Popery seemeth to make a head againe, and the Papists looke for a day. It stands us then upon which love Christ and his Gospell, that we should be well ap∣pointed, and thorowly armed against them. And for this purpose the Revelation of Saint John is of great use and necessity. As I said before, so I say againe, that it is the Prophesie of our time, written to this speciall end, that by it wee might be both
fore-warned and fore-armed. If wee doe consider the whole matter of this booke, we shall easily finde out the use and end of it: For the excellent matter of it doth argue the ex∣cellent end and use of it. Now then, as concerning the generall matter of this Booke, heere are to be found very large and lively descriptions of the most glorious Person of Christ,Chap. 1. Chap. 2. Chap. 3. and all his excellent offices, both of King, Priest, and Prophet; and also most notable descriptions of the Church, and of the Ministers of it: and of the persecutions and afflictions, which it must of necessity passe through in the World. Also of Gods mercifull providence for his Church, and most vigilant care over it in the middest of all extremities. Here are set before our eyes very lively descriptions of the Churches deadly enemies; both of Satan himselfe, and his three great instruments, the Roman Emperour, the Pope, and the Turke. Here are set down all their cruell persecu∣tions of the Church, and their utter over∣throw in the end. Here are described Hell, Death, the resurrection, and the last judge∣ment. Here also the very Kingdome of Hea∣ven is at large described, with all those great rewards, infinite glory, and endlesse felicity
which remaine for all the faithfull worship∣pers of God. I conclude therefore, that for as much as this Prophesie is of such excellent contents, therefore the use and necessity of it must needes be very great. And for this cause Iohn is willed and commanded by Alpha and O∣mega to write the things which he had seene, the things that were, and the things that shall come hereafter, By the things which he had seene, is meant that glorious vision menti∣oned in the first Chapter, wherein Jesus Christ did appeare unto him in the middest of the seven golden Candlesticks,erse. 13.4.15.16. in most glorious manner, as is there described. And all this was in the Isle of Pathmos, where Iohn was first called and authorized to this worke, and therefore he is willed first of all, to record this vision which hee had already seene. By the things that are, hee meaneth the present state of the seven Churches of Asia, which were then the most flourishing Churches in the World, as they are descri∣bed in the second and third Chapters; and in them the estate of all other Chur∣ches. By the things that shall be, he meaneth all
the prophesie of this booke, which were to be fulfilled in their time, and all those strange accidents, which should come to passe in processe of time, and the severall ages of the Church, even unto the end of the world. Thus we see how Iohn received a precise com∣mandement from the Sonne of God, to write things past, present, and to come, that they might stand in record unto all posterities, from generation to generation. Thus much touching the fift circumstance, which is the end and use of this booke, Now followeth to speake of the last circumstantiall point, which is the au∣thority of this Prophesie, which is strong∣ly confirmed from the Author of it, which is JESUS CHRIST, and therefore it is called the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which GOD gave unto him. And againe it is written: I Jesus sent mine Angell to testi∣fie these things in the Churches. Here wee see plainly,Chap. 22.16. that Jesus Christ the very Sonne of God, the Alpha and Omega, is the Author of this booke, for he subscribes his name un∣to it, and set his hand and seale unto it. Needs therefore must the authority of it be very great, which commeth from so great a perso∣nage: for looke what dignity and auhority
he is of, from whom the booke commeth, of the same dignity and authority is the book it selfe. Another strong argument to confirme the authority of this book, may be taken from the protestation of Jesus Christ in these words; I protest unto every man that heareth the words of the Prophesie of this Booke,Cha 22.18 if any man shall adde unto those sayings, God shall adde unto him the plagues that are written in this Booke. And if any shall diminish of the words of the Booke of this Prophesie, God shall take away his part out of the Booke of life. Heere we see how Jesus Christ maketh the authority to this Booke equall to all other the Oracle of God, to the which it is not lawfull for any man to adde or detract under paine of condemnation. It maketh much al∣so for the authority of this booke, that S. John doth so often repeat, reiterate, and in∣culcate his owne name; I John, I John, I John: I John the Apostle; I John the Evangelist; I John the Divine, shewing by all these repeti∣tions, how needfull a thing it was that the faithfull should bee throughly instructed who he was, even one of the Lambs twelve Apostles, and therefore to be void of all sus∣pition and doubt concerning the authority of
this booke, and not once to imagine it to bee any invention of man, or feigned device, sith it was penned by so great an Apostle. Moreover, the authority of this Pro∣phesie is confirmed by foure reasons in the last Chapter. The first is the affirmation of the Angell: who saith, The words are faithfull and true.Chap. 22.6, 7, 8. The second is the au∣thority of the most high GOD himselfe in these words, The Lord GOD of the holy Prophets sent his Angell to shew unto his servants the things which must shortly be ful∣filled. The third is the testimony of Jesus,ver. 6, 7. who pronounceth them blessed which keepe the words of this Prophesie. For, saith he, Behold I come shortly: Blessed is he that kee∣peth the words of this Prophesie. The fourth and last is the witnes of John, in these words: I am John which heard and saw these things. Now it may bee demanded, what is the cause that here are so many things heaped up for the confirmation of the authority of this Booke. Surely we must thinke there is some speciall cause and reason of it. For the Holy Ghost doth not use to deale so much and so earnestly in a matter, but upon great cause. Wee may easily gather what the cause is. The Booke painteth out the Whore
of Babylon, and the whole Kingdome of the great Antichrist, together with all Sathans cunning and fleight therein, and for this cause Sathan hath laboured especially to weaken the credit and authority of this Booke. He by some meanes in old time pre∣vailed thus farre, that even among some Churches of true Christians, the authority and truth of it was doubted of. The Holy Ghost did well foresee the practice of Sa∣than, and therefore bringeth the more rea∣sons for the confirmation thereof. If the credit and authority of this Booke should never have been impugned, there needed not any such speciall confirmation. But now (God be thanked) there is no question or controversie concerning the authority of this Prophesie. It is received as authenticall by the common consent of all the Churches. Almost all the ancient Fathers doe acknow∣ledge it to be canonicall. The new Writers doe with one voyce give their consent and approbation unto it. The Papists themselves doe acknowledge it to be the sacred and un∣doubted Word of God; though of all Scrip∣tures they cannot endure it should be med∣led withall, because it cutteth them so neere the bone. Moreover, it may not be omited,
that God is called the Lord God of the ho∣ly Prophets, which proveth that this Pro∣phesie is of equall authority with the Pro∣phesies which were of old, in as much as the same God is the Author of it. And this Book is to be held in the same account with the Books of Moses, and of the Prophets, for all things contained in it shall as cer∣tainly be fulfilled in their times, as theirs were. In Esay, in Jeremy, in Ezechiel, in Daniel, and in the rest we finde many things, which the Lord shewed by them long be∣fore they came to passe. Even so there bee many things fore-shewed and fore-prophe∣sied in this Booke, which in their time shall be assuredly fulfilled. Nay, we see and know that many things here fore-told, are already fulfilled, and some things are come to passe even in these our dayes. He that shall look into the times that are past, since this Pro∣phesie was given, shall finde that all things have fallen out agreeable to the Prophesie of this Booke. And surely if there were none other thing to perswade us touching the authority thereof, this might suffice, that every thing hath fallen out just and jumpe, as the Prophesie did fore-shew. It is our great negligence, that wee doe not
cleerly see so much. And I doe humbly en∣treat all the people of God to looke more diligently and narrowly into it in all time to come. And thus much as concerning the circumstances. Now, as concerning the Booke it self, it may very fitly be divided into three visions, as it were into three generall parts. The first vision is contained in the three first Chapters. The second vision is contained in the next eight Chapters following, from the fourth to the twelfth Chapter. And the last vision is contained in all the Chapters following, from the twelfth to the end. As concerning the first vision, my pur∣pose is not to stand much upon it, because it is plain and easie to understand, and because it containeth no Prophesies of things to come, but only openeth the present state of the Church at that time; and also because I have already touched the summe of it in handling the circumstantiall points, I will therefore content my self with a very briefe opening and resolution of it, beginning at the first Chapter.
CHAP. I. The summe of the first Chapter. THe first Chapter containeth foure prin∣cipall things. The Title of the Book. The salutation of the Churches. The manner of Johns calling to receive this Prophesie. The description of Christ, the person that called him. The Title of the Book is set downe in these words: The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him. It containeth three things: First, the Au∣thor of the Booke, which is Jesus Christ, re∣ceiving it from God the Father. Secondly the end and use of this Booke,Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. which is, to shew unto all the Servants of God, the things which must shortly bee done. Thirdly, the singular fruit and benefit which the Church shall receive by it, in these words: Blessed is he that readeth, and they that heare the words of this Prophesie, &c. The salutation is in these words, John to
the seven Churches which are in Asia, Grace be with you, and peace, &c. It containeth a des∣cription of the Trinity, or three Persons in the Godhead. The Father is described of his eternity, namely, to be Hee which is, which was, and which is to come. The Holy Ghost is described of his di∣vers gifts and operations, and therefore is called the seven Spirits which are before the Throne, or which proceed from the Throne: but S. John speaketh here of the holy Ghost, according to the vision shewed him in the fifth Chapter, where Christ is said to have seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent into all the world. Of the which afterward. Jesus Christ is described of his three great offices, of King, Priest and Prophet, and also of his glorious power and eternity, First, touching his Kingly office, he is called the Prince of the Kings of the earth, that is, King of Kings, for he is King of Sion. He is a King to rule and governe his Church. He must reigne over the house of Judah for ever. Hee must reigne o∣ver all his enemies, and in the middest of his enemies, even till hee have trode them all under his feet. And this bene∣fit
wee have by it, that we are made Kings in him, in this life to reigne over our cor∣rupt affections, and after this life to reigne as crowned Kings for ever with him, in infi∣nite glory, and endlesse felicity. Secondly, touching his Priest-hood,Ver. 5. he is said to love us, and wash us from our sinnes in his bloud. For he is our only high Priest, which by his owne blood hath once entred into the holy place, and obtained eternall re∣demption for us. Hee onely it is,Heb. 9.12 which through the eternall Spirit, offered himselfe without fault to God, to purge our consci∣ences from dead workes to serve the living God:Heb. 9.14 So then by vertue of his Priesthood and sacrifice, we are reconciled unto God, have free accesse unto the Throne of Grace, and are made Priests in him to offer us spiri∣tuall sacrifices acceptable to GOD through him:Verse 6. For he hath made us Kings and Priests unto God even his Father. Thirdly,Vese 5. concerning his Propheticall Office, he is called that faithfull witnesse: For He is said to Pilate:John 18.37. For this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I in∣to the World, that I might beare wit∣nesse unto the Truth. And the Apostle saith. Hee witnesseth under Pontius Pilate
a good confession.Tim. 9.13 So then Jesus Christ is one of those three great witnesses which beare re∣cord in Heaven. Jesus Christ is the Prince of Prophets, even that great Prophet that should come into the world, through whom all the counsells of God are revealed to us: He is that only begotten Sonne, which is come downe from the bosome of his Fa∣ther, and hath made knowne unto us what∣soever he hath received of his Father. Hee both by his Doctrine, Life, and Mi∣racles hath borne witnesse unto the truth, and by the vertue of his Propheticall Office, the whole will of God is made knowne un∣to us. For GOD hath sent him as the great Prophet to instruct the world in Righteousnesse, and hath revealed him∣selfe to us in him; and therefore he is cal∣led the Image of GOD, the brightnesse of his Glory,Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3. and the ingraven forme of His Person. And therefore Hee said to Philip: Hee that hath seene Mee, hath seene my Father also.John 14.7 And if you had knowne Mee, you should have knowne my Father also. Mat. 11.7.And againe, No man knoweth the Father, but the Sonne, and hee to whom the Son will re∣veale him. Thus we see that Jesus Christ is
that faithfull witnes, and Prince of Prophets, in whom the will of God, and all the coun∣sels of the Father are revealed unto us. The manner of Johns calling to receive this Prophesie, is set downe in these words; I John even your brother,Ver. 9, 10, 11. and companion in tri∣bulation and in the Kingdome and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the Ile of Pathmos for the Word of God, and for the witnessing of Jesus Christ: And I was ravished in the Spirit on the Lords day, and heard behinde me a great voice, as it had beene of a Trumpet, saying: I am Alpha and Omega, that first and that last; and that which thou seest, write in a booke, and send it unto the seven Churches which are in Asia, &c. Now out of these three verses five things are to be observed: First, that John is commanded by the voyce of Christ, which he heard behinde him as loud as a Trumpet, to write and record the visions which he saw, & being so writen and recorded, to commend them to all the Churches, for the common benefit and use thereof. So that herein John doth nothing of himselfe, nothing of his owne braine, but all things by speciall warrant and authority from Jesus Christ, and that Alpha and Ome∣ga,
which doth call him, and authorize him to this great businesse which now he is set a∣bout. Secondly, Johns ravishment in spirit, to the end he might be made more capable of all these heavenly visions which were shew∣ed unto him. Thirdly, his great humiliation, whereby also he was fitted to receive and understand these great mysteries. For God will guide the meeke in judgement, and teach the humble his wayes;Psal. 25. yea, his secrets are with them that feare him. Therefore although John was a great Apostle, and hath seene wonderfull visions, yet he is not thereby puft up with pride and conceit of himselfe, but in the greatest hu∣miliation of his soule calleth himselfe a bro∣ther and companion of all the faithfull,Ver. 9. but speci∣ally of such as patiently suffer for Iesus Christ and his Kingdome. Fourthly, the time when Iohn was called, which was the Lords day. Fiftly and lastly, the place where he was called, which was the Ile of Pathmos, as formerly hath been shewed. The description of Christ, the Person that called Iohn to this new office, is set downe in the next five Verses following, wherein
the excellent glory of Christs Person is de∣scribed: First,Ver. 13, 14, 15, 16. from the place where Christ did appeare unto him. Secondly, from the severall parts and members of his royall Per∣son. Thirdly, from his provident care over his true Ministers, and all his faithfull people. Touching the place where Christ in a vi∣sion did appeare to Iohn, he saith, it was in the middest of the seven golden Candlestickes. For saith hee, I turned backe to see the voice that spake with me, and when I was turned, I saw seven golden Candlestickes, and in the middest of the seven Candlestickes one like the Sonne of man, &c. The seven golden Can∣dlesticks are interpreted by Christ himselfe in the last Verse of the Chapter, to be the se∣ven Churches. The Churches are said to be of gold, because Christ delighteth in them as we doe in gold; he valueth every true mem∣ber thereof as we doe gold; for every belee∣ver is all glorious within; every true Chri∣stian is very faire and beautifull; every re∣generate man is as gold, even as most pure gold. It is said afterward, that Christ walketh in the middest of the seven golden Candlestickes:Ver. 11.13. that is, Hee is alwayes present with His
Church, to feed it, governe it, defend it, and comfort it. The Prophet saith that Christ hath seven eyes which goe through the whole world; whereby is signified his watchfull providence for his Church; for he is alwayes looking out for the good of it, to defend and protect it against all adversa∣ry power. Which thing was figured in the Rammes skins, wherewithall the Arke was covered, to defend it against all violence of winde and weather. Even so the mercifull protection of Christ, as it were the conti∣nall covering of his Church. As touching the parts and members of his royall Person, he is described of his head, and haire, of his face, of his eyes, of his voyce, of his feet, of his garments, and of his girdle. As concerning his head and haire, they are said to be as white as wooll, and in snow, which signifieth his great wisdome and knowledge, to performe all things in his Church, for wisdome and knowledge for the most part doe accompany white heads, and gray haires. His face shineth as the Sun in his strength: Which signifieth that Christ is the same to his Church, that the Sunne is to the World.
For as the Sun lightneth the whole World with his brightnesse, so Christ with the brightnesse of his face enlightneth his whole Church. His eyes are like a flame of fire: that is, exceeding bright, and piercing into all pla∣ces, yea the very heart of men, for nothing is hid from his sight, with whom we have to doe. Hee hath Eagles eyes to foresee all dangers intended and plotted against his Church, that he may in due time prevent them. His voyce is compared to the sound of ma∣ny waters, because it should sound through∣out all the World by the preaching of the Gospell. Waters is expounded Chapter 17. verse 15. of multitudes, nations, and tongues. Christs voyce therefore is like many Wa∣ters, because his voice should goe through many Countries and Kingdomes. His feet are compared to fine brasse; to signifie both the perfection of all his wayes, and also his mighty power to tread downe all his enemies. He is clothed with a garment downe to the ground, to signifie that hee walked as King and Priest in the midst of the 7. golden Can∣dlesticks. For Kings and Priest in old time
did weare long garments, especially in the execution of their offices. He is girded about the paps with a golden girdle: For as Kings and Priests did gird their garments close unto them, lest otherwise they might be hindred in the execution of their offices, so Christ girdeth himselfe close to his businesse; for he is no idle beholder of the state of his Church, but one that conti∣nually worketh out the good thereof. Concerning his provident care over his faithfull Ministers, he is said to carry them in his right hand; for he had in his right hand seven starres:Ver. 16. Ver. 10. that is, the Ministers of the Churches. As Christ saith: The seven starres are the Angels; that is, the Ministers of the seven Churches. Ministers are compared to Starres, because they should shine as bright Starres in this darke world, both by life and doctrine. Christ is said to hold them in his right hand, because he alwayes defended them a∣gainst the malice and fury of the World, which of all others is most outragiously bent against them, and their favorites. But let men take heed of over-bold pre∣suming to pull the Stars out of Christs right
hand, lest they smart for it. The world is very busie this way, they thinke to wring them out of his hands: but alas poore souls, they are not able, he holdeth too fast, who can pull them out of his right hand? If they continue bold, and busie this way, they may hap at last take a Beare by the tooth, and per∣adventure pull an old house over their heads. Another reason why CHRIST is said to hold the seven Starres in his right hand, is because he worketh by them, and their mi∣nistery, as an artificer with his toole in his right hand. The things which Christ hath done by these instruments are glorious and admirable. For by the Ministery of the Gos∣pell he hath converted many sinners, and sa∣ved many souls, then the which nothing can be more honourable and wonderfull: and therefore the Word of GOD which is the Ministers weapon, is compared to a sharpe two edged sword, which came out of CHRISTS mouth. Now unto all this may be added that Christ saith; He was dead, but now alive, be∣cause he dyed, and rose again. And also that he saith; He had the keyes of Hell and Death: that is, authority and power over Hell and damnation. For he hath absolute power
over Hell and damnation. For he hath abso∣lute power to open and shut, bind and loose, and therefore it is written, Hee hath the key of David, which openeth and no man shut∣teth, and shutteth and no man openeth. All this setteth forth the great power and glory of Christs Person, and all aymeth at this marke and end, to commend unto us the au∣thority of this Booke, because it commeth from a person of so great dignity and excel∣lency. Last of all, it remaineth to shew how John was affected with this vision, wherein Christ did so gloriously appeare unto him: for he saith, When I saw him I fell at his feet as dead. Wherein he sheweth how greatly he was amazed and daunted with the sight of Christs most glorious personage. He was stricken with such an astonishment and feare, that there was almost no life or spi∣rit left in him, and all this was to humble him and to strike him downe even to the ground, in as much as by it, he findeth his owne weaknesse and imperfection; not ca∣pable of such a sight, so farre as to endure it. It was no doubt profitable, or rather neces∣sary that this holy Servant of God should thus be humbled and made fit to receive this Revelation with the greater reverence from
his great Lord and Master. And also it maketh much for our profit, as appeareth in that every part of this vision is rehearsed in the Epistles to the Churches. But to con∣clude, John being thus humbled and cast downe in himselfe, is comforted and raised up by Christ, who laid his right hand on him, and willed him to fear nothing: For saith Hee, I am the first and the last, and am alive, but I was dead, behold, I am alive for evermore. In which words Hee doth greatly cheare up Johns heart, and telleth him plainly, that this might and terrour of his person is bent onely against the wicked enemies of His Church, nothing at all against the friends thereof: but contrariwise, that all this po∣wer and glory, might and Majesty is wholy and altogether for the good of his Church. Wherein we may all cleerely see and know to our great comfort that the same Arme of God which casteth downe the wicked, rai∣seth up the Godly; the same power which woundeth them, healeth us; the same hand which destroyeth them, saveth us; the same might and Majesty which hurteth them, helpeth us. For whatsoever is in GOD, is wholy for his, and wholy against those that are none of His. And thus much con∣cerning
the first Chapter, shall suffice. Chapter 2. and 3. I Have thought good to handle these two Chapters together, and in a generall and compendious manner to set downe the most speciall matters contained in them both; not meaning to insist upon every particular, both because these two Chapters are plaine and easie to understand, and also because they have been sufficiently beaten upon by many. These two Chapters doe generally containe seven Epistles, written to the seven Chur∣ches of Asia; wherein the present estate of the Churches of Asia is very lively de∣scribed, and in them the estate of all other Churches then militant upon the face of the earth. Every one of these seven Epistles con∣taineth foure things. First, an Exordium or entrance into the matters. Secondly, a generall proposition. Thirdly, a narration. Lastly, a conclusion. The Exordium or entrance of every Epistle containeth two things; namely, the person to whom the Epistle is written,
and the Person from whom the Epistle is written. The proposition is one and the same in all these Epistles, contained in these words: I know thy works. The narration containeth the matter of each Epistle, and consisteth of commendati∣ons, and discommendations; of admonitions, reprehensions, threats and promises. The conclusion of every Epistle is one and the same; in these words, Let him that hath an ear hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches. First, concerning the person to whom these Epistles are sent, he is named in the be∣ginning of every Epistle, To be the Angel of such and such a Church. By this word Angel, he meanes not the invisible spirits which we call the Angels of heaven, for the things at∣tributed to these Angels, can in no wise agree to the invisible Spirits, as to the Angels of se∣veral Churches, to be neither hot nor cold, to leave their first love, to repent and amend, & sundry such like attributes through all these Epistles. But by the word Angel, he meaneth the Minister or Pastor of every Church: which therefore is called an Angel, because he is the Minister of GOD, as the word signifieth: As also because every faithfull
Minister ought to be received and regarded as an Angell of God, as the Apostle wit∣nesseth of the Galathians, that they received him as an Angell of God, yea as Christ Jesus. And he giveth many admonitions in his Epistles to this effect; for he would have all faithfull and painfull Ministers to bee greatly reverenced and had in double honor; to be acknowledged and had in singular love for their works sake; to be cared for, to be made much of, and to want nothing: For indeed, a good Minister is a Jewell of price. A good Minister is a friend in Court, which we say is better then penny in purse. A good Minister is like a candle, which spendeth it selfe to give light to o∣thers. A good Minister is like a Cocke, which by the clapping of his wings awaketh himself, and by his crowing awaketh others. For a good Minister by his private studies, prayers and meditations, awaketh himselfe, & by his publick preaching awaketh others. The Scriptures affirmeth a good Minister to be the very glory of Christ. And again, that a good Minister is a singular blessing of God:2 Cor. 8.23. Jer. 3.14. For the Lord himselfe faith; I will take you one of a City, and two of a Tribe, and will bring you to Sion: and I will give you a Pastor,
according to my heart, which shall feede you with knowledge and understanding. Now then if a good Minister bee so great a blessing of God, and so peerelesse a Pearle, how great is the sin of those which contemne them, and tread their Ministery under foot, as vile and nothing worth? Our Lord Jesus saith of all such: He that despiseth you despiseth me.Luke 10.16. Let those scoffers and scorners therefore take heed how they despise Christ, for assuredly he will not long put it up at their hands. If any man demand a reason, why all these Epistles are specially sent and directed to the Angels, or Pastors of the Churches, seeing Iohn before, chap. 1.11. is comman∣ded to write them to the Churches of Asia: I answer, that he writing to the Pastor, ex∣cludeth not the Churches, but in them, or under them, he writeth to the whole Chur∣ches, as plainly it appeareth in the conclusion of every Epistle, when he saith: Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirit saith to the Churches. Then that which is spoken to the Angel of the Church, spoken to the Church. The reason why the speech is specially dire∣cted to the Pastor of every Church, is be∣cause the good or bad estate of the Church, for the most part dependeth upon the
Ministers. For commonly we see it com∣meth to passe; Such a Pastor, such a People: Such a Shepheard, such Sheep: Such a Husbandman, such husbandry. And as the Prophet saith,Hos. 4.9. Like Priest, like People. For we may observe in all these Epistles, that where the Minister is commended, the peo∣ple are commended; and where the Mini∣ster is discommended, the people are dis∣commended also: So that they stand and fall, sinke and swimme together. As concer∣ning the Person from whom these Epistles are sent, it is Jesus Christ, who is very glori∣ously described of his divers qualities in the entrance of every one of these Epistles: First, in the Epistles to the Church of Ephesus, it is said: These things saith hee that holdeth the seven Stars in his right hand, and which walketh in the middest of the seven Candle∣stickes. Secondly, in the Epistle to the Church of Smyrna: These things saith he, that is first and last, which was dead, and is alive. Thirdly, to the Church of Pergamus: Thus saith hee, which hath a sharpe sword with two edges. Fourthly, to Thyatira: These things saith the Sonne of God, who hath eyes like a flame of fire, and his feet like fine brasse. Fifthly, to the Church of Sardis: These things saith he
that hath the seven Spirits of God, and seven Stars. Sixtly, to the Church of Philadelphia, it is thus said of Christ: These things saith he that is holy and true, which hath the key of David, which openeth, and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth. Lastly, to Laodicea, it is thus said: These things saith Amen, the faithfull and true witnesse, the begin∣ning of the Creatures. Now then, we doe plainly see how glori∣ously Jesus Christ is described of his seve∣rall properties in every one of these Epistles, and what honourable and magnificent titles are given unto him; and to all this end, to move attention, and to worke in us a re∣verence of so great a Personage, that wee might more seriously regard, and deepely ponder the things which proceed from so great a Majesty: For we see and know by common experience that almost every mans words are heeded and regarded according to the opinion and reverence which is had of his Person. Sith then that every one of these Epistles, fronted with this great authority: Thus saith the Sonne of God: Thus saith Christ: Thus saith Alpha and Omega; therefore we ought to give diligent heed to the things here∣in contained. So like wise we read in the He∣brewes,
that after the Holy Ghost had very notably described the Person of Christ, and extolled him farre above the Angels and all other creatures, he giveth the use of it in the beginning of the second Chapter, saying, Therefore we ought to give more diligent heed to his doctrine. And thus much concerning the Exordium or entrance of these seven Epistles, touching the person to whom, and the Person from whom these Epistles are sent. Now it followeth to speake a word or two of the generall proposition contai∣ned in these words: I know thy works. We read in all these Epistles, how the Sonne of God praises some of the Churches, and dis∣praises others; commends some Pastors, and discommends others. Now he that will praise or dispraise, must especially looke to this, that he be upon a good ground; and therefore Jesus Christ before he enters into any praysing or dispraysing, commending or reproving, doth first protest that he knoweth their workes, and is privy to all their parti∣cular actions, yea, their very thoughts, and therefore cannot erre or be deceived in his censures. True it is indeed, that men may erre in their opinions and censures of others, be∣cause they know not mens hearts, and with
what affections things are carried. Men, I say, may praise or dispraise too much or too little. But Jesus Christ whose eyes are a flame of fire, and which searcheth the reines, cannot faile one jot, nor erre a haires breadth, as we say, either in commending or discommen∣ding, and therefore he stoppeth their mouths at the first dash, so as they can have nothing to reply, when he saith, I know thy works; I know well enough what thou art, and what thou hast been, I am not deceived in thee, I know thy sitting downe and rising up, and am accustomed to all thy wayes: And this briefly of the proportion. The narration (as is aforesaid) contained in the matter of the Epistles, consisting of praises and dis∣praises, admonitions, reprehensions, threats and promises. Touching the first, we finde that some Churches are highly commended, others wholly discommended; others partly com∣mended, partly discommended. As for ex∣ample, The Pastor and people of Smyrna and Philadelphia, are generally commended for all things, and discommended for nothing, there is no fault found with them; that is no grosse fault as in others; for they were not without common corruptions and infirmi∣ties.
The Minister of Smyrna was a very rare and excellent man, although a poore man to the world ward: For Christ saith thus unto him,Apo. 2.9. I know thy poverty, but thou art rich; that is, rich in grace, and the manifold gifts of the Spirit. Thou hast done great ser∣vice to the Church. Thou hast imployed thy gifts to the good of many. Thou takest great paines in the Ministery, and art greatly bles∣sed in thy labours; for thou hast an excellent flock, a notable good people, and therefore I cannot but greatly commend both thee and them. The Minister of Philadelphia was also a very worthy and notable man. For although his gifts were not so great as some others, yet was he very painfull and faithfull in a little; of whom it is said, Thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denyed my name: that is, thou art very constant in the profession and pra∣ctice of Christian Religion; and thereupon Christ promised to blesse his labours: For saith hee, I will make them of the synagogue of Sathan which call themselves Jewes, and are not, but doe lie: Behold I say, I will make them that they shall come and worship before thy feete, and shall know that I have loved thee. Here we doe plainly see how Christ promi∣seth
to blesse this mans Ministery, for his painfulnesse and diligence, although he was not of the greatest gifts: For men of greatest gifts are not alwayes most blessed in their la∣bours: For God doth commonly worke the greatest things by weake meanes, that all glory might redound unto him, and no flesh might boast in his sight. For otherwise if men of greatest gifts should alwayes bee most blessed in their labours, and win most soules unto God, then wee would be ready to ascribe that to men, and their gifts, which is proper to God, and so his praise and glory should be somewhat ecclipsed. Thus we see what excellent men the Ministers of Smyrna and Philadelphia were, and what excellent people they had in their charges. But on the contrary, the Pastor and the peo∣ple of Sardis and Laodicea, are discommen∣ded for all things, and commended for no∣thing. Indeed the Minister of Sardis had a great name for learning, and other good gifts, but he was grown very idle and negli∣gent, and did little good with his gifts: Of whom it is said, Thou hast a name that thou livest, but thou art dead: That is, there was no spirit in him, no life of grace, his gifts waxed rusty for want of use, he was fallen asleepe;
he was fallen away from the grace of God, he was nothing the man which he had been. Therefore he is admonished to awake and strengthen the things which remaine, which were ready to dye. The Minister of Laodicea, and the people also, were growne luke-warme, neither hot nor cold, they were become carelesse and secure, not caring greatly which end went forward in GODS matters, so they might enjoy the present profits and pleasures of this life. Concerning the Pastors and people of E∣phesus, Pergamus and Thyatyra, they are partly commended, and partly discommen∣ded. These three were reasonable good Mi∣nisters, and had many good parts in them, and tooke paines in their charges, although there be some faults found with them. For the Minister of Ephesus is commended for six things, for labour, for patience, for zeal, for wisdome, for sincerity, and for courage; but discommended for leaving his first love; that is, for revolting, or somewhat going backe, or rather indeed, for cooling in the love and zeale of God. The Minister of Per∣gamus, and people also are greatly commen∣ded for their constant profession of the truth
in the middest of manifold troubles, and the very heat of persecution. For the rage of the enemies grew so fierce against the profession and professors of the Gospel, that Antipas the Pastor of Pergamus (as some suppose) was put to death: For Christ saith thus of his Church: Thou dwellest where Satans throne is, and yet thou keepest my name,Apo. 2.13 and hast not de∣nyed my faith even in those dayes when Antipas my faithfull martyr was slaine among you, where Satan dwelleth. But yet notwithstanding this Church is found fault withall for some few things, that is two grosse faults; the one for suffering the doctrine of Balaam to be broched there by the instruments of Satan; the other that they maintained the doctrine of Nicolaitans. The doctrine of Balaam did uphold the lawful∣nesse of eating things sacrificed to Idols,Apo. 2.14 and of committing fornication; for he taught Ba∣lac the King of Moab, thus, to put a stum∣bling blocke before the children of Israel. The doctrine of the Nicolaitans did uphold the common use of women, that is, that wo∣men might be made common. These two most grosse and absurd doctrines were suffe∣red and maintained in the Church of Per∣gamus. As concerning the Church of Thy∣atira,
they are greatly commended for thei love and service to the Church; for thei faith, patience, and manifold workes, an especially for their constant proceeding i Religion and Godlinesse, and that with in¦crease:Apo. 2.19. For of this Church it is said, I kno thy love and service, and faith, and thy pati¦ence, and thy workes, and that they are moe a the last then at the first: But this Church i discommended for suffering the wicked wo∣man Jezabel, (that is, a false Prophetesse, who was craftily crept into this Church) to teach and seduce the people of God in that congregation, teaching the same false do∣ctrine that Balaam did at Pergamus; which was,Apo. 2.10. that it was lawfull to commit fornica∣tion, and to eat meats sacrificed unto Idols: Hitherto concerning the praises and disprai∣ses of the Churches. Now followeth to speake of the admonitions. First the Church of Ephesus having fallen from their first love, is admonished to re∣member from whence they were fallen, to repent, and to doe their first works. Also the Church of Smyrna is admonished and exhor∣ted to stand fast in the midst of those perse∣cutions and troubles, which should be raised up against it by the Emperor Trajanus, and
continue for the space often yeare: They are therefore exhorted & incouraged by our Lord Jesus, not to feare the things which they should suffer; for although the Divell and his Instruments should have scope to persecute and imprison them for ten dayes; that is, ten years, according to the Propheticall account; yet if they had continued faithfull to the death, they should have had the Crowne of life. The Church of Pergamus suffering and maintaining the doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicolaitans, is admonished to repent and a∣mend. The Church of Thyatyra, which suffe∣red the false doctrine of Jezabel is admonished to look to her selfe, and to hold fast the truth of Religion. Sardis being dull and dead, is ad∣monished to awake and strengthen the things which remain that were ready to dye. Phi∣ladelphia is admonished to hold that which they had, that no man take their Crowne. Laodicea being neither hot nor cold, but luke-warme, is admonished to be zealous and amend. And although they thought their state good enough, being puft up with conceitednesse, yet they are charged to bee poore, naked, and blinde, and thereupon counselled and admonished to buy spiri∣tuall Gold, that they may bee rich: and
spirituall garments to hide their nakednesse, and spirituall eye-salve to anoint their eyes that they may see. Concerning reprehensions, Ephesus is re∣proved for going backward: Pergamus and Thyatyra for suffering and maintaining cor∣rupt doctrine, as formerly hath beene shew∣ed. Sardis for dulnesse, deafnesse, and un∣soundnesse in their manner of worshipping God. Laodicea for luke-warmenesse and conceitednesse. Touching threats, Ephesus is threatned, that except they repent and doe their first workes, their Candlesticke should be remo∣ved out of his place; that is, the Church should be translated to some other place, but not destroyed: For God doth remove, but not destroy his Candlesticks. Pergamus is threatned, that unlesse they did speedily re∣pent, Jesus Christ should come shortly and fight against them with the sword of his mouth. Thyatyra is threatned, that except they repent them of their workes, they should be cast into a bed of affliction, and all their favorites should be slain with death. Sardis is threatned, that if they did not watch and awake, CHRIST would come suddenly upon them as a Thiefe, and they
should not know what houre hee would come. Concerning promises, they be very great and large; for everlasting joy, and the very fulnesse of glory is promised to all that fight the good fight of faith, and overcome in the spirituall battle against the flesh, the world and the Divell. Ephesus is promised, that if they fight it out couragiously and constantly to the end, they should eate of the tree of life, which is in the middest of the paradise of God. Smyrna is promised in like case, that they should not be hurt of the second death. Per∣gamus likewise is promised to eate of the Manna that is hid, & to have the white stone of victory given them. Thyatira is promised to have power given them to rule over Nati∣ons, and to be lightned with heavenly bright∣nes, like the morning Star. Sardis is promi∣sed to be cloathed with white array; that is, with heavenly glory, and to have their name continued in the booke of life. Phila∣delphia is promised to have a piller made in the Temple of God; that is, a firme and un∣moveable place of eternall glory. Laodicea is promised to sup with Christ, and to sit with him upon his throne for evermore. Thus we
see what great and precious promises are made to all Churches that fight and overcome in this their spirituall battell and conflict. Concerning the conclusion, it is one and the same to all these seven Churches. Where∣in they are exhorted, that such as have eares to heare, should heare, ponder, and consider all the aforesaid praises, and dispraises, admo∣nitions,, reprehensions, threats, and promises. And it is therefore said, such as have eares, because they are very few to be found that have circumcised and sanctified eares, to heare and understand heavenly things. This is proper to the elect, this is but to whom it is given. And thus briefly and generally we see what was the present state of every one of the Churches of Asia, unto which this Prophecie was to be sent: so that by them we may see in what estate the universall Church militant was at that time. For as some of these seven as yet stood firme, and others had much declined, so was it with all other Churches. Hitherto concerning the first vision, contai∣ning generally the inscription of this booke: Johns salutation to the Churches. Johns new calling: The excellency of Christ which cal∣led him: And the present estate of the Church.
Now we are to proceed to the second vision, contained in the next eight Chapters to the twelve, wherein is shewed, what should be the future estate of the Church in all ages, even unto the end of the world. CHAP. 4. THe principall thing contained in this fourth Chapter, is a description of the person of God, the author of this booke, who is most gloriously described of that excellent glory that is in himselfe, and of his royall throne which hee sit∣teth upon, and of his goodly retinue, and troopes of Saints and Angels attending a∣bout his most glorious throne. Whereunto is added the diverse qualities, both of Angels and Saints, both in themselves and their owne natures: as also in their manner of praising and worshipping of God. This is the generall summe and sense of this Chapter. But for the better clearing and more full opening of, I will come to the words of the text and open them as they lie in order. After this I looked, and behold a doore was open in Heaven, and the first voice I heard,Verse 1. was as it were of a Trumpet, talking with
mee, saying: Come up hither, and I will shew thee the things which must bee done here∣after. These words (After this) have relation to the first vision spoken of before, as if he should say, after I had received the former vi∣sion, concerning the present estate of the Church, now I had another vision concerning the future estate therof; and therfore he saith, a doore was opened in Heaven, that he might come in and see all these things which should be revealed to him. For the opening of the doore in Heaven doth here signifie the unlocking of heavenly things unto Iohn, or his entrance into them: for so the word doore is taken 2. Cor. 3.12. Apoc. 3.8. After the opening of the doore, he is called up with a loud voice, like a Trumpet, saying, Come up hither: for although the doore was ope∣ned, yet durst he not enter in till he was cal∣led and commanded to come in. For in these cases he doth not presume in any thing as of himselfe, without speciall warrant and di∣rection: As the Scripture saith: No man ta∣keth this honour unto himselfe,Heb. 5.4. but he that is called of God, as Aaron was. The voice that calleth him, is like a Trumpet that is loud and shrill, that he might be stirred up more dili∣gently
to attend unto the contemplation of these great secrets which should be revealed unto him. This voice commandeth him to come up hither: which sheweth that Iohn was rapt up in the Spirit unto the Heavens to see this vision. This voice promiseth to shew him things which must be done hereafter: that is, that he should be made acquainted with the future estate of the Church, as al∣ready he was with the present estate thereof. And immediately I was ravished in the Spirit,Verse 2. and behold, a Throne was set in Heaven, and one sate upon the Throne. Upon this suddaine and extraordinary cal∣ling by so heavenly and loud a voice, Iohn was forthwith ravished in Spirit. For as the Prophet Ezechiel was by the spirit in the visi∣ons of God, carried from Caldea to Ierusalem: So this holy Apostle is carried by the Spirit in the visions of God into Heaven, and by the same Spirit is made fit and capable of all these heavenly visions which should be shew∣ed him. So that in all this we do plainely and cleerely see, that Iohn hath (as it were) a fur∣ther calling and admittance from Heaven, to to behold and see these wonderfull secrets which now are to be imparted unto him. Behold a Throne, &c. Here beginneth the
description of the most high and glorious majesty of God, who is described after the manner of earthly Kings and Judges sitting upon their thrones and judgement seats. For he is King of Zion, and Judge of all the world. And he that sate, was to look upon like unto a Jas∣per stone,Verse 3. and a Sardine, and there was a Raine∣bow round about the Throne like an Emeraud. God for his admirable glory and beauty, is here compared to two most precious stones. The one which is the Jasper, being of a per∣fect greene colour, as Philosopers write: the other, which is the Sardine, being of a most bright red colour: Nothing can suffi∣ciently resemble the glory of God, being in∣finite: but these things being the most pre∣cious under the Sun, do after a sort shaddow it unto us. There was a Raine-bow round about the Throne, which may signifie, that Gods Throne in glory and beauty doth farre excell all other Thrones of mortall Princes; yea, even that of Salomon, which was of most pure Ivory, or rather it may signifie, that al∣though God in himselfe is most glorious and admirable, yet hee keepeth promise and co∣venant with the sons of men. For the Raine∣bow
was a signe of his covenant, as appea∣reth Gen. 9. and assuredly God will be mind∣ful of his covenant to a thousand generations. This Raine-bow is said to be like an Eme∣raud, which is alwaies of a fresh greene co∣lour, signifying that Gods covenant of grace and mercy towards his Church, is alwayes fresh and greene, and his goodnesse towards his people perpetuall and unchangeable. Moreover, God is described of his glorious retinue, and heavenly company about him. For it is sayd:Verse 4. Round about the throne were 24. seats, and upon the seats 24. Elders: which signifie the whole Church, both militant and triumphant, both of Jewes and Gentiles; and are therefore called 24. because the Church of the Jews grew out of 12. Patriarchs: and the Church of the Gentiles out of 12. Apostles. And as the glory and pompe of mortall Kings is set out by their troops and traines of nobles, and other excellent personages: So the glory of God (which in it selfe can receive no in∣crease) is to our capacity commended and set forth by his goodly companies of Saints and Angels. These 24. Elders are cloathed in white rayment, which signifieth their righteousnesse, as it is expounded, Chap∣ter 19. verse 8. not inherent, but imputative:
For they having no righteousnesse of their owne. Christs righteousnesse is imputed unto them through faith, and through faith is made theirs. For Abraham beleeved, and it was impu∣ted unto him for righteousnesse. These 24. Elders had on their head Crownes of gold, which signifie their victories over the world: for all the elect overcome the world through faith, as S. Iohn teacheth; and not the world only, but even the flesh and the Divell also: And therefore the crowne and garland of victory belongeth unto them as most valiant conquerors, Verse 5.Moreover it is said, that out of the throne proceed lightnings, and thundering, and voices, which signifie his terror and fearefull power in the preaching of the Law: for the preach∣ing of the Law, is as it were a voice of light∣ning and thundring. The powerfull preach∣ing of the law, is the very thundring of hell, and lightning of the wrath of God upon all impenitent sinners: and therefore at the de∣livery of the Law, there were lightnings and thundrings, and Mount Sinai it selfe did tremble and shake. Further it is said, there were seven lampes of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven Spirits of God. These seven lampes
which are interpreted to be the seven spirits of God, doe signifie the preaching of the Gospell, and the manifold graces and gifts of the Spirit, which are given to the Church by the meanes thereof. For the Gospell giveth a cheerefull and comfortable light, being the Ministry of the Spirit, as the Apostle saith, and therefore is resembled to seven Lamps. So then from the throne, that is, from the presence of God, proceedeth both Law and Gospell, and the Ministry of them both for the saving of soules. And all this maketh much for the setting forth of Gods glory and Majesty, being the marke heere aimed at. And before the throne there was a Sea of glasse like unto Chrystall:Verse 6. This Sea of glasse is the world, which is fitly compared to a Sea, because it is full of stormes, tempests, and waves, that are con∣tinually raised up in it. It is full of rocks, upon which many dash, and make shipwracke. It is compared to a Sea of Glasse, for the brittlenesse, changes, and uncertainety of all things in the world. It is said to bee before the Throne like Chrystall, because the all-seeing God doth
as cleerely behold from his Throne all the thoughts, words, and works of the sonnes of men, and all other particular actions of all his creatures under the Sunne, as we behold our face in a Chrystall. For all things are naked, and as it were laid out in an anatomy unto his eyes, with whom we have to doe. Moreover it is said, that in the middest of the throne,Verse 6. and round about the throne, were foure Beasts full of eyes before and behinde. These foure beasts doe signifie the Angels of Heaven, the invisible and elect Angels, as it is expounded, Ezech. 10. verse 20. where the Prophet in a vision seeth foure beasts, as it were bearing up and drawing Gods Cha∣riot of triumph. And at the 20. verse he saith expressely, that he at last understood they were the Cherubins: The first and tenth Chapter of Ezechiel being throughly looked into, do make this plaine. The reason why the Angels are called by the name of Beasts, is, because in the next verse they are compa∣red to beasts for their qualities of certaine beasts. They are named foure in number, be∣ing otherwise innumerable, because they are likened to foure severall beasts. The Angels are sayd to have eyes before and behind, for their great vigilancy over the
Church, and every member thereof: and be∣cause they are endued with knowledge of things past and things to come: and last of all, because they see and discerne almost all actions under the Sun, upward and downe∣ward, backward and forward. And the first beast was like a Lyon,Ver. 7, the second like a Calfe, &c. Here the Angels are compared to foure severall beasts: to a Lyon for strength and courage: to a Calfe or an Oxe, for service and use: to a Beast having the face of a man, for wisedome: to an Eagle, for swiftnesse and readinesse to execute the will of God. And moreover, because the Eagles soare a∣loft, and fly a very high pitch, we are given to understand, that the heavenly Spirits are much in celestiall contemplation, and do re∣ceive the knowledge of hid secrets & coun∣sels, for they are much aloft about the Throne of God, and many high and deepe secrets are opened unto them. And the foure beasts had each of them sixe wings about him,Verse 8. and they were full of eyes within, &c. This maketh it very plaine, that by these Beasts are understood the sixe Angels, be∣cause he ascribeth unto every one of them
sixe wings a peece. For the Angels are de∣scribed with wings, both in the first and tenth of Ezechiel before mentioned: and also in the sixth Chapter of the Prophesie of Isai∣as, where the Seraphins are sayd to have six wings a peece; two to cover their faces: two to cover their feete: and two to flye with∣all. And they have two wings to cover their faces withall, because they are not able to endure the unconceiveable brightnesse and glory of God, for he dwelleth in unap∣proachable light. They have two wings to cover their feete withall, because mortall then are not able to looke upon the bright∣nesse that is in Heaven. For we reade that many have beene astonished and dazled with the glory and brightnesse of Angels, so glo∣rious creatures are they. They have two wings to flie withall, to note their prompt obedience and readinesse to execute the com∣mandements of God, as formerly was shew∣ed. Moreover, the Angels are said to have wings, and to flye swiftly: because God by them doth speedily dispatch many purposes, actions and services here below: and for this cause the Scripture affirmeth, that he rideth upon the Cherubins: that hee dwelleth betweene the Cherubins: and that hee maketh the
Clouds his Chariots, and walketh upon the wings of the winde. For as earthly Kings are in their progresses carried in their most sump∣tuous coaches, drawne by the most excellent Coach-horses, to dispatch great businesses, and many weighty affaires within their do∣minions: so the Visions in Ezechiel do shew that the immortall King is carried most swiftly in his Chariot of triumph, drawne by the Cherubins, as it were by beasts, to di∣rect and over-rule all actions under the Sun. Moreover, these Angels are said to be full of eyes within,Verse 8. to note not onely their fulnesse of knowledge, but also their inward sight into all heavenly things; yea, even such as are most secret and hid: for they are of all other creatures most inward with God. None of his Children know so much of his counsell as they. Furthermore the Angels are heere said to prayse God uncessantly,Verse 8. day and night, saying; Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Al∣mighty, which was, which is, and which is to come: where we may cleerely see, that the Angels prayse and worship God in a bur∣ning zeale without wearinesse. For they are not as men,, which through their great cor∣ruption, are full of dulnesse and wearinesse in Gods worship; but they do alwaies serve
him with infatigable desires, and therfore are called Seraphins, because they burne in the zeale of God; and Cherubins, because their delight is to approach neare unto him, and to be alwaies about his Throne; yea even in his chamber of presence. They doe double and treble this word (holy) and warble much upon it, because they know full well, that he is righteous in all his waies, and holy in all his works, and that all his proceedings and judgements are even then weighed in the ballance of Justice and equity, when to mans sense and the judgement of reason, they seeme nothing lesse. For his judgements are as a great depth which mans reason cannot sound. Further, wee see that when these beasts, that is, the Angels, gave glory and honour and thanks to God, &c. the 24. El∣ders also fell downe before him, and worship∣ped him that liveth for evermore. Where we may see, that both Saints and Angels, doe joyntly prayse and magnifie God, and him alone, Even that GOD that liveth for ever∣more, even that GOD which was, which is, and which is to come: that is, the eternall and everlasting God. For the Scripture sayth: Praise him, O yee Saints, and praise him, O yee Angels that excell in strength. And the 24.
Elders cast their Crownes before the Throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour, &c. Wherein we see, that all the Elect do empty themselves of all worthi∣nesse to have any glory, acknowledging that their Crownes of glory are Gods free gift, and that the praise thereof belongeth only to him and nothing to themselves. And this in very deed is the right manner of worship∣ping God, frankly to ascribe all glory to him, and all shame to our selves, to give all to him to whom all is due, and nothing to our selves, which have nothing; for nothing can be given or taken out of nothing. Now then, to conclude and winde up this 4. Chapter, we do clearely see the summe and drift of all is, that Heaven doore was o∣pened unto John, and that he was let in, and called up into the Chamber of presence by a very loud voice, there to take notice of the future estate of the Church: and that the per∣son which thus called him up was the very immortall God himselfe, who is so glori∣ously described of his Throne, his troopes and traines of Saints and Angels, as we have heard. And all this is to commend and set forth the authority of this booke, whose Au∣thour is so excellent, yea, super-excellent.
CHAP. V. AFter this Vision containing the glory of the divine Majesty was shewed unto John, that he might know from what foun∣taine this Prophesie was derived, now in this fift Chapter is taught and shewed by what meanes and by whose mediation, the knowledge of such hidden mysteries were revealed unto the Church; namely, by the meanes and mediation of Jesus Christ, in whom onely the counsels and secrets of God the Father are opened, and made knowne unto men. For he is the great Prophet and Doctor of the Church, which is come down from the bosome of his Father, and hath made knowne unto us whatsoever he hath re∣ceived of his Father, as he himselfe testifieth. And the Church is commanded by a voice from Heaven to heare him, and him alone. This fifth Chapter containeth three things, generally,Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. First, a description of the booke, which was in the right hand of God. Secondly, a description of Jesus Christ, which receiveth it at the hand of his Father and openeth it. Thirdly, a description of those most glori∣ous
praises which are given to Christ by the Angels, Saints, and all the creatures in Hea∣uen and earth. I saw in the right hand of him that sate upon the throne, a book written within,Verse 1. and on the backe side, sealed with seaven seales. By this booke here mentioned, is meant this present booke of the Apocalyps, or Re∣velation, as it shall plainely appeare in the next chapter, when we come to the opening of the seaven seales thereof. For the things which fall out upon the opening of the seve∣rall seales, do plainely declare, that all is meant of the particular matters contained in this present booke. This book is said to be in the right hand of him that sitteth upon the throne, because all the secrets revealed in it, come from the coun∣sell and decree of the most high God, and are ordered by his meere direction & providence. It is called a written booke, to shew that the things contained in it, are so firmely de∣creed in the counsell of God, that none of them shall faile, but come to passe, and be fulfilled n their season. They are such as we may write of, as we use to say: and therefore for the cer∣ainty of them, they are here said to be writ∣en in a booke.
This booke is sayd to be written within and without, for the multitude and variety of matters contained in it. For there were both many and great things which should fall out in the World from the time that John received the Prophesie, unto the end of the World. This booke is sealed with seven seales, that is to say, perfectly sealed, because the things contained herein, are counsels and secrets, only known to God, till it pleased hi to reveale them to his Church by his Son. The elect Angels knew nothing of the things written in this booke, before the seales were opened. Verse 2.And I saw a strong Angell, which proclaimed with a loud voice; Who is worthy to open the booke, and to loose the seales thereof. Heere is Proclamation made to all crea∣tures, that if there were any manner of per∣sons in Heaven or earth, among men or An∣gels, that would take upon them to open and expound this booke, that they should com forth and shew themselves, and be very willingly and gladly heard.Verse 3. But alas, the next verse doth shew, that none in heaven o earth was able to open the booke and expoun it: whereupon John wept very much, becaus
no man was found worthy to open and interpret this booke. The cause of Johns weeping and lamen∣ting, was for feare the Church should be deprived of such profitable and excellent things as he knew were contayned in this booke. Such was his love to the Church: such was his zeale and care for the people of God. An example worthy of all imitation to mourne and weepe for the concling of the book of God, and to rejoyce in the o∣pening of it. But Papists and Atheists are of a contrary minde, for they rejoyce in the concealing and keeping close of the Scrip∣tures, and are much grieved with the ope∣ning and revealing thereof; because thereby their hypocrisie and villany is detected and discarded. Ʋpon this, one of the Elders sayd unto John:Verse 5. Weepe not: Behold, the Lion which is of the Tribe of Judah, the roote of David, hath ob∣tained to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof. Heere we see how Iohn is comforted and cheered up by one of the Elders, being now very pensive and sad; and is willed to plucke up a good heart, and to be of good cheere, for he could tell him good newes;
to wit, of one that could open and expound this booke, and all the secrets in it; and that is Jesus Christ, the great revealer of secrets, and onely expounder of all riddles, and hid∣den mysteries, as before hath been spoken. Jesus Christ is here said to be of the Tribe of Judah, because he is lineally descended of that Tribe, according to the flesh, and his humane nature. He is compared unto a Lyon, by allusion unto Jacobs words in his last will and testa∣ment, concerning Judah, namely, that he should couch as a Lyon, and as a Lyonesse, and none should stirre him. He is fitly compared to a Lyon, for his great and admirable po∣wer and strength, for he raigneth and must raigne over all his enemies, and in the mid∣dest of all his enemies, till he hath troade all his enemies under his feete. He is called the roote of David, both here, and also in the 22. Chapter of this Booke, verse 16. be∣cause he sprung out of David, the Sonne of Ishai, as a branch out of his roote, as the Prophet did fore-tell, that A rod should come forth of the stock of Ishai, and a graft should grow out of his rootes. And the Apostle sayth, that Christ was made of the seede of David, according to the flesh.
Then sayth John, I beheld, and loe,Verse 6. in the middest of the throne, and of the foure beasts, and of the Elders, stood a Lambe, as though he had beene killed, which had seven hornes, and seven eies, which are the seven Spirits of God sent into all the world. Here John taketh a view and sight of Jesus Christ, from the very middest of the throne, and of the foure beasts, and the Elders. Christ doth not appeare about the throne, as do the Saints and Angels, which are but ministers and ministring Spirits: but in the very middest of the Throne, and the foure beasts, &c. because he is God ever∣lasting, coequall and coeternall with the Fa∣ther; in whom (as the Apostle saith) dwelleth all the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily or essentially. And here afterwards the same worship and honour is ascribed unto him both by the Saints and Angels, which before is ascribed unto God the Father. Christ is heere compared to a Lambe, for his innocency; for the Scripture sayth, He was a sheepe dumbe before his shearer. Hee is the Lambe of God that taketh away the sinnes of the world. Hee is the Lambe slaine from the beginning of the world: He is compared to a
Lyon, for his great and incomparable strength in conquering Hell, Death, and damnation, and all infernall power. And to a Lambe, because he hath dispatched all this upon the Crosse, by the sacrifice of himselfe once of∣fered: for he did never more lively shew forth his Lyon-like power, then when he was as a Lambe slaine and sacrificed upon the Crosse. This Lambe Christ is here sayd to have seven hornes, which signifie his manifold power, or fulnes of power, or perfect power, according as this metaphor or borrowed speech of horne is usually so taken in all the Scriptures. This Lambe also is sayd to have seven eies, which are interpreted to be the seven spirits of God: that is, the manifold graces and gifts of the Spirit, which he gi∣veth unto his Church. Now then to con∣clude this point, for asmuch as the number of seven in this booke is a number of per∣fection and alwaies noteth perfection, there∣fore by Christs seven hornes, and seven eyes, we may, and that soundly understand his perfect power, and his perfect sight and knowledge in all things. For his seven eyes are so taken in the third Chapter of the Prophesie of Zachary, where it is said a
Ʋpon one stone shall be seven eyes. Meaning, that Jesus Christ, the corner stone of the Church, should be full of eyes, to looke out for the good of his Church, and to give light to all others: for he is the life and light of the World. And he came and tooke the booke out of the right hand of him that sate upon the throne.Ver. 7. Here Jesus Christ takes the booke out of his Fathers hand, purposing both to open it, and expound it: For he is the only expounder of the law, and the best interpreter of his Fathers will. Hereupon it is sayd, that the foure beasts,Verse 8. and 24. Elders fell downe before the Lambe, to testifie their thankefulnesse, and inward joy and rejoycing, that the Sonne of God would take upon him this office, which none other would or could performe. Moreover, by their falling downe and worshiping him, they doe plainely testifie, that he is God over all, to be blessed for ever. For otherwise the Angels of Heaven, both Cherubins and Seraphins, would not thus fall down and worship him, ascribing unto him both deity and divine honour. Consider then how great he is, of whom it is said: Let all the Angels of God worship him.Psal. 97.7.
Moreover, these Angels and Saints are sayd to have every one Harpes and golden Vials,Verse 8. full of Odours, which are the prayers of the Saints. These Harpes doe signifie the sweet con∣sent and harmony both of men and Angels, in sounding forth the praises of the Lambe: for herein the whole Church both militant and triumphant do accord and tune together, as many harpers harping upon their harpes;Apo. 14.2. as is written also in another place. Hereby also they do plainly testifie that in∣ward peace and spirituall joy, which all the faithfull have through Christ, which is more sweet and delightsome to the soule, then any musick is unto the eares. The Vialls full of Odours, are expounded to be the prayers of the Saints, which are therefore compared to odours, because they smell sweet in the nostrils of God, and are more fragrant then any nosegay or per∣fume whatsoever: for he taketh great plea∣sure in the prayers of his people; especially when they came out of golden vials, that is, sanctified hearts and consciences: for every sanctified heart is a golden heart in the sight of God; and every regenerate conscience is a Jewell of price, guilt with gold, and enameled
with pearle. For this cause the holy man David wisheth earnestly, that his heart might be so renewed and cleansed inwardly, that his prayer might be directed as incense in Gods sight,Psal. 14.1. and the lifting up of his hands as a sweet smelling sacrifice. Furthermore, these Saints and Angels do sing a new song. That is, they do sing to the prayses of the Lambe with renued affections, and unwearied desires. Their inward joy continueth alwaies fresh and greene as the Bay-tree: They never wither or waxe weary of the service of God: Their song is ever∣more new, and therefore evermore delight∣some. For the more new any thing is, the more pleasant and delactable: for men are not affected with old, but altogether with new things. Now then, Jesus Christ having taken this booke into his hand to open and expound, is applauded unto by the generall consent and voyces of the whole Church: for say they, Thou art worthy to take the booke, and to open the seales thereof. Wherein they do all with common consent, give their voyces unto Christ, acknowledging him to be the onely fit person in Heaven or earth, to take upon him the function of opening a booke so clo∣sed,
so clasped, so shut, so sealed; and they do yeeld a reason of their proceedings, because (say they) thou wast killed, and hast redeemed us unto God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. Meaning hereby, that he was put to death, to pay the price of our redemption, in whom all belee∣vers, both Jewes and Gentiles are saved. Their reason then is this: he that hath died, and risen againe, and is now exalted farre a∣bove all principalities and powers, &c. is the most fit instrument to open and interpret this booke: but thou O Christ the Lambe of God, art such an one; therefore thou of all others art most meete to take the matter upon thee, and to enter into this businesse. Further, they amplifie their reason thus:Verse 10. that he hath made us of slaves and servants, Kings: and of prophane persons, Priests unto the most high God. And last of all, that we shall raigne upon the earth. Not meaning hereby, that we shall raigne as earthly Kings, or onely enjoy an earthly Kingdome. For out of all doubt the Saints shall raigne with Christ in the Heavens for evermore. But heere is mention made of raigning in the earth, because after this life Gods Children shall have the fruition and inheritance both of Heaven and earth; that is
to say, that new Heaven and new Earth,2 Pet. 3.12 where∣in dwelleth righteousnesse: for the Heavens and the earth being redintegrated and pur∣ged from corruption, shall be the portion of the Saints, and the habitation of the Elect for evermore. After all this,Ver. 11. John heareth the voice of in∣numerable Angels besides the foure Beasts. That is, the Cherubines and Seraphins, or chiefe Angels; that is, Angels deputed to chiefe offices, round about the throne, which all with a loud voice doe acknowledge the Lambe which was killed,Ver. 12. to bee worthy of all honour, glory, and praise, &c. And not only these innumerable Angels, being 20. thousand times ten thousand, but also all other crea∣tures both in Heaven and Earth: As the Sun, Moone, and Starres, the fishes in the Sea, and the beasts in the earth, do all in their kinde sing the same song, acknowledging all ho∣nour and glory, praise and power, to belong unto him that sitteth upon the throne,Ver. 13. and unto the Lambe for evermore. For although the creature is as yet subject to the bondage of corruption, and therefore groneth and travelleth in paine, waiting when the Sonnes of God shall be revealed, yet it standeth in assured expectation of restitution to liberty
and incorruption; and therefore here all the creatures do praise the Lambe for that re∣stauration which they had so lovingly and wishly looked for. And the foure beasts said Amen. That is, they do subscribe to those prayses which the creature yeeldeth to their Creator. And not onely the Angels do subscribe and consent unto it, but the foure and twenty Elders also, that fall downe and worshp him that liveth for evermore. So that the Lambe is praysed and worshipped of all hands, both of men and Angels; and all other creatures as God everlasting, and bles∣sed for evermore. CHAP. VI. IN the fourth Chapter wee have heard the description of God the Father, which holdeth the sealed booke in his right hand. In the fift Chapter we have also had the description of Jesus Christ, the opener and interpreter of this seven sealed Book. Now in this sixth Chapter wee are to understand of the mattter and contents of this Booke, and of the strange accidents and events which followed upon the opening of every severall Scale.
For in this Chapter sixe of the Seals are ope∣ned by the Sonne of God, and the Mysteries thereof disclosed unto John, that he might declare them to the Church, for the comfort and instruction thereof. This Chapter containeth sixe principall things, arising from the severall opening of the sixe seales, and they are these: The spreading of the Gospell. Great persecutions following therupon. Famine. Pestilence. Complaints of the Martyrs.Ver. 1.2.3.4. &c. Fearefull revenge upon the world, for shedding the blood of Gods Saints. After,Verse 1. I beheld when the Lambe had opened one of the seales, and I heard one of the foure beasts say as it were the noise of thunder, Come and see. Now after all these former matters, John did very intentively fixe his eies upon the Lambe, being now about to open and unclaspe the first Seale of the booke; and all on the sudden he was admonished and stirred up by one of he Cherubins, that he should draw neere and come up, and take knowledge of these great nd important matters, which were now to
be revealed unto him. And to the end that he might be throughly awaked, and stirred up to attention in so waighty matters, it is sayd, that the voice of the Angell which spake unto him, was like the voice of a thun∣der: So that thereby Iohn was throughly rouzed, fitted and prepared, to receive these heavenly visions. verse 2.Therefore I beheld, and loe, there was a white horse, and hee that sate on him had a bowe, and a Crowne was given unto him, and he went forth conquering, that he might over∣come. Iohn keeping his eye steady upon the Lambe, having now opened the first seale, doth in a vision see a white horse, &c. By this white Horse, is meant the Mi∣nistery of the Word of God, and the first preaching of the Gospell by Christ and his Apostles, and the successors in the Primitive Church. The white horse is taken in this sense in the nineteenth Chapter of this Prophesie; where our Lord Jesus being upon this white Horse, beateth downe all his enemies before him: For who is able to resist his word, and the ministery of it. In the first Chapter of the Prophesie of Zachary, our Lord Jesus purposing to build
up his Church, being in a very ruinous estate after the captivity, is brought in by the Prophet on horse-backe, both for the reedi∣fying of his Church, and also for the punish∣ment of the Babilonians, his enemies, and the enemies of his people. In the 45. Psalme the Church the Spouse saith thus to her beloved Husband Christ: Gird thy sword upon thy thigh,Psal. 45. O thou mighty one, the sword of thy glory and comely beauty, and with thy comely beauty ride on prosperously for the businesse of truth and of meek righteousnesse, &c. Now in all these places of the Scripture, we do plainely see, that when Christ goeth about either to preach his Gospell, or build up his Church, or to be revenged on the ene∣mies thereof, he is brought in on horsebacke. And this doth strongly confirme and war∣rant this exposition, seeing it is not any ima∣gined sense, or new device of mans braine, but such a sense as other places of Scripture will very fully beare out. Moreover, if we do seriously consider, and deepely weigh the purpose and intend∣ment of the holy Ghost in all this, it will not a little helpe and further this exposition. For the chiefe scope and drift of all is, to describe the state of the Church from the Apostles
time to the end of the World. For this Pro∣phesie serveth to shew unto John the things that must shortly come to passe. Now, we all know by blessed experience, that the first estate of the Church did consist in the preaching of the Gospell by Christ and his Apostles: and therefore this must needs be understood of that time and estate of the Church. For Jesus Christ is he that sitteth up∣on this white horse, that is, by the Ministery of his Gospell he conquereth and subdueth the Nations under him. There may be three reasons alledged why this Horse is sayd to be of a white colour. First, because the Doctrine of the Gospell which was preached by Christ and his Apo∣stles, was pure and sincere, being without all spots and blots of errour and heresie. For the white colour in the Scripture doth signi∣fie purity, sincerity, innocency, joy, glory, and beauty. Secondly, because the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, was full of joy and com∣fort: As it is sayd of Samaria, after Philip had set the Gospell abroach there, that there was great joy in that City. Thirdly, because the Ministery of Christ and his Apostles, was very glorious and
beautifull, as it written: How beautifull are the feet of them which bring the glad tydings of peace! &c. And againe, with thy comely beauty ride on prosperously,Psal. 45. for the businesse of truth, &c. If any man demand a reason of Christs sitting on horse-backe, and riding forth on horse-backe: I answer, that it doth fitly re∣present that marvellous swiftnesse where∣with the light of the Gospell should be car∣ried and spred, not only throughout all Ju∣dea, Samaria, and Galile, but also throughout all the Kingdomes of the world. For it is not a wonder, to consider how swiftly, and as it were on horse-backe, and also how far over the heathen nations, within a few yeares after Christs ascension, the doctrine of the Gospell was preached, and of multi∣tudes imbraced? He rode forth indeed pros∣perously and swiftly upon this white Horse, even the Ministery of the Gospell, for the businesse of truth, and of meeke righteous∣nesse; and his right hand wrought fearfull things, as saith the Psalmist. Moreover, it is here said, that Jesus Christ hath a bow in his hand. And in the 25. Psal. from whence it seemeth all these phrases and speeches are borrowed, he is said to have
sharpe arrowes in his hand, whereby he pierceth the heart of his enemies. Now his bowe and arrowes do signifie the piercing power of the Gospell, whereby the World hath been subdued unto Christ. For, all the arrowes of the Gospell which Christ shooteth out of his bowe, which is even the tongue of his Ministers, do stick in the hearts of men; yea they pierce into all the secret places of the soule. For the Ministery of the Gospell is lively, and mighty in operation, sharper then any two-edged sword, and entreth through,Heb. 4. even unto the dividing asunder of the soule and the spirit, of the joynts and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and the intents of the heart, Heere is yet further mention made of a Crowne which was given unto Christ, and that he went forth conquering that hee might overcome, This Crowne signifieth the victory which he getteth over the World with his bow and arrowes. For the Psalmist saith: By thy sharp arrowes in the hearts of the Kings enemies, th people shall fall vnder thee. We reade in the second of the Acts of the Apostles, that 3000. of the Kings enemies were at once shot thorow with this bowe
and these arrowes, and did fall under him. We read of many other, at other times, and in other places. For the Apostle saith plain∣ly,2. Cor. 10. that the weapons of our warrefare are not carnall, but spirituall, mighty through God to cast downe holds, casting downe the imagina∣tions, and every high thing that is exalted a∣gainst the knowledge of God, and bringing in∣to captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. Thus we see how Christ and his Apostles and all their true successors, riding upon this white Horse, which is the Ministry of the Gospell, have gon over all the world conque∣ring and overcomming. I am not ignorant that some do expound this otherwise: but my purpose is not to meddle with other mens opinions and judge∣ments, but to set downe that which God hath given to me to see, and which in mine owne conscience and perswasion, I suppose to be the truth; referring all to the judge∣ment of the Church, and such therein as are indued with the Spirit of God. For, the spi∣rit of the Prophet is subject to the Prophets. And be it knowne unto all men, that my chiefe endeavours throughout this whole booke, shall be to seeke the sense that is, and
not the sense that is not: to meddle onely with truth, and let falshood goe. And when Hee had opened the second Seale, I heard the second Beast say,Ver. 3. Come and see. As before at the opening of the first seale, so now againe at the opening of the second seale, John is called upon by another Angell to give attention: and so afterwards at the opening of the third and fourth seal. Where∣in we may observe the heavinesse and drow∣sinesse of mans nature in all heavenly things, which is evermore ready to sinke and fall asleep, except it be awaked by many means, and stirred up by speciall grace. Ver. 4.And there went out another horse that was red, and power was given to him that salt thereon, to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another: and there was given unto him a great sword. This red Horse representeth the cruell persecution and bloudy Warres, which fol∣lowed the preaching of the Gospell. For the red colour in the Scripture doth note bloud, cruelty, and Warres. The rider upon this Horse is the Divell himselfe: for who but he, and his instruments delight in bloud, persecution, and warres? He hath
power given him to take peace from the earth (for he could have no power, except it were given him:) and to this purpose a great sword was given him, to murther and kill withall. And all this is to be understood of the state of the Church under the tenne great persecutions, raised up against it by the persecuting Emperours, Domitian, Traja∣nus, Nero, Antonius, Decius, Dioclesian, Maxentius, Licinius, and other cruell ty∣rants, even untill the time of Constantine the Great. Stories doe report, that these cruell persecutors did in a most savage and horrible manner, torture, torment, and shed the bloud of innumerable multitudes of Gods people. So that as the first estate of the Church, under the preaching of the Gos∣pell, was joyfull and peaceable: So this se∣cond estate of the Church, under such out∣ragious persecutions, was troublesome and tragicall; and yet for all that, in the middest of all these swords, bloud and flames of persecution, the Church did still prevail and encrease. For the bloud of the Martyrs is the seede of the Gospell. And the Church of∣ten times being sowne in bloud, yet spring∣eth up, and groweth in bloud. And as for the
cruell and blood-sucking Emperours, which could not endure the light of the Gospell, but strove by tyranny to suppresse it; the just God which taketh vengeance of all iniqui∣ty, and especially of the persecution of his children, was even with them well inough: for he gave them over, some to be slaine in the warres, some to be tortured with horrible diseases, some to be poysoned, some to be murthered, and some to murther themselves. Thus did God the avenger shew himselfe from Heaven, as the Stories report, and pay home to the full these blood-suckers of his Church, making them examples of his Wrath, and spectacles of his vengeance to all Nations. verse 5.And when he had opened the third seale, I heard the third beast say, Come and see. Then I beheld, and loe a blacke horse, and he that sate on him, had ballances in his hand, &c. By the black horse, famine, and dearth is signified; for the black colour, is a mourn∣full and sad colour: and what maketh men more pensive and sad then famine, and ex∣tream hunger? For it is a thing untolerable: and therefore the holy Ghost sayth: They be better that are killed with the sword,Lam. 4.9. then they
that dye of famine. He that sitteth on this horse, hath a ballance in his hand, which sig∣nifieth great penury and scarsity of all things, but especially of victuall: insomuch, that men must be pittanced and stinted in their victuals, and their bread and drinke must be delivered out by waight and measure, as it fareth in strait and sore siedges of Cities, when victuals wax scarce. This is it that God threatneth in Levit. 26. and Ezec. 4.5. That he would breake the staffe of bread,verse 6. and that ten women should bake in one oven, and deliver bread by measure. Now to declare the grievousnesse of this famine, a voyce commeth from the Throne and from the Angels, that a measure of wheat should bee for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny: the measure here spoken of, is a Chenix, which some Writers say, was so much as would serve a man for bread-corne for one day: And the Romane penny under Domitian, was alwayes seven pence of our mony. And at that time the labouring man did worke for a penny a day, which would doe little more then buy him bread-corne How then should his wife and children doe? Whereas it is sayd: Wine and Oyle hurt thou not. I take that it should ra∣ther
bee translated, In Wine and oyle thou shalt not doe unjustly: as the word will beare it. And the sense is, that in the state of corn and victuall, they shall deale conscionably and mercifully, not selling at the highest, but rather at the lowest rate now in the times of extreme scarcity. Now all this is to be understood of that most grievous famine which we read to have been about the yeare of our Lord, 316. and sundry times afterward. And all this for the contempt of the Gospell preached by Christ and his Apostles upon the white horse; and the murdering of Gods Saints, by him upon the red Horse, and his instruments. So grievous and fearfull a thing is the con∣tempt of the Gospell, and the persecuting of the Saints. And God did most justly cause the world to smart for it, and make them with sorrow enough to feele the punishment of the Gospell rejected. Ver. 7.And when he had opened the fourth seale, I heard the voice of the fourth Beast say: Come and see. Ver. 8.And I looked, and behold a pale horse, and his name that sate on him was Death, and hel followed after him, &c. This pale Horse signifieth the pestilence
and other contagious diseases, which God most justly brought upon the world for the contempt of the Gospell, and the murdering, of Christ and his Apostles. And as I noted before out of the Scriptures, that when God commeth either in mercy or judgement, hee is said to come on Horse-backe, to note his expedition and swiftnesse, both in the one and the other: so, as before, Christ is upon the white Horse, the Divell upon the red Horse, famine upon the blacke Horse: so here death and hel are said to be upon the pale Horse: for pestilence and death maketh men look pale: but being dead, he saith Hell followed. For assuredly Hell doth alwayes follow the death of the body, excepting those onely whom Christ hath delivered from hell and damna∣tion by the power of his death. Thus then it is; the red Horse with bloud, the black Horse with famine, the pale Horse with pestilence, have power given over the fourth part of men to murther, kill, and slay; as all Stories doe shew, that for the re∣jecting of Christ and his Church and his Gospell, these plagues were carried as it were on horse-back, over a great part of the world. Now as touching this famine and pe∣stilence which fell out upon the opening of
the third and fourth seales, they are to be re∣ferred unto those times especially, wherein the Hunnes, Goths and Vandals, and other barbarous Nations which were the wasters of the world, did waste and decay the Ro∣mane Empire both farre and neere. Where∣upon grew this famine, scarsitie, and pesti∣lence, and strange diseases heere spoken of a∣bout some 300. yeares after Christ, and some∣what more. And when he had opened the fift Seale, I saw under the Altar, the soules of them that were killed for the word of God, and for the testimony which they maintained, &c. Here is discovered the state of the Mar∣tyrs after this life, and the condition of the spirits of all just and perfect men. For where∣as it might be demanded, what became of all those heapes and multitudes of men which were slaine for the testimony of Jesus in the ten persecutions: it is here answered, That they were under the Altar. John in a vision seeth them under the Altar. That is, under the mercifull protection of Christ in Hea∣ven, who for them and for us all, was made both Altar, Priest, and Sacrifice. This Altar, Christ, is afterwards called the golden Altar, which is before the Throne of God.Chap. 8.3. So then it
is cleare, that the soules of the Martyrs were with Christ in glory. For he saith to his dis∣ciples: Where I am, there shall you be also.Joh. 14.3. And in another place he sayth:John 12.32. If I were lift up from the earth, I should draw all men unto me, that is, all beleevers. Then it followeth, that the soules of these just and righteous men were in Paradise, and in Abrahams bosome, which is the very Port and Haven of salvation. For although the persecuting Emperours, and other tyrants of the earth, had power to kill their bodies, yet had they no power over their soules, as our Lord Jesus affirmeth. And they cryed with a loud voice, saying: How long, Lord, holy and true,verse 10. doest not thou judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell up∣on the earth? Heere we see plainely, that the soules of the Martyrs doe very vehemently cry for vengeance upon these cruell Tyrants which shed their blood. Moreover, they cry for it speedily, and seeme to be impatient of de∣lay. But it is to be observed, that they do not this in any hatred, or private desire of re∣venge, in respect of any wrong or cruelty shewed to them; but in a very love and bur∣ning zeale of the Kingdome and glory of Christ, and whatsoever desire they have, it is
wholly to that end. Wherefore they are here under a figure brought in crying for venge∣ance, rather to expresse what judgement of God tarrieth for the cruell persecuters, then to shew what minde they beare towards them. For it is indeed their cause that cry∣eth for vengeance. And as Abels bloud; so their bloud cryeth aloud in the eares of the Lord of Hoasts for revenge. Moreover, we may not imagine or gather out of this loud crying of the Martyrs in Heaven, that they have any disturbance, impatience, disquietnesse, or any discon∣tentment there. But this they doe in a fer∣vent desire of that fulnesse of glory, which they assuredly hope for and looke for in con∣summation of all things, when both their souls and bodies shall be joyned together. Ver. 11.And long white robes were given unto every one; and it was said unto them, That they should rest for a little season, untill their fellow servants and their brethren which should be killed, even as they were, were ful∣filled. These white robes doe signifie that ho∣nour, glory, and dignity, whereunto not only the Martyrs, but also all other faithfull belee∣vers are advanced in the chambers of peace:
for so white Robes are to be understood in sundry other places of this booke. And this doth plainly prove, that the martyrs were now in glory with Christ. Now, as concerning the answer to their complaint and cry, it was this, That they should be content, and have patience for a little season, (for the time remaining, to the end of the World, was but as a day with God, and as a moment in comparison of e∣ternity:) and the reason of the delay is yeel∣ded, which is this; that there were numbers of others, their brethren in the World, which should bee martyred and slaine for the truth, as well as they, under the great Antichrist of Rome, and the bloudy Turke, at and upon the opening of the seventh seal. And therefore in consideration that the most wise God had decreed and fore-determined with himself in most secret and hid counsell, to bring multitudes of others to glory by the same way and meanes that themselves were brought, that therefore in the meane time, being so short a time, they should rest satisfied and contented. And here by the way, we see what stayeth the comming of Christ unto judgement; namely this, that the number of the Martyrs and Saints, and al
such as he hath chosen unto life, are not yet accomplished. And behold when he opened the sixt Seale, and loe, there was a great Earth-quake,ver. 2.13.14. and the Sunne was as blacke as sacke-cloth of haire, and the Moone was like blood. And the starres of Heaven fell unto the earth, as a fig-tree casteth her greene figges, when it is shaken of a mighty winde. And Heaven departed away as a scrole when it is rolled, and every Mountaine and Ile were mo∣ved out of their place. Upon the opening of the sixt Seale, very dolefull and fearefull things doe follow: As earth-quakes, the darkning of the Sun, the obscurity of the Moone, the falling of the Starres, the rolling together of the Hea∣vens, the remooving of mountaines and Iles out of their places, the howlings and hor∣rors of Kings, Captaines, and other Poten∣tates of the earth, which are all things very terrible and fearefull to behold: and all these doe represent and figure out unto us the most fearefull tokens of Gods high displeasure and most heavy indignation against the wicked World. Very grievous things fell out upon the opening of the second, third, and fourth seales: but they are farre more
grievous which follow upon the opening of this sixt seale: for this sixt Seale contayneth an aggravation and increase of all the former judgements. For now after the cry of the Martyrs for vengeance, God the avenger of the bloud of the Righteous doth shew him∣selfe from Heaven, and declare his wrath in more fearefull manner then before, even to the great astonishment of all the creatures in Heaven and Earth. So horrible a thing is the shedding of the blood of the Christians. For now we see plainely, that God heareth the cryes of his Martyrs, and commeth as a Gy∣ant, or an armed man, to take vengeance of all their enemies, For,Psal. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints: and he is much mooved with the cry of their blood, as here we see. And therefore now threat∣neth to hold a generall Assize, wherein he will make inquisition after blood, and ar∣raigne and condemne all such as are found guilty thereof: according as the persecuting Emperours and many others did finde and feele by wofull experience. For, if God be angry but a little, who may endure it. Now although the Stories do report, that in those dayes, which was above 300. yeares after Christ, there were many great and
fearfull Earth-quakes in divers nations and Cities of the World: yet it is apparant, that the Earth-quake here spoken of, cannot bee taken litterally, nor any of the rest here men∣tioned. For there was never any time, nei∣ther is it mentioned in any Chronicle, that ever the Sunne was as blacke as sack cloth of haire; or the Moone turned into bloud; or the Starres fell from Heaven; or the Hea∣vens rolled together like a scrole; or that Mountaines and Ilands were moved out of their places. Therefore of necessity all this must be understood metaphorically; that is, that God did in so strange and fearfull a manner manifest his wrath from Heaven by tumults, commotions, seditions, and alterati∣ons of Kingdomes, as if these things of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, had been visi∣bly represented to the eye. An earth-quake in this booke, and other bookes also of the Scriptures, doth by a borrowed speech sig∣nifie commotions of Common-wealths, troubles, tumults, uprores, and great alte∣rations of States and Kingdomes. The dark∣ning of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, and rolling together of the Heavens, do by a me∣taphor in the Scripture, signifie the wrath of God; which they being not able to endure,
are said here to blush at, to cover themselves, to hide themselves, to be ashamed of them∣selves, to remove out of their places, no more to do their office, &c. For as birds do hide themselves, and thrust their heads into bushes, when the Eagle commeth abroade: And as all Beasts of the Forrest doe tremble and couch in their dennes, when the Lyon roareth: And as the subject doth hide himselfe, and dare not shew his head, with whom the King is displeased; So here it is said, that the whole earth doth tremble, and all the celestiall creatures are amazed and confounded with beholding the angry face of God against the world, in so much that they do as it were draw a canopy over them, hide themselves under a cloud, and surcease to do their offices. The darkning of the Sunne and Moone, is taken in this sense in the second or Joel, and also in the second Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. For there God promising and foretelling, that in the last dayes he would abundantly powre forth of his Spirit upon all flesh (which is to be understood of the plentifull preaching of the Gospell in the Apostles time, and the abundance of grace that was given with the same) addeth, that
for the contempt of so great grace and mer∣cy, he would shew wonders in Heaven a∣bove, and tokens in the earth beneath. Blood and fire, and the vapour of smoke; the Sunne shall be turned into darknesse, and the Moone into blood, before that great and notable day of the Lord come. The mea∣ning of the Prophet is, as Peter also doth expound it,Acts 2. that God from Heaven will shew such apparant signes of his wrath a∣gainst the World, that men should be no lesse amazed, then if the whole order of na∣ture were inverted. And this was perfor∣med, when as the Jewes for the contempt of Christ and his Gospell, were most miserably destroyed by the Romanes. Even so here, under the opening of the sixt seale God doth threaten, That for the murdering of his Sonne Christ, and his Apostles, and innumerable Christians, he would bring strange judgements and extra∣ordinary calamities upon the world, accor∣ding as all stories do shew, that those times were full of bloodsheds, commotions, fa∣mine, pestilence, and miseries of all sorts. I am not ignorant, that the darkning of the Sunne and Moone, and the falling of the Stars from Heaven, are sometimes in this booke put for
the obscurity and corruption of pure do∣ctrine, and the falling away of the Pastors of the Church from their sincerity and zeale. But in this place the circumstances will not beare that sense: First, because here the darkning of the Sun and Moone, &c. is joyned with an Earth-quake, the rolling to∣gether of the Heavens, and the moving of Mountaines and Islands out of their places; which argueth a most horrible confusion, of all things. Secondly, because afterward in the eight chap. he doth of purpose speake of the corrupting of pure doctrine, and the falling away of the Ministers, referring it to that Chapter, as his proper place. Thirdly, because the Kings and Captaines of the earth here immediately mentioned, would never have been cast into any such perplexities and horrors upon any corruption of doctrine and the ministery, as here we reade of. For com∣monly men are not any whit touched or mo∣ved with that, or such like things. Last of all, because the scope and drift of the holy Ghost, under the opening of this sixt Seale, is to describe corporall, not spirituall; visible, not invisible judgements. For he doth orderly and of purpose handle them in the next Chapter.
Now, whereas it is sayd in the last three verses, that the Kings of the earth, and the chiefe Captaines,Ver. 15.16.17. and the mighty men, and every bond-man, and every free-man hid them∣selves in dennes, and amongst the rockes of the mountaines, and said to the rockes and moun∣taines, Fall on us, &c. the sense and meaning of all is this, that these visible judgements should be so horrible and extraordinary, that all sorts of men then living upon the face of the earth, should even wish them∣selves buried quicke, or that they might run into a mouse-hole, or awger hole, to hide themselves from the wrath of the Lambe. For being both outwardly terrified with the sensible judgements, and inwardly gri∣ped and tormented with the fury of their owne consciences, they are at no hand able to endure it. CHAP. VII. THis Chapter doth wholly appertaine unto the opening of the sixt Seale. It sheweth generally, how God in the mid∣dest of all the broyles which hapned under the opening of the sixt seale, yet did preserve his owne Church, and merci∣fully
provide for his owne people. This seventh Chapter may very fitly be divided into three parts. First, it sheweth, that as God did most fearefully punish the World with visible and sensible Judgements, as we have heard before: So now he would set upon them with invisible and spirituall plagues, which are of all other most grievous and intole∣rable. Secondly, it sheweth the state and condi∣tion of the Church militant here in earth, as before was shewed under the opening of the fift Seale,Verse 2, 3, 4, &c. the state of the Church trium∣phant in the Heavens; namely, that it is sea∣led and set in safety from all dangers. Thirdly, it sheweth the blessed and hap∣pie estate of all Gods elect, and their fer∣vent prayses and zealous worship of God, who thus mercifully did provide for their security in the middest of greatest perils and extremities.Ver. 10, 11, &c. And after that, I saw foure Angels stand on the foure corners of the earth,Verse 1. holding the foure windes of the earth, that the windes should not blow on the earth, neither on the sea neither on any greene tree.
These foure Angels are Angels of darknes, or foure divels; which is proved by this rea∣son, that they hold the 4. winds from blow∣ing on the Earth: that is, stoppe the course of the Gospell, which is a spirituall plague. They are sayd to stand upon the foure corners of the Earth, because power was gi∣ven them to plague, not some one or two Countries, but the Universall World, both East, West, North, and South. The blowing of the winds doth very fit∣ly represent the preaching of the Gospell, and that heavenly inspiration and breathing of the Holy Ghost which goeth with it. Wind is so taken, Joh. 3. where our Lord Jesus sayth, The wind bloweth where it listeth, &c. So is every man that is borne of the Spirit. And againe in the fourth of the Cantic. in these words; Arise, O North, and come O South, and blow on my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. Where it plainely ap∣peareth, that the Church craveth the inspi∣ration of the Spirit, that her fruits may a∣bound: For what can be meant by these winds which she wisheth to blow upon her garden, but the breathings of Gods Spirit and Word? It followeth then, that if the blow∣ing of the winds in the Scriptures do signifie
the breathing of Gods grace, and holy Spi∣rit, that the stopping of the winds by a rea∣son of the contraries, doth here signifie the stopping of the same, and the deprivation of all heavenly blessings. So that it is cleare, that a spirituall plague is heere represented, which also is the more apparant, because heer is such a speciall proviso and care had for the Churches safety, that it might not be in∣fected with this spirituall contagion. Now all this doth plainely fore-prophesie, not only the stopping of the course of the Gospell: but even the utter taking of it away from the World, for their great contempt thereof, and the horrible murthering and massacring of all the true professors of it: according as it came to passe afterward in the prevailing first of Heresies, and afterward of the Popish and Mahometish Religion, as in the two next Chapters following shall plainely ap∣peare. And I saw another Angell come up from the East,Ver. 2.3. which had the Seale of the living God, and he cried with a loud voyce to the foure Angels, to whom power was given to hurt the earth and sea, saying: Hurt ye not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees, till we have sealed the ser∣vants of God in their foreheads.
This Angell is Jesus Christ, who by the Prophet is called the Angell of the covenant. That Angels do represent and sustaine he person of Christ their head, is so common and usuall a thing in the Scriptures, that I sll not need to stay in it. That this Angell is Christ, it doth ne∣ly appeare by the things heere ibuted unto him, which can agree to o her. First, in that he hath the Seale of e living God (which is the Spirit of adoption) to set upon all the elect, for he is th ely keeper of this great Seale, and is privy Seale. He onely hath authority to set it upon whom he will. Secondly, because he is said to come up from the East: that he is the only Sun of righteous∣nesse, which ariseth upon his Church every morning, and with his bright beames expel∣leth all darknesse from it: According to that of Zacharias in his propheticall song: Through the tender mercy of our God,Luke 1.70. the day spring from on high hath visited us. Thirdly, because he holdeth a sove∣raignty and command over the Divls: for he chargeth them heere to stay their hands from doing any hurt, till he had provided for his elect.
Whereas it is said,verse 2. that power was given to these Divels to hurt the earth, the Sea and trees: that is, the number of Reprobates, we may note, that the divels have no absolute Power, but only by permission: as appeareth in this, that they could neither ouch Job, nor enter into the heard of Swine without li∣cence.Job 1. Whereas it is said,Verse 3. ill we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads, it doth plainely shew that the punishment of the wicked are deferred till provision be made for the Elect. The floud came not upon the old World, till Noah and his family were re∣ceived into the Arke. The Angels destroyed not Sodom, till Lot was set in safety. The plaguing Angell spared the first borne of Egypt, till the posts of the Israelites houses were sprinkled with the blood of the Paschall Lambe.Ezec. 9. The sixe Angels sent to destroy Je∣rusalem, are charged to stay the execution, till the servants of God were marked in their fore∣heads. All these examples do manifestly declare what tender care the Lord in all ages hath had of his owne people, that they might be delivered and set in safety in the midst of all extremities. Even so heere we see that
God is very carefull, that his owne children might not be infected with those damnable heresies which now already upon the stop∣ping of the course of the Gospell began to be hatched, and afterwards did spring and grow up in the Church, both thicke and three-fold. Verse 4.And I heard the number of them that were sealed, and there were sealed an hundred forty and foure thousand of all the Tribes of the children of Israel: Of the Tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand, &c. Now John heareth the number of them that were sealed; and he reckoneth up the whole Church militant, consisting both of the Jewes and Gentiles: He saith, that of the Church of the Jewes there were sealed 144000. Wherein he putteth a certaine number for an uncertaine, and a definite number there∣withall also for an indefinite; for his mea∣ning is not that there were just so many, and neither moe nor lesse sealed: but this number doth arise of 12. times 12. in that he saith, of every Tribe twelve thousand: for twelve times 12. thousand, make an hundred forty and foure thousand. Neither yet may we thinke, that of every Tribe there were an equall number sealed, not moe nor lesse of
one Tribe then another, but this number of twelve, is used as the perfect and full num∣ber; in as much as the Church of the Jewes was founded upon the twelve Patriarkes: unto which our Saviour had respect, when for to gather the dispersed and lost sheepe of the house of Israel, he chose twelve Apostles. Now heere we are to observe, that not∣withstanding the horrible persecutions and calamities which fell out upon the opening of foure of the Seales, yet God had his Church even of the Jewes, which in the judgement of reason, a man would have thought long ere now, had been utterly extinct and abolished. But the Apostle sayth:Rom. 11. God hath not cast off his people which he had chosen: that is, utterly cast them off. It is therefore a most sure and certaine po∣sition in divinity, that God hath alwaies his; that is, in all ages, in all times, in all places, in all Countries, even in the midst of all trou∣bles and flames of perscution, yet God hath his hid and invisible Church even up∣on the face of the earth. As it was in the dayes of Elias. As was in Christs time,1 Kin. 19.18. when the Shepheard was smitten, and the sheepe scat∣tered. And as it was in the dayes of the great Antichrist, as afterward we shall see.
Moreover, it is to be observed, that in the enumeration of the 12. Tribes, the Tribe of Dan is left out, and the Tribe of Levi taken in. The cause of the omission and skipping of the Tribe of Dan, was their continuance in Idolatry from the time of the Judges, (at what time they first fell into it) even unto the Captivity. This Tribe is also omitted in the Catalogue of the Tribes mentioned 1. Chr. chap. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Then the rea∣son of this omission, is first their unworthi∣nesse: And secondly, that there might be a place and roomth for the Tribe of Levi to be taken in; which in this Catalogue for singu∣lar reason, and a speciall mystery might not be omitted. For, although the Tribe of Levi had no portion or inheritance amongst the other Tribes in the earthly Canaan; and now the Priesthood being transferred unto Christ, the Holy Ghost doth expresly af∣firme, that the Tribe of Levi, as well as o∣thers, hath his part and portion in the hea∣venly inheritance, and the celestiall Canaan. Ver. 9.10.After these things, I beheld, and loe a great multitude which no man can number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the
Lambe, clothed with long white Robes, and Palmes in their hands; and they cryed with a loud voice, saying, Salvation commeth of God, &c. This is to be understood of the Church of the Gentiles, and they are said to be an innu∣merable multitude of all Countries and Nati∣ons. For although the Church of God in re∣spect of the Reprobates is very small, and as an handfull upon the face of the earth; yet in it selfe simply considered, it is very great and large: for even out of Adams cursed race, God hath chosen many thousands to life. And here still we are to observe the great goodnesse and mercy of God, that notwithstanding former persecutions, and the great blindnesse which afterward did invade the Church in the pre∣vailing errors and heresies: yet John heareth and seeth such an huge number sealed up to salvtion, through Christ, both of the Jewes and Gentiles. The Church of the Gentiles exceeding in number the Church of the Jewes, are here said to have long white Robes, in token of their purity and innocency; and Palmes in their hands, in signe of their victory over the world, flesh, and the divell. For Palmes in ancient time were ensignes and badges of victory.
After this, is set downe how the whole Church of the Gentiles do praise and wor∣ship God freely,Ver. 10, 11, 12. acknowledging salvation to be only of him through Christ. And all the Angels of Heaven do applaud, subscribe, and say Amen to the same, as we have heard before in the fourth Chapter. The foure beasts are heere mentioned a∣gaine, whereby is meant the Angels, both because they are sayd to have wings, Chap∣ter 4. which agreeth to none but Angels, E∣say 6. and also because they are expressely named and interpreted to be the Cherubins, Ezec. 10. If any man muse why the Angels should be called Beasts, let him be resolved with these foure reasons. First, because they are compared to beasts before, as the Lyon, Calfe,Ezec. 1. &c. Secondly, because Ezechiel cal∣led them so, in as much as they draw Gods Chariot of triumph. Thirdly, because the Prophet Zachary compareth them to red, speckled,Zach. 1.8. and white Horses. Fourthly, be∣cause the same Prophet calleth them Gods Coach-horses, and the multitudes and socie∣ties of them, he calleth Gods Chariots, which came out of two mountaines of brasse: that is, they went forth at his decree (which
standeth as fast, and unremoveable as a Mountaine of Brasse) to comfort and deliver his Church out of the captivity of Babylon, and also to succour and helpe the remnant which were left behind in Judea. Now in the Prophets, these Chariots and Chariot∣horses are sayd to carry the Almighty most swiftly throughout all the world. And there∣fore in Zachary it is said of the Angels:Zac. 1.10. These are they which goe thorow the whole world. In Ezechiel it is said, that the beasts ran,Eze. 1.14. verse 7. and re∣turned like lightning. And againe, that they sparkled like the appearance of bright brasse: and the wheeles of Gods Chariots were mooved with inconceiveable swiftnesse, even as fast as the Angels did flye. Let these reasons and Scriptures then satisfie us touching this, that the Angels are called beasts. After all this, one of the 24. Elders asketh John what they were, and from whence they came,Ver. 13. which were thus arraied in long white Robes. Which question is asked of the Elder, not as being ignorant thereof; but to stirre up John, being ignorant, to enquire of the mat∣ter, that he might instruct him therein. And therefore when John confessed his ignorance, desiring to be instructed therein, the Elder telleth him the whole matter; namely, that
they were such as were come out of great tribu∣lation.Verse 14. For none can enter into life, but through many afflictions, as the Apostle saith. After this againe, the militant and visible Church is described and set forth, not according to their present state, but according to that which is to come;Ver. 15.16. for they are heere spoken of, as if they were already in the possession of Hea∣ven, and that for the infallible certainty and assurance thereof. Therefore the Apostle sayth, that even already they doe sit together in heavenly places.Verse 16.17. And here they are sayd to be in the presence of the Throne of God, &c. to hunger and thirst no more, &c. to have all teares wiped from their eyes, and to bee led by the Lambe unto the Fountaines of living wa∣ters. All which doth very plainely and plen∣tifully expresse that infinite glory and end∣lesse felicity which is prepared for all the true and faithfull worshippers of God. Ma∣ny good lessons and observations might be gathered out of all this: But I do of purpose omit them, because in this work I do chiefly and almost altogether aime at interpretation, therein also studying brevity, soundnesse, and plainenesse.
CHAP. VIII. VVE have heard out of the seventh Chapter, how the divels and their instruments, the Romane Emperours, did stoppe the course of the Gospell, Now in this Chapter we are to heare the wofull ef∣fects of the stopping thereof, which was the springing up, and prevailing of manifold errours and heresies in the World. So that the principall scope and drift of this Chap∣ter is to shew, that God for the contempt of his Gospell, and great indignities offered to the true professors thereof, did give up the World to blindnesse, to errour, to super∣stition and heresie: and as the Apostle sayth, Because they received not the love of the truth,2. Thes. 2. therefore God sent them strong delusi∣ons, that they should beleeve in lies. For as be∣fore we have heard how the world was most fearfully punished with externall plagues and judgements: So heere we are to understand how the same was punished with judgements spirituall and internall, as formerly hath beene sayd upon the stopping of the foure winds. For although that spirituall plague was very great, yet these
spirituall plagues which follow upon the opening of the seventh seale, are far greater. For now we are to heare and understand, not onely of the errours and heresies, where∣by a way and passage was made by degrees, as it were by certaine staires, for Antichrist to climbe up into his cursed chaire, and to take possession thereof; but also we are to understand of his very tyranny and King∣dome it selfe; and also of the Kingdome of the Turke, and the last judgement. For the things contained under the opening of the seventh Seale, do reach unto the end of the world. For the booke sealed with seven seales, containeth all the whole matters which were to be revealed. This Chapter containeth foure principall things as it were the foure parts thereof. ver. 1.2.3.4.5, 6, &c.First, the reverent attention and silence, with admiration which was in the Church at and upon the comming forth of this most horrible vengeance. Secondly, before the execution of these most execrable plagues, the Church is re∣membred and set in safety with all her Children, by her great Mediator Christ Jesus. Thirdly, the execution of this vengeance,
which commeth forth at the blowing of the seven trumpets by seven Angels. Fourthly, the vengeance it self contained in the prevailing of errour and heresie: the falling away of the Pastors of the Church, and the universall darkenesse that followed thereupon. And when hee had opened the seventh Seale, there was silence in Heaven above halfe an houre. By Heaven in this place he meaneth not the Kingdome of glory after this life: but by Heaven is meant the Church heere upon earth: as it is so taken, Chap. 12. Verse 1. and Chap. 14. Verse 2. There may be three reasons yeelded, why the Church is called Heaven. First,1. Joh. 5.1. because the birth thereof is from Heaven: for it is borne of God. Secondly, because the inheritance thereof is from Heaven, and therefore is called,Col. 1.12. Phil. 3.20. The inheritance of the Saints. Thirdly, because the conversation thereof is in Heaven, as the Apostle sayth. To this may be added, that our Lord Jesus in his Gospell doth so often call his visible Church the Kingdome of Heaven by a Trope,Mat. 13. because CHRIST beginneth
his raigne in the faithfull therein, whom af∣terward he translateth actually into the very Kingdome of glory. By silence here is meant the great attention of the Church, because great things were now at hand. For now up∣on the opening of the seventh Seale, far grea∣ter matters are threatned then any before: and therefore the Church doth listen unto them in deepe silence, and as it were in hor∣ror and trembling through admiration: for now there appeare such dreadfull judge∣ments of God, to be executed upon the earth, that all the heavenly company are astonished and amazed to behold it, and do as it were quake and tremble to thinke up∣on it. For as when heavy newes commeth down from the Prince to be proclaimed in open markets, all good subjects do listen and give eare with silence and trembling: so it fareth in this case. By halfe an houre, he meaneth that short time, wherin the minds of the godly were prepared, fitted and dis∣posed, wisely to consider of these matters, and to make good use of them. I know right well, that this Verse is far otherwise interpreted of some: but I take this to be most sound, and simple, and best agreeing to all that followeth: for the next Verse is
joyned unto this by a conjunction copula∣tive, to note a coherence of the matter, and to draw the sence together: for he sayth, And I saw seven Angels, which stood before God,verse 2. and to them were given seven Trumpets. These seven Trumpets signifie that God would proceed against the World in fearefull hostility, and come against it as an open enemy unto battell, proclaiming open warre against it, as it were with sound of Trumpet and Drumme, setting up the flag of defi∣ance against it. And hereupon groweth this silence and trembling in the Church, which only mooved with the signes of Gods wrath, when as all others sit still in secu∣rity, as the Prophet Zachary saith in a like case. To stand in this place, signifieth to admi∣nister, as it is said of the Priests and Levites, that they stand before God, and before the Altar, that is, minister. So heere the Angels doe stand before God, as ready to administer and execute these Judgements. For they are ministring spirits, and heere they do sound the alarum at the commandement of God. These Angels are popounded as seven in number, because it pleased God at once to powre down his wrath upon the rebelli∣ous
World, but at divers times, and by piece-meale. Whether these were good or bad Angels, it is not materiall to dispute, see∣ing God executeth his judgements, both by the one and the other.2 Sa. 24.16 Moreover, it is specially to be observed, that the blowing of these seven Trumpets, do all belong to the opening of the seventh seale, are as it were the seven parts there∣of; for the things which fall out upon the blowing of these seven Trumpets, do reach even unto the last Judgement, as the Angell sweareth, Chap. 10.6.7. Then another Angell came, and stood before the Altar,ver. 3. having a golden Censor, and much odours was given unto him, that he should offer with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altars, which is before the throne. We heard before, that when the course of the Gospell was stopt by the divell and his instruments, yet God was very carefull for the safety and sealing up of his owne servants: so likewise we are now to hear of the like care and providence: for now, that errours and heresies were to be sowne in the World, whereby many were corrupted; and that He himselfe from Heaven doth proclaime open enmitie against the despi∣sers
of his Gospell, by giving them up to blindnesse and errour; he doth double his care and providence to all his faithfull worship∣pers. For heere we do plainely see, that the Church hath a mediator, and that he which keepeth Israel, neither slumbereth nor slee∣peth. And therefore when the wrath of God doth most of all breake forth upon the world for the contempt of his graces, yet the Church is remembred, and set in safety with all her Children. For her prayers come up before God, and are accepted through the mediator. And this is the sence and drift of this third verse. By this Angell is meant Jesus Christ, the Angell of the covenant, as we have heard before, who is not an Angell by nature, but by office. It is manifest that in the old law there was a golden Altar, and a golden Censor, on which the Priest did burne sweet incense before the Lord; which did figure the mediation of Christ, in whom the prayers of the Saints are accepted. Now heere the holy Ghost alludeth to that sacrificing Priest-hood of the old Testa∣ment, where incense was offered at the Altar, which now is the sweet savour of the death
of Christ, through whom both we and all our sacrifices are seasoned and sweetned. Who therefore is this Angell but Christ? What are the sweet odours with the which the prayers of all Saints come before God, but the most sweet mediation of the Lord Jesus? What is meant by the smoake of the odours which with the prayers of the Saints went up before God out of the Angels hand? Surely the sweet incense of Christ medi∣ation, wherewith our prayers are spiced and perfumed, that they might be as sweet in∣cense of Christs mediation, wherewith our prayers are spiced and perfumed, that they might be as sweet smelling sacrifices in the Nostrils of God. For as water cast into a fire, raiseth a smoake: so the teares of the faithfull besprinkled in their prayers, make them as sweet incense, acceptable to God through Christ. The summe of all is this, that in the middest of all these heresies, and those hellish troubles which should be rai∣sed up by the Pope and his Clergy, the Turke and his armies, as in the next Chap∣ter we shall see, the elect have their prayers heard for their preservation by the merits of CHRIST. verse 5.And the Angell tooke the Censor, and fil∣led
it with the fire of the Altar, and cast it into the earth, and there were voyces, and Trumpets, thundrings, and lightnings, and earthquakes. Heere we see how Jesus Christ taketh the Censor, and filleth it with the fire of the Altar; that is, the graces and gifts of the Spi∣rit: for so the fire of the Altas is taken in Esay. In this sense it is sayd, that our Lord Je∣sus should baptize with fire and the holy Ghost; that is, the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost. In this sense also the holy Ghost did rest upon the Disciples, in the likenesse of cloven tongues like fire, where∣upon they were all filled with gifts and graces. The holy Ghost is compared to fire, be∣cause he burneth out our drosse, purgeth the hearts of the faithfull, and setteth them on fire with the burning love and zeale of Gods glory. So then it followeth, that as before there was provision had for the safety of the Church by her Mediator, so heere many hea∣venly gifts and graces are bestowed upon her. For Christ casteth this fire of the Altar upon the earth; that is, upon his dwelling in the earth.
Hereupon it is sayd, that there were voy∣ces, and thundrings, &c. that is, all manner of broyles, tumults, uprores, slaughters, and divisions. For after the Gospell was sounded forth in the Church by the power of the ho∣ly Ghost, the divell is disturbed, and the World molested. And hence spring all these broyles and tumults, thundring and light∣ning: and we must looke for such stirres af∣ter the preaching of the Gospell, whilest there is a world and a divell. Therefore our Lord JESUS saith, he came not to bring peace into the Earth,Mat. 10.34. but fire and Sword, and to set a man at variance against his Father, and likewise the Daughter against her mother, &c. For divisions and civill dis∣sensions do alwayes follow the preaching of the Gospell; which thing is not yet simply in the nature of the Gospell of peace, but accidently through the frowardnesse and corruption of mans nature, which will not yeeld unto it, but most stubbornely rebelleth against it. Then the seven Angels which had the seven Trumpets,verse 6. prepared themselves to blow. Now beginneth this open warre to be proclaimed against the World, for their great ungodlinesse and rebellion against the truth.
So the first Angell blew the Trumpet,verse 7. and there was Haile and Fire mingled with blood, and they were cast into the earth, and the third part of trees was burnt, and all greene grasse was burnt. It were absurd to imagine that any thing in this Verse is to be taken literally; see∣ing in the literall Sense there was never any such matter. Therefore, of necessitie it must be expounded mystically, and allegorically. Therefore, by this Hayle and Fire mingled with blood, is meant Errors and Heresies. For, as Hayle doth beate downe Corne, and destroy the fruits of the Earth; Fire doth consume, and blood doth corrupt and putrifie: So false doctrine and Heresie doth annoy, consume and corrupt the soules of men. For, it is sayd, that all these things mingled together, were cast upon the earth: that is, the inhabitants of the earth, and the third part of the trees, that is, the numbers of men or a very great part of the World was corrupted. For trees, in the Scripture signifie men: and all greene grasse was burnt: that is,Esa. 61. the fresh fruits of grace did wither apace and dry up: for as error and heresie did prevaile, so truth and godlinesse did decay. All this hath relation to the Heresies of Sabellius,
Manicheus, Marcion, Fotinus, Paulus Samo∣satenus, Nestorius, Novatus, Diodorus, Apo∣linaris, Pelagius, and many others which about this time, being foure hundred yeares after Christ, began to spring up and grow apace. And the second Angell blew the Trumpet, and as it were a great Mountaine burning with fire was cast into the Sea, and the third part of the Sea became blood, &c. Upon the blowing of the second Trum∣pet by the second Angell, heere appeareth a great Mountaine burning with fire, where∣by is meant some great and notable here∣sies, as that of Arrius, which troubled and wasted the Church for the space of three hundred yeares, being greatly favoured of sundry Emperours and other great Poten∣tates in the Earth, by meanes wherereof, it continued and overspred so long. Also this may be referred to other great and notable Arch-heresies: as that of Donatus, Mace∣donius, Eutycheus, Valentinus, and such like: which all are heere compared to a mountaine for their hugenesse and greatnesse, and to a burning Mountaine, because the Church was almost burnt up thereby. For this word Mountaine, is sometimes in the Scripture
put for any let or hinderance to true Religi∣on, as is errour and heresie. Zach. 4.7. Luke 3.5. Therefore it is sayd, that it was cast into the Sea, that is, these great heresies are cast up∣on the World in Gods wrath and heavy in∣dignation: for the Sea is put for the World: Chapter 4. Verse 6. Chapter 13. Verse 1. Chapter 12 Verse last: for as the Sea is full of Rocks, sands, sirts, waves, stormes, and tempests: so it fareth with this present evill world. Moreover it is sayd, that the third part of the Sea became blood: that is, all Europe, or some great part of the World was corrupted and infected with these great heresies. And he saith in the next verse, that the third part of the ships were destroyed: that is,ver. 9. a great number of mariners and ship-masters, as well as land∣men were infected with these heresies, and dyed of them, and in them. Then the third Angell blew the Trumpet, and there fell a great Starre from Heaven,verse 10. bur∣ning like a Torch, and it fell into the third part of the Rivers, and into the Fountaines of waters. Starres in this booke are put for the Mi∣nisters of the Gospell, as we have heard out
of the first Chapter, and the reasons why Then followeth, that the falling of this Star from Heaven, doth most fitly signifie and set forth the declining and fall of the Pastors of the Church, and their corrupting of the true Doctrine: which is meant by the fresh Ri∣vers, and pure Fountaines into which it fell. This Starre hath his name of the elect: For it is called Wormewood: because through the fall of it, the sweet waters into which it fell, were turned into bitternesse, and men dyed of them: that is, the doctrine was corrupted, which turned to the destruction of many. ver. 12.And the fourth Angell blew the Trumpet, and the third part of the Sunne was smitten, and the third part of the Moone, and the third part of the Stars, so that the third part of them was darkned, &c. This darkning of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, doth signifie that great darkenesse which was brought upon the Church by such teachers as did daily more and more degenerate. Three things are generally to be observed in the blowing of these first foure Trumpets. First, that the plagues here mentioned, are specially to bee understood of spirituall plagues.
Secondly, that there is a progression from lesser to greater in these plagues. Thirdly, that in every one there is menti∣oned but a third part destroyed; which plainly sheweth, that although the Church was greatly annoyed and pestred with these errours and heresies, yet it was not destroy∣ed and brought to utter desolation: for the full setting up of Antichrist was not yet come. All these errours and heresies which were cast upon the World, and did spring and grow apace in all places, did (as it were) make way for Antichrist, and (as it were by stirrops) hoist and helpe him up into his cur∣sed Chaire. By the Stories of the Church, and course of times, it seemeth that the holy Ghost pointeth at those manifold heresies which sprung up in the Church after the first three hundred yeares, especially after the death of Constantine the Great, who procured peace to the Church, destroyed idolatry, and set up true Religion in his dayes. Now after his raigne, and the raigne of Theodosius that good Emperour, Constan∣tius, Julianus, Arcadius, Honorius, and many other wicked Emperours succeeded; by whose meanes all things in the Church
grew worse and worse; yet this one thing is to be observed, that all truth of Religion was not utterly extinct and put out, till the full loosing of Satan, which was a thousand yeeres after Christ, as we shall plainely see when we come to the 20. Chapter, concer∣ning the binding of Satan for a thousand yeares. For sure it is, that the maine prin∣ciples and grounds of Religion, continued in the Church till this full loosing of Satan; which was about the time of Silvester the second, that Monster, as afterward we shall heare. But now in the meane time, we see what heresies sprung up, what corruption grew and increased more and more, what darknesse beganne to over-spread a third part of the world: and these things grew worse and worse, even till by these meanes the great Antichrist came to be possessed of his cursed seat and Sea of Rome, which was about some 600. yeares after Christ. And I beheld, and heard one Angell flying in the midst of Heaven,ver. 13. saying with a loud voyce: Woe, Woe, Woe to the Inhabitants of the earth, because of the sounds to come of the three Angels which were yet to blow the trumpets.
Because the judgements which were to be executed hereafter, upon the blowing of the next three Trumpets, were farre more dreadfull and horrible than any were before, therefore heere is a speciall Angell or Mes∣senger of God, sent of purpose to give war∣ning thereof, and to proclaime openly in the Church three fearefull woes, which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth; that is, all earthly minded men, as wordlings, Papists, and Atheists, at such time as the next three Angels should blow the Trumpets. The first of these three great woes, is to be understood of the Papacy. The second of Turcisme. The third of the last Judge∣ment. As if he should have sayd: Woe un∣to the world, because of Popery. Woe un∣to the world, because of Turcisme. Woe unto the world, because of the last Judge∣ment. Woe unto the world for Popery, be∣cause thereby men should be punished in their soules. Woe unto the World for Tur∣cisme, because thereby thousands should be murthered in their bodies by the Turkish Armies. Woe unto the world, because of the last Judgement, for thereby all world∣lings should be plagued both in body and
soule in hell fire for evermore. Sith then these three last plagues which were to come upon the world, are more fearefull and terrible than any of the other foure, no marvell though heere is sent of pur∣pose a speciall messenger to give intelligence thereof, that every man might looke to him∣selfe, seeing such great dangers were at hand. And for this cause also it is said before, that there was silence in the Church for the space of halfe an houre. CHAP. IX. THe principall scope and drift of this Chapter, is to paint out both the Pope and his Clergie, and also the Kingdome of the Turke, and his cruell Armies. For ha∣ving already set downe how a way and pas∣sage was made for the Pope to climbe up in∣to his cursed Chaire, by the prevailing of he∣resies, the falling away of the Pastors of the Church, and the great over-spreading of darknesse and ignorance: now he commeth to describe the Pope in his full heighth and greatest exaltation, being now universall Bi∣shop, and in full possession of his Seat and Sea of Rome, which was about some six hun∣dred
yeeres after CHRIST, as formerly hath been shewed. At wat time Pope Bo∣niface obtained of the Emperour Phocas, that murderer, which slew his Master Mau∣ritius the Emperour, that the Bishop of Rome should be called the Universall bishop, and the Church of Rome, the Head of all Churches. This ninth Chapter may very fitly be di∣vided into two parts:In the first 12. verses. The first is a lively description of the Pope himselfe, his King∣dome and his Clergy. The second is a de∣scription of the Kingdome of the Turke, and his most savage Armies: so that this Chapter is a full opening of the first two great woes mentioned before, concerning the Papacy and Turcisme. And the fifth Angell blew the Trumpet and I saw a Star which fell from Heaven,verse 2. and to him was given the key of the bottomlesse pit. Warning was given before, that when this fifth Angell should blow the Trum∣pet, a most fearefull woe should come up∣on the World, surpassing all that went be∣fore, which is the setting up of Antichrist in his pride; that man of sinne, that sonne of perdition. The Pope is here compared to a Starre,
as well as other godly Ministers in this booke, because the Bishops of Rome at the first were godly and excellent men; for a∣mongst the first thirty of them, there were some Martyrs. But it is heere sayd, that now this Starre was fallen from Heaven unto the Earth; that is, the Bishops of Rome were greatly degenerated and fallen cleane away from heavenly things to earthly: for they declined from time to time, and grew worse and worse, so farre as to become the great Antichrist. But some man may say, Why may not this Starre falling from Heaven upon the earth, be understood of other Pastors falling from the truth, as well as the Pope, as it is taken in the former Chapter, and in the twelfth Chapter, and the fourth verse? I answer, that the circumstances will not heere beare it. Therefore to perswade every honest mans conscience, that this must needs be under∣stood of the Pope in his pride, let us give eare to these three reasons following. First, we are to consider, that the maine drift of the holy Ghost in the opening of the seven Seales, and blowing of the seven Trum∣pets, is to lay out the state of the Church in all ages, till the comming of Christ. Further,
we are diligently to observe, that the things contained under the opening of the seventh Seale (whereof the blowing of the seven Trumpets are as it were parts, and do all be∣long unto it) do stretch even to the end of the world, so as there is no strange acci∣dent, or any wofull condition of the Church in any age, but it is set forth under the ope∣ning of these Scales, and blowing of these Trumpets. But the Papacy was a state of the Church, and that most woefull and la∣mentable, therefore it is described under the opening of the Seales, and blowing of these Trumpets. But it is not described under the opening of any other Seale, or blowing of any other Trumpet: Therefore of necessity it must be referred to this seventh Seale, and the fifth Trumpet: And this is my first reason. If any man object, that the Pope and his Kingdome are most lively described in the Chapters from the twelfth to the last: I answer, that all those Chapters belong to a new vision, wherein some things propoun∣ded under the opening of the seven Seales are more fully opened and expounded. But this I say, that in the second vision, the whole estate of the Church in every age is layd open, even untill the last judgemet: and
therefore when the seventh Angell here doth blow the seventh Trumpet, immediately fol∣loweth the last Judgement: as appeareth, chap. 10. vers. 6. and chap. 11. vers. 15.16. My second reason is drawne from the course and consideration of times: for the great prevailing of errours and heresies men∣tioned before, which made way for Anti-christ, was from the first 300. yeeres, untill the 600. yeere, and so forward. But now im∣mediately upon this great increase of errour and darknesse, commeth the description of a speciall Star fallen from Heaven at this time, which was about 600. yeeres after Christ; and therefore it must needs be understood of the Pope. And this is my second reason. My third and last reason is drawne from the description of the Pope and his Clergy, in the firste leven verses of this Chapter. For he is so lively described and painted out in particulars, that all men that know him, or ever heard of him, must needs say it is he. For this description heere set downe by the holy Ghost, can fitly agree to none other. The Papists themselves do confesse, that this Starre here mentioned, must needs be understood of some Arch-heretike and full wisely, forsooth, they apply it to Luther and
Calvin. But we affirme, that it is to be un∣derstood of the Pope: For was there ever any such Arch-heretike as he which opposeth and exalteth himselfe against all that is called God, and against all imperiall powers, as the Apostle saith? But now let us proceed to the description of him. First, he is sayd to have the key of the bot∣tomlesse pit, which agreeth well to the Pope: for he hath power given him to open hell gates, to let in thousands thither: but no power to open Heaven gates, to let in any thither: for he furthereth many to hell, none to Heaven. He doth indeed falsely challenge to himselfe the Keyes of the Kingdome of Heaven, to let in, and shut out at his pleasure. But here we see the holy Ghost doth attri∣bute no such power unto him, but only tel∣leth us, that his power and jurisdiction is in hell, and over hell, and as for Heaven, he hath nothing to doe with it. It were needlesse to shew how this Metaphor of keyes is taken for power and jurisdiction in the Scriptures, as hath been proved before, Chap. 1. vers. 18. and as needlesse to prove that by the bottom∣lesse pit, is here meant hell, as appeareth Chap. 11. vers. 7. Chap 20. vers. 1. And he opened the bottomlesse pit, and there
arose the smoke of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace, and the Sun and the Aire were darkned by the smoke of the pit. Here we see how the Pope openeth hell gates with his Key, and a most horrible, grosse and stinking smoke ascendeth up in∣to the ayre presently upon it, insomuch that both the Sunne and the Ayre were darkened with it. Which all is to be understood of that spirituall darknesse, ignorance, super∣stition and Idolatry, wherewith the whole Church was over-spread, after the great An∣tichrist came to the possession of his cursed Chaire, and was in his pride and height, ru∣ling and raigning over the Kings of the earth. For then indeed the Sunne was darkned and eclipsed; that is, the light of the Gospell was almost cleane put out. For that which is spoken heere of the darkening of the ayre and the Sunne, is to be understood of a grea∣ter and more generall darknesse, than that which was mentioned in the former Chap∣ter, wherein but a third part of the World was darkned. But now the Antichrist inva∣deth the Church, all is overspread with grosse and palpable darknesse, all is as darke as Pitch: no man can see where he is, or which way he goeth. For the whole aire is
filled with this thicke smoke, which came out of hell pit. And there came out of the smoke Locusts upon the earth, and unto them was given power, as the Scorpions of the earth have power. By these Locusts is meant the Popes Cler∣gie, as Abbots, Monkes, Friers, Priests, Shave∣lings, and such like vermine; which are therefore compared to Locusts, because they wast and destroy the Church, even as Lo∣custs destroy the fruits of the earth. For both Historiographers and Travellers do affirme, that whole fields of greene Corne new come up, have been wasted and eaten up in one night as bare as the earth, by swarmes of Locusts in the East-countries. For in those parts of the World, multitudes of this little vermine are to be found: even so the Popish Clergy consumeth and devoureth all greene things in the Church. Moreover; it is to be noted, that these Lo∣custs came out of the smoke of the pit; that is, they were bred out of it: for Monkes, Fryers, Priests, and such like Caterpillers, were bred of ignorance, error, heresie, super∣stition, and the very smoke of hell: for from hell they came, and to hell they will. They are descended of the blacke horse of hell,
and thither they will returne. Moreover, it is sayd, that power was gi∣ven them to sting like Scorpions. For whom have they not stung with their most vene∣mous stings? I meane their damnable errors, and divellish devices. Whom have they not wounded with their corrupt doctrine and divellish authority? They are the forest soule-stingers that ever the World had, who have left their venemous stings in the soules of thousand thousands, where with they have been poisoned and stung to death. And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grasse of the earth,verse 4. neither any greene thing, neither any tree, but only those which have not the Seale of God in their fore∣heads. It may be demanded, what became of the Church when as the whole earth was full of these crawling and stinging Locusts. This question is now here answered: to wit, that these Locusts are charged and commanded, that they should not hurt any of the Elect: for this Woe and this plague extendeth no further than to the inhabitants of the earth, as we heard before. Their power is li∣mitted onely to the Reprobate, they have no∣thing to do with Gods chosen people. And
here againe we see what great care God hath for his in the midst of the greatest dangers, as hath been twice noted before, Chap. 7. Chap. 8. For now Antichrist raigning in his full pride, yet his Elect are preserved in the midst of these Scorpion-locusts, flying about their eares like swarmes of Hornets, not one of them is stung to death. Christs little flock is alwaies defended, and set in safety. And to them was command,verse 5. that they should not hurt them, but that they should be vexed five moneths, and that their paine should be as the paine that commeth of a Scorpion when he hath stung a man. Some write, that such as are stung of a Scorpion do not die forthwith, but have a lingring paine, wherewith they are miserably vexed three or foure daies before they dye of it. Now unto this lingring paine is this spi∣rituall stinging compared: for these Locusts are commanded of God, that they should not kill the very Reprobates outright, and at once, but torment them with a lingring death for the space of 5. months, that is, 500. yeers: for so long did the Papacy continue in his height and pride, full strength and vertue, and so long did the Pope and his Clergy sting men with lingring and Scorpion-like paine.
verse 6.Therefore in those dayes shall men seeke death and shall not finde it, and shall desire to dye, and death shall fly from them. This verse doth shew, that all Papists be∣ing thus stung and tormented in their con∣sciences with this lingring paine of Popish doctrine, shall wish themselves out of the world, and buried quicke, that they might be rid of their spirituall stinging, and hellish torments which they had in their consci∣ence. For the Popish doctrine hath no sound comfort in it, it leaveth men in desperation, in sicknesse, and upon their death-beds. For alas, what comfort can a poore distressed conscience have in Popes pardons, Indul∣gences, Masses, Dirges, Merits, Workes, Pilgrimages, Purgatory, Crosses, Crucifixes, Agnus Dei's, and such like trash and trumpe∣ry? These, alas, are too weake remedies for any spirituall diseases: they are not suf∣ficient to procure pardon at Gods hand for any sinne. Alas, the poore blind Papists did know and feele that they were vile sinners: they knew they must come to judgement: they knew that the reward of sinne was death, even the second death: they knew all this full well, and therefore had horrible convulsions in their consciences, and knew
not how to winde out of them. For the do∣ctrine of free justification in the blood of Christ, was hid from them, they knew it not: and therefore all assurance of Gods fa∣vour, all peace of conscience, and all joy in the holy Ghost was utterly taken from them; and therefore many of them dyed in most desperate and uncomfortable manner. And for this cause it is heere sayd, that they sought death, and desired to be rid out of the world one way or another: for a tormented conscience who can beare it? it is a kind of hell torment. And the forme of the Locusts was like unto Horses prepared unto battell,verse 7.8. and one their heads were as it were Crownes like unto gold, and their faces were like the faces of men. And they had haire as the haire of women: and their teeth were as the teeth of Lions. Hitherto we have heard of the pedigree and poysoned stings of these vile Locusts, and how they vexed the Inhabitants of the earth all the time of the great Antichrist. Now we are to understand of their forme and likenesse: For the Spirit of God doth here paint them out in their colours, that all men may discerne them, and beware of them. First, it is said that they were like un∣to
horses prepared unto battell: that is, they were as strong and fierce as barred horses, to rush and runne upon all such as should but once mute or mutter against them, or their Authority: Moreover, they have Crownes of gold upon their heads, which sheweth and signifieth, that they were the Conquerours of the Earth, and Lords of the World, and who but they? for in those dayes no man, nay no Lord or King durst quitch against a Monke, a Frier, or a pild Priest: for if any did, they were sure to smart for it. They had also faces like the faces of men; that is, they set faire faces upon matters, and pre∣tended great devotion in Religion, flattering the people, and making them beleeve that they could give them pardon of all their sinnes, and bring them to Heaven, when as in very truth, for their bellies, and for their gaine, they did cunningly smooth with the Nobles, the rich and the mighty, setting faire faces upon their proceedings; and as Saint Peter saith, Through covetousnesse with fained words,2 Pet. 2.3 they made merchandize of mens soules, and did closely winde themselves in∣to the hearts of the simple people, by their fawning insinuations, being in very deed nost notable flatterers and hypocrites. They
had haire as the haire of women, that is, they were altogether effeminate, being given to delicacy, lust and wantonnesse; they were drowned in whoredome and all kinde of beastlinesse, being a shole of most filthy vil∣laines. Their teeth were as the teeth of Li∣ons, to catch and snatch at all they could come by. They devoured all the fat morsels every where, they got the Church-livings into their hands: they first made impropri∣ations: they incroached upon temporall mens lands: they swallowed up all every where. If we looke upon the Abbeyes, Pri∣ories, and Nunneries, we may easily judge what teeth they had. Moreover, it is sayd they had Habbergions, like to the Habbergi∣ons of Iron; that is, they were so strongly armed with the defence and countenance of the Pope, that no Secular power durst once quitch against them. Their wings were like the sound of Chariots, when many Horses runne unto battell: that is, with flattering noise and terrible threatnings, they strove to uphold their Kingdome. Also in Churches and Pulpits, they make a roring noise, and take on terribly to maintaine their abhomina∣ble Idolatry, They had tailes like unto Scor∣pions; and there were stings in their tailes.
For with their poysoned Doctrine and sting∣ing authority, like Adders and Snakes they stung many to death. Moreover, power was given them to hurt men five moneths, that is, all the time of Antichrists reigne, as before hath been shewed. ver. 10.11.They have a King over them, which is the Angell of the bottomelesse pit, whose name in Hebrew is Abbadon, and in Greeke he is named Apollyon; that is, destroying. As the Fowles have a King over them, which is the Eagle; and the Beasts, the Lion; and mortall Men some Chiefe Gover∣nour, under whose protection and subjecti∣on they live: so heere these hellish Locusts are sayd to have a King over them, which is the Angell of the bottomlesse pit: that is, the Divell or the Pope, which you will, un∣der whose Ensigne they fight, and under whose defence they live. Their Kings name in Hebrew is called Abbadon, and in Greek Apollyon. The words are both of one signifi∣cation, that is, destroying: for both the Di∣vell himselfe, and his Vicar the Pope, are de∣stroyers and wasters of the Church of God. One woe is past, and behold yet two woes come after this. We have heard at large what this first
Woe is, namely, the plage of the world, by the Pope and his Clergie. Now we are to heare of the second woe, which is the most huge and murthering army of the Turkes: wherein the third part of men were slaine. Some do expound this second woe of the kingdome of Antichrist and his armies; but that it is not so, may appeare by these reasons following. First, the Angell denouncing woe, woe, woe, denounceth three severall woes, and therefore it is said: One woe is past, and behold yet two woes come after this. It followeth then that this is a distinct and severall woe from the former and therefore cannot be the same. Secondly, this woe containeth specially a bodily slaughter of the third part of the world, and of the wicked reprobates: but the first woe was specially a plague of mens soules, as we have heard, and therefore this cannot be the same with the first. Thirdly, we are to understand, that this booke describeth all the greatest calamities and plagues tha should come upon the world in any age after Christ, and therefore we may justly thinke, that the kingdome of the Tuks is not left out, seeing it was one of the grea∣test plagues that ever came upon the world.
But the kingdome of the Turks is described in no other part of this Revelation, and there∣fore must of necessity be here described. ver. 13.14.Then the sixt Angell blew the Trumpet, and I heard a voice from the foure corners of the golden Altar, which is before God, Saying to the sixt Angell which had the Trumpet, loose the foure Angells which are bound in the great river Euphrates. Now we are come to the description of the Second woe, which followeth upon the blowing of the sixt Trumpet, by the sixt Trumpet by the sixth Angell. And first of all he sayth; He heard a voyce from the foure corners of the golden Altar. By the golden Altar, is meant Christ, as before hath been shewed, with the reasons thereof. From this Altar the voyce commeth to the Angell which blew the sixth Trumpet,Chap. 8.3. that we might know it is the voyce of the mighty God, and the commandement of our Lord Jesus. The voyce commandeth the sixth Angell to loose the foure Angells which are bound in the great River Euphrates. By these foure An∣gels, which are thus bound at Euphrates, is meant many Divels or Angels of darke∣nesse, as we have heard before, Chapter 7, Verse 1. Their binding signifieth their re∣straint,
by which they were held backe from doing that mischiefe which they de∣sired to do. Their loosing signifieth, that power was given them to performe that which they wished. They are sayd to be foure in number, be∣cause they should raise an horrible plague in the foure corners of the Earth, both East, West, North, and South. The sense is, that the Divells have yet farther and grea∣ter scope given them to plague and destroy the inhabitants of the Earth. These Divells had exceeding great power in the Kingdome of Antichrist, but they are unsatiable in mis∣chiefe, and so after a sort lye still bound till they have their desire. The place where they lye bound, is Euphrates, wherein is a mystery: for Euphrates literally taken; is a great River, which ran so night the City Ba∣bylon in Chaldea, that it was a mighty de∣fence unto it, so that the City could not be taken, untill they that laid siedge unto it, cut out trenches, and derived the waters another way. Now for the mystery, it is this: Rome in this book is called Babylon, by a metaphor, and after the same manner, the great River Euphrates, as we shall see afterward, ch. 16. signifieth the power, wealth, and authority
which that City Rome, even this Westerne Babel, hath to defend it selfe. Then it fol∣loweth, that in this power, authority and strength of Rome, the Divels lye bound, for they waited through the power of Rome, to work yet far greater mischiefe, and therefore are said to be bound, so long as they were re∣strained. The mischiefe which they plotted and purposed to bring to passe by the Autho∣rity and power of Rome, was the hatching and bringing forth of the Mahometish Religion, which in very deed did spring from the dark∣nesse of Rome, as from his proper root and originall cause. The Divells did fore-see, that out of the superstitions and Idolatries of Rome, defen∣ded by their great power and authority, Mahometish Religion, might very well be framed, and therefore not being content to plague the West part of the World with Popery and Idolatry, they doe greedily desire also to plague the East part of the World with the false Religion of Maho∣met. They are not satisfied with plagueing and poysoning all Europe with abominable Idolatries, except also they plague and in∣fect all Asia and Africa with the Turkes most execrable Religion: so insatiable are
the devills in working mischiefe. Now in the meane time they thinke themselves too much straightned, bound and tyed up in Rome and Romish Religion, except they may be loosed; and proceed further to over∣spread the whole World with all impieties, and horrible abominations. A man would thinke that when the Divell had prevailed so farre, as to place Antichrist in his cursed Chaire, and to breed the swarmes of Lo∣custs out of the smoake of Hell, they might have been satisfied: for then, as we may say, hell seemed to be broke loose. But yet all this cannot satisfie the unsatiable Devill but they will have the Religion of Mahomet established to poyson and plague all the East parts of the World in their soules: and also they will have the most huge, cruell, and sa∣vage Armies of the Turkes raised up, to mur∣ther and massacre millions of men in their bodies, in the West part of the World, as presently we shall heare. Now till all this be effected, they are said to lye bound at Rome. But here we see, that this sixth Angell hath a precise commandement from JESVS CHRIST, to loose these Devils which lay bound at the great River Euphrates, that they might plague the whole World farre
and neare, at their pleasure: so now all the Divells of hell are let loose, and let us heare what followeth. ver. 15.And the foure Angels were loosed, which were prepared at an houre, at a day, at a month, and at a yeare, to slay the third part of men. Now the Divels being loosed and unbound by a speciall commandement from Christ, were in a readinesse to execute their mis∣chiefe. This ascending by degrees from a short time unto longer and longer; From an houre to a day, &c. doth signifie, that as the Divels were prest, and at hand at an houres warning, as we say, to put in practice whatsoever they had plotted; so they were as forward to continew the same, From as houre to a day, from a day to a month, and from a month to a yeare, that is, from time to time, untill the date of their commission was out: for their time was limited, and their commission bounded, as afterward wee shall see. And this is our comfort, that both the Papacie is limited to five months, and the Turcisme to houres, dayes, months, and yeares. The divers power is limitted, though it greiveth them full sore: They cannot do what they list,
they cannot continue as long as they would. After the number of Horse-men of warre were twenty thousand times tenne thousand,ver. 16. for I heard the number of them. Now, upon the loosing of these Divels, here followeth the description of a most horrible plague which they raised up; and it is a huge army, a murthering army, an army in number exceeding great; for he saith, They were twenty thousand times tenne thousand; that is, two hundred millions, or two hundred thousand thousands. But we may not thinke that this Army was ever all at one time, or in any one age, but here are the armys of ma∣ny ages reckoned up, and the full plague of many yeares set forth. How could Saint John number such an Army, may some man say? He answereth this doubt, and saith, He heard the number of them. He did not number them; but the number was told him. Moreover, it is to be noted, that as this Army did exceed in number, so also in terror and strength, and therefore they are said to be all horsemen. For an Army of horsemen are both more strong and more terrible, than any army of footmen. And thus I saw the horses in a vision,ver. 17. and them
that sate on them, having fiery Habergions and of Jacinth, and of Brimstone, and the heads of the Horses were as the heads of Lions, and out of their mouths went forth fire and smoke, and Brimstone. Here is the description of the horse-men and horses, as they appeared to John in a vi∣sion. First, touching the horse-men, it is said that they were very well armed with Hab∣bergions; that is, Coates of Male, Corslets, or Curets, and that of a fiery colour, and of the colour of Jacinth; that is of smoake, as appea∣reth in the last clause of this verse, and also of the colour of Brimstone. For as horse-men in compleate armour were wont to weare in their Breast-plates and Targets certaine en∣signes and colours, whereby they might be made terrible to their enemies: So these Turkish warriours and horse-men do hold out their colours of fire, smoak, and Brim∣stone, as it were flagges of defiance against the whole world, threatning present death to all that should with-stand them, or as if they meant to spit fire and flame at them, or to choake them with smoake and Brimstone, and then burne them up with fire and Brim∣stone. All this their colours and ensignes in their Breast plates and Habbergions did por∣tend.
Now, as concerning Horses, no doubt they were as fierce as the Horse-men. They weare great Lances, they had heads like Li∣ons; that is, they were full of stomacke and fiercenesse,ver. 18. and out of their mouths went forth fire, and smoake, and Brimstone: that is, they had the same colours and ensignes upon them that riders had. Of these three was the third part of men killed, that is, of the fire, and of the smoake, and of the Brimstone which came out of their mouthes. Here is set downe the great slaughters and massacres which these martial horse-men and Turkish armies made thorowout the most part of Europe. For he sayth, the third part of men, that is, great numbers in Europe were slaine by the fire, the smoake, and the Brim∣stone, which came out of their mouths: that is, by their bloody cruelty, and barbarous im∣manity, some being murthered in their bo∣dies by cruell death, and others violently drawne to the wicked Religion of Maho∣met. For partly by externall violence, and partly by a subtill shew of Religion and de∣votion, they destroyed thousands both in their Soules and bodies. And therefore it is sayd, Their power is in their mouths,ver. 19. and in
their tayles, For their tayles were like unto Serpents, and had heads wherewith they hurt. But for the better understanding of these things, I thinke it not amisse a little to open and lay forth the rising up, and increasing of the power of the Turke. About the yeare of our Lord 591. was Mahomet borne in a certaine Village of Ar∣rabia, called Itrarix, for so Histories do re∣port. This Mahomet by fraud and coozenage grew into great credit and fame among the seditious Arabians and Aegyptians, insomuch that they made him a Captaine over them, to warre against the Persians. After this, he married a rich wife, and by that meanes he wonne the hearts of many with gifts. In the dayes of Heraclius the Em∣perour, which was in the yeare of our Lord 623. he grew to be very mighty. After this he fained himselfe to be a Prophet, and said that he had visions and revelations, and talked with Angells. And so by the helpe of Sergius a Monke, he framed a new worship and Religion, a patched part out of the old Testament, partly from the Papists, and partly from the Heathen. He raigned nine yeares, and so dyed. After him succeeded in the Kingdome of
the Sarazens Ebubezar, who raigned two yeares. Haumar who raigned twelve yeares. Muhavias, who raigned twenty foure years. All these made great warre against the Per∣sians, and sundry other Nations, and over∣came them, and set up the Religion of Ma∣homet amongst them, and so the Kingdome of the Sarazens grew mighty: but in pro∣cesse of time the Kingdome of the Turkes grew great, and the Kingdome of the Sara∣zens diminished. Within a short time after this, the Tartarians, a barbarous people, waxed strong and made warre against the Turkes, and prevailed greatly for a time. But about the yeare of our Lord 1300. the Empire of the Tartarians was over-throwne, and the Empire of the Turkes did flourish more than ever before: for now came the grea∣test monsters, and most Savage and cruell tyrants of all. The first of them was Ottoma∣nus. The second Bajazethes. The third Amu∣rathes. These made bloody warres against the Christians. I meane the Papists in Eu∣rope, and enlarged the Turkes dominions very farre. They did from time to time so cruelly murther and massacre the inhabitants of the West, with their huge and bloody ar∣mies;
that at last both the Pope, the Empe∣rour, the King of Hungary, the King of Po∣lonia, the King of France, the Duke of Bur∣gundy, and the Duke of Venice, and almost all the Potentates in Europe, did joyne together to make warre against the Turkes, so huge leave huge armies, but yet could not pre∣vaile; so strong were the Turkes, so huge and dreadfull were their armies: Then we see that verified which here was foretold, to wit, That the monstrous armies of the Turkes with their horses and horse-men, should slay the third part of men: that is, the Idolaters in Europe, by heapes and Infinite numbers. To set downe the particular battels betwixt the Turkes and the Christians in Europe, and their horrible blood-shedding, would re∣quire a volume: but this which I have brifely set downe, may serve to give some light unto it, and may suffice for the under∣standing of this Text. Now it is sayd in the next verse, That notwithstanding this heavy hand of God which was upon the Papists in Europe, and these fearefull Judgements and massacres, they repented not of their Idola∣tries, but waxed worse and worse: for no Judgements, no plagues can make the wic∣ked any whit the better, as we see in the ex∣amples
of Pharaoh and Saul,ver. 20. And here it is sayd, That the remnant of men which were kil∣led by these plagues, repented not of the workes of their hands, that they should not worship de∣vills and Idols of gold and silver, and of brasse, and of stone, and of wood which neither can see nor heare, nor goe, Also they repented not of their murther, and of their sorcery, neither of their fornication, nor of theft.ver. 21. And thus we see how the Divells which were bound at Eu∣phrates, being let loose upon the World, in the wrath and just judgement of God, did fearefully plague both the Turkes, in their Soules, and the Papists in their bodies. The one with false Religion, the other with bloo∣dy swords: and so was the desire of the Di∣vell fully satisfied. CHAP. X. HAving opened and expounded the two first Woes which fell out upon the blowing of the fift and sixt Trumpet, contai∣ning the two great plagues of Popery and Turcisme, wherewith the World was pu∣nished many hundred yeeres: now in this Chapter we are to heare of good newes, and great comfort, after so much sorrow. For
heere Jesus Christ commeth down from hea∣ven to deliver his poore afflicted Church, and to be revenged of all his cruell enemies. For now before the third and last woe, con∣taining the greatest plague of all upon the World, which is, the last Judgement: where∣in the wicked shallbe tormented in hell fire for ever, both in body and soule, I say, before the blowing of the seventh Trumpet, by the seventh Angell, of which we shall heare in the next Chapter. Now in the meane time is shewed in this Chapter, what care God had for his little flocke, which no doubt were hid in those daies, and did not appeare and yet were scattered in corners, even in the middest of the darknesse of Popery, and the most furious and hellish rage of the Turkish armies. And therefore the principall scope and drift of this Chapter, is to shew how the Gospell should be preached in many King∣domes, now after this generall darkenesse, for the discovering and overthrow, both of Popery and Turcisme, and to shew what should fall out in the Church now in the middle time, before the seventh and last Trumpet blow: for then commeth the last Judgement, as the Angell sweareth in this Chapter, verse, 6, 7.
This Chapter doth containe foure princi∣pall parts. The first is a description of Christ and his glory.ver. 1. The second sheweth how the Gospell should be preached,ver. 2. in many Nations and Kingdomes, by the Ministers of this last age, whereby all adversary power should be over∣throwne. The third is a watch-word,ver. 6.7. given to the World by Christ, that when the seventh An∣gell should blow the Trumpet, the World should end. The last doth shew,ver. 9.10.11. how all faithfull Prea∣chers being called and authorized by Christ, should travell and take paines in the study of Gods Booke, and afterward should publish the knowledge thereof far and neere. And I saw another mighty Angel come down from Heaven, cloathed with a cloud,ver. 1. and the Raine∣bow upon his head, and his face was as Sunne, and his feet as pillars of brasse. This Angell of might is Christ, as appea∣reth by the description of him, and by all the consequents following:Mat. 24. for he is said to be cloathed with a Cloud, which signifieth his great glory and Majesty: For he shall come in the clouds of heaven to judge the world; that is,
with great pomp and glory. The Raine-bow was upon his head, which signifieth the cove∣nant of peace with his Church, as before, Chap. 4. verse 3. His face was as the Sunne, which signifieth comfort and deliverance to his Church, and the dispelling of all the smoake of the bottomlesse Pit, as the Sunne Scattereth and driveth away the thick mists. His feete are pillers of brasse, which signi∣fieth that he should tread downe all his ene∣mies under his feet,1 Cor. 19. both Pope and Turke: For he must raigne till he have destroyed them all. The Pope along time kept all the Kings of Europe in awe. The Locusts were of great power. The Turkes prevailed excee∣dingly. But what are they all to this migh∣tie and glorious Angell Christ? What is their power to withstand him? What can Abaddon the King of the Locusts do against this mighty King of Sion? What can the Turkes most terrible Horses and Horse-men doe against this Angell which sitteth upon the white Horse? Alas, alas, they are able to do nothing. They must all be trodden down under his feet of brasse. ver. 2.And he had in his hand a little book open, and He put his right foot upon the Sea, and his left up∣on the earth.
This little Booke signifieth the Bible. It is called little in respect of the great and huge volumes of Popish bookes, though in it selfe it be large. It is sayd to be open, that all men might looke into it, because it had been shut a long time before, even during all the time of the darkning of the Sunne and Aire, by the smoke which came out of the bottomlesse pit. But although it was long shut up in the time of Popery, and lay buried in a strange tongue: yet now it is opened, and publike∣ly preached unto all the servants of God. And all this no doubt is to be understood of Luthers time, and all the times ever since the Gospell was spread abroad after the great darkenesse. For some hundred yeares agoe it was hard to finde an English Bible, but now God be thanked, there are thou∣sands to be found in the hands of Gods peo∣ple. And therefore the things here Prophe∣sied of, are fulfilled in our daies: for we live under the opening of the seaventh Seale, and the blowing of the sixth Trumpet, and the powring foorth of the sixth Viall, as here doth partly appeare, and shall, God willing, bee made more manifest when we come to the sixteenth Chapter.
Now we are diligently to obserue, that as the opening of this Booke, and the preaching of the Gospell by Luther and his successors, hath dispersed the former darknesse, and beaten down Popery; so also hath it driven backe the Turke, and taken from us all feare of him, which in former ages was the ter∣rour of the World; for since men have looked into this book, repented of their Ido∣latry, and turned unto God with all their hearts, the Turke and his power hath not been feared, especially in these parts where the Gospell is preached. For God in his mercifull providence towards his Church, hath diverted his power another way, and set him a worke else where. So that if men cannot be brought to beleeve, that God raised him up as a scourge for Idolaters, and a plague for Idola∣trie and other soule sinnes, according to the words in the former Chap. where it is said, They repented not of the workes of their hands, &c. yet when they see, that at the ope∣ning of the Booke of God, and forsaking Idolatry, the feare of him is removed, let them beleeve it. What can be more plaine, than that this open Booke in the hand of the Angell, hath delivered us from the Pope, and
from the Turke? A most happy opening of this blessed booke. More it is said, that he put his right foot upon the Sea, and his left on the Earth. The setting of Christs right foot upon the Sea, signifieth that he is ruler of the Sea, and standeth as firmely upon the Sea, as up∣on the Land. The setting of his left foot upon the Earth, doth signifie, that he is Lord of the Earth, and true heire to all things in it. And cryed with a loud voice,verse 3. as when a Lion roareth, and when he had cryed, seven thunders utterd their voyces. This crying with a loud voice, like the roaring of a Lion, doth signifie the manifesta∣tion of the wrath of Christ, against all his enemies: for now he beginneth to roare a∣gainst them, as a Lion when he is hungry, roareth for his prey. Therefore now both the Scorpion, Locusts, and the fierce Horses and horsmen are like to goe to the pot. By the seven thunders which uttered their voyces, is meant those perfect and exquisite judgements which now were to be inflicted both upon the Kingdome of the Pope and the Turke. We have heard before, that se∣ven is a perfect number in this book: and that
thunder is put for the thundring of Gods wrath, and all such broiles and plagues as follow thereupon, and this is the reason of this interpretation. verse 4.And when the seven thunders had uttered their voyces, I was about to write, but I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me: Seale up these things which the seven thunders have spoken, and write them not. It should seeme these seven thunders did so speake, as they might be understood, for John was about to write the things which they spake, thinking that they were uttered for that end and purpose, that he should de∣liver them in writing to the Churches. But he receiveth a commandement to the con∣trary, for he is willed not to write them, but to conceale them untill the appointed time. But some man may say; Why were they uttered, seeing they must be concealed, and kep close? I answer, it was not in vaine: for first, though the particulars be not expressed what the thunders speake: yet here we are taught, that there remaine most fearfull Judgements against all the oppressors of the Church, which Christ hath thundred out with terrour against them. And when the
time determined is come, they shall be seene and understood: but in the meane time, they be sealed up and kept close according to that of Job. Why should not the times be hid of the Almighty, so as they which know him, should not perceive the times appointed of him? and that of Daniel. These things are Sealed up untill the time determined. And the Angell which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth, lifted up his hand to heaven.verse 5. And sware by him that liveth for evermore,ver. 6. which created heaven, and the things that therein are; and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things that therein are, that time should be no more. But in the daies of the voice of the seventh Angell,ver. 7. when he shall begin to blow the trumpet, even the ministery of God shall be finished, as he hath declared unto his servants the Prophets. The summe of these three verses is, that Christ giveth warning of the last judgement, that men might awake and looke out in time.Amo. 6 1. And because men for the most part are carelesse and secure, putting the evill day far from them, as the Prophet speaketh, therefore here Christ bindeth it with a solemne oath, and solemne gestures thereunto annexed, as was
the lifting up of the hand in antient time Genesis, 14.22. The thing that our Lord Jesus disposeth, is, that time shall be no more; that is, Time as it is now, or the state of things as they be now: but he telleth us flatly, that as six Angels have already blowne their Trumpets, so when the seventh Angell should blow, the Mystery of God shall be finished: that is, the time of punishing the wicked, and re∣warding the godly, should come, which is therefore called a Mystery, because the world understandeth it not: They thinke there is no such matter. Mal. 3.14.They imagine there is no reward for the just, or punishment for the wicked, as the Prophet saith: But the holy Ghost saith, Verily there is a reward for the righteous:Psa. 58.18 doubtlesse there is a God which judgeth the Earth. And here it is said, that God hath declared it to his servants the Prophets. And the voice which I heard from Heaven spake unto me agine,verse 8. and said, goe and take the little booke which is open in the hand of the Angell, which standeth upon the Sea, and upon the Earth. So I went unto the Angell, and said unto him, give me the little booke.vrse 9. And he said unto me, take it, and eat it up, and it shall make thy
belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth, as sweet as hony. Then I tooke the little booke out of the Angels hand, and eat it up,ver. 10. and it was in my mouth as sweet as hony: but when I had eaten it, my belly was bitter. And he said unto me,verse 11. Thou must prophesie againe among the people, and nations, and tongues, and to many Kings. The briefe sence of these foure verses is, that the Preachers of the Gospell being cal∣led, allowed, and authorized by Christ unto their ministery, should study the Scriptures with great diligence, even untill they had ea∣ten up the booke of God, and they should preach and publish unto all nations and King∣domes that truth of God, and doctrine of the Gospell, which now a long time had lien hid in the raigne of Antichrist. It is to be obser∣ved, that John in this place representeth the person of all the ministers of the Gospell, which should be raised up in these last daies, for the overthrow of Antichrist, and the re∣stauration of true Religion: for John himselfe did not live to these times. Further it is to be noted, that all godly Students and zealous Ministers do eate up the booke of God by reading, study, prayer,
and meditation, and they find it sweet in their mouth, that is, they find and feele great joy and comfort in the study and meditation thereof, especially when God revealeth ther∣by great and hid secrets unto them, and gi∣veth them to understand the mysteries of the Gospell, and counsels of his will, which are locked up from the wise and prudent of this world. This I say, is sweeter unto their mouth than hony, and the hony combe. Concerning their phrase of eating up the Booke, looke Ezek. 2.9. for here the holy Ghost alludeth thereunto. This booke being so sweet in the mouth, yet being eaten and digested, is better in the belly. There may be three reasons yeelded of this bitternesse: First, because it being once taken downe into our soule by godly meditation, doth mortifie our corrupt nature, and bring under our lust, and therefore seemeth bitter to flesh and blood. Secondly, because afflictions and trialls do alwaies necessarily follow the sound digestion of the Gospell. Thirdly, because the doctrine of the Gos∣pel being swallowed by the ministers therof,
must not be kept to themselves, as it were closed up in their stomacks, but they must out with it againe, as if it were some loath∣some and bitter thing, which must needs be cast up againe: And for this cause it is sayd in the last verse, that they must prophesie againe among the people, and nations, and tongues, and many Kings. Now blessed be the name of the Lord our God, who hath given us to live in this age, wherein we do with our eies be∣hold and see the fulfilling of all these things: let us therefore praise God for this great worke which we see wrought in our daies and let us still more and more magnifie this little Booke, which will utterly destroy Popery, and bring downe the proud Anti∣christ, do all that fight for him what they can. CHAP. XI. VVE have heard that the little Booke should be opened, and the Gospel preached and published to many nations and Kingdomes, after the great darknesse of Po∣pery, and that this was done by Luther, Me∣lancthon, Calvin, Peter Virit, Peter Martyr, Bullinger, Bucer; and all their faithfull suc∣cessors
unto this day. Now in this Chapter we are to understand the effect and good successe of their preaching and publishing the Gospell, which was, that the Church should be restored, reformed, and built up thereby, which a long time had been wa∣sted and oppressed by the tyranny of Anti∣christ, and that many should embrace this Gospell, forsake their Idolatries, and turne unto God with all their hearts, yea, whole Nations and Kingdomes in Europe should be converted to the faith, as we see this day, God be praised. So then the principall drift of this Chapter is, to shew those things which yet remaine to be fulfilled under the blowing of the sixth Trumpet, which is the preaching and prevailing of the Gospel, even unto the worlds end: and also the things which follow upon the blowing of the se∣venth trumpet, which is the resurrection and last judgement. This Chapter containeth six principall things, as it were six parts thereof. First, it sheweth how the true Church should be gathered together,ver. 1.2. and built up by the preaching of the Gospell, and all the wicked refused and cast out. ver. 3.4.5.6.Secondly, it describeth the builders; that
is, all the faithfull Ministers which had, and should resist Antichrist. Thirdly,ver. 7.8. it sheweth how Antichrist should persecute the Preachers and Professors of the Gospell unto death, and murther them by heapes. Fourthly, it sheweth that Papists, Atheists and wicked worldlings,ver. 9.10. should rejoyce in the death of Gods people, and not vouchsafe them so much as the honour of buriall, but sends gifts one to another for joy that they were rid out of the Earth. Fifthly, it sheweth that notwithstanding the rage and fury of the World,ver. 11.12.13. in persecu∣ting them to death, God should not only re∣ceive their soules to glory, but also raise up others endued with the same spirit, which should preach, professe, and witnesse the same truth constantly and continually, even unto the end of the World. Lastly, it sheweth,ver. 14. &c. that after the preaching of the Gospell some good time in this last age, the seventh Angell should blow the trumpet, and the world should end. And there was given unto me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angell stood by saying, Arise,verse 1. and measure the Temple of God, and the Alar, and them that worship therein.
Here Jesus Christ giveth a reed unto John like unto a rod, and hereupon he is com∣manded by an Angell to goe about the mea∣suring of the Temple, the Altar, &c. By this measuring with a reed like a rod, is signified the restoring and building up of Gods house, which now was greatly ruina∣ted, and runne into decay through the long prevailing of Popery. Measuring with a reed, is taken for the building up of Gods Church, after the decaied estate thereof, both in Ezekiel, Zachary, and this Prophesie. John in the persons of all faithfull Ministers, hath this measuring rod given him, because the Church was to be restored and built up by the Ministers and Ministery of the Gos∣pell. The thing to be measured is the Temple, the Altar, and them that worship therein. This is an allusion to the legall worship, whereby our spirituall worship is repre∣sented. For by the materiall Temple, is meant the spirituall Temple, or Church of God. By the Altar of stone, is meant the spiri∣tuall worship. By them that worship therein with carnall sacrifices, is meant all the true members of the Church, which worship God in spirit and truth.
Now then, both the Church, the true wor∣ship and worshippers, were all to be measu∣red, repaired, and built up by Ministry of the Word, which all were decayed and al∣most laid waste, by the Popes tyranny. But the Court which is without the Temple cast out and measure it not,verse 2. for it is given to the Gentiles: and the holy City shall they tread under their foot two and forty moneths. John is here forbidden to measure and build up the Court which is without the Temple. Whereby is meant all Heretickes; Hypocrites, worldlings, and all such as have a place in the Church, but are not of the Church. This phrase of speech is taken from the old shadowish worship as the rest be∣fore. For in the Temple of Jerusalem there was an outward Court which was common to all good and bad: the holy place which was proper to the Priests and Levites: and the holy of holiest, or most holy place, where none might come but the high Priest only. Here is a reason added why the Lord God refuseth all Papists and Hypocrites, and all such as belong to the outward Court only, and it is this: that this outward Court is gi∣ven
unto the Gentiles, that is, to all false Christians and counterfeits in religion, which are members of the visible Church, but have nothing to do with the invisible. These are compared to Gentiles in two re∣spects: First, in regard of prophanesse, for they are as prophane as the Heathen. Se∣condly, in respect of persecuting the truth: for Hypocrites and Atheists are as forward in persecuting the people of God as the Hea∣then Emperours, which persecuted the Church by the space of 300. yeares. All comes in this, that when the Church should be ga∣thered and built by the preaching of the Gos∣pell, God would have all Papists, Atheists, and Hypocrites shut out. Moreover, here is the second reason yeel∣ded, why the outward Court should be cast out, and not measured; to wit, because they should tread the holy City under foot, forty and two moneths: that is, they should persecute the Church all the time of Antichrists raigne, For forty two moneths in this Verse: and 1260. dayes in the next Verse: and three dayes and a halfe Verse 9. and time, times, and halfe a time, in the twelfe Chapter, the foure∣teenth Verse, and 1260. dayes, the twelfe Chapter, the sixth verse, do signifie all one
thing, which is the short raigne of Anti∣christ; for these moneths, these dayes, and these times, do every one of them make three yeares and an halfe, For who know∣eth not that forty two moneths make just three yeares and an halfe, and that 1260. dayes, maketh even so much also: and by time he meaneth a yeare, bytimes, two yeare, and by halfe a time, halfe a yeare. Now the reason why Antichrists raigne is numbered by dayes, moneths and halfe times, and all a∣mounting but to three yeares and a halfe, is to note the short continuance thereof, for the comfort of the Church, as appeareth more fully and plainely in sundry places of this Prophesie, where it is set down in plaine words, that Antichrist should raigne but a short time; for what is five or six hundred yeares in comparison of eternity. But here the Papists do shew themselves most sottish and ridiculous, in that they would gather from hence, that the Pope is not Antichrist: for (say they) Antichrist shall raigne but three yeares and an halfe, but the Pope hath raigned many yeares, ther∣fore the Pope is not Antichrist. Now to answere the proposition of their argument taken from this place. First it may
be answered that this place is not to be un∣derstood literally, but mystically: as many other things in this booke. Secondly, here is a certaine number put for an uncertaine, a definite number for an in∣definite, which also is usuall in this booke, as we heard before concerning the sealing of the Tribes, of every Tribe 12000. which maketh 144000. Now no man is so mad as to thinke there were just so many sealed, and neither more, nor lesse. Thirdly, here is an allusion to Daniels weekes, and other propheticall computati∣ons, wherein somtimes a day is put for a yeare, a weke for seven yeares, as in Dani∣els sevens, and a moneth for thirty yeares. So then I conclude that it is extreme folly to in∣terpret this place litterally. The curious and frivolous interpretations of this place, and such like in this booke, by some writers, I do of purpose omit, as matters untrue, unsound, and unjudiciall: for I only in this book seeke the sense that is, and not the sense which is not, as hath been said before. verse 3.But I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesie 1260. dayes cloathed in sackcloth. Having set down how Antichrist and
his company, being those Gentiles which possesse the outward Court, should tread downe the holy Citty, that is, the true Church of God for a short time, now he commeth to shew, that even in the height and pride of the Popes power and governe∣ment, yet the Church was not utterly ex∣tinct, God did never utterly forsake it, but in all ages, and at all times, God raised up one or other to withstand all Popish proceedings, which is here meant by the two witnesses. For assuredly these two witnesses doe not signifie Enoch and Elias, as the Papists and some others doe dreame; but they signifie all the faithfull Preachers and Professors of the truth, which in all ages both former and later have opposed themselves against the Pope, his Clergy, his doctrine, his religion, and all his abhominable proceedings. They are called witnesses, because they should beare witnesse unto the truth. They are said two in number, for three reasons: First, because they were very few in those dayes when Poperie did so generally prevail; for two is the smallest number. Secondly, because the law of God doth admit of no lesse number in witnesse-bea∣ring,
as it is written; In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word stand. Thirdly, it is an allusion to Zorobabel, and Jehoshua; which were the two restorers and builders of the Temple after the captivitie:Hag. 2.5. Christ saith here, that he will give power to his two witnesses: for no man hath any power in heavenly things, except it be given him from above: and especially to stand fast to the truth in the heat of persecutions and troubles. It is said, that these two witnesses shall pro∣phesie: that is, preach, declare, and speake. For so Prophesie is taken in the former chap∣ter and last verse: so also in other places of the Scripture. The time of their prophesying, being 1260 dayes, hath been expounded before. These two witnesses are cloathed in sack∣cloath, which signifieth that they should lead a sorrowfull life here in this world. For in old time when men did fast and mourne, they did use to put on sackloath. It follow∣eth then that these faithfull Preachers and witnesses of the truth, did not spend their dayes in mirth, jollity, and worldly pompe and bravery, as did the Popes Clergie, and pompous Prelates of Antichrist.
Now if any man will demand how this may appeare, that there have been alwaies some raised up of God, to write, preach, de∣clare, and speake against the whore of Ba∣bylon, even then when shee was aloft and raigned as the Queene and Lady of the world: I answer, that Histories are very plentifull in this point; which at large doe shew, that in all countries and kingdomes of Europe, there were ever some stirred up to impugne and resist the whore of Babylon: As, In England. Robert Grosted, Bishop of Lincolne.An. dom. 1293. An. 1400. John Wickliffe, supported by Edw. the 3. and divers of the Nobility in England. In Germany. Taulerus a Preacher.An. 1354, 1356. 1357. 1359. 1359. 1360. Franciscus Petrarcha. Johannes de rupe scissa. Conradus Hager. Gerhardus Rhidor. Petrus de Corbona. Johannes de Poliaco.1420. John Zisca. In Bohemia. John Husse.An. dom. 1414. 1416. 1370. Jerome of Prague. Mathias Parisiensis.
In Spaine. An. 1250.Arnoldus de nova villa. In Italy. An. 1500.Jerome Savanarola, a Monke. Silvester, a Frier. In France. An. 1160. An. 1252. An. 1290. An. 1290.Waldas, of whom came the Walden∣ses, or poore men of Lyons in France. Guilielmus de sancto amore. Robertus Gallus. Laurentius. In Ireland. An. 1362.Armachanus, an Archbishop. In Suevia. An. 1240.Many Preachers at once. In Grecia. An. 1230.All the Churches of Grecia renoun∣ced the Church of Rome for their abominable Idola∣try. It were too tedious to recite all, which the Stories doe report to have withstood both Pope and Popery, even when it did most of all beare the sway: these may suf∣fice for the understanding of the Text. As for those which have been raised up since the decay and fall of Popery, I meane since Lu∣thers
time, they are so many, and so well knowne, that I need say nothing. These are two Olive trees, and two Candle∣sticks standing before the God of the earth.vers. 4. Here the two witnesses are compared to two Olive trees, because that as the Olive tree doth drop downe his oyle and fatnesse, so the faithfull Ministers doe droppe downe upon the Church the sweet oyle of the Spi∣rit, which is all heavenly and spirituall gra∣ces, as the Metaphor of oyle is often so taken in the Scriptures. They are also compared to two Candle∣sticks, because that as the candlestick bea∣reth up the candle set upon it, so the Ministers of the Gospell beare up and hold forth the light of Gods word, even in the greatest darknesse. These candlesticks are said to stand be∣fore the God of the Earth: because God bea∣reth rule, not only in heaven, but in earth also, even then when all things in the earth seeme to be most troubled, and the Church militant nder greatest persecutions, as now it was. And if any will hurt them,ver. 3. fire proceedeth out of their mouthes, and shall devoure their ene∣mies: for if any will hurt them, so must he be killed.
vers. 6.These have power to shut heaven that it raine not in the dayes of their prophesying, and have power over waters to turne them into bloud, and to smite the Earth with all manner of plagues, as oft as they will. Here is shewed, that if any despise the simplicity of these two winesses, and offer them wrong because of their basenesse and contempt in the world, that there is a fire commeth out of their mouth, that is, the fiery and mighty power of the word of God, uttered out of their mouthes, which over∣throweth and overturneth their enemies; nay, as fire it consumeth them to ashes: for the Ministers of the Gospell are armed with ready vengeance against all disobedience.1 Cor. 10. There∣fore they be starke mad, and know not what they doe, which oppose themselves against the true Ministers of Christ. For the sword which they fight with, slaieth the reprobates in their soules, though not in their bodies: for the ministry of the word is the savour of death to all unbeleevers. That which is here spoken of shutting the heavens that it raine not, and turning the wa∣ters into bloud,1 King. 17. is an allusion to Elias and Moses: whereof the one by his prayer shut the Heavens; the other by his rod turned
the waters into blood. Now the faithfull Ministers of the Gospell are compared to these two, not because they should worke such outward miracles as they did, but be∣cause they should be furnished with spirituall power, which is farre greater. For most sure it is, that the invisible and spirituall power, where with the Ministers of the Gospell are armed, is very great and glorious, though the world see it not, nor know it not. For the Apostle saith, The weapons of our warfare are not carnall, but spirituall,2 Cor. 10.6. mighty through God to cast downe holds, casting downe the ima∣ginations, and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, &c. And when they have finished their testimony,ver. 7. the beast that commeth out of the bottomlesse pit, shall make warre against them, and kill them. Here is set downe the greater cruelty and bloudy tyranny which Antichrist should use against these faithfull witnesses of our Lord Jesus. For although they overcome him with the spirituall sword, which is the fire that commeth out of their mouthes: yet for a time power was given to this Beast that commeth out of the bot∣tomlesse pit; that is, the Pope and his
adherents to murther Gods Saints with the materiall sword: but yet note that Antichrist can doe nothing, till the two witnesses have finished their testimony; such is Gods care and providence for all his faithfull ser∣vants. And their corps shall lie in the streets of the great City, which spiritually is called So∣dome, and Aegypt, where our Lord also was crucified. By the great City, here is meant Rome; and yet not the City onely of Rome, but all the Romane Empire, power, and juris∣dictions, as afterward shall be made ma∣nifest. Now the corps and dead carkasses, which were murthered and massacred in all Nations by Antichrists tyranny, are here said to lie in the streetes of Rome, that is, to bee cast forth into the open fields, as not worthy the honour of buriall, in all places, countries, and kingdomes within the Roman Empire or jurisdiction of Rome, as we read to have been in England, Scotland, France, Ireland, Germany, and Spaine. And as the Holy Ghost saith, The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat to the fowles of the heaven; and the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the earth. Moreover, it is to bee observed, that
Rome is here compared spiritually, or by a trope, to Sodome and Egypt. To Sodome for filthines; for what City ever was, or is more filthy than Rome,Chap. 12. the mother of whoredomes and abominations of the earth. And to Egypt for Idolatry, and keeping Gods people in spiri∣tuall bondage. Last of all, it is here said, That our Lord Jesus was crucified at Rome; which may seem strange, sith all men know, that Christ was crucified at Jerusalem. But to answere this doubt, we are to understand, that in re∣spect of the place, our Lord Jesus was cruci∣fied at Jerusalem: but if we respect the power and Authority that put him to death, he was crucified at Rome: for Christ was put to death by a Roman Judge, by Roman lawes, by Roman authority, by a kind of death pro∣per onely to the Romanes, and in a place which then was within the Romane Empire: And for this cause is here said, that Christ was crucified at Rome. And they of the people, and kindreds, & tongues,ver. 9. and Gentiles, shall see their corps three dayes and a halfe, and shall not suffer their corps to be put in the grave. Hitherto we have heard of the rage of Antichrist against the two witnesses: Now
further we are to understand of the malice and fury of all his adherents, that is, all Pa∣pists, Atheists, and the rest of the blinde peo∣ple, and seduced multitude, which did al∣low the Popes cruelty in shedding the bloud of the Martyrs; and they doe testifie the al∣lowance and approbation of the Popes fact, and also their owne malice and madnesse a∣gainst them in this; that they will not vouch∣safe them the honour of buriall, but cast out their dead bodies as carrion, or as the dead bodies of Dogges or Swine: thereby shew∣ing that they esteemed them no beter than so. Nay, we read that their hellish rage and madnesse was so great and outragious, that they wreaked their malice upon the dead bones and carkasses of Gods Saints and Mar∣tyrs. For their bloudy and most malicious mindes could not be satisfied, except they digged up the bodies of Gods witnesses out of their graves, and burnt them to ashes. Whereas it is said, They shall see their corps: the meaning is, that all the blinde people within the Romane Empire should bee eye∣witnesses of these things, and not only so, but even great Agents also in the slaughter of Gods people. By three dayes and a halfe, which is halfe a
weeke, he meaneth all the time of Antichrists raigne, and tyrannicall goverment, as before hath been shewed. For these three dayes and a halfe, being in propheticall computation three yeeres and a halfe, signifie the same things that the two and forty moneths, and a thousand two hundred and threescore dayes before. And they that dwell upon the Earth shall rejoyce over them and be glad,vers. 10. and shall send gifts one to another: for these two Prophets vexed them that dwelt on the Earth. Here we see how the inhabitants of the Earth, that is, the seduced multitude and blinde people in the time of ignorance, doe greatly insult and triumph over the death of the Lords witnesses; and they doe expresse their joy by sending gifts and presents one to another, as if they had received some great benefits, or had heard the most joyfull newes in the world. And the reason is added, be∣cause they vexed and tormented them; mea∣ning thereby, that the preaching of the truth, and the reproving of their errors, Idolatries, and manifold impieties, was a dagger, and a corsey unto them, they could at no hand endure it, for the preaching of the Gospell
is the torment of the World, and the Preachers the tormenters. These few Prea∣chers thundring against their superstitions, and abhominable service of Antichrist, did vex every veine in their heart, and inwardly so wound and lance their consciences, that they could have no rest till they had rid them out of the world. But now having dispatch∣ed them, and made riddance of them, they are very crank and jocund. vers. 11.But after three dayes and a halfe, the spirit of life comming from God, shall enter into them, and they shall stand upon their feet, and great feare shall come upon them which saw them. Notwithstanding the rage and savage fury of the Pope and his followers, yet here is shewed, that they could not prevaile as they desired: for within three dayes and a halfe, that is, when the date of Antichrists raigne was expired, and the time come that Pope∣ry must be disclosed by the light of the Go∣spell breaking forth, there followeth a great alteration: For these two Prophets or wit∣nesses are raised up againe: For he saith, the Spirit of life which came from God, shall enter into them, and they shall stand upon their feet.
This may seeme somewhat strange: but it is not to be understood, that they should be raised up bodily in their persons, till the last resurrection: but that God would raise up others endued with the same spirit, which should mightily defend both the doctrine, cause, and quarrell, which their Predeces∣sors had maintained, and sealed with their bloud: in whom they should after a sort re∣vive, and live againe, even as Elias did re∣vive, and as it were live againe in John Bap∣tist, who is said to be endued with the power and the spirit of Elias, as it was foretold by the Prophet, and as our Saviour himselfe doth avouch. Now blessed be God, that we live in these dayes, wherein we see with our eyes all these things fulfilled. For when the Pope and his Clergie had murthered Gerbar∣dus, Dulcimus Navarrensis, Waldus, Nichola∣us Orem, John Picus, John Zisca, Visilus Gro∣ningensis, Armerias, Wickliffe, Husse, Jerome of Prague, and many Preachers in Suevia, and one hundred holy Christians in the Country of Alsatia, and many other Coun∣tries, and of all conditions of men: yet for all that, spight of their hearts, God raised up others in their stead, as Luther, Calvin, Zuing∣lius, Peter Martyr, Peter Viret, Melancthon,
Bucer, Bullinger, and their successors, yea the thousands of excellent Ministers and Prea∣chers which are dispersed over all Europe at this day: in whom all the former witnesses doe revive, and as it were stand upon their feet againe. And now a great feare is come upon the Pope and his Clergie, and all his favourites; for they did never so much as dreame of such an alteration: but this is the Lords doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes. And they shall heare a great voyce from him, saying unto them:vers. 12. Come up hither: and they shall ascend up to Heaven in a Cloud, and their enemies shall see them. Here the Lords witnesses, whom Anti∣christ had murdered, and called, and taken up into heaven, that they may be crowned with glory and immortality, having in the earth fought so excellent a fight of faith as they had: for even as Christ their head was taken up in a cloud to the Heavens, even so his faithfull members are here taken up in a cloud to raigne with him for ever. More∣over, it is here said, that their enemies shall see them ascending up: they shall as it were ascend up in their fight: for from the fire and fag∣got, swords and speares of their enemies,
they went directly unto God, and the very consciences of their persecutors did witnesse so much; nay some of them being in horrible convulsions of conscience, did not stick to utter it, avouching the innocency of Gods Martyrs: as sometimes Pilate, and the Centurion did of Christ. But though they had not beene justified by their enemies, yet are here justified by a great testimony: for the voyce from Heaven, the voyce of God doth justifie them, and cleare them, accounting them worthy to bee called up from the Earth to Heaven, and received to eternall glory. For howsoever the Pope and his Clergie condemned them for Here∣tickes and Schismatickes: yet here they are justified and cleared by a voyce from Hea∣ven, which is more than the voyces, suf∣frages, and approbations of all men in the World. And the same houre there shall bee a great earth-quake, and the tenth part of the City shall fall, and in the earth-quake shall be slaine in number seven thousand, and the remnant were sore feared, and gave glory to the God of Heaven. As he hath shewed before that the world was very joyfull and jocond, when they
had made dispatch of Gods witnesses: but afterward full of feare and terrour, when they saw what followed: So here in this Verse is shewed, that at the same houre, that is, about the same time when they have per∣secuted the Saints, & see thousands of others raised up in their stead, and as it were out of their bloud, that there should immediately follow a great earth-quake: that is, horrible commotions, seditions, tumults, and open warres among the Kingdomes and Nations of the world, and amongst all people which should live after the breaking forth of the light of the Gospell; as this day we see with our eyes: For who now in these dayes doth not see and feele this Earthquake? Who knoweth not what stirres there have beene, and are every where about Religion? Who is ignorant that all the warres, seditions, trea∣cheries, treasons, & rebellions that are this day in Europe betwixt one Kingdome & an∣other, are especially concerning the matter of Religion? But mark what followeth: Be∣hold the effect of this Earth-quake; It is said, that the tenth part of the Citty shall fall. By the City here hee meaneth the great City of Rome, mentioned before, vers. 8. which is therefore called the great City, because
it was the chief city of the Roman Empire, and the very seat of Antichrist. Now then, the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost is, that when there once beginneth to be an earth-quake, that is, broyles, contentions, alterations, questions, and disputations a∣bout religion; and that the Popish do∣ctrine, which had so long prevailed in the world, should be called in question; yea, openly preached against, convicted, and condemned, that then Rome shall begin to fall, and Romish religion to suffer a great eclipse; yea, the tenth part, that is, some part of the city of Rome; I mean, the doctrine and authority of Rome, shall bee over∣thrown. Now this falling of the tenth part of Rome was fulfilled within some few yeers after the broaching of the Gospel by Lu∣ther and his immediate successors; but since it is gone back many degrees, and hereafter it shall still ebb and consume away by de∣grees, even till it come to nothing: as, God willing, shall be plainly proved here∣after. Moreover, here is set downe another effect of this earth-quake; which is, that thereby shall bee slaine in number seven thousand, that is, many thousands; for the
number of seven is a perfect and universall number, as formerly hath been declared. But the sense of this clause is, that all such as will not yeeld to the Gospel after matters once come in question, and the light thereof breaketh forth, but continue still in their blindnesse and hardnesse, standing out stur∣dily against the truth, shall feel the heavie judgement of God upon them, and come to miserable and wretched ends; as did here in England, Stephen Gardiner, bloudy Bonner, and many other such open persecuters in o∣ther nations and countries, as the book of Martyrs doth plentifully witnesse. Last of all, it is said, that the rest were terri∣fied, and gave glory to the God of heaven: that is, the elect of God seeing these horrible judgments upon the persecuters of the Go∣spel, and having their eyes opened through these contentions and broyles about religi∣on, should repent of their former idolatries, blindnesse, and ignorance, should yeeld to the truth, and give glory to the God of heaven,Chap. 9. as at this day we see thousands doe, God be thanked. Wee heard before in the time of the Turks murthering army, when the third part of men were slain, that the rest repented not of their idolatry. But now
(God be praised for it) many doe repent every day, and turne from dumb idols to serve the living God. And therefore, al∣though the times wherein we live be sinfull and troublesome, yet are they golden times and dayes, in comparison of former ages, wherein Antichrist did reign and rule over all. Moreover, from this place may plainly and strongly be concluded, that the Gospel shall prevail more and more in all the king∣domes of Europe, even untill the end of the world. For here wee see it fore-told and prophesied, that in the very last age of the world, and even as it were a little before the blowing of the seventh trumpet, which pre∣sently hereupon is sounded, as in the next verses appeareth, many should repent, and give glory to God. The second woe is past, behold,Vers. 14, 15. the third woe will come anon. And the seventh Angel blew the trumpet, and there were great voyces in hea∣ven, saying, The kingdomes of this world are our Lords, and his Christs, and he shall reigne for evermore. Now cometh the third, the last, and the greatest woe, which is the woe of eternall death upon all the ungodly, both in their soules and bodies for ever in the last judg∣ment.
The second woe was Turcisme: and this third wo is the last judgment. For it now followeth, that the seventh Angel bloweth the last trumpet; as our Lord Jesus sware before, that when the seventh Angel should blow the trumpet, there would be no more time.Chap. 10.6. Therefore when we see all things ful∣filled which do belong unto the sixth trum∣pet, it remaineth that we should every hour expect and look for the blowing of the se∣venth trumpet, and the end of the world: For the holy Ghost telleth us, that when the kingdome of the Pope and the Turke shall fall, and the Gospel be preached in many nations and kingdomes, that then the third woe will come anon, that is, the last judgment followeth presently upon it. Now at the blowing of this seventh trumpet there were great voyces in heaven, saying, The kingdomes of this world are our Lords, and his Christs, and hee shall reigne for ever∣more. These voyces in heaven are triumphing voyces of Gods elect, who doe exceeding∣ly rejoyce and triumph, that the kingdome of Satan and Antichrist is overthrown, and that the kingdome of God and of Christ is set up, and shall stand for evermore. For
now all adversary power being overthrown, Christ doth deliver up a peaceable kingdom to his Father, as it is written, Then shall be the end,1 Cor. 1.15, 24. when he hath delivered up his peaceable kingdome to God the Father: For hee must reigne over the Church militant, till he have trod downe all his enemies under his feet; and when the Son of God hath subdued all things to himselfe, then shall hee be subject to his Father, as hee is the Mediator of the Church, and yet reign with his Church tri∣umphant for evermore. Then the four and twenty elders which sate before God on their seates, fell upon their faces,Verse 16. and worshipped God. Saying, Wee give thee thankes,Verse 17. O Lord God Almighty, which art, which wast, and which art to come: for thou hast received thy great might, and hast obtained thy king∣dome. These four and twenty elders do signifie all the elect, both of Jewes and Gentiles,Chapt. 4. as wee have heard before; which all in most suppliant manner doe worship the onely e∣verlasting God, even in the Church trium∣phant, and doe greatly rejoyce, and give all praise and glory unto him, because now he hath received the kingdome, the power, and
the glory, both Pope, and Turk, and Empe∣ror, and all his enemies being subdued under his feet. Verse 18.And the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the Prophets, and to the saints, and to them that fear thy name, and to small and great, and shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth. Now he mentioneth the wrath and ven∣geance which is to be powred forth upon all the wicked at the last day, and also the reward of the godly. For whereas he saith, The Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged; the sense and meaning is, that all the profane enemies of the Church, which had their time in which they were angry with Gods people, and in their wrath did afflict and vexe them very sore, should now be judged and condemned in Gods wrath: for now the day of his wrath and venge∣ance is come, wherein hee will destroy them that destroyed the earth, and seemed to carry all before them; and where also he will give a full recompence of reward to all his faithfull worshippers, both small and
great, both preachers and professors of his Gospel. Then the Temple of God was opened in heaven,Verse 19. and there was seen in the Temple the ark of his covenant, and there were lightnings, and voyces, and thundrings, and earth-quakes, and much haile. This is a further amplification of that which is set down in this former verse. For now hee saith, that the Temple of God should be opened in heaven: that is, an open door and passage should be made through Christ, for all the elect to enter into Gods everlasting kingdome, and reigne with him and his An∣gels for evermore. By the arke of the Cove∣nant, is meant Christ, who is said here to be seen in the Temple, or kingdome of glory, because through his mediation onely (in whom the covenant of peace is established with his Church) the twenty four elders are made partakers of their crownes, and enter in with him and his Angels into the everla∣sting Temple made without hands, and eter∣nall in the heavens. But on the contrary, here is said, that there were lightnings, thundrings, &c. that is, most horrible vengeance and wrath powred down upon all reprobates in hell-fire for evermore. For when it shall be
said to all the faithfull, Come yee blessed, &c. then also shall it be said unto all unbelee∣vers: Goe ye cursed into hell-fire, &c. Now for warrant of this exposition of the last verse, that the Temple in heaven is to be understood of the kingdome of glory, look chapter 15. verse 5, 6, 8. chapt. 16. verse 1. The reason hereof is, that as the doors of the Temple of Jerusalem being set open, Gods people entred in and worshipped: so the everlasting gates of the new Jerusalem, and celestiall Temple being set open by Christ, all the elect do enter in, and worship God without wearinesse, even as the Angels, for evermore. That the ark of the covenant is taken for Christ, see 2 Sam. 6.2. Psal. 78. vers. 61, 62. This ark of the covenant, that is, Christ, is here seen in the Temple, because Christ hath already taken possession of heaven as Mediator and Head of the Church, and now doth set open the kingdome of heaven to all beleevers, that through him they may have free accesse thereunto, as it is written, that through him onely we have an entrance unto the Father.Eph. 2.28. That by thundrings, lightnings, earth∣quakes, hail, is meant that horrible vengeance
and wrath which is powred forth upon all the ungodly, see Psal. 11. verse 6. Let this briefly suffice to satisfie the conscience of the reader. And thus much concerning the second vision contained in these eight chap∣ters going before: wherein we have heard all things expounded that doe belong unto the opening of the seven seales, and the blowing of the seven trumpets, that is, all notable things which were to fall out from the Apostles times unto the end of the whole world. CHAP. XII. NOw having finished the second vision, we are come unto the third, contained in all the chapters following, even unto the end of this book. Wherein divers things which were obscurely and darkly set down in the former vision, are more plainly and fully opened and expounded: so that this third vision is as it were a Commentary or more cleare exposition of sundry things contained in the second vision.Chap. 6. But especial∣ly of the persecuting Roman Empire men∣tioned in the opening of the second seal, and also of the Papacy mentioned at the blow∣ing
of the first trumpet.Chapt. 9. But the generall sum of this third vision is a lively painting out of the malignant Church, and the great upholders thereof, the Divell, the Roman Emperor, and the Pope. It sheweth also the rising and falling of the Roman Empire, and the rising and falling of the Papacy. It shew∣eth also the utter overthrow of both toge∣ther, with the eternall condemnation of the Divell which set them all awork to fight a∣gainst the Church. Last of all, it sheweth the eternall felicity of the Church, and the unconceivable happinesse of all Gods cho∣sen in the heavens for evermore. The princi∣pall drift of this twelfth chapter is to set forth the nature of the true, visible, and mi∣litant Church here on earth, whose head is Christ Jesus: and also the false malignant Church, whose head is the Divell; together with the continuall enmity and war which is alwayes betwixt them. This chapter may very fitly be divided into five parts: The first is a description of the Church. The second is a description of the Divell, the Churches enemy. The third containeth the Churches battel with the Divell, and her victory.
The fourth sheweth the joy and triumphs of the godly in the Churches victory over Satan. The fifth and last sheweth the fury and malice of Satan, who, although he was foiled in battel by the Church, yet would not give over, but continued persecuting the Church in her members, and making war against the remnant of her seed. And there appeared a great wonder in heaven:Verse 1. A woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon was under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars. First, the holy Ghost calleth the matters of this chapter a great wonder, to stir us up to attention; for men are much moved with wonders: and a wonder indeed it is in the literall sense, to see a woman clothed with the Sun, &c. but a far greater wonder in the spirituall sense, as we shall hear; and the greatest wonder of all, that a poor weak woman should encounter with a great red Dragon, and overcome him. It is said to be a wonder in heaven, because the Church here in vision appeareth not upon the earth, but in heaven, in as much as her birth is from heaven, her inheritance in heaven, and her conversation in heaven.
The Church is here compared to a wo∣man, as in the 45. Psalme, and the whole booke of the Canticles, and that for three reasons. First, as a woman is weak and feeble, and in law can doe nothing of her selfe without her husband; so wee of our selves are weak and feeble, and in matters of Gods law and worship, can doe nothing without our hus∣band Christ, as hee saith, Without me yee can doe nothing. Secondly, as a woman through the com∣pany of her husband is fruitfull, and bring∣eth forth children: so the Church by her conjunction with Christ and his word, doth bring forth many children unto God. Thirdly, as the love and affection of a woman is to her husband, as Genesis, chap∣ter 2. verse 16. so the love and affection of the Church is altogether to Christ, and Christ to her. This woman is clothed with the Sunne: that is, the Church is clothed with Christ the Sunne of righteousnesse,Mal. 4.2. as the Prophet speaketh. The Moon was under her feet. Where∣by is meant, that the Church treadeth under her feet all worldly things, which are com∣pared
to the Moon for their often changes, waxings, wainings, and increasings, decrea∣sings, continuall mutations, and uncertain∣ties. The Church treadeth all transitory things under her feet: that is, shee maketh light account of them, she regardeth them not in comparison of heavenly things: For he that is clothed with the Sun, careth little for the light of the Moon. Shee hath upon her head a crown of twelve starres: which signifieth that the Church is adorned and beautified with the doctrine of the twelve Apostles; that is, the doctrine of the Gospel, as it were with a crown of gold, of pearl, and precious stones. For the doctrine of the Gospel is the crown of the Church. And shee was with child,Verse 2. and cryed travel∣ling in birth, and was pained ready to be deli∣vered. The Church is said to be with child af∣ter shee hath conceived the immortall seed of the Word by the ministery of the Go∣spel, as the Apostle saith:2 Cor. 4.15. In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel: And to the Galatians, O ye little children, of whom I travell in birth againe till Christ be formed in you.
It is not onely said, that this woman wa with child; but also, that she was very nee her time, ready to bring forth, and to be de∣livered, and that she cryeth in travell. Now the child which she bringeth forth is Christ Jesus,Gal. 5.19. as appeareth in the fifth verse, for there it is said of him, that he should rule all nations with a rod of iron. Now although Christ was born but of one member of the Church, which is the Virgin Mary: yet may it be said, that the whole Church, which was before his com∣ing, did even travell with paine to bring him forth, because they had, through faith in the promises, a longing and fervent desire and expectation of his coming. For from the first promise made to Adam, and after∣ward renewed to Abraham and his posterity, the Church stood in a continuall expectati∣on of the promised Messias, looking wishly every day when hee should be actually ex∣hibited to the world. For which cause here she is said to cry, travelling in birth. And not unfitly also may the Church be said to cry travelling in birth, when, through many persecutions and afflictions, shee bringeth forth children unto God by the ministery of the Word. For the Church bringeth forth
no children at ease, but with hard travell, and much ado, having so few friends to help her, and so many enemies against her, as a∣non we shall hear. And there appeared another wonder in heaven:Verses 3.4. For behold, a great red Dragon having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his head. And his taile drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth. And the Dragon stood before the woman, which was ready to be delivered. Now wee are come to the description of the Churches great and capital enemy, which is the Divell: who, because he studieth and laboureth continually to impeach the good estate of the Church in heavenly things, to deject her from her dignity, and dispossesse her of her inheritance, therefore here in a vision he is said to appear in heaven: for he meddleth with the Church in and about heavenly things, practising to pull her out of heaven, from whence shee came, and whi∣ther she must return, even to cast her into hell and condemnation with himselfe, if it were possible. The Divell is compared to a Dragon, for his fury and felnesse; to a great Dragon, for his power and might; and
a red Dragon, for his bloudy cruelty, ma∣lice, and madnesse against Christ and all hi members. His seven heads signifie his manifold sleights and subtilties, wherein he is a crafts∣master. His ten horns signifie his dreadfull power. For who knoweth not that hee is stronger then any other creature, having not lost his strength by his fall, but remaineth as strong as an Angel of light. His seven crowns upon his heads do signifie his manifold victories over the world. For he hath from time to time, and from age to age got so many conquests of the world, through his sleights and power, that now he is the god of the world, as the Apostle saith, and reigneth as king over them. The Dragon hath a monstrous tail both for length and strength: for it is so long that it reacheth up to heaven, and so strong, that it brusheth down many stars from thence. That is, the Divell through ambition and covetousnesse, and other fleshly lusts, doth pull down many ministers, which shined in doctrine and life as the starres of heaven, even unto the earth, where they have lost their brightnesse and glory, and shine as
much as the Moone in a mist. Moreover, it is said,Verse 4. that the Dragon stood before the woman in travell, to devoure the child as soon as it was born. Wherein wee are to observe the malice and fury of Satan, in that he watcheth so narrowly to devour the blessed Seed, even the Saviour of the world, so soon as he was born. And for this cause he stirred up Herod the king subtilly to seek him out by the wise men, that hee might kill him: and afterward most cruelly pra∣ctised the same, by murdering so many in∣nocents. But this is alwaies a generall truth,Matth. 2. that Satan seeketh to smother not onely Christ, but every member of his in the cra∣dle; yea, to blast them in the bud, before e∣ver they come to fruit or flower. So shee brought forth a man-child,Verse 5. which should rule all nations with a rod of iron, and that her child was taken up to God and his throne. Notwithstanding the malice and watch∣fulnesse of Satan, yet the Church bringeth forth Christ, which should rule and over∣rule all nations with a rod of iron; that is, the scepter of his Word, as it is in the second Psalme: and with the rod of his mouth, as the Prophet speaketh.
Isa. 11.4.Moreover, it is said, that this child was ta∣ken up unto God and his throne. That is, Christ by his resurrection did take possessi∣on of his chaire of estate in despight of He∣rod, Pontius Pilate, the Priests, the Pharisees, and all other his enemies, which sought to keep him down: and now he being ascen∣ded unto heaven, doth draw all his members unto him, in despight of the Divell and all his imps. Verse 6.And the woman fled into the wildernesse, where shee hath a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore dayes. Now after the womans child was set in safety, here is shewed what became of the woman her selfe: to wit, that shee was so sore pursued by the Scribes and Pharisees, and by the Priests and Elders, that shee was fain to fly into the wildernesse. The naturall sense and meaning of this place is, that when the Church began to grow after Christs as∣cension, and the number of the Disciples to increase exceedingly, as wee read in the se∣cond of the Acts, Satan did so greatly ma∣ligne it, and began to be in such a rage, that he would have eaten them up all at a bit, and rooted them out at once, that so the woman
might have no more being in the earth. And therefore we read, Acts 8. that after the sto∣ning of Stephen, there was such a persecution raised up against the Church by the high Priests, the Princes of the Jewes, the Phari∣sees, & all that cursed crew, that all the Apo∣stles and Disciples of Christ were scattered and dispersed here and there in the heathen countries, and amongst the heathen people, which here are called the wildernesse, that is to say, a ground untilled, desolate and barren of all fruits of godlinesse. But now may some man say, How shall the Church do in the wildernesse? how shall she live? how shall she be sustained? There is no tilling, no sowing, no planting, there groweth no corn, there is nothing to be had either for food or raiment. Here it is an∣swered, that God prepared a place for her, where she should be fed; God took up an inn for her: shee wanted neither food nor raiment in her persecutions and troubles. Which teacheth, that God doth alwaies pro∣vide for his own, even in great miseries, scar∣cities, famines, banishments and persecuti∣ons; as sometimes hee did for Elias in the time of dearth, and for the children of Israel in the wildernesse.
The time wherein the Church was fed in the wildernesse, was a thousand two hundred and threescore dayes: that is, during the time of her persecutions, as before hath been shewed, chap. 11. verse 2. Vers. 7, 8.And there was a battell in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon and his angels fought. But they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven. Now wee are come to the third part of this chapter, which is the battell betwixt Christ and the Divell. For whereas the Dragon could not smother Christ in the cradle, as hee endeavoured, and so deprive the Church of all her happinesse for ever; now he proclaimeth open war, both against Christ and all his members, plotting and purposing to oppugne the very salvation of the Church, though it be founded in Christ. Wherein hee sheweth both his im∣pudency and furious madnesse. Michael here signifieth Christ, as in Daniel, chap. 10. verse 13. This name is given to Christ in Daniel, because hee is the first of the chiefe Princes; that is, hee is the head of the An∣gels,Col. 1.16. who are chiefe Princes, as the Apostle affirmeth.
That Christ hath his Angels joyned with him, is not to note any weaknesse or want of strength in Christ alone to overcome his enemies, but to shew, that as Christ effe∣cteth great wonders in the world; so for the most part he doth it by instruments and meanes: as sometimes Angels, sometimes men. But here specially it meaneth the A∣postles, and their successors: yea, and at this day all Christian kings, princes, and poten∣tates of the earth, and all others, which take part with Christ against the Divell and his instruments. Well, here wee see that these two Gene∣rals and grand Captains, Michael and the Dragon, doe muster both their armies, joyn battell, and fight a pitched field, the event and successe whereof is this, that the Dragon and his Angels goe downe. O blessed suc∣cesse may wee say! For if the Divell had prevailed, it had been woe to us: sith this battell was about, and concerning the very salvation of mankind by Christs death and resurrection. We know how the Divell set upon Christ alone to tempt him unto sinne, that so hee might overthrow the worke of our redemption, supposing in this combat or monomachie to have got the day: but
he prevailed not. Afterward, how strong∣ly did hee oppugne him by his Angels; I mean, the Scribes and Pharisees, the high Priests and Elders of the people; yea, all the Divels in hell, and his whole infernall army, not only in murthering and crucifying his naturall body, but also in using all forcible and cunning meanes to keepe him downe, that hee might never rise up again; as the great stone upon his tomb, the sealing of it, the watch set to keep it? For the Divell knew right well, that if Christ rose againe, he should lose the field: For the resurrecti∣on of Christ is our actuall justification, And Christ was mightily declared to be the Sonne of God by his resurrection from the dead.Rom. 4.25. Well, doe the Dragon and his angels what they can, yet Christ is risen again, and hath spoi∣led principalities and powers; yea, all the infernall army, and hath made a shew of them openly, and hath led them all in tri∣umph upon his crosse: so that we see in this first and greatest battell, the Divell hath the foyle. And it is further said, that this Divell and all his angels were cast out of heaven, and their place was no more found: which is not to be understood of their first casting out of heaven immediately after their creation:
for at that time they were no Divels, nor enemies to the Church, but Angels of light; but now since their fall, and since they were Divels: they are said to be cast out of hea∣ven, not because they ever came in heaven since they were Divels, but because they can no longer impeach the Church touching her blessed estate in heaven. They are with∣out all hope to dispossesse her of her inheri∣tance; for that is ratified & made sure unto her in the death and resurrection of Christ. And for this cause it is said, that the Divell hath no more to doe in heaven; that is, hee cannot for his heart overthrow the salvati∣on of Gods children.Rom. 8.33. For who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifieth, who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea, or rather, which is risen a∣gaine, &c. True it is indeed, that this battell is said to be in heaven, that is, about heaven∣ly things; yea, about the highest points of heaven, which is salvation or damnation: for the Divell upon this very point hath from the beginning mightily wrestled and struggled with the Church, and doth even untill this day: but blessed be God that hee cannot, nor shall not prevail against any one of Gods elect. For our Lord Jesus saith, I
give unto them eternall life,John 10.28. and they shall never perish, neither shall any take them out of my hand: my Father which gave them mee is greater then all. Neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. Againe, All that the Father giveth mee shall come unto me. And this is the Fathers will which hath sent me, that of all which hee hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up againe at the last day. Now further wee are to observe, that as Christ in his own person hath once prevailed in the main battell against the Divell, so his Church militant shall likewise alwaies pre∣vail through him: For it is written, The gates of hell shall not prevail against it.Mat. 16. Verse 9.And the great Dragon, that old serpent called the Divel and Satan, was cast out, which deceived all the world: He was even cast into the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him. Now, because the divel cannot overthrow the salvation of Gods elect, he is said to be cast out of heaven into the earth: that is a∣mongst earthly and carnall men, that he may exercise his tyranny, and wreak his malice upon them. For he hath power given him to tyrannize over them at his pleasure, and the Apostle saith,Ephes. 2. he worketh in the children of diso∣bedience, and taketh him captive to do his will.
Then I heard a loud voyce in heaven, saying,Verse 10. Now is salvation, and strength, and the king∣dome of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast downe, which accused them before God day and night. Here is the triumphant song of victory, which all the Saints and Angels do sing unto God, praising and magnifying his power, and the power of his Son Christ, for over∣coming the Dragon, and giving the victory to the Church through Christ. For now with great joy and loud voices they sing and say, that the Churches salvation is sealed and made sure unto her for ever. It can never be shaken. The divell is foiled and cast down into the earth. These songs of joy after great victories are of great antiquity in the Church; as we read of the children of Israel after the over∣throw of Pharaoh and his army in the red sea: of Deborah after the great victory over Sisera; of the women that sung after the vi∣ctory of Goliah by David. The Divell is called the accusey of the brethren for two causes: First, because hee accuseth Gods elect of much sinne, and cal∣leth for justice against them day and night at Gods hands, that they might be condem∣ned
upon such articles as he is able to prove against them: for hee knowing right well that the Judge of all the world is a just God, and must needs deale uprightly, doth daily urge him to doe justice unto sinners, being willingly ignorant that all Gods people, though sinners, are cleared and discharged in Christ. Another reason is, because of the calum∣niations, reproaches and slanders which in all ages, at all times, and in all places and countries he hath alwayes unjustly raised up against the true worshippers of God. Verse 11.But they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they lo∣ved not their lives unto the death. Here is shewed, that the Churches victo∣ry over Satan and hell is not through any power or might of her owne, but by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of the te∣stimony; that is, the word of God, which they witnesse, professe, love, and stick unto even unto death. Verse 12.Therefore rejoyce ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them; Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea: for the Divell is come downe unto you, which hath great wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time.
Here againe the Saints and Angels, and all the blessed company of heaven are cal∣led upon, and exhorted to rejoyce, because the Divell and his angels are cast out, and the elect have the victory over him through the blood of the Lamb; and because the sal∣vation of the Church is sealed up, and God onely reigneth through Christ. Which all are matters of so great moment, that not onely the Church militant is stirred up to rejoyce herein, but even the Church triumphant also, that is, the spirits of just and perfect men. But on the contrary, here is fearfull woe denounced against the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea; that is, all Papists, Atheists, worldlings, and re∣probates. For sith hee cannot have his will of the Church, yet hee will have his will, and wreak his malice upon them, by hard∣ning their hearts, and blinding their eyes, and making them his slaves and vassals, to fight for his kingdome against Christ, a∣gainst his Church, against all goodnesse, and all good men. Therefore is added, why the Divell is in such a rage with the world, and cometh upon them in so great wrath and fury; to wit, because hee hath but a short time: that is, because his kingdome draweth
to an end, therefore he doth so bestir him. Verse 13.And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman which had brought forth the man child. Now the Divell seeing himselfe cast out of heaven, so as he cannot impeach the sal∣vation of the Church, he raiseth up horrible persecutions against her by his instruments here in the earth, labouring to root her out if it were possible: for being overcome of the head, he doth now with might and main set upon the body, and what horrible storms he hath in all ages, specially in these last daies, raised up, and daily doth raise up against the Church, both the Scriptures and all Church-stories do abundantly declare. Verse 14.But to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might flye into the wilder∣nesse into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and halfe a time, from the pre∣sence of the Serpent. These two wings do signifie all the waies and means of evasion which God gave to his Church, when he delivered her from the hands of her pursuers and persecuters: and also her swift flight from them and all their malicious practises. For although the Church cannot absolutely fly from the pre∣sence
of the Divell with her Eagles wings, being so unspeakably swift as he is; yet af∣ter a sort shee is said to fly from him and his presence, when the power of the tyrants and persecuters which he raised up, cannot overtake her, to murder and kill her. But as touching her flight to the wildernesse, and her lodging and nourishment there by Gods providence, in the middest of all pe∣nury and extremity, wee have sufficiently heard before in the sixth verse, and there∣fore here I surcease to speak any further of it. As concerning the space and continu∣ance of her nourishment in the wildrenesse, which is here set downe to be a time, and times, and halfe a time; it is the same with the thousand two hundred and threescore dayes mentioned in the sixth verse; and the twenty four moneths mentioned chap. 11. verse 2. and the three dayes and an halfe, mentioned chap. 11. verse 6. as before hath been shewed. And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water af∣ter the woman like a floud,Verse 15. that he might cause her to be carried away of the floud. Now the Church being secretly hid, and nourished by Gods providence in the wil∣dernesse, so as the Divell and his instru∣ments
cannot find her out or come at her, hee taketh another course, and casteth a∣bout another way to annoy her; and that is, by casting a floud of water after her to drown her withall: whereby is meant the innumerable lies, reproaches and slanders, which hee raised up by sundry hereticks a∣gainst her in all ages; as the Arrians, Dona∣tists, Papists, and such like, and all to bring her into the hatred of Princes, Potentates, and all that were in love with her, that sith otherwise he could not prevaile against her, yet at least he might utterly sink her in this gulf of reproaches. Verse 16.But the earth holp the woman, and the earth open∣ed her mouth, and swallowed up the floud which the Dragon had cast out of his mouth. The same God which first delivered the Church from the violence and fury of Sa∣tan, and afterwards cast him out of heaven, and gave her victory over him; and after that again miraculously hid her, and preser∣ved her in the wildernesse, doth not now at a dead lift forsake her, nor suffer her to be drowned in this floud of reproaches, and un∣just calumniations, which the Dragon cast up after her; but causeth the earth to help her, and to swallow up the floud: That is, he useth
all creatures in the earth to help his Church: and not only so, but also he stirreth up ma∣ny earthly and carnall men to defend the Church and to take part with her against her enemies, as sometimes hee did Cyrus, Ebedmelech, Nebuzaradan, Gamaliel, and sundry others, whose power and policie hee used for the good of his Church, and for the drying up of that floud of reproaches, which Satan hath in all ages cast up against her. And, God be thanked, we see at this day, that this floud of slanders and calumnies, which Papists and Atheists cast out against the Church and her particular members, doe dry up daily, and shall dry up more and more, being drunk in by the earth. And the Church doth stand still unmoveable, and shall stand and continue even unto the end of the world. Then the Dragon was wroth with the woman,Verse 17. and went and made warre with the rem∣nant of her seed, which kept the commande∣ments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. Here we see there is no end of the Divels malice; he is infatigable in mischief: though he have never so many foiles, yet he will ne∣ver give over, but begin again. For where∣as
he could not prevaile against the woman, to cast her out of heaven by impeaching her election and salvation in Christ, nor yet root her out of the earth by persecutions, being hid in the wildernesse, and locked up in the privie chamber of Gods providence, as some∣times young Joash was locked up in the Priests chamber from the fury of Athalia:2 King. 11.2. now hee goeth another way to work, and setteth upon her in her seed and posterity, which remain in the earth unto this day. So that now, sith he cannot do what mischiefe he would against the Church, yet will he do what he can: seeing he cannot wound her in her head, yet will he bite and pinch at her heel,Gen. 3.15. as it is written, that hee should bruise her heel. And as it is the malice of Satan against the Church; so is the rage and fury of all his members, even all the wicked and ungod∣ly, against the true worshippers of God. They are restlesse in malice and mischiefe: if they cannot vex them one way, they will try another: if they cannot touch them in their lives, yet will they molest them in their goods and good name: if they can∣not do what they would, yet will they doe what they can: they will never give over: if they can spight them in the least thing that
is, they shall be sure of it. For they are as full of venome as a toad, and as full of malice to Christ as an egge is full of meat. And I stood on the sea sand.Verse 18. Now John affirmeth that hee stood upon the sea sand to behold the Beast which ri∣seth out of the sea in the next chapter, or else because the Greek word may be of the third person, which is, He stood; that is,. the Dra∣gon stood; it may bear this sense, That the Divell stood upon the sea sand, as it were working and framing out of the sea his chief instrument, which is the Beast, now follow∣ing to be spoken of. CHAP. XIII. WEe have heard in the former chapter the description of the Church, & of her arch-enemy the Divell, and of the battel betwixt them, with the successe therof. Now in this chapter wee are to hear of the Dra∣gons two great instruments, whereby hee fighteth against the woman: that is, the Ro∣man Empire, and the Papacy. For by these two, as it were his two hands, he hath in all ages, from the Apostles time to this day, most cruelly assailed & afflicted the Church. Therfore the main drift of this chapter is to
describe at large these two beasts, together with all their beastly proceedings. So that this chapter may fitly be divided into two principall parts. The first is a description of the Roman Monarchy, when it was at the highest pitch, unto the 11. verse. The second is a description of the Papacy, when it was in his pride and exaltation, in all the verses following unto the end of this chapter. In the first of these two maine branches the Roman Empire is diversly described: Verse 1.First, the pedegree thereof. Verse 2.Secondly, of her 7. severall governments. Verse 3.Thirdly, of her great and out-stretched power. Fourthly, of her victories. Fifthly, of her blasphemies. Sixthly, of her fury, rapine, and pride. After this is set down the wound which was made in the Empire, with the curing of the same. Lastly is set down the great and admira∣ble power and authority of the Roman Em∣pire,Ver. 4.5. &c. which ruled over a great part of the world, and had many nations subject unto it, especially when the Popes were the heads thereof.
In the second main part is the Papacy ve∣ry lively described. First, from the pedegree thereof,Verse 11. which is of the earth. Secondly, from the Civill and Ecclesiasti∣call power thereof, which is pretended to come from Christ, although in truth it is of the Divell. After this is set downe,Ver. 12, 13. that the Papacy should be as mighty, and perform as much in the service of the Dragon, against God, as ever the Empire of the Heathen could doe, both by authority, and force, and especially by lying wonders. Then it is shewed that as the Papacy did in substance of matter set up,Verse 14. and restore a∣gain the old Roman tyranny to be worship∣ped and wondred at; so hath it framed an Hierarchy or Ecclesiasticall government,Verse 15. af∣ter the very forme and president of the ancient Roman tyranny; which is indeed so like it, that it is called the lively image there∣of: and hee hath by his Clergy and their jurisdiction,Vers. 16, 17. put such life and spirit into this Image, that it spake with authority and power in all countries and kingdomes; in so much, that whosoever would not sub∣mit himselfe thereunto, and both professe
and practise Popery, and yeeld himself whol∣ly to the Papacy, he should die for it. Last of all, is described & discovered from the numerative letters of the name of the second Beast, both who hee was, and from whence he shall spring. Verse 8.And I saw a beast rise out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns were ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemie. First, we are to understand that a beast in the Scripture doth signifie a Kingdome, or Monarchy; and that not in respect of the civill power thereof, which is of God, as it is written,Rom. 13. There is no power but of God: but in respect of the tyranny, crueltie, ambition, pride, and other such like beastly qualities thereof, which are of the Divell: and there∣fore this beast is said to ascend out of the bottomelesse pit, chap. 17. ver. 8. This word beast is thus taken in the seventh of Daniel, where the three great Monarchies of the Babylonians, Medes, and Persians, and of the Grecians, are compared for their pride,Dan. 7.17. rapine and cruelty, to a lion, a bear, and a leopard. The Angel in that chapter saith expresly, that these beasts were Kings, that is, Kingly Governments or Dominions.
By the beast in this place is meant the Ro∣man Monarchy, not in regard of the civill power thereof, but especially in respect of the tyranny of it, in oppressing the Church. By the sea here is meant the troublesome state of the nations; as it is taken, chapt. 4. ver. 6. and chap. 2. ver. 1. For from the boy∣ling and broyling estate of the former king∣doms and heathen nations, which were as a raging sea, did the Roman Empire spring up, as all stories do witnesse. And the Prophet Daniel doth flatly teach,Dan. 10.11. that through the di∣vision of the Greek Empire, which fell out in the successors of Alexander the Great, e∣specially betwixt his two Captains, Ptolome∣us and Seleucus, this Roman Monarchy by degrees made a head, til at last it came to this pitch, which now we shall hear of. By the seven heads of this beast, are meant the seven severall governments of the Ro∣man Empire. First, by Kings. Secondly, by Consuls. Thirdly, by Decemviri. Fourthly, by Dictators. Fiftly, by Triumviri. Sixtly,Chap, 17.9. by Emperors. And lastly, by Popes, as hereafter shall more plainly appear. By the ten horns of this beast is meant the great power and large dominion of the Ro∣man Empire; or,Chap. 17.1. as the Angel himself doth
expound it, thereby is meant ten kings, that is, many kingdomes which should be sub∣ject to the Roman Monarchy, and wherein in very deed the power and strength of the Empire did consist. For by these Horns the Roman Empire did not onely push down o∣ther Nations: but especially dosse against the Church, and as it were cruelly gore the sides thereof. Now then we see that the Roman Empe∣rors, both in horns and heads, were like their father the Divell, or the Dragon. By the ten crowns upon his ten horns, are meant his great and manifold victories over other countries and kingdomes. The hornes of the beast are said to be crowned, and not his heads, because the Ro∣man Empire hath alwaies more prevailed by power then by policy, by strength then by subtilty. But the Dragon hath his heads crowned, and not his horns, because he hath alwaies done more hurt by policy, then power; by subtilty, then strength. One thing in all this is greatly to be heeded, that the holy Ghost in this chapter doth specially speak of the Roman Monarchy, as the Popes were heads thereof; or as it was under the dominion of the Popes in their pride,
when as the Emperors were almost troden under foot; and not simply and solely as the Emperors were heads thereof. Moreover, it is said, that upon the seven heads of this beast was written the name of blas∣phemy. For, besides the blasphemies of Caligu∣la, Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian, Julianus, and the other old heathenish and persecuting Emperors, which have arrogated unto them∣selves divine honour, wee shall anon hear of the surpassing blasphemies of the Popes a∣gainst God and all goodnesse.Verss 4, 5. And the beast which I saw was like a Leo∣pard, and his feet like a Bears,Verse 2. and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, and the Dragon gave him his power, and his throne, and great au∣thority. Here the Roman Empire is described of the likelihood of qualities which it had with the other three Empires going before it. For first, it is compared to a Leopard for swiftnesse to prey upon others; and also for fiercenesse and subtilty, as did the Greeke Monarchy. Secondly, it is compared to a Beare for rapine and ravening, as the Mo∣narchy of the Medes and Persians. Thirdly, it is compared to a Lion for pride and insolency, as the Monarchy of the Chal∣deans.
So then, by this description it is ve∣ry clear, that this beast signifieth the Roman Monarchy, because it containeth in it the whole power of the other three Empires: and is here described as a compound of di∣vers beasts, yea, as a very monster of monsters, having the body of a leopard, the feete of a beare, and the mouth of a lion. Moreover, it is said that the Dragon gave his power, and his throne, and great authority. Which plainely sheweth, that the power and authority of the Roman Empire is of the Divell,Chap. 17.8. in respect of the evill qualitie thereof; that is, fraud, rapine, and oppression. In which respect it is said to ascend out of the bottomlesse pit, as was declared before. But the substance of it, and the government it self was of God.Rom. 13.2. For the powers that be are ordained of God, as saith the Apostle. Verse 3.And I saw one of his heads, as it were woun∣ded unto death: but his deadly wound was hea∣led, and all the world wondred, and followed the beast. Here John, in a vision, seeth one of the seven heads of the beast almost wounded unto death. There be divers and differing
opinions of the learned touching this wound of the Empire, both when it should bee, and how, and by whom. Some understand it of the death of Julius Caesar: some of Nero: some of the oppression of the Gothes and Vandals: some of the great pre∣vailing of John Husse, and Jerome of Prague, in the greatest part of Bohemia. But to let all these passe, if wee doe wisely consider and weigh with our selves, that by a beast in this place, is not meant any lawfull ad∣ministration of government, but a tyran∣nicall power in persecuting the Church, we shall find that a head of the beast was then wounded, when Constantine the Great slew Maxentius and Licinius the two last persecuting Emperors, set up true Religion, and brought peace to the Churches. For hereby the Roman Empire was greatly wounded, as touching the tyranny of it. The holy Ghost doth not set down which of the seven heads were thus wounded, but in generall saith, one of them. Now it is very probable that hee meaneth the sixth head: For wee doe not read of any such wound in the former five which were past. Neither can it bee understood of the seventh head, which was the Papacy, because it received
no such wound as yet. It followeth then that the wound was in the sixth head; that is, in the Empire. But we read of no Empe∣ror that did so wound the beast, as did Con∣stantine the Great. And therefore it is very probable, nay, an hundred to one, that the holy Ghost here pointeth at him. But it followeth, that his deadly wound was healed, to wit, by these wicked Em∣perors which succeeded Constantine, as Constantius, Julianus, Valentius, and others, which afresh did set up Idolatry, and per∣secuted the Church. Now upon the hea∣ling of this wound, it is said, that all the world wondred, and followed the beast: that is, many nations, or the greatest part of the world, did submit themselves to the Roman tyranny. For sure it is, some king∣domes were never subject to the Empire of Rome, as some part of Asia, and some part of Africa. Verse 4.And they worshipped the Dragon, which gave power unto the beast, and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to war with him? Now is shewed how all the subjects of the Roman Empire did worship the Dra∣gon: that is, they maintained that wor∣ship
which he liked and loved; that is, the worship of idols, which the Apostle calleth the worship of Divels.1 Cor. 10.20, 21. And it is said al∣so, they worshipped the Beast: that is, they did all with one accord submit themselves both to the religion and authoritie of the beast: that is, to the Popes, as they were the seventh head of the Empire: For, as I said before, so I say againe, the holy Ghost here speaketh of the Empire, when it was in the greatest glory and exaltation; yea, when all the world wondred and followed the beast; yea, when all admired the great & large dominion of the Roman Em∣pire, and said within themselves, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make warre with him? Now the Empire of Rome was never so great and powerfull, as when the Popes were heads thereof; I mean, when they executed the whole Civill jurisdicti∣on of the Empire, besides their Ecclesia∣sticall power, which now did both meet in one. For now the Papacy was aloft, and the Roman Empire joyned with it: so that the eyes of the world were dazzled with the pomp and magnificence thereof, and they said, What is like unto it? Or who is comparable to the Pope, the seventh head
thereof? for then the blinde world thought that the power of the Pope was not onely above all things in this world, but also did reach even to heaven and hell. For they imagined that the Pope might carry to hea∣ven whom hee would, and whom he would he might cast down to hell: And therefore who could warre with the beast? And thus we see the reason of their wonderment, and of their speech. All stories, and experience it self do shew, that there was never any pow∣er in the world so wondred at, as the usur∣ped power and majestie of the Pope, after hee came to bee the head of the Roman Monarchy. For then the world supposed that hee had power even as God: and that he might depose and set up Kings and Em∣perors at his pleasure. Then it is clear, that under the dominion of the Popes, Rome hath been in her highest exaltation and glory: For the Papacy was the seventh head of the beast, whereby the Whore of Babylon was supported in her most magnificall pomp and pride. Verse 5.And there was given unto him a mouth that spake great things and blasphemies, and power was given unto him to doe fourty two moneths.
And hee opened his mouth unto blasphemy a∣gainst God, to blaspheme his Name,Verse 6. and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. Here are set down the proud and blasphe∣mous speeches both of the old and new Ro∣man Empire, and of the old and new Ro∣man Emperors. For this beast (as I said be∣fore) comprehendeth all the Roman Em∣pire, both under the heathen Emperors and the Popes. Touching the great things and blasphemies which the old persecuting Em∣perors have belched out against the God of heaven, it would require a volume to set them down in particulars: I will therefore onely mention two or three for examples sake: As first, that of Caius Caligula, which would have his image set up in Temples to be worshipped as God, and that the people should swear by his name. Nero also did o∣penly blaspheme the Name of Christ, & re∣quired divine honour to be given unto him. Domitian commanded that hee should be called God and Lord. Many others requi∣red the like things: and so all the world wondred and worshipped this blasphe∣mous beast. Now as the sixth head, which was the old Empire of Rome, was full of
the names of blasphemy; so the seventh head, which is the new Empire under the do∣minion of the Popes, which he here chiefly speaketh of, did most of all blaspheme. For the Pope did challenge to himself all power both in heaven and earth: hee would be worshipped as God: hee usurped authority over the Word of God: hee did take upon him to forgive sins: hee did most blasphe∣mously incroach upon all the offices of Christ, as King, Priest, and Prophet: he hath commanded the Angels: hee hath erected blasphemous images, and caused pictures to be made of the Godhead: he boasteth and cracketh great things of his papall power, of Peters keyes, of Peters chair, of Peters succes∣sion, of his miracles, of his two swords, and of his manifold prerogatives royall. One of the Popes poysoned his god: another cast his god into the fire: another would eat his peacock in despite of God. Some of them counted the religion of Christ a tale or fa∣ble, some drank to the Divell, some said they could do as much as God. It were infinite to set down all their blasphemies: for it is said of the whore of Babylon, that she was full of the names of blasphemy. Let this suffice for the un∣derstanding of this text, that as the old hea∣thenish
Emperors did blaspheme, so the Popes, being heads of the Empire, did most of all blaspheme. And as it is here said, they did not only blaspheme the Name of God, but also did open their black and blasphe∣mous mouthes against his tabernacle; that is, his Church, calling it a company of here∣ticks, schismaticks, apostates, and such like; and also against them that dwell in heaven; that is, the spirits of just and perfect men which are in heaven, as Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, and such like. Moreover, it is to be noted, that this mouth was given unto this monstrous beast, thus to blaspheme and speak great things. But this is to be understood, that it was gi∣ven in the wrath and just judgment of God upon the world, to plague them withall, be∣cause they regarded not the knowledge of the truth. But it is added, that this power of the beast thus to work his actions was limi∣ted to 42 moneths; so that although he rule and rage for a time, yet shall he not long continue. And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them;Verse 7. and power was given unto him over every kindred, and tongue, and nation.
Verse 8.Therefore all that dwell upon the earth shall wor∣ship him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb which was slain from the beginning of the world. These two verses doe set forth the great power which was given to this beast, both in fighting agaist Gods people, and also over∣coming of them, and murthering of them by heaps. As we read of thousands murthe∣red in the first ten persecutions, and ten thousands by the Popes, since they came to exercise the civill authority and jurisdiction of the Roman Empire, and that in all coun∣tries and kingdoms of Europe; as it is here said, that power was given unto him over every kindred, and tongue, and nation. And it is added, that all that dwell upon the earth, that is, all the subjects of the Roman Monarchy, shall worship the beast, and make a God of him; as we read they have done. And the chiefe motive thereof was his blasphemous mouth, boasting and threatning great things if any did withstand him: and also his mighty power and authoritie, whereby hee bare down all before him. For if any did mutine against him, hee was sure to smart for it. And thus through his tyrannicall power hee subdued all nations under him, and made
them stoup, and fall downe and worship him. But it followeth, that for all this, none of Gods elect did worship him, or submit themselves to his religion and authority, but only those that dwell upon the earth; that is, earthly men: as Papists, Atheists, and Re∣probates, and all such whose names are not writ∣ten in the book of life. Christ is called the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, be∣cause the saving power of his death was from the beginning of all beleevers, although he was not actually exhibited untill the ful∣nesse of time. If any man have an ear let him hear.Vers. 9, 10. If any lead into captivity, hee shall goe into captivity: if any kill with a sword, hee must be killed by a sword. Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints. Here is shewed, that the things spoken of this great beast are very secret and mysti∣call, and can be understood of none but those only whose eares and eyes God openeth to hear, and see, and understand, that is, the very elect of God: as for all papists, and world∣lings, their ears and eyes are sealed and shut up, they cannot understand them, but doe still worship the beast, ascribing unto him divine power and honour.
In the tenth verse the judgment and ven∣geance of God is denounced against the Roman Monarchy, both former and later; which, as it hath long oppressed the Church with cruell bondage, and drawne thousands into perpetuall captivity; so it selfe also should be cast down, with all the adherents thereof, both in this life, and that which is to come. For, as the Roman Empire did ty∣rannize over the world, & led millions into spirituall captivity and bondage: so here it is avouched, that according to the just law of quittance, it should be brought to the same lore. And as this beast had murdered many by the sword, so hee himself must be murdered by the sword also; as the Apostle saith,2 Thes. 1.6. God is just, and therefore will recompence tribulation to them that trouble his Church. Now all this seemeth unto mee to be a cleer pro∣phesie of the fall and finall destruction of the Roman Empire, which indeed, considering the pitch that it was at, may seem a thing strange and incredible: and therefore the holy Ghost stirreth us up to attention in the 9th verse, as to a thing of great wonderment and admiration: for if the Roman Monar∣chy fall, the Papacy must of necessity fall with it. For the Roman Empire is that beast
which beareth up the whore of Babylon, as appeareth in the seventeenth chapter of this Prophesie, where wee shall (God willing) plainly and at large hear of the joint destru∣ction of them both together. It is added: Here is the patience and the faith of the saints. That is, here is required great pa∣tience of all Gods children, to wait & tarry till the performance and accomplishment of those things, and also faith and full assu∣rance to beleeve that they shall in Gods ap∣pointed time come to passe. For few do be∣leeve these things, & therfore wait not with patience for the accomplishment thereof. And I beheld another beast coming out of the earth which had two horns like a lamb,Verse 11. but he spake like the dragon. Having described the first beast, which is the Roman Empire; now the holy Ghost cometh to describe the second beast, which is the Papacy, or the kingdome of the great Antichrist: for although he be descri∣bed before in regard of his Monarchy, that is, the civill jurisdiction which he exercised, as he was the seventh head of the beast, and head of the Empire; yet here he is descri∣bed after another sort, that is, according to this ecclesiasticall authority: and there∣fore
he is called another beast, or a beast dif∣fering from the former, in that he exerciseth another power, beside the power of the hea∣then Emperors of Rome, which is his spiritu∣all jurisdiction, in which respect he is called the false prophet. The second beast riseth out of the earth, as the former rose out of the sea: then it ap∣peareth, that Antichrist is, by his breed, a son of the earth, obscurely born, and by little & little creeping up out of his abject estate, as did the Turk. It is here most truly said, that the kingdome of Antichrist ariseth out of the earth, and is the very breed of the earth; for assuredly it never came from heaven. It was first hatched out of covetous∣nesse, ambition, pride, murders, treasons, poysoning, sorceries, enchantments, and such like. For all stories do shew, that from these roots the Papacy grew to his exceeding height and altitude. This second beast hath two horns like the Lamb; Whereby is meant his Civil and Ec∣clesiastical power, or his Kingdom & Priest∣hood, which hee falsly pretended to come from the Lamb: and therefore he giveth in his armes two keyes, and hath two swords carried before him. So Boniface the eighth
shewed himself one day in apparel as a Pope, and the next day in armour as the Emperor; and the two horns in the Popes Mitre are signes hereof. But the holy Ghost here tel∣leth us, that these two hornes are not the horns of the Lamb, but only like the horns of the Lamb: for he received not his power from the Lamb Christ, but from the Divell, that is, the Dragon with ten hornes. Then thus it is, The Papacy is the seventh head of the first beast, that is, the Empire; and yet a beast by it selfe, with two horns like the Lamb, in respect of his joint power and au∣thority, both Ecclesiasticall and Civill, in which respect he is called even the Eighth: and one of the seven, chap. 17.11. Although this second beast have two horns like the Lambe, yet he spake like the Dragon, that is, all his words and works, practises and proceedings, lawes and decrees are for the Dragon, of whom hee hath his power, and throne, and great authority. So that whatso∣ever he pretendeth in religion, and matters of Gods worship, as though hee would be like the Lamb; yet assuredly hee is altoge∣ther for the Dragon and the Divell, hee is assured unto them, as all experience doth manifestly witnesse.
Verse 12.And he did all that the first beast could do before him: and he caused the earth, and them that dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed. Here is shewed, that this second beast was as mighty and strong as the first beast, and could doe as much as hee, even in his pre∣sence. Whereby is noted the great power and authority of the Papacy, in performing as much in the service of the Dragon a∣gainst God and his Church, as ever the Em∣pire of the heathen, and those wicked Em∣perors could doe: yea, hee did much more against Christ and his religion, then ever the persecuting Emperors could doe, even then when they were at their highest pitch. And all this hee did in his presence that is, in the sight and open view of the whole Empire, or whole world. And he caused the earth, and them that dwell therein, that is, all Papists and worldlings, to worship the first beast, that is, to receive the worship and religion of the old Roman ty∣ranny, which set up and maintained idola∣try: so then, although the power in the Pa∣pacy came under the name of Christ, yet in truth it was the same with the power of the persecuting Empire; for the heathen Empe∣rors
condemned the true worship of God, and set up false worship, even the worship of Divels, which is idolatry, & so do the Popes also. So then wee see that this second beast is all for the first beast, that is, he levyeth all his power and authority to set up the wor∣ship and religion of the old Roman tyrants; and to force all men by cruell lawes and de∣crees to receive and embrace the same. So this second beast is nothing better then the first; nay, in truth, a great deale worse. And he did great wonders,Ver. 13, 14. so that hee made fire to come down from heaven on the earth, in the sight of men, And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth, by the signes which were permitted him to doe in the sight of the beast, saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make the image of the beast which had the wound of a sword, and did live. These two verses containe two speciall things: the one is, the false and fained mi∣racles of Antichrist: the other is the cursed effect thereof. To the first, which is the wonders and miracles which Antichrist should work, it is here said, that hee should make fire to come downe from heaven, as Elias did:
The meaning whereof is not, that the Pope could indeed cause fire to come down from heaven, as Elias did: but, in the opinion of the blind world, they seemed to have as great power as Elias had: For, partly by counterfeit miracles, and partly by some strange things done by the power of Sa∣than, the seduced world hath verily belee∣ved, that the Pope and his Clergy had as great power to work miracles as ever had Elias. Touching the second thing, which is the effect of these wonders: It is here said, that the inhabitants of the earth, that is, Papists and worldlings, were grossely deceived and deluded by them, even by those lying won∣ders, which were permitted him to do in the sight of the beast, that is, in the face and o∣pen view of the Empire: According as the Apostle fore-told,2 Thes. 2. that the coming of Anti∣christ should be by the effectuall working of Sa∣than, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and in all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousnesse a∣mong them that perish, &c. But concerning the Popish counterfeit signes and wonders, it is needlesse to write, being so well known unto all men as they are, and so common and notorious in all stories.
Saying to them that dwell on the earth,Verse 14. that they should make the image of the beast, which had the wound of a sword, and did live. Now Antichrist, having gotten the world under him by his counterfeit miracles, doth lay his commandement on them, to make the image of the beast. Now what is here meant by the image of the beast, is some∣what hard to discuss: some think, that by the image of the beast, which had the wound of the sword, and did live, is meant the re∣pairing and the restoring of the decayed e∣state of the Empire, by the Popes, to his full strength and vertue. Wee do read that the estate of the Empire under Nero, Otho, Gal∣ba, and Vitellius, was weak and feeble, in comparison of that which was before under Augustus, Tiberius, and Claudius. We doe read also that the Gothes and Vandals made horrible rents and dissipations in the Roman Empire. We do further read, that the Empire was divided and rent in pieces, so that there was the Emperor of the East, and the Emperor of the West: yea, at last the Empire of the West fell quite down: so that for the space of 300 yeares and more, there was no Emperor of the West, till the
Bishop of Rome, Leo the third made Charles the great, the king of France, Emperor. Then was the Empire of the West again erected, and in time grew to as great a height under the dominion of the Popes as before; yea, far greater. Now, I say, some do take this resto∣ring of the decayed estate of the Empire, by the Popes, to his former strength and pow∣er, to be the making of the image of the beast which had the wound of a sword, and did live. But for my own part, I cannot be of that o∣pinion; and my reason is, that the restoring of the decayed estate of the Empire to his former condition was the setting up of the beast himself; for the Empire is the beast, and not the image of the beast; for wee must needs grant, that the beast and the i∣mage of the beast are two severall things. But the Popes, in recovering the Empire to his pristine estate, set up the beast againe: and therefore not the image of the beast. Therefore the image of the beast cannot be understood of the restauration of the de∣cayed estate of the Empire. Besides this, it is here said, that the inhabitants of the earth had a great hand in the making this image. But the inhabitants of the earth bare small sway in the recovering and erection of the
Empire: (For therein the Popes were all in all, after it came into their hand.) Therefore this cannot be understood of the Empire, but of some other things: let us then dili∣gently search out what may be the true mea∣ning of this place. It must needs be granted, that by the beast which had the wound of a sword and did live, is meant the recovered e∣state of the Empire, as before, ver. 12. And by the image thereof, I understand the form of government: for an image doth signifie a likenesse, a similitude, a figure or form of a thing. And as in all civill and ecclesiasticall regiments there is both a substance and a form, a matter and a maner; so here, having before set down, that Antichrist had ere∣cted the substance and matter of the Roman tyranny; now he sheweth, that he would al∣so set up the image and form of the same. For before, ver. 12. it is said, that Antichrist, this second beast, caused the world to wor∣ship the first beast, that is, to receive and im∣brace the lawes, worship, and religion of the old heathenish Roman tyrants, as before hath been shewed: & now here is added, that he did not content himself with causing the inhabitants of the earth to worship the old beast in the substance of his religion; but also
hee layeth commandements upon them, to make his image, that is, to erect an externall forme of Ecclesiasticall government, after the very pattern and forme of the govern∣ment of the old Empire; yea, so like it, that it is called the very image of the same. For, as the form of government under the old Em∣perors was cruel and tyrannicall, and altoge∣ther bent against the Church; so the forme of Ecclesiasticall government under the Popes was cruell and tyrannicall, and altoge∣ther bent against the Church; and therefore here it is called the image of it: for it is as like it as it can look. Then it followeth, that Antichrist hath set up that externall forme of worship, which the idolatrous Romans of old used, and that he hath renewed the per∣secuting Empire, not onely in substance of matter, but also in forme of government: and therefore I conclude, that the Popish Church policy and externall regiment is the very image of the beast. Here the inhabitants of the earth are said to make the image of the beast, because they gave their consent to the making of it: for indeed the Popes themselves were the chief agents and doers of it. Verse 15.And it was permitted unto him to give a spirit
unto the image of the beast, so that the image of the beast should speake, and should cause, that as many as would not worship the image of the beast, should be killed. Here is shewed, that this image of the beast was not a dead image, but a living i∣mage: for Antichrist put a spirit into it; that is, life, and power, and great authority; inso∣much that this image could speake, and not only speak, but speak with great authority and terror: so as whosoever would not wor∣ship this image, that is, submit himself to the Popish Hierarchie should be put to death. But may some man say, How did this image speak? I answer, by the Popes Clergy. For the Romish rabble of Cardinals, Abbots, Monks, Priests, Friars, and all that cursed corporation were the very breath, life, and spirit of this image: I mean, that the life-bloud of their externall regiment did lie in the execution thereof by the Clergy, as it were in certaine arteries and veines. For what was their outward form of govern∣ment without this cruell execution of their stinging Clergy-men, but as a dead image without life? But when Antichrist had once consecrated and erected his Romish Priest∣hood, then did hee put life into his image,
which before he had caused to be made and erected. Then we do plainly see, that the Po∣pish Hierarchy is not a bare resemblance of the old Roman policy, to stand as a picture on a wall, but hath a spirit put into it by the false prophet, and speaketh with such power and terrour in all kingdoms, that it causeth all to be put to death that will not submit themselves unto it, and fall down and wor∣ship the beast. Who knoweth not this, that as many in the countries as would not im∣brace Popery, and the old Roman tyranny, the Popish Clergy, their Inquisitors, and o∣ther Officers did condemne them in their Courts as hereticks, schismaticks, and deli∣vered them over, being condemned, to the secular power to be put to death? Vers. 16, 17.And he made all, both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, to receive a mark in their right-hand, or in their foreheads. And that no man might buy or sell, save hee that had the marke, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. Antichrist is not content to murder and massacre in all countries which wil not wor∣ship the image of the beast; that is, stoup to his government and authority: but he will go yet a step further, and will have all sorts
of people brought in bondage unto him, as his marked servants. For as men use to set a brand upon their sheep and other cattel, and to ear-marke them, that it might openly and manifestly appeare to whom they ap∣pertaine: so doth Antichrist, this Romish beast, cause all men in all kingdoms to car∣ry in open view his mark or brand, where∣by all men see that they doe appertain unto him. It is here said, that all the vassals of Anti∣christ, of what degree, estate or condition soever, must receive this mark in their right hand, or in their forehead; that is, they must openly professe and practise the worship and religion of the beast: For the forehead is put for the profession, and the right hand for the action; so that in one of them at the least, every man must openly declare, that he acknowledgeth the Pope of Rome to be lord of his faith. Moreover it is added, That no man might buy or sell, save hee that had the marke, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name: the meaning is, that no man might traffique in the world, or have any doings amongst men; nay, hee might not be suffered to live, except hee had the mark of the beast
in his forehead, or in his right-hand, that is, unlesse he did professe and practise the wor∣ship, the religion, laws, decrees of the Pope. For the marke of the beast is put for his worship, religion, lawes, decrees, regiments, and policy. Moreover, the Popes vassals have not on∣ly his mark upon them, whereby they may be known, but also the name of the beast; for they must be named after him, even as children bear the name of their fathers, and must be called of the Pope, or Papa, Papists. And not only so, but also they have another privie mark upon them, and that is the num∣ber of his name, which is Latinos, or pro∣fessors of the Latine religion, Latine king∣dome, and Italian Church, as shall by and by appear. Now then, to grow to conclusion, and to make a brief recapitulation of all things here spoken concerning the second beast, which is Antichrist: Let us consider what increasings and proceedings he hath made, as it were by degrees. First, although hee hath two horns like the Lambe, that is, Civill and Ecclesiasticall power; yet hee speaketh like the Dragon, that is, he bendeth all his power and autho∣rity,
words and works for the Divell. Secondly, hee doth as much as the first beast could do in the service of the Dragon. Thirdly, he causeth the first beast to be worshipped; that is, established the sub∣stance of his religion. Fourthly, hee maketh the image of the beast; that is, addeth a forme to the sub∣stance. Fifthly, he putteth life into his image by his Clergy. Sixthly, he will have his image worship∣ped and yeelded unto on pain of death. Lastly, he will have all men of all condi∣tions to wear his livery, and to receive his mark, as it were his hired and covenant ser∣vants. Here is wisdome:Verse 1. Let him that hath wit count the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred three∣score and six. Now last of all, the holy Ghost telleth us that it is a very high point of wisdome and understanding to count the number of the beast, and requireth a sharp and preg∣nant wit; and withall, telleth us, that it is the number of a man; that is, such as a man en∣dued with Gods Spirit may find out. Then
wee are incouraged to search into it, sith it is within the compasse of mans reach. It is no impossible thing. If therefore we could find out his name, we would desire no more, then the field were won, for his name would discover him, and descry him to all the world, and quite stop the mouthes of the Pa∣pists, so as they should never have any thing more to say. For if Saint John had said ex∣pressely and in plain termes, that the Popes of Rome are this second beast, and the very Antichrist himselfe, then the Papists had beene put to perpetuall silence, all matters quasht, and all controversies ended betwixt them and us for ever. But here the holy Ghost doth not tell us his name plainly, but mystically, as many other things in this booke, that the worldlings which should fulfill them might be blinded, whilest the eys of Gods elect are opened to see into the truth of all these matters. Well, to come to the point: S. John doth only here set down the numerative letters of the beasts name. Hee wrote in Greek, and hee only setteth downe three Greek letters or characters; which in Greek numeration make six hun∣dred sixty six. Now further, we are to note, the numerative letters of the Greek word
Lateinos do make just this number. And yet further, we are to observe as a very speciall thing, that Irenaeus,Irendi. con∣tra haeres. an ancient Father of the Church, who lived very neer unto the Apo∣stles times, mentioneth this word Lateinos, as the name of the beast: And moreover af∣firmeth, that it was a common received opi∣nion in his time, and before, that the beast should so be called. Now then let us consider how this fit∣teth. First, wee know that the numerative letters of Lateinos doe justly fit Saint Johns Greek numerative letters. Secondly, wee know that Antichrist is the head of the La∣tine Church, or Latine Empire; and there∣fore this very Lateinos. For here we do not enquire after the name of any particular man, but about the name of a kingdome; for the beast is a kingdome, and a succession of men. Now Italy in old time was called Latinum, and the Italians Latini, which no∣teth of what Countrey the beast should come. Moreover, the beasts name, or name of the Roman Empire is Lateinos, because the Empire, both under the heathen ty∣rants, and the Popes especially, had all their religion, service, prayers, lawes, decrees, writings, and translations in Latine: all was
in Latine, Latine; the Pope preferred his Latine translation of the Bible before the Hebrew and Greek originals. Thus then it is, Saint John telleth us flatly, the number of the beast is six hundred sixty six. Irenaeus saith, that Lateinos is his name, which containeth just the number: Therefore here we have his name, here he is found. For if his name be Lateinos, we need search no further, wee know who it is, we know who is meant: for is not the Pope Lateinos? are not the suc∣cession of them Latini? are they not the heads of the Latine Church, and Latine Em∣pire? have they not all their worship and service in Latine? are they not Latines? for what is the name of the Roman Empire but Lateinos? and what is the name of the Po∣pish Hierarchy but Lateinos? True it is in∣deed which the Papists say, that many names may be invented, whose letters make this number: but the Spirit of God speaketh not of fained names, for thereof can come nothing but uncertainty: but he willeth us to count the number of his name, which then the beast had that is, Lateinos. I do thus then conclude; The beast is a kingdom, and the Papacy is the kingdome of the Latines: Therefore the Papacy is the beast.
The Papacy is Lateinos, and containeth the number of the beast: For what other Monarchy can be shewed since the Reve∣lation was given, whose numerative letters containe this foresaid number? assuredly none. And therefore out of all doubt Saint John pointeth at the Roman Empire, and Monarchy of the Popes. For Lateinos doth both containe the number of the beast, ac∣cording to Saint Johns computation, and also his name, which is the Latine Empire, or Roman Empire. And thus have wee heard the description of these two huge and monstrous beasts, the sea-beast, and the land beast; which both from the A∣postles time hitherto have indeed played the beast against Christ and his Church, and still doe play the beasts, and will never cease playing the beasts, till their horns and hoofes, heads and bodies be clean cut off, which will be shortly, as wee shall heare anon. CHAP XIIII. WEe have heard in the former chapter the description of the two great and dreadfull beasts. Wee have heard how
mightily they have prevailed now many yeers, and raigned as Monarchs of the earth. Now in this chapter we are to hear the fall and ruine of them both. So that the main drift and scope of this chapter, and all the chapters following untill the twentieth chapter, is to shew, that both the Roman Empire and the Papacy shall ebb as fast as ever they did flow, shall wain as fast as ever they did waxe, shall decrease as fast as ever they did increase, and fall down as fast as e∣ver they did rise up, even untill they come to utter ruine and desolation. This chapter containeth seven principall things. Verse 1. Ver. 2, 3, 4, 5.First, it sheweth that God had his Church upon the earth, even then when it seemed to be utterly extinct by the prevailing of the two outragious beasts. Vers. 6, 7.Secondly, it sheweth that the poor per∣secuted Church did syncerely and zealously worship God even in the fire and flames of afflictions. Verse 8.Thirdly, it sheweth that the Gospel shall be preached with great successe in these last dayes throughout many kingdomes. Ver. 9, 10, 11.Fourthly, it sheweth that Rome shall fall down at the preaching of the Gospel.
Fifthly,Vers. 12, 13. it sheweth that all Papists shall be condemned, and cast into hell fire for ever. Sixtly, it sheweth that it shall go wel with Gods elect, which having refused the wor∣ship of the beast, do live and die in the Lord. Lastly, it describeth the day of judgment,Verse 14 &c. wherein all, both good and bad, shall have according to their deserts. Then I looked,Verse 1. and behold a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred and fourty and four thousand, having his Fathers name written in their foreheads. Now at the last the holy Ghost bringeth in Jesus Christ upon the theater of the world, as it were to play his part in this tra∣gedy, and to help the poor weak woman, which we heard of before, against the Dra∣gon, and the two monstrous beasts, which would have torn her in pieces, and utterly devoured her, if this Lambe Jesus Christ had not stept in and rescued her. Well, now cometh in our Lord Jesus, and beginneth to stirre in these matters, and to take upon him the protection and defence of the poor helplesse woman, against both the Dragon, and the Dragons two great instruments. But some may say, What is a poore lamb to encounter with a dragon, with a
lion, with a leopard, and a bear? I answer, that although Christ be a lamb to his church, even the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world, and the Lamb that was a slain Sacrifice from the beginning for the redemption of his elect: yet to all his ene∣mies hee is a most strong and terrible lion, even the Lion of the tribe of Juda, as hee is called before.Chap. 5.5. Now this most terrible Lion, even the Lord of hosts, the Lord mighty in batell, cometh forth to protect and defend his Church against all her enemies, who is of such infinite might and puissance, that nei∣ther the old dragon, nor his young imps, not all the cursed hel-hounds that bark, and bite, and take their part, shall ever be able to stand in his hands: For, rage they never so much he shall hamper them all wel enough. For though hee hath given them the reine a long time, and let them alone, and suffered them to play the tyrants with the woman his spouse; yet now he will no longer put it up at their hands, but will up, and main∣tain the womans cause, and bear her out a∣gainst them all: nay, he will make ready his bow, that he may shoot off, and make his ar∣rows drunk in the bloud of her and his ene∣mies, and wil whet his glittering sword, that
he may sheath it in the heart of Antichrist and all his adherents. Therefore now let both the great beasts and their fire look to themselves; for here comes in one that will knock them all down, and lay them in the dust, that they shall never rise up again. For this cause now at length S. John in a vision seeth a Lamb stand upon mount Sion, that is, Christ present with the Church: For mount Sion was an antient figure of the Church; as it is written, Mount Sion, lying north-ward, is faire in situation,Psal. 48.2. it is the joy of the whole earth, and the city of the great King. And again, The law shall goe forth of Sion,Mich. 5.2. and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Moreover, Saint John seeth here with the Lamb an hundred fourty and foure thousand: that is, the particular members of the Church, putting a certain number for an uncertain, and specially alluding to the sea∣ling of the twelve tribes of Israel, as before hath been shewed. For it might be deman∣ded, where the Church was when all the world wondred, and followed the first beast? And also when all,Chap. 7, 4. both small and great, rich and poor received the mark of the second beast? Saint John answereth, that even then, in the midst of the heat of per∣secutions,
God had his hid and invisible Church, whom Jesus Christ did protect and preserve even in the very flames of persecuti∣ons, being alwaies present with them, and a∣mongst them, as he said to his disciples, a lit∣tle before his bodily departure from them: Loe, I am with you even unto the end of the world. And here he is said to stand upon mount Sion with his hundred fourty and four thousand. And it is added, that this number of Gods faithfull elect children had his Fathers name written in their foreheads: that is, they did pro∣fesse and practise the doctrine and religion of God their Father only, utterly renouncing and abhorring the worship & religion of the beast. For the Fathers name in this place is set opposite to the mark of the beast; to sig∣nifie, that as the worshippers of Antichrist received his mark; so the true worshippers of God received his brand, which is his Spi∣rit, and the fruits therof, whereby they were perfectly discerned from those which had the beasts mark. So then, it cleerly appeareth from this place, that God preserved many thousands of his true worshippers, even in the daies of the great Antichrist, when there seemed to be very few or none remaining upon the earth, as it was in the dayes of
Elias. In vain therefore do the Papists ask us where our Church was before Luthers time, sith the holy Apostle here stoppeth their mouth, and telleth us plainly, that Christ had his little flock in the wildernesse, even then, when it was in greatest streights, and as we say, driven to the walls. And therefore visibility is no sound note of the Church, as the Papists do most ignorantly dispute. For it is a fond and absurd kind of reasoning, to say there is no Church at all, because it doth not visibly appear: as if a man should reason, that there is no moon in the heavens, be∣cause sometimes there is none seen, as in the change. And I heard a voice from heaven as the sound of many waters, and as the sound of a great thunder:Verse 2. and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps. Here is set forth how his company of true worshippers doe magnifie and praise God for his great mercies towards them. First, John heareth a voice from heaven, that is, an heavenly voyce, or the voice of the Church praising and glorifying God. For we have heard before,Chap. 8.1. that Heaven in this booke is sometimes put for the Church upon the earth, and the reasons thereof. Wheresoever
therefore the Church is assembled to hear the word, and to pray, and give thanks, there is a voice from heaven, or an heavenly voice. Now this voice is compared to three things: first, to the sound of many waters. Second∣ly, to the sound of a great thunder. Thirdly, to the voyce of harpers harping with their harps. It is likened to many waters, because it proceedeth from sundry sorts of people, of sundry nations, countries, and kingdoms, as the word waters is taken afterwards in this Prophecie.Chap. 17.1. Chap. 17.25. It is compared to thunder, because the prayers and invocations of the true Church are as loud in the eares of God as any thunder-crack. It is compa∣red to harpers harping with their harpes, both because their spirituall worship and service is as sweete unto God as any musick unto men; as also, because all Gods faithfull people doe tune together among them∣selves, and in their worship, as the strings of a wel-tuned instrument of musick, or as many musicians playing together, which make a sweet harmony, and most melodi∣ous ditty. Verse 3.And they sang as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the El∣ders, and no man could learn that song, but
the hundred fourty and foure thousand which were brought from the earth. Now it sheweth how this holy society of the faithfull do continue their praying and glorifying of God; they are not weary of well doing, but hold on constantly in the course of Gods worship, having new songs of thanksgiving in their mouthes, and ser∣ving God daily with renewed affections, as men inflamed with the zeale of Gods glo∣ry: and all this they do performe before the throne, before the foure beasts, and the Elders; that is, in the presence of God and his An∣gels, and his holy congregation. And no man could learn that song but the hundred fourty and four thousand; that is, none of the reprobates and ungodly worldlings could inwardly feel and understand this spirituall worship, but only the elect, to whom it is given to un∣derstand the secrets of God, and the myste∣ries of his Sons kingdome. These are they which are not defiled with women,Verse 4. for they are virgins: these follow the Lamb wheresoever hee goeth: these are bought from men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. And in their mouthes was found no guil;Verse 5. for they are without spot before the throne of God.
This holy company are not defiled with women, that is, with grosse and divers sins, or rather with idolatrous pollutions: For they are virgins, that is, chast worshippers of God, which are not polluted with the defilements of Antichrist. These follow the Lamb Christ whithersoever hee goeth. They hear his voice, they professe his worship, and obey his do∣ctrine; they abhor Antichrist, they follow not the beast, nor receive his mark. They are bought from men, and bought from the earth, as it is said before; that is, they are redeemed and bought with a price from the currupt lump of mankind, and cursed race of Adam, that they might be the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb, that is, wholly consecrated to his worship, and to serve him in righteous∣nesse and true holinesse all the daies of their life. In their mouthes was found no guile; that is, they do declare their innocency and up∣rightnesse both in their words and works, as those which Christ hath chosen out of this world, and bought with a price through his bloud, in whom they are without spot or speck before God. Verse 6.Then I saw another Angel flye in the middest of heaven, having an everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and
to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. Saying with a loud voyce, Fear God,Verse 7. and give glory to him: for the hour of his judgement is come, and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountaines of waters. Hitherto the holy Ghost hath taught us how the Church was preserved under the tyranny of Antichrist, and greatest waves of persecutions, and that even then they did purely and faithfully worship the true God. Now he proceedeth to foreshew the ruine and downefall of Antichrist, and plainly to prophesie the utter decay of the kingdome of Babel. This doctrine therefore wee are to hearken unto with great attention and cheerfulnesse, because it doth so much con∣cerne our good, and the good of the whole Church; also because wee live in the dayes wherein we see it is in part fulfilled. First therefore wee are to understand what is meant by this Angel here menti∣oned, to wit, not any celestiall Angel, or invisible spirit, as it is sundry times taken be∣fore: but by this Angel, and the two Angels following, are meant all the faithfull mini∣sters of the Gospel, which should be raised
up in these last dayes, for the overthrow of Rome, and the delivering of the Church from under the captivity of Antichrist: which may plainly appeare by this that is said; this Angel preacheth the everlasting Gospel unto them that dwell on the earth, which cannot properly agree to the celesti∣all spirits. We have heard out of the tenth chapter, that Jesus Christ did open the little book, which is the Bible, and did give autho∣rity to his faithfull ministers to goe preach and publish the doctrine thereof to many nations,Chap. 10.11. countries, and kingdomes: now unto that agreeth this which is here spoken of, and is a further opening and declaring of that which is there set downe. For as there Jesus Christ cometh downe from heaven, and openeth the little book, which had been long shut up under the darknesse of Popery, and the smoak which came out of the bottomlesse pit: so here Christ Jesus raised up his faithfull ministers and preachers to publish and proclaime the doctrine of the Gospel, which had long lain hidden under outragious persecutions of the two mon∣strous and most hideous beasts. To this also agreeth that which is written in the eigh∣teenth chapter of this book, where Saint
John seeth an Angel come down from hea∣ven, having great power, so that the earth was lightened with his glory. By which An∣gel is meant all the preachers of this age. And the Angel is said to have great power: for what is more powerfull then the mini∣stery of the word? And moreover it is said, that the earth was lightened with his glory, that is, with the brightness of the preaching of the Gospel, whereby the darknesse of Po∣pery was dispersed and driven away, and Ba∣bylon falleth upon it, as there you may read, and as here wee shall see the like effect by and by. Moreover, it is here said, that this Angel flyeth in the middest of heaven: that is, very swiftly carryeth this everlasting Gospel through all the Church. For when Gods appointed time was come, wherein hee would goe about the overthrow of Popery, hee caused his everlasting Gospel to be set abroach, and to spread over many king∣domes and nations, as we see this day. Now because those kingdoms where God would have the knowledge of his Gospel divul∣ged were many and great, therefore here is expedition required: and this Angel doth carry it not standing but flying. And all this
we see perfectly fulfilled with our eys, when God raised up Luther, Zuinglius, Melancthon, Peter Viret, Calvin, Bucer, Bullinger, Peter Martyr, and all their worthy successors unto this day, which have spread the everlasting Gospel very far, and carried it very swiftly over England, Scotland, Germany, Denmark, Polonia, Swevia, Russia, and many parts of France and Flanders. Another reason why this Angell is said to flie in the middest of heaven, is, because no power of man shall ever be able to stay the course of this ever∣lasting Gospel which this Angel carrieth a∣broad, no more then men are able to stop the course of the Sun in the heavens, or a cloud in the skie. For this Angel flyeth in the midst of heaven, far above the reach of the beast, and all kings and potentates that stand for the kingdome of the beast. There∣fore let them doe all what they can, they shall never be able to stop the course of the Gospel: for it is called the arm of God, and his very arm holdeth it forth to the world; and who is able to bend it in, or to turne it backward? There be three reasons why the Gospel is called everlasting. First, because it is in his own nature ever∣lasting,
as it is written,1 Pet. 1.25. The word of the Lord endureth for ever. Secondly, because it putteth us in pos∣session of everlasting things; as it is writ∣ten, Thy word, O Lord,Psal. 119. endureth for ever in heaven. Thirdly, and principally, because as it was long before Antichrist was hatched, so it shall continue when he and his kingdome is dead and rotten. Saying with a loud voice, Fear God,Verse 7. and give glo∣ry unto him, &c. Here is set down the doctrine which this Angel preacheth with a loud voice, that is, with great zeale. The sum whereof is this, Fear God, and give glory unto him, and worship him that made heaven and earth, &c. The sence is, that the true and everliving God should onely be feared and worshipped, and all glory should be given unto him alone through Christ, and none to Antichrist, none to Cardinals and Legats, none to Angels, none to Saints, none to images, roodes, crosses and crucifixes. Here then is set downe an abridgement of the doctrine of this everlasting Gospel; namely, that men should onely feare God, and worship him, and give all glory to him alone; and not
to any creature. And the reason is yeel∣ded, because the houre of his judgement is come, that is, the time of the manifesta∣tion of the Gospel, or lawes of the most high God: for so the word Judgement is often taken in the Scriptures. Here are wee to observe one speciall thing, to wit, that the Gospel which this Angel flyeth withall, containeth the brief summ of all the doctrine which Luther, Calvin, Peter Mar∣tyr, and the rest have taught out of Gods Word, and agreeth in all points with it. For what other thing did they all preach, teach, and write, but that men should turn from idols to the living God? from fearing, glorifying and worshipping creatures, to feare, worship, and glorifie God alone which hath made all things? What other thing doe all the preachers of this age pub∣lish and proclaime in all their Sermons, but this, Feare God, and give glory onely to him? Is not this the Epitome and short sum of all the doctrine of the Preachers of Eng∣land, Scotland, Germany, France, Denmarke, and all the rest? and therefore I conclude, that this Angel must needs be understood of the Preachers of this last age, which now these fourscore yeeres have sounded the
trumpet of the Gospel against all the in∣ventions of Popery. And, blessed be God, wee see these things fall out in our dayes, and are eye-witnesses of the fulfilling of them. And there followed another Angel, saying,Verse 8. It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great city: for she gave to all nations to drink the wine of the wrath of her fornication. Here is set down the blessed effect of the preaching of this everlasting Gospel, which is the downfall of Babylon. For as when the cleer Sun ariseth upon the earth, the thick mists and clouds are dispersed: even so when the bright beames of the Gospel doe shine forth unto the world, Babylon, that dark kingdom vanisheth away incontinent∣ly. And, as it is written in the eighteenth chapter: so soon as the earth was lightened with the glory of this everlasting Gospel, Babylon immediatly falleth. Therefore now before I go any further, my purpose, through the as∣sistance of God,Five maine points. is to prove these five points out of this verse, and that which followeth unto the twentieth chapter, to wit; First, that Babylon here signifieth Rome. Secondly, that Rome shall fall, and how. Thirdly, that Rome shall fall finally, and
come to utter desolation in this life. Fourthly, by whom, and when it shall be overthrown. Lastly, the causes of the utter ruine and o∣verthrow thereof. How Rome is to be ta∣ken.But before I go about to prove that Baby∣lon here is Rome, I would have it carefully observed what is meant by Rome, viz. not the topography of Rome, that is, so much ground only as is compassed within the wals of that city, but the regiment, government, and prerogative that is claimed by vertue of that Monarchy whereof Rome is the head. By Rome is meant the power and authority of Rome: or to speak plainly, by Rome is meant the Roman Monarchy. Further, we are here to observe the reason why the holy Ghost calleth Rome Babylon; for Rome lite∣rally and properly taken, is not Babylon, in as much as they were two divers cities, one in Italy, the other in Chaldea: but Rome is called Babylon mystically, figuratively, and, as the holy Ghost speaketh, spiritually, and by a kind of allusion:Chap. 11.8. A reason why Rome is cal∣led Babylon. For as the old Eastern Ba∣bylon did a long time oppresse the Church of the Jewes; so Rome, this Western Babylon, hath long oppressed the Church of the Chri∣stians: As the Eastern Babylon did many yeers
hold down the people of God in miserable bondage and servitude; so the Western Ba∣bylon did a long time keep the Christian Church in spirituall thraldome and misery. In which respects Rome is spiritually compa∣red to Sodom and Egypt: to Sodom for filthi∣nesse, and to Egypt for idolatry, and keeping Gods Church in spirituall bondage and sla∣very. And thus we see the reason why Rome is called Babylon, which is not simply and properly, but after a sort, that is, by a phrase of speech, or Trope, which they call a Meto∣nymie, or changing of names, when that is gi∣ven to one thing which is proper to another, for the likenesse of quality that it hath with it, or adjoyned unto it. Now, having shewed the reason why Rome is called Babylon, and what is meant by Rome, we are to proceed to the first point; which is to prove, that Babylon in this place signifieth Rome; which, although it be gran∣ted of all sound Divines, and avouched in the writings of the best learned, both new and old, so as it shall need no great proof; yet will I add three or foure reasons out of this book, to make it more plain and appa∣rant. First therefore, I do thus reason out of the seventeenth chapter and last verse, Ba∣bylon
is that great city which reigneth over the kings of the earth: But there was no other city which did reigne over the kings of the earth when John wrote this book, but one∣ly Rome: Therefore Rome is Babylon. For as for Jerusalem, it was at that time made an heap of stones. The first proposition is a∣vouched by the Angel of God, expounding unto John what is meant by the great whore, whose damnation hee had shewed him be∣fore; and by the woman which sate upon a scarlet coloured beast. The woman which thou sawest,Chap. 17.18. saith the Angel to Saint John, is that great city which raigneth over the kings of the earth: that is to say, Rome, or the Ro∣mish synagogue and malignant Church. For the Angel could not speak more plainely, except he should have named Rome, then to say thus; The woman, the great whore of Ba∣bylon is the great city which raigneth over the kings of the earth. For if one should say, The great citie of England; every man knoweth that thereby is meant London: if one should say, The great citie of France; every one knoweth that thereby is meant Paris: so when the Angel saith, The great citie which reigneth over the kings of the earth: all that lived in those times knew
that thereby was meant Rome:Babylon is Rome. for Rome was the chief citie of the Monarchy, and is put in this book for the whole Monarchy, and the religion thereof, as hath been said before. My second reason is this:Chap. 17. Babylon is the mother of whoredomes, and abominations of the earth. Babylon is that great whore, with whom have committed fornication the Kings of the earth, and the inhabitants of the earth made drunk with the wine of her forni∣cation: But Rome, and none but Rome is such a one: Therefore Rome is Babylon. My third argument is this: Babylon is that city which hath had seven severall govern∣ments: But only Rome hath had seven seve∣rall kinds of government: Therefore Rome is Babylon. The proposition is proved from the words of the Angel, expounding unto John what is meant by the seven heads of the scarlet coloured beast whereupon the woman sate. The seven heads (saith hee) are seven kings;Chap. 17.9. that is, seven orders or states of kingly go∣vernment; for seven kings in this place are not put for seven severall men which were kings as some doe take it: but for seven
severall governments,Dan. 7.17. as it is taken in Dani∣el, The foure great beasts, saith the Angel there, are four Kings, that is, four kingdomes, governments, or monarchies, as all men know. So here, by seven kings is meant the seven severall regiments of Rome; that is to say, by Kings, Consuls, Decemviri, Dictators, Triumviri, Emperors, and Popes, whereof the first five were then fallen when John wrote, one was, that is, the Empire, and one was to come, that is the Papacy. My last argument is this: Babylon is that city which is situate upon seven hils: but onely Rome of all cities in the world is situ∣ated upon seven hils, therefore Rome is Ba∣bylon. The proposition is avouched by the An∣gel, which saith in the seventeenth chapter, that the seven heads of the scarlet coloured beast are seven mountains whereon the woman sitteth, that is, seven hils whereon the city of Rome is situated, whose names are these: Capitolinus, Palatinus, Aventinus, Exquilinus, Celius, Viminalis, and Quirinalis, as all Poets and Historiographers do testifie. One saith thus of Rome. Virg. Geor.Septem quae una sibi muro circumdedit arces. Another thus:
Septem urbs alta jugis toti quae praesidet orbi.Propert. Another called Rome , the citie with seven heads, that is, seven hils. It is cleer then by these reasons, that Babylon in this place signifieth Rome. As for the exposi∣tion of the Papists, which affirmeth that Ba∣bylon here signifieth the universall society of the wicked, it is fond and ridiculous: For the holy Ghost saith,Chap. 18.7. Babylon is that citie which reigneth over the kings of the earth. But to say that the universall society of all the wicked reigneth over the kings of the earth, is absurd and ridiculous. Therefore to say that Babylon is the universall society of the wicked, is absurd and ridiculous. The distin∣ction of the Jesuits here is also as frivolous as their expositions; for they say, If Baby∣lon be Rome, then it must be understood of Rome under the heathen Emperors: but not under the Popes. But the Angel saith, The woman, that is, the whore of Babylon, or Antichrist, sitteth upon seven mountains: Er∣go, she sitteth at Rome, and Rome is the seat of Antichrist, and consequently, Rome un∣der the Popes is Babylon. Moreover, we may reason thus against the Popish dictinction; That which was Babylon under the heathen Emperors, is the same which is here pro∣phesied
to be the chiefe citie and seat of Antichrist: But Rome was then Babylon: Ergo Rome is now Babylon; for Rome is that citie which the Angel saith should be the seat of Antichrist: And this book doth shew, that the great Antichrist should reign in the same citie where the heathen Em∣perors had reigned: and therefore it stan∣deth firme, That Rome under the Popes is Babylon. This being then granted, that Babylon here is Rome; it followeth, that Rome shall fall: for the holy Ghost saith, Babylon is fal∣len, speaking in the present tense, as the man∣ner of the Scripture is in prophesying of things to come. For whatsoever God hath determined to come to passe, is, as it were al∣ready done, because of the certainty of it: and for this cause also the word is doubled: It is fallen,Rome shall fall. it is fallen. Wee see then most cleerly, that almost 1500 yeers before Rome began to fall, the certain fall thereof was fore-told. This place it self is cleer enough to prove my second point, which is, That Rome shall fall. But my purpose is to reduce and gather all the five chapters following to certain heads, to prove the main points which I have propounded: first then I reason
thus to prove the second point, that Rome shall fall: That citie and kingdome which hath the seven vials of Gods wrath emptied and powred downe upon it, cannot stand, but must needs fall: But Rome is that citie, which hath the seven vials of Gods wrath powred downe upon it: Therefore Rome cannot stand long, but must needs fall. The proposition is manifest, and not to be deni∣ed. The assumption is proved throughout all the sixteenth chapter, and especially in the tenth and second verses; in the tenth verse the vials of Gods wrath are expressely said to be powred down upon the throne of the beast: and in the second verse of that chapter it is avouched, that the second viall was powred downe upon the men which had the marke of the beast, and upon them which worshipped her image. How then can the throne of the beast hold out? or how can they which have received the beasts mark stand up long? For there is a great emphasis or vehemency in the manner of speech. For hee doth not simply say, the wrath of God;Chap. 15.17. but the fulnesse of Gods wrath: he doth not say, should be a lit∣tle sprinkled; but powred down as it were by pail-fuls upon the kingdom of the beast. How then can the kingdome of the beast
stand, which hath so many great Ordnance, and so many double Canons discharged and shot off against it? Surely it must needs fall. Chap. 17.8.My second reason is this: The beast that was, and is not, and yet is, shall goe into perdition: But Rome is the beast that was, and is not, and yet is: Therefore Rome shall go into per∣dition. The assumption is set down chap. 17. ver. 8. For the Roman Monarchy was great in the dayes of Julius Caesar, Augustus, Clau∣dius, Tiberius; and therefore it is said, that it was. But in the reign of Nero, Otho, Gal∣ba, and Vitellius, it was greatly decayed, and therefore it is said, It is not; meaning, so great as it had been: and yet in some sort it was; and therefore it is said, And yet is. Now this beast shall goe into perdition. Therefore the Roman Monarchy shall be destroyed, and consequently, the Papacy: for the Ro∣man Empire holdeth up the Papacy, as it is written, that the woman or whore of Babylon sitteth upon the scarlet coloured beast, which had seven heads and ten horns, that is, the Roman Monarchy which beareth up the whore, and beareth up the Papacy: but the holy Ghost saith, this beast, that is, the Roman Empire, shall goe into perdition. Then it followeth, that the Papacy shall follow after: for if the
beast that she sitteth upon, and which bear∣eth her, fall under her, then she must needs fall together with him. But we see, God be thanked, that the Roman Monarchy is in a manner quite fallen; therefore the Papacy cannot stand long. My third argument is this:Verse 11. The beast that was, and is not, being even the eighth, and is one of the seven, shall goe into destruction, But Rome is the beast that was, and is not, being the eighth, and one of the seven: Therefore Rome shall goe into destruction. The assumption is set down chap. 17. ver. 11. For the Papacy or dominion of the Popes is the seventh head of the beast in respect of their civill power, and yet a beast by them∣selves, that is, an eighth in respect of their ecclesiasticall power. Now the Angel saith flatly, they shall both go together into destruction, that is, both the Empire and the Papacy. For as the dominion of the Popes goeth down, so also their worship and religion goeth down with it: and for this cause it is expresse∣ly set down in the nineteenth chapter, that the beast and the false Prophet, that is,Chap. 19.2 the Ro∣man Empire and the Papacy were both de∣stroyed together. Sith then the holy Ghost hath spoken it twice for failing, that Rome
shall go into perdition, and shall go into de∣struction; I take it to be a very sound con∣sequence, that Rome shall fall, and shal be de∣stroyed. But how shall it fall, may some man say? Or wherein shall it fall? I answer, that it shall fall in the credit and estimation of her doctrine,How Rome shall fall. it shall fall in wealth and ri∣ches, it shall fall in power and authority. And in all these it shall fall by degrees, as it did rise up by degrees: it shall not fall at once, as it did not rise up at once. Chap. 16.12.This is set down in the sixteenth chapter, where the fall of Rome is compared to the drying up of the river Euphrates, which was dryed up by degrees: Thus it is, Euphrates was a great river which did run very neer unto the old Babylon in Chaldea, and it was the wall and fortification of the city; in so much, that Cyrus and Darius, the kings of the Medes and Persians, laying siege against it, could not take it, till by policy they dig∣ged water trenches, and turned the waters another way, and so dryed them up, that the holy Ghost saith, The way was prepared for them to passe over. Now, as this Euphrates was the strength and fortification of old Baby∣lon: so the honour, wealth, riches, power and authority of Rome is the very fortification
of it.Chap. 16.12. But the punishing Angel is comman∣ded to powre down the vial of wrath upon this Euphrates; that is, upon all that uphold∣eth or fortifieth Rome, and forthwith it dried up; that is, all the credit, power, ri∣ches, and authority of Rome did diminish daily, doth diminish, and shall diminish by degrees unto the end of the world. For the utter destruction of Rome is not yet come, but it is greatly decayed from that it was fourscore yeers ago: and if it continue de∣caying eighteen yeers more, as assuredly it shall, then will it be brought to a low ebb. Since Luthers time we know how the Popes Euphrates hath dryed up; but there is yet much water left, and it is yet too deep for the kings of the earth to passe over and take it. But it shall ebb so low, that the kings of Europe shall easily passe over and take it, as wee shall heare anon. But in the mean time we see that it falleth, and that it is in falling, and the work of God goeth forward every day. For now in this age, God be thanked, many Kings and Princes, with great multitudes of their subjects have their eyes opened to behold, that the Romish re∣ligion is abominable; and that the Papacy is the very kingdom of the great Antichrist.
And whereas before they worshipped the beast,The kings of the earth in this age re∣nounce the Pope. now they hold up their hands only to the God of heaven, and glorifie him in his Son Jesus Christ. Now wee see that many lawes are made in sundry kingdomes and provinces to abolish that usurped power of the Bishop of Rome: Many acts, edicts, and injunctions are set forth in sundry nations and kingdomes of Europe to destroy, root out, and deface all monuments of idolatry and superstition, which Antichrist had ere∣cted in all kingdomes. Now the Popes which were honoured as gods in the earth, are counted and adjudg∣ed as the most vile and abominable crea∣tures that live upon the earth. Doth not all this experimentally shew that Babylon is fallen, and that Babylon doth fall by degrees? It is very palpable, wee need no further proofe for this second point. But here wee are further to observe, that the Jesuites, per∣ceiving the great decay of Rome, and the continuall drying of their Euphrates, do be∣stir them to stop the leake,The Jesuites bestir them, and why. that it might not dry up altogether. Even as when men let out the waters of great fish-ponds, so as the water waxeth low, we see the fishes skip and plunge, and take on wonderfully: So the
Jesuites, perceiving the waters of their Ro∣mish Euphrates to empaire and dry up dai∣ly, do mightily take on, digging and search∣ing every day to open the springs, and to find out some fresh fountains to maintain their great fish-pond, and to keep the wa∣ters deep enough, that there may be no safe passage over for the kings of the earth to come and take their great Babylon. All this doth appear out of the 16th chapter of this Prophecie: where S. John in a vision seeth three unclean spirits like frogs,Chap. 16.13. coming out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false Pro∣phet. By which frogs the holy Ghost mea∣neth the Jesuites and seminary Priests,The Jesuites compared to frogs, and why. which are compared to frogs for three rea∣sons: First, that as frogs delight in filthy lakes and puddles; so the Jesuites delight in the filthy puddles of idolatry and super∣stition. Secondly, as frogs make a great croaking in their marish grounds; so the Jesuites make a great croaking in kings Courts, in Noblemens houses, and Gentle∣mens houses and almost every where, where they can get any entertainment, croaking and cracking of the Popes supremacy, the Popes holinesse, the Popes blessing, the
Popes keyes, the Popes power, Peters chair, Peters successors, Christs vicar, and many good morrows, I know not what. Thirdly, as frogs are all of one nature and quality, de∣lighting in croaking and living in puddles: so the Jesuites are all of one mind and dis∣position in evill, croaking every where to maintain their Euphrates, and living daily in whoredome, Sodomitry, and all kind of out∣ragious beastlinesse. But that I may more fully perswade the conscience of the reader, that by these frogs are meant the Jesuites and seminary Priests; let us seriously weigh that which goeth before, and that which followeth after in this text, and we shall di∣scern it to be very cleer and apparant. First, it is said,Chap. 16.10. verse 10. that when the fifth An∣gel powred out his viall of Gods wrath upon the throne of the beast, by and by his kingdome waxed darke: that is, the majestie, power, pomp, credit, and estimation of Antichrist began to be diminished, obscured, and to suffer a great eclipse: which thing was ful∣filled shortly after Luthers preaching. And presently it followeth, that they gnawed their tongues for sorrow: that is, they were full of fury and rage, barking and grinning like mad dogs, or rather like hel-hounds, against
all such as set the Gospel abroach, whereby their Babylon began to shake. For at the first, when the Gospel began to peep forth, they did despise it, as a thing which they could easily suppresse; but within a short time they found, that neither by excommu∣nication, wherewith in former times they had, even as it were with lightning and thun∣der, caused kings and nations to tremble; neither by force of wars and bloudy slaugh∣ters, neither by any skill in learning, nor by treacheries they could any thing prevaile, but that the Gospel did still more and more lay open their filthinesse and shame; then did they become, and so do they continue unto this day, even as mad-men in sorrow and rage, which the holy Ghost expresseth, in saying,Chap. 16.11. that they gnawed their tongues for sor∣row, and blasphemed God, &c. whereby it is e∣vident, that the beast, and all that received his mark, are full of fiery hatred and malice, and cannot tell which way to be revenged. For the more they strive, the more they lose. Faine would they have Popery restored to his ancient credit and dignity, and they de∣vise what they can to bring it about; but it will not be. For their kingdome wax∣eth darker and darker, weaker and weaker:
and that is a dagger unto them, and a griefe of all griefe, which maketh them gnaw their tongues, and gnash their teeth for sor∣row.Chap. 16.11. But yet for all this, they repented not of their works, (saith Saint John) and therefore God is more incensed against them, and causeth the sixth Angel to powr out another vi∣all upon the great river Euphrates, and the wa∣ter thereof dryed up: as wee have heard. Now then observe carefully,Note this. and note it diligent∣ly, that the frogs came forth upon the dark∣ning of the kingdome of the beast, and the drying up of their Euphrates. For, who knoweth not, the Pope and his complices, perceiving the weakening and diminishing of their kingdom, have sent out these Jesu∣its and seminary Priests into all parts of Eu∣rope, to repair the ruines of Rome, if it were possible? and this is one circumstantiall rea∣son to prove these three frogs to be under∣stood of the Jesuites. But let us proceed to open the whole description of the holy Ghost, that it may yet more plainly appear: First,Chap. 16.13. these frogs are called unclean spirits, because they are the very limbs of the Di∣vell, full of all filthinesse and uncleannesse. Secondly, they are called spirits, because they come out of the mouth of the Dragon, the
beast, and the false prophet. Thirdly, they are called three in number, being in truth neerer three thousand, because they pro∣ceed out of three severall mouthes, the Dra∣gon, the beast, and the false prophet: that is, the Divell, the Roman Empire, and the Pa∣pacy: three horrible monsters, three terrible bug bears, which with one consent con∣spire together against the Gospel, to uphold their Babylon, and to stop the leak of their Euphrates. Now these three frogs are said to come out of the mouth of the Dragon, the beast, and the false prophet, because they come with the very minde and message of the Pope, and the Roman Empire, and so consequently, with the very mind and spirit of the Dragon. For they are the very breath of the Pope, and the spirits of the Divels, as like him, as if they had been spit out of his mouth. They are sent on the Divels er∣rand, and the Popes embassage into all coun∣tries and kingdomes, and are taught their lesson what they shall say, and instructed what they shall doe, and what courses they shall take with men, both kings, Nobles, and the meaner sort: and for this cause the holy Ghost saith, they came out of the very mouth, the very heart, and the very
bowels of the Pope, and of the Divell. And although these Jesuits and seminary Priests are called of the favourites, Catholick Do∣ctors,The holy Ghost cal∣leth the Je∣suits the spi∣rits of Di∣vels. Chap. 16.14. holy Fathers, &c. yet the holy Ghost saith flatly, they are the spirits of Divels, working false and fained miracles, and with great efficacy of error, deluding and decei∣ving the simple and blind multitude. We see then, that the holy Ghost in all this descri∣ption doth plainly note out the Jesuites and seminary Priests: for to whom can these things here spoken of agree, but onely to them? And do not wee which live in these dayes sensibly see and discern the fulfilling of all these things? Surely wee cannot but see and feel them, unlesse wee be wilfully blind, and do of purpose blind-fold & hood∣wink our selves. But the holy Ghost goeth yer further, and doth more fully, and as it were demonstratively point them out unto us, describing them by their office, which is, to go unto the kings of the earth,Verse 14. and of the whole world, to gather them to the battell of that great day of God almighty. Who is ignorant that the Jesuites and seminary Priests are sent out to all Kings and Nobles of the whole world, that favour them and their procee∣dings? Are they not croaking in corners
thick and threefold in all parts of this land? Are they not practising of treacheries and treasons against our most gracious King and the whole state? Are they not plotting the destruction and subversion of this Church & common-wealth? Nay, as the holy Ghost saith, the chiefe end of their coming abroad is to solicite & gather the kings of the earth unto battell against God, against Christ, and against all true professors of religion. The battell betwixt them is here called, The bat∣tell of the great day of God almighty, that is, that battell wherein the Almighty God will have the day, and goe away with the victo∣ry. For it followeth,The Jesuites by their craf∣ty perswasi∣ons shall bring the popish kings and their ar∣mies to a place where they shall be destroyed. that the Jesuites and seminary Priests did prevaile with the se∣duced kings of the earth so far, as to gather them together to a place, which in Hebrew is called Armageddon, that is to say, a place where they shall be destroyed, and that with such an horrible slaughter, that the place shall take a name thereof. For it was an usuall thing among the Hebrews to call the place where any famous thing fell out by a name which did report the same to all posterity, as, Kibroth Hataavah,Numb. 11. the graves of Concupiscence; Hamon Gog,Ezek. 39. the multi∣tude of Gog; and divers such like. And so
here Armageddon, the destruction of an ar∣my, because the kings of the earth and their armies which shall fight against the Church at the instigation of the Jesuites, shall come to a place, where they shall have a notable overthrow. This word Armaged∣don may fitly be derived of two Hebrew words, that is to say, Cherem, which signi∣fieth destruction, and Gedudh, which signi∣fieth an army; that is, the destruction of an army: or as some say, and that very judicial∣ly, it may come of Genermah Gidnon, which signifieth the subtilty of destruction; be∣cause the blind Kings and Nobles of the earth shall, by the subtilty and crafty per∣swasions of the Jesuits and seminary priests, be intised to fight against the Protestants in a place where they shall have a famous foyl. Some derive Armageddon of Har, which in Hebrew signifieth a Mountain, and Me∣giddo, which is the place where the godly king Josias was slaine: and so this place should be called Armageddon, the Mountain of Megiddo, for the slaughter of kings that shall be there. To the which the Pro∣phet Zecharie alludeth,Zech. 12.11. saying, In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon, in the valley
of Megiddo. Well, we do see that all these significations and derivations of Armaged∣don, come to one thing in effect; which is, that the great armies which assemble them∣selves in battell against the Lord, shall be destroyed: and therefore it is not much materiall to dispute which is the more like∣ly signification of the word. But this let us observe for our comfort, that whensoever wee shall see the Kings and Captains, No∣bles and Potentates of the earth, being so∣licited by the Jesuites, Priests, and the false Prophet, to levie great armies, and make great powers to fight against the Gospel, and the true professors therof, for the main∣tenance of great Babylon, they shall not pre∣vaile, but be utterly overthrowne and de∣stroyed; as in part wee see fulfilled in the yeer of our Lord 1588, when the great and invincible Armado of the Spaniards, as they thought, which was long in preparing against us, and at last, by the instigation of the Je∣suites, brought upon us, came to Arma∣geddon, as we know, GOD be praised. And in all time to come, in the like case, let them look for the like successe. Well, now to grow to some conclusions of this point; we do plainly see that Rome falleth, their king∣dome
waxeth dark, their Euphrates dryeth up, and they espy it. The Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet send out their frogs into all countries and kingdomes, hoping to prevent it by the help of the kings of the earth, and especially the king of Spaine: but alas all in vain, for they must come to Armageddon when they have done all that they can. For God fighteth from heaven against them, God bringeth them down, and no power of man is able to up∣hold them. But now let us proceed to prove the third maine point; which is, that Rome shall fall finally, and come to utter desolation. For all sound Divines are perswaded of the fall of Babylon, and doe grant that it falleth, and is in falling: but all are not so throughly per∣swaded of the finall fall thereof in this life. Therefore now I will prove by manifest Scripture that Rome shall fall finally.Rome shall fall finally. First, if the things be deeply considered, and nar∣rowly looked into, which S. John saith shall fall out upon the powring forth of the seventh viall of Gods wrath by the seventh Angel, they do fully portend a deadly down∣fall and utter overthrow of Rome: For the seventh viall is not powred upon the earth,
or sea, or fountains of waters, or on the Sun,Chap. 16.17. as the first foure vials were, which signified some particular judgment; but it was pow∣red forth into the very air, which signifieth the universality of it, and containeth the most generall and most grievous judgment and vengeance of Almighty God upon the whole body of the kingdome of Antichrist, a little before the last day. The text saith, that upon the powring forth of this viall,Verse 17. there was a loud voyce heard out of the Temple of heaven from the throne: that is, from the very presence of God, saying, It is done, it is dispatched, the utter overthrow of Rome is fully con∣cluded of, and all things finished which belong to the powring forth of the seven vials, which containe the seven last plagues, wherein the whole wrath of God is ful∣filled, as appeareth chap. 15. As before it is said, Babylon is fallen,Chap. 15.1. because it should cer∣tainly fall: so here God himselfe saith, It is done, because it shall certainly be done. For whatsoever God hath determined to be done, is as it were already done, because it shall most certainly be effected. Sith then the Lord hath pronounced this of Rome, there remaineth nothing but a daily ac∣complishment
of it: and let all the Papists know for a certainty, that they must goe to their geere, they must come to their pay∣ment, there is no way of evasion. For, hath the Lord spoken it, and shall it not come to passe? Now upon this that God saith, It is done, followeth presently, that there were voyces and thundrings,Chap. 15.18. and light∣nings, and there was a great earth-quake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, even so mighty an earth-quake.Chap. 6.12. What is meant by thundrings, lightnings, and earth-quakes in this book, I have before shewed: to wit, commotions, seditions, tumults, uprores, and alterations of states, kingdomes, and com∣mon-wealths: and then the meaning of this place is, that there shall be horrible sha∣kings, concussions, tumults, and great altera∣tion of state in all the kingdomes which are subject to Antichrist, none of them shall escape. For this seventh viall of Gods wrath upon the kingdom of the beast, is compared to a most horrible and blustring tempest, raised up in the whole aire, that is, in all places of Antichrists dominions. And it is specially to be noted, as a thing of great moment, that the holy Ghost saith, there was never such an earth-quake as this since the world
began, and since men were upon the earth. For assuredly, so soon as the seventh Angel powreth forth his viall, the kingdom of Po∣pery shall goe down amaine, which shall not be long before the end of the world, as all circumstances here doe shew. After all this, Saint John telleth us the effect of this thundring, lightning, and extraordinary earth-quake; which is,Chapt. 16.19. that the great city was divided into three parts; that is, there shall be a most horrible rent and division in the city of Rome, and throughout all the Popes dominions. What this rent and division is, and how it shall be, I cannot determine, being a thing to come, as all the rest comprehended under the powring forth of the seventh viall: But this I am sure of, that Rome shall goe down; and there shall be such tumults, up∣rores, rents, divisions, disputations, and con∣cussions in Rome, and throughout all the Romish jurisdiction, as never were heard of, nor read of since the world began: For Saint John addeth,Verse 59. that Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fiercenesse of his wrath: that is, God doth now at length call to mind all the wrongs done to his people, and
all the righteous bloud shed for the space of seven or eight hundred yeers by the whore of Babylon, that he may be fully revenged; and execute the fiercenesse of his wrath both upon her and her whole kingdom: yea, and that in such terrible and wrathfull man∣ner, that there shall be no place of refuge, no place to flie into for succour: for Saint John saith,Verse 20. Every Ile fled away, and the mountaines were not found: Meaning that the Papists in that day shall have neither mountain nor Iland to fly unto. And last of all the holy Ghost saith, that there fell a great haile like talents out of heaven upon the Idolaters;Chap. 16.21. insomuch, that they blas∣phemed God, because of the plague of the hail: for the plague thereof was exceeding great. A talent was about the weight of threescore pound, as some write. Then it followeth, that this hail of Gods wrath upon the Pa∣pists shall be most terrible and fearfull, and beat them down to the ground, as it were an haile of mil-stones, or plough-irons. Now when this hail of talents cometh, as assuredly come it shall, then shall the king∣dome of Popery be beaten to dust and pow∣der: and therefore no marvell though the Idolaters, seeing all this, be in a most hor∣rible
rage, and blaspheme God,Verse 21. as Saint John saith, because of this exceeding and most extraordinary plague, which shall then come upon them. But now to conclude, and wind up all together: for as much as this last viall is powred into the aire (God saith, It is done) an extraordinary earth-quake followeth, the great citie of Rome is rent, Babylon called into question, and fearful hail∣stones of wrath powred downe upon the I∣dolaters; I doe conclude, that Rome shall fall finally, and come to utter destruction in this life. Now let us proceed to further proofe. In the eighteenth chapter of this book the whore of Babylon saith in heart: I sit, being a Queen, and am no widow,Chap. 18.8, 9. Isa. 47. and shall see no sor∣row. Therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and shee shall be burnt with fire; for that God which condem∣neth her is a strong Lord. First, here Rome is described as shee was in the height and top of her pride and se∣curity, when shee held the dominion of the kings of the earth, and boasted that she was the head of the Catholick Church, carrying her selfe very insolently above all kings and Emperors, treading upon their necks, and
making them attend at her gates bare-foot in the middest of winter, as the stories re∣port. Yea, and that shee was no widow; that is, no solitary or desolate person, but one that had many lovers which were strong to defend her, so as she should feel no want, nor see any sorrow. But the time will come, and draweth on apace, wherein shee shall be throughly punished for her haugh∣tinesse, and intolerable pride and security: For the holy Ghost saith, her plagues shall come in one day; that is, suddenly, shortly, and speedily, even death, sorrow, and famine, and shee shall be burnt with fire; for that God which condemneth her is a strong Lord. If this be not plain enough to prove an utter overthrow of Rome, I know not what can be plain e∣nough. For if death, famine, and fire will not pull her downe, I know not what shall pull her downe. But Saint John saith flatly, that God himselfe, who is a strong Lord, will oppose himselfe against Rome, and con∣demne her. Who can uphold her? Can the king of Spaine? can the Cardinals? can the Emperour? can all the Dukes of Italie, and all the potentates of the earth that take part with her? No, no, they are all too weake. For if God take against a man,Job 23. who can reclaim
him, saith the holy Ghost? For hee doth whatsoever hee will. And againe, God is wise in heart, and mighty in strength; who ever hard∣ned his heart against him and prospered? If God call not back his anger, the most proud hearts are bowed under him. And God saith in E∣zek. 22. Can thy hands be strong, or can thy heart endure in the day that I shall have to doe with thee? Then it followeth, that though Ba∣bylon fit as a Queen, and all her lovers take part with her, yet because the strong Lord is against her, therefore shee shall come to utter destruction. Some of good judgement in the truth have gathered from this place, that the very city of Rome shall be burnt with fire, which assuredly may well be: but this I am sure of, that the phrase of burning with fire doth in the Prophets alwaies signifie an utter destru∣ction and desolation of a city or a kingdom;Amos 5.6. and therefore it followeth, that Rome shall be utterly destroyed. But behold yet a stronger and plainer proofe. For Saint John saith,Chap. 17.21. A mighty An∣gel took up a stone like a great milstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, With such a violence shall that great city Babylon be cast downe, and shall be found no more. All men know, that old
Babylon in Chaldea was destroyed by the Medes and Persians long before Saint John wrote this book; and therefore that is not here meant: but the new Babylon, which is Rome, as before hath been proved. The phrases of speech, and the signes which the Prophets used to declare the destruction and desolation of old Babylon, are here allu∣ded unto the destruction of Rome. For wee read in the Prophecie of Jeremie, that the Prophet having written in a book all the e∣vil that should come upon Babel, for holding Gods people so long in most miserable cap∣tivity,Jer. 51.61. said to Serajah, When thou comest un∣to Babel, thou shalt reade all these words, and when thou hast made an end of reading this booke, thou shalt binde a stone to it, and cast it into the middest of Euphrates, and shalt say, Thus shall Babel be drowned, and shall not rise up from the evill that I will bring upon her, al∣though they weary themselves. Now let us consider how this agreeth with the same which is here set down, and wee shall find, that all things are here set down with grea∣ter force to expresse, as it were, a deeper vengeance, and a more heavie (and unre∣coverable destruction.) First, there is a man; here is a mighty Angel: there the
man taketh up a stone; here the Angel ta∣keth up a great stone like a mil-stone: there the stone is cast into the river; here into the deep sea. All these circumstances being ap∣plied to Rome, do greatly aggravate the mat∣ter, and very plainly shew, that it shall fall without all hope of recovery.Rome shall fall without all hope of recovery. For the Lord declareth by this forcible signe of casting a mil-stone into the sea, that the citie and kingdome of Antichrist shall bee cast deep down into perdition, and shall lie o∣verwhelmed and drowned in the same for ever. For if old Babylon was utterly destroyed, and came to a finall desolation in this life; much more shall Rome, as the holy Ghost disputeth: But old Babylon came to utter ruine and desolation in this life, as both Isai∣ah and Jeremiah do witnesse: Therefore new Babylon, that is, Rome, shall come to utter de∣struction: and, as the holy Ghost here saith, shall be found no more, or shall fall without all hope of recovery. Stories doe report, that Rome hath been sundry times destroyed by the Gothes and Vandals, and others: yea, once fired and quite burnt up; but afterward built and raised up againe by the Emperors: But
here the holy Ghost saith expressely, that it shall have a finall fall, and an unrecovera∣ble destruction. For can a mil-stone cast in∣to the bottome of the sea ever be got up a∣gaine? No, no, it is impossible. Therefore let the Jesuites and seminary Priests doe what they can, they shall never set up Rome againe, they shall never restore her to her former state and dignity; they shall never repaire her credit againe. Let the Pope, and Cardinals, and the King of Spain, and all the world, and all the Divels in hell joine to∣gether, they shall never get up this mil∣stone out of the bottome of the sea. For the Angel hath cast it in with such a violence, that no power of man shall ever fetch it out again. True it is indeed, that the Jesuites bestir them, and the seminary Priests and Papists doe work apace in all lands, and adventure themselves in most desperate manner to re∣cover againe the credit of Popery, and to set up againe the dignity and the power of the Pope, and the glory of their Church and citie, and their bold enterprizes doe make many even to doubt that they will againe one day prevaile: But assuredly we are to make full reckoning, that although
here and there they may support for a time some ruinous parts of their rotten frame; yet doe what they can, it shall in the end down upon their heads, and come to utter desolation. Indeed, Rome standeth yet, and Popery is not quite fallen downe. But they are disclosed, their credit is cracked, their pow∣er decayeth; and so this thing is begun, and the time draweth on when it shall be ful∣ly accomplished. Hee that had beheld the power, the pomp, the riches and estimati∣on of the Church of Rome about some four∣score yeeres past, and looketh upon it now, shall see a wonderfull alteration. It seem∣ed then to be without all danger of sha∣king: for the Emperor, and the Kings of the earth stood forth with all their force and might, power and policy to uphold it: but, God be thanked, we see how it is alrea∣dy come down, and shall come down eve∣ry day more and more, whosoever saith nay to it. But behold, yet more and more plain proof for the utter desolation of Rome. For Saint John describeth the eternall desolation thereof, by denyall of those things which are in cities inhabited; First, hee saith, there
shall be no more any voice of harpers,Chap. 18.22. musicians, pipers and trumpeters heard in Rome, that is, all musick shall surcease, which argueth an utter desolation: For what inhabited cities are without musick? Secondly, hee saith, There shall be no crafts∣men of what trade soever found in Rome, which argueth an utter desolation: For what flou∣rishing citie is without artificers? Thirdly, he saith, No light of a candle shall any more shine in Rome, which argueth an utter desolation: For what inhabited city is with∣out candles? Fourthly, he saith, No sound of a mil-stone shall be heard in Rome, which doth argue an utter desolation: For what city is without mils to grind their corn? Lastly, he saith, The voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more in Rome, which argueth an utter desolation: For what citie is without bride and bride∣groom? and without marriage for procrea∣tion sake? Then I conclude from all this, that Rome shall fall finally, and come to ut∣ter destruction. But behold yet a more plain and pre∣gnant proofe, drawne from the pitifull mournings and most wofull lamentations
of the kings of the earth, the merchants and the mariners, who all doe joyntly la∣ment and mourn for the destruction and desolation of Rome, crying, Alas, alas,Chap. 18.10. that great city Babylon, that mighty city: for in one houre is thy judgement come: in one houre so great riches are come to desolation, in one houre shee is made desolate. What can be more plainly and fully spoken to prove an utter desolation of Rome? What can be more required then to have it set down in express terms, as here we see? For now the holy Ghost useth no figure, no hardnesse, no cir∣cumlocution, no obscurity; but telleth us plainly, and thrice for failing, that Babylon, that is Rome, is made desolate, is to come to desolation. Moreover, it is said that the kings,V. 10, 15, 18. mer∣chants and mariners shall stand afarre off for fear of her torment, and they shall weep and waile when they shall see the smoake of her burning; signifying that the torment and plague of Rome shall be so great, that kings, for all their might, shall not dare to come nigh to rescue her: no, not the king of Spain with all his great might and power; he shall be fain to stand afarre off, or rather utterly to forsake her, weeping and wailing as well as
others, for her most fearfull and unrecovera∣ble destruction. But we are to observe in all this, that the holy Ghost useth a figure or kind of speech, which they call a Prosopopoeia, or faining of a person, whereby the Popish kings being dead and rotten, are brought in lamenting and bewailing the fall of Babylon, as if they were alive againe: or else it may be under∣stood of Cardinals and Legates, which are even as kings upon the earth. But it cannot be understood of Christian kings, for they shall be the instruments of God to pull down great Babylon, as we shall hear anon. Furthermore, let us consider the causes of this great lamentation for the deadly down∣fall of Babylon, by the Popish kings, mer∣chants, and mariners. First, the kings, they mourn and lament,Verse 9. saith Saint John, because they had committed fornication with the great whore of Babylon, and lived in pleasure with her: that is, they have lived long with her in a∣bominable idolatry, and pleased her that way, and therefore she gave them dispensa∣tions to live in wantonnesse and all carnall pleasures, and even to doe what they list, spending their dayes in sensuality, and all kind of fleshly delights.
Secondly, the merchants doe weep and waile,V. 12, 13, 14. because no man buyeth their ware a∣ny more. These merchants are not named, but they may easily be knowne by their wares, which the holy Ghost describeth, to wit, that they be the Popish merchants, the shaven merchants, who are here brought in mourning and lamenting for the losse of their gaine. The Monks, Friars, and Priests cannot have that utterance of their wares that in times past they have had; their wares are now out of request: their markets waxe dead, and they have cold ta∣kings. When these fellowes passe by the great Monasteries and Abbeyes, and see them made ruinous heapes, and withall re∣member the fat revenues, the good cheer, the pleasure and delight which sometimes they have had in those places, it cuts their hearts, and maketh them shake their heads at it, saying, Alas, alas,Verse 16. that great city that was clothed in fine linnen, and purple, and scar∣let, and gilded with gold, and precious stones and pearls; for in one hour so great riches are come to desolation. Mark then, that the ruine of their great city, with all the pomp, pleasure and riches thereof, is that which doth yet stick in their stomacks.
Thirdly, the mariners doe greatly mourn and lament for the losse of their profit and commodity. For while Rome had domini∣on over the kingdomes, and the Pope ru∣led over all, even us God upon the earth, there was nothing but trudging over the seas to Rome out of all Lands, and againe from thence: there was carrying and re∣carrying; insomuch, that multitudes of mariners and ship-masters were continually set on work, and gained greatly thereby. No marvell then though these mariners are brought in amongst other friends of Rome, bewailing her destruction, even with dust upon their heads, weeping, and crying, and saying, Alas, alas, that great city where∣in were made rich all that had ships on the sea by her costlinesse: For in one houre shee is made desolate. Thus wee see how the kings, and merchants, and mariners shall bewaile the utter ruine and great desolation of Rome, for the losse of their pleasure, their gain, and their profit! Moreover, wee are to observe, that that which is spoken by the old Prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah, as touching the utter deso∣lation of old Babel, is applyed by Saint John no new Babel, which is Rome. Tou∣ching
the Easterne Babylon, the Prophet saith thus: Babel, the glory of kingdomes,Isa. 13.19. the beauty and pride of the Chaldeans, shall be as the destruction of God in Sodom and Gomor∣rah. It shall not be inhabited for ever, neither shall the Arabian pitch his tent there, neither shall the shepherds make their folds there. But Ziim shall lodge there, and their houses shall be full of Ohim: Ostriches shall dwell there, and the Satyrs shall dance there: that is, fairies, hobgoblins, night-spirits, and such like; whereby is signified the utter desolation of old Babylon.Chap. 18.2. Now Saint John applyeth all this to Rome, saying, Babylon, that great ci∣ty, is become the habitation of Divels, and the hold of all soule spirits, and a cage of every un∣clean and hatefull bird: Noting hereby both the filthinesse of Rome, and also her utter de∣solation. But now let us proceed to our last and greatest argument, to prove the finall fall and utter destruction of Rome and all Ro∣mish power and authority. In the nine∣teenth chapter of this Prophecie our Lord Jesus is described sitting upon his white horse, which is the ministery of the Gospel, as hath before been proved, and is most glori∣ously brought in by Saint John, as grand
Captain and Generall of the field, fighting with all his army against Antichrist and his souldiers. S. John giveth him goodly names and titles,Chap. 19.12, 13, 14, &c. calling him the Word of God, the King of kings, and the Lord of lords: and saith, that hee hath a Name written that no man knew but himself; which is his infinite glory and majesty. And moreover, that his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head many crowns, and a sharp sword in his mouth, and clo∣thed with his warlike garment dipt in bloud, and all his heavenly souldiers follow∣ed him upon white horses: meaning there∣by all Christian kings, dukes, lords, nobles, captains, preachers and professors of true re∣ligion. This grand Captain, with all these wor∣thy souldiers, saith Saint John, shall muster together, and prepare themselves to fight a∣gainst the beast, and the false prophet, and all their forces; and at last hee seeth them joyn battell.Verse 19. I saw (saith Saint John) the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies gathered together to make battell against him that sate upon the white horse, and against his army. Now all this is to be understood of the battels betwixt the Papists and the
Protestants in these last dayes. But, may some man say, Who shall have the victory? What is the successe? What is the issue? let us hear of that. The holy Ghost answer∣eth,The Prote∣stants shall have the day. that the beast and the false prophet were taken, foiled, and overcome; using a warlike phrase, because in the wars they use to take their greatest Captains and Commanders a∣live, and to put them to their ransomes. The like unto this we have in the seventh chap∣ter, where Saint John telleth us, that when the Popish kings and potentates shall make war against Christ and his Gospel, they shall have the like successe unto this. For, saith hee, These have one mind,Ch. 17.13, 14. and shall give their power and authority unto the beast, they shall fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is the Lord of lords, and King of kings. But, may some man say, When the Lea∣ders and Commanders of the Popish armies shall be taken captives and set at their ran∣somes, what shall become of the inferiour Captains and souldiers? The holy Ghost an∣swereth, that the remnant were slaine with the sword of him that sitteth upon the horse: that is, they were put to the sword, and all the fowles were filled full with their flesh. And
for this cause Saint John saith,Chap. 19.21. that he saw an Angel stand in the Sun, who cryed with a loud voice, saying to all the fowles that did fly by the middest of heaven, Come and ga∣ther your selves together unto the supper of the great God. Now, to make this plain: We know, that they which proclaim any matter, seek some market-crosse, or high place to stand in, where they may be heard: so this Angel, which proclaimeth the victory against An∣tichrist, before any stroke be strucken, be∣cause of the certainty of it, standeth in the Sun, as it were in the theater and middest of the world, as in a place most fit for the pur∣pose, that hee may be heard throughout all the earth. Now this proclamation is dire∣cted to all the fowls of the ayr, to bid them to a supper, which is here called the supper of the great God. But it may be demanded, What cheer shall they have? The holy Ghost answereth,Verse 18. that they shall eate the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of great Cap∣tains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of hors-men, and the flesh of all free-men, and bond-men, and of small and great. This wee know, that when men are slain
in great numbers in the wars, their bodies lie scattered as meat for the fowls of the air. And therefore here all fowles are invited and bidden to a great supper made them by the great God, whose hand is in all this; their cheer and their dainties are reckoned up to be the flesh of Kings and Captains, &c. Now out of this may be strongly conclu∣ded, that hereafter in all time to come, when the armies of the Pope, which is the beast; the armies of the king of Spain, who hath given his power and authority unto the beast, and is his great upholder; when the armies of the Cardinall, his great confede∣rate; when the armies of the Leaguers, his great adherents; yea, when all these, and all other Popish armies shall joyne and band themselves together against the Christian kings, and defenders of the Gospel, they shall have a notable overthrow; insomuch that their dead carcasses shall even cover the earth, and the fowles of the air shall come to their great supper, which the Lord of hosts will make ready for them. For assuredly, and out of doubt, they that live, shall see the fulfilling of all this, and shall see the Popish armies goe down by heaps in all countries and kingdomes, and be made meat for the
fowles of the air.The Popish armies shall go down by heaps. Chap. 16.6. Chap. 13.10. For the holy Ghost saith, They shall come to Armageddon; that is, the place where their armies shall be destroy∣ed. And again, If any lead into captivity, hee shall go into captivity: If any kill with a sword, he must be killed with a sword. For as the Po∣pish forces have in former times taken cap∣tive the people of God, and cruelly murthe∣red them: so now the time draweth on a∣pace, wherein themselves shall be taken and put to the sword. And therefore now at last I conclude, that Rome shall fall finally, and come to utter de∣struction in this life. For as Rome did rise up by degrees in this life, so Rome shall fall by degrees in this life: as Rome grew up to her full height and highest pitch in this life, so it shall come to her lowest ebb and greatest declination in this life: I meane, before the coming of Christ unto judgement. For the falling down of haile like talents upon the kingdome of the beast, shall be in this life: The extraordinary earth-quake upon the do∣minions of Antichrist shall be in this life:Rome shall be utterly de∣stroyed in this life. The coming of the Popish armies to Arma∣geddon shall be in this life: The mourning of the kings, merchants, and mariners for the overthrow of Babylon shall be in this
life: The great battell betwixt the beast and him that sitteth upon the white horse, shall be in this life, before the day of judgment: The powring forth of all the seven vials of Gods wrath upon the kingdome of the beast shall be even in this life. For it were an ab∣surd thing to say, any of these things shall be after this life; or to say that these things shall not be till the very coming of Christ; for they are all things to be effected here in this earth: and the holy Ghost doth describe them as things to be done upon the face of the earth: for otherwise we could have small comfort in any of these things, if they should not be done here in earth, or if they should all be deferred till the very coming of Christ, and in the meane time Antichrist shall prevaile. But it will be objected, that S. Paul saith, The Lord shall consume Antichrist with the spi∣rit of his mouth and abolish him with the bright∣nesse of his coming:2 Thes. 2. Therefore before his coming he shall not be utterly abolished. True it is indeed,An objection answered. he shall not utterly be cut off in all his members, till the very coming of Christ: For there will be some Papists remaining in all countries, even unto the end; there be some, nay, many, that will
carry the beasts mark even untill the last day. But the holy Ghost in this Prophecie speaketh of the revolting and falling away of kingdomes and countries from the See of Rome; whereby it shall come to passe, that it shall be exceedingly weakned, and brought so low, that the kings of the earth shall easily take it; or, as the holy Ghost speaketh,Chap. 16.26. shall easily passe over, their Euphra∣tes being dryed up, and enter their Babylon. But then, will some man say, Shall there be no Pope at all a little before the coming of Christ? I answer, and not I, but the holy Ghost for me; hee shall be a poor Pope, a naked Pope,Chap. 17.16. The Pope shall bee brought ve∣ry low. 2 Sam. 3. a desolate Pope, a Pope whose flesh shall be torn, whose flesh shall wither, as we shall hear anon: Hee shall be such a Pope, as Ishbosheth was a King, when Abner and all Israel fell away from him. He shall be such a Pope as the king of Portugal is a king. But it will be objected, How know you this? are you a prophet? can you fore-tell of things to come? I answer, Saint John was a Prophet, and indued with a Propheticall spirit in this matter of his visions and reve∣lations; and I speak no more then Saint John hath set down. And therefore I hope
I speak within my compasse: for I doe but relate Saint Johns words, and explain them in such measure as I am able. This Prophecie doth plainly declare, that Babylon shall fall, Rome shall come down, the Pope shall never be esteemed again: and I do beleeve it to be so; I beleeve God, I beleeve his word, I beleeve all that is spo∣ken in Scripture, and I do indeavour to per∣swade others also. For sith the holy Ghost hath so plainly and so fully fore-told it, why should we not beleeve it? why are wee so slow to beleeve all that is written in the Scriptures? Hath God spoken it, and shall it not come to passe? shall any jot of his word fail? shall we think he jesteth with us, when he doth so often and so seriously tell us of the downe fall of Rome? Surely, surely, the cause why men are not fully perswaded of the finall fall of Rome, is, because they do not diligently peruse this book of the Apoca∣lypse. But let them be studious and diligent in this book, and they shall be out of all doubt, that Rome is the great whore of Baby∣lon, that the Pope is Antichrist, and the Pa∣pacy the beast. But now, me thinketh, I hear some men say, How is it like that Popery shall fall
down more and more here among us, sith it hath so many friends, backers and upholders, and seemeth to gather strength, and make an head again? I answer, that all is but a lightning before death. I answer, that all is but the stopping of a water-brook, or ma∣king a dam overthwart it, which will cause it to swell more, and to break over with great violence. I answer, that all is no more then is fore-told, that the Jesuits shall come forth like frogs out of their puddles and marish grounds, and keep a croaking for a time, till they have croaked their own de∣struction and many others. For they shall never set Popery here in England, to stand and continue, do what they can. I must needs confesse, that our sins being so horrible and outragious as they are, and being grown to such an height and ripenesse, doe deserve some fearfull vengeance, and that God hath a just controversie against us, as sometimes hee had against Israel,Hos. 4. because there was no mercy, nor truth, nor knowledge of God in the land: but swearing, lying, killing, stealing, and whoring, and bloud toucheth bloud, and there∣fore saith God, The land shall mourn, &c. But yet I hope for his covenant sake, for his great mercies sake, for his names sake, for his glo∣ry
sake, and for his Churches sake, he will be gracious and favourable unto us, and not bring upon us that vengeance which our sins have deserved: or at least wise though he correct us, as indeed he hath just cause, and we may justly fear it; yet hee will doe it in mercy for our amendment, and not in wrath to our destruction, as hee saith by his Prophet: I will not utterly destroy thee,Jer. 30.11. & 46.28. & 10.24. but I will correct thee by judgment, and not utterly cut thee off. But howsoever it shall please the most wise God to deale with us, yet this I say, and am perswaded of, that Popery shall never be established again in this kingdom: my reason is, because the everlasting Gospel carried abroad by the Angel that flyeth in the middest of heaven, shall spread still more and more throughout all the kingdomes of Europe, as appeareth, chap. 14. v. 6. for other∣wise how shall Rome fall? how shall the Jewes ever be converted?Rom. 11.24. how shall fire come down from heaven, and devoure both Gog and Magog,Chap. 19. as the holy Ghost fore-tel∣leth shall come to passe, and as we shall hear more anon? Moreover, S. John telleth us plainly,Chap. 10.1. that in these last dayes the Gospel shall be preached to many people, and nations, and tongues, and to many kings. And further hee
saith, that in this age wherein we live, many shall renounce idolatry, repent, and give glo∣ry to the God of heaven. But some man may say, How prove you that this kingdome is one of them which Saint John speaketh of, and which hee meaneth, wherein the Go∣spel shall be preached unto the end of the world? I answer, that it is proved out of the seventeenth chapter of this Prophecie, where the holy Ghost telleth us flatly, that those ten kingdomes of Europe which had a long time been the ten horns and strength of the beast,Chap. 19.13. and being of one mind, had given their power and authority unto the beast, should now in these last dayes rise up against the whore of Ba∣bylon,Verse 16. make war against her, hate her, and make her desolate. But this kingdome is one of those ten hornes, and one of those ten kingdomes which a long time had given her power and authority to the beast. Therefore as this kingdome hath happily begun to hate the whore, and to make her desolate and naked; so undoubtedly she shall continue unto the end of the world.England & other king∣doms which have forsa∣ken the beast, shal so continue un∣to the end of the world. For if this kingdome, and other kingdomes which now hate the whore, doe not continue, how shall she be made desolate and naked, &c.? Then it
should seem, the beast shall revive and reco∣ver himselfe again, and so St. John shall be found a false Prophet. But God is true, and all men are lyers; and St. John shall be found a true Prophet: and therefore these kingdoms of Europe which have begun to hate the whore, shall continue, and never give her o∣ver, till (as the holy Ghost saith) they have eaten her flesh, and burnt her with fire; that is, till they have utterly devoured her. But here it will be objected, that in the latter dayes iniquity shall have the upper hand. I answer, first, that I find no such place of Scripture. But this I find, that our Lord Jesus fore-tel∣leth his disciples, that very shortly after his death and resurrection, many seducers and false teachers should arise, which should de∣ceive many, and draw them away from the love of the Gospel: and, saith he,Mat. 24.12. because ini∣quity shall be increased, the love of many shall be cold. But this speech of our Saviour doth not properly concern our times: but yet it must needs be granted, that the wicked shall wax worse and worse, and the world shall not amend, but still be worse and worse, and grow to a greater height and ripenesse of sin, as appeareth in this Prophecie. Yet for all this, we must note withall, that the
number of true beleevers in those last daies shall be very many,Ch. 11.1, 11, 13. as this book doth also teach. But it may be objected, How can this geare stand together, that in the last dayes there shall be multitudes and millions of reprobates, and most wicked and abomina∣ble persons, and yet withall, a great increase of true beleevers? I answer, that the world will be alwaies like it selfe, impious and un∣beleeving. But the Church shall purely worship God, and that with daily increa∣sing even unto the end. But now, me think∣eth, I heare some man say, What likelyhood is there of all this which you write touching the overthrow of Rome? Doe wee not see, that Rome is yet strong? Doth not Italy, Spaine, the greatest part of France, and Ne∣therland, and Germany stand for her defence? Hath not the whore still many and great bearers and upholders? What likelyhood is there then that ever she shall be brought so low as you speak of? I answer, that in this case wee must not ask the question,We may not say, What likelihood is there of this? What likelyhood? Wee must not consult with flesh and bloud: wee must not take coun∣sell of humane reason: For God is marvel∣lous in his devices, and when he hath once decreed and determined of any future e∣vent,
hee will compasse it by means far sur∣passing all humane reach and capacity; yea, by such plots and devices, as mans wit could never have once dreamed of. For hee hath all means in heaven and earth in his hands, and is admirable in all his proceedings: and therefore wee may not ask this question, What likelyhood, or how can it be, or how can it possibly come to passe? What likely∣hood was there an hundred yeeres past, when Rome was in her delight, and all the kingdomes of Europe stood for her, that ever she should have been forsaken of so many of her old friends, as at this day she is? What likelyhood was there, that when the Pope could command the Emperor, and all the Kings of Europe, and their kingdomes, that ever hee should have been brought so low as at this day he is, God be thanked? What likelyhood was there that ever poor Mar∣tin Luther should stand out with the ever∣lasting Gospel in his mouth against the Pope, Emperor, and as it were, the whole world, and yet die in his bed in a good old age? What likelyhood was there that King Henry the eighth, of famous memory, should renounce Rome, oppose himsefe a∣gainst the Pope, and suppresse the Abbeye,
Priories, and Monasteries in this kingdom, and take their lands and livings into his owne hands? Therefore I conclude, that when God hath decreed the utter overthrow of Rome, wee must not ask this question, How can it be? or which way shall it be brought about? For the Scriptures do teach, that God in all ages hath done the greatest exploits, either by himselfe alone without means, or else by weak means, or contrary to all means. 2 Chron. 20.By himselfe, without meanes, hee overthrew the Moabites, Amorites, and them of Mount Seir, which made war against good king Je∣hosaphat. Exod. 14.By himselfe he destroyed Pharaoh and his army in the red sea. Josh 6.By himselfe hee overthrew Jericho that great city. 2 King. 19.By himselfe he slew the huge army of the Assy∣rians that made war against Ezekias. 2 Chro. 14.By himselfe he smote the great and dreadfull ar∣my of the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah. 2 King 6.By himselfe hee smote the Syrians, which besie∣ged Dothan, the citie where the Prophet Eli∣sha was. Judg. 7.By weak meanes he overthrew the innumerable
army of the Midianites, even by Gideons three hundred. By weak meanes hee slew a garrison of the Phi∣listims,1 Sam. 14. even by Jonathan and his armour-bearer. By weake means hee overthrew the kings of So∣dom, and thereabouts,Gen. 1. even by Abraham and his family. He overthrew Goliah by David:1 Sam. 17. Judg. 4. Judg. 6. Sisera by Ja∣el: Abimelech by a woman. Contrary to means, hee saved the three childrenDan. 3. from burning, being in the fire. Contrary to means,Jonas 2. he saved Jonas from drown∣ing, being cast into the sea. Contrary to means,Dan. 6. he preserved Daniel from de∣vouring, being cast into the lions den. Contrary to means,Exod. 14. hee kept the Israelites from drowning being in the bottome of the sea. Contrary to meanes and all expectation,Josh. 1. hee cau∣sed the Sun to stand still at noon day, whilest hee overthrew the five kings of Canaan by Joshua. Therefore I conclude, that forasmuch as God in al ages hath effected the most strange and admirable things,The  o∣verthrow of Rome con∣cluded of. either by him∣self without means, or by very weak means, or contrary to all means, herefore it is in vain to ask this question, How, or by what
means shall Rome be destroyed? For it is enough for us to know that it shall be de∣stroyed, and come to utter desolation. And in my judgment the holy Ghost hath so of∣ten and plainly affirmed this, that no man should any more make any doubt of it, or once call it into question. For what can be more plain,Chapt. 14.8. Chapt. 16.2. Chapt. 17.8. Chap. 17.11. Chap. 18.21. Chap. 18.8. then to say, Rome is fallen: Rome shall fall. Great hail-stones like talents shall fall upon it. It shall goe to perdition. It shall fall to destruction. It shall be cast downe like a great mil-stone into the bottome of the sea. It shall be burnt with fire.Chap. 17.16. Chap. 18.22. It shall be made desolate and naked. It shall be without inhabitants. All the Popish sort,Chap. 18.9. both high and low, shall with great mourning and lamenting bewaile the deso∣lation thereof.Chap. 16.16. Their armies shall come to Arma∣geddon.Chap. 19.28. The beast and the false prophet shall be taken, and their Captains and souldiers slain by infinite heapes, and their carcasses made meat for the fowles of the air? If all this be not plain enough, I cannot tell what can be plaine enough. True it is indeed, the holy Ghost doth not name Rome; but it is apparant by the circumstances, that all these places must needs be understood of Rome, of Romish power, and of th omish armies. For there can no other sound sense be given of them,
as all divine writers and interpreters doe af∣firme, both new and old. And therefore I conclude, that Saint John in this prophecie could not speak more plainly, except hee should have named Rome; for hee nameth Babylon; he nameth the great city which then reigned over the kings of the earth; he nameth the city situate upon seven hils; he nameth the city which had seven severall governments: And therefore out of all doubt he meaneth Rome. Well then, sith it is so, that Rome, and all Romish power and authority shall fall flat down, and come to utter destruction and desolation in this life, let all men take heed how they joyn with Rome, how they joyn with the Romish Church, and how they re∣ceive the beasts mark: for assuredly they shall all be destroyed together, both in this life and that which is to come, as wee shall hear by and by. Let all the wise men therefore, and all such as have any care of their salvation, fol∣low the wholesome counsell and advice of the holy Ghost, which saith,Chap. 18.4, 5. Go out of her my people, that yee be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues: for her sins are come up to heaven, and God hath remembred her iniquities. Our only wisdome then will be to
separate our selves from the whore of Baby∣lon, that is, from the Church of Rome, and to joyne our selves with all speed unto the Church of God; that is, the Church of the Protestants; for this shall stand and flourish, the other shall fall down and perish. But what then, shall we be sorry for the fall of Babylon,Gods people are to re∣joice in the overthrow of Rome. Chap. 18.20. and the ruine of Rome? No, no, the holy Ghost counselleth us greatly to rejoyce in her destruction and overthrow, saying, O heavens rejoyce over her, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, because God hath given you judgement on her. Wee are therefore to be so far from mourning and lamenting for the desolation of Rome, the kings, mer∣chants, mariners, and other her friends, as that it ought to be the very joy and rejoy∣cing of our hearts: For Saint John saith, that not onely the holy Angels, Prophets, Apo∣stles and Martyrs shall rejoyce at the de∣struction of Rome; but also all the Saints, and all the whole body of the Church. And therefore he saith, that after the utter over∣throw of Rome,Chap. 19.1, 2. Hee heard a great voyce of a great multitude in heaven, saying, Hallelujah, that is, praise yee the Lord; for hee hath con∣demned the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged
the bloud of his servants shed by her hand. And againe, saith Saint John, they said, Hallelu∣jah, Hallelujah, Hallelujah, thrice together, thereby expressing the great joy and thanks∣giving for the destruction and overthrow of the great whore: and even so ought all that love God, that love the Church, and that love the truth, greatly to rejoyce in the de∣struction of Rome, because this monster shall no longer oppresse the Israel of God. And sure it is, that the more zealous and godly that a man is, the more hee will rejoyce at the destruction of Popery: for a man can∣not love God and his Church, that doth not laugh in the destruction of that Antichri∣stian and bloudy kingdome. Let no man here say, This is cruelty, this is want of cha∣rity, and want of pity, to laugh in the de∣struction of any, or to rejoyce at other mens harmes. But the most wise God saith,Chap. 8.6. Re∣ward her even as shee rewarded you, and give her double according to her works; and in the cup that shee hath filled to you, fill her the double. In as much as shee glorified her selfe, and lived in pleasure, so much give yee to her torment and sorrow. And therefore I affirme, that no man ought to be moved with any compas∣sion or pitie for the overthrow of Rome:
But herein that saying of the Prophet is true:Psal. 137.9. Blessed is hee that taketh and dasheth her children against the stones. And again, Bend thy bow,Jer. 50.14. shoot at her, sare no arrowes: for shee hath sinned against the Lord. Moreover wee are to observe, that forasmuch as the Lord willeth and commandeth all men to reward Rome as she hath rewarded us, and to give her double according to her works, there∣fore we ought every one of us, as much as in him lieth, and as his calling will bear, to doe his uttermost to pull down Rome; the Ma∣gistrate by the sword, the Minister by the word, and the people by their prayers. For even Christian Kings and Princes, and all the Nobles of the earth must not be negli∣gent to fight against Rome: For herein that saying is true,Jer. 48.10. Cursed is hee that doth the work of the Lord negligently, and cursed is hee that keepeth back his sword from bloud. For this cause I doe, upon my knees, night and day most humbly and instantly intreat the God of heaven, that as he hath put into the heart of our most gracious and excellent King to hate the whore of Babylon, and to be his greatest instrument in the whole world for the weakning and overturning of Rome, and the defence of his most glorious
Gospel (which is his crowne and glory in all the Churches, and his great renown in all Christian kingdomes) so hee may con∣stantly continue, and never cease drawing out the sword of justice, till he have utterly rooted out of his dominions all the cursed crew of Popish Jebusites, and all such as have received the beasts mark, and espe∣cially the Jesuites and seminary Priests, which are the Divels brokers, the Popes a∣gents, and the King of Spaines factors in all kingdomes. Here also I do most humbly, even upon my knees, with dropping eyes, yea, if it were possible, with tears of blood, beseech and intreat the learned and reve∣rend Fathers of our Church, that they would bend all their power and authority, with all their might and maine against the Romish strumpet; and the rather, because in these daies she seemeth to make a head again, ha∣ving so many and great favourers, that she and her complices dare perk with their nebs, and very boldly and confidently prate of a toleration. Here also I doe most humbly and ear∣nestly intreate all my learned and godly brethren, the Ministers and Preachers of this Church of England, that in all their
publick teachings and private proceedings, they would make strong opposition against Rome, and Romish religion. And I beseech the God of gods, that we may all joyn to∣gether with united forces, to march on vali∣antly against the armies of Antichrist, and to spread the everlasting Gospel far and neer, to the utter overturning and beating down of this western Babylon; and that howsoe∣ver wee may amongst our selves differ in judgement in some things; yet that there might be no breach of love, nor alienation of affection amongst us, but that wee may all goe together hand in hand, and arme in arme to preach Gods everlasting truth, and to set our selves against the common adver∣saries. For if that we will not set our selves against them, yet they will be sure to set themselves against us. And thus much con∣cerning the third main point, which is the finall fall and destruction of Rome, even in this world. Now it followeth to speak of the fourth main point; which is, By whom, and when Rome shall be overthrowne. But for the better understanding of this point, concer∣ning the persons that shall overthrow Rome, wee are to observe, that Saint John descri∣beth
the whore of Babylon sitting upon a scar∣let coloured beast,Chap. 17.4. having seven heads and ten horns, whereby is meant the Roman Mo∣narchy, as hath been shewed before. After this the Angel expoundeth unto John, what the heads and horns of the beast mean, and saith, that the ten horns are ten kings,Verse 12. or king∣domes, which yet have not received a kingdome, but shall receive power as kings at an houre with the beast. The sense is, that these ten kingdomes had not received such power and authority under the Emperors, as they should under the Popes, for there was great difference in these kingdoms under the Popes, from that which they had been under the Emperors. For they received far greater power, and they carried another mind toward the Pa∣pacy, then the nations did before toward the Empire: for they did submit themselves to the Papacy for conscience and love, even as to the holy Church, which they never did to the Empire. And this is the reason why the holy Ghost saith, They had not received a kingdome, but should receive power as kings at an houre with the beast. Which is not to be under∣stood simply, but after a sort; for they had
received kingdomes under the Emperors, but not in such sort as afterward they did under the Popes. For the Roman Monar∣chy under the dominion of the Popes was in his greatest height and altitude, and the Kings of Europe grew up together with the Papacy in power, might, and dominion. And Saint John addeth,Chap. 17.13. that these ten kings or kingdomes were all of one mind, and did give their power and authority unto the beast: that is, they did with might and main labour to uphold the Babylonicall strumpet. But the Angel telleth John flatly, that the ten horns, that is, the ten kingdomes of the Em∣pire, which before had given their names, their power, and authority to the beast, to uphold her and defend her, should now in these last dayes all change their mindes, and turne against her. For, saith the An∣gel to John,Chap. 17.36. The ten hornes which thou sawest upon the beast, are they which shall hate the whore, and make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat up her flesh, and burn her with fire. Here then it doth plainly appeare, who they be that shall overthrow Rome, and by whom it shall be destroyed: to wit, by the ten kings of Europe, or kingdomes of Europe, which some very learned do reckon up to be these,
England, Scotland, Germany, France, Spaine, Denmarke, Sweveland, Poland, Russia, and Hungary.If the holy Ghost by the ten horns do not meane a definite number, that is, just ten: yet assuredly he meaneth all the king∣doms of Eu∣rope, and whatsoever else did once uphold the beast. Saint Johns words are plaine, that these kingdomes which took part with the beast, shall take against her, and pull her down: But we know, that all the king∣domes of Europe did take part with her: Therefore it followeth, that all the king∣domes of Europe shall take against her. And therefore it is very probable, that in timeIt is pro∣bable that France, Spain, and I∣taly shal for∣sake the whore. France, Spaine, and Italy shall turn against the beast. Wee know that the rest of the kingdomes are already turned against the beast, and the beast hath lost seven of his horns, the eighth, which is France, begin∣neth to be somewhat loose, and to shake a little, which if it fall off, the rest will follow after apace. The reason why the kingdoms which were subject to the Roman Empire are compared to horns, is, because that as hornes are the strength and defence of a beast, wherewith also hee pusheth down o∣ther creatures; so the strength and defence of the Roman Empire and the Papacy was in the kingdomes which were subject unto them, and took part with them; whereby also they did mightily push at other nations and kingdomes.
Moreover, we are to observe, that whereas Saint John saith, the same horns which did uphold and defend the whore, shall pull her down; it is not to be understood of the same men, but of their successours in the same kingdomes. For the king of England, Scotland, Denmarke, Polonia, and other countries, which gave their power and au∣thority unto the beast, are dead and gone. And if we respect the persons of men, those which succeed them now in these king∣domes, and pull downe the whore, are o∣ther persons; but because they succeed, and governe in these kingdomes, they are said to be those ten hornes of the beast. Then thus it is; these ten kings which now hate the harlot, are called the ten horns of the beast, not because they be any defence and strength unto him, but because they sit up∣on the same thrones of their ancesters, which did uphold and maintaine him. But this one thing is very cleer and apparant out of the interpretation of the Angel, that the same kingdomes which have maintained Popery, shall put it down, as we see already fulfilled in England, Scotland, Denmarke, and the rest which have imbraced the Gospel. And it is very likely, that the other king∣domes
which as yet have not imbraced the Gospel, shall in Gods good time imbrace it. For this seemeth unto me to be a very good argument, taken from the words of the interpreting Angel: Those ten king∣domes which have upheld Rome, shall pull downe Rome: But France, Spaine, and Italy have upheld, and doe uphold Rome: There∣fore France, Spaine, and Italy shall pull down Rome. To this may be added for confirma∣tion,Chap. 14.6. that the everlasting Gospel shall be prea∣ched in these last dayes to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. Which I un∣derstand of all the nations of Europe which were subject to the Roman Empire and the Papacy. And further, that the holy Ghost saith, that the preachers of the Gospel from Lu∣thers time, shall publish Gods truth among people, and nations, and tongues, and many kings: which I understand as before. I am not ignorant that some good Di∣vines make it doubtfull whether Rome shall be overthrown by the kings of Europe on∣ly, or by the Turk also, and the kings of the east. For mine own part, I dare not resolute∣ly determine of it, being a thing to come, but the event shall declare, and they that live
shall one day see it. It may be the Turk and the Easterne Princes may have some hand in this businesse: for the Roman Mo∣narchy did stretch farre that way when it was in his highest elevation. But that which is alledged of the drying up of the waters of Euphrates,Chap. 16.11. that the way of the kings of the East might be prepared, proveth nothing; because it is an allusion to Darius and Cyrus, which were kings of the East, and took old Ba∣bylon, by drying up the waters of Euphrates, and leading over their armies, as wee have heard before. I doe thus then resolve and conclude, that the Turke and the Easterne kings may happily have some stroke in this work:The kings of Europe shall over∣throw Rome. but it seemeth most probable unto mee, that the kings of Europe shall be the greatest agents in this action. For the words are plain, that the kings of the earth which sometimes were subject to that monstrous beast, should now at last shake off the yoke of her servitude, and withdraw the o∣bedience of their subjects from her, and shall hate and abhor the harlot of Rome, and should make her desolate, by withdrawing their sub∣jects from her obedience; and naked, by spoyling her of her treasures; and shall eat her flesh,Chap. 17.1. and tear her in pieces, for very hatred; and
burn her with fire, that is, bring her to utter destruction. So that she which before at her pleasure might command all princes to begin war, to cease from war, to defend her quarrels, and to annoy her enemies, now is glad to flatter a few seduced Princes to take her part, that shee be not utterly forsaken of all men whatsoever: Or else to practise by treason and treacherie, suborning the Jesuites, those rogues and vagabonds, to stirre up tumults amongst the people, and to trouble godly estates and common∣wealths that despise her dominion; but as∣suredly without all hope ever to recover her ancient tyranny. But here it may be ob∣jected, that the preaching of the Gospel is the greatest and strongest meanes to o∣verthrow Babylon. And therefore how can it be done by the Christian Princes? I answer, that it is true indeed, that of all o∣ther meanes, the Gospel is the strongest; but the thing is this: First, the Gospel be∣ing set abroach, shall detect and discover the whore of Rome, and all her abominable do∣ctrine and filthinesse, which the Christian Princes espying, shall renounce her, make warre upon her, and slay in the field thou∣sand
thousands of her souldiers, as we heard before. And hitherto concerning the per∣sons that shall overthrow Rome. Now it followeth to speak of the time when it shall be destroyed: which of all the rest is a thing most hard to be decided. For the holy Ghost saith,Job 24.1. Why should not the times be hid of the Almighty; so as those which know him, should not fore see the times appointed of him?Dan. 12.9. And againe, the words are closed and sealed up, untill the time determined. And a∣gaine,Acts 1.7. It is not for you to know the times or the seasons which the Father hath put into his owne power. Yet even in this point I will, by Gods assistance, set downe so much as is revealed, and so much as God hath given me to see. First, I doe confesse, that God in his word hath set downe a just period, and precise determination of all the greatest afflictions and persecutions that ever came to his Church before the coming of his Sonne in the flesh, for the comfort thereof; as that of Egypt, after the expiration of four hundred and thirty yeers: that of Babylon, after the date of seventy yeers:Dan. 8. that of the Medes and Persians, after the determination of an hundred and thirty yeers: that of Alexan∣ders state,Dan. 11. after six yeers: that of Magog and
Egypt, after 249 yeers. So likewise that of Christs death and resurrection after seventy sevens, or seventy weekes, which make 490. yeers,Dan. 9.42. as the Angel Gabriel fore∣told unto the Prophet Daniel. But concer∣ning the just period and precise determina∣tions of the persecutions of the Church since Christ, by the Roman Empire and the Papa∣cy, we find not the like set down: and here∣of there may be two reasons yeelded. First, because the Church of the Jewes was not under so cleer and precious promises as wee are, therefore it was needfull, for the better strengthening of their hope, and comfort in afflictions, that they should know the very time determined: but because the Church of the Christians liveth under most cleer and comfortable promises of delive∣rance, therefore God according to his deep wisdome would have our faith exercised in an assured expectation of the accom∣plishment thereof, though the precise time be concealed. Another reason may be this: the utter overthrow of Rome falleth out to be but a little before the coming of Christ to judgement, as appeareth in this Prophe∣cie. Now then, if we knew the day or yeer certainly when Rome should fall finally, it
would give us too much light unto the knowledge of the last day, which God in great wisdome hath of purpose hid from the knowledge of all men, yea, and of Angels. I know right well, that a certain learned Writer doth precisely determine the utter destruction of Rome to fall out in the yeer of our Lord 1639.Napier in Apoc. 14. pag. 183. But by the favour of so excellent a man be it spoken, I see no suffi∣cient ground thereof. But touching this matter, of the time of Romes finall fall, I will deliver mine opinion, and my reasons, sub∣mitting my selfe to the judgement of the learned: for I would be loth in this or any other thing to goe beyond my compasse, or passe the bounds of modesty and humility, and therefore do refer all to be tried by the shekel of the sanctuary. I doe therefore thus judge, that the ut∣ter overthrow of Rome shall be in this age, I mean within the age of man: my rea∣son is this: Wee in this age live under the opening of the seventh seale, the blowing of the sixth trumpet, and the powring forth of the sixth viall. For the first, it is manifest, because the opening of the seventh seale containeth all things that shall fall out to the end of the world: as
hath been proved and shewed before. For the blowing of the sixth trumpet, that is also plaine, because under the blowing thereof the little Book was opened,Chap. . and the Gospel preached, as wee see in this age.Chap. 10.2, 10, 11. For the powring downe of the sixth viall of Gods wrath, that also is most cleer, because thereupon the great river Euphra∣tes dryeth up, and the Jesuites are sent out to solicite the kings of the earth to battell against the Church, as wee see fulfilled in these our dayes. Then I reason thus;Chap. 14 6, 8. Rome must fall downe finally in that age wherein the little Book is opened, and the everla∣sting Gospel preached: But in this age the little Book is opened, and the everlasting Gospel preached: Therefore in this age Rome must fall downe finally. And again, I reason thus:Chap. 16.16. Rome must fall down final∣ly in that age wherein the river Euphrates, that is, the fortification of Rome dryeth up, and the Jesuites are sent forth to stop the leak thereof: But all this falleth our in this age, as wee see with our eyes: Therefore in this age Rome shall fall downe finally.It is very probable that Rome shall fall fi∣nally in this age. The reason of the proposition is, for in this age the Popish armies shall come to Arma∣geddon.
Moreover, this I say, and not I, but the Lord, when the seventh Angel bloweth the seventh trumpet, then cometh the end of the world: But the sixth Angel hath soun∣ded the sixth trumpet long agoe, as appea∣reth by the effects: Therefore it cannot be long ere the seventh Angel blow: But Rome must fall downe finally before the seventh Angel blow, as hath been shewed before: Therefore the utter fall of Rome cannot be long deferred. I do not determine either of day, moneth, or yeer, because it is not revealed. But I ghess at an age, because the holy Ghost pointeth us unto an agent. If any man see further I will easily yeeld unto him, & thank God for light.But all these things I set downe for the comfort of Gods Church, not desiring to understand above that which is meet to un∣derstand: but to understand according to so∣briety. Now it resteth to speake of the last main point, which is the causes of Romes utter ru∣ine and overthrow: which first of all are set down foure severall times for failing,Chap. 14.8. Chap. 18.3. Chap. 19.3. Chap. 17.2. to be because she made all nations drunk with the wine of the wrath of her fornication. They which outwardly make others drunk, or commit fornication with others,
are worthy to be severely punished. How much sorer punishment are they worthy of which doe the same spiritually? and therefore wo be to Rome. Another cause of the destruction of Rome,Chap. 16.6. Chap. 18.24. The causes of Romes ut∣ter downfall. is, for that she hath shed the bloud of all the Prophets, Martyrs, and Saints, as it is writ∣ten, In thee was found the bloud of the Pro∣phets, and of the Saints, and of all that were slaine upon the earth. What is hee worthy to have that is a most cruel bloud-sucker? nay, what is hee worthy to have that shall mur∣ther a kings children? yea, that shall mur∣ther his eldest son, and heir apparant to the crown? But Rome hath murthered thousands of the King of heavens children: yea, Rome hath murthered the great heire of heaven and earth, I meane, the very Son of God:Chap. 11.8. (for Christ was put to death by the Roman power and authority, and by a Roman Judge, as before hath been shewed:) Ther∣fore let all men judge what Rome is wor∣thy to have. Moreover, Saint John telleth us,Chap. 18.23. that Rome with her inchantments hath decei∣ved all nations. Then let the matter be refer∣red to the judgment of any indifferent man, to determine and set downe what punish∣ment
sorcerers and inchanters are worthy of; especially spirituall sorcerers and in∣chanters. Besides all this, the holy Ghost saith,Chap. 18.. that Rome is the habitation of Divels, and the hold of all foule spirits, and a cage of e∣very unclean and hatefull bird. What thinke you is like to come of an habitation of Di∣vels? What trow yee will be the end of a shoale of foule fiends, and a company of most ugly monstrous hel-cats? What is like to become of a cage of howlets, ra∣vens and vultures; yea, a nest of vipers, toads, snakes, adders, cockatrices, and all the most stinging serpents, and venemous vermine in the world? What will be the end of pild Priests, filthy Friers, mangy Monks, rogning Jesuites? Are not these a cage of unclean birds? What do they study? what do they plot? what doe they practise every day, but seditions, perjuries, murthers, conspiracies, treacheries, and all manner of villanies? If I had no other reasons to perswade me that Rome shall fall, and come to a miserable end, yet this onely would make mee so to think, that these villanous Jesuites do teach and conclude in their cursed conventicles, that it is not only lawfull, but also merito∣rious, to murther any Christian Prince that
is not of their catholick religion: Oh mon∣strous villains! O most hideous hel-hounds! have not these monsters suborned divers de∣sperate caitifs to embrue their hands in the bloud of Christian Princes? How many have been their plots? How desperate have been their practices to murther and poyson our late Queen Elisabeth, the French King, and our most gracious and late Soveraigne King James, and other Christian Princes? But can such proceedings prosper? can such courses be blessed? can a man be established by iniquity? No, no, let them know for a certainty, that God will crosse and curse all such divelish proceedings, as hitherto hee hath done, his most holy name be praised. But if any man list to know more of the practices and proceedings of Jesuits, let him read M. Doctor Sutcliffe his answer to Par∣sons Ward-word, a book worthy to be read and known of all men. But now to grow to a conclusion of this point, and to wind up to∣gether all the reasons and causes of Romes ruine; thus I do determine, that forasmuch as Rome is the great whore,Chapt. 1.17.2. with whom have committed fornication the kings of the earth: forasmuch as Rome hath made all nations drunk with the wine of her fornication: forasmuch as
Rome hath deceived all nations with her in∣chantments: forasmuch as Rome is a den of divels, and a cage of unclean birds: forasmuch as Rome hath shed the bloud of the Apostles,Num. 14.24. Martyrs, and Saints: forasmuch as Rome hath murthered the Son of God; therefore it shall at last come to most miserable de∣struction, being that Chittim which in the end must needs perish; for what punish∣ment, what paine, what torture what tor∣ment can be enough for this damnable whore, which hath committed such execra∣ble and most outragious villanies? Be it therefore known unto all men by these pre∣sents, that Rome for all her monstrous and prodigious sins, shall fall still more and more, and come to a fearfull destruction, even in this life. But some man may say, What shall become of Rome, and of all her friends after this life?Ch. 14.9, 10, 11. Saint John answer∣eth, that if any man worship the beast and his i∣mage, and receive his mark in his forehead, or on his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and hee shall be tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb. And the smoke of their tor∣ment shall ascend, and they shall have no rest day nor night which worship the beast, &c. Here
is sentence of eternall damnation passed upon all the friends of Rome. O that all Pa∣pists would consider this in time, and think with themselves, what a wofull thing it is to be a Papist, for they and their kingdome must goe down in this life, and in the life to come they must be tormented in hell-fire for ever. For Saint John saith flatly, that all Papists shall be cast into the great wine-presse of the wrath of God,Chap. 14.20. where they shall be strained and tryed till bloud come out of the wine-presse, unto the horses bridles, by the space of a thou∣sand and six hundred furlongs. And again hee saith,Chap. 19.20. that the beast and the false prophet were taken alive, and cast into a lake of fire burning with brimstone. Let all men therefore take heed how they joyn with the Papists, for wee see what shall be their end, both in this life and the life to come. Therefore let all Gods people come out of Babylon, and ha∣sten out of Sodom, lest they be wound up in their judgements. Let all wise men practise the policie of the Gibeonites, who when they saw that Joshua did so mightily prevaile a∣gainst the Canaanites, and beate downe all before him, did very politickly provide for their owne safety, and by subtill means en∣ter into league with Joshua and the Israel
of God. So let all that have any care of their owne salvation, speedily forsake Babylon, which otherwise will fall upon their heads; and flye to Zion, which shall stand fast for evermore. And thus having reduced all the five following Chapters, to prove these fore∣said points, I will proceed unto the twen∣tieth Chapter: for there is almost nothing of any moment or difficulty in the 15, 16, 17, 18, and 19 Chapters, but it hath been al∣ready opened and expounded. CHAP. XX. SAint John having in the former Chapters plainly and plentifully set down the ut∣ter overthrow both of the beast and false prophet, that is, the Roman Empire and the Papacy, doth now in this Chapter set forth the condemnation of the Dragon, their grand Captain, which set them all on work. For there hath as yet been no motion of him, which hath been the beginner and rai∣ser up of the rest, and the great worker of all mischiefe; therefore now cometh his judgment and condemnation. Now because he hath been a more generall worker, and his mischiefe hath extended larger then the
kingdome of Antichrist, therefore in this twentieth chapter there is an history of him set forth by it self: First, how he seduced the nations before the coming of Christ: after∣ward, how Christ at his coming bindeth him by the light of his Gospel from seducing the nations, and so holdeth him shut up for the space of a thousand yeeres, in which the Church did greatly flourish, and many were raised up unto the spirituall life. But when the thousand yeers were expired, Satan was let loose, and went forth again to seduce, and by the great Antichrist and the Turk, ga∣thered innumerable multitudes into his ar∣mies to fight against the Church, which ar∣mies are called Gog and Magog. But they are all overcome and destroy∣ed, and that old Serpent himselfe is caught, and together with his instruments, the beast and the false prophet, is cast into hell-fire, to be tormented for ever. And this is the summe and principall drift of this Chapter. It containeth five principall things, as it were five parts thereof. The first is the binding and chaining up of Satan by our Lord Jesus,Verses 1, 2, 3. for the space of a thousand yeers.
Ver. 4, 5, 6.The second is, the flourishing of the Church during the time of Satans captivity. Verses 7, 8, 9.The third is the loosing of Satan after the thousand yeers expired, and the woful effects thereof. Verse 10.The fourth is, the casting of the Divell in∣to a lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and false prophet were. Vers. 11, &c.The fifth is a glorious description of the last judgment, wherein every man shall be judged according to his works. The TEXT. Verse 1.ANd I saw an Angel come down from hea∣ven, having the key of the bottomlesse pit, and a great chain in his hand. Verse 2.And he took the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Divell and Satan, and bound him a thou∣sand yeers. Verse 3.And cast him into the bottomlesse pit, and hee shut him up, and sealed the door upon him, that hee should deceive the people no more till the thou∣sand yeers were fulfilled: so after that he must be loosed for a little season. This Angel here spoken of, is our Lord Jesus, who is therefore said to have the key of the bottomless pit, because he hath power
and authority over hell and death, as we have heard before. By the chain in his hand is meant the do∣ctrine of the Gospel. The time when Satan was thus taken and bound, was when Christ first preached the Gospel, and his Apostles after him, to all nations. The cause why he was bound and chained up, was for that he had a long time seduced all nations, and reigned as king and lord over the Gentiles, and greatly seduced the Jewes also. The time of his imprisonment is set down to be a thousand yeers; that is, all the time from the preaching of Christ and his Apo∣stles, untill Gregory the seventh, and other monstrous Popes, which did let Satan loose againe. Which space of time is ghessed by the learned, to be a thousand yeers, or there∣abouts. But here it is to be observed, that this binding of Satan is not to be taken sim∣ply and absolutely, as though Satan was so bound and chained up for this thousand yeers, that he could not seduce at all, or do no mischiefe at all after the preaching of the Gospel by Christ and his Apostles, I say, this is not to be taken simply, but after a
sort; that is, that he could not so generally and universally seduce all nations, as hee had in former time, before the coming of Christ. For otherwise, it is well knowne, that even after Christs time, he did greatly persecute the Church, bring in many errors and heresies, and harden and blinde many mens hearts: but yet all this was nothing, in comparison of that which hee had wrought in former ages, when he was even as it were the god of the world, and the Gentiles worshipped him as god, as the A∣postle teacheth,1 Cor. 10. That all the worship of the heathen nations was the worship of Divels. And againe,Acts 14.16. That God in times past suffered all the Gentiles to walke in their owne wayes: And then was Satan a great prince indeed. But now cometh a chaine for him: For Christ preacheth the Gospel, and sendeth forth his Disciples with power, and there∣upon saith,Luke 18.10. I saw Satan fall downe like light∣ning: For the preaching of the Gospel beateth downe the kingdome of Satan and sinne. Moreover, it is to be noted, that not∣withstanding all Satans power and might, craft, and subtilty, yet this Angel which hath the key of the bottomlesse pit, doth
apprehend him, and shut him up, and seale the doore upon him: that hee cannot get abroad to seduce so generally as in former time. But Saint John saith, that after a thousand yeers, hee must be loosed for a little season; that is, the time wherein the great Antichrist should beare the sway: which was some four or five hundred yeers. For the Gospel did prevaile in some measure in the world, a thousand yeers after Christ, and the prin∣ciples and grounds of true religion conti∣nued in the Church untill the first loosing of Satan, though with many blots, corrupti∣ons, and abuses. For after the first 600 yeers, the cleer sincerity of the truth was much dimmed with errors and heresies; but yet the main grounds did remain till the full expi∣ration of the thousand yeers. Now wee know that the Gospel hath been preached in these last dayes above threescore yeeres. Therefore it followeth, that the strength of Popery continued not much above five hun∣dred yeers; which here the holy Ghost for our comfort calleth a little season: of which wee have heard before,Chap. 11.2. and therefore I doe here omit it. And I saw seats, and them that sate upon them,Verse 4.
and judgement was given unto them: and I saw the soules of them that were behead∣ed for the witnesse of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which did not worship the beast, neither his image, neither had taken his mark upon their foreheads, or on their hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thou∣sand yeer. Verse 5.But the rest of the dead men shall not live again untill the thousand yeers be finished: this is the first resurrection. Verse 6.Blessed and holy is hee that hath part in the first resurrection: for on such the second death hath no power; but they shall be the Priests of God, and of Christ and shall reign with him a thou∣sand yeers. Here now is set forth the estate of the Church militant, for the space of the thou∣sand yeeres wherein Satan was chained up. For it is said here, that the Church did grow and flourish; yea, and greatly exercise her power and authority during the time. And therefore Saint John saith, that he saw seats, and they sate upon them, and judgement was gi∣ven unto them. Whereby hee meaneth, that the Apostles and their successours had their chairs, seates, and consistories, wherein they did both preach the word, and execute the
Churches censures; as the Scribes and Pha∣risees before did sit in the chaire of Moses: and I take it, the latter part of the fourth verse is to be referred to the first clause, to wit, that the Church did live and reigne with Christ a thousand yeeres: Which is not to be understood of the Church triumphant, as some do take it and all the rest of the fourth verse; but of the flourishing estate of the Church militant during the time of Satans captivity: for all the faithfull do after a sort live and reigne with Christ, even here in the earth, when they overcome the world by faith, and subdue Satan and sin by the pow∣er of grace. Now where it is said, that John saw the soules of them that were beheaded for the wit∣nesse of Jesus, &c. It is to be understood of those, which in the time of the persecu∣ting Empire, and growing of the Papacie, were slaine for the truth. For the second beast, which is the dominion of Popes, reign∣ed not in those thousand yeers, in the which Satan was bound, but yet did grow by de∣grees towards their height, and used great tyranny against the servants of God before Satans full loosing. The Chiliasts or Millinaries doe fondly
gather from this Scripture, that after the o∣verthow of Antichrist, the Lord Jesus would come and reigne with the faithfull here a thousand yeers upon the earth, and that in this time that Christ did so reigne as a great and glorious King upon the earth, his subjects should enjoy all maner of earthly pleasures and delights. This foolish error is confuted by the words that follow in the text, as wee shall see afterwards. Whereas hee saith, The rest of the dead shall not live again: It is to be understood of such as were spiritually dead, that is, such as de∣spised the Gospel which was preached those thousand yeers, and were not thereby re∣vived and quickned unto eternall life; but did still remain as men dead in sinnes and trespasses. Therefore the meaning of Saint John is, that as in the thousand yeers many that heard Christ and his Apostles, and their suc∣cessors, were raised up from the death of sin to the life of righteousnesse; so many others were not quickened by their doctrine, but still dwelt in their sinnes, whom hee cal∣leth the rest of the dead: and hee saith, These shall not live again; meaning the life of God, or the life of grace. And whereas he addeth,
untill the thousand yeeres be finished, hee mea∣neth never, or not at all, for so the word untill is often taken in the Scriptures: and it is sure, that after the expiration of the thousand yeers, they did not live the life of God, and the life of the Spirit. For then the Divell was let loose upon the world, to work his pleasure, and to seduce with all effi∣cacy of error and iniquity. Whereas it is said, This is the first resurre∣ction; hee meaneth the rising from sin, to the life of righteousnesse, which was in the thousand yeeres of the Gospels preaching, and therefore he addeth, that he is blessed that hath part in the first resurrection, &c. and saith, that all such shall reigne with Christ a thousand yeers. Which is meant of the reigne of the faithfull even upon earth for the space of the thousand yeers in which Satan was bound: but yet excludeth not their eternall glory in the heavens. And when the thousand yeers are expired,Vers. 7.8. Satan shall be loosed out of his prison. And shall goe out to deceive the people which are in the foure corners of the earth, even Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battell, whose number is as the sand of the sea.
Verse 9.And they went up unto the plain of the earth, and they compassed the tents of the Saints a∣bout, and the beloved city: But fire came downe from God out of heaven, and devoured them. Now Saint John telleth us, that after the determination of a thousand yeares, Satan shall be let loose upon the world, for their unthankfullnesse, and contempt of the Gos∣pel, to seduce and deceive, even as much as ever he did. No marvaile therefore, that the two great and monstrous Heresies of Popery and Mahometry, did now begin mightily to grow and increase in the world. For what other thing can be looked for after this set∣ting loose of Satan? But we are to observe, that as Satan was bound by degrees, through the Ministry of Christ, and his Apostles, and in their imme∣diate successors; so also he was loosed by de∣grees, by the prevailing of Heresies, till the great Antichrist was hatched, and brought into the possession of his cursed Chaire. For Satan was not fully loosed, till the yeare of our Lord 998. At what time Silvester the se∣cond came to be Pope, who was in league with the Divell. Stories doe report that at his death he called for the Cardinals, and
confessed that hee had familiarity with the Divell, and how hee had given himself unto him body and soule, so that he might come to the Papall dignity. After him succeeded sundry other Popes, which were notorious monsters, some of them murtherers, some poysoners, some sor∣cerers, some conjurers; by whom the Divell was fully loosed, all light of the Gospel and rue religion being in a manner cleane put out, and most abominable idolatry, and all manner of villany spreading over the face of the earth, and hereof Saint John saith, that Satan being fully loosed, hee went forth to deceive the people which were in the foure corners of the arth, even Gog and Magog, &c. This seducing by Satan here spoken of, is the same with hat which is spoken chap. 13. onely this ex∣epted, that this of Gog and Magog is more generall. Wee read there, how all nations, indreds and tongues were made to worship he image of the beast, and to receive his mark; but that is to be extended no further hen to those kingdoms which were subject o the Papacy. But here, by these armies of Gog and Ma∣og, are understood all the chiefe enemies f the Church in these last dayes, since the
loosing of Satan, both open and secret, both Turk and Pope; for the Turk is an open enemy, the Pope a more close enemy: Gog signifieth covered, Magog uncovered, whereby is noted the Turk: For the Pope cometh co∣vered under the name of Christ, and Christs Vicar, Peters successor, &c. But the Turk cometh uncovered, for hee openly denyeth and impugneth Christ. Moreover, the names of Gog and Magog are here set downe, to note of what coun∣tries these chiefe enemies should spring; to wit, out of Scythia, Syria, Arabia, Italy, and Spaine; for Magog was the son of Japheth, Gen. 10. ver. 2. of whom came the Scythians. Gog was the name of a great Captaine in the lesser Asia, which built a city, and na∣med it after his own name, Gogkartah; that is the city of Gog: and it is put in the Pro∣phecie of Ezekiel for the whole region of the lesser Asia, and Syria; whereby the Pro∣phet did fore-tell, that the great enemies of the Church should arise out of those coasts. And in very truth they did; for out of Egypt, Scythia, Syria, and the lesser Asia did spring up Ptolomeus, Seleucus, Antigonus, Cassan∣der, and the rest of Alexanders successors, which vexed and oppressed the Jewes by the
space of 294. yeers, even untill the coming of the Messias, at what time the divided Greek Empire was overthrown, and transla∣ted to the Romans. Furthermore, it is to be noted, that the Prophet Ezekiel saith, That Gog is the chiefe Prince of Mesech and Tubal: By Mesech he meaneth Arabia; and by Tubal, Italy and Spaine: noting thereby the countries and kingdomes from whence the great perse∣cuters of the Church, from the return out of the captivity of Babylon untill the com∣ing of the Messias, should arise: for assured∣ly their enemies were collected of divers nations but served chiefly under the Princes of Asia the lesser, of Syria, and of Scythia. Now then to conclude, Gog and Magog in E∣zekiel, are put for the Princes of those coun∣tries which were the chiefe Captains in ga∣thering great and mighty armies unto battel against the children of Israel, after they were come out of the captivity of Babylon. And the Prophet there, in one summe, under the armies of Gog and Magog comprehendeth all the enemies that fought against them from time to time, after the captivity, unto the coming of Christ. And now for the applica∣tion of this unto the enemies of the Church
under the Gospel, wee must first note, that through this booke, the figures and phrases of speech are taken out of the Law and the Prophets. Now therefore, when the Lord would set forth in one summe all the ene∣mies of the Church, which Satan mustereth after the time of his loosing out of prison, before the coming of Christ to judgment; there is no one place more fit to set forth all these armies, then those armies of Gog and Magog: and therefore the names, even Gog and Magog are here brought in, to set forth these huge armies of the Turk, and of the Pope, and of all the enemies of the Church in these last dayes, which should gather themselves to battell, being in num∣ber as the sand of the sea, as Saint John saith, yea, did cover the whole face of the earth with their multitudes, and compasse the tents of the Saints about, and the beloved citie: that is, did make warre against the Church and people of God, which, in comparison of them, were but as a few tents, or some lit∣tle citie. But mark what followeth, and consider the issue of the battell: The ho∣ly Ghost saith expressely, that fire came downe from God out of heaven, and devoured them: which doth plainely shew, that the
armies of Gog and Magog, though never so huge, shall be destroyed by the fire of Gods wrath. Now from this I gather, that as the armies of the Pope shall goe downe still more and more, as formerly hath been shewed, and as experience in many yeeres good successe, both in Ireland, Netherland, and against Spain also, hath partly proved (Gods most holy Name be praised:) so also the armies of the Turk shall be overthrown, so far forth as they fight against the true Church; or at least be so kept back, that they shall not be able to compasse the tents of the Saints, as we see and feel this day, God be thanked. And the Divel that deceived them,Verse 10. was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and false prophet are and shall be tormented, even day and night for evermore. Here is set down the Divels doom; to wit, that he shall be cast down into the infernall pit, as well worthy, both for his seducing all nations, and stirring up the armies of Gog and Magog against the Church, even to roo it up, if it were possible. Therefore Saint John telleth us, that foras∣much as hee is the authour of all mischiefe, and he that hath set all the rest a work, there∣fore
both hee and his instruments, the beast and the false Prophet, Gog and Magog, shall all drink of the same cup of Gods eternall wrath, and be all thrown down together in∣to one close prison, which is that gaping gulfe, and infernall lake that burneth with fire and brimstone for ever. Lo then what shall be the end of the Di∣vell, the Turk, the Pope, the Emperour, the King of Spain, the Cardinals, and all o∣ther the Divels instruments, which here on earth have persecuted the Church, and com∣passed the tents of the Saints, and the belo∣ved city. Now after all this, in the five last verses, Saint John entreth into a lively and cleere description of the last judgment; first, no∣ting the terror and majesty of the Judge himself,Verse 11. in this, that from his face both heaven and earth fled away: that is, no creature shall be able to endure his angry countenance in that day: and yet withall setting downe the purity and uprightnesse of his judgment, and judgment-seat, calling it a white Throne. And after this, the generall citing and perso∣nall appearing of all men before him, of what degree estate, or condition soever: For both death and hell,Verse 13. sea and grave did deliver up
their dead, and all without exception came to judgement, and the bookes of their consci∣ences were opened (for every mans work is ingraven upon his conscience, as it were in letters of brasse, or with the point of a diamond, as the Prophet speaketh,Jer. 17.2. Verse 12.) And they were judg∣ed of those things which were written in the books, according to their works, and according to the te∣stimony of their own consciences.Verse 14. And death and hell, that is, all the heires of death and hell, even all the society of reprobates, both Pa∣pists, Atheists, and all unbeleevers, yea, who∣soever were not found written in the book of life,Verse 15. were cast into the lake of fire, which is the second death. Now here I would have it diligently observed, that the holy Ghost hath three se∣verall times in this book described the last judgment; to wit, in the latter end of the eleventh chapter, in the latter end of the fourteenth chapter, and now in the latter end of this chapter. And moreover, I would have the order and causes of these descripti∣ons well weighed: For in the eleventh chap∣ter, having before described the kingdome of the Pope and the Turk, with their over∣throw, and also the preaching and prevai∣ling of the Gospel in these last dayes, hee cometh to describe the last judgement: In
the fourteenth chapter, having set downe, that the everlasting Gospel should bee plentifully preached in this last age, and the overthrow of Babylon immediately following, forth∣with hee proceedeth to the description of the last day: In this chapter, having be∣fore concluded of the utter overthrow of Rome, and of the beast and false prophet, of Gog and Magog, and all adversary pow∣er, at length he proceedeth to this descripti∣on of Christs second coming, which wee have heard of. And out of all this I do ga∣ther, that the utter overthrow of the Pope, and all his adherents shall be in this life, a little before the coming of Christ to judg∣ment. CHAP. XXI. AS wee have heard before the utter o∣verthrow of the beast, and the false prophet, and all their adherents; and also of the everlasting condemnation of the Dra∣gon, that old Serpent, which set them all a∣work: So now in this chapter we are to hear of that most happy and blessed estate which the faithfull shall dwell in for evermore: so that the maine drift of this chapter is most
fully to describe that infinite glory and end∣lesse felicity to the which all the 144000, that is, all the elect of God shall be advan∣ced, when both the beast, and all that have received his mark, shall be cast downe into the infernall lake. This chapter may very fitly be divided in∣to four parts. The first is,Verse 1. a description of the renovati∣on of the world, and the restauration of the creature. The second is,Ver. 2, 3, 4. a laying forth of the most glorious estate of the Church, when it shall be freed from all misery. The third is,Vers. 5, 6, 7, 8. a protestation from God himselfe concerning the renovation of all things, the felicitie of the elect, and the endlesse paine and torment of all repro∣bates. The fourth is,Ver. 9, 10.11, 12, 13, 14, &c. a lively description of the very kingdom of God, and the unspeakable joyes of heaven under the figure of a great city, called the holy Jerusalem: which citie is here most gloriously described in her walles, gates, foundations, streets, height, length, bredth, brightnesse, matter, forme, persons, and inhabitants.
The TEXT. Verse 1.AND I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea. Verse 2.And I John saw the holy city new Jerusalem come downe from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband. Verse 3.And I heard a great voice out of heaven, say∣ing, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and hee will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himselfe shall be their God. Verse 4.And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, nei∣ther sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more paine: For the first things are passed. By a new heaven and a new earth, is meant the renewed estate of heaven and earth af∣ter this life, in their quality, not in their substance. For wee do beleeve according to the Scripture, that this visible heaven, and this visible earth shall continue for ever, as touching their matter and substance; but shall be greatly altered and changed in con∣dition and quality:1 Pet. 3. For Saint Peter saith, Wee look for new heavens, and a new earth, ac∣cording
to his promise, wherein dwelleth righ∣teousnesse; that is, such heavens, and such an earth, as is free from all corruption and sin. Which thing also the Apostle Saint Paul doth plainly teach, saying,Rom. 8.19. that the creature doth fervently expect, when the sonnes of God shall be revealed: that is, when Gods children shall be made known to be as they are, the very heires of infinite glory, which in this life doth not appear. And hee yeelded two reasons of this desire of the creature; one is, because in the meane time it is subject to vanity and corruption: the other is, that then it shall be free from both. And for this cause the Apostle saith, that the creature groaneth with us and earnestly desireth and long∣eth after that day wherein it shall be set free from the bondage of corruption,Rom. 8. and redintegrated and restored to that pristine estate where∣in it was before the fall. But whether this is to be understood of heaven and earth onely, or of heaven and earth with their ad∣juncts and particular creatures, I will not here goe about to discusse: howbeit, I doe greatly incline to their opinion, which hold, that heaven and earth, with all their furni∣ture, being redintegrated and restored to their first estate, shall remaine for ever, to
set forth the glory of the Creator, and for that use of glorified men which now the Angels have of them. Chap. 4.6. Chap. 8.8. Chap. 13.2.Now whereas Saint John added, that there shall be no more sea: Hee meaneth that there shall be no more any troublesome and con∣fused estate of this world, no more broyles, waves, tempests, and storms, as it falleth out in this life: For the word sea is so taken twice or thrice before. By the holy city, new Jerusalem, hee mea∣neth the Church triumphant, which there∣fore it is said to come downe from God out of heaven,Verse 2. because it hath all his newnesse and holinesse from God, and from heaven, whereby it is now prepared and made rea∣dy to be married unto Christ, even as a Bride tricked and trimmed up for her Husband. And for this cause Saint John heareth a voice from heaven,Verse 3. saying, Behold, the Taber∣nacle of God is with men, and hee will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and hee will be their God: Meaning thereby, that Je∣sus Christ will keep house with his glorified Spouse, and be at bed and boord with her for ever in the heavens, at what time shee shall be freed from all teares,Verse 4. woe, and misery, as the next verse declareth, yeelding also a
reason hereof, which is, that the first things are passed; that is, the state wherein the world is now, being subject to many af∣flictions, temptations, vanities, and corrup∣tions. And hee that sate upon the Throne said,Verse 5. Be∣hold, I make all things new. And he said un∣to mee, Write: for these words are faithfull and true. And hee said unto mee, It is done:Verse 6. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give to him that is athirst, of the well of the water of life freely. Hee that overcometh shall inherit all things,Verse 7. and I will be his God, and hee shall be my Sonne. But the fearfull, and unbeleeving,Verse 8. and the abo∣minable, and murtherers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and lyers, shall have their parts in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Here the omnipotent God, which sitteth upon the most glorious throne, doth protest, that hee will make all things new; that is, restore the world to that excellent estate wherein it was before Adams fall; and his elect to a state and condition farre more ex∣cellent
in heaven: for the greater certain∣ty and assurance of it, willeth and comman∣deth John to write it,Verse 5. and record it as a thing most certaine and infallible, and to set it downe as a thing already done. For things to come, which are decreed in the councell of God, are as certaine as if they were past: for God cannot erre, alter, nor change, and therefore he saith, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the unchangeable and immutable God:Verse 6. And addeth, that hee will give freely to every one that is athirst of the well of the water of life; that is, without all regard of our deserts, hee will give to every one, that earnestly seeketh after heaven and heavenly things, his fill thereof. And more∣over,Verse 7. that whosoever overcometh in the spiri∣tuall battell shall have the full fruition of all good things, both in this life and the life to come, as having speciall right and interest therein through Christ, God being his Father, and hee his Sonne and heire. But on the con∣trary, hee willeth it to be written and re∣corded as a thing most certain and sure, that all reprobates, all atheists, worldlings, and all unbeleevers shall have their part and portion in the lake which burneth with sure and brimstone for ever.Verse 8.
And there came unto mee one of the seven Angels which had the seven vials full of the seven plagues, and talked with mee,Verse 9. say∣ing, I will shew thee the Bride, the Lambs Wife. And hee carryed me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain,Verse 10. and showed me that great citie, that holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God. Having the glory of God,Verse 11. and her shining was like unto a stone most precious, as a jasper stone, cleer as crystall. Here one of the Angels mentioned in the sixteenth chapter, which had a viall full of Gods wrath, talketh with S. John, and telleth him, that hee will shew him the Bride, the Lambs Wife; that is, the trium∣phant Church in her glorified estate, being united and married unto Christ in the king∣dome of glory. And therefore Saint John saith, that this Angel carryed him away in the spirit to a great and high mountaine, and shewed him that great citie, holy Jerusalem, &c. We read in the seventeenth chapter, that when this Angel shewed John the whore of Baby∣lon, hee carried him away into the wildernesse in the spirit: because the whore of Babylon
should make the Church barren and deso∣late, as the wildernesse. But now that hee is to shew him the Spouse of Christ in her glory, and to describe the everlasting Je∣rusalem, hee carryeth him in the spirit unto a very high mountaine, that hee might take a sight of it, as Moses was carryed up to the top of mount Nebo, that from thence hee might take a view of the holy land. Which teacheth, that none can take a right view of heaven and heavenly things, but only such as flie an high pitch, and mount far above this earth in holy affections, and heavenly con∣templation. Moreover, Saint John telleth us, that as soon as hee tooke a sight of this new Jeru∣salem (farre passing all Sinai's sights) forth∣with hee espyed in it the very glory of God. If hee had said, hee had espyed the glory of an Angel, it had been more: But that hee espyeth the very glory of God, it is most of all. For who can conceive or expresse what the glory of God is, being infinite? The Apostle saith, that God dwelleth in unaccessi∣ble light, or such light as none can approach unto. Then this is one word for all touching the beauty and super-excellency of the new
Jerusalem, that it comprehendeth in it the very glory of God: but yet for amplifica∣tions sake, it is compared to a Jasper stone, for never-fading greennesse: and to a Crystal stone, for bright shining and glittering for ever. And had a great wall and high,Verse 12. and had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve Angels, and the names written, which are the twelve tribes of the cheldren of Israel. On the East-side there were three gates,Verse 13. and on the North-side three gates, on the South-side three gates, and on the West-side three gates. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations,Verse 14. and in them the names of the Lambes twelve Apostles. Now Saint John proceeds to the de∣scription of the wall and gates of this great city. This we all know, that a strong wall serveth for the defence and safety of a city, nd for the security of such as dwell in it: or if it be so high that none can scale it, and o thick that none can batter it, then it is in∣eed impregnable, and the citizens in great ecurity: But the wall of heaven is so high, s none can scale it, as it is set downe in this welfth verse; and so thick, that no double
cannon can pierce it, as appeareth verse 17. therefore all the inhabitants of this new Je∣rusalem are out of all fear of danger. Moreover, this citie hath twelve gates, to signifie an hard accesse for enemies to break in: and an easie passage for the citizens themselves to goe in and out: And at those twelve gates twelve Angels, at every gate an Angel, as it were a porter, to see that none be let in but the true citizens, and free deni∣zens, and such as have to do there, which are here named to be the twelve Tribes of Israel; that is, all the elect of God, both of the Jews and Gentiles. Moreover, it is said, that there were three gates on every side of the citie, both East, West, North, and South, to note, that out of all quarters of the earth the redeemed should be gathered;Matth. 8. and as our Saviour saith, Ma∣ny shall come from the East, and the West, the North, and South, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God. So that it is not materiall what countrey or nation a man is of, whether English, Scottish, French, or Spanish, so he be a beleever; for then hee shall be sure to be let in at one gate or ano∣ther, either at the East-gate, or the West-gate, the North-gate, or the South-gate. Moreover,
the wall of the city hath twelve foundations; that is to say, it is surely founded: And in e∣very gate the name of an Apostle, so that all the gates had the names of the Lambes twelve Apostles, to signifie, that the ground and foundation of this city is laid upon the do∣ctrine of the Apostles and Prophets,Ephes. 2. Jesus Christ himself being the chiefe corner-stone. And hee that talked with mee had a golden reed to measure the city withall,Verse 15. and the gates there∣of and the wall thereof. And the city lay foure-square,Verse 16. and the length is as large as the breadth of it: and he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand fur∣longs, and the length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equall. And hee measured the wall thereof an hundred forty and four cubits, by the measure of man,Verse 17. that is, of the Angel. Now St. John telleth us, that the Angel which talked with him had a golden reed, to measure both the city, and the gates and the wals thereof. Measuring with reeds was a thing of great use in ancient time, as we read in the Prophecie of Ezekiel and Zachary, and as we have heard in the eleventh chapter. But be∣cause all things belonging to this celestiall Jerusalem are super-excellent and glorious;
therefore the very measuring rod and reed is of pure gold. This great and glorious city is said to lie four-square, to note unto us, that it standeth fast and unmoveable; for round things are easily rolled and moved this way or that way, hither and thither: but square things are not apt to roll or move. This e∣verlasting Jerusalem therefore lyeth foure-square, because it can never be moved, but standeth fast for ever; as the Apostle saith, Seeing wee receive a kingdome which cannot be shaken,Heb. 12.28. let us have grace whereby we may so serve God, that wee may please him with reverence and feare. The Angel with his golden measuring rod measureth the square sides of the city, both in length, breadth, height and depth of it, and findeth each of them to be 12000 furlongs, which after eight furlongs to the mile, maketh in our accompt 1500 miles, and so the whole square of this great city cometh to 6000 miles, which is a goodly compasse, and noteth unto us the great large∣nesse of Gods kingdome, and that there is roomth enough for all the inhabitants thereof: yea, most pleasant and commodi∣ous rooms, as our Lord Jesus saith, In my Fa∣thers house are many dwelling places;John 1.4. if it were
not so, I would have told you, for I go to prepare a place for you. After this hee measureth the thicknesse of the wall, and findeth it to bee an hun∣dred and fourty and foure cubits thick, which after our common account of two cubits to a yard, amount to seventy and two yards, which is a jolly thicknesse, even so thick as no cannon can pierce, and there∣fore altogether inexpugnable, as hath been said before. And the building of the wall of it was of Jasper,Verse 18. and the city was pure gold, like unto cleere glasse. And the foundations of the wall of the citie were garnished with all manner of precious stone:Verse 19. The first foundation was of Jasper, the second of Saphire, the third of Chalcedony, the fourth of an Emerald, The fifth of a Sardonix, the sixth of a Sardius,Verse 20. the seventh of a Crysolite, the eighth of a Be∣ryl, the ninth of a Topaze, the tenth of a Chry∣sophrasus, the eleventh of a Jacinct, the twelfth of an Amethyst. And the twelve gates were twelve pearles,Verse 21. and every gate is of one pearle, and the street of the citie is pure gold, as shining glasse.
As wee have heard of the forme of this goodly city; so now we are to hear of the matter of it, that is to say, of what stuffe it is made. First, Saint John telleth us, that the whole city is of most pure and glitter∣ing gold, like unto glasse: and that the wall was of Jasper, most green and flourishing; and also, that the very foundation of the wall was beautified & adorned with twelve sundry kinds of precious stones, which hee reckoneth up. We count it a great matter here below, to compasse and close in our houses with a wall of brick, and none can doe it but men of place: but alas, what is that to this wall? What is brick to preci∣ous stones, and pibbles to pearl? But Saint John addeth, that the gates were of pearle, and the streets of the city of pure gold; Oh how brave, how beautifull, how glorious, how glittering, how gorgeous, how admi∣rable a city is this! for if the gates be of pearl, and the streets of gold, then what are the inner rooms, what are the dining cham∣bers, and what are the lodging roomes? But here we may not grossely imagine, that the kingdom of God is of such metall and matter indeed, as is here described. But the holy Ghost would give us some taste of
it, and after a sort shadow out unto us un∣der these things, which are in most precious account amongst men, what the glory and excellency of the immortall kingdome is. For otherwise, there is no comparison be∣twixt gold, pearl, and precious stones, and those heavenly, invisible, and immortall things which wee looke for, and hope for through Christ: which in very deed are so great, so glorious, and so unconceivable, that gold, pearl, and precious stones are scant so much as any shew, shadow, or resemblance thereof. And I saw no Temple therein,Verse 22. for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it. And this city had no need of the Sun,Verse 23. neither of the Moone to shine in it: for the glory of God did light it, and the Lamb is the light of it. And the people which are saved shall walk in the light of it,Verse 24. and the kings of the earth shall bring their honour and glory unto it. And the gates of it shall not be shut by day:Verse 25. for there shall be no night there. And the glory and honour of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it.Verse 26. And there shall enter into it no uncleane thing,Verse 27.
neither whatsoever worketh abominations or lies: but they which are written in the Lambs book of life. In this new Jerusalem there is no Temple, as was in the old Jerusalem; for there shall be no need of any, no need of doctrine, of sacraments, of prayer in the old Temple, wherein the law was taught, sacraments ad∣ministred, sacrifices offered, and many other rites and ceremonies observed. But Saint John saith, that now God and Christ shall be all in all. They shall be the Tem∣ple of the most holy city. And all the elect shall fully know them, and dwell with them for ever. And as the city hath no need of any Temple; so hath it no need of any light, ei∣ther of Sunne or Moon: for the glory of God, and the brightnesse of the Lambe doe light it for ever: whose incomprehensible brightnesse doth as farre excell the brightnesse of the Sun and Moone, as they doe excell a little candle at noone day. But it may be de∣manded, Who shall dwell in this so glorious a city, and in this so great a light? Saint John answereth, that the people that are saved shall walk in it: that is, all the Israel of God, all true beleevers, which are happy that ever
they were born, that they may come to the possession of such a kingdome as is here described: For Saint John saith, that the resplendent brightnesse of this city is so great, that even the kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honour unto it: And also, that the glory and honour of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it. Oh how unspeakable is the glory of this citie, that kings shall throw downe their crownes and scepters before it; accounting all their pomp and glory but as dust, in re∣spect of it! For the magnificence and pomp of all the Potentates of the earth shall here be laid downe. And albeit none of the Kings and Nobles of the Gentiles might be admitted into the old Jerusalem, yet all the Gentiles that beleeve shall be ad∣mitted into this new Jerusalem, and made free denizens thereof for ever. And al∣though the gates of this citie alwayes stand open both night and day, as not fea∣ring any danger of enemies: yet no unclean thing shall enter into it, but onely they which are written in the Lambes book of life. Thus wee see how gloriously the holy Ghost hath described unto us this citie of the Saints, and habitation of the just for ever∣more.
He needs must be a very block, that is not moved with the consideration of this endlesse felicity: For this city is described unto us in so glorious and admirable a man∣ner, to bring us into love with it, and to work in us an unquenchable thirst and de∣sire after it. Oh therefore let us spend ma∣ny thoughts upon it; let us enter into deep meditations of the inestimable glory of it; let us long till we come to the fingring and possession of it, even as the heire longeth till hee come to the possession of his lands; let us think every day ten, and every yeere twenty, till we be in possession; let us with the Apostle,2 Cor. 5.2. sigh and groane, desiring to bee clothed with our house which is from heaven: Let us in the meane time cast away all things that may hinder us in our Christian course; let us shake off every burden, and runne with patience the race that is set be∣fore us; let us, as they which prove maste∣ries, abstaine from all lets and hinderances: and sith we strive so exceedingly for a cor∣ruptible crowne; how much more ought wee for an uncorruptible? For what pains, what cost, what labour can be enough for a kingdome? Let us therefore strive and straine to get into this golden city, where
streets, walls, and gates, and all is gold, all is pearle; yea, where pearl is but as mire and dirt, and nothing worth. Oh what fooles are they which deprive themselves willing∣ly of this endlesse glory, for a few stinking lusts! Oh what mad men are they which bereave themselves of a roome in this citie of pearle, for a few carnall pleasures and de∣lights! Oh what bedlams and straught beasts are they which shut themselves out of these everlasting habitations for a little transitory pelse! Oh what intolerable sots and sops are all such as will willingly be barred out of this palace of infinite pleasure, for the short fruition of worldly lucre and trash! Let us therefore, in all time to come, make more reckoning of heaven, and lesse reckoning of the earth; let us mind heaven∣ly things, and despise earthly things; let us presse hard unto the things that are before, and forget the things that are behind; let us strive hard for the price of the high cal∣ling of God, and contemn even the glory of this world.
CHAP. XXII. IN this chapter Saint John proceedeth yet more largely to describe the blessed estate of all Gods Saints in the kingdom of glory; and the principall scope and drift of this chapter is yet more to enlarge the joyes of Gods people after this life, and to ratifie the authority of this prophecie. This chapter containeth foure principall parts. Ve. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.The first is an amplification of the joyes of Gods kingdome. Vers. 6, 7, 8, 9. 16, 19.The second is a confirmation of the au∣thority of this book. Ve. 9, 10, &c.The third is an exhortation both to spread abroad the knowledge of this book: and al∣so for every man to prepare himselfe for the coming of Christ unto judgment. The fourth is a fervent desire of the Church for the second appearing of Christ. The TEXT. Verse 1.ANd he shewed me a pure river of the water of life, cleer as Crystall, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb.
In the middest of the street of it,Verse 2. and of either side of the river was the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and gave fruit every moneth: and the leaves of the tree serve to heal the nations with. And there shall be no more curse,Verse 3. but the throne of God, and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his ser∣vants shall serve him. And they shall see his face,Verse 4. and his name shall be in their foreheads. And there shall be no night there,Verse 5. and they need no candle, neither light of the Sun: for the Lord God giveth them light, and they shall reign for evermore. The Angel doth yet further shew unto John a pure river of the water of life: Whereby is signified the overflowing abundance of good things which the righteous shall enjoy in the kingdome of glory. This river is said to proceede out of the throne of God and of the Lamb; because God in Christ is the originall of all this life and happinesse. Further it is added, that in the midst of the golden street of this new Jerusalem, and of both sides the river, there was the tree of life: Which representeth Christ now in his heavenly Paradise, as in former time was represented
Christ in the earthly Paradise: and also that eternall and blessed life which our first pa∣rents should enjoy, if they did continue in the obedience of God. This tree standeth not in an out-corner of the city, but in the very middest of the street, and of both sides of the river, that all the citizens of the new Jerusalem might have free accesse unto it, and taste of the most dainty fruits thereof in great variety: for it beareth twelve manner of fruits, that is, in Christ all variety of pleasure, and endlesse light is to be found. This tree beareth fruit every moneth, as well in winter as in summer: for here every moneth is autumne. The sense is, that in Christ the new and fresh fruits of immor∣tal joy (without any satiety or loathing) are for ever to be found. The leaves of this tree are very medici∣nable and sanative; for they serve to heale the nations with: that is, to preserve them from all diseases and griefes: which argu∣eth a most blessed life, not subject to sick∣nesse, or any other infirmity. For Christ is our never failing Physitian, which in this life healeth all our spirituall diseases and infirmities, and after this life will preserve
us in perpetuall health and happinesse. There shall be no more curse: that is, in the heavenly Paradise we shall no more be sub∣ject to any curse, as Adam was in the earth∣ly Paradise: which also argueth the per∣fection of happinesse after this life; and yet for further amplification of this most glo∣rious estate, it is said, that the throne of God, and of Christ shall be erected in the middest of this golden street, and all his cho∣sen people shall there accompany him, dwel with him, be alwayes about him; yea, and serve him without wearinesse for ever; yea, all his faithfull worshippers shall come so neer his throne, that they shall see his very face, and be ravished with his glory, ha∣ving his Image, his Name, his Wisdome, and Mercy imprinted in their foreheads: yea, his unconceiveable light and glory shall be so resplendent, that there shall be neither night, nor need of candle: but in his glitter∣ing and most glorious chamber of presence shall all his elect reigne and triumph with him for evermore in infinite felicity, and the very fruition of eternall delectation, where shall be mirth without measure, and solace without sorrow, as the Prophet saith, In thy presence is the fulnesse of joy,
and at thy right hand there is pleasure for ever∣more. Verse 6.And hee said unto mee, These words are faith∣full and true, and the Lord God of the holy Prophets sent his Angel to shew unto his servants the things which must shortly be ful∣filled. Verse 7.Behold, I come shortly: Blessed is he that keepeth the words of the Prophecie of this book. Verse 8.And I am John, which saw and heard these things, and when I had heard and seen, I fell downe to worship before the feet of the Angel which shewed me these things. Verse 9.But he said unto me, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the Pro∣phets, and of them which keep the words of this book: worship God. In these foure verses are four principall reasons brought to confirme and ratifie the authority of this book. The first of them is the affirmation of the Angel. The second is the authority of the most high God. The third is the testimony of Jesus, pro∣nouncing them blessed which keep this Prophecie. The fourth is the testimony of Saint John,
who heard and saw these things. But be∣cause in the Epistle to the Reader I have more at large handled this Argument, and these same verses; therefore here I doe of purpose relinquish them: and that also of Johns adoration, and the Angels refusall, be∣ing things most manifest and easie to un∣derstand. And hee said unto mee,Verse 10. Seale not the words of the Prophecie of this booke, for the time is at hand. Hee that is unjust, let him be unjust still;Verse 11. and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still; and hee that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still. And behold I come shortly,Verse 12. and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be. I am Alpha and Omega,Verse 13. the beginning and the end, the first and the last. Blessed are they that do his commandements,Verse 14. that their right may be in the tree of life, and may enter in thorow the gates into the city. For without shall be dogs, and enchanters,Verse 15. and whoremongers, and murtherers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth or maketh lies. Here is first an exhortation, to publish and proclaime the knowledge of this book
to all people, and in no wise to conceale it, or keep it close, as formerly hath been shew∣ed in the Epistle. Here is a further admonition, that they which are unrighteous, should be unrighteous still, &c. Which is no allowance or encou∣ragement granted unto wicked men to con∣tinue in their evill wayes, but is rather a ter∣rible threat, if wee take all the words to∣gether in this and the next verse; as if hee should say, If men will needs continue in their filthinesse, yet certainly Christ will come shortly, and reward them according to their works. Or else it may be a phrase of speech, which they call an ironicall concession; as in ano∣ther place the holy Ghost saith to the yong man,Eccles. 11. 1 Kin. 22.15. Matth. 6.45. Walk in the wayes of thine own heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know, that for all these things God will bring thee unto judgment: So likewise in other places. After this, here is blessednesse pronoun∣ced upon all such as keep the commande∣ments of God, as it is said, that their right is in the tree of life; not meaning thereby, that their keeping of the commandements is the cause of their right in Christ, but onely an effect or consequence. For our good works
do not go before, as causes of our justificati∣on; but follow after, as declarations of the same. For by doing we are not made just in the sight of God, but only declared to be just in the sight of men. And as for the keeping the comman∣dements, wee do it not in such perfection as Gods justice requireth, but in such measure as his mercy accepteth through Christ. And here the holy Ghost saith, that all they which have a right in Christ, which is the Tree of life, and endeavour to keepe the commandements, shall enter in thorow the gates into the new Jerusalem: But on the contrary, all the rout of reprobates, whom hee calleth dogs, enchanters, whoremon∣gers, &c. shall be utterly shut out, as ha∣ving nothing to do in the everlasting citie, their portion being allotted in the infernall lake. I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testifie unto you these things.Verse 16. I am the root and generation of David, and the bright morning Star. And the Spirit and the Bride say Come.Verse 17. And let him that heareth, say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And let whosoever will take of the water of life freely. For I protest unto every man that heareth theVerse 18.
words of the Prophecie of this booke, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book. Verse 19.And if any man shall diminish of the words of the book of this Prophecie, God, shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from those things which are written in the book of life. Verse 20.He which testifieth these things, saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus. Verse 21.The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen. The authority of this book is here again ratified from the person of him who is the Authour of it, that is, Jesus Christ, who is, here called, The root and generation of David: both because hee is descended of the house of David according to the flesh: and also because the eternall kingdome which all the Prophets did fore-tell, should spring out of the house of David, was indeed and in truth established in Christ, who is our true David, and our righteous branch, and as it is here said, the bright morning Star, which hath most gloriously risen upon the world, to dispell all darknesse, and to bring the great and ever∣lasting light.
Moreover, here is great protestation made in the 18 and 19 verses, of great plagues to be inflicted upon all such as shall add any thing unto this booke, or take away any thing from it. Which also maketh greatly for the confir∣mation of the authority of this book. For that, to the which nothing may be added, and from the which nothing may be taken away, must needs be absolute and perfect: But this book is such a one: Therefore this book is absolute and perfect, being a part of Gods everlasting truth. Last of all, here is set down the fervent desire of the Bride after the Bridegroome; for she being inflamed with the Spirit, desi∣reth him to come and make up the match betwixt them, that shee may be joyned to him in marriage, celebrate the solemnizati∣on, and live together with him in the eter∣nall triumph: which is the sense of these words, The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And let him that heareth, say, Come. For it is proper and peculiar only to the Bride to hear, wait, and long for the coming of Christ. And let him that is athirst, come. That is, all such as thirst after righteousnesse, may truely say, Come, sweet Jesus. For they are allowed freely to drink of the water of life. The
plain meaning of all this is, that the Church being directed by the holy Ghost, most ve∣hemently prayeth and longeth for the com∣ing of Christ, that shee may have her top∣full happinesse, and full fruition of all those super-excellent things which are provided and purchased for her through him. And therefore to satisfie her desire, Jesus Christ the heavenly Bridegroom saith, I come short∣ly. To the which the Bride saith, Amen, Amen. Even so be it. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and make an end of these sinfull and conflicting daies, that all thy daer ones may have and enjoy their long looked for happinesse and felicity in the hea∣vens for ever and ever. FINIS.
An Epitome of Mr. Bright∣man his Exposition upon the REVELATION. Shewing, or Prophesying what shall befall Germany, Scotland, Holland, and the Churches adhering to them. Likewise what shall befall England, and the HIERARCHIE therein. LEarned Mr. Brightman in his Booke of the exposition on the Revelations, seriously considering and resolving himselfe, that the 7 Epistles Saint John wrote to the 7 Churches in Asia, were also written and di∣rected to the 7 succeeding Churches among the Gentiles, of which those 7 were a type or counterpane (omitting for brevity what he saith concerning the other 4 Churches) we present you with a briefe of what he more immediately applies to our selves. In generall, he saith, that there was a ter∣rible storme to be expected, and it would
be such an horrible tempest, that it would terribly shake the Christian Churches. First, for Germany, there was the bitterest scourge for it that ever had fallen upon it, and that it was to come shortly: Germany should be like a house that is robbed by furi∣ous, mad and cruell spoylers, that would have no mercy of neither Sex nor Age; and the comming thereof should be suddain and unexpected, like a thiefe in the night; which we may see he truly fore-told, it being ful∣filled in our years, and the inhabitants there∣of have found it by sad experience: let Eng∣land take warning, considering what he said, was the cause that would bring all this mi∣sery; because, saith he, they tooke no care for a full and through Reformation, therefore by the just judgement of God, they should loose their Citizens and Inhabitants; and they with other Churches should come to nothing, and shortly it would appeare; he calls Germany by the name of Sardis. Secondly, for Scotland and Holland, and the other Churches adhering to them; (typi∣fied by godly Philadelphia) he saith, tha they shall shut and none shall open, and they shall open and none shall shut; a Virgin Church, chaste, not so defiled with Rome▪ superstitions as others; and speaks of a Co∣venant and Society they should be joyned in
and bids them not to be perplexed nor dis∣couraged at what the world spitefully pra∣teth of them, as if he had heard men in our times call them Traytors, Rebells, Seditious, and bids them not regard the scoffes of the wicked, who will despise them, because they are godly, little, lowly, and weake in visible power, in comparison of their enemies: For, saith he, no enemy shall be able to pro∣vaile against them, and they shall set up a to∣ken of victory shortly; and every one shall be compelled to say, that they are dearly be∣loved of God, they shall be seen to prosper so exceedingly, and so marvelously promo∣ted and advanced beyond all mens expecta∣tion; and when that storme and horrible tempest shall come upon the Christian Chur∣ches, these Churches shall stand fast like a pillar, and be preserved from wasting, when the other Churches which did not take care for a full Reformation, as they did, shall by the just judgement of God, come, as it were, to nothing; there shall be, saith he, such a miserable hurly burly of all things, that there shall scarce be the forme of a Church percei∣ved, but only with holy Philadelphia. Though their enemies whet their blasphemous tongues against heaven and God himselfe, they shall not carry it away scotfree, let them clatter as much as they will, no endeavours
of their adversaries shall be wanting by slan∣dring, railing, and all despitefull wrongs to bolt up this doore; others shall with force and arms strive to stop it up, as if they would breake this Church all to peeces; but Christ will faithfully performe his word to them, if they keep covenant with him, and their ene∣mies shall lose all their toil and sweat, and get nothing but shame and reproach: the praise of this Churches courage shall be so much the greater, because being but little, and her adversaries so potent, she yeelds not, nor stoops not for all their proud threats, nor for∣sakes the truth, as terrified with the vaine feares of men: And their enemies should boast and flourish, as if they alone were the people of God, creaking and cracking of no∣thing so much as the good of the Church; but they doe but deceive themselves and the world with glozing and goodly words, when they reject Christs government, and sticke to the abrogated Ceremonies of the Law, and of Rome, and thrusting a worship on Christ he hath not appointed, whereby they make themselves the Synagogue of Sa∣tan, and not a Congregation of Saints; no∣table and famous at last shall the triumph of the Church be over Papists and Popery; hi∣therto they have fought against them with quils and ink, but the time shall come ere long
when they shall quite be rooted out with wea∣pons, and that with the helpe of this Church; and let the experiences of this Church stablish their mindes against all future feares: And for her reward she shall remain to see the restoring of the new Church, wherein the new Jerusa∣lem shall come downe from heaven, and be joyned with it in covenant and society, and enjoy the same felicity, then men shall acknow∣ledge that her Reformation was right, and not a device of mens braines, as contentious bab∣lers now affirme; when they shall see the same ordinances to flourish in the new Jerusalem, then Christ shall arise with triumph, and deface his enemies, and give triumph to his Spouse: Here therefore, O holy Philadelphia, thou art little and lowly, but God shall exalt thee, re∣gard not the scoffes of the wicked, who shall by this meanes pull wofull plagues upon them∣selves, but they shall bring thee a Crowne of glory, and the end of thy welfare is comming shortly. 3. For England, whose counterpane he takes to be Laodicea, tearming it, luke-warm, vain-glorious Laodicea, concerning it, he saith, he that gathereth the teares of his children into his bottle, knoweth right well, that I could never with dry eyes take a survey of this Laodiceas lamentable condition, but I powred out teares and sighs from the bottom of my heart, when
I beheld Christs loathing of us, and were it not that out of duty, as a watchman, I dare not be∣tray the salvation of this Church, by not giving warning, I would have held my peace; but my hope is that those which love the truth will hearken and accept, and thinke, as the truth is, I envy no mans person, honour or greatnesse: Yet when I perceived that these 7 Churches were propounded for a type of all the Chur∣ches among the Gentiles, and withall, saw the order, time and marvellous agreeing of all things together, I durst not perfidiously bury the truth in silence. In that Christ saith of this Church, I know thy workes, that thou art neither hot nor cold; he ob∣serveth, that Christ maketh mention of no one good thing that it hath, the worst of all the 7 (although there were many faithfull in it) yet not any so past hope in regard of the outward forme and government; which comes to passe not so much through its owne default, as by meanes of the faulty government of the Angels, who have so ordered and governed it, that it was tempered and blended together of strange contraries, a Hoch-pot, not so cold that wee would be all Romish, and cleaving to Idolatry and superstition altogether; nor yet so hot that we pursue and admit of a through Refrmation; abstaining from grosser sins, well given in Re∣ligion, and will serve God so far as they may
keep the estimation of prudent men moderate in Religion, just Statists or Protestants of State, which are known commonly to be luke-warm professors. This mediocrity, saith he, is worst of all, which indeed is honoured of the world, because it hath a certaine shew of moderation and peaceablenesse; but Christ preferreth a blind Papist, or no Religion at all before this hotch-potch lukewarmnesse. And also whose outward government, and regiment in the Church, is for the most part Antichristian and Romish, tempering pure doctrine and Romish regiment together, broaching again monstrous opinions heretofore hissed out; and through this government they have so filled the Church with such a corrupt Clergy like themselves, to serve their owne turne, ignorant drones, pro∣fane Priests, Sir John Lack-Latines to say pray∣ers, being so corrupt in their admissions to Church-livings, that any starke foole or arrant knave, may fulfill their conditions for admit∣tance, whereby they have filled and pestred the Church and Ministery with abundance of this kinde of vermin and vile-varlots: And though they love riches and honour so dearly, that they content themselves with the losse of a full Reformation; yet that they might not seem to prefer any thing before the truth and good of the Church, they doe with swelling words blazon the happinesse of this Church
thus governed as it is; therefore the Holy Ghost brings in this Angell boasting himselfe in vain-glory, I am rich, &c. Pastors of other Churches are poore and of no preferment, but our Bishops have lordly titles and revenews, the Peers of the Realme, equall to the greatest Earles in wealth, attendance, Pallaces, stateli∣nesse, and all worldly pompe; so also the next rankes, Deanes, Arch-deacons, Prebends, &c. how mighty, massie and pursie are they grown with wealth and boast thereof; doth not this amplifie the honour of our Church, to have our brave silken Ministers to glister and jet through the streets with troops like Noble-men, so by this meanes to drive away contempt from the Ministery? no, saith he, this hath brought it, and this miserable lukewarmnesse; what do you tell them of the Primitive times, as if they were children still in blankets and swadling bands? the Church is now growne up to peace and riches, then it was poore and in persecution, their rules then not fit for us now; but he de∣monstrates that such kinde of dignities be∣seems not the Ministers of the Gospel: Thou art therefore for all this a beggarly wretch, O thou English Angel, and Christ shall take a great pleasure in casting away and spewing out this Angel, and his punishment shall be very dread∣full: the land of Canaan once spewed out the inhabitants, and they were utterly over∣throwne:
and shall their punishment be lesse or lighter whom Christ shall vomit out? Therfore from these words, I would thou wert either cold or hot, saith he, I would thou wert either all Romish, or admit of a through Refor∣mation: blaming those Angels only, and those that cleave to them, Priests and Laity; who being bewitched with ambition and cove∣tousnesse, doe scornfully reject this holy Re∣formation, not enduring the remedy, but ac∣counting that worse then the disease: this Churches disease, therefore, is more despe∣rate. Therefore he saith in plaine tearmes, that the Bishops, which he calls no better then Lord-beggars, because their riches and honours (for the most part) they get by fawning, flattering, bribing, being ambitious to get under great men, and so creep into the Court for prefer∣ment. But (saith he) both they and their whole luke-warme Hierarchie shall quite bee over∣throwne, and never recover their dignity a∣gaine: and at their overthrow, they shall en∣danger the people, by reason of their consen∣ting to them; Yet the people shall escape overthrowing; but it is to bee feared, the people shall feele some adversity: But God will not suffer the Hierarchy to escape; for they seeking honours and riches, and not those thinges which are Christ's,
shall have reproachfull judgements; few or none shall sigh or sob for them; but they and their Priests shall be vile before the people, and men shall read the reports concerning them with delight: and they shall be cast out, and spued up as vomit out of a corrupted sto∣mack, that no man will be willing to take up againe, from these words, Therefore because thou art luke-warme, and neither hot nor cold: It shall come to passe that I will spew thee out of my mouth. For thou saist, I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and knowest not how thou art wretched, and miserable, and poore, and blinde, and naked. Therefore, saith he, purge out thy Romish leven, dote not on thy riches and ho∣nours, but minde his things and honour, who for thy sake became poore and contemptible; set up faithfull Ministers in every Congregati∣on; repent thee of the injury done to thy faith∣full watchmen, casting them into prison, and out of their livings, who have reproved thy su∣perstition, and contended for this Reformati∣on. We have need of zeale, Princes, Peeres, Angels, People, earnestly to bend our selves with all our power to turne away this evill that hangeth over our heads, by seeking a full Reformation: for as yet we hang by Geometry, as it were between heaven & hell, the steam of the Romish foggy lake doth deadly annoy us: let us therefore, saith he, marke what hath been
said, and not like dogges, gnash and gnaw our teeth at the stone that is cast at us, but tremble at the dreadfull hand that cast it, and hear∣ken to these wholesome warnings with all speed. The whole state of this Church of Laodicea is worthy of serious consideration, as Mr. Brightman applies it to England, in this and di∣vers Chapters; for he speakes of our times, as if he were now living. And further he saith in his Epistle, and else∣where in his Commentary, that many are the miseries the Christian Churches must suffe: for there will bee a long and dolefull Tragedy, which will overthrow with scourges, slaugh∣ters, death and ruine: and that the Sword of the Lord shall be made drunke in their blood, except they receive warning and amend. But yet, saith he, Be of good cōfort Germany, France and Britany, and all you Christian Churches: this is the last Act: for after this Theater and long Tragedy is past, there will succeed in the roome thereof happy dayes, with abundance of peace and all good things. And it is his judgement (if I may not say his Prophesie) comparing one Scripture with another, and times with times, That before the yeare 1650. the Jewes shall be called, the Whore of Romes nose shall be slit, and she stript of all her glori∣ous garments and attire, her power and sinews
cut, and the Pope himself shall run out of Rome into Avignon, or in Bononia, or thereabout, one of his owne Cities, and the City of Rome shall be burnt with fire. And that the King of Spain, and the King of Polony, and some other Kings shall bewaile her, and would faine helpe her, but dare not, be∣cause they shall be afraid of their owne safety, lest they be devoured or scorched with the same fire. And further, he saith, that the Em∣peror of Germany shall destroy Rome, if he set to the worke, it being most proper for him; but if he did not, some other shortly will have the praise of that victory: Therefore, saith he, you godly Princes take the matter in hand, and set to this worke, it shall not be a thing of so great trouble as you thinke for, feare not the huge armies that will come to helpe her: If you thinke the Spaniard, or the French-man, or any other King will raise mighty forces against you to defend her, as being Romes friends; these are altogether vaine feares, scare-crowes, gob∣lins, bug-beares for simple people: for her friends shall stand afar off with waiting, testi∣fying their love, sighing and sobbing, but ta∣king no paines, nor striking a stroke to deliver their Whore, being now an old withered harlot, but crying, Alas, alas that great City. And a∣gaine, he further saith: And you the rest of the Christian Princes, you need doe nothing,
only be valiant, and of a good courage in di∣spatching your worke for the Lord, and mat∣ters shall prosper as happily as you desire; and understand at length by what way you may procure to your selves honour and tranquilitie, so quietnes and joy to the whole Christian world: Therefore draw your swords against Rome, for you shall prevaile. And saith he, within 45 yeares after Rome is destroyed, the Pope once more gathering all his friends toge∣ther to try his last chance, shall then be utterly overthrowne, being about the yeare 1686. which wil be the longest time he can continue. But Rome being destroyed, and the Jews call'd, there will bee then to the end, a most happy tranquility, and things very great indeed, and to be admired: the joy will be so much, that it will be strange and unexpected: for in the place of former troubles there will be perpetu∣all peace, and then Kings and Queens will be nursing fathers and nursing mothers unto the Christian Churches. Then the great Turke shall be 40 yeares on the decaying hand, and lose many Countries, but in the yeare 1696. he also shall be utterly overthrowne: and then Christ shall raigne with his Ordinances chiefe in the world. They that please to examine these quota∣tions in the Margent, by Master Bright∣mans Booke on the Revelations, which
which hee wrote above 40 yeares ago, they shall finde the composer hereof hath endeavo∣red as neere as he could, to render the Authour in his owne words, including much in so little roome. Yet not to forget that hee saith further of England and Ireland, Although Christ be angry with us by reason we are so far from a perfect Reformation, and they which labour to bring in the Popish ceremonies hated of God, to en∣danger the overthrow of our Kingdome; yet he saith, Christ hath begun his Kingdome (at that time he wrote) which was in the dayes of blessed Q. Elizabeth, who happily begun and proceeded in the worke of Reformation, ac∣cording to the time and those dayes she lived in; the finishing whereof will be required of this Generation; otherwise expect God hath a sad controversie with this Land. But Christ hath begun his Kingdome both in England and Ireland, to reigne evermore: and the enemies shall endeavour many enterprises, yet they shall vanish like smoake, and they shall never prevaile to overthrow Christ his Kingdom be∣gun here: for they will never want Christian Princes to maintaine his Truth begun, which he saith begun from the yeare 1558. For the seventh Angel blew his Trumpet for this time, and saith he would raigne evermore. He fur∣ther saith, that ere long, before the yeare 1650.
the fourth Angell shall powre out his Violl up∣on the Sun; which Sun he interprets the holy Scriptures, which illustrate the mindes of men as the beames of the Sun doe the eyes of the body. This Violl being powred on them, shall give them greater force and edge, more vehe∣mently to scorch the man of sin: so that hee shall gnash and rage aginst this Sun, which hath so discovered his ugly hew to the world: and it shall not onely burne and vexe him, and those of his houshold, but also hypocrites, and all others who are not endued with true godli∣nesse; That they shall even boile with envy and strife, and all bitternesse of minde, like the men of Atlas, which curse the Sunne, because it parcheth them with too much heate. And lastly, hee saith (for the better un∣derstanding of what hee meanes) that the City of Rome is not limited to that City, but extends as farre as the Pope hath any dominion: So that the Citty of Rome is in destroying, if any of her dominions bee in destroying, as he interprets the Holy Ghosts meaning. But the Pope is to be quite and fully overthrowne at the yeare 1686. There∣fore by computation Rome must bee in de∣stroying at 1641. in some of his Domini∣ons.
So I conclude this briefe Relation (of what Mr. Brightman largely insists upon, shewing his grounds in his Book, why he affirmes these things) with Christs counsell to this Church of Laodicea. I counsell thee to by of me gold tryed in the fire, that thou mayest be rich, and white rayment that thou mayest be cloathed, and that the shame of thy nakednesse doe not appeare; and anoint thine eyes with eye∣salve, that thou mayest see. FINIS. LONDON: Printed for Richard Harper. 1644.
