d1147 12277084 58480
A DESCRIPTION OF Candia, In its Ancient & Modern State: With an Account of the Siege thereof, Begun by the Ottoman Emperour, in the year 1666, continued in 1667 and 1668, and surrendred the latter end of 1669. The most part Collected from private Letters, du∣ring the Siege, sent by one in the service of the Republique. Licensed, Jan. 4. 1669/70. LONDON: Printed by J. C. for William Crook, at the Green-Dragon without Temple-bar. 1670.
To the Reader. Courteous Reader, I should not have attempted to trouble you with this Preface, were it not to comply with the Mode of the Times, and partly to fill up a vacant page. This Treatise wherewith I present you, is a Collection methodiz'd and reduc'd to Form and Order for the Readers advantage; containing an exact description of Crete, known now by the general name of Candia; with a Relation of the various names of the Place, according to the diversity of Masters it hath been subject unto; and the Scituation thereof; the fertility and commo∣dity of the Soil; the Nature of the
Inhabitants, and their Ancient and Modern both Civil and Eccles∣iastical Government; together with an account of the Original (though pretended) Cause of the Siege; and the Transactions, and Military Ex∣ploits in the year 1666, when this last Siege first began; which was continued in 1667 and 1668, and surrendred to the Turk in 1669. All that I shall add is onely this, that here you will finde both variety to divert, and verity to satisfie you; so that I presume there will be no cause for any person to repent of his pains, in the perusal of this Com∣pendious Relation, which hath been so long and so earnestly desired by all parties to be seen in publick.
A DESCRIPTION OF Candia. IT were altogether inconsistent with the truth of our intended Description of Candia, and would swell it to a larger Volume then is design'd, to ac∣quaint you with the various Poetical Fictions and Fabulous Stories of Doting Antiquity, concerning the same; as, that it was the Kingdom of Saturn in the In∣fancy of the World; the Birth-place and Nur∣sery of his Son Jupiter; the Seat and Resi∣dence of Minas, and Rhadamanthus, whose
Laws were afterwards imitated in the Prime Cities of Greece; and the abode of the lustful Pasiphae; as also, that here was the so much, celebrated Labyrinth made by Daedalus for the inclosing and securing the Minotaure: nor must it be forgotten, saith that Learned Knight,Sir W. Raw∣leigh's History of the World. that Strabo the Geographer, who flourished in the time of Tiberius Caesar, was of Cretan Parents (though born in the City of Amasia in the Realm of Pontus) which adds unto this Island as much true renown, as any of the Fictions or Stories (be they what they will) of former times. Therefore we shall onely glance upon them where the nature of the Subject requires it, and endeavour to give you an exact compendious account of the Names and Scituation of the Place, the fertility and Commodities of the Soil; the nature of the Inhabitants, and their Ancient as well as Mo∣dern Civil and Ecclesiastical Government: and so proceed to the original cause of the Siege, and the transactions in 1666, 1667, 1668, and part of 1669 till its surrender. Candia hath in several Ages, and in several Authors, obtain'd several names (as Sir Walter Rawleigh hath observ'd.) By Homer and Eustathius it is call'd Heca∣tompolis,
from the number of one hun∣dred Cities it then contain'd; but in proces of time, and by the devastation of War, they are all so destroy'd, that the ruines of them are hardly visible. By Pliny and Solinus, Maca∣ros, and Macaroneses, the happy or fortunate Island, from the goodness of the Soil and tem∣per of the Air. By Stephanus, Idaea, from Ida a famous Mountain there. By Giraldus, Tel∣chinia, from the Telchini Priests of Cybele (the Wife of Saturn, and Mother of the Gods) who was the principal Goddess of this Island. The general Name which hath prevailed most in all Writers, is that of Crete, called Creta, quasi Cureta, by the Figure Syncope, from the Curetes the Inhabitants hereof, and Priests of Cybele, so called, , from their ton∣sure or shaving of the head: and this seems the best Etymology; though some derive it from Cretes the Son of Jupiter, and others from Crete the Daughter of Hesperus. At present it is known by the name of Candia, either à Can∣dore from the whiteness of the Rocks which encompass it, or from Candia the Metropolis thereof. Candia is an Island, and according to Clu∣verius in his Geography, the largest of all the Isles that are adjacent to Greece; being, as Munster and our late Cosmographers write, in
length 270, in breadth 50, and incompass 590 Miles; and scituated in the Mediterranean, at so equal, a distance from Europe, Asia and Africa, according to Sir Walter Rawleigh, as if it were naturally design'd to be what Ari∣stotle calls it, The Lady and Mistress of the Sea; for it is distant from Peloponnesus, now called Morea, one hundred Miles; as many from Asia minor, and not above one hundred and fifty from the shore of Africa; verifying that of Virgil: Creta Jovis magni medio jacet insula Ponto. Jove's Birth-place Crete, a fruitful Land, I'th' middle of the Sea doth stand. As to the Heavenly Bodies, it is scituated un∣der the beginning of the fourth Climate, so that the longest day in a manner is but four∣teen hours and a quarter. It hath on the East the Carpathian, on the West the Ionian, on the North the Aegean, and on the South the African or Lybian Sea. In form it extends East and West with three Promontories; that towards the East, called anciently Samonium, is now Capo di Salomone; that on the South-West looking towards Africa, formerly Her∣maea, is now name'd Capo Gabrasse; and that
on the North-West towards Peloponnesus, of old called Cunarus, is now Capo Chestin; this last being opposite to Malta a Promontory of Laconia. The Soil is very fruitful, especially of those Wines which we call Muscadels, of which ac∣cording to Sir Walter Rawleigh they transport yearly twelve thousand Butts: this Wine Munster calls Vinum Malviticum, so nam'd from the Mountain Malva; he saith it abounds herewith, and hath store of Cypress-Trees. There is also plenty of Gums, Honey, Sugar, Olives, Dates, Apples, Oranges, Lemons, Raisins, Melons, Citrons and Pomgranates. There are many other things at present worthy observation. First, that this Island breeds no Serpent, Venemous, Ravenous, or hurtful Creature; so that their Flocks graze securely without a Shepherd. Secondly, if a Woman bites a man shrewdly, it is not cured without difficulty; which if true, saith the Noble Knight, then the last part of the forementioned priviledge, that it breeds no hurtful Creature, must be false. Thirdly, they have an Herb call'd Alinios, which if chewed in the mouth will keep a man from hunger that day. Fourthly, here is besides many other Physical herbs, that called Dictamnum or Dictamnus, an excellent Antidote against Poyson; which
is onely peculiar to this Island. It af∣fords also great store of Laudanum, a Juyce or Gum forced with incredible labour out of a Tree called Cistus, wherewith the Mountains abound: 'tis a soporiferous Medicine, good to create Sheep, if prescribed according to art. The cheifest Mountain of note is Ida, now Psiloriti, scituate in the midst of the Island: here Jupiter is fabled to be privately nurst, and from hence he is called Idaeus. Rivers of eminency they have few or none; the principal are Nilopotamus, Scasinus, Epi∣cidnus and Vivotro, towards the North; Popu∣liar towards the East, and Liniens towards the West; but none of them are Navigable. The Island is very populous, insomuch that it is thought the Signiory of Venice upon a sud∣den occasion can raise in it sixty thousand men able to bear Arms. As to the Nature of the people, they have always had the repute of able Mariners; they being scituated in the midst of the Sea, having very commodious Harbours and a Fish-trade; so that when in those times they would tax any person for relating an incredible story, they used to say, Cretensis nescit pelagus; meaning thereby, that the thing was as im∣probable, as for one of Crete to be no Sailer:
yet this Virtue or Qualification of theirs was stain'd with many notorious Vices, which they yet retain among them, as Malice, Envy and Lying; to which last they are so addicted, that it grew proverbial to call a horrid Lye Cre∣tense mendacium; and this fault the Poet Epi∣menides did reprove in them (who was Na∣tive of this Island) cited by St. Paul to Titus, Ch. 1. V. 12. . The Cretans always lyars are, Ʋnruly Beasts, of labour spare. To which may be added the Latine Proverb, Cretizare cum Cretensibus, To deceive the De∣ceiver, or to be false in word and deed: as also, that of the Greeks, , i. e. there are three Nations whose names begin with the Greek letter K worse then any o∣ther, viz. , the Cap∣padocians, Cretans and Cilicians; though some apply it to the Cities of Corinth, Capua and Car∣thage, beginning all with the same letter in that Language; all which were conceiv'd very dangerous to the State of Rome. Nor are the Candians at this day less sick of their old Distemper; for they are as great lyars, and as
idle as ever they were formerly, and avaricious withal, being very impatient of labour, not ca∣ring to attain any Science perfectly; onely they are good Archers, being accustom'd to shooting from their youth, and herein thought more dexterous and expert then the Turks them∣selves. As to their Civil Government, according to Cluverius and Munster, it was first Monar∣chical; they being governed by Kings till Q. Metellus did reduce the Isle (under his power) into a Province; and it remain'd under the Roman and Constantinopolitan Emperors, until the Saracens did over-run it with the rest of Greece: but Baldwinus Earl of Flanders, and Emperour of Constantinople, did confer it upon Boniface Marquess of Montferrat; from whom it was purchased by the Venetians, Anno 1144, at a vast rate, and continued ever since under the Signiory of Venice, under the name of Candia, till in the year 1669 it was surrendred to the Turk. As to their Ecclesiastical Politie, they were first converted to the Christian Faith by St. Paul; who having planted the Gospel there, left the watering of it to Titus, who by him was Consecrated Bishop of this Isle, recom∣pending the Churches therein to his care, with power of Ordination and Ecclesiastical
Censure, as appears clearly by the Text, which proves it belonged to him as their Bishop, and not as their Evangelist onely: and this mani∣festly apparent, not onely in the Subscription of that Epistle (according to the mode of writing in those days) where he is stiled, , The first Bishop of the Cretan Church; but also by the concurrent Testimony of Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 3 c. 4. S. Ambros. in Praesat. ad Ti∣tum, S. Hieron. in Titum, c. 1. v. 5. and in his Treatise de Scriptor. Ecclesiast. Theodoret. quoted by Oecumenius in Praefat. ad Ep. Tit-Oecumenius himself in Tit. 1. and lastly by Theo∣phylact. in his Preface to the same Epistle; all which do, in terminis, call him Bishop, and the Bishop of Crete, agreeable to the usual sence of the word Episcopus in that age, distinct from Presbyter. This Church whilst wholly under the Discipline of the Greek Patriarchs, was go∣vern'd by four Archbishops, and one and twen∣ty Bishops; but since their subjection to the Republique of Venice, there is but one Archbishop, that is of Candia the chief City; and eight Bi∣shops, besides the titular Patriarch of Constan∣tinople, who hath his residence there; some Prelate of the Latine Church having been al∣ways honoured with that empty Title, ever since the recovery of that City from the Western Christians.
The Language vulgarly and generally spo∣ken here, is the Greek Tongue; though Gentle∣men and Merchants depending on the State of Venice, speak Italian also. Both the Greek and Latine are used in their Divine Offices: the peo∣ple generally are of the Communion of the Grecian Church; yet the Latine Service; is also used in many places of the Island. The ground of this War between the Otto∣man Emperour and the Venetian, I finde in an Epistolar address to his Majesty from Venice, by the hand of a Noble man of this Nation then residing there, to be to this effect. It hath been the design of the Turk, ever since the Conquest of Rhodes and Cyprus, to gain the Kingdom of Candia; and that for this reason, because then the Christians being destitute of all Harbours in the East, he might with the greater security fall upon them in the West. Anno 1645 (when all Christendom was at variance) Ibraim the Father of the now Tur∣kish Monarch, in the depth of a long conti∣nued peace, when least expected, began this War by setting upon the Venetians, and gave this out as the pretended cause of this Quar∣rel. In the former Agreement ratified and con∣cluded between them, it seems, among many other Articles that the Republick had tyed
themselves up to perform, this was one, they did engage to deny the Knights of Malta shelter in any of their Ports or Harbours. Anno 1644, it fell out that the Gallies of that Order seiz'd a Sultana, and took her, who with three Millions of Crowns design'd a Pilgrimage to Mecha. They steering homewards laden with this rich booty, were com∣pell'd by the unseasonableness of the Weather, or for want of fresh water, clancularly, and by stealth, to strike into a by-Port of Candia, whence after some refreshment they return'd safely to their own Isle. The next year the Turk furnisheth out a Fleet of 460 Sail great and small, solemnly protesting to the Senates Ambassadors, that these preparations were for the Isle of Malta; but when they had past by them, and steer'd a course almost as far as Sapienza, they sud∣denly tackt about, and landed sixty thousand men, who immediately sate down before Canea without the least declaration of War. The Venetian being thus so unexpectedly sur∣priz'd, made all possible provision to put them∣selves in a defensive posture; but before they could rouze their ancient and accustom'd courage, they lost the whole Kingdom, except Candia, and Carabusa, Spina longa and Suda, three adjoyning Insulets. The Grand Signior
being elated and puft up with this success, gain'd by that happy crime (in his opinion) prosperous treachery, own'd the War o∣penly, and publickly declar'd the Senates sheltring of the Malteses to be the cause; though 'twas privately decreed, that if they met with any considerable force or resi∣stance in the first assault, that the Captain Bassa should lose his head (to pacifie the Senate) for attempting it without Order, and so to perswade them it was onely a Capricio of his own brain, and a plot of his own contrivance. Anno 1648, they soon were Masters of the Field, and began the Siege of Candia with so furious an onset, that they made a breach and entred it, and for the space of seven hours vvere vvithin the Town; but the Defendants by their valour beat them out with infinite loss and damage. Anno 1649, they made a second attempt, which proving fruitless and ineffectual, they then left it, never expecting to win it by storm. On a rising ground about three Miles from the old, they have built another Town, called New Candia, which is the Residence of the Turkish Bassa, where they have strongly fortified them∣selves, blocking up the City; so that now there is no commerce at all but by Sea, which fur∣nisheth the Candiots with plenty of provisions, and all other necessaries whatsoever.
AN ACCOUNT Of the Siege of CANDIA. HAving given you a Description of Candia, we will proceed to the last Siege and Surrender thereof, which we have, no account of till about September 1666; and then all hopes of peace being laid aside, the Turks made some attempts upon Almissa, a strong place in Dalmatia, but with little or no success; and much about the same time fell upon Marcasca, a Town upon the Sea-coasts, which they intended to attaque; but General Cornaro rallied up those Forces he had, and could get together so sud∣denly, and marched towards the Enemy, man∣ning out several Barques and Gallies, that
might play on them with their Cannon, and do execution: yet before he appear'd, the Turks had made an assault, but were so warm∣ly, receiv'd, that they were, beat off with the loss of nigh 150 of their men which were left dead upon the place, besides a considerable number of wounded persons which they brought off with them: and a few days after, made another assault upon the Town; but Ge∣neral Cornaro drew out of the Garrison all the men privately in the night, undermining the Fort, with an intent to blow up the Turks: they came up furiously to the Walls, but find∣ing no Enemy grew jealous of the Stratagem and retreated, and in a short time saw the Mine fired, which made them march farther into the Country; but the Venetian Forces returned to Spalatto, and there continued to observe the Enemies motion Little was done by them till towards the latter end of this instant September, at which time some Turks were discovered before Can∣dia Nuova; but they onely fired a few Guns and returned back to their Quarters; the Gar∣rison being well fortified, and furnished with men and provisions. At the same time they made an attempt upon Gradan, a strong Fort near Marcasca; but they were so vigorously entertained by the Besieged, that they were
forced to quit their Posts with the loss of four hundred men. In October the Turks of Canea took the Field vvith their peeces of Cannon, intending to leavy Contributions in the Country; and to prevent all information, set strong Guards up∣on the adjoyning Sea-coasts. Tovvards the latter end of this Month Signior Barbaro, Proveditor-General, arrived in Candia; his Predecessor Signior Priuli being upon his departure to Dalmatia in the quality of General. The Morlacks (vvho are Croats or Dalma∣tians, so called from the Hills where they formerly lived, being a sort of people that for∣sook the Turkish bondage, and put themselves under the Senates Government) about this time made several incursions into the Turkish Quarters vvith great success, taking a conside∣rable number of Slaves, and bringing several droves of Cattle along vvith them. In November the Grand Signior declar'd his resolution to make War with the Republique, by making preparations both by Sea and Land to attempt Candia the next Spring; to vvhich purpose he lays great Subsidies upon his peo∣ple throughout all his Dominions, and by his light Gallies hath landed some Forces in Canea. This month also the Grand Visier
arrived in Canea, and was received with great joy, which the Turks manifested by many days feasting; who resolved to take the Field as soon as the Season would permit, and to lay close Siege to Candia: The Grand Signior himself giving all possible incouragement to the Levies, and promising extraordinary pay to those that will list themselves among the Janisaries, with an exemption from all Taxes and Subsidies. The Turks preparati∣ons being now very considerable for some weighty designe, the Senate doth strengthen the City again it all attempts; and though it be so well fortified by Nature, yet they defend∣ed it with above 1700 pieces of Cannon, be∣ing very well furnisht with expert Veteran Of∣ficers and Souldiers. In December the Grand Visiers intentions to besiege Candia are daily more and more disco∣vered, which occasion'd General Cornaro and Marquiss Villa to go to Candia with a consi∣derable number of choice men to its assistance. Towards the latter end of this Month the Grand Visier lay about Retimo, having a Body of 40000 Turks drawn together in the Field; and the Marquiss Villa disposed all things in good order, and raised several outworks which did very much contribute to the strengthing of the City. About this time there was talk
of a Treaty, to make the Christians careless in their defence. In January the Turks drew near Candia, and the Garrison made several brisk Sallies with some loss to the Turks, in one of which Vertmiller was slightly hurt. The Grand Visier upon a general Muster of his Forces in the Isle of Candia, found his Army consisted of 23000 men, and issued out Orders to all parts ad∣joyning in the Turks Dominions, to hasten re∣cruits of Men and Ammunition, in order to the speedy besieging of Candia, and to cast se∣veral vast Guns of extraordinary business, to be employed in that service. The Chief Visier continued still at Retimo, making all necessary provisions for his intended design; and sent several of his Officers to take a view of the City and her Fortifications, which the Mar∣quiss did take daily care to strengthen, and for the removal of all combustible matter out of the Houses, to avoid the execution of their Morter-pieces. Toward the latter end of this Month, the Venetian Convoy arrived at Candia, under the command of Semitecolo; and twelve Gallies laden with Bisket were sent into Candia by the Admiral of their Fleet riding at Paros, whose Squadrons were conti∣nually cruising about the Sea to intercept the Provisions design'd for the Turks. The Grand
Visier was now indispos'd at Retimo, but or∣dered the strengthning of New Candia, intend∣ing to raise a Battery near the Lazaretto, to hinder the passage of the Republique's Vessels for the relief of the City; against which the Venetian Forces cast up a strong Fort to beat them off, and prevent their nearer approaches. The Sultan then sent fresh commands to the Visier, to imploy the utmost of his power and endeavours for the gaining of the Metropolis. The Visier being dissatisfied with the former proceedings of the Bassa's of Canea and Candia Nuova, he beheaded them both, and used the like serverity to several Officers, under pretence that they were wanting in the performance of their Duties the last Summer. He hath al∣ways along with him the Aga of the Janisaries as Pay-master to the Army, whose advice sways extreamly with him in all matters of Importance. In the interim the Senate is stu∣dious to defend their Territories against the common Enemy. Now the Treaty that was set on foot by the Prime Visier is wholly bro∣ken off, being resolv'd to prosecute the Siege vigorously. The Visier about the latter of January, or the beginning of February, de∣parted from Retimo to Candia Nuova, intend∣ing to go back to Canea. The Turks laboured hard at the Batteries before Candia, and chiefly
that near Lazaretto, but with little success; for the besieged plyed them very closely from their new Fort, and made a Sally, forcing the Turks from their Batteries, killing five hundred upon the place, and taking forty six Prisoners, with the loss of forty men onely. The Prime Visier now return'd to Canea, as 'twas thought to continue there, as a place of security during the Infection, the Plague raging so violently in the Camp; and their Admiral Bassa to the Dardanellos with the major part of the Fleet. In February the Grand Visier in person with a party of Turks took a view of the Posts, the better to form his Leaguer against the City; but he was so warmly entertained with Can∣non, Morter-pieces, and Granadoes, that they fell into some disorder; which the Garri∣son perceiving, made a smart Sally upon him, forcing him to quit the place and flee to Can∣dia Nuova, leaving his Nephew slain by a Cannon-shot from the Walls dead upon the place, with other considerable persons. At Canea he remain'd in expectation of his Suc∣cors of twenty thousand men from the Grand Signior: and in the mean time the Garrison threw down all the Works cast up by the Turks against the Town, and levelled all their Trenches.
The Turkish Army was now very much visited with the Plague, and destitute of Vi∣ctuals, so that the Visier dispersed his Forces about the Island. And much about this time, Signior Nicola Lyon, Commander of one of the Venetian Ships, met with a Turkish Vessel laden with Provisions, under the Con∣duct of six Gallies, who after an hours dispute took her; at which the Visier was so highly incensed, that he took off the heads of six of the Captains, as being too remiss, and want∣ing duty and courage to defend her. Towards the latter end of this Month, the Turks with a considerable party Marched hear Candia, but were repulsed with no inconsiderable loss; in which encounter two Renegadoes of note were taken prisoners, and carried into Candia. In the beginning of March, Signior Pada∣vino, the Venetian Ambassador, arriv'd at Canea; upon whose approach, the Turkish Forces by order from the Grand Visier, being about 40000 in number, were drawn together in his view: also a Body of Turks a little af∣ter came up to the Walls of Candia in a bravado, but were receiv'd so stoutly by a party that Sallied out against them, that they were forced to quit their station in confusion and great disorder. In this Month, about the
middle thereof, a Turkish Gallie carried off by the Christian Slaves aboard of her, was brought into the Fleet: the manner of the surprise was as followeth: There were 180 Turks and upwards aboard this Gally, with their Officers, among whom there hapned to be a Renegado Grecian, who proving a penitent Apostate, contriv'd this plot, to free himself and the Christian Slaves con∣demn'd to the Oars: He went down pri∣vately into the Hold, and made several holes to let in the water; and having so done, came hastily upon the Deck, crying out that the Vessel had sprung so many and so great Leaks, that it was irrecoverably lost: hereupon the Turks made immediately to a Rock not far off them, where they ran ashore: the Slaves laying hold of this opportunity, row∣ing off the Gally, stopped the Leaks, brought her to Paros, and presented her to the Cap∣tain-General; who presently sent two Gal∣lies well arm'd and man'd to the Rock, where they took all the Turks (who were old Souldiers and persons of Eminency) five or six onely excepted, who were drown'd, endeavouring to save themselves by swim∣ming. In March, some of the Venetian Ships successfully engaged with the Caravan or
Convoy from Alexandria; the Admiral whereof had 300 stout Souldiers aboard of him brought out of Barbary; the Vessel belonging to Tunis, which was commanded by the Sansack of Grand Cayro, or Viceroy of Egypt, who was by Orders from the Grand Signior to go to the assistance of the Grand Visier, and to take upon him the command of the Bassa of Canea: he brought with him 2000 Souldiers raised upon his own ac∣count to that purpose, with several Officers, who had made a solemn vow to the Grand Signior to do their utmost in the War, and to lose their lives rather then to quit the Siege. This Vessel during the dispute took fire, and was consum'd with its fraught, to the value of 200000 Reals, and 50000 Zecchins designed to pay the Grand Visiers Army, besides the private Gold of the Of∣ficers. Many of the men seeking their safe∣ty in the Boat, were taken and made slaves; and several other Vessels of that Convoy fell into the Christians hands with a consi∣derable Booty, and one among the rest la∣den with noble Horses for service was taken by a Christian Privateer that commanded a Pink. The Visier hearing of this ill suc∣cess, cut off the heads of three Captains that arriv'd at Canea, and commanded ten
fresh Gallies to rescue the rest of the Convoy, and conduct them safe to Canea, upon pain of death. About this time there was a Truce be∣tween them for a season, for the repair of the Ruines on both sides occasion'd by a dread∣ful Earthquake that hapned on Holy-Thurs∣day, and several others since: in the former, a great part of Albania suffer'd; it threw down many Houses in Cattaro, with a great part of the Wall towards the Sea, destroy∣ing 600 persons at least; and Buda was wholly swallowed up, in which there pe∣rished the like number of people, both these places being subject to the Republique; and Dulcigno and Castel Nuova, two places be∣longing to the Turks, were both sunk; which was the cause of this Truce between the Ve∣netian and the Turk. General Cornaro and the Marquiss Degl' Oddi were imyloyed to repair the da∣mages suffered at Cattaro by this Earth∣quake. In the Month of April 1667, the Grand Visier plained the Country for five Miles to∣gether about the Port of Suda; cutting down the Trees and Vines, and driving a∣way all the Cattle, that the Garrison might not be supplyed from those parts: whilst in
the mean time the people belonging to the Republique were very industrious, and fini∣shed several Out-works which did very much strengthen Candia; besides, Captain-General Morosini sent large Supplies of Pro∣visions and Moneys into the City in several Vessels commanded by Captain Gio. Morosini. But the Visier finding his Army to consist of 50000 men, having received supplies from the Ottoman Court, raised his Bat∣teries against the Fort of St. Demetrius; who was manfully withstood by the Defendants, with some loss to the Besiegers. The Turks having found an opportunity to convoy forty Gallies with Souldiers and Ammuni∣tion into Canea, were so much incouraged hereby, that they a little after gave a busie assault to Suda, a considerable Fortress of the Venetians; but were beaten off with much slaughter. In May, the Turkish Saiques taking their way by the South-Sea, arrived at Gira Pe∣tra, and put ashore 5000 Janisaries; which so heartned the Army, that the Visier resolved upon the Siege of Candia: to this end he disarm'd all the Gallies, imploying the Souldies in his Army, and the Slaves as Pioneers to work in the Trenches; and speedily raised three Batteries against the
three principal Bulwarks of that City; which the Christians defended with extraordinary valour. But the Visier being sensible of the Grand Signior's high displeasure, attempted them with all his force, and played upon their Forts with his Batteries, intrenching 5000 men before the Fort St. Demetrius, battering it with 100 of pieces of Cannon; he being then in expectation of the recruit of 8000 men from Morea: And the Bassa of Bossina pressed one man out of every House in all the Countries about him; ex∣cepting Licia and Corbaccia, who denyed it, pretending their inability to go to War, by reason of a Famine lately among them. The Turks had now laid a close Siege to Candia, battering it in four places; but the Visier first demolished the Town of New Candia (formerly built by the Turks) because that the materials thereof might be useful in raising their Works, and to prevent his Souldiers retreating thither. The Ports against which he made his Batteries, were Bethlem, Sabionera, Jesus and St. Demetrius; the men imployed against them were 40000 in number, besides 12000 Pioneers. But the Christians were much incouraged by the arri∣val of the Convoy under the command of Gui∣stiniano, Commissary of the Provisions, who
had sent 70000 Ducats into the Town, be∣sides all other necessaries, and brought with him 75000 more, which vvere conveyed to the Captain-General for the use of the Ar∣mata. The Siege vvas very industriously managed by the Grand Visier, their Forces vvell ordered, and their Cannons continu∣ally roaring; they gave a stout assault, but vvere repulst with considerable damage. The Visier being oblig'd upon his ovvn re∣putation to hazard his vvhole Army, made six furious assaults upon the City, but vvas in all beaten off vvith the loss of 12000 men, at least, in these attempts. For tvven∣ty days time that the Turks had spent in the Siege of Candia, they gained not so much as one foot of ground; and their great Bat∣teries and Cannon did little injury, being at too great a distance, and mounted too high, so that by falling upon the highest Houses they onely beat off some Tiles, and threvv dovvn some Chimnies; vvhich vvas all the execution that vvas done. The Christian Privateers did do the Republique excellent Service at Sea; among others one called the Notali, having seven hundred men a∣board, took in fevv days above tvventy prizes. General Villa made a lusty Sally out of
Candia vvith 2000 choice men, vvho fell upon one of the Turks Posts vvith such courage and resolution, that he made a great slaughter among them, they being out of order; but at length rallying together, pur∣sued the General, vvho drevv them into a place prepar'd for that purpose, and then ordered the Mines to be fired; vvhich vvas so successfully effected, that according to the information of a Renegado afterwards, near 3000 Turks were destroyed. On the 28 of May, the Turks began some violent attaques upon the Fort near Bethlem, and the Gate Panigra; and that morning they played upon the Bulwarks with two pieces of Cannon, which were answer'd by the Guns from their Counter-batteries and Courtines. The 29 the Enemy made nearer approaches, and began with two Guns onely to batter the Bulwarks of Jesus; but the Christians with their Guns from the Gallies, and those from the Works, play'd upon the Turks so warmly, that they were disordered, and the Grand Visier forced to change his Post. On the 30 the Turks onely wrought hard to raise a Battery against St. Andrews Fort.
The 31 the Enemy assaulted the Fort with great fury; and in that days service Captain Galeazzo, an Officer of Piedmont, was un∣fortunately slain by a Shot in the Out-work of St. Maries, and Colonel Castaneuf; but the Savoyards under his command, to re∣venge his death, did fall that night upon the Turks with Hand-Granadoes, Swords and Pistols, assisted by some other Forces, and made a great confusion among them, com∣pelling them to leave their Works with much disorder. The Savoyards followed them into one of their Redoubts, and slew a considerable number of them; the Guns from the Town in the mean time play∣ing upon the Enemy, to hinder their pur∣suit. June the first, there was little or no action; onely the Enemies Cannon firing, dismounted a Gun in the Fort Marti∣nengo. June the second, they formed another Battery, and fired at the Besieged with two other pieces of Cannon, bringing up a Gal∣liot with another Vessel to furnish them with Provisions, wherewith they were la∣den; and the Venetians sent out two Gal∣lies to ingage them, but they were so stout∣ly defended by their Batteries, that the
Gallies were forced to betake themselves to their own Fort for protection. The same morning, the Turks laid an Am∣bush near the Out-work of Mocenigo, to in∣tercept the Venetians, and prevent the relief of their Guards; but they were valiantly re∣sisted and put to flight, leaving many of them dead upon the place, besides those that were kill'd in the retreat, which were more in number. June the third, the Turks spent this morning in interring their dead, and in Fu∣neral-Ceremonies; but that afternoon they fired very thick upon the Town, with Bullets of 80, 90, and 120 pound weight. June the fourth, they approached within a stones cast of the Walls; and that night there was a resolute skirmish before Panigra, where they were receiv'd with Volleys of Musket, and plenty of Cannon-shot. June the fifth, in the morning, near the Works of St. Mary they raised a new Bat∣tery, playing upon the Besieged with four great Guns; and wrought very hard to cast up a Trench to secure a Passage for their Ar∣tillery, in which they were defended by a great number of Musqueteers, drawn thi∣ther for that designe; but they had such a
peal of Ordnance, Small-shot and Grana∣does from the Town, that they desisted from their enterprize, with an extraordin∣ary loss of men; the Besieged onely had some few Souldiers wounded, but lost not one man that day. June the sixth, the Guns onely played on both sides. The seventh, the Turks plyed again their Works, and made their approaches with greater preparation then formerly, working under ground. The eighth instant they raised another Battery against St. Andrews Bulwark, and endeavoured the reparation of their old Battery at the Lazaretto; but the Marquiss Villa ordered a Counter-battery well plant∣ed with Guns to be made to secure the place, and in his retreat by the Mole, re∣ceived a slight hurt in his hand by the flying of the Stones, occasion'd from Can∣non-short that strook upon the Walls. That night they made a Sally from the Half-moon of Mocenigo; where there was a sharp fight which continued for many hours, but concluded with great slaughter of the Ene∣my by the Cannon and Morter-pieccs from the City-works. On the nineteenth of July Signior Baroni
with two Gallies, and not long after Signior Carenzo Pisani, who was chosen Proveditor for Candia, entred the Port with Succours for the City: and the same Evening his Ex∣cellency Captain-General Morosini followed them Incognito with two Gallies more. He was at his landing near the Arsenal, received by Signior Barbaro with great joy, and all the Martial Ceremonies usual upon such oc∣casions; who presented him with the Keys of the City; and with a great Train of Of∣ficers and Souldiers, accompanied with Sig∣nior Maro Proveditor to the Fleet; and the Proveditor of the Isle attended him to his Coach, and the Lodgings prepar'd for him: He passed under a Triumphal Arch erected in the great Street for him, being met also by the Cavalry at the Gates of the City, and saluted by the great Guns; the whole City testifying their extraordinary joy and satisfaction for his arrival, by their loud Acclamations and rare Fire-works. The next morning the Turks at break of day discharged a great Volley of Musquets and Cannon against the City, which the Besieged scorning to be indebted to them) return'd from the Walls. The same morning Colonel Chateauneuf attaqued a Redoubt cast up by the Enemy
near Panigra, to give the Captain-General some signal testimony of the courage and resolution of the Besieged, and very freely threw his Hand-granadoes among them: but the Turks being prepar'd for their re∣ception, issued out, and pressed very hard and close upon them; yet they, being se∣conded by another party commanded by the Captains Castelli, Bonefort, and a third whose name we have no certain knovvledge of, renewed their assault, and did consi∣derable execution upon the Turks: but the Alarm being by this time grown warm, and great numbers coming to their as∣sistance, the Candiots retir'd to the Covert way of, the Fort Panigra, and the Enemy pursued them with great shouting; and notwithstanding the Palisadoes, and a Guard of forty Musqueteers that play'd upon them with their Vollies, they were forc'd to leave their Colonel Chateauneuf behind them, and shelter themselves in the Moat; but he with an inconsiderable number of Officers valiantly beat off the Enemy twice or thrice together, and was at last relieved by Ser∣jeant Major Motta, who Sallying out of the Fort, beat back the Turks into their Re∣doubt with a great slaughter; he himself receiving a shot in the breast, but without
hurt, his Armor being well tryed, and of proof. In this attaque the Christians came off with the loss of one Serjeant, two Soul∣dies, and two others wounded. At the same time Colonel Martinom, Com∣mander of Panigra, sent out twelve Souldiers with Granadoes, and forty Foot-men com∣manded by Major Bricheras Lieutenant, to assault another Redoubt cast up on the right hand of the Fort; which they performed with great courage, beating out the Turks, and putting many of them to the Sword: but the Enemy growing more numerous, they retreated, their Lieutenant being shot dead under the Redoubt, but like true Soul∣diers, resolving not to leave the Body of their Officer in the power of the Enemy, they return'd upon them, and with great va∣lor forced them to give ground, taking up the Body, and retiring to their Works with much glory and renown. The Savoyards also, being but 60 Officers and Souldiers, with Granadoes, under the Command of Colonel Torre, Sallied out from the Ravelin of Bethlem, and fell upon the Enemies Line, where a Body of Turks stood upon their Guard to defend the Pioneers; and there hapned a very hot dispute; but they sending out a recruit
of Savoyards so assist them, the Enemy was beaten from the Line, and forced to seek their safety in some of their Redoubts, lea∣ving 60 of their party dead upon the place, four of whose heads the Candiots brought with them, and presented to the Captain-General, whose valour in this noble attempt was rewarded with forty Reals; and in this Service they were so fortunate, as to come off with the loss of a single Souldier. Co∣lonel Arborio and Marino, with the Count Brusano Captain of the Guard to Marquiss Villa, sallied out of the Post of St. Mary, with a party of fifty men; forced the Turks out of two several Redoubts, kill'd a con∣siderable number of them, and lost onely one Serjeant. There was also great execution done up∣on the Enemy by a Squadron that issued from the Fort of St. Demetrius, who slaughtred many of them. The Turks being by this time sufficient∣ly sensible of their successless procedings by Batteries and open force, were wholly bent upon their Mines, imploying constantly night and day ten thousand Pioneers to work in them; whereupon they advanced greatly in their approaches, the driness of the Sea∣son contributing very much to their de∣signes;
and laboured extreamly to meet with the Mines from the Out-works; some whereof the Christians did spring and blow up, which proved very fatal and destruc∣tive to the Turks. In the interim the great shot fly very liberally on both sides, but with little damage to the City, onely beating down the tops of some Churches and high Houses, with the loss of four or five per∣sons. The Turks still plyed the City very close with their Guns from the Batteries; and throwing Morter-pieces into the Town, with little loss to the Besieged, but great loss to the Besiegers. The Christian Cor∣sayres did very considerable service by crui∣sing upon the Sea, and in the Archipelago; by which means they did infinitely inrich themselves, having taken several great Prizes, and intercepted the Enemies Vessels which were laden with Provisions intended for their Armies supply. Now the Turks began to be very sparing of their Cannon-shot, which was supposed to be for want of Powder; who finding little or no success thereby, they fell to their Mines, and sprung one made under the Out-work of the Half-moon of Mocenigo, and entred the breach, took possession there∣of; killing fifty Souldiers placed there to
defend it: The Enemy being elevated with this success, sent 3000 men to make good the place, of which they continued Masters for the space of one day and a half; but Marquiss Villa knowing that it might prove advantagious to them in attaquing the next Work, was resolved to dispossess them; and therefore he nobly issued out with a Party of able Souldiers, and at the same time gave fire to a Mine, formerly made un∣der it, though undiscovered by the Enemy, which blew up so successfully, that the Turks persiht most miserably in the ruines; and then the Marquess falling in among the rest, after a sharp and bloody fight of six hours continuance, beat them off, and re∣gain'd the place, with the loss of 300 of his own men, and above 2000 Turks. The next day the Grand Visier, having had so great a loss of his best Souldiers, called a Council of his principal Bassa's; where it was resolv'd, that they should send a Trumpeter to the Captain-General, to de∣sire that Signor Giaverina might come and treat with them in order to an agreement: but Colonel Vecchia went out in his stead, they not approving of sending out the for∣mer at present; and he was courteously receiv'd by the whole Army, but especially
by the Visier, who treated him with a costly Collation; telling him, That if his General wanted Provisions, he would freely send him what his Camp did afford: but the Colonel after thanks return'd for his civil proffer, as∣sured him that the City was so plentifully supplyed by the Fleet, that they could not stand in need of any thing: he was safely sent back to the City, with much importu∣nity that Giaverina might be admitted to treat with them; which vvas at last conde∣scended unto, and he vvas receiv'd by the Turks with great joy, vvho vvelcom'd him vvith all their Cannons, and saluted him vvith several Musqueteers; the general cry through the vvhole Camp being nothing but Peace, Peace. At this time the Vene∣tians receiv'd very certain intelligence, that the Turks Army did not consist of above 25000 men, the Svvord and Sickness having svvept avvay the one half of their Army; though succours vvere daily expected from Morea. About this time the Captain Bassa vvas discovered near the Isle Cerigo, vvhere he had landed several of his men, but the Venetian Gallies coming to ingage him, he put off to Sea with such haste, that he left 200 of his men behind him, vvhich vvere taken by the Candiots and made slaves.
But this Treaty like the rest soon vanish∣ed, and came to nothing. The Turks con∣tinuing still their Works under-ground, put∣ting all their confidence in the Mines, vvhich the Besieged laboured to frustrate by their Counter-Mines; yet they applyed their greatest force and Works against Panigra; labouring hard at their Mines, vvhich they often sprung on every side, and in the mean time plyed the Tovvn and Fort, especially, vvith great and small shot: but the Be∣sieged are not backvvard, either in the one or the other, so that the Enemies designs prove unsuccessful. Before Panigra the Turks raised one very large Battery that had nine great Guns, from vvhence they played furiously for ma∣ny days together, and vvere ansvvered by the Besieged, vvith extraordinary loss to the Besiegers; for above 12000 Turks perished by the Candiots Sallies, Shot, Granadoes and Mines, with several Captains of Note, and ex∣perienced Officers among them. The Veneti∣ans having lost since the beginning of the Siege about 1000 men, with some Comman∣ders; among whom Baron Baroni is one, vvho vvas kill'd by a Musquet-shot on the 26 of July. And the Ladies, & others of that tender Sex, did give as signal testimonies of their
courage & valour in the defence of the Town, as the men; among vvhom the Wife of Co∣lonel Motta, vvho vvas Coloness of the Regi∣ment of Women, behaved her self vvith incredible resolution and infinite courage; vvhose death vvas much lamented, she be∣ing unhappily kill'd by the fall of a Wall, beaten dovvn by the Besiegers Cannon; vvho still are very intent upon the Siege, and approach nearer and nearer the Tovvn, by the daily springing of their Mines, shaking the vvhole City vvith the force of them; and are constantly assaulting, but as constantly repuls'd and beaten off; and 300 of them lost their lives, besides a great many more buried in their ovvn mines, by the blovving up of one of the Venetians Counter-mines. But the Turks by their frequently repeated and continued Batteries, had by this time made a great breach in the left Horn of the Fort Panigra, and another in that of Mo∣cenigno; and on the eleventh of Angust they gave a violent assault to both; and to divert the Candiots, did at the same time storm the Tovvn at several other places; but by the courage of the Besieged vvere e∣very vvhere repuls'd vvith great slaughter; the Besiegers leaving many of their dead behind them, vvhose heads adorn the
Houses of the Venetian Officers, vvherevvith they are set round, as Trophies of their Va∣lour, and revvards of their resolution. Yet the Turks are no vvays discouraged, but are principally incouraged by a Renegado Je∣suit called La Grange, who is courteously en∣tertain'd by the Visier, and wholly sway'd by his advice. The Turks now make use of several Gunners that are Christians, whom they have compell'd into their service by force, or drawn them in by flattery; and to ter∣rifie the rest, they cut off the head of one of them, who was suspected not to have fired his Gun to the best advange. They still continued springing of their Mines; which occasions many daily sharp encoun∣ters; and the courage of the Candiots is as frequently signaliz'd by the great slaughter of the Turks: which so incensed the Vi∣sier, that he commanded a general assault, which was perform'd with a noise as great as their fury, and for a considerable time continued with much obstinacy; but they finding the greatest loss to be their own, and the Defendants inconsiderable; the Visier gave over the assault, whose trouble and almost despair is encreased by the great wants of necessary Provisions in the Camp,
and the difficulty of being supplyed, by rea∣son of the indefatigable industry & diligence of the Venetian Squadrons, who so continual∣ly. cruise before Canea, that they cannot steal in with their Vessels: insomuch that the Turks grew full of despondencie, considering that in so long a Siege, after so many men lost, so many assaults made, and so many Mines sprung, they had not as yet made themselves masters of any one Out-work of the Christi∣ans; and though the Turks were in great wants, yet the Venetians were destitute of nothing that was necessary, either of men, money, Ammunition, or any other Provisions whatsoever. But the Turks still made daily assaults, springing fresh Mines; yet by the prudence and conduct of the Besieged, their attempts have been frustrated. Now the Turks Can∣non had torne some houses, and beat down some part of their Walls; but the great num∣ber of Granadoes shot from the Enemies Morter-pieces, did the greatest prejudice to the Town. Now the Captain-general, for prevention of all surprizes, commanded all his Souldiers to keep their Posts allotted them, by a ve∣ry strict Proclamation; and Ordered that all sorts of Victuals should be sold near the
Walls of the Town, to remove all pretences for their absence. Then the Turks raised a Battery near the Post, but to no purpose; and bent the most considerable force they had against the Out-works of Mocenigo and Panigra, and did them some damage by the often spring∣ing of Mines, and chiefly that of Panigra. At this time Signior Giustiniano Commissary of the Victuals, with two other Officers, were kill'd by the blowing up of one of them, which wholly destroyed the Left-horn of Panigra: and another Mine blew up the Counterscarp. Upon an exact view of all the Souldiers in the City, it was found that about 1500 had been killed since the Siege; but that there were still above 10000 able men left to defend the place. Now the Grand Visier being more intent then ever upon the taking of the City, gave order that materials for building Huts and Lodges convenient for the Souldiers, should be brought to the Leaguer, intending to lye before the Town all the Winter; resolving not to raise the Seige till he had either ta∣ken the Town, or lost his whole Army in the Attempt. And the Turks having made their ap∣proaches
proaches to the Half-moon of Mocenigo and the Fort Panigra, lodged themselves in the Trenches thereof; and in a small time sprung several Mines under each Work, which took so effectually, that a wide breach was made in both places; and the same night they immediately made a desperate assault, appearing in great numbers upon the breaches, distinguished by some white upon their Armes: but the Besieged being very well prepar'd to receive them, the Turks, after a smart fight, were forced by the Gar∣rison to give over the Attempt, with a great loss of men, and some Colours. So that the Enemy being so constantly defeated in their designs upon the Out-works, have given over those places, being much discouraged by their great losses. The Visier therefore commanded the Pioneers to undermine the Town-ditch; which the Christian Officers observing, by their Counter-mines within endeavoured to defeat them, and with great good success met with one of their Gal∣leries, which they absolutely ruin'd, and bu∣ried the Turks therein that were imployed in that business. The Candiots about this time received a recruit of 2000 Souldiers, and 200000 Crowns for their encourage∣ment.
In September, the Grand Visier finding that his Souldiers, especially the Janisaries, were ready to break out into a mutiny, and threatned to leave the Siege, being impati∣ent at the tediousness thereof, resolv'd to put things to a speedy issue; and therefore commanded a general assault to be made, which was accordingly executed. The Turks did storm the Breaches very furiously; but were resisted so valiantly by the Besieged, that after a fierce and bloody dispute, they gave over with the loss of 7000 men: The Christians loss was also great, who had 1500 of their men slain; among whom were five Noblemen of Venice, who with great honour sold their lives in a defensive War against the Common Enemy of Christianity. The Turks finding their labour fruitless, notwith∣standing their endeavours to lodge them∣selves in the breaches of Panigra and Moce∣nigo; have since spent their time in fil∣ling the Trenches between the Bulwarks of those two Forts, to hinder all communi∣cation between them; and to that purpose they had brought thither a great quantity of earth, though with considerable loss and danger; and were in hopes to make a pas∣sage to the left Angle of the Fort Panigra, where they had made the widest breach;
but the Besieged, to frustrate their designes, appear'd upon the breach with a party of select Souldiers, and a certain number of Slaves taken out of the Gallies that rid then in the Harbour, who behav'd them∣selves so couragiously, that the Enemy re∣treated; and the Christians in the interim cast up so strong a defence in that part of the breach, clearing all to the Trench, and throwing out the Earth they cast in, that there was little encouragement for a se∣cond attempt: besides, they placed a Ma∣chine over against the Breach, (which was the invention of Captain-General Morosini) which was Musquet-proof, and could con∣tain 20 Souldiers; where they might safely manage their Arms to defend the Breach. Many Mines were daily sprung, and one of the Christians did notable execution, where by blowing up twelve Barrels of Powder, there happened a great slaughter among the Turks; and many of their bodies were thrown into the Trench. The Besieged also made many success∣ful Sallies, and to their great encourage∣ment had receiv'd a supply of two thou∣sand men, with store of all necessary Pro∣visions, that arrived safe at Candia in their Convoy, which consisted of twelve Ships:
This made them resolve upon a general Sallie out of the City, which was perform∣ed with great loss to the Turks. The Enemy being almost tyred out with the Siege (espe∣cially the Janisaries and Spahi) their Army bring reduced from 60000 to 20000, were resolv'd to quit the Siege; yet the Visier by his great diligence and large promises per∣swades them still to continue at the Siege, where they still beat the Town vvith their Ordnance. But among other late adventures, in October, about four Gally-slaves, belonging to the Venetian, being imployed in one of the Out-vvorks, discovered about 100 Turks dravving near them in a Body; vvhereupon one of them, vvhose name vvas Bressano, making himself Captain, encouraging his Companions, and taking such vveapons as came next to hand, issued out upon the Turks vvith great resolution; kill'd 30 of them in a very small time, vvounded many of the rest, and put them all to flight for their safety: Bressano having in this Sally given a sufficient testimony of his great courage, by killing 16 of them vvith his ovvn hand. The Captain-General at this very instant stand∣ing upon the Walls, and observing all pas∣sages, sent for him, and commending him
his valour, rewarded him with a Gold-Chain, and the Command of a Company of Foot; being very liberal in bestowing moneys upon the rest of the Slaves, and en∣rolling them into a Company. Much a∣bout this time an Aga with four Turks fled into Candia, with a considerable sum of money; and ten or twelve thousand Turks had quitted the service, being weari∣ed with expectation, and tir'd out with the Siege; which extreamly incensed the Visier; yet he gave order for the repair of the Fort of New Candia, which he at his first set∣ting down before the City had demolished as altogether useless; being resolv'd to spend the whole Winter in lying before the Town: and in order thereunto, sent out se∣veral dispatches into Egypt, Barbary, and all other places in the Ottoman Empire; threatning the Bassa's with severe and pre∣sent punishment, if not absolutely and speedily obey'd. The Grand Signior was now arriv'd at Morea in person, to hasten the transporta∣tion of fresh forces, intending to summon together the whole strength of his Empire, rather then desert the Siege dishonourably. Yet notwithstanding the great losses of men, the tediousness of the Siege, the frustrating
of their designes in their assaults above, and the successlessness of their Mines under ground, the impatience of the Grand Sig∣nior, maugre all discouragement what∣soever, they still engage in many warm disputes, and endeavour to fill up the Trenches; but the Besieged still beat them off, and throw out what they cast in: but the Christian Officers lookt upon this as prejudicial, and time ill spent, seeing the Enemy from one of his Batteries planted upon the Counterscarp, destroyed their Blinds, and laid them open to their Small-shot; therefore they resolv'd to destroy the Battery, and imployed the Pioneers to that purpose, who sprung a large Mine, which blew it up wholly, with a great number of Turks, burying all their Cannons in its ruines, together with the Mustapha Bassa, Beilerbeg of Anatolia, one of the most con∣siderable persons among them, and who chiefly advis'd the carrying on the Siege on that side of the City. Several other Mines were sprung the day following on both sides, by which the Panigra was totally destroy'd, and reduc'd to a heap of rubbish, though still defended with infinite valour; the Christians appearing in white Armor, to the terror of the Enemy. After this, the Be∣sieged
made many Sallies, and in their re∣treat drew the Enemy over Mines which were prepar'd for them; and when the Christians saw their opportunity, fir'd them with great execution, and in little time beat them to their second Redoubt, returning with Arms and Baggage in all their Sallies. Yet the Turks by the approaches of their Galleries made their advances with great obstinacy, springing divers Mines upon the Trenches of the City, with great damage to the Palisadoes of the Falsbray near ad∣joyning; but the Christians, by their indu∣stry, placed new Palisadoes on the Falsbray: The Turks still working their Mines with all the subtilty imaginable; one whereof they sprung, which was under the Half-moon at the right-hand of the Panigra, which al∣most fill'd a part of the Trench near the Front of the Bulwark Bethlem with its ruines; of which the Turks were resolv'd to make the best advantage they could, and that very night were making preparati∣ons for a storm; but there fell such violent rain in the night, that they were forced to desist. Afterwards they sprung another Mine in the Graft, which removed many Palisadoes, and endangered the person of the Marquiss Villa. Another Mine of the E∣nemies
which was ready to spring, was hap∣pily discovered by the Christians, and the Powder remov'd: the Enemy afterwards, when they thought it convenient, fir'd the Train, being big with expectation of the issue; but they were set upon by a party of the Besieged, who also gave fire to two Mines of their own near Mocenigo, and one of 35 Barrels of Powder, which over∣whelm'd many Turks in the ruines, and dis∣ordered their Mines in those places. Now the Garrison having receiv'd a con∣siderable supply of fresh Souldiers and some Horse, they made a resolute Sally; and the Turks drawing up all their forces, main∣tain'd the dispute two hours together; but they were at last beaten into their own Trenches, with great loss of their chief Captains and Commanders, besides private Souldiers; the Grand Visier himself esca∣ping not without great hazzard of his life, or imprisonment. The Turks Army being now reduced to 18000, were resolv'd upon a dernier effort, and to make a general Sally; but were repuls'd with great slaughter. Now since the Turk had made several experiments of the valor of the Candiots, by Assaults and Skirmishes which prov'd unsuccessful, he endeavour'd to obtain by
stratagem what he could not do by force; to which end they shot several Arrows in∣to the City, to which they had fastned Let∣ters, both in French and Italian, which con∣tain'd many Arguments to perswade the Christians to a surrender, bragging of their Supplies they suddenly expected, resolving not to quit the Siege; menacing them, up∣on their refusal, with all the extremities us'd by an incensed Enemy. On the fifteenth of November, in the E∣vening, the Grand Visier discharged all his Cannon, which were seconded with five Volleys of Musqueteers, three of them with Bullets, and two without; accompanied with great shouts, and setting up many Lights about the Camp; which made the Christians jealous of some large Succours sent them, or some extraordinary expecta∣tion from their Mines: but they drew up their men, and commanded them to stand all night to their Arms; and in the morn∣ing they found it onely to be a Turkish Ro∣domontado, a meer Artifice of the Grand Visiers, by throwing out reports of Succours and Supplies, to raise the drooping spirits of the Souldiers. The sixteenth of November, being the Anniversary of St. Giustina, on which in
the year 1570, the Christians gain'd a glo∣rious Victory against the Turks, was cele∣brated by the Besieged with as much true zeal and joy, as that of the Turks the day before was counterfeit and feigned. Some few days after, the Grand Signior sent the Visier a Vest and Scimiter as a present; which he receiv'd, with some Moneys for the Souldiers pay, which made them repeat the like Triumphs throughout the whole Turkish Camp. After this, the Christians made a large Mine without, the Raveline di Samo Spirito, divided into three parts, which they sprung so prosperously, that it ruin'd their Redoubts and Lines, blew up their Bodies in the Air, and entomb'd others of them in its ruines; which was followed by a stout Sally, to the destruction of many Turks, and some Commanders of Eminencie. At which the Visier was so much inrag'd, that he resolv'd to win the Town, or lost his life in the attempt; sending to all his Bassa's through∣out the Grand Signiors Dominions, for all supplies of Provisions they could possibly furnish him withal. The Turks having gain'd the ruin'd Out-works of Panigra, advanced with their Mines and Galleries towards the great
Trench; but a considerable slaughter hapned among the Turks, by the frequent springing of the Mines, and numerous Sallies that were daily made: but Signior Lorenzo Pi∣sani, the Proveditor of Candia, was slain by one of their Morter-pieces; and that Noble Venetian Bertolo Pisani unfortunate∣ly kill'd by a shot. Yet the rains falling so excessively upon them, the Grand Visier, withdrew, leaving about 6000 men behind him to defend the Batteries, and other Works. Much about this time, Secretary Giavarina, Minister of State to the Venetians, who had continued some time in the Grand Visiers Camp, lodged in the Tents of Caterzogolo, which was a place of bad air, died, and five or six of his Family; which might be occasion'd by the Contagion that raged so violently among the Turks. The City was now in a good condition, by reason of their constant supplies from the Fleet; but the Turks endeavoured to make good their Post in the ruines of the Fort Pa∣nigra: and the Venetian General ordered a new Line to be drawn in the old Works, to the end that the Besieged might be in a capacity to defend every part of the Town sufficiently, if the Turks (according to their
menaces) should imploy their whole power against Candia the next Sum∣mer. The Grand Visier being now retir'd with the major part of his Army into the Vale of Giofiro, the 6000 men that he left, still employed themselves about the defence of those Posts that they had in their possession; the Besieged minding, during this vacancy, the prepration of their Works, and clearing their Trenches: but the Visier sent some additional Forces, and plenty of Provisions from the Walls, where the gross of the Army retir'd, with express orders to lose no opportunity of gaining upon Candia; which so encouraged them, that about Christ∣mas they made frequent assaults, and were as frequently beaten off; but on St. Ste∣phens day there was a great dispute; the Besieged issuing out in white Arms, destroy∣ed a great number of the Enemy. In January the Turks quitted all their Batteries before Candia but two, and sent most of their Cannon into Candia Nuova: and at this time there dyed among them near 200 in a day of the Plague; which made the Visier retire ino Canea, sending his sick and wounded Souldiers into Napoli di Malvasia.
The Christian General resolving now upon a Sally, drew out a strong party, fell upon the Enemies Redoubts, and put the Turks to their heels; with a great loss of men on their part, and but forty of the Be∣sieged. Now the Bassa of Morea, had raised a Body of 8000 Turks, who were ready to be imbarqued for Canea; but they in their way seeing 3000 Turks wounded; who were conveyed in Carts to several Hospitals in Morea, prepar'd for their reception; this sight made so deep an impression upon them, that they all quitted the service, flee∣ing into the Mountains for safety, and leaving their Bag and Baggage behind them; declaring their unwillingness to en∣gage in such desperate service, where an Army of 60000 that sate down before Candia at first, was already reduc'd to 16000. But the Grand Signior resolv'd to employ all his Forces, both by Sea and Land, for the carrying on of the War a∣gainst Candia; and therefore dispatched two Chiauces to Tunis, and some other parts of Barbary, to command all assistance of Shipping, that they could possibly afford him; but he receiv'd a cold and dissatis∣factory answer, by way of excuse. In February the Turks having receiv'd
some Supplies, renewed the Siege, and cast up a large Fort at the Sabionera, and planted many pieces of Ordnance thereon, where∣with they played very hard upon the Port and Town, but with very inconsiderable damage. Towards the latter end of this Month, a Renegado that commanded a Body of two thousand Turks, endeavoured to sur∣prize the Fort St. Andre; but the Mar∣quiss Villa having timely notice of their designe, sent Colonel Motto with a consi∣derable number of able and resolute men, who assaulted the Enemy so couragiously, that they slew 500 of them upon the place, put the rest to the rout, and with a very small loss return'd with 50 heads to the Town. Now the City had receiv'd a considerable supply of men; and Captain Molino having made a discovery of five of the Turkish Gallies coming out of the Dardanelloes, having aboard them men and Ammunition for the Grand Visier, chased them with his Squadron for some hours, and sunk two of them, the other three run aground upon one of the Islands to a∣void him, where they were broken in pieces, but the men escaped. The Turks about this time got many
Ships together, with Supplies intended for Canea; but they understanding that the Christians Fleet was cruising about those Coasts, were forced to flee into Rhodes for shelter, and there expect the opportunity of a safe passage. Yet notwithstanding all these discouragements, they continued their Mines, and attempted to make a way through the Graft, that they might assault the Town with the less difficulty; but by the vigilancy of the Defendants, at this very time, two of the Galleries made near one of the Principal Bulwarks of the Town, were blown up by the Christians Counter∣mines. The Grand Signior appear'd still more active in, and intent upon the business of the Siege then ever, drawing up great numbers of men in all places, intending to make them in all 100000 strong; and to employ 100 Gallies, and fifty other Ships of force in the Service, with a great supply of all necessaries to the effecting of such a work. On the eighth of March, seven Venetian Gallies cruising in the Archipelago, were set upon in the night by twelve under the com∣mand of Durach Bey, a famous Corsaire; but some other Christian Vessels coming
opportunely to their assistance: the Admi∣ral took seven of them, which he sent in∣to the Port of Candia, sunk three, so that there onely escap'd two, very much disabled. In which Naval engagement the Christians lost 400 men, and among the rest Signior Daniel Giustiniano the Pay-master; Foscarini, one Captain of a Gally, and six other Of∣ficers were wounded; but there fell of the Turks Durach Bey himself, and some other persons of note, with a great number of men; four hundred and ten Prisoners were taken, and 1100 Christians and upwards freed from Turkish servitude. About the beginning of April, 1668, Georgio Maria Vitali was by the Senate made Knight of the Order of St. Mark, for his service against the Turks. Upon this de∣feat, the Captain of the Armata sent a Tartan from Candia to Venice, who arriv'd the 21 of April, S. N. being Sunday, and brought with him several Flags, and other Trophies of Victory, as a present to the Grand Duke: and upon the entry of these Prizes into the Port of Candia, where they had a very joyful reception, and were welcomed with the discharge of the Towns great Guns; General Villa observing the Turks idly gazing upon the Triumphs of the Christi∣ans,
sallied out upon them unexpectedly, forcing them to flee into their Camp, and killing them on their own Redoubts; re∣turning with 100 of their heads, or there∣about; which with Durach Bey's, and se∣veral Turkish Captains that were slain at Sea, were placed upon Poles round about the City-Walls, to the terror of the Turks, and confusion of the Bassa, who vvas seen in a raging humour to tear his Beard out of vexation, to see that he in his designes prov'd so unfortunate. Upon the arrival of this Nevvs, the Senators attended the Duke to congratulate for this success; vvho vvith the Popes Nuncio, and Spanish Ambassa∣dor, that vvere then at Venice, vvith a nu∣merous Train of the Nobility, advanced to the Church of St. Mark, vvhere they heard Te Deum sung; and then vvent in processi∣on, as is usual upon such solemn occasions. This very Evening the Senate honoured General Morosini vvith the dignity of Knighthood, and conferred several honours upon his Relations, appointing revvards to be distributed among such persons as had signalized themselves by their eminent Ser∣vice in this Engagement. The Turks grevv novv dead-hearted at the late defeat of their Gallies, and the suc∣cessful
Sally made by the Marquiss Villa; insomuch, that the Grand Visier took up a resolution to make no farther progress a∣gainst Candia, till the expected succours, promised him by the Ottoman Emperour, were safely arriv'd. Signior Morosini being inform'd that the Turks had a great succour intended for Canea, took the Sea with 25 of his best Gallies, some Galleasses and Fire∣ships, to engage them, whose Fleet consisted of 100 Gallies, 60 Saiques, and 25 great round Ships laden with Provisions; but General Morosini, after a bloudy sight of ten hours continuance, burnt, sunk, and took a great many of them; and two of their principal Bassa's became his Prisoners, with most of the chief Commanders. About this time also several Privateers of the Re∣publique, Malta, and other places, met toge∣ther; who joyning their Forces in the Gulph of Rhodes, took twelve Saiques be∣longing to the Turks, laden with Provisions for Canea. The Senate having had infor∣mation that a Greek discover'd the Grand Visiers designe to surprize the Venetians Gallies, whereby they obtain'd so signal a Victory, ordered him a Pension of fif∣ty Ducats a Month, in lieu of a re∣ward.
On Saturday, May the second, S. N. Ge∣neral Villa arriv'd at Venice, who had served the Republique in Candia about two years, in obedience to the Commands of his Master the Duke of Savoy, and with the Senates permission; leaving the Sieur des Marets to supply his place, till the arrival of Monsieur de St. Andre Montbrun, who is to succeed him in the General∣ship. Captain Molino also met with five Turkish Vessels coming from Alexandria, bound for Canea, with considerable supplies for the Visier; but he sunk two of them, and took the remaining three. General Spaar, a German, who was im∣ployed by the Senate as General of the For∣raign Forces in Candia, with a Pension of 4000 Ducats, safely arriv'd at Candia, with a Company of Ships well furnisht with Men, Ammunition and Money; so that the Town was in as good condition at this time, as when they first laid Siege to her. In this Month of May, the City made two Sallies more upon the Turks, wherein they behav'd themselves with incredible courage. And Signior Claudio Arassi a Serjeant Major, with Signior Mutio Mattei
Major-General of the Ecclesiastical Forces, dyed in Candia of the Wounds they re∣ceiv'd in that Engagement of the Beiler-Gallies. Now the Turks endeavour to work with their Mines under ground, but the Besieged still Counter-mine them. The Grand Visier lost two of his prime Engineers, and is in so bad a condition for want of necessary Provisions, that his Souldiers daily flee from their Colours; yet he still obstinately plays with his great Guns, and by mining, attempts the eversion of the repair'd, or new-rais'd Fort of Panigra, and the Half-moon of Mocenigo, making his ap∣proaches towards the Port of St. Andrew, but to little purpose; for the Besieged made a vigorous Sally upon them, as they lay be∣fore that Fort, making them quit the Re∣doubt they had raised with much prejudice, and carryed with them many Prisoners into the Town; who upon examination, con∣fess'd that the Turkish Army did not exceed 18000 in number, and those ill command∣ed too; for most of their experienc'd Of∣ficers and Souldiers had lost their lives; the Visier still expecting the promis'd Sup∣plies from the Sultan, and the Bassa of Morea. The Turks finding that they could no
ways advance themselves by open Force, endeavour'd to perform their designes by Treachery; which was thus attempted: They had so far prevailed with two Christi∣an Fugitives, with large promises of larger rewards, that they did ingage to give their utmost assistance: One of them was to con∣vey himself into the City (whilst the other remain'd as an Hostage in the Turkish Camp for security) which he did, and was to nail up some of the Cannons in one of the Forts, which the Turks were then im∣mediately to Storm, upon a signal given: but he was discover'd before he could effect what he intended; and being threatned, made a full confession of the whole matter: whereupon the Venetian Forces being drawn up, the appointed signal was given, and the Turks approach with cheerfulness, as to a certain Victory; but at length they found themselves so briskly entertain'd, that they retir'd with a great loss of men; whose deaths they reveng'd upon him they had in their Camp, whom they cruelly put to death; and the other receiv'd the due reward of his intended Treachery in the City. Thirteen Turkish Vessels vvere met vvith by a Squadron of Malteses, that vvere
bound with succours for Candia, who took seven of them; but those of Malta dismist the Ships, finding they belong'd to Christi∣ans, who were compell'd to that employ∣ment. The Turks were now much disheartned, and grew very cold in their Assaults; finding that their supplies came in slowly, contrary to their expectation; which ani∣mated the Christians, who issued out, and engaged: them in their own Works, bring∣ing away several of their heads upon their Pikes: but the Visier being lately affronted, was resolv'd on a resolute attempt upon the Town; and to that end, sent for 6000 Sacks from Canea, which were to be filled with Earth, and other Materials, to fill up the Trenches, and make a passage for his men, that he might thereby become. Master of some nevv Post: but this designe soon shrunk to nothing; their Forces daily de∣creasing, and relief no vvays increasing as vvas hoped; insomuch, that above one hundred Turks fled lately to Candia, beg∣ging Pass-ports to return into their ovvn Country. In June, the City vvas refurnished vvith store of all Provisions, by the arrival of their Convoys; and the Fort Panigra, upon
vvhich the Turks, last Summer, had done the notablest execution, vvas so repai'd, that it vvas better to endure their attempts then formerly. The Visier had a recruit of five thousand Janisarics novv arriv'd in a tempestuous Season, vvhen Admiral Morosini vvas in the Harbour, or else 'tis probable he had met vvith them, and stopt their in∣tended course; and some Saichs also, not∣vvithstanding the care and vigilancy of the Venetian Generals, have privily by night conveyed themselves from Morea into Ca∣nea, being laden vvith Provisions and Forces, vvhich moved the Visier to some speedy action; to vvhich purpose he raised a great Battery before the Fort St. Andre, and ply∣ed their Cannon closely, and furiously as∣saulted the Out-works, but was bravely beaten off by the Defendants: the Sieur des Marets gave eminent proof of his valor in this Service; vvho though surrounded, and out-numbred by the Turks, made his vvay through the midst of them, and re∣gain'd the Tovvn, vvith the loss of a Colo∣nel, another Officer, and most of his Fol∣lovvers; yet the Turks had no cause to boast, their ovvn loss being more conside∣rable. The Turks did now almost despair of
reducing Candia; yet vvith all their strength they assaulted it in several parts at once, vvith great cryes setting upon the Out∣works of the Forts of St. Dennis, St. Andre, the Sabionera and Panigra; but vvere beaten off the three first with great slaughter: their chiefest and greatest assault was made upon Panigra; where coming on so violently and numerously , they possessed themselves of a small Work without the Fort, and kept it all night: But the next morning Signior Carbonaro, an expert Souldier and Engineer, fell so vigorously upon them, with a party in white Armor, sallying out by break of day, and so nobly engag'd them, that after three or four hours dispute, they were dislodged in spight of all assistance; but the Enemy sprung a Mine at their departure un∣der the Work, which destroyed and hurt se∣veral of the Besieged, with Signior Carbo∣naro: But in this, and the precedent days action, the Enemy lost above 1000 men; and since that, played with such fury upon the Town, both with their Cannon and Small-shot, that the General Bernardo Nani was wounded in the head by one of the latter, of which he afterwards dyed; and some Souldiers were shot upon the Walls.
In this Month the Captain Bassa being at Sea with forty Gallies, and five men of War of Barbary, met with Cavalier Georgio Maria Vitali, a Privateer of great renown; who not at all considering the vast disparity and disadvantage in the number and strength both of Ships and Men , entertain'd them with infinite courage, and defended himself for the space of thirty six hours against them; shattering many of, the Enemies Gallies, and destroying a multitude of their men; but in the end was himself unfortunately slain with a Cannon-shot, having of 500 men but six remaining; his Ship being ex∣treamly torn, fell into the hands of the Ene∣my, with Goods and Money, to the value of two hundred thousand Reals. During this engagement, which was maintain'd by the Gallies, the Men of War set upon Captain Sgara, who was in the Neptune, a Ship entertain'd upon the Publick Ac∣count, attended by a Pinck; the Ship after a resolute resistance was taken, and the Captain too Prisoner; but the little Pinck being nimble, did fortunately save her self. June the twenty seventh, the Senate pre∣fented Marquiss Villa, who was then making preparations in order to his return
to Savoy, with a present valued at 6000 Ducats, in acknowledgement of the emi∣nent services he did for the Republique in this Siege. And July the sixteenth, S. N. the Mar∣quiss Villa went to take his leave of the College, and receiv'd a rich Bason of Gold as a present from the Republique, on which was ingraven a grateful acknowledge∣ment of the signal Services he had done them. Now the Visiers Army was somewhat increased, but not so much as was expected: the Captain Bassa being nearly related to him, is very zealous to afford him all the assistance imaginable: they still continue the Siege; notwithstanding the Venetian Fleet hinders their supplies, so that there was so great a dearth among them, that a pound of salt-flesh was sold for 40 Aspres, a pound of Biscuit, or Bread, for 20; but Candia had plenty of all sorts of Provisions, by reason that the Christian Privateers, of∣ten resorted to their Port, to sell their prizes. Besides, Monsieur de St. Andre Montbrun safe∣ly arriv'd at Candia (to supply the place of Marquiss Villa) with a great number of stout Souldiers; who to render himself fa∣mous by some enterprise upon the Enemy,
made a resolute Sally with a party upon the Turks that lay before the Fort Sabio∣nera, forcing them out of their Trenches with great loss, and destroyed the Work they had cast up against the Fort; and Ad∣miral Morosini, the Proveditor Catarin Cor∣naro (till the Senates farther order) in the place of Bernardo Nani, lately deceased. Still the Turks obstinately continued the Siege, and spent much shot upon Sabionera, Bethlem and Panigra; and the Visier or∣dered a general assault to be made, being inform'd by a Fugitive Greek, that the Ve∣netians were too slenderly provided in their Forts, to meet with any stout opposition; but he found the contrary, for the Besieged beat them into their own Line, with the loss of some hundreds of their men. Where∣upon the Visier caused the Greek to be immediately impal'd for his mis-informa∣tion. The Christians lost some men in this attaque, and among the rest Monsieur des Marets, a person of great courage was kill'd out-right; and Monsieur de St. Andre Mont∣burn receiv'd a slight hurt in the face by a stone. On Saturday, July the twenty eighth, S.N. the Senate made choice of his Excel∣lency Girolome Battaja, a person of prodigi∣ous
Valor, and great Conduct, to succeed the late Bernardo Nani in his command, as General of the Forces in Candia; who by Order from the Senate was then preparing to depart. Signior Alessandro Molino was made by the Senate Captain of the Venetian Fleet in the Levant, to succeed in the Dignity of Censor; and they also made choice of Sig∣nior Tdeo Morosini to succeed him in the Fleet. The Turks had now given a furious as∣sault to the City, which was continued a whole night; the chiefest force being im∣ployed against the Fort of Sabioneca; but were repuls'd with incredible valor. In this attempt they were thought to lose 1500 men at least; with several Officers of note: of the defendants, there dyed about 200, with whom Colonel Aldobrandi, a person of an undaunted spirit, lost his life. In another Assault, soon after, the Enemy for some little time were possest of the Half-moon of St. Andre; but the Christians having before undermin'd it, blew it up, with great destruction to the Turks. In the Port of Gira Petra, ten Turks men of War, belonging to Barbary, met with five of the Venetian Fleet; the Confidence,
the three Kings, the Mary, the Contarino, and the Golden Palm, commanded by the Sieur de Lionne; and after a severe and smart fight, one of the Enemies Vessels being grappled with the Contarino, they both sunk to the bottom; and the Captain of the Mary seeing that he was altogether over∣power'd, closed with another Barbary Ship of great strength; but firing his powder, they both blew up together: the noise and roaring of the Cannon in this engagement, had call'd in three other Ships to their as∣sistance; at whose appearance, the Enemy made away with all the Sail they had, though they were superior both in number and strength; yet they departed not with∣out some evident marks of this sharp en∣counter. The Turks now for several days toge∣ther play'd hard. upon the Fort Sabionera, with Cannon and Morter-pieces; and then made a vigorous assault, but were beaten off: and at this time, Monsieur St. Andre Montburn made a stout Sally upon them, in which about 2000 Turks were slain. Now had the Turks receiv'd a considerable suc∣cour, which spirited the Visier, and made him resolve to hold out the Siege. But 800 Janisaries that were become both unable
and unwilling to continue any longer in that service, mutinyed, and deserted the Siege; seeking for an opportunity to imbark them∣selves for their own Country. As the Cap∣tain-General of the Christians Fleet was riding about Suda with 15 Gallies, waiting the motion of the Turks Fleet, he receiv'd intelligence, that the Bassa of Canea had for the supply of the Camp before Candia (not without the Grand Visiers order) sent 200 select Turks out of that Garrison, to convoy some Cattle, great and small, to their Army: Upon this information, the Captain-General landed a strong party of his, commanded by an experienced Officer, who lay close in ambush somewhat beyond Picorna, where they were to pass; and as they came marching, he fell suddenly in upon them, scattered them, kill'd some up∣on the place, and return'd to the Gallies with prisoners, and the whole Booty; so that the Cattle were, by the Generals or∣der, presently sent into Candia for their supply. Much about this time, Monsieur de St. An∣dre Montbrun observing that the Turks be∣gan to confide in, and rely very much upon a small Work they had rais'd near the La∣zaretto, expecting thereby to annoy the Ve∣netian
Vessels, as they passed to and fro in the Port; he with some hundreds in Boats fell upon the Turks by night, and forced them to quit the same, which was imme∣diately demolished, according to his or∣der. The Turks did murmur, and were very much discontented at the proceedings of the Visier, having lost before Candia above 80000 able Souldiers, and trifled away two years time without gaining any one consi∣derable Post: they generally affirming, that their Prophet could not be expected, in ju∣stice, to favour or assist them in a War, that with so little cause, and so great circum∣vention and treachery, was at first under∣taken. In August, the Grand Visier continued his Batteries against the Town for thirty six hours together, without the least intermis∣sion; in which assaults he lost 8000 of his men; wherein the Besieged receiv'd some loss also, and a few Officers. At Santa Vemerando, the Turks rais'd a new Fortifi∣cation, which made the Christians sally out, and repulse them with great damage, whereby they did alarm the whole Camp; insomuch, that the Visier himself came to their assistance.
In this month, Vincenzo Rospigliosi Gene∣ral of the Popes Gallies arrived at Candia, to the great satisfaction and joy of the Be∣sieged; who was saluted at his arrival with all the Artillery, with Volleys of Small-shot from the Souldiers, and then treated very honourably by the Proveditor General: Rospigliosi did distribute a very large sum of money among the Souldiers, as a Dona∣tive, and gave several presents to the Of∣ficers. The Christians receiv'd supplies a∣gain, which they stood in need of; and the Turks play'd constantly upon the Port with their Batteries, and had lodged themselves upon the Walls of Candia. The Turkish Fleet riding near Canea, consisted of 100 Gallies and upwards; with thirteen Bar∣bary men of War, having found 3000 men at Gira Petra, and 6000 at Canea, to re∣cruit the Visiers Army, which was very much impair'd by their frequent assaults, whereby the Besieged had receiv'd very considerable damages; for they lost several eminent Officers, particularly Colonel Portario a Siciliot, the Engineer Quadru∣plano, Serjeant-Major-General Motto, Co∣lonel Gamba, and the Marquiss Carlotti. The Turks made several attempts upon the Fort Sabionera, in which they lost in few
days 6000 men and better; and after∣wards turned the main Body of their Ar∣my against the Fort St. Andre; and at the same time, to divert the Defendants, storm∣ed three or four other parts of the Town; but Monsieur St. Andre Montbrun was so vi∣gilant, that after a long and sharp conflict, the Turks were beaten off with great slaughter from all places. The Venetians had landed 1000 able Foot about this time, expecting daily greater succours. Now the Turks divided their Army into two Bodies; and at the same time made two desperate assaults upon the Forts of Sabionera and St. Andre, lying near the Sea; but herein they lost great numbers of their men, and the Aga of the Janisaries was carried off by them with a mortal wound; but by an unfortunate shot they kill'd Signior Andre Semitecolo and Grioni, belonging to the Besieged. Now there ar∣riv'd at Candia, the Convoy commanded by Giacomo Cornaro with Men and Ammuni∣tion, and 500 able Souldiers from Terra Firma, having in all put a supply of above 3000 fresh men into Candia. The Venetians being highly encouraged by these supplies and recruits, made a sally upon the Turks that were placed before
the Fort St. Andre, and counterfeiting a flight, drew them upon a Mine near the Fort Panigra, where they made a halt, and blew up the Mine, destroying some hundreds of them. The Turks having now lodged them∣selves in the Ditches of Sabionera, endea∣voured by a Mine to blow up part of the Courtin; but the execution fell upon their own people, doing little or no damage to the Works. On Wednesday the twelfth of Septehiber, S.N. a Ship arriv'd at Venice from the Ar∣mata, bringing in it the body of the lately de∣ceas'd General Bernardo Nani. The Besieged made a sally upon the Be∣siegers that lay before Sabionera, beat them off of their Works, and carryed away with them six of their great Guns: upon which the Visier drew off his Forces forty paces from their former Posts. In one of the Turks assaults, Colonel Prosilio, the Governour Tadeo Morosini, and Colonel Venturini, were all three kill'd with one Cannon-shot; and the Besieged, in a sally made upon the Ene∣my, kill'd many of them, and retreated to the Town with some of their Baggage, but lost about fifty men, and a Nephew to the Marquiss Villa, with three other persons of
quality. The Turks made another assault, being hightned with the former success; but were forced back with the loss of 1200 men, which were left dead upon the place. Much about the same time that the E∣nemy attempted the Fort St. Andre, the Besieged sallied out upon them, and killed many upon the place, taking some Sacks of wool, which the Enemy us'd to defend them from their shot, with some Swords and Arms, which they carryed into the Town. In these assaults, and the sally at the Sabio∣nera, the Christians lost about sixty men, among whom were the noble Marco Barba∣rigo, Colonel Sala, one Engineer of Bur∣gundy, and three Serjcants; among the wounded were these persons of note, Lo∣renzo Dona, Francisco Balti, Santo Barbaro, and some others, whose names we could not learn; also the General Cattarin Cornaro was slightly bruised with a stone. On the third, fourth, fifth and sixth in∣stant, the Turks repeated their Assaults up∣on the Fort Sabionera, being moved there∣unto by a large Breach they had made, of twenty Venetian paces in breadth; and though great numbers of them fell, they with great obstinacy pursued their designe, endeavouring to march over their dead, and
to advance their Standard on the breach; but they met with such strong opposition, that the Standard was broke in pieces, and they driven back with extraordinary, da∣mage. In this action the prodigious valour of a Gally-slave was very observable, who was found to have kill'd forty two of the E∣nemy with his own hand in one day; which the Captain-General taking notice of, pub∣lickly rewarded him, and made him at that instant Serjeant to a Company. On the thirteenth instant, the new Ge∣neral Battaja arriv'd at Candia with 2000 Souldiers, which he put into the Town, with a great sum of money and Am∣munition. About the latter end of his Month, the rains falling in such abundant showers, de∣stroyed many of their Mines and Pioneers, and did them much mischief. On the fourth of October, the General St. Andre Montbrun made a notable brisk sally upon the Enemy, from the Fort of St. An∣dre, beating the Turks out of their own Line, and possest themselves of one of their Batteries, drawings off a Morter-piece, and intending to carry off their Cannon planted there; but the Turks coming suddenly up∣on them with their whole strength, ob∣structed
them in that enterprize, so that it prov'd ineffectual; and they retreated into the Town: Signior Francisco Battaglia, a Duke in Candia, and Brother to the Gene∣ral of that name, as he was with his own hands drawing off one of the Turks Guns, was kill'd unluckily by a Musket-shot; but his body was carryed off in spight of all op∣position, by the valor of Carlo Dona, and Pietro Badoar; besides, eighty men were lost in this service, and several wounded; a∣mong the rest, Signior Matteo Semitecolo was shot in the Arm: since this, a Fugitive from the Enemies Camp inform'd the Besieged, that the Turks lost in this action about 1200 Souldiers; and among them the Aga of the Janisaries, the Grand Visiers Lieute∣nant, and two other eminent Commanders, and had 1500 wounded persons; which so discouraged the Besiegers, that many of the Janisaries deserted the service, and fled in∣to the Mountains near adjoyning: and farther, that 300 Janisaries besides had seized upon some small Barks, and were put to Sea, being quite wearied with the length of the Siege, and the little success of their enterprizes, resolving to return home: and withal, that the Enemies Gallies had land∣ed about 1000 Janisaries, for the succour
and reinforcement of their Army; which upon the strictest and most exact inquiry then made, notwithstanding all their sup∣plies and recruits, did consist onely of twenty thousand men; among whom were judged to be at least seven thousand Pio∣neers. On the fifth of October, the Turks made three several assaults upon the Fort St.An∣dre; and that so furiously and obstinately, that the Town was in very great danger of being utterly lost: but in the end, the Defendants forced them off with the slaughter of three hundred men, and some Officers. The Besieged, about this time, were very much dejected, at the sudden departure of the Popes and Malta Squadron; by which means the Turks took an opportunity to re∣inforce their Army with some thousands of men; but the Marquiss St. Andre Montbrun, upon the appearance of the French Succours, with a party of resolute Germans that were lately arriv'd at Candia, made a stout Sal∣ly, beat the Enemy from their Posts, and did great execution. In revenge of this af∣front, the Turks the very next day made a general assault with 30000 men at once, carrying Wool-sacks before them to keep
off the Small-shot; which being perceiv'd by the Besieged, they immediately drew their great Guns to the Breaches, leden with Case-shot, and pointed upon them; which so gall'd the Turks, that they were forced to retire: whereupon the Besieged made another Assault upon them with great slaughter; insomuch, that the Enemy lost in these actions about 10000 men. Don Vincenzo Rospigliosi, General of the Popes Gallies, being a little before return'd from the service of Candia, which highly incensed his Holiness, excus'd it by laying the fault upon the Duke De Ferrandina; who being negligent, and not coming up with the Nea∣politan and Sicilian Squadrons, which he Commanded, he was unwilling alone to expose the Popes Gallies to such imminent danger. The Visier at this time was very severe, having taken off the head of one of his Bassa's, for making a fruitless assault with∣out order: the Turks fleeing daily from their Colours, and scattering themselves in seve∣ral parts of the Island, though he had us'd all means imaginable to induce them to return; but his severity in putting them to death when return'd, made the rest betake themselves to the Mountains for security.
The Grand Visier despairing of success, having receiv'd so many and so great losses by the repeated Sallies of the Besieged, and being very much injur'd by the Autumn∣rains, took up a resolution to withdraw his Forces to New Candia; but the Grand Sig∣nior being very much incensed at his ill success, threatned him with the loss of his head, if he gave him not a better account of the Siege then hitherto he had done. His Holiness being very active to assist the Can∣diots against the Common Enemy of the Christian World, gave the Senate his Bull to dispose of some Monasteries in their Ter∣ritories, to the value of one Million of Crowns, which the Republique made use of. At the latter end of this Month, the new Venetian General of the Fleet, Tadeo Moro∣sini arriv'd at Candia with store of Ammu∣nition, Souldiers, Provisions and Money; wherewith he discharged the Souldiers Ar∣rears, to their. great satisfaction. Whereup∣on they made frequent Sallies against the Turks to their damage; in one of which, Monsieur St. Andre Montbrun had a slight. wound in the shoulder by a Musquet-shot. The Sister, an able Vessel, belonging to the Venetian Fleet, was attaquet by five men of
War of Tripoli in her Voyage homewards from the Levant, who defended her self for many hours very resolutely; but the Captain finding that he was over-power'd and out-numbred, and so much disabled that he could make no further opposition, blew up his Ship, and destroy'd great numbers of the Turks that were at that time boarding of him. In November, the Turks withdrew them∣selves from Sabionera; but stood still with great obstinacy before the Fort St. Andre, intending to advance upon the Shoar, and shut up the entry into the Haven; but the French succours marching out in four divi∣sions, made a brisk Sally, being commanded by the Duke de Roannez (who was owned there by his ancient Title of de la Feuillade) with extraordinary slaughter of the Enemy. The Count Strafoldi, who arriv'd about this time at Palma Nuova from Venice, intending to direct his course for Candia, to Command a Regiment of the German Souldiers late∣ly employ'd in that service, was unfor∣tunately drown'd, as he imbarked at Talia Vento, with eighteen men, by the folly of the Sea-men, the Bark being over-set. The Senate ordered, that a present of Gold Plate, valued at thirty eight Marks, should be
sent to Cardinal Rospigliosi, as an acknow∣ledgement of the sense they have of his zeal to promote their interest. The Grand Vi∣sier having receiv'd some succours from the Captain Bassa, was very much encou∣raged to continue the Siege, raising Terrasses about his own Tent, and had taken 2000 of his stoutest Souldiers, as a Guard to his person. General Morosini about this time dispatched Colonel Machierotti, a Candiot, with Letters to the Visier, desiring him to accept of an exchange for Signior Lascaris General de Bataille, formerly taken Prisoner; who went in a Felucca with a white Flag before Giofiro; but receiv'd this short answer from the Visier, That he came thither to take the City , and not to treat about Prisoners: whereupon Cavalier Grimani was imployed in the vacant charge. The Turks continue the Siege with great eagerness, notwithstanding their numerous and signal defeats, and the vast inconveni∣ences of the Winter-Season; and press ve∣ry shrewdly upon the Bastion of St. Andre, playing upon it with their Cannon; by one of which the Sieur du Prc, Major to the Brigade belonging to the Count de St. Paul, had his head taken off; and the Sieur de
Chamilly and Lare, was hurt with the stones beaten out of the Parapet by the same shot; the Sieur de Marianval of the same Brigade was slain; the Chevalier de Merinville wound∣ed by a Granado; and the Sieur de Sablo∣niere hurt with an Arrow. The Grand Sig∣nior being willing to supply the Visier, as much as was possible, commanded 6000 men to be levyed out of the neighbouring places, sending them to Salonica; but be∣fore the Captains could ship them, they rais'd a mutiny, and betook themselves to their heels, to avoid the service. On the twenty-eighth of November, the succours from Malta arriv'd safe at Candia, and were nobly receiv'd by the Generalissimo, and the Marquiss St. Andre Montbrun, who was then recover'd of his hurt he lately re∣ceiv'd; but the Duke de Roannez was some∣what displeas'd, he being disappointed of his hopes of commanding them. Now a party of 350 French Volunteers, with 50 more of the Garrison, sallied out upon the Enemy; but the former lost thir∣teen of their number, and the others three; but they kill'd some of the Enemy, brought off four of the Turks heads: and the Gene∣ral made another Sally with sixty choice men, who cleared the Trenches, killing fifty
time, with the assistance of two Christian Privateers, took five Saiques off of Canea, laden with Provisions and Ammunition, intending for that Port; and in the ingage∣ment sixty Turks were slain, with their Captain a Renegado of Calabria, and fifty four Prisoners taken, who were put to the Chain, and the Provisions sent into Candia. The Pope now ordered preparations to be made by his Chamber, for the honourable In∣terment of the Marquiss Villa, Commander of the Popes Forces, in the Church of St. Maries the great, who was kill'd in a Sally by a Cannon-shot, with the same Funeral State and Pomp that was made for Sig∣nior Mutio Mattei, who had the same Charge, and dyed in the same Cause. The Grand Visier having intelligence that the French Forces were re-imbarqued, and homewards bound, made a furious as∣sault, in the night, upon the Bulwarks of the Sabionera and St. Andre, at the same time, with 4000 men at each place, and obsti∣nately disputed with the Besieged for two hours space; but they were forced to retreat to their Posts, leaving the ground covered with their dead, and carrying off many that were wounded: the Christians losing not
above forty men in this service. About the latter end of February, or be∣ginning of March, Morosini the Captain-Ge∣neral or Admiral of the Armata landed at Candia with 2000 able Souldies from Zante, 1700 Barrels of Powder, and a great quan∣tity of Provisions arid Ammunition. The three Regiments of Lunenburghers, consisting of 2500 stout, well-disciplin'd men, were in March imbarqued for Candia, being very well satisfied with their noble reception at Venice; the Senate bestowing gold Chains upon their Officers, and a Du∣cat apiece was given to the Souldiers as a Donative. About this time, the Christians sprung a Mine , and fired it, by the which was destroyed a great number of the E∣nemy, with a Turkish Engineer, who was in great repute among them, and whose di∣rections they observ'd in all their attempts. The Visier, to revenge his death, and the loss of his men, sprung a Mine too; but it had not that effect which was expected: and then the Turks, by his command, attempted the Bulwarks of St. Andre with Ladders; but they were beaten off with great loss, and many of their Ladders were by force drawn up from them into the Town. Up∣on the Popes request, his Imperial Majesty
granted him 3000 men for the succour of Candia, who were privately listed without beat of Drum, out of the Imperial Heredi∣tary Countries onely. On Saturday, March 30, 1669, S. N. the noble Giacomo Cornaro was chosen Pro∣veditor General of the Armata, and Signior Pietro Diedo an experienc'd Senator, as Com∣mander of a Convoy of many Ships laden with all manner of Provisions, and where∣in also were many Souldiers, Chyrurgeons, Gunners and Labourers to be imployed a∣bout the Works, and in the Mines. Colo∣nel Giovanni Battista Zano endeavouring to take a Gallery from the Turks near Santo Spirito, was buried in one of their Mines; but the General sent out a strong party, who beat off the Turks, and recovered his Bo∣dy out of the ruines of the Mines, and car∣ried it into the Town: Signior Pietro Die∣do by reason of his extraordinary indisposi∣tion of Body, was upon his request excused from his Voyage into the Levant; and the Senate made choice of Cavalier Zozzi Cor∣naro in his room. In April 1669, the Turks made three desperate assaults upon the Town, but were in all of them beaten off; and the Besieged by the successful firing of one of their
Mines, totally ruin'd the Enemies Mount and Battery rais'd before the Fort St. Andre. In this Month the Grand Signior sent a Bassa to the Visier, who in his name con∣demned the Visier for the little advantage he had made in the Siege, trifling away three years time, with an expence of so much Trea∣sure, and the loss of such numbers of men, as might suffice for the Conquest of intire Kingdoms. The Visier being very much disatisfied with this message, gave a furious assault to the Bulwark of St. Andre, and Ravelin di Santo Spirito; but the Turks af∣ter an hours hot dispute drew off; and a∣bout 5000 of them hoping to pass over one of the Mines of the Besieged of 150 Barrels of Powder, it was fired, and blew up 3000 of the Enemy, wounding and disordering them; and taking hold of this advantage, made a sally upon the Besiegers, and return∣ed to the Town with 1000 Prisoners, or thereabouts. On Saturday, May the twenty sixth, S.N. the Holy Sacrament was in St. Marks Church in Venice, pablickly and solemnly expos'd and on the Tuesday following, the Duke, Senate, and the greatest part of the Nobility went in Procession; publick Prayers
being made in all Churches, to crave a bles∣sing upon the succours and supplies intended to be sent to Candia by the Republique. Now the Grand Visier being very ap∣prehensive of the Christian succours from se∣veral parts, was resolv'd to make a ge∣neral assault on the Forts of Sabionera, St. Andre, and Santo Spirito, ordering his Army (which notwithstanding his recruits, consist∣ed but of 24000) into three Bodies, to be imployed against those three places; and for the better expedition of his designe, did from several Batteries play for several days upon the Town, and principally upon the Jews quarter; upon which they had done some execution; but he altered his minde, as to the general assault for the present, and call'd a Council of War, being resolv'd, if possible, to oblige the Town to a surrender, before the arrival of the Christian supplies: and in order hereunto, On the tenth of May, two hours before break of day, the Turks, according to their usual custom, fell upon the Bulwarks of Sa∣bionera with great noise and fury, but af∣ter a bloudy dispute of three hours continu∣ance, the Christians springing several Mines, forced them to a rude and disorderly retreat, leaving several scaling Ladders behind them;
and they lost in 'this service three Bassa's , with several other eminent Officers, besides a great number of men. And about this time, the Venetian Cap∣tain-General of the Armata, having receiv'd intelligence, that there were eighteen men of War belonging to Barbary, enter'd into the Grand Signiors Service for that Sum∣mer; and were set out from several parts of Alexandria, Smyrna, and Soria, laden with Men, Ammunition and Provisions, bound for Canea, divided twenty four Men of War, under his Command, into three Squadrons, with orders to ingage the Ene∣my, if discovered. The Admiral himself sailing to the Eastward of Candia with ten Ships, where he discovered them, making all the Sail imaginable for Canea, whom he immediately fell upon, without any conside∣ration of their number, and a smart dispute was entertain'd for some time; but the noise of the Guns brought in another Squa∣dron of eight Venetian Ships to his assistance, so that in a short time the Enemy was worst∣ed, six Vessels sunk, and four taken, the rest making away from him very much torn, and in great disorder: besides the number kill'd in that engagement, they took 800 Turks Prisoners.
The Besiegers, notwithstanding all these ill successes, continued on Shore, pressing the City on all parts, plying it with their Batteries and Granadoes, especially on the side of the Fort St. Andre, where his Excel∣lency Signior Cavalier Cattarin Cornaro, Pro∣veditor extraordinary of the Armata, was kill'd unhappily by a Granado, which wounded him in the flanck, who receiv'd the Sacrament, and dyed an hour after. On Monday, June the seventeenth, S. N. the Senate made Election of his Excellency Signior Alvise Mocenigo, to succeed in the place of the deceased Cavalier Cornaro, and conferred the Dignity of Knighthood upon his Brother Signior Girolamo Cornaro, in testimony of the high esteem they had to the party slain, ordering a solemn Funeral to be celebrated for him upon the publick account, and a stately Tomb to be erected to his memory. On Saturday, June the twenty second, there arriv'd at Venice a Ship from Can∣dia, with the Body of the late deceased Proveditor extraordinary, Cavalier Cattarin Cornaro. The Venetians had now received several Recruits, under the Command of Signior Priuli, as well as the Turks; who with
somuch assiduity continued their Batteries, Storms and Mines , that they made them∣selves Masters of the most part of the Fort, & planted there a Battery of ten pieces of Can∣non, intending to play upon the Retrench∣ment of the Christians , with the which they dismounted several of the Defendants Cannon, and did great execution in the Town. In these late actions, Signior Gia∣como Contarini receiv'd a very dangerous wound in the Arm; Colonel Pini, an ex∣perienc'd Officer was kill'd; and Monsieur de St. Andre had a slight hurt in the Arm, by the breaking of a Granado. The French Succours put to Sea in June, and arriv'd at Candia in his most Christian Majesties Fleet, commanded by the Duke de Beaufort; the Land-Forces being under the Command of the Duke de Navailles. And the Duke de Beaufort went in person to visit the City of Candia, who was receiv'd with the discharge of all their Artillery, and with great acclamations; who taking a view of the Enemies posture, receiv'd a slight wound by a Hand-Granado. About this time one Andrea Borazzi flee∣ing to the Enemy, profer'd his service to the Visier, promising to inform him which were the weakest parts of the Town; who
was sent accordingly with some Turkish Officers; but he leading them to an Emi∣nencie near the Walls, that they might the better survey the Town, the besieged fired a Mine under him, which blew up the Of∣ficers, he onely escaping: but the Grand Vi∣sier commanded him at his return to be put in Irons, suspecting his designe to be a meer piece of Treachery. Still the Turks employed their whole strength against the Bulwark St. Andre, and made a considerable Breach in the Re∣trenchment; but the Christians oppos'd them undauntedly, and repair'd by night what they beat down by day; and sprung a Mine of 150 Barrels of Powder under the Enemies Battery upon the ruines of the Bastion, which blew up a great number of the Turks, and four of their Guns: but the Besieged lost a person of great Resolution and Conduct, the Noble Pietro Querini, by a Bomb, which breaking, gave another Of∣ficer a mortal wound: the Captain-General (who flood between them, observing the Enemies) remaining untoucht. The Sul∣tan upon advice of the arrival of the French supplies, proposed terms of peace, as he had formerly done oftentimes, onely to amuse them, he being absolutely averse to any
such thing in reality, and to gain upon them the better by such fair proposi∣tions. The Turks now had by their frequent as∣saults and mines, made themselves Masters of the ruin'd Bastion of St. Andre, except a part of an Orillon , which was still in dis∣pute. But the General with a party of flout men made a sally upon the Turks; who not being able to stand in opposition with them, quitted their Posts: This vacant time the Besieged spent in casting up a small Defence there, which kept the Enemy at a farther distance. Now that the French Forces were arriv'd, and the Duke de Navailles had consulted with the Captain-General; the Turks were advanced, and had taken up their Posts up∣on the Bastions of St. Andre, and la Sabio∣nera: upon this Consultation with the French and Venetian Officers, it was thought very proper to attaque them upon the Sa∣bionera; and the Duke de Navailles, the Ge∣neral of the Forces, desir'd to have those Souldiers out of the Garrison, that could be well spar'd; which they condescended un∣to: and farther, order was, given for five or six hundred Pioneers, to be imployed in throwing down the Works made by the E∣nemy;
and a Sally to be made at the same time, to divert them from sending relief to the other side. The Duke de Beaufort un∣willing to be an unactive spectator, offer'd them 1500 men out of the Fleet, and put himself in the head of the French Forces, being ready to receive Orders from the General, though very much urg'd to the contrary. And thus he entred upon a∣ction. June the twenty fourth, first 400 com∣manded men marched out, and 50 others with Granadoes at the head of them; af∣ter them three Troops of Horse, under the command of Monsieur Dampier; then the Regiments of Gaures, St. Valier, Lorrain and Bretagne followed, with four Troops of Horse upon the Wings, besides a party of the French Kings Musqueteers, and 100 Re∣formed Officers placed between the first and second Line, to be ready upon any occasion. The Forces that came from the Fleet were at the same time to fall upon the left-side of the Sabionera; and Monsieur Marshal of the Camp appointed to assist them. In this Or∣der they marched silently and undiscover'd, and drew up in Battalia, in a little plain near the Enemies Camp: the commanded men coming within Musquet-shot, were
fired at by the Turks; and then Monsieur de Dampier was commanded by the General to fall upon two Redoubts in the head of their Quarters, being assisted by some of the Guards; which was so couragiously and successfully managed, that they took them immediately, and put every men to the Sword; and then their Lines were entred, and the Regiments of St. Valier and Lor∣rain possest them: the commanded men with the Companies of Guards, beat the Enemy out of their Trenches and Works. Thus far their designes prospered, though they had but 300 of the 1500 expected from the Ships; nor were any Venetian Forces nor Pioneers sent out to their assistance, as was promised. The Turks having thus deserted the Camp, drew up into a Body, upon a rising, on their right-hand; which being observ'd by the General, he in the head of his Forces marched towards them, and beat them twice from their Station; but he charged them so home upon the third rally, that he gain'd the place whereon they first drew up their men. Then hapned a cross accident that ruin'd that whole days designes; for some Powder, Morter-pieces and Granadoes, taking fire by chance upon a Battery which
the Guards were possest with, they forsook the place in disorder and confusion, though Monsieur Castellan used all art imaginable to bring them back; and the 300 men that came from the Navy, fell into the same dis∣order, notwithstanding all the endeavours of the Commanders to rally them. This made the Turks begin a fresh charge; where∣upon the Admiral, Monsieur Colbert, and the fifty Musqueteers, joyned with the first Bat∣talion, and manfully opposed them; but this accident had imprinted such a general terrour upon the Souldiers, that they were oblig'd to retreat; which was much fa∣vour'd by a Courtin, made good by the Ge∣neral. The Body of Reserves was invested by several Forces, which after a slight skir∣mish at the Bastion of St. Andre, were sent to assist their fellow-Souldiers at the Sabio∣nera; who also retreated disorderly at last. The General gave signal testimonies of his Courage and Conduct in this days disaster; and made good his Retreat, passing through a party of the Enemy, with three or four Gentlemen onely that assisted him; but if all things had been performed as was in∣tended, this day might, in all probability, have put an end to the Siege. The Vene∣tians had in all 600 men which were kill'd
and disabled. A Trooper escaped from the pursuit of the Enemy, found the Duke de Beaufort so wounded, that he had not strength to get up behind him; and he drew him a while by the Arm, thinking to bring him off; but being so closely followed by the Turks, that he was compel'd to flee, he left him to the Enemy, who kill'd him presently upon the place. Yet the next day, being the twenty fifth of June, about 200 of the French made a Sally out of the Bastion of St. Andre, which gave such an Alarm to the Turks, that they came to make good their Posts; but the Besieged firing three Mines, blew up many of the Besiegers, with some Com∣manders of Quality; and destroyed a very considerable Battery. On July the fifth, S. N. the Count de Vivonne arriv'd at Candia with the French Gallies, who took possession of the charge of Admiral, finding the Fleet destitute of one. The same day also arriv'd the Squa∣dron of Malta Gallies with eight hundred Souldiers. On the sixth, the Duke de Navailles, being over-heated in the late engagement, fell in∣to a violent Fever. On the twelfth of July, arriv'd a Convoy
at Candia with 1600 Souldiers, Ammuniti∣on and Monies. The Baron de St. Marre, Captain of the Guards to the Duke de Beaufort, hearing as yet no news of his Master by Spies, or any other means whatsoever, went in person to the Visier's Camp; where being admitted by him into the Tent, he gave him a view of all the Heads that were cut off in the late fight; but he could not finde the Admirals among them; at which the Visier was very much dissatisfied, and afterwards gave him liberty to discourse with several Prisoners in the Camp, but he could learn no news of him that was satisfactory. On the twenty fourth instant, all the French, Malta and Pope's Squadrons were ordered to lye before the Turks Post at St. Andre, where they fir'd upon the Enemies Camp, and did them great damage: but when the Generals had drawn out their Forces, and were ready to fall upon the Besiegers, the Terese, which was the French Vice Admiral, blew up by some unfortunate accident, or a shot from the Enemy, with 400 men aboard, to the damage of several Vessels, the Admiral particularly, that lay next her, and the Captains Gally that took fire also, but was quenched; which made
the whole Fleet put out to Sea, and hin∣dred the Generals designe of making a Sal∣ly: but the Turks receiv'd great hurt by the firing of the Fleet; and lost an Aga, the Visiers great favourite. On the thirtieth instant, a Sally was made by Monsieur Colbert at the Sabionera, with some execution upon the Enemy; but Mon∣sieur Colbert was slightly hurt in the head with a stone which fell from the Gate, bro∣ken by a Morter-piece. The General Girolamo Battaja was mor∣tally wounded, in three places, by a Morter-piece breaking near him, which was dis∣charg'd from the Enemies Batteries, he be∣ing then busied about the Sabionera, and giving Orders to his Officers against some fresh approach intended by the Besiegers. The Turks continue still imploying their greatest force against St. Andre, having raised a Battery, and planted eight Guns there∣on, firing upon the Retrenchments made by the Besieged, to supply the ruines of that Fort; but were valiantly oppos'd and re∣puls'd: however, the Enemy took an ad∣vantagious Post near the Scozzese; which made Signior Navaglier, a Noble Venetian, sally out with a party of Souldiers, intend∣ing to dislodge them; but he received a
dangerous Musquet-shot in the neck. The Turks still plyed the Town with showers of Stones, Morter-pieces and Granadoes; and Count Waldeck General of the Brunswick Forces, was kill'd with one of them. The Besiegers then endeavouring to bend their strength towards the Arsenal, on the side of the Sabionera, met with such opposition, that they gave over that attempt, and con∣verted their Forces to the other side of the Town, where they made themselves Ma∣sters of the first Retrenchment, not without great loss; and did attaque the second; but the Besieged had cast up two o∣ther Works behind them, with large Trenches. In Angust, the Duke of Mirandola arriv'd at Candia, and landed his Ammunition with 1400 of his own men, and 600 others, and Monies for the Souldiers. The Turks had now cast up a great Mount upon the ruines of the Bastion of St. Andre, and planted several Cannon up∣on it, with which they greatly annoyed the Town; but to frustrate this designe, the General caused the Church of St. Frances to be fill'd with Earth, and drew twenty great Guns upon it, which played hotly upon the Enemy, dismounted their Cannon,
and made the place altogether useless. The Turks still laboured hard to take in the second Retrenchment; but the Defen∣dants fir'd a Mine made under that Bulwark, which being divided into several Branches, kill'd many of the Enemies, destroyed part of their Works, whose ruines divided 400 Turks from the rest of the Body, so that they could not possibly escape, but were all taken prisoners, and carryed into the Town: and the Besieged made another successful Sally, upon the firing of another Mine, with an incredible slaughter to the Turks, and brought off with them a considerable num∣ber of the Prisoners. Then the Turks on the other side of the Town, endeavour'd to shut up a Sally-port near the Sabionera, that so they might make a farther progress to∣wards the Sea, and by degrees attempt the Arsenal; but by a Sally in favour of seve∣ral Mines, they left off that enterprise with loss. Now the Auxiliary Forces sent from France were imbarqued, being in all 88 Sail, in order to their return. Upon whose de∣parture, the Turks took courage, and im∣mediately fell upon the Sabionera, and St. Andre, with two great parties, thinking the Besieged were dispirited, and quite disani∣mated,
the French Fleet being gone; but they found the contrary to their detriment, losing 3000 men, after three fierce assaults; and the Defendants but 200, with several that were wounded; who by firing of a Mine of thirty Barrels of powder under the Bulwark, where the Enemy had raised a Battery which much infested the second Retrenchment, that was wholly destroyed, and the Turks in great numbers either blown up, or buryed in the rubbish of the Battery. The Generalissimo at length, finding af∣ter all their Sallies, Assaults, Mines and Skir∣mishes, that Candia was reduced to a meer heap of Rubbish, being so far entred by the Turks, and the Garrison so lessened, that there remain'd in it no more then 3600 men fit for Service, so that it was thought ab∣solutely impossible to preserve it any longer from the Enemy, call'd a Council, where it was resolv'd nemine contradicente, that they should use their utmost endeavours in order to a Treaty with the Visier about a Surren∣der; and accordingly Colonel Arnardi, and Signior Scordeli the Vice-Chancellor, were employ'd to manage the Treaty; and on the first of September, were sent out to the Post on the side of Giofiro with a white
Flag, whose business was communicated to the Grand Visier: The news was immedi∣ately spread throughout the whole Turkish Camp, and entertain'd with excess of joy, and Commissioners appointed to treat on the Turks behalf; between whom that whole day was spent, with no other issue, but that the next conference should be in the open Field, before the Fort Demetrius, where the Turks set up a large Tent for that purpose; where the Treaty was con∣tinued till the fifth of September, and then the Articles were concluded upon by both parties; for performance whereof they gave Hostages on both sides, particularly Signior Calbo Commissary for Provisions, De Riva Lieutenant of the General Guards, and Zaccaria Mocenigo, from the Venetians; and the Beglerbey of Temiswar, Mahomet Bassa, the Aga of the Janisaries, and Gassi Bey, the Tefferdat of Romilia, from the Turks. The Turks Hostages were sent into Can∣dia and the Venetians into the Turkish Camp, where they had an extraordinary civil reception, there being a rich Apartment pre∣par'd for them, a Guard of Janisaries or∣dered to attend them whither they pleas'd, and a Table of thirty Dishes of meat al∣lowed
their Arms and Baggage. That he permit the Inhabitants, who have no desire to continue there, to retire with their Families, Kings and Jewels, whither they please. That he consent, that the Captain-General may carry away all the Republiques Sacred Vessels, and all Or∣naments whatsoever belonging to their Churches. Seventhly, that the Captain-General may take out of the City of Candia 320 Brass Guns, which are to be in the power, and at the free disposal of the most Serene Republique of Venice. Eighthly, that the Prisoners and Slaves taken on both sides, during the Siege of Candia, be immediately restor'd; the Captain-General and the Grand Visier having already given out their Orders requir'd for the execution of this Article. Ninthly, that all these Articles agreed and faithfully executed, both parties shall swear and promise to preserve the Peace reciprocally, and inviolably, for the advantage of the Trade, and the mutual quiet of both their Subject. On Friday, the twentieth of Septem∣ber, the Garrison marched out without the least disturbance; the Visier being re∣solv'd
to be rendred as famous for his justice in performing Articles, as for his vigilancy and courage in War. September the thirteenth, a stately Hearse was expos'd to publick view in St. Marks Church, and the Church it self hung with Black, and fill'd with many Lights, in cele∣bration of the Funeral of his Excellency Signior Cavalier Cornaro, where a solemn Mass, and variety of excellent Musick, was perform'd by several Quires; and in the close, Father Cosmi pronounced a Funeral-Oration, wherein was an account of all the eminent Services of that Illustrious Com∣mander. On the twenty second instant, the Senate resolving to confer the Dignity of Procura∣tor of St. Mark upon Signior Francisco Mo∣rosini, Captain-General in Candia; the great Council being assembled, the Election was made by a general suffrage; and the favour was the greater, in that there being then no vacancy, he was added a supernumerary. On Friday, September the twenty seventh, the Forces were drawn out of the City of Candia; and the same day, according to the Articles of Agreement, the Keys were sent to the Visier, who receiv'd them with many signes of joy, and rewarded the
person that brought them with a large sum of Money; whereupon he immediately sent into the Town some of his people to cleanse it, and take the dead bodies out of the four principal Churches, viz. of St. Francis, St. Titus, St. Salvator, and St. Peter; about which work several days were spent. The Grand Visier's civility was eminently mani∣fested to all the Venetians Officers of any note; but more remarkable to the Genera∣lissimo Morosini, to whom he gave several presents, with this Complement, That the Peace should be as long-liv'd as his Command; to whom the General return'd several pre∣sents likewise. On the fourth of October, the Grand Vi∣sier made his solemn entry into the City of Candia, at the Breach of St. Andre, with all his Army, which consisted of about 15000 Souldiers, & between ten & eleven thousand Pioneers; besides other necessary Attendants. At his entrance, he found the City empty, without People, Goods or Provisions; there being onely left behind two Greeks, three Jews, and eight more strangers, whom the Visier would also have sent away; but they were of opinion, it was more convenient to change their Religion then City , and so turn'd Turk.
Since the Grand Visier's entring into the City, he hath converted the four principal Churches thereof into Mosques, for the worship of Mahomet; and the other are turn'd into Stables, for his own, and the Horses of his Souldiers. In this Month the Articles of Peace were ratified by the Grand Signior at Larissa; and on Monday, October the twenty one, S.N 1669, the French Ambassador made his ad∣dress to the Venetian College, with Com∣plements of Condolency for the Surrender of Candia, and of Congratulation for the Honourable Articles of Peace concluded between the most Serene Republique and the Ottoman Port; which were, the same E∣vening they came to their hands, being the eighteenth instant, ratified and confirm'd by the Votes of the whole Senate, three onely excepted; and the Ratification immediately dispatched to their Captain-General. Since this, Signior Cavalier Molino was chosen Ambassador extraordinary to the Grand Signior, with an ample and firm Ra∣tification or the said Peace, together with a noble and rich Present of Cloth of Gold to himself, and several considerable sums of Monies, as Presents to his Officers and Mini∣sters.
Now the Generalissimo Morosini left the charge of the whole Army, with the Conduct of the Fleet which is to transport the Venetians, with all things necessary, to the care and management of Monsieur de St. Montbrun, who made some stay at Standia, he himself being gone to Suda, with seve∣ral persons of Quality, the Natives, a Squa∣dron of Ships, and a considerable quantity of Provisions, and number of Men, to re∣inforce that, and the rest of the Garrisons that continue still under the Jurisdiction of the Republique; and to furnish them with all things convenient and necessary for their defence, upon all occasions that should hap∣pen. The Visier was now resolv'd to remain at Candia, and to take up his Winter-Quar∣ters there, notwithstanding the many solli∣citations to return to the Ottoman Court, and the joyful entertainment and reception that he might rationally promise himself from the success of this tedious and long Siege; excusing his absence, by representing to the Sultan the necessity of his continuance in that Island, to settle his Conquest; but 'tis thought by some, that he was unwilling to intermeddle with the troubles of that Court, till he could see the issue of the affairs of the
Sultaness; who hitherto had preserv'd the lives of the Grand Signiors Brethren, by the assistance and help of the Janisaries, that had espoused her interest, and ingaged in her concerns. The Generalissimo Morosini still continued visiting the Forts and Garrisons in St. Can∣dia, and the Neighbouring Islands. Whilst the Senate took all care imaginable for the disposal of those distressed Families, who upon the Surrender of Candia forsook their Habitations; and issued out Orders to pro∣vide for their reception and maintenance in the Towns of Pola and Parenzo in Istria. The Archbishop of Candia having lost his Benefice, obtain'd the Church of St. Gregory, by his application to the Republique, in lieu thereof, and the Revenues thereof were to be setled upon him towards his support, and the maintenance of the Dignity of that Pre∣late; two of the Canons of which Church were dispatched to Rome, to procure Power and Authority from his Holiness, for the set∣tlement thereof accordingly. Having thus given you a description of Candia, in its Ancient and Modern Capacity, with an account of the beginning of the Siege in 1666, its continuance in the years
1667 and 1668, and Surrender in the lat∣ter end of 1669 : We will close all with this Observation, That it is a most prodigi∣ous thing, scarce to be parallel'd in History, though it ought to be Registred to the im∣mortal honour of the Venetians, that an in∣considerable small handful of men, notwith∣standihg all Attempts, Assaults, Mines, Countermines, Batteries, Martial-Strata∣gems, and opposition whatsoever, both by open force, and private Treachery, should be able to defend one single City by Sea and Land, against the whole strength of the Ottoman Empire, for the space of one and twenty years together: which should incite all Christian Princes to imitate them in such Noble and Heroick Actions, and unani∣mously to defend their Territories against the Sanguinary Turk, who is, and ever hath declar'd himself to be the Common Enemy of Christendom. FINIS.
