E2495 11204859 46746
seal of the Commonwealth ¶ By the Parliament. WHereas the old and Implacable Enemy having for some time before the re∣storing of this Parliament, Formed a Design for the bringing in of Charls Stewart, to the Destruction of all the faithful and constant Assertors of the Parliaments most Iust and Righteous Cause, and had brought it to such ripeness, that (by the confession of divers Engaged) the day was prefixed the First of this instant August for their Rising in Arms; but through the good Providence of the Lord, were so timely discovered, that their Design was in a great measure disappointed. Nevertheless, it hath pleased the onely Wise God, to suffer the said Design so far to break forth, that Randolph Egerton a Major-General, and Robert Werden a Colonel, with divers others, Officers and Commanders in the War under the late King, together with Sir Thomas Middleton, Sir George Booth, and other Apo∣states, in prosecution of the same Design, have Proclaimed Charls Stewart to be King, Le∣vied Actual War, and possest themselves of Chester. The Parliament doth therefore Declare and Proclaim the said Randolph Egerton, Robert Werden, Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton, and their Adherents in this War, to be Rebels and Traytors. And because it is not probable that the said persons should, upon what specious pretences soever, undertake so wicked a Design without expecting Assistance from others, The Par∣liament, to the end that no more of the people of this Commonwealth be seduced into any Compliance with them, do also Declare, That whosoever shall from henceforth any ways Assist, Abet or Conceal the carrying on of their said Design, be Deemed and Adjudged Re∣bels and Traytors, and shall be proceeded against accordingly. Tuesday, August 9. 1659. ORdred by the Parliament, That this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and Published. THO. St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament. London, Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament. And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans Church, 1659.
