E3504 13254787 98674
NAVIGATION AND Commerce, THEIR ORIGINAL AND PROGRESS.Containing A succinct Account of Traffick in General; its Benefits and Improvements: Of Discoveries, Wars and Conflicts at Sea, from the Original of Navigation to this Day; with special Regard to the ENGLISH Nation; Their several Voy∣ages and Expeditions, to the Beginning of our late Differences with HOLLAND; In which His Majesties Title to the DOMINION of the SEA is Asserted, against the Novel, and later Pretenders.By I. EVELYN Esq S. R. S. Ciceroad Attic. L. 10. Ep. 7.Qui MARE tenet, eum necesse est RERUM Potiri. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Benj. Tooke, at the Sign of the Ship. in St. Pauls Churchyard, 1674.
TO The King. SIR, THAT I take the Boldness to In∣scribe Your Ma∣jesties Name on the Front of this little History, is to pay a Tribute, the most due, and the most be∣coming my Relation to your Majesties Service of any that I could devise; since Your Majesty has been pleas'd among so
many Noble and Illustrious Persons, to name me of the Councel of Your Com∣merce, and Plantations: And if it may afford Your Majesty some diversion, to behold, as in a Table, the Course, and Importance of what Your Majesty is the most Absolute Arbiter of a∣ny Potentate on Earth, and Excite in Your Loyal Sub∣jects a Courage, and an In∣dustry becoming the Advan∣tages which God and Na∣ture have put into their Hands, I shall have reach'd my humble Ambition, and Your Majesty will not Re∣prove
these Expressions of it in SIR, Your Majestie's Most Dutiful, Most Obedient, and ever Loyal Subject and Servant, J. EVELYN.
NAVIGATION AND COMMERCE THEIR Original and Progress. 1. WHosoever shall with seri∣ous Attention Contem∣plate the divine Fa∣brick of this Inferiour Orb, the various, and admirable Furniture which fills, and Adorns it; the Constitution of the Elements about it, and, above all, the Nature of Man (for whom they were Created) he must needs acknowledge,
that there is nothing more agreable to Reason, than that they were All of them Ordain'd for mutual Use and Commu∣nication. 2. The Earth, and every Prospect of her Supericies, presents us with a thou∣sand Objects of Utility and Delight, in which consists the Perfection of all Sub∣lunary things: And, though, through her rugged and dissever'd Parts, Rocks, Seas and remoter Islands, she seem at first, to check our Addresses; Yet, when we ag'en behold in what ample aies, Creeks, trending-Shores, inviting Harbours and Stations, she appears spreading her Arms upon the Bordures of the Ocean; whiles the Rivers, who re-pay their Tributes to it, glide not in direct, and praecipitate Courses from their Conceil'd, and distant Heads, but in vaious flexures and Meanders (as well to temper the rapidity of their Streams, as to Water and refresh the fruitful Plains) methinks she seems, from the very Beginning, to have been dspos'd for Trafick and Commerce, and even Courts us to visit her most soliary Recesses. 3. This Meditation sometimes affe∣cing my Thoghts, did excedingly
confirm, and not a little surprize me; when reflecting on the Situation of the Mediterranean Sea (so aptly contriv'd for Inter-course to so vast a part of the World) I concluded; That if the Hollanders themselves (who of all the Inhabitants in it, are the best skill'd in making Canales and Trenches, and to derive Waters) had joyn'd in Consul∣tation, how the scatter'd parts of the Earth might be rendred most Accessi∣ble, and easie for Commerce; They could not have contriv'd, where to have made the In-let with so much advan∣tage, as GOD and Nature have done it for Us; Since by means of this Sea, we have admission to no less than Three Parts of the habitable World, and there seems nothing left (in this regard) to humane Industry, which could render it more consummate;Rederio de Toledo, lib. 1. c. 6. So Impious was the saying of Alphonsus (not worthy the name of Prince) That had he been of Counsel with the Creator when he made the Universe, he could have fam'd it better. 4. If we cast our Eyes on the Plains and the Mountains; behold them na∣turally furnish'd with goodly Trees; of which some there are, which grow
as it were, spontaneously into Vessels and Canoes, wanting nothing but the Launching, to render them useful: But, when the Art of Man, or of God rather (for it was he, who first instructed him to Build) conspires, and that he but sets his divine Genius on work, the same Earth furnishes Materials, to e∣quip, and perfect the most Beautiful, Useful, and stupendious Creature (so let us be permited to call hr) the whole World has to shew: And if the Winds, and Elements prove Auspicious (which was the Third Instance of our Con∣templation) this enormous Machine (as if inspir'd with Life too) is ready for every Motion, and to brave all en∣counters and adventures, undertakes to fathom the World it self; to visit strange, and distant Lands; to People, Cultivate, and Civilize un-inhabited, and Barbarous Regions, and to pro∣claim to the Universe, the Wonders of the Architect, the Skill of the Pilot, and, above all, the Benefits of Com∣merce. 5. So great, and unspeakable were the Blessings which Man-kind received by his yet infant Adventures; that it is no wonder, to see how every Nation
contended, who should surpass each other in the Art of Navigation, and ap∣ply the means of Commerce to promote and derive it to themselves; God-Almighty (as we have shew'd) in the Constitution of the World, promping us to awaken our Industry for the sup∣ply of our Necessities: For Man ony being oblig'd to live Politickly, and in Society, for mutual assistance, found it would not be accomplish'd without Labour and Industry; Nature, which ordains all things necessary for other Creatures, in the place where she pro∣duces them, did not so for Man; but en∣nobling him with a superiour Faculty, supply'd him with all things his needs could require. Wheresoever therefore Men are born (unless wanting to them∣selves) they have it in their power, to exalt themselves, even in these regards, above the other Creature; and the Lil∣lies which spin not, and are yet so splen∣didly clad, are not in this respect, so happy as an Industrious and prudent Man; because they have neither know∣ledge, or sense of their Being and Per∣fections: And, though few things indeed are necessary for the Animal life; yet, has it no prerogative by that alone, above
the more Rational, which Man onely enjoys, and for whom the World was made; seeing the variety of Blessings that were ordained to serve him, pro∣claims his Dominion, and the vastness of his Nature; Nor, had the great Cre∣ator himself been so Glorified, without an Intellectual Being, that could Con∣template, and make use of them. We are therefore rather to admire that stu∣pendious mixture of Plenty and Want, which we find disseminated throughout the Creation; What St. Paul affirms of the Members of the Little World, be∣ing so applicable to those of the Great∣er, and no one Place, or Country able to say, I have no need of another, Con∣sidered not onely as to consummate Per∣fections, but even divers things, if not absolutely necessary, at least, Conveni∣ent. 6. To Demonstrate this in a most conspicuous Instance, we need look no farther than HOLLAND, of which fertile (shall we say) or Inchanted Spot, 'tis hard to decide, whether its Wants, or Abundance are really greater, than any other Countries under Hea∣ven; Since, by the Quality, and other Circumstances of Situation (though
otherwise productive enough) it af∣fords neither Grain, Wine, Oyle, Timber, Mettal, Stone, Wool, Hemp, Pitch, no, almost, any other Commodity of Use; and yet we find, there is hardly a Na∣tion in the World, which enjoyes all these things in greater affluence: and all this, from Commerce alone, and the ef∣fects of Industry, to which not onely the Neighbouring parts of Europe con∣tribute, but the Indies, and Antipodes: So as the whole World (as vast as it ap∣pears to others) seems but a Farm, scarce another Province to them; and indeed it is That alone, which has Buil, and Peopl'd goodly Cities, where no∣thing but Rushes grew; Cultivated an heavy Genius with all the politer Arts; Enlarg'd, and secur'd their Boun∣daries, and made them a Name in the World, who, within less than an Age, were hardly consider'd in it. 7. What Fame and Riches the Vene∣tins acquir'd, whilst they were rue to their Spouse, the SEA (and in acknow∣ledgment whereof, they still repeat and celebrate the Nuptials) Histories are loud of: But, This, no longer cont∣nu'd than whilst they ad regard to their Fleets, and their Trafick, the
proper business, and the most genuine to their Situation. From hence, they Founded a glorious City, ixt upon a few muddy, and scatter'd Islands; and Thence, distributed over Europe, the product of the Eastern World, 'till changing this Industry into Ambition, and applying it to the Inlarging of their Territories in Italy, they lost their Interests, and Acquists in the Me∣diterranean, which were infinitely more considerable. Nor in this Recension of the advantages of Commerce, is her Neighbour Genoa to be forgotten; whose narrow Dominions (not exceed∣ing some private Lordships in Eng∣land) have grown to a considerable state; and from a barren Rock, to a proud City, emulous for Wealth and Magnificence, with the stateliest Empo∣riums of the World. 8. The Easterlings, and Anseatick Towns (famous for early Traffick) had perhaps never been heard of, but for Courting thi Mistress; no more than those vaster Tracts of Sweden, Norway, Muscovy, &c. which the late Industry of our own People, has rendred consi∣derable. The Danes, 'tis confess'd, had signaliz'd themselves by their im∣portunate
Descents on this Island, and universal Piracies; whilst negligent of our Advantages at Sea, we often be∣came Obnoxious to them; But, when once we set-up our moving Fortresses, and grew numerous in Shipping, we liv'd in profound Tranquillity, grew o∣pulent, and formidable to our Ene∣mies. 9. It was Commerce, and Naviga∣tion (the Daughter of Peace, and good Intelligence) that gave Reputation to the most noble of our Native-staples, WOOL, exceedingly Improv'd by Forreigners; especially, since the Reigns of Edward the Second, and Third; and has been the principal oc∣casion, of Instituting, and Establishing our Merchant-Adventurers, and other worthy Fraternities; to menion onely the esteem of our Horses, Corn, Tin, Lead, Iron, Saffron, Fullers-Earth, Hides, Wax, Fish, and other Natural, and Artificial Commodities, most of which are Indigene, and Domestick, others Imported, and brought from forraign Countries. Thus, Asia Re∣freshes us with Spices, Recreates us with Perfumes, Cures us with Drougs, and adons us with Jewels: Africa
sends us Ivory and Gold; America, Silver, Sugar and Cotton: France, Spain and Italy, give us Wine, Oyl and Silk: Russia, Warms us in Furrs; Swe∣then, supplies us with Copper; Den∣mark, and the Northern Tracts, with Masts, and Materials for Shipping, without which, all this were nothing. It is Commerce, and Navigation that Breeds, and Accomplishes that most ho∣nourable and useful Race of Men (the Pillars of all Magnificence) to skill in the Exportation of Superluities,See Mr. Coock. Im∣portation of Necessaries; to settle Staples, with regard to the Publick Stock: What 'tis fit to keep at Home, and what to send Abroad: To be Vigi∣lant over the Course of Exchange; to employ Hands for Regulated Sala∣ries; and, by their dexterity, to mode∣rate all this, by a true, and solid Inter∣est of State, which, without this My∣stery, cannot long subsist, as not al∣waies admitting permanent, and immu∣table Rules: In a word, the SEA (which covers half the Patrimony of Man, renders the whole VVorld a stranger to it self, and the Inhabitants, for whom 'twas made, as rude as Cani∣bals) becomes but one Family, by the
Miracles of Commerce, and yet we have said nothing of the most Illustri∣ous product of it; That it has taught s Religion, Instructed us in Polity, Cultivated our Manners, and Furnish'd us with all the delicacies of Virtuous and happy Living. 10. VVhether the First Author of Traffick were the Tyrians, Trojans, Lydians; those of Carthage; or (as Iosephus will) the Mercurial Spirits soon after the Flood, to repair,Antiq. l. 1. and supply the Ruines of that universal Overthrow, we are not solicitous: That it entered with the Earliest, and best daies of the restored-VVorld, we shall prove hereafter, by the timely applications of Industrious Men, to in∣large, and improve their Condition. The Romans indeed, were not of a good while, favourable to Merchandizing; For, the Patricians, Senators and Great-Men might not be Owners in particu∣lar, of any considerable Vessel, besides small Barks, and Pleasure-Boats, and the most illustrious Nations have e∣steem'd the gain by Traffick and Com∣merce incompatible with Nobless: Not, for being Enemies to Trade; but, be∣cause they esteem'd it an Ignoble way of
Gain, Quaestus Omnis indecorus Patri∣bus, saies Livy,Lib. 1. Dec. 3. and were all for Con∣quest and the Sword; for, otherwise, they so encourag'd this Industry, that the Latins (whom for a long time,Ltini multis modi conse∣quuntur Civi∣tatem Roma∣nam; Vt, si Navem dfi∣caverint duo∣rum Millium Mdirum ca∣pacem, &c. Ulpian, Instit. Tit. Latinis, N. 6. they held under such servitude, that they might not devise their Estates when they dyed) if any one of them came to be able to build an handsome Ship, fit for Burthen and Traffick, he was Li∣bertate donatus, and obtained his Free∣dom, with power to make his Testa∣ment, and capable of bearing Office: And one would wonder that Traffick being so profitable, Lycurgus (that great Law-giver amongst the Lacede∣monians) should prohibit it; some be∣lieve it was for its being so obnoxious to Corruption, and the Luxury intro∣duc'd amongst the People by Com∣merce with Strangers; the Lying and Deceit, Perjury and Theft, in buying, selling, and making bargains; for which reason Plato design'd the Towns of his Common-wealth to be built far distant from the Sea; and our Saviour scourg'd the Mony-Changers out of the Temple; so difficult a thing it is for those who Deal much, to preserve their hands clean: But, 'tis said, Plto changed his
mind; and we all know, that as the Romans themselves grew Wiser, so they dignified it, and took-off that illunderstood Reproach, as the Orator has himself told us, when (condemning the Pedlary, and sordid. l. 1. Mercatura, si tenuis est, sor∣dida putanda est.—Nihil enim pro∣ficient, nisi ad∣modum menti∣antur. Vices of Re∣tailers) he acknowledges, That where Staple, and Useful Commodities can be brought in to supply the Needs of whole Countries, 'tis a commendable Service, Videtúrque jure optimo, posse laudari; nay, shew'd by their own Ex∣ample, that for the Greatest Men to turn Merchants, did less taint their Blood, than their Sloth and Effeminacy; and upon this account, the Wisest of the Heathens (for such were Thales, Solon, Hippocrates, and even Plato him∣self) have honour'd Merchandize; and, of later times, many Kings and Princes; and then indeed, does Traffick rise to its Ascendent, when 'tis dignified by their Example, and defended by their Power: This, the Dukes of Florence, and other Potentates have long since understood; and, now at last, the French King: witness the Repair of his Ports, Building of Ships, Cutting new Chan∣nels, Instituting Companies, Planting of Colonies, and Universal encourage∣ment
of Manufactures by cherishing, and ennobling of Sedulous and Indu∣strious persons: But, more yet than all this, or rather all this in more Perfecti∣on; His Majesty (our gloious Mo∣narch) by whose Influences alone (af∣ter all the Combinations of his late powerful Enemies) such a Trade has been Reviv'd, and Carried on, and such a Fleet, and Strength at Sea to protect it, as never this Nation had a greater, nor any other of the past Ages has ap∣proach'd; Witness, You Three migh∣ty Neighbours, at Once, taught to sub∣mit to him! For the Blessings of Navi∣gation, and visiting distant Climes, does not stop at Traffick only; but (since 'tis no less perfection to keep, than ob∣tain a Good) it enables us likewise with means to defend, what our honest Indu∣stry has gotten; and, if necessity, and Justice require; with Inlarging our Dominions too: Vindicating our Rights, Repelling Injuries, Protecting the Op∣press'd, and with all the Offices of Hu∣manity, and good Nature; In a word, Justice, and the Right of Nations, are the Objects of Commerce: It main∣tains Society, disposes to Action, and Communicates the Graces, and Riches
which God has Variously imparted: From all which Considerations, 'tis e∣vident; That a Spirit of Commerce, and strength at Sea to protect it, are the most certain marks of the Greatness of Empire, deduced from an undeniable Sorites; That whoever Commands the Ocean, Commands the Trade of the World, and whoever Commands the Trade of the VVorld, Commands the Riches of the VVorld, and whoever is Master of That, Commands the World it self; so as had the Spaniard treble his VVealth, he could neither be Rich, nor Safe with his prodigious Sloth; since, whilst he has been sitting∣still; VVe, and other Nations have driven the Trade of the East-Indies, with his Treasure of the West, and, u∣niting, as it were, Extreams, made the Poles to kiss: They are not therefore small Matters, you see, which Men so much contend about, when they strive to Improve Commerce, and, by de∣grees, promote the Art of Navigation, and set their Empire in the Deep, from whence they have found to flow such notable Advantages. Instances of this we might add in abundance; and that it is not the vastness of Territory, but
the Convenience of Situation; nor the Multitude of men, but their Address and Industry which improve a Nation. Cosmo di Medices would often say; That the Prince who had not the Sea to friend, was but half a Prince: And, this, Charles the Fifth had well consi∣dered, when he gave it for a Maxime to his Son Philip, That if ever he would sit quiet at home, and advanc his Af∣fairs abroad, he should be sure to keepup his Reputation on the Waters. The truth is, this great Emperour had neg∣lected his Interest at Sea, and it laid the foundation of the Rebellion of his Low-Country Subjects, against his Successor: To pretend to Universal Monarchy without Fleets, was long since looked on, as a Politick Chymaera, and was wit∣tily insinuated to Antigonus b Patro∣clus,Athenaeus De∣ipnosoph. l. 8. when (being a Commander under Ptolomy Lagus's Son) he sent him a Present of Fish and gren Figgs, in∣timating, that unless he had the Sea in his power, he had as good sit at home, and trile: it was but labour in vain▪ And this was the sense of another as great a Captain, when reckoning up the infinte prerogatives which the Sea af∣forded;In Repub. . Xenophon seems to despise the
Advantages of the Land in Compari∣son: Truly the Romans themselves, were longer in struggling for a little Earth in Italy only, than in subduing the whole World, after once their Eagles had taken light towards the Sea, and urg'd their fortune on the deep. When once they had subdu'd Agrigentum,Polibyu. Carthage was no longer impregnable; and after they had pass'd Gads and the Herculean Streight, nothing was too hard for them, they went whither they would, and cruiz'd as far as Thule. 11. We shall not adventure to divine,Illirobur & aes triplex circ pectus—Hor. digitis à morte remotus qua∣tuor— who the hardy Person was who first resolv'd to trust himself to a Plank within an inch of Death, to compel the Woods to descend into the Waters, and to back the most impetuous, and unconstant Element; though probably, and for many Reasons, some-body long before the Deluge; Isti sunt potentes: 6. Gen. 4. Grotius on the place will have the Navigationis repertores, piratae, such as in succeeding Ages were Iupiter, Cre∣tensis, Minos, &c. Since it is not ima∣ginable, the World, that must needs be so Populous, and was so Curios, should have continu'd so many Ages without Adventures by Sea: But, the
irst Vessel which we read of, was made by divine Instinct and direction, and whilst the Prototype lasted (which Hi∣stories tell us was many hundred years) doubtless they built many strong, and goodly Ships: But, as all things are in continual flux and Vicissitude; so the Art in time impair'd, and Men began anew to Contrive for their Safety or Necessity in Rafts, and hollow-Trees; nay, Paper, Reeds, Twigs and Leather (for of such were the rude beginnings of the finish'd Pieces we now admire) till advancing the Art, by making use of more durable Materials, they then began to Build like Ship-Wrights, when Pyrrhon the Lydian invented the bend∣ing of Planks by Fire, and made Boats of several Contignations; nor con∣tented with the same Model, the Pla∣tenses, Mysians, Trojans and other Na∣tions, contended for the various Shapes. Thus to Sesostris is ascribed the Long-Ship itted for Expedition: Hippus the Tyrrian devis'd Carricks and Onerary Vessels of prodigious bulk, for Trafick or Offence: Athenaeus speaks of some that for their enormous structure had been taken for Mountains, and floating-Islands; such was that of
Hiero describ'd by the Deipnosophist,Oneraria Cere∣alis Siracsia, &. a mooving Palace adorn'd with Gardens of the Choicest Fruit, and Trees for shade: Hippagines is said to have trans∣ported the firt Horses in larger Boats; Others ascribe it to Darius, when he retir'd into Thrace; though we think them rather of antienter date; for what else means, the Ferrying over King Davids Goods and Carriages, mention'd in the Second of Samuel?2 Sam. 19. Thus far the Keel; for to the divers parts of Vessels, for better Speed, and Government, several were the Preten∣ders. The Thasii added Decks; Pisaeus the Rostrum or Beak-head; Tiphys the Rudder; Epalamius compleated the Anker, which was at first but of one Flook: But, before all these, was the Use of Oars, which from the Bireme, invented by the Erythraei,iremis i∣strix, Vallata Turrita, &c. came at last to no less than fourty Ordines, or Banks (for so many had Ptolomy Philopater's Gally) which,Plutarch. in Dmet. Athe∣naeus, lib. c. 9. how to reconcile with possible (though that famous Vessel were built for Pomp, and Ostentation only, and therefore with a double Prow) to∣gether with those monstrous Ships of War set forth by Demetrius, which had in them 4000 Rowers, let the Curious
consult the most learned Palmerius, in his Diatriba upon a fragment of Memnon:ho. 717. and fr portenous and Costly Vessels, The late Vendosme built by Lewis the XIIIth. of France; the Swedish Magaleza, the Venetian Bucen∣toro; not to omit those Carricks which the Spaniard emploies yearly to his Indies. But, neither did all these helps suffice, 'till they added Wings too: They attribute indeed the Invention of Masts, and Cross-Yards to those of Creete; but to Theseus, Icarus, and De∣dalus the application of Sails, which 'tis said, Proteus first skill'd to manage, and shift with that dexterity, as he was fain'd to turn himself into all shapes; and it was doubtless, no little wonder, to see that a piece of Cloth (or, as Pliny, wittily, a despicable Seed, for so he calls that of Hemp, of which Sails were made) should be con∣triv'd to stir such a Bulk, and carry it with that incredible celerity, from One extream of the Earth to the Other: Of that esteem was this ingenious In∣vention, that, besides Prometheus, and the rest we nam'd, whole Countries challeng'd it, and the Rhodians, Iönians, Corinthians, those of Tyus, Aegypt
Aegineta, oetia with innumerable other, vaunt themselves Masters of the Science, nor is there any end of their Names. It were a thing impossible, to investigate by whom the several Rig∣gings of Vessels, and compleat Equip∣ment were brought into Use: The Skill of Pilotage has aids from the Mathe∣matics, and Astronomy;Vegetus, Pol∣lux, Laz. Bji∣ius, Crsenti∣us, Fournier, &c. and that of governing Ships in Fight is another, and a different talent. These, and ma∣ny more, were the Daughters of Time, Necessity, and Accident; so as even to our Daies, there is ever something ad∣ding, or still wanting to the Comple∣ment of this incomparable Art. Of the Magnet we shall speak hereafter, nor are we to despair in the perfecting of Longitudes, Dies, Diem docet, and whilst many pass, Science shall be stil improv'd: We shall onely observe, concerning Men of War, Fleets, and Armada's for Battel, that Minos was re∣ported to be the Author, which shews that manner of desperate Combat on the Waters, to be neer as antient as Men themselves, since the Deluge: Indeed, to this Prince do some attribute the first knowledge of Navigation,Dio , l. 6. Srbo. l. 10. and that he disputed the Empire of the
Seas with Neptune himself, who, for his Power on the Watry Element, was esteem'd a God: But, however these particulars may be uncertain, we are able to make proof, That the first Fre∣gats were built by the English, and generally, the best, and most Commo∣dious Vessels for all sort of Uses in the World; and, as the Ships, so Those who Man them, acknowledg'd for the most Expert, and Couragious in it. But, 12. From the Building of Ships, we pass to the most Celebrious Expediti∣ons tha have been made in them. The Gentiles (who doubtless took Saturn for Noah, and his Sons, for other of the Deities) magnifie sundry of their Ad∣ventures by Sea: And, if from the im∣mediate Off-spring of that ancient Pa∣triarch, Sem, and Iaphet, the Asiatick-Iles, and those at remoter distance in the Mediterranean and European Seas, were peopl'd (whilst the Continent, and less dissever'd Africk, was left to Cham) we have a certain Epoche, for the earliest Expeditions, and, shall less need to insist on those of the Mythical, and Heroic Age; the Exploits of Osiris, Hercules, Cadmus; the Wandrings of
Ulysses, and the Leaders that expugn'd Troy. To touch but a few of these; Bacchus, whose Dominion lay about the Gulph of Persia, made of the first Adventures, when from him (after the Rape of Ariadne) the Tyrrian Pirates learn'd the Art of Navigation, or rather to become more skillful Rovers; If at least, they were not of the first for Antiquity in this Art; Since the Phoe∣nicians (whether expell'd by Ioshua, or transported by their Curiosity) having spread their name in the Mediterra∣nean, were admir'd as Gods for their boldness on the Waters, and esteem'd among the first that Navigated, accord∣ing to that of the Poet, Prima ratem ventis credere docta Tyrus.Tibullus. That Cadmus sail'd into Greece, Peo∣pl'd those Iles in the Aegaean, taught them Letters, and Sciences, as he had learn'd them from the Hebrews, we have undoubted testimony: Some af∣firm that the Phoenicians circl'd the World long since, the Herodotus has something to that purpose, where in his Melpomene, he speaks of those whom King Necus caus'd to Embark
from the Red Sea, and that ten years after return'd home by the Columns of Hercules through the Streights: However, that they penetrated far be∣yond the Western Ocean, and the Shores of Africk, the Expedition of Hanno in a Navy of LX. Ships makes out by Grave Writers; so their coming as far as our Britain, the Pillars which they fixt at Gades,. and Tingis, to which some report they were crept in early daies: And as towards the West, so Eastward, taking Colonies from Elana and the Persian-Gulph. As to what they might be for Merchants, illustrious is the proof out of Esay, where Tyrus is call'd the Crowning City, whose Merchants are Princes, and whose Trafickers the honourable of the Earth; when under the pretence of Transporting Commo∣dities into Greece, they carried away Iô, Daughter of Inachus, which the Cre∣tans requited, when shortly after, their amorous God, sail'd away with the fair Europa in the White-Bull; for so was the Vessel call'd, which gave Occa∣sion to the Fable, and serves to prove, how antient the giving Names, and Vide Valer, Flaccum A∣gnut. l. 8. Herodot. H∣chinum, Sui∣dam, Senam, Lucianum, Srabonem. Amongst the Poets, Vgil. Ps. Satius, &c. Badges is. Indeed so expert were those of Crte in Sea-Affairs, and so
numerous in Shipping, as by the suffrage of ancient times, there were none durst contend with them for Sovereignty: let us hear the Tragaedian, O maria vasti Creta Dominatrix freti,Sen. Trag. in Hippolyto. Cujus per omne littus innumere, Rates Tenuere Pontum: quicquid Assyria tenus Tellure Nereus pervium Rostris secat. 13. The Colchick Exploit in the fa∣mous Argo (so call'd from her nimble Sailing) was perform'd by above 50 Gallants, of which Nine were Chief under Iason, and Glaucus his Experi∣enc'd Pilot: But, whether they went to those Countries about the Euxine Shores in hopes of Golden Mines (sha∣dow'd by the Fleece) or in expecta∣tion of the Philosophers Stone (said to be in possession of King Aeta) we leave to the Romancers: There is in Homer a List of Hero's, and Ships under their command, mention'd to be set out by the , or States-General of those Provinces, reported to have been no less than a Thousand; Non anni domuêre decem, non mille Ca∣rinae.Iliad. 2.
And that this Number is not fictitious; not onely the wondrous exactness of the Poet in describing the Commanders by Name, but the Number of Ships under each Flag, as the Learned Mr. Stanley makes it good beyond exception in his excellent Notes upon Aeschylus, and we propose the Instance, because it is so very remarkable for its Antiquity. 14. But, to quit these dark, and less certain Memorials, and mingle that of Commerce with Martial Undertakings: The First for whom we have Divine, and Infallible Record, is of the Great∣est, and the Wisest Prince, that ever sway'd a Scepter: For, though it ap∣pear, the Phoenicians had us'd the Sea before, and, perhaps, were the. Di∣onys. . first Merchants in the World since the De∣luge: Yet, it was Solomon doubtless, who open'd the Passages to the South, when animated by his directions, and now leaving-off their Rafts, and Im∣proving their Adventures in Ships, and Stouter Vessels, they assay'd to pene∣trate the farthest Indies, and visit an Unknown Hemisphere: or if haply, they prevented him; yet, were now glad to joyn with this glorious Mo∣narch; because of those advantagious
Ports his Father had taken from the Idumeans, which might otherwise inter∣rupt their Expeditions. What a Mass of Gold, and other precious things (the peculiar Treasure of Princes) this Fleet of his brought home, the suc∣ceeding story relates;2 Chro. 9. 21. and there is farther notice of Mariners, whose Tra∣ding was for Spices and Curiosities; and the Voyage to Tarshish (which by some is interpreted the Ocean, as indeed it signifies in the Chaldaean Language, but doubtless, means Tartessus in Spain) is again repeated. Iehoshaphat, after So∣lomon, neglected not these prosperous beginnings, though, not with equal Success; for the Ships were broken at Esion-Geber: We shall onely remark, upon the Account of Commerce, that Solomon had no less than two Fleets de∣stin'd for Trafick, of which, One went to Ophir (perhaps Sophra, Taproban, or Ceilon) in the East-Indies,Cant. 5. 11. Dan. 10. 5. and the Other to Tarsis, that is (Tartessus) Cales; which being Then, and long after esteem'd for the utmost Confine of the World, had its name from the Phoenicians, as well as divers other places, and Ports of Eu∣rope (even as far as Italy, France, and Britany it self) which both They, and
We reserve to this day in no obscure footsteps: And that Spain abounded in plenty of Gold too (whatever some su∣perficial Searchers think) we learn from Strabo, Diodorus, Mela,See Bochartus Phaleg. l. 3. c. 7. Canaan, l. 1. c. 34. Pliny, and se∣veral Grave Authors, whose attestation may be of good weight; the Tyrians, and Phoenicians frequently Sailing into those Parts. But, though we had yet no print of this from the Sacred Volumes, it is not to be devis'd, how the Isles of the Gentiles, and other Places of in∣accessible distance could be planted and furnish'd, without those early Intercourses by Sea, which, by degrees (as in part is shew'd) accomplish'd the Dominions of Warlike-Men, and States, and encourag'd some to stupendious At∣tempts. 15. To proceed to Instances of un∣questionable Credit, we have those of the Persians, and Greeks both before, and since the Peloponnesiack War: And, indeed the Greeks were the first of the Heathens that joyn'd Learning with Arms, that did both Do and Write what was worthy to be remembred; and that small parcel of Ground, whose greatness was then onely valu'd by the vertue of the Inhabitants, planted Tra∣pizond
in the East, and divers other Cities in Asia the Less, the protection of whose Liberties was the first Cause of War between them and the Persians: As to Exploits, the Athenians, and smaller Islands of the Aegean, exceed∣ingly amplified their Bounds with their Naval-Power; so as Thucydides enume∣rates their Annual descents upon Pelo∣ponnesus, during that Quarrel: But, the Exploits of Alcibiades, both when so ungratefully Exil'd from his Country, and after he was again restor'd to it, were celebrated in story,Iustin. l. 5. as well as those of Conon, under whom, we first hear of a Treasurer of the Navy, for the better Paying of the Sea-men, even in those early daies: But, these Con∣flicts did many of them concern the Persian by Tissaphernes under Darius, Artaxerxes, and others: The Diffe∣rences also with the Megarenses, where Pisistratus obtain'd the Victory, and the Exploits of Themistocles; but, espe∣cially that decretory Battle in which Xerxes's Fleet of 1500 Men of War, was vanquish'd by less than 400, which gave the absolute Dominion of the Sea to one City, and so inrich'd it, that the Lacedemonians (envious at her
prosperity) maintain'd a War against it, to the almost ruine of both, see the effects of Avarice! But this was indeed before the Peloponnesian War, between the LXXX and LXXXIV Olympiad, and first commenc'd against Strangers, and then the Lacedemonians, Corcyreans, and other their Neighbours for the space of Seven years continance, till by the Courage, and good Conduct of Lysander, a Peace was at last conclu∣ded, with the destruction of Athens, as it usually happens to the First who give the Occasion, and are the Aggres∣sors. She was yet set-up once again, by that gallant Exile whom we namd, under the Banner of Artaxerxes; but so to the desolation of poor Greece (weakn'd by her many Conflicts) that King Philip, and his Son Alexander, soon took their Advantage, to make themselves, first Masters at Sea, and then of the World; for they are infal∣lible Consequents. And here we might speak something of Corinth, a City (if ever any) emulous of the highest praises for Traffick, and Exploits at Sea; but we involve her amongst th Grecians, and pass over to the opposite shoar; where▪ upon division of the
Macedonian Empire, we find the Car∣thaginians (a People originally from Tyrus) of the earliest fame for Com∣merce, and so well appointed for the Sea, as gave terrour to Rome her self: Nor do we forget the Syracusans, re∣nown'd for their many glorious Acti∣ons at Sea, which continu'd to the very Punick War, the most obstinate that History has recorded. 16. It was 492 years from the Foun∣dation of the City, before they had Atchieved any thing considerable on the Waters; when inding the wonted Progress of their Victories obstructed by those of Carthage (then Lords at Sea) they fell in earnest to the Building of Ships of War, and devising Engines of Offence, which before they hardly thought of. Their first Expedition by Sea, was under Appius Cludius, a∣gainst the Sicilians, which made those of Africa look about them, and gave rise to the Punick War under Cajus Duillius, and his Collegue, with an hundred Rostrated Vessels, and 75 Gallies: But, the most memorable for number, was, when the two Admirals Regulus, and L. Manlius, with above an hundred thousand Men (in Ships that
had every one 300 at the Oar) were encounter'd with a yet more prodi∣gious force, in the Battle at Heraclea, unfortunate to the Carthaginians: But, neither did it so determine: For, when Hannibal (returning out of Spain) in∣vaded Italy; The Romans found no better expedient to divert him, than by dispatching Scipio, with a Fleet into Africa. The third, and last Contest (after a little repose) determin'd not till the utter ruine, and subversion of that emulous Neighbour. These seve∣ral Conflicts with this hostile City (which lasted near Twenty years) are admirably describ'd by Polybius; e∣specially that of M. Regulus, who, with that unequal Power, fought three Battles in one day; and, in anothe, Aemilius (with about the same number of Ships) took, and sunk above an hundred more, and lew near 40000 of the Ene∣my, though by the terrible and un∣fortunate Wrack, which afterwards surpriz'd him, such another Victory had undone them. They made War, after this, with the Achaians, Balea∣ians, Cilicians, Sertorians, and those of Crete; indeed, wheresoever they found Resistance, diffident yet at first,
of this unaccustom'd manner of Com∣bate, and which for sometime, caus'd them to lay it by; but, they quickly resum'd it, and overcoming all diffi∣culties, then Onely might be said to speed Conquerours of the World, when they had Conquer'd the Sea, and subdu'd the Waters. 17. The Piratick-War of Pompey we find celebrated by Tully, pro Lege Manilia: He invaded the Cyclades; won Corcyra, got Athens, Pontus,Florus, Plu∣tarch. and Bithynia, and cleared the Seas with that wonderful diligence, that in forty daies time, he left not a Rover in all the Mediterranean, though grown to that power, and number, as to give terrour to the Common-walth. We forbear to speak of Sextus his unfor∣tunate Son, vanquish'd by the Trea∣chery of his LibertusCall'd  Menas by race Epo. Menodorus, and pass to the great Augustus, who in many Sea-Conflicts signaliz'd his Courage; especially, in that Decretory Battail at Actium, where the Contest was de summa Rerum, and the World by Sea, first subdu'd to the Empire of a single Person. What discoveries this mighty Prince made, did as far exceed his Praedecessours, as the frozen North,
and horrid Coasts of Cimbria, the milder Clime of our Britain, which was yet in those daies esteem'd another World, and her oundaries, as much unknown, as those of Virginia to us: 'Twas call'd Alter Orbis; and Grave Especially Clem. Romanus. See also Clau∣dius, Servius, Iosephus, Dio, Eutropius, Scaliger, &c. Authors, who speak of the unpassa∣bleness of the Ocean, mention the Worlds that lay beyond it: Morino∣rum gentem ultimam esse Mortalium, says Ptolomy; and the rince of Poets▪ —Extremique hominum Morini. For it appears no late fancy, that all was not discover'd long before Colum∣bus; though those who took the Hea∣vens for a kind of hollow-Arch, co∣vering onely what was then detected, little dream'd of Antipodes: 'Tis a∣mous yet what the Prophetick Tragoe∣dian has offer'd at,Sn. in Med. and a thing beyond dispute, that the Antients had the same notions of our Country, as we of America: But to leave thse Enqui∣ries at present (till we come more particularly to speak of our Country in the following Series) we shall onely, as to the Romans, give the Curious a tast, what Care these Wise People
had of their Naval Preparations, when once (as we have shew'd) they found the Importance of it, and after how prudent a Method they dispos'd it. 18. Augustus had in his Military Establishment one Squadron of Men of VVar at Ravenna, as a constant Guard of the Adriatic; and another riding at Misenum,Suet. in Aug. c. 49. to scowr the Tyr∣rhen-Sea, together with a Brigade of Foot-Souldiers at either Port, to clap on Board upon any sudden occasion. The Misenian-Feet lay conveniently for France, Spain, Morocco, Africk,Vgetius. Ae∣gypt, Sardinia, and Sicily; That at Ra∣venna, for Epirus, Macedon, Achaia, Propontis, Pontus; The Levantine parts, Creete, Rhodes, and Cyprus,Notitia Impe∣ri. &c. So as by the Number of their Vessels, and Arms, they made a Bridge (as it were) to all their Provinces, and vast Dominions at what distance soever;MIL. CL. P. R AR. Miles lassis Fraeto∣iae Ravenna∣tis. And many of these particulars we could farther Illustrate by Mdas, and noble Inscriptions, to be gather'd out of good Records,PRAETOR. MAR. E CL. M. R. Miliiae  did we need the Ostentation of any farther Researches: VVe shall only observe, that they had their Praetrio Praefectus, who In∣spected
all this. Marine Laws and Customes they also had: Whence was it else that the Corn-fleet was still from Alexandria to make Puteoli, as it were by Coquet bound? So the Ships of that Port: See Acts 28. 11, 12, 13. VVhence else was it that onely the same Corn-fleet, as being of so absolute ne∣cessity for the sustenance of the Imperial City, had the Priviledge to come into Harbour with Top and Top-Gallant; unless the rest did Supparum dimere, or strike Sal to the Ports of the Empire? So early was the claim to the Flag, and the Ceremonies of Naval-Honour sta∣ted. Yet higher; Their Rostrate-Crowns;See Tully de Snct. and that pretty Insolence by Act of Senate allow'd to C. Duillius after having won the Romans their first Victory at Sea, that he should, all his life after, be brought to the publick Entertainments in the Town-Hall with a Pipe playing before him; and lam∣beaux on each side;Gter's In∣scriptions. that Column too, whose Fragments yet preserv'd, exhi∣bit with the memory of that Illustrious Action, perhaps the Ancientest piece of Latin now extant, at least in the Originals. All these allegations do a∣bundantly testifie with what trans∣ports
of joy that aspiring people re∣ceiv'd the Accession of Power by Sea. They also had their Decuriae Fabrorum Rhavennatium, Master Ship-Wrights of the Dock at Rhavenna; and, we ind Fire-Ships mention'd inFront. Strata∣gem, l. 4 c. 7. Fronti∣nus; Stink-Pots, nay Snake-Pots, and False-Colours; for such, we read, were us'd by Cassius, Scipio, Annibal, M. Portius, Iphicrates, Pisistratus, and o∣thers: And, if the Trajan Port at Ostia were now extant, we might see such a patern of a Mole, Lantern, Magazine for Ships, and Accommodation for Merchants Goods, as was never before in the World, and would put to shame all modern Industry of that Nature; to shew the care they had, and the pro∣digious Expences they made, for this so important, and necessary a VVork: But these things hapning in her early and best daies, the fervour quickly abated; for from the Death of Augustus, and some few of the succeeding Empe∣rours (as in thatVide Poco∣piu, l 3. Paulu , l. 14. decline, by the Con∣duct of Belizarius, Artabanes, and some of the later Captains) the Romans, as powerful by Land as they were, per∣formed no much at Sea: hose glori∣ous Actions were the Consequents of
a frugal and vigilant People; But, when Softness, and Prodigality took off their Minds from the great, and no∣ble Enterprizes of their Ancestors, and the Defence of their Country was discompos'd by Factions among them∣selves, the Goths, Vandales, Lombards, and Saracens broke in upon them, to the utter ruine, and subversion of that renowned Empire. 19. But the Business of Navigation, and Commerce (which could not long be Eclips'd, so soon as a Magnanimous Prince appear'd) was again Reviv'd uner Charles the Great; about whose time, it wee not hard to find out the Original of amost all the Naval-Offices, and Thalassarchia or Admiralty, to this Day continuing; as appears in both the Notitiae Imperii Occidentalis & Ori∣entalis, wherein there occur divers no∣table Particulars concerning them, e∣ven till the loss of Constantinople, and the Impeial Sat it self: But, to trace this great Article from its source, and show the Progress it has made in the Ages past, we have but to look over the Catalogue which Eusebis has given us, adjusted to the poche in which they had successive Dominion of the Sea:
namely, the Lydians whom (as appear∣ing the most Conspicuous) he sets in the Van: Then the Pelasgi, Thraces, Rhodians, Phrygians, Phaenicians, the Aegyptians, Milesians, those of Caria, Lesbia, the Phocenses, Naxii, Eretri∣enses, Aeginetae and others too long to recite: Let us look back to the Aegy∣ptians, who we read, were so addicted to Traffick, as they essayed to joyn the Mediterranean with the Red-Sea, and thereby open a passage to the Com∣merce of Arabia, Aethiopia, and the Shoars of India: VVhich attempt (un∣successful as it prov'd) did not yet impeach the Alexandrian Staple, from whence Rome of Old, the Genoezes, Venetians, and others of later date, have inricht themselves: For the Eastern Scale being in Caesars time at Coptos, and afterwards, remov'd to Alexan∣dria; when the Arabs and Goths over∣ran the VVorld (and the Indian Trade interrupted) was convey'd to rebe∣zond upon the Euxine, and from thence by Caravan to Aleppo, thence again re∣cover'd to the Red-Sea, and Alexan∣dria by the Sultan, who then possessed Cairo, where it was long Monopo∣liz'd by the Venetians, of whom we
give a more particular Account. VVhat immense Treasure the Romans received out of Asia, and Syria; out of Africa from Aegypt, and by the Nile; the Per∣sian Gulph, and from India, we are told out of StraboLib. 17.. This Merchan∣dize was first convey'd over-Land from Berenice, by Philadelphus (to avoid the perils of Navigating the Red-Sea) to Ppta on the Nilus; and thence (with the Stream) to Alexandria, though many Ships adventur'd to pass from Mris (or the Berenice above-mention'd) even to the very Indies; by which means there came Yearly to Rome, no les then 1000 Tuns of Gold, besides other precious Commodities. But, when the Empire fell to decay, the Venetians (as we noted) took their advantage, till then a few scatter'd Cotages of poor Fisher-men, and o∣thers, Fugitives from the Gotic In∣undation, and setling by degrees upon a Cluster of divers muddy, and almost, inaccessible Islands: See what Com∣merce can effect! But, these Industri∣ous People assay'd another way, name∣ly, from Ganges through Bactria, and the River Oxus, and so the Caspian Lake, Asracan and the Volga; thence
to Tanaïs by the Euxine, and so to Ve∣nice; truly an immense Circle, and which soon wearied them out, when even of later times, the Negoce of In∣dia was supplied from Tripoly, and A∣lexandretta (Cities of Syria) and from Aleppo by Caravan, to which Scale Merchants came from Armenia, Arabia, Aegypt, Persia, and generally, fom all the Oriental Countries. From A∣leppo again they return'd to Bir near the Euphrates; thence to Badaget, or Ophram in Media; Balsara, and the Gulph all down the Stream: To this Balsara is yet brought all sorts of In∣dian Commodities, as far as Aethiopia, and the Islands of that Ocean; where being charg'd on smaller Vessels, they are tow'd-up against the Euphrates to Bagdet▪ in which Passage, being now and then interrupted by the Thievish Arabs (especially at the Frontiers) In∣telligence is familiarly convey'd by the Inter-nunce of Pidgeons trained up for the purpose, that is, carried in open Cages from the Dove-houses, and freed, with their Leters of Advice (con∣triv'd in narrow scrowls about their bodies, and under the wing) which they bring with wonderful Expedi∣tion:
as they likewise practice it from Scanderoon to Aleppo upon the coming∣in of Ships, and other Occasions, These were the later Intercourses from Venice to, and from the Oriental Parts, till in the Year 1497,1497. that the famous Vasco de Gama (that fortunate Portugueze, and whom we may truly call he Re∣storer of Navigation) found out a nearer VVay, by going farther about: For Henry,1410. the Third Son of Iohn the First of Portugal, hearing that Bethen-Court, a Norman, had detected certain Islands in the Atlantick Ocean some years before; sent two Ships in search of the Africa Shoars Southwards: Ten Years after this,1344. Consalvo, and Tristan Vaz made discovery ofDetcted be∣fe by one Mcha a English-man. Madera, and certain Genoëzes had sail'd as far as the Sierra Lione, within eight Degrees of the Aequator; after which, there was little advance till the Reign of Alphonsus the Second, in whose time, the Portuguezes Coasted as far as the ro∣monory of St. Katharine under the second Degree of Southern Latitude: But, Iohn the Second sending men by the old Way of Alexandria, and the Midland-Sea to Goa, Peter Covilan, an Active Spirit amongst them, hearing of
a famous Cape, which extending it self far into the Sea and that being doubl'd, did open a passage into the East, brought News of it to King E∣manuel (then Reigning) who there∣upon, employ'd the two Brothers Vasques (whom we nam'd) and Paulo, with four Vessels, and 160 Men, with that Success, as to discover a passage to the Indies by Long-Sea, to the al∣most utter ruine of Venice; and, in a short time after, to the total Interrup∣tion of that tedious Circle by Land, Rivers, and Lakes, which we have been describing; nor are we to forget Petrus Alvarez, Almeïda, and others: And in this manner, for divers Years (at least till the Reign of Iohn the Third) did the Portugals and Spaniards carry the Trade of the World, from the rest of the World, till the HOL∣LANDERS (being prohibited all Intercourse with the Ports belonging to the Catholick-Rings) attempted the same Discovery, and in short time, so out-did the former; that, by the Year 1595,1595. they had Establish'd a Compa∣ny for the East-Indies, and within a while after, another for the West, which has subdu'd the best part of Brazile,
and in the Year 1628,1624. 1628. fought, and took the Spanish Plate-Fleet, to their im∣mense Inrichment: But, in what man∣ner they have setled themselves and Factories in those Parts, and by what Arts maintain'd it, will require a fuller discovery. 20. We not long-since mention'd the Goths and Vandals, and who almost has taken Notice of the Ancient Port of Wisbuy, formerly a Receptacle of Ships, and famous Emporium in those Parts? when even the Laws, and Ordinances of Wisbuy, took place like those of Oleron, from Muscovy, to the Streights of Gibraltar; and though both Olaus Magnus, Herbestan, and Others have exceedingly celebrated this City, and Haven; Yet we cannot learn, how it came to be deserted, unless by the Lux∣ury, and Dissentions of the Inhabi∣tants; by none (that we can find) re∣corded: But, that it was once in so lourishing a state, testifie the yet re∣maining Heaps, the Columns of Marble, Iasper, and Porphyrie: the Gates of Brass and Iron, exqisitely wrought, and other foot-steps of August foun∣dations. Albertus the Swedish King, endeavour'd by great Privileges, to
have (it seems) establish'd again, and restor'd it to its ancient splendour, but it did not succeed: Nevertheless, the Laws we mention'd (written in the Old Theutonick Language, and without date) obtain'd amongst the Germans, Danes, Flemmings, and almost all the Northern People: We mention the Instance to shew, that as some Places have set up, and thriven by their In∣dustry; so Others, have lost what they once possess'd; and that this Vicissi∣ude is unavoidabe, Tyrus, and Car∣thage, and Corinth, and Syracuse (that in their turns contended with all the World for Navigation and Commerce) are pregnant Examples. The famous Brundusium (whence the Great Pom∣pey led from the fortune of Caesar) is now quite choak'd-up: Ioppa is no more, and Tingis, which of old deriv'd its Name from Commerce, and was a re∣nown'd Emporium near three hundred Years before Carthge was a City, was lately the Desolate Tanger; though now again, by the Inluence of our glorious Monarch, raising its aged head with fresh vigour: But, what's become of hundreds we might Name;Srabo, Dions. . See Isaa, c. 23. Spina nar Ravenna, Luna in truria, Lesbus, and
even Athens her self? When nearer home, and at our own doors, Staver∣nen in Friezland, anciently a famous Port, now desolate, Antwerp (lately the Staple for the Spice and Riches of the East, and that Sold more in one Month, than Venice did in four and twenty) lies abandond: The stately Genoa (which once employ'd twice-twenty thousand hands in the Silken Manufa∣cture) is now, with her ElderSister Venice, ebbing apace; Venice, I say, the Belov'd of the Sea, sems now orlorne, compar'd to what she was, and from how a small a principle she had spread! 21. The Bretons and Normans (e∣specially against the Saracens) those of Province, Marselles, arbon, &c. had long since been famous at Sea, we say, long since; for the ancient Gaules had great Commerce with those of Car∣thage (as appears out of Polibyus and Livy) but the French in general, have of later daies, and since the Reign of Charles the Eighth,il. Cmins. performed little considerable: Francis the First (that Magnificent Prince, who had made the famous Andrea d'Oria his Admiral) built indeed no less than ifty Gallies for the Italick-War, and had some Con∣flicts
with our King his Neighbour; But Henry the Fourth, seem'd wholly negligent of Sea-affairs, as relying up∣on the Generosity of Queen Elizabeth, in whose daies, neither He, nor any other Potentate about her, durst pre∣tend to Shipping, or such Fleets as might give jealousie to their Allies; which, had this incomparable Prin∣cess, or, rather, her eaceful Successor, as well observ'd with the Hollanders in point of Commerce and Trade too; the Ages to come, as well as present, had been doubly oblig'd to their memory: But the Scene is now chang'd, as well with them as with France; since Car∣dinal de Richlieu, in the Reign of Lewis the Thirteenth, Instituting a Colledge, and Fraternity of Merchants about thirty Years since; and by Opening, Enlarging, and Improving their Ports and Magazines, has put the present Monarch into such a Condition, as has exceedingly advanc'd his Commerce, and given Principle to no inconsidera∣ble Navy; and ifD Rub. Galliae, l. 2. Claudius Sesellius the Bishop of Marselles's Prophecies succeed (who writ about the time of Lewis the Twelfth) the Northern World is like to have an importunate
Neighbour within few Years to come, from his growing Power, even upon the Ocean. 22. The Danes, and more Northern People were formidable (especially to this Island) under the Conduct of their brave Canute, Ubbon the Frizian, and other Captains; making frequent descents upon Us in mighty Fleets, en∣counter'd by the Saxons: But, all these living more by Brigandize, and Piracy, than by Traick, gave place to the Spaniard, and Portugals, whose success∣ful Expeditions, and Discoveries, have rendred them deservedly more VVor∣thy for these last six, or seven hundred Years, than any we have hitherto men∣tion'd, for their shedding of Blood, and Invasions. Nor with less Glory, and timely application of themselves to Sea Affairs, did the formerly-mention'd Genoëzes, and others of the Ligurian Coast, signalize their Courage, as well as their dexterity in Traffick; espe∣cially, against the Saracens; since which, they did exceedingly flourish; till the Dukes of Tuscany, by better Policy, and the direction of Count Dudley (pre∣tended Duke of Northumberland) raising its Neighbour Ligorn from a
despcable, and neglected Place, to a Free and well-defended Port, did well nigh  it; for, by this means, the greatest Merchants or repute in the World (namely those of Genoa) are become the greatest, and sordidst Usu∣rers in it; as having otherwise litle means to employ the Riches, which they formerly got, by a more honest, and natural way of Trade: But, as the O∣pening of Marselles may in time en∣danger that of Ligorn, whilst the French King is corting all the World with Naturalization, and other popular Im∣munities; other Princes are instructed how to render themselves Considera∣ble, who are blest wih any advana∣gious Post upon the bordres of the Ocean; and, of This, Gotenberg (not to mention Villa-Franca, and some other Ports) is now a worthy Instance, which, till of late, was hardly known bevond its Wooden Suburbs, though it must be acknowledg'd, that both the Danes and Sweeds had perform'd no∣table Explots; the former from He∣rald the Third, by the Conduct of Ub∣bon the Frisian (not to insist on their heavy Impositions on this Island) and the latter from Gustavus the first, who
serv'd himself of Gallies even upon the Northern Seas, built for him by the Venetians, and set out that enormous Ship, we mention'd, which carryed 1300 Men: What Conquests the late Great Adolphus made, who went into Prusia with an Armada of 200 Ships, is known to the amazement of Eu∣rope. 23. We have more than once shew'd, from how humble a rise Venice had ex∣alted her head, and spread the fame of her Conquests, as well as Naviga∣tion, over Asia, Aegypt, Syria, Pontus, Greece and other Countries, bordering upon the Ocean: she War'd against the Istrians, vanquish'd the Saracens. In the Holy land; they won Smyrna, de∣vasted all the Phoenician Shoars, espe∣cially under Dominico Michaele, who with 200 Vessels, having rais'd the Siege of Ioppa, took chus, Samos, Lesbos; to omit their Successes against the Ge∣noëzes emulous of their growth, but never to forget the former, and of late, strenuous resistance against the Turk; especially in that signal Battle of Le∣panto, and what their famous General Capello did at Tunis, and Algiers of later time, and the Building, Furniture, and
Oeconomy of their Arsenal, and Ma∣gazines Celebrated throughout the World; when (before the lucky Por∣tuguezes had doubl'd the Cape of Bon∣Isperanza) the sweet of the Levantine Commerce (transfer'd from this Port onely) invited men to build not Ships alone, but Houses, and Palaces in the very bosom of Neptune, with a stu∣pendious Expence, and almost mira∣culous: The Government of their Ma∣ritime-Affairs, care of their Forrests, Victualling, Courage and Industry of their Greatest Noble-men, who are fre∣quently made Captains of sigle Gallies, and sometimes arriving to be Chief Admirals, come near a Dictatorship; are things worthy of praise; and of the Name they have obtain'd. Genoa (whom we mention'd) had sigaliz'd it self against the Saracens, the Republic of Pisa, and even Venice it self, espe∣cially under Paganus Doria in the Year 1352, near the Bosphorus Streight; and with the Island of Tenidos had been hir'd by the Young Andronicus to come into his assistance: From the time of Cosino di Medices, and Sylvius Piccol∣mini their Admiral, the Floretines gave proof of their Valour in Africa, and of
their Care for Sea Affairs, the Arsenal at Pis gives a commendable In∣stance. 24. The Rhodans (to whom some attribute even the Invention of Navi∣gation, and whose Constiutions were niversally receiv'd) obain'd a migh∣ty repue at Sea; and the Courgious Exploits of the Maltezes, and other Military Orders against the Common Enemy, the Trk, are renown'd over the World; winess, ten thousand which they lew, and half as many that they took in the Year 1308, with hundred thousands of those Miscrants destroy'd by them since their removal to Malta; especally when joyn'd with the al∣lies of Venice and Genoa, in the Years 1601, 1625, 1638, and other slaughers innumrable. We name the Trk, and they give us Cause to remember them, by what the Christian Pale has too of∣en felt, when more by their Numbers, than their Courage, they took from it Cyprus, Rhodes, and the never to be for∣gotten Candi; besides, their Conquests and Incursions, on the rest of Europe and Asia: They are not,'tis Confess'd, of any Name for much Commerce, but for the Disturbance of it, which calls
aloud pon the Christian VVord to put a mely period to their Insolence, be∣fore it be incorrigible, and to pursue the bold, and brave Exploits of our Blakes Lawsons, and Sprags against te Moores and Barbares, and by Exampe of our Heroic Prince, to restore that Security to Trade, which can onely make it Re-lourish. 25. The Aethiopians, Persians, In∣dians and Chinezes (for those of Tar∣tary, present, or ancient Scyths, come hardly into this Account) may be reckon'd among the Nations of Traf∣fic; Especially, the last nam'd, as who are by some thought to have had knowledge of the Magnet before the Europeans▪ nay, so addicted were they to Sailing, that they invented Velieros Chariots, and to Sail upon the Land: It was long since that they had inter∣course with those of Madagascar, and came sometimes as far as the Red-Sea with their Wares; and for Vessels, have to this day about Nankin, Ionks of such prodigious size, as seem like Cities, ra∣ther than Ships, buit full of Hoses, and replenish'd with whole Families: In shrt, There is hardly a Nation so ude, but, who is some degree, Cul∣tivate
Navigation, and are Charm'd with the Advantages of Commerce: But, it would cost an immense Volume, to discourse at large of these things in particular, and to mention onely, the brave Men, who have in all Ages sig∣naliz'd themselves at Sea for their Arms, or, more peaceful Arts; to Count the Names of the famous Captains, and Adventures of later times, whose Ex∣peditions have been VVar-like, and for Invasion, and many for Discoveries and Commerce. Here, then we Con∣tract our Sails, and shall direct our Course nearer home, from whence we have been so long diverted. 26. The First, that presents it self to our second Consideration, are the Spaniards, and Castilians, who (upon the Success of their Neighbours the Portugals) making use of that fortu∣nate Stranger Columbus, prompted by a magnanimous Genius, and a little Phi∣losophy, discover'd to us a New VVorld: This Great Man, being ur∣nish'd-out by Ferdinand, and Isabella of Castile, in four Voyages, which he made from the Year 1492,1492. to An. 1502, detected the Antillias, Cuba, Iamaica, &c. with some of the Terra firma;
though to let pass Zeno (a Noble Vene∣tian, reported to have discover'd the North-East part of America above an hundred Years before) there be,1390. who tell us, that a certain obscure Mariner (Alphonso Zanches de Huelva by name) had the first sight of this goodly pros∣pect, eight years before this glorious Genëz (for Columbus was of that City) or any the pretenders: This poor Sea-man, hurried upon those un∣known Coasts by Tempests (which continu'd for almost a ull Month) was carried as far as St. Domingo in Hispaniola: How he return'd is not said; but, that from the Observations of this Adventure, Christophero receiv'd the first notices of what he afterwards improv'd, being at that time in the Maderas, where Zanches arriving, died not long after, and bequeath'd him all his Charts and Papers. There are likewise who affirm, that some mean Bisayers (loosing themselves in pursuit of Whale-Fishing) had fall'n upon some of the American Islands, above an hundred years, be∣fore either of the former; but, since of this we have no Authentic proofs; Certain it is, that Columbus, taking his Conjectures from the Spiring of cer∣tain
Winds from the Western Points, by stong Impulse, concluded, that there must needs be some Continent towards those Quarters: Upon this Confidence, he offers first, his Service to Iohn King of Portugal, and then, to our Henry the Seventh of England, by both which Princes rejected for a Romantic Dream, he repairs to the Court of Spain, where, partly by his Importu∣nity, and much by the favour of Isa∣bella, he was with great difficulty set∣out at last, when to equip him, the Royal Lady was fain to pawn some of her Iewels: But it was well Repaid, when for the value of 17000 Crowns, he not long after, return'd her almost as many Tuns of Treasure, and, within eight or nine Years, to the Kings sole Use, above 1500000 of Silver, and 360 Tuns of Gold: See the Reward of Faith, and of things not seen!1497. These fortunate beginnings were pursu'd by Americus Vesputius (a Florentine, and a Stranger too) who being sent by Ema∣nuel of Portugal to the Molucca I∣slands (five Years after) hapning to be driven upon the same Coast, carried away the Name, though not the Ho∣nour from all the former, though there
be, who upon good proof affirm, that Iohn Chabt a Venetian, and his son Sebastian (born with us at Bristol) had discover'd Florida, and the Shoars of Virginia, with that whole Tract as far as New-found-Land, before the bold Ge∣noëze; nay, that Thorn, and Eliot (both Countrymen of ours) detected this New-World before Columbus ever set foot upon it; for we will say nothing of the famous Owen Gwynedd, whose Adventures are of yet greater Antiqui∣ty, and might serve to give Repuation to that noble Enterprize, if we had a mind to be contentious or it, But, 27. That indeed the most shining Exploits of this Age of Discoveries, were chiefly due to the several Hero's of this Island, we have but to call-over the Names of Drake, Hawkins, Caven∣dish, Furbisher, Davis, Hudson, Raleigh, and others of no less merit: For im∣possible it was, that the English should not share in Dangers with the most Re∣nowned, in so glorious an Enterprize; Our Drake being the First of any Mortal, to whom God vouchsafed the stupendious Atchievment of Encom∣passing, not this New-World alone, but New and Old together: Both of them
Twice embrac'd by this Demi-God; for Magellan being slain at the Manil∣lias, was interrupted in his intended Course,1528. and left the Exploit to Seba∣stian Camus his Collegue. 28. This Voyage of Drake was first to Nombre de Dios; where coming to a sight of the South-Seas, with tears of Joy in his eyes, his mind was never in repose, till he had gotten into it, as in five years after he accomplish'd it, when passing through the Magellan Streight towards the other Indies, and doubling the famous Promontory, he Circum-navigated the whole Earth, and taking from the Spaniard St. Iago, Do∣mingo, Cartagena, and other signal Pla∣ces, Crown'd in the Name of his Mi∣stress the Queen, at Nova Albion, he return'd to his Country, and to a Crown of Immortal Honour. This gallant Man was Leader to Cavendish, another Country-man of Ours, of no less Resolution; for these brave Per∣sons scorning any longer to creep by Shoars, and be oblig'd to uncertain Constellations; plow'd-up unfathom∣able Abysses, without ken of Earth or Heaven, and really accomplish'd A∣ctions, beyond all that the Poets of
Old, or any former Record (fruitful in Wonders) could Invent or Re∣late. 29. And now Every Nation, stimu∣lated by these Adventures, daily added New-things to the Accomplishment of the Art: Things, I say, unknown to former Ages: And herein were the Por∣tugals very prosperous, One of whose Princes brought first into Use the Astro∣labe, and Tables of Declination, with other Arithmetical, and Astronomical Rules, applicable to Navigation; be∣sides, what several others had from time to time Invented: But, neither were these to be compar'd to the Nau∣tic Box, and feats of the Magnet; before which the Science was so im∣perfect, and Mariners so terriied at Long Voyages; that there were Laws to prohibit Sailing even upon the Me∣diterranean, during the Winter Season; and, however great things have been reported of Plato's Atlantic, the Dis∣coveries of Hanno, Eudoxius, and o∣thers of Old time, from the Persian Gulph, as far as Cales; it was still with sneaking by the Shoar, in continual sight of Land; or by Chance, which indeed has been a fruitful Mother in
these, and most other Discoveries; that Men might learn Humility and not Sa∣crifice to their own uncertain Reason∣ings.1305. In that memorable Expedition of the French to Invade our Country, there was hardly a Pilot to be found, who durst adventure Twenty Leages into the Main; and those who had been the most assur'd, did hardly reach within many degrees of the Aequi∣noctial. The Azores were first stum∣bl'd-upon by a roming Pirat, surpriz'd by Storm: All the Asiaic Indian Seas, and some of Africa, lay almost as much in the dark, as the Hyperboreans, and horrid North.1465. And though this deect was encounter'd more than two Ages past, by that ever to be renown'd Ita∣lian lavio of Amalphi (for we pass what is reported of the Ancient Arabs, Palus Venetus, and Others) yet, was it near fourscore Years after, ere it came so far North as these Countries of Ours, to which his Needles continu∣ally pointed. But, it was now when the Fullness of Time was come, that by this means, the Western Indies should be no longer a Secret, and what have been the incomparable Advanta∣ges, which this despicable Stone has
produc'd (the property whereof is ever to have its Poles, converted to the Poles of the World, and its Axed dire∣cted Parallel to the Axes of the World) is Argument of Admiration: But, that by vertue of this dull Pibble, such a Conti∣nent of Land, such Myriads of People, such inexhaustible Treasures, and so ma∣ny Wonders should be brought to light, plainly Astonishes, and may Instruct the proudest of us all, not to contemn small-things; since so it oftentimes pleases the Almighty to humble the Loftiness of Men, and to Choose the Base things of the World, to Confound the Things that are Mighty. And less than This we could not say, concerning that inestimable Iewel, by whose Aid and Direction, the Commerce, and Traffick of the World has receiv'd such Advantages. 30. We have now dispatch'd the Portugals and the Spaniards: There re∣man the ENGLIGH and the HOL∣LANDERS, who Couring the good Graces of the same Mistris, the TRADE of the WORLD, divide the WORLD between them: Deservedly then we Celebrate the Industry of the Batavi∣ans: They must really be look'd upon
as a Wonderful People; nor do we di∣minish our selves whilst we magnifie any worthy Actions of theirs; since it cannot but redound to our Glory, who have been the Occasion of it; and, that as oft as thay have forgotten it, we have been able to Chastize them for it: It is, I say, a Miracle that a People (who have no Principle of Trade a∣mong themselves) should in so short a space, become such Masters of it: Their Growth ('tis Confess'd) is admi∣rable; and if it prove as solid, and permanent, as it has been speedy, ROME must her-self submit to the Comparision: But, we know, who has Calculated her Nativity, and that Vio∣lent things are not alwaies lasting.Bentivoglio hist. Flan. We will yet give them their due; They are Gyants for stature, fierce in Beard and Countenance, full of goodly Towns; Strong in Munition, Nume∣rous in Shipping; in a World HIGH and MIGHTY-STATES, and all this the product of Commerce and Na∣vigation; but by what just Arts e∣qually, and in all parts improv'd we may hereafter enquire, as well as to whose Kindness they have been the most Obliged, and the most Ingrateful: We
omit to speak here of their Discove∣ries, and Plantations, which the Cu∣rious may find in the Journals Heems∣kerk, Oliver Vander-Nordt, Spilberg, Le Maire (who went six Degrees far∣ther South than Magellan himself, and found a shorter passage into those Seas) to these we may add L'Eremite, the late Compilers of their Atlases, and Others, which many Volumes would hardly comprehend, and because they are generally known; Tacitus, and other famous Authors have celebrated their Early Exploits at Sea, and of later times, Fredric Barburossa did bravely against the Saracens at Pelusium in Aegypt:1219. The Frizians greatly in∣fested the Danes, and those of Flanders, especially under William the Son of Iohn Count of Holland, and in the time of Philip the good Duke of Burgundy: They were the first that wore the Broome, when, Anno 1438, they had clear'd the Levantine Seas, subdu'd the Genoëzes,V. Pont. Heu∣terus Austr. l. 13. and vanquish'd the French about an hundred years after: How they plagu'd the Spaniard and Portu∣gals, from the year 1572 to almost this day, there is no body ignorant of; and for that of their Discoveries, Quae
vero ignota littora,Dec. 1. l. 1. quasve desinentis mundi or as Scrutata non est Belgarum Nauticae? was justly due to them from Strad; and the Truth is, they have merited of Fame for many Vertues, and shew'd from what small, and de∣spicable Rudiments, Great things have emerged; and that Traffick alone, which at the first raised, has hi herto supported this Grandure against a most puissant Monarch, for a most an Age intire: But, their Admission of For∣reigners, Increase of Hands, Encou∣raging Manufactures, Free, and Open Ports, Low Customes, Tolleration of Religions, Natural Frugality, and In∣defatigable Industry could ndeed, por∣tend no less. We conclude then with ENGLAND, which though last in Order, was not the last in our Design; when upon reflection on our late Differences with our Neighbours of HOLLAND, we thought it not unsuitable to Praeface something concerning the Progress of that Com∣merce, which has been the Subject of so many Conflicts between us. 31. To the little which has been hitherto said of the great things which Our Nation has perform'd by Sea in
the later Ages, we might super-add the Gallantry, and brave Adventures of former; since from no obscure Au∣thors we learn, the Britains to have accompanied the Cimbrians and Gauls,Camdenus▪ Strabo, l. 3. in their memorable Expedition into Greece, long before the Incarnation of our Lord, and whilst they were yet Strangers to the Roman World; not to insist on the Cassiterides,W. Howel In∣stit. Hist. B∣charti Canan, l. 1. c. 39. & l. 3. c. 9. known to the Phoenicians, and with so much judg∣ment, vindicated by a Learned Author, in that his excellent and useful Institu∣tion: In all events, we resort to the greatest Captain, and, without dispute, the purest of Ancient Writers:De Bello Gall. lib. 3. The Description which Caesar makes of the Supplies this Island afforded the Gauls (and, which made him think it worth his while to bring-over his Legions hither) will inform us, that the stru∣cture of their Vessels was not altogether of Twigs, and Oxes-Hides; And the Veneti, it seems, had then a Navy of no less than 200 Sail, built of goodly Oak, tall, and so bravely equipped for War, and to endure the Sea, as that great General acknowledg'd the Romans themselves had nothing approach'd it: which we mention, because divers
grave Authors believe the British Ves∣sels (sent sometime as Auxiliaries) were thought to be like them: And the slender Experience which the Gauls (or, in truth any other Neighbour of theirs) had of the opposite Shoars, when the Britains were thus Instructed both for Defence, and Commerce (and, at that time peritted certain Mer∣chants onely to frequent their Coasts) is a fair Praescription, how Early She Intituled her self to the Dominion of the Seas; which, if at any time inter∣rupted by barbarous Surprize, or In∣vasion (as in the Ages following it seem'd to be) yet, neither did That continue any longer, than till the pre∣valent Force was established, which soon Asserting the Title, as Lords, and in Right of England, maintain'd her Praerogative from Time immemorial: I know not why therefore, a solitary Writer, or two, should go about to deprive this Nation of more than Twelve hundred Years at Once; be∣cause an Heroick Prince has had the Misfortune to have his Mighty Actions reported by some weak, and less-accu∣rate Pens: Yet, such, as the Times wherein they liv'd, could furnish;
especially too, since this has been the Fate of as brave Men, as any whom History has Recorded: But, by this Pretence, some there are, who would take from us, the Renowned AR∣THUR, who is reported to have led his Squadrons as far as Ise-Land,See APXAI∣ONOMIA, sive, de Pris∣cis Anglorum Legibus, writ∣ten by Lam∣bard, and Pub∣lish'd by Mr. Wheelock. and brought the Northern People under his Flag, planting the Conines of the British-Ocean, as far as the Russian Tracts; and this (together with all th Northern, and Eastern Isles) to be D Iure, Appendices unto this Kingdom, me may find in the Leges Edwardi, con∣firm'd by the Norman Conquerour; for so it had indeed been left to the famous EDGAR (to mention onely Egbert, Althrd, Ethelfred, &c.) Princes, all of them, signally meritorious for their Care of the Sea) who soon find∣ing by Experience what Benefit, and Protection his Country receiv'd by the extraordinary Vigilancy on the Coasts, and the Vindicating of his Dominions on the Waters, Cover'd them at Once, with no less than Four thousand Sail; nor, it seems, without Cause (the time consider'd) since we lay so ex∣pos'd to a barbarous Enemy. Alfred (whom we mention'd) found it so in
his daies; a sober, and well-Consulted Prince; and therefore provided him∣self of the same Expedient against the troublesome Danes, whom he not sel∣dome humbld: But, this MAXIME, as often as Neglected, did as certainly expose the Nation to Prey, and Con∣tempt, as not long after it, to the Norman Power,Nimis multa extare docu∣menta Britan∣niae esse Domi∣ns, qui essent Maris. Grot. Hist. l. 13. and may so again to a Greater, when through a fatal Supine∣ness, we shall either Remit of our wonted Vigilancy, and due Provisions, or suffer our Up-start Neighbours to Incroach upon us; so True is that say∣ing, By what means any Thing is Ac∣quir'd, by the same 'tis Preserv'd. Did this Island wisely Consider the Happi∣ness of not needing many Fronteirs to protect her from hourly Alarms, or In-Land Fortresses to check the suddain, and rude Incursions, to which all Con∣tinents are Obnoxious; she would not think her Bounty to her Prince a Bur∣then; who by maintaining a glorious, and formidable Navy at Sea, not onely renders her Inhabitants secure at Home, without multiplying of Gover∣nours, and Garnisons (which are ever jealous to a Free, and Loyal People) but, unless wanting to themselves, Re∣pairs
their Layings-out, with immense Advantages; and by securing, and Im∣proving that Trade, and Commerce, which onely can render a Nation flou∣rishing, and, which has hitherto given us the Ascendent over the rest of the World: so True is another Axiom, Qui MARE tenet,Cic. ad Aic. l. 10. Ep. 7. eum necesse esse re∣rum potiri; but, without which, 'tis in vain to talk of Sovereignty. 32. By these Politicks King Iohn was enabl'd to pass the Seas into Ire∣land with a Fleet of 500 Sail; Impe∣riously Commanding whatever Vessels they should met withal about the Eight Circumluent Seas, to Arrest them, and bring them to understand their Duty: But, our Third Edward (to whom the House of Burgundy ow'd so much) Equipp'd above a Thousand tall Ships upon another Occasion; with an handful whereof, he defeated a prodigious Navy of the French, and Spaniard, that were gotten together; and we have seen a perfect, and un∣doubted List of no ewer than 700 Men of War, which this Prince brought before Calais, though he made use of but 200 of them, to vanquish a Fleet consistng of more than double the
Number with the loss of Thirty thou∣sand French; which had such an In∣fluence on his Neighbours, that, where∣as, till then, there had been some Re∣misness in the Nation, and a declension of Sea-Affairs; the bravest, and great∣est Men in the Land, began greedily to embrace Maritime Employments; and the Title ofThalassiar∣cha. See Vos∣sius de Vitii Sermonis Lat. l. 2. It's de∣riv'd from Emir, or A∣mir Praefectus in Arab. Admiral, introduc'd in his Praedecessors time, was now held in highest Esteem. 33. We mention'd the House of Burgundy, and it had reason to Remem∣ber us, and our Wool, which was the fairest Flower of that Ducal Coronet, and as some good Antiquaries remark, really gave Institution to their Golden Fleece: However it were, this Wise Prince, representing to the lemings their miserable Posture (at that time obnoxious to the French, as of late they have likewise been) and, Inhibit∣ing the Importation of Forraign Cloths; the Serene and quiet Condi∣tion of this happy Island, invited them over to settle here, erect their Manu∣factures amongst us, and joyn their Art to our Nature.
34. We pass by the Exploits, and glorious Atchievments perform'd by our Kings against the Saracens in the Holy-War, which charg'd the Sheilds of the ancient Nobless, and, of which, all Asia resounded: Here, our Edwards, Henries,1358. and Richards did memorable things; in particular, Richard the Se∣cond took of the French, almost an hun∣dred Ships at once, of which some were Vessels of great burthen, richly Fraite: And an Earl of Arundel (bear∣ing this Princes Name) beat, took, and destroy'd 226 Ships deep laden with 1000 Tuns of Wine, comming from La Rochelle, after an obstinate Encoun∣ter, and many brave Exploits: T these we might add, the Gallant Prepa∣rations of Henry the Fifth, and of se∣veral more, had we a design, or any need to accumulate Instances of our Puissance, and Successes at Sea, so thick sown in Forreign, as well as Domestic Histories: But, he that would be In∣structed for a more ample Discourse, may take notice of the League made between Charles the Great, and our Mercian Offa (now more than 700 years since) as he may find it in an E∣pistle of Albinus, or the Learned
Alcuin ('tis all one) and Consult our Country-men Walsingham, Malmesbury, and other Writers; where he will see in what high repute this Nation has been, both for its numerous Shipping, and the flourishing Commerce it main∣tain'd in most known-Parts of the World; and, which we may farther confirm, by the several Authentic Sta∣tutes, and Immunities yet extant, not omitting the Policy of Keeping the Sea, facetiously, yet solidly, set forth in the good Old Prologue, intituled, The Pro∣cess of the Libel, written more than 200 years past, not unworthy our deepest reflexions: And verily, it were a madness in us to neglect the Care of those Causes, from whence (as by a Series of them will yet appear) the Effects of all our Temporal Blessings spring, and, by Vertue whereof, they can only be maintain'd. 35. Henry the Seventh, and his Magnificent Successor, were both of them powerful at Sea; though the too weak-Faith of the former, depriv'd him of the most glorious Accession, that was ever offer'd to Mortal-man: This, he endeavour'd to have repair'd, by the famous Cabot, whom he after∣wards
employ'd to seek Adventures; and, though the Success were not equal, it was yet highly laudable, and (as we have shew'd) not altogether without Fruit. 36. Henry the Eight his Son, bad divers Conflicts with the French,Lord Cher∣bery Hist. Hen. 8. See also that rare piece of Hans Hol∣bein's in his Majesties Gal∣lery at White-Hall. Tri∣umphing sometimes in Sails of Cloth-of-Gold, and Cordage of Silk: But, that which indeed repair'd the Remisness of the One, and Profusion of the Other, and gave a Demonstration of how ab∣solute concern, Traffic, and Strength at Sea are to this Island, was the Care which Queen ELIZABETH took, when by her Address alone, she not onely secur'd her Kingdoms from the formidable Power of Spain; but, Reap'd the Harvest too, of that Opu∣lent Monarch, and brought his Indies into her own Exchequer; whilst that Mighty Prince, had onely the trouble to Conquer the New-World, and pre∣pare the Treasure for her: And this she did, by her Influence on Naviga∣tion, and by the Courage and Conduct of those renowned Hero's, who made her Reign so famous.
37. This glorious Princess had 130 Sail of fair Ships, when she sent over for the Island Voyages, of which 60 were stout men of War; and with these (besides many other Exploits) she de∣fended HOLLAND, defied Parma, and aw'd the whole Power of Spain: With an handful of these (compara∣tively) she defeated the Invincible Ar∣mada in LXXXVIII,1588. Encounter'd, and took Gallions, and other Vessels of prodigious strength and bulk; and, what havock was made at Cales, by yet a smaller number, her Enemies to this day feel:Annl. l. 5.: Grotius, speaking of this Action, tells us, that the Wealth gotten there by the Earl of Essex, was never any where parallel'd with the like Naval Success; and, that if these be∣ginnings had been pursu'd (as with ease they might, had the brave Mans Coun∣sel been follow'd) it had prov'd one of the most glorious Enterprises that Hi∣story has recorded: However, besides the immense Spoil, and Treasure they took, and the Marks they left of their Fortitude (to the loss of 120 Great-Guns of the Enemies, irreparable in those daies) the Spaniard was not so redoubted Abroad, as they let him
miserably weakn'd at Home: To these, we may number the Trophies won by particular Adventurers: Sir Francis Drake, having with four Ships onely, taken from the Spaniard a Million, and 189200 Ducats in one Expedition, Anno 1587, in a single bottom 25000 Pezos of the most refined Gold; and after, with a Squadron of Five and twenty Sail, terrifying the whole O∣cean, he sack'd St. Iago, Domingo, and Cartagena (as before mention'd) and, carried away with him, besides other incredible Booty, 240 Pieces of Ar∣tillery, which was a prodigious Spoil in those early daies, and, when those Instruments of Destruction were not in such plenty as now they are. What shall we say of Iohn Oxenham, one of the Argo-nauts with Drake? who, in a slender Bark, near Nombre de Dios (having drawn-up his Vessel to Land, and cover'd it with a few boughs) marched with his small Crue over un∣known paths, till arriv'd at a certain River, and there building a Pinnac, with the Timber which they fell'd upon the Spot, he boldly launches into the South-Sea, and, at the Island of Pearls, took from the Spaniard 60000l. weight of
Massie-Gold, and 200000 in Silver! though lost in his Return with it, by the perfidy of his Associates; such an Exploit is hardly to be parallel'd in any story. Sir Richard Grinvill, in another Voyage to Cadiz, with but 180 Souldiers (of which 90 were sick and useless) in the Ship Revenge, main∣tain'd a Conflict for 24 hours, against 50 Spanish Gallions, and slew above 7000 Men, sinking four of their best Vessels: Than this, what have we more—! What, can be greater! In sum, so universal was the Reputa∣tion of our Country-men in those daies, for their strenuous Exploits at Sea; That even Those who took all Occasi∣ons to depress, and extenuate them, are forc'd here to Acknowledge, and that from the Pen of an Author whose Word goes far,Graiorum, Romanorum∣que gloriae, qui res olim sua Navales per acies asserue∣runt, non dabie tunc Anglo∣rum & fortun, & Virtus respondit. Grot. Hist. l. 1. That the Greeks and Romans, who of Old, made good all their mighty Actions by Naval Victories, were at this time, equal'd by the Fortitude and Gourage of the English. 38. 'Twas in Her daies, they dis∣cover'd far into the North-East, and North-West, Gathaian, and China Pas∣sages, by the indefatigable diligence of Willoughby, Burroughs, Chanceler, Button,
Buffin, Furbisher, Iames, Middleton, Gilbert, Cumberland, and others, wor∣thy to be consign'd to Fame: In her Brothers the Sixt Edwards Reign, the formerly mention'd Chabot, had six times attempted the North-West Tracts to the Indies; and, long before these, a bold Prince of Ours, essay'd to pass the Moluccos by the same Course; entred the streights of Anian, and is, by some, intituled to the first Disco∣very of the Canaries. The Summer-Islands, and the goodly Continent of Virginia, were first detected, and then Planted by the English; among whom we may not pass by the Industry of Captain Iones, Smith, and other late Adventurers, whose great Exploits (as Romantic as they appear) were the stea∣dy effects of their Courage and good Fortune: We have said yet nothing of Pool, who began the Whale-fishing, nor of Captain Bennet, who discover'd Cherry-Island: Pet, and Iack-man that pass'd the Vaigates, Scythian lces, and the River Ob, as far as Nova Zembla: Of Iohn Davis, who had penetrated to 86 degrees of Latitude, and almost set his foot upon the Nor∣thern-Pole: Here let us also remember
Captain Gillan, to the lasting honour of his Highness, Prince Rupert, and the rest of those Illustrious Adventu∣rers; nor forget to celebrate the He∣roic Inclination of his Sacred MA∣JESTY, our Great CHARLES, under whose Auspices, Sir Iohn Nor∣borough has lately Pass'd, and Re-pass'd the Magellan Streight; by which that Modest, and Industrious Man, has not onely performed what was never done before; but has also made way for a Prospect of immense Improvement. Finally, 39. It was Queen Elizabeth who began, and establish'd the Trade of Muscovy, Turky, Barbary, and even that of the East-Indies too, however of late Interrupted by ungrateful Neigh∣bours: Nor less was she vigilant at Land, than at Sea; Mustering at once no fewer than One hundred and twenty Thousand fighting-Men of her own Vassals, not by uncertain Computa∣tion; but, effectually sit for War: And indeed, but for the extraordinary Vertue of this brave Virago, not England alone, but even France and Holland had truckl'd under the weight of Spain, whose Ambition was then upon its
highest Pinnacle: In one word, Navi∣gation and Commerce were in her days in so prosperous a Condition, that they seem to have ever since subsisted but upon the Reputation of it; and the success of our Country-men in their Attempts at Sea was so far Supe∣riour to other Nations, as by the suf∣frage of the most Learned Strangers (and to shew it was universal) they could not but acknowledge, Omnibus hodie Gentibus Navigandi industria,Keckerman. & peritia, Superiores esse Anglos, & post Anglos, Hollandos; for we do not fear to give even our greatest Enemies their Dues, when they deserve it. 40. We now arive to King IAMES, and CHARLES the First (Princes of immortal Memory) And for the for∣mer; there was in his time built (be∣sides many others) those two gallant Ships, The Trades-Increase, and the Prince; The one for encouragement of Commerce, and the other a Man of War; And, though upon different Ac∣counts, and at different times, they both unhappily miscarried; yet, they serv'd to testifie, that neither Defence, nor Trade were neglected; since, as to that of the first, Sir Walter Raleigh doubts not
to affirm; That the Shipping of this Nation, with a Squadron of the Navy-Royal, was in this Princes time, able, in despight of Europe, to Command the Ocean, much more, to bring the Nether-Lands to due Obedience: But, says he, as I shall never think him a lover of his Country, or Prince, who shall perswade His Majesty from Cul∣tivating their Amity; so would I counsel Them to remember, and con∣sider it: That seeing their Inter-course lies so much through the British-Seas, that there is no part of France, from Calais to Flushing, capable of succour∣ing them; that, frequently, Out-wards by Western-Winds, and ordinarily, Home-wards, both from the Indies, Straites, and Spain, all Southerly-Winds (the Breezes of our Climat) thrust them of necessity into His Ma∣jesties Harbours; how much his Ma∣jesties favour does import them: For, if (as themselves confess) they subsist by Commerce onely; the disturbance of That (and, which England alone can disturb) will also disturb their Subsistence: I omit the rest: Because I can never doubt either their Grati∣tude, or their Prudence. But, this
brave Man was it seems, no Prophet, to fore see how soon they would forget themselves: They began in his days to be hardly warm in comparison, and in∣deed it is not (as observes the same Per∣son) much beyond a Century, that ei∣ther the French, Spanish, or Hollander, had any proper Fleets belonging to them as Kingdoms, or States; the Vene∣tians, Ienoezes and Portugals, being then (as we have noted) the only Com∣petitors both for Strength, and Traf∣fick; the Dutch litte Considerable; since within these fifty years, the Spa∣nish and Portugals employ'd many more Ships at Sea than the Hollander (their Fishing-Buffes excepted) who, 'til fur∣nish'd with our Artillery, were very Contemptible, as might be made out by undeniable Evidence: Insomuch that the formerly mention'd Raleigh affirms, One Lusty Ship of his Majesties, would have made forty Hollanders Strike Sail, and come to an Anchor: They did not then (says he) dispute de Mari Libero. But will you know in a word from him, what it was that has exalted them to this monstrous Pitch? It was, the employ∣ing their own People in the Fishery up∣on our Coasts; by which they infinite∣ly
Inrich'd themselves; 2. Their En∣tertaining of Auxilliaries in their diffi∣cult Land-Services; by which they pre∣serv'd their own Vassals: 3. The Fideli∣ty of the House of Nassaw; from which they had a wise, and experienc'd Gene∣ral: 4. The frequent Excursions of the Duke of Parma into France, hindring the Prosecution of his growing Succes∣ses: 5. The Imbargo of their Ships in Spain, and interdicting them Free-Trade with that Nation, which first set them upon their Indian Adventures: 6. And, above All, the Kindness of Queen Elizabeth: But, the Case is (it seems) much alter'd since that wor∣thy Knight made his Observations and took his Leave of the Prince of Orange at Antwerp; When (after Leicesters re∣turn) he pray'd him to say to her Ma∣jesty, Sub Umbra Alarum tuarum Prote∣gimur; for that they had wither'd in the End, without her Assistance. 41. We have yet but only mention'd the Inherent Right of the Crown of England to the Dominion of the Seas; because the Legality and the Reason of it have been Asserted by so many able and famous Pens, from which we learn, that it doth of Justice appertain to the
Kings of Great Britain,Seldes, not only as far as Protection extends (though there were no other Argument to favour us) but, of sacred, and immemorial Royal∣ty: But, 'tis Pretended by those great Names,Grotius. Mari∣us. Clirac. s. Pontanus. alals, &c. who have of late disputed this Subject, and endeavoured to Depose our Princes of this Empire Iure Natu∣rae & Gentium: That the Sea is Fluxile Elementum, & quod nunquam idem, possi∣derinon posse; That 'tis always in Suc∣cession, and, that one can never An∣chor on the same Billow; That Water is as Free as the Air; and that the Sea ter∣minates Empires which have no Bounds; and therefore, that no Empire can ter∣minate that which acknowledges none; and, though all this were nothing; That his Majesties Father, had tamely lost it to the late Usurpers, which is an inso∣lent scoff of Marisotus's,orbis Marit▪ triumphing ore a setter'd Lion; Whilst for all this, to patch up a wrched Pretence, he descends to take hold of a certain Ob∣solete, and Foeudatarie Complement, sometime since passing between the two Kings; as if a Ceremonious Acknowledg∣ment for a Province or two in France (which is an usual deference among Prin∣ces upon certain Tenures) gave sufficient
Title, and Investiture to All that the Kings of England possess in the World besides. But in this sort do the Parti∣zans of aspiring Monarchs manage their egregious Flatteries, Whilst to silence all the World, we can shew it Prescrip∣tion so far beyond the present Race of Kings, that even the Name of their PHARAMOND was not known,Mela. when our EMPIRE on the SEA set Limits to the Coasts of Gauls, and said, Hitherto shall ye Come—Nor, to that alone, but even as far as Spain it self: For, what pretence could those Princes have to this Dominion, whose very Mo∣narchy is but of Yesterday, in respect to the goodly extent, which now they call France? and especially when the only Maritime Provinces were shread into so many Fragments and Cantons, under their petty Princes; for so were Narbon, Bretayne, Aquitaine and even Normandy it self (portions belonging then to our Kings) nor had they 'till of later days, so much as the Office of Ad∣miral belonging to the Sea, that is, till their Expedition into the Holy-Land, when yet they were fain to make use of the Genoezes to transport them as we have it confess'dIo. Tillius de eb. Gal. L. 2. by their own Au∣thors.
As to their other Arguments, we need not spend much breath to ilute those pittiful Cavels of the Instability, and Fluctuation of the Waves &c. which could not be there, without a Channel and a Bottom to contain them, as if we contended for the Drops of the Sea, and not for its situation, and the Bed of those Waters; and since Rivers and Streams have the same Reason on their side to exempt them from being in Com∣mon, and at every mans disposure. And these things I have only touch'd, to repress the pruriency of some late Flatterers, who not only injure a Truth as resplendent as the Sun; but the Ju∣stice of a great Prince, whom by these false Colours, they would provoke to unrighteous disputes; whilst we pre∣tend to nothing but what carries with it, the strongest Eviction, a thing of this nature is capable of. 42. Needless it would be to amuse the Reader with recounting to him at large, how in the ancient Division of things, the Sea, having here assign'd over with the Land, there sprung up from the same Original, a Private Dominion; but undoubtedly, when God gave to Man the Soveraignt of the Ocean, by
intitl'ing him to the Fish, which were produc'd in the bowels of it (that is, to the Thing it self, by its Use, and Enjoyment) by the same Grant, he pas∣sed over to him, and consign'd to his disposure, the distribution of it, and introduction of a separate, and pecu∣liar Jurisdiction: There is nothing more perspicuous in our Case, and as to his Majesties Claim (the Reasons for it rightly consider'd) from so many Royal Predecessours, and so long a tract of years, who for security of Navigation, and Commerce between their Neigh∣bours and Allies, were at such vast ex∣pences, to Equip, and set forth Great Ships, and Navies; and that, upon the intreaty, and solicitation of those, who recurr'd to their protection; and might themselves justifie the prescri∣bing Rules and Boundaries to such as should pass the Seas, and receive such Recognitions, and Emoluments, as were peculiar, and within their Circle, both for their Honour, and Mainte∣nance. The deduction shall be very short, considering how vast an Ocean of mat∣ter lies before us; but it shall be full. 43. Caesar, ere he had invaded Britain,
summoning the Gallic Merchants to in∣form him of the shores, and situation of our Ports, could it seems learn nothing from them; for, says he, not a man of them frequented that Rivage without licence; and when Claudius had subdu'd the more Southern parts of the Nation, the British Sea, following the fate of the whole Island, came with the same privileges to be annex'd to the Empire, and did never loose them, through all the Revolutions which hap∣pen'd; but that as soon as the preva∣lent power came to be settl'd, they im∣mediately asserted their Dominion on the Sea. That of very wide extent this Nation had peculiars of its own, the Consternation of the Calidonians evince; when in the time of Domitian, AgricolaTacit. in Vit. Agric. sailing round the Island, they were in such perplexity to see him in their Chambers, for so they called those Northern Streams. But not longer to insist on these early begnnings, and what the Romans did; when the frame of that Empire was chang'd, about the time of the Great Constantine,Ntitia Imp. Occid. the Comites of the Saxon shore (substitutes to him who commaded the West) had their Jurisdiction oer all the Sea, rom
the Borders of that Shoar, and West part of Denmark, to the Western Gallia, all along the other side. 44. There are who put some stress here, upon ancient Inscriptions, espe∣cially that mention'd by Greuter, of a Proefect of a British Fleet; and on the Ornaments, and Ensigns of Dominion, found in several Medals, and Antiqui∣ties to be met withal in the Collecti∣ons of learned men; vindicating the peculiar we contend for, and conti∣nu'd from Edward the Third in several fair stamps, nor are they to be reje∣cted: It suffices us, that whatever the Government were, still the dominion of the Sea return'd with that of the land to the Nation;Zzimus l. 6. An. 43. See Claud. in Lad. Stil. l. 2. as when the Britains re∣jected the Roman Yoak, which how ex∣tended, when it came under the power of the English Saxon Kings, and Danes, is known to all the World, as well as with what mighty Navies, Edgar, Ca∣nutus and others, asserted, and prote∣cted it, under no lower Style, than that of King, Supream Lord and Governour of the Ocean, Lying round about Bri∣tain; for so runs the settlement of cer∣tain Revenues, given by King Edgar, to the Cathedral of Worcester, says Mr. Sel∣den.
45. Since the Norman Conquest, the Government of the several Provinces, or Sheriffs, exercised Jurisdiction on the Sea, as far as their Countys exten∣ded. Henry the Third constituted Cap∣tain Guardians; and our First Edward distributed this Guard to three Admi∣rals; so did the second of that name; and the form of our ancient Commissi∣ons to the several Admiralties, mention the dominion of our Kings upon the Sea; nor did any other Nation whatso∣ever Contest it, as having little, or no∣thing on the opposite Shoars; whilst 'tis evident, the English Monarchs possess'd their Right in its intire Latitude, for more than a thousand Years, under one intire Empire, and an un-interrupted enjoyment of the Sea, as an appen∣dant. 46. To this we might add the Pass-Ports sued for by Forreigners from the Reign of Henry the Fourth, and so down to Queen Elizabeth, who during her War with Spain sometimes gave leave to the Swedes, Dances, and Ansiatic Towns, and sometimes prohibited them, Petitioning for Passes, to sail through her Seas; nay, more, she caus'd to be taken, and brought into her Harbours,
Laden-ships of those Nations transgres∣sing her Orders; as far as the Streights of Lisbon, which she could never have justify'd, had she not been acknowled∣ged Soveraign of the Seas, through which they were to pass: And though her Successour King Iames, appointed certain limits on the English Coast, by imaginary lines drawn from point to point, round the Island, in which he sometimes extended them far into the Sea; I was not to Circumscribe a Ju∣risdiction (a thing which he most indu∣striously caution'd his Ministers never to yield,Rt. pat. 2. Iac. part 32. so much as in discourse) be∣yond which he did not pretend; but in relation only to Acts of Hostility, be∣tween the two great Antagonists, the Spaniard and the Hollander, declaring himself both Lord, and Moderator of the British Seas from his Royal Prede∣cessors. 47. In several Commissions given to Sea Commanders, by Edward the Third,Rot. Scot. 10. Ed. Membran. 16. the words are, Our Progenitors, the Kings of England, have before these times, been Lords of the British Seas on every side; and in a certain Bill, prefer'd in Parliament to the same Prince,Rot. pat. 46. Ed. 3. N. 2. 'tis said, That the English were
ever in the Ages past so renown'd for Navies, and Sea-Affairs; that the Coun∣tries about them, usually esteem'd, and call'd them Soveraigns of the Sea; And from the same Parliamentory testimony in the Reign of Henry the Fifth we learn, that the Estates in that august Assembly, did with one Consent af∣firm it as a thing unquestionable,Rot. pat. 8. Hen. 5. Mem. 3. At. 6. That the Kings of England were Lords of the Sea, and that That Sea was all which flow'd between the stream on both sides, and made no doubt, but a Tri∣bute might be impos'd, by Authority of Parliament upon all Strangers passing through them, as we shall find Richard the Second to have done long before. 48. In the Reign of Edward the Se∣cond,Rot. pat. 14. Ed. 2. p. 2. M. 26. in dorso. Robert Earl of landers, com∣plaining of Injuries done his Subjects at Sea, alledges, that the King of Eng∣land is bound in Right to do him Ju∣stice, for that he was Lord of the Sea: But there cannot in the World be a more pregnant Instance for the vindica∣tion of this dominion, and the silencing all Objections, than the famous com∣plaint against the Genoeze Grimbaldi, who during the War between the French and those of Flanders, infesting the Seas,
and disturbing Commece, occasion'd all the Nations of Europe, bordering on the Sea, to have recourse, and appeal to the Kings of England; whom from time to time, and by Right immemo∣rial, they acknowledged to be in peace∣able possession of the Soveraign Lord∣ship and dominion of the Seas of Eng∣land, and Islands of the same; This Li∣bel, or Complaint was exhibited in the time of Edward the First, almost three hundred years since, and is still ex∣tant in the Archives of the Tower. 49. And thus we have seen how the Sea is not only a distinct province, Ca∣pable of Propriety, Limits, and other just Circumstances of Peculiar Domi∣nion, as a Bound, not Bounding his Majesties Empire, but as bounded by it in another respect; and that this was never violated so much as by Syllogism, 'till some Mercenary pens were set on work against Spain, through whose ten∣der sides, at that time, and with great artifice,1509. Treaty with Spain, concerning Trade to the Indies. the Barnevelt faction endea∣vour'd to transfix us; Soon it was per∣ceiv'd, and as soon encounter'd; in the mean time, that one would smile to find their mighty Champion then fairly ac∣cknowledg upon another Occasion, and
when it seems he resolv'd to speak out. Angliae Regina Oceani Imperium—That the Queen of England,Grot. Annal. l. 2. 1570. was Dominatrix of the Sea—So great is the Truth, and will prevail: In a word, if the premier Occupant. be a legal and just plea to the Right of other possessions, the Kings and Queens of England, descending from, or succeeding to them who first asserted the Title, are still invested with it; sure we are, this Argument was held good, and illustrated by the First, and best foundation of Empire, when the State of Venice (claiming the Adriatic by no other) held that famous Contro∣versie with Ferdinand of Friuli by their Advocate Rapicio and Chizzola, Com∣missioners being mutually chosen to de∣termine it; and how far Antiquity is on our side, The Greeks, Romans, Tyri∣ans, Phoenicians, and othes have abun∣dantly declar'd, and with what caution they interdicted Strangers here with us, till the Claudian Expedition annex'd it, with the dominion of all Britain, to that Glorious Empire▪ which to pro∣tect against the Piratical Saxons (then not seldom infesting our Coasts) the Comites Maritimi Tractus were by the Praefect establish'd, as we have already
shew'd: And so it continu'd for near five hundred years after, when the Sax∣ons taking greater advantage of the Ro∣man remissness (distracted as they grew by intestine troubles) made their des∣cents upon us, and with the fortune of Conquest, carried that likewise of the Sea. 50. We have but mention'd King Edgar, whose survey is so famous in Story, when with more than four thou∣sand Vessels, he destin'd a Quaternion to every Sea, which annually circl'd this Isle, and as a Monument of their sub∣mission, was sometime Row'd in his royal Gally by the hands of Eight Kings. This Signal Action becoming the Reverse of a Medail, was by a like device illustrated in the Rose-Noble, in which we have represented the figure of a King invested with his Regalia, stan∣ding in the middle of a Ship, as in his proper, and most resplendent Throne; for the Same reason likewise (as some in∣terpret) did Henry the Eight, add the Portcluse to his current Mony, as a Character of his peculiar Title to this Dition, exclusive to all others. 51. We have spoken of the Danes, and Normans, and their successive claim,
and of the Custodes Maritimi, more antient than that of Admiral, as now constituted, which indeed began with the Edwards, when the French, at war with Flanders, but pretending to usurp that dignity, were fain to abolish their new office, and acknowledging they had no Right, pay the damages of the depredations they made, as appears by that famous Record in the Tower, men∣tion'd by Sir Iohn Burroughs in which the Title of our Kings is asserted from immemorial prescription; nay, when at this time, he had not all the opposite Shoar to friend. 52. The Constitution of our Cinque-Ports give another noble Testimony to this Claim, and the addition of two more Admirals by our Third Edward, guarding as many Seas, as there were Superiour Officers of this deno∣mination, not omitting the Title of Lords of both Shoars, anciently us'd from hence to Henry the Fifth; nay, when Edward renounc'd his Claim to Normandy1166. (as at the Treaty of Charters) the French themselves acknowledg'd this Right, and therefore neither here, nor at the Court of Delegates in France, did they claim any pretence to the Is∣lands,
or Interluent Seas. But what need we a more pregnant Instance, than that Universal deference to the Laws of OLERON (an Island of Aquitania then belonging to this Crown) publi∣shed after the Rhodan had been long Antiquated, which obtain'd over all the Christian World. And to this we might add the Dane-Gelt (in plain Eng∣lish, a Ship-mony Tax) impos'd as well on Strangers as Denisons that practic'd Commerce upon our Coasts and Sea; East and North, where the great Inter∣cursus was; nor expir'd it here, but continu'd Customary, as appears by innumerable Records, for enabling the King to protect the Seas, and to Ob∣struct, or Open them as he saw conveni∣ent, with Title to all Royal Fishes, Wracks, and Goods found floating in Alto-mari, as we can prove by several Commissions, and Instruments, and confirm by precedents, not of our Mu∣nicipal constitutions alone, but, such as have been binding, and accepted for such, of the Nations about us; Wit∣ness that famous Accord made between our Edward the First, and the French King Phillip and Fair, calling him to ac∣count for the piracies we have men∣tion'd. And
To this we might produce the spon∣taneous submission of the Flemings in open Parliament, in Edward the Seconds Reign, and the Honour, or rather Duty of the Flag, which King Iohn with his1200 Peers, had many Ages since,M. S. C mmen. de Rebs. Ad∣mir. ol. 28. challeng'd, upon the Custom ordain'd at Hastings, decreed to take place universally, not barely as a Civiliy, but as a Right of importance for the makng out, and confirmation of our Title to the Domi∣nion we have been vindicaing; And that this has been claim'd and pay'd Cum debitâ Reverntiâ (to use the ex∣press words of those old Commissions, which had been long since given by William and Maurice Princes of Orange) to all the Sea Commanders in those days; we have for almost this whole later Cen∣tury, seen the matter of fact testified not only by continual Claims, Orders, commissions and Instructions; but by searching divers athentick Journals, which have noted the particulars in a thousand Instances: Nor has this been paid to whole Fleets only, bearing the Royal Pavillion; but to single Vessels, and those of the smaller Crast (as they are stil'd) wearing his Mjesties Cog∣nizance, to whom this homage has been
done, even by the greatest Navies, meeting them in any of the British Seas in their  most Latudes. Nor has this been so much has question'd, til that arch Rebel for end of his own, would once have betray'd it; and that the late D∣magegue the Dutch and what all the World has paid us, which puts it ou of dispue: In the mean time it was necessary, and no way improper to the Scope of this Treatise, that after what has been so newly pretended, to the prejudice of the Title we have asserted; some thing should be said to abate the Confidence of impertinent Men, and to let he World know, that our Prin∣ces (to whom God, and Nature has im∣parted such prerogatives) will not be ba'd out of them, by the sentences, and ophisms of Lawyers, much less b Sophan's, and such as carry not the least shadow of reason: But it would
fill many Volumes to exempfie the Forms of our ancient Commissions from time to time, Investing our Admi∣rals, with the Exercise of this Soveragn Power; as well as that of safe Conducts, Writts of Seizure, and Arrests; the Copies of Grants, and Permission to Fish (of which in the next period) ob∣tain'd of our Kings, by Ptition &c. to be found at large in our Books, Par∣liament Rolls, and other Authentick Pieces too long for this Tract: But, if any will be contentios, because they are some of them of ancient Date, we have, and shall yet shew Instances suffi∣cient, and Ex abundanti for this last age, to which our ntagonists have from time to time submitted, not only in the wide, and ample Sea, or at our own Coasts, but in the very Ports, and Harbours of Strangers, where they looked for Pro∣tection; that all the World may blsh at the weak and unreasonable Conten∣tions, which would invalidate this Claim, if at least there be in the World any such thing as Right, Presription, Deference, or other Evidence, which amongst soer men, is agreed to be LAW, for the Clearing of a Title. To Sum up all then, If Right of Presrip∣tion,
succession of Inheritance, Con∣tinual Claim, Matter of Fact, Consent of History, and confessions even from the mouths, and pens of Adversaries, be of any moment to the gaining of a Cause; We may bespeak our Nation, as he did King Iames upon another Oc∣casion, and as justly transfer it to his gloriousGro. Syva. l. 2. Successor—Quis dat jura Mari &c. And with this I should conclude, did not the Fishery, which is another irre∣fragable Proof of his Majesties Domi∣nion, require a little Survey, before we shut up this discourse. 54. How far this Royal Jurisdiction has extended, may best be gather'd out of the Reverend Camden, Speaking of King Iames the Sixth of Scotland,Fliz. & ri∣tan. and of Queen Elizabeth of England; who first discovering the While-Fishing, had consequently, Title to those Seas, as far as Green-land Northward; and what it was to the South, the Proclamation of our Third Edward (yet extant) abun∣dantly makes appear: This, consum'd by the Fourth of that Name, Guards, and Convoys, were appointed to preserve the Rights inviolable; as was likewise continued by the Three▪ succeeding
Henrys, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh, and their descendents, who impos'd a cer∣tain Tribute upon all Forreiners, in Recognition of their Indulgence to them. Witness the French,1489. the Dukes of Britain, of Burgundy (especally Phi∣lip) and those of Fanders, who never presum'd to cast a Net without Permissi∣on, and a formal Instrument first obtai∣ned, the Originals whereof, are yet to be seen, and may be collected out of both the French, and Burgundian sto∣ries; and, as it doth indeed to this day appear by his Majesties neighbourly Civility, granted to the French King for the Provision of his own Table, and to the Town of Bruges in Handers, by a late Concession; the number and size of Boats, and other Circumstances be∣ing limited, upon transgression whereof, the offenders have been Imprison'd, and otherwise mulcted. 55. And, as the French, so the Spa∣niard did always sue to our Princes for the like priviledg and kindness: King Phillip the Second (as nearly related as he was to Queen Mary his Wife) find∣ing a Provso in an Act of Parliament, that no Forreiner should fish in those Seas without permission, paid into the
Exchequer no less than an annual rent of one thousand pounds, for leave to fish upon the North of Ireland for the sup∣ply of his dominions in Flanders: Now for the Dutch. 56. That famous Record Pro Homi∣nibus Hollandiae (so the Title runs) points to us as far as our First Edward,1295. not only how obsequious then they were in Acknowledging the Kings Do∣minion on the Sea, but his Protection, and permission to Fish on the environs of it;Rt. pat. 23. Ed. . Memb. 5. And his Successor Edward the Third, as he gave leave to the Counts of Holland (who always petition'd for it) so he prescribed Laws, and Orders con∣cerning the Burden of the Vessels to be employ'd about it: The like did Henry the Sixth to the French, and others; with the Season, Place, and Method to be observ'd, which are all of main im∣portance in the Cause: And this was so religiously inspected in former times, that Edward the Fourth, constituted a Triumvirat power to guard both the Seas, and the Fishery against all Pre∣tenders whatsoever, as had Richard the Second long before him, who impos'd a Tribute on every individual Ship that pass'd through the  Ad∣miralty,
for the maintenance of that Sea-Guard, amounting to six pence a Tun, upon every Fishing Vessel weekly, as appears by a most authentick Re∣cord, and the Opnion of the most emi∣nent Judges, at that early day: who upon consideration, that none but a So∣verein power could impose such a pa∣ment, gave it in as their opinion, that this Right and Dominion, was a  of the royal Patrimony, and insepara∣ble: Nay, that wise Prince Henry the Seventh, thought it so infinitely con∣siderable, that (upon deeply weighing the great Advantages) he was setting up a Trade, or Sap of sh, in prefe∣rence (say some) to that of Wool itself, and all other Commerce of his Domi∣ons; which being long before  Low-Countries had a Name for Mrchau, they had still perhaps, , if some Renegado's of our own ( and Stephens by Name) had not encg'd the Dutch of Enchusen (with other Mal∣contented Persons of the Craft, deser¦ting their Country, and their  to molest his Majesties Sres,  the accompt of these Mn; since wh, They, and Others, have coni their Presumptions even to Insolence:
57. Neither was less the Care of King Iames,1606. to vindicate this incom∣parable prerogative, than any of his vigilant Predecessors,1458. who, having de∣riv'd that accession of the Shetland Islands by marriage with a Daughter of Denmark,1609. publish'd his Proclamations immediately after his coming into Eng∣land: For it must be acknowledg'd, that Queen Elizabeth did not so nicely and warily look after this jealous Ar∣ticle, as had been wish'd; diverted by her extraordinary Pitty, and abundant Indulgence to the distressed States. But, this Prince roundly asserts his Patrimo∣ny,See Copy of a Letter in Sir ob. Cotton's Library, and the Credenti∣als given to Sir Hen. Wot∣ton. upon many prudent Reasons of state, and especially, for encouragement of the Maritime Towns, fallen much to decay, and plainly succumbing un∣der the injurious dealing of such as took the Fish from before their dores; and renew'd his Commands, that none should for the future, presume so much as to hover about, much less abide on our Coasts, without Permission first ob∣tain'd under the Great Seal of England and upon which the Hollanders petiti∣on'd for Leave, and Acknowledged the Limits appointed them, as formerly they had done: Let us hear the Historian escribe it and blush.
The Hollanders (says he) taking in∣finite plenty of HerringCamden in Br upon this Coast, and thereby making a most gainful Trade, were first to procure leave (by ancient Custom) out of Scarborow-Castle; for the English per∣mit them to Fish; reserving indeed the Honour to themselves, but, Re∣signing the Benefit to Strangers, to their incredible inriching &c. What could be said more to our purpose, or to our Reproach? This was that which King Iames endeavour'd to bring into a better method, when taking notice of the daily incroachment of our Neigh∣bours, he enjoyn'd his Ambassador (who was then Sir Dudley Carleton) to Expostulate it with the States,1618. as may be seen in that sharp Letter of Mr. Se∣cretaries: Dated the twenty first of December 1618, in which he tells them, That unless they sought leave from his Majesty, and acknowledg his Right, as other Princes had done, and did; it might well come to pass, that they who would needs bear all the World before them by their Mare Liberum, might soon endanger their having nei∣ther Terram, Nec Solum, Nec Rempub∣licam Liberam: I do only recite the
Passage as I find it publish'd, and take notice how Prophetick it had lately like to have been. 58. This happy Prince taking um∣brage at the War between the Hollander and the Spaniard, did ix Limits by Commission, and Survey, nearer than which (though as Moderator, he offer'd equal Protection to boh) no Enemy to another State, mght commit any hostile Act,Seldns l. 2. . 22. and producing his Reasons for it, asserted his Right so to do; not as if those Boundaries circumscrib'd his do∣minions, but, as being sufficient for the vindication of his due in that great Ar∣ticle. And their not observing this, in∣cited King Charles the First of Blessed memory, to Animadvert upon it, when in the year 1639,1639. our good friends be∣haved themselves with so little respect, in that memorable Conflict with the Spa∣niard; and when approaching too near our Shoars, they were check'd for their Irreverence in his Majesties Imperial Chambers; Indeed, for the First (but seeming) Aront, that this Nation did ever receive upon it. 59. And now it will not be amiss, nor inconsistent with our Title, to let the World see, the immence advantages
of the Trade which has been driven upon the sole account of the Fishery; by the prodigious emolument which it has (to our cost and reproach) afforded our more industrious Neighbours, the foundation of whose Greatness has been laid in the bottom of our Seas; which has yielded them more Treasure than the Mines of Potosi, or both Indies to Spain. Who would believe that this People raise yearly by the Herring, and other isheries, a Million of pound Sterling, and that Holland, and Zealand alone (whose utmost Verge doth hardly ex∣ceed many English Shires) should from a few despicable Boats, be able to set forth above Twenty thousand Vessels of all Sorts, it for the rude Seas, and of which more than 7000, are yearly em∣ploy'd upon this Occasion? 'Tis evi∣dent, that by this particular Trade, they are able to breed above fourty thousand Fisher-men, and one hundred and sixteen thousand Mariners (as the Census has been accurately calculated) and the gain of it is so universal, that there's hardly a Beggar in their Coun∣try, nor an hand, which doth not earn it's bread: This is Literally true, and
the Consideration of it seem'd so im∣portant, that even in the days of Charles the Fifth, that great Monarch is repor∣ted to have sometimes visited the Tomb of Bueckeld (where he had been above two hundred years Interr'd) in solemn recognition of his Merit, for having, as 'tis said, been the Inventor of Pick∣ling and Curing Herring: In a word, so immense is the advantage which this ar∣ticle alone brings the State, that a very favourable Rent, still in arrear to his Majesties Exchequer, for permission to Fish (as should be prescribed, and ap∣pointed them) amounts to more than half a Million of pounds, and a Custom only at home of what they take, with the Tenth Fish for Waftage, to near five hundred thousand pounds more; but the quantities which they sell abroad, to a sum almost not to be reckon'd: Then let it be computed, the Hands employ'd for Spinning of Yarn, Weaving of Nets, and making other necessaries for the Sa∣ting, Curing, Packing, and Barelling, Building of Vessels, and fitting them out to Sea: It is certain the Shipping (which is more than all Europe can assemble be∣sides) Sea-men, Commerce, Towns, Har∣bours, Power, Publick-Wealth, and
aluence of all other things, is sprung from this source; and, that in Barter for Fish (without exportation of Coin) they receive from Spain, Italy, Germany, &c. Oil, Wine, Fruit, Corn, Hony, Wax, Allum, Salt, Wool, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tarr, Sope-Ashes, Iron, Copper, Steel, Claw-Boards; Timber, Masts, Dollars, Armour, Glass, Mill-Stones, Plate, Ta∣pestry, Munition, and all things that a Country (which has no one Material of these of proper Growth) can need to render it consummately happy. The In∣dies and farthest Regions of the Earth, participate of this Industry; and to our shame be it spoken, we blush not to buy our own Fish of them, and purchase that of Strangers, which God, and Nature has made our own, inriching others to our destruction, by a detestable sloath; whilst to encourage us, we have Timber, victuals, Havens, Men, and all that at our dores, which these people adven∣ture for in remoter Seas, and at excessive charges; And thus the prize is put into our hands, whilst we have not the hearts to use it; nor do we produce any rea∣sons,See Mr. L' E∣'s late Discourse of the Fishery. why we are thus unconcern'd, that ever I could find, were solid; some Ob∣jections indeed are presented, but they
appear'd to me so dilute, and insignifi∣cant, that 'tis not possible to compose ones Indignation at the hearing of them, and see a Kingdom growing every day thinner of People, and fuller of Indi∣gence, without some extraordinary e∣motion: To see with what numerous, and insulting Fleets, our Neighbours have been often prepar'd to dispute our Title to these Advantages, by the bene∣fit and supply of that which we neg∣lect, and condemn as unpracticable: If this be not enough to raise in us some worthy Resentments; Let the Confes∣sion of the Dutch themselves incite us to it; who (in a Proclamation, pub∣lish'd near fifty years since) have stil'd their Fishing Trade, the Golden Mines of their Provinces,1624. and stimulated an Industrious and emulous people with all the Topicks of Encouragement: Were this alone well consider'd, and briefly pursu'd, there would need no great Magick to reduce our bold Sup∣planters to a more Neighbourly temper: The Subjects of this Nation have no more to do, than apply themselves to the Fishery, to recover at once their Losses, and as infallibly advance the prosperity of the Kingdom, as 'tis evi∣dent
it has enabled our late Antagonists to humble Spain, and from little of themselves, to grapple with the most puissant Monarch of Europe, and bring him to the ground: For my part, I do not see how we can be able to answer this prodigious sloath of ours any lon∣ger; and especially, since 'tis evident, it will cost us but a laudable Industry; and (in regard of our situation, and ve∣ry many Advantages above them) much less trouble and charge: Or suppose a Considerable part of our forrein less∣needfull Expences were diverted to this Work, what were the dis-advan∣tages? We talk much of France (and perhaps with reason) but are we so safe from our dear friend, upon this Com∣posure, as never to apprehend any fu∣ture unkindness? For my own part, I wish it with my Soul: But of this I am sure, We may prevent, or encoun∣ter open desiance; but whilst we are thus undermin'd, we suffer a continual Hostility; since the Effects of it ruin our Commerce, and by Consequence the Nation: Nor speak I here of our Neighbours the Hollanders only; but of those of Hamborough, Lubee, Embden, and other Interloopers, who grow ex∣ceedingly
Opulent, whilst we sit still, and perish, whose advantages for Ta∣king, Curing, Uttering and Employing of hands (were the Expedients menti∣on'd put in practice, or the ruinous numbers of our Men, daily locking to the American Plantations, and from whence so few return, prudently stated, and Acts of Naturalization promoted) are so infinitely Superiour to theirs: But, so our cursed Negligence, will yet have it, not for want of all Royal Encouragement, but a fatality, painly insuperable. 60. We have said little yet of our American Fishery, and the loss we make of a vast Treasure on the Coasts of Vir∣ginia, Green-land, Barmudas, &c. sa∣crificing infinite Wealth both at home, and abroad to the Spaniards, French, those of Portugal, and Biscay. 'Tis well known that Green-land, was first detected by the English, about the lat∣ter end of Queen lzabeths reign, and afterwards the Royal Standard ere∣cted there, in token of Dominion, by the Name of King Iames's New-land, his Majesty asserting his just Rights, by many Acts of State, as more particularly on the Tenth of Ianuary 1613,1613. when
he signified his pleasure by Sir Noel Caroon then in Holland, in vindication of his Title both to the Island Fishery, and all other emoluments whatsoever Iure Dominii, as first discoverer, and to prohibite Strangers interposing, and fishing in his Seas without permissi∣on:1608. For this effect,1609. Commissioners were establish'd at London to grant Li∣cences, yearly renewable for such as would fish on the English Coast; at E∣denbrough, on the Northern, and by Proclamation,1616. Interdicting all un-licen∣ced Practises; the Duke of Lennox (as Admiral of Scotland) being order'd to assert the Right of the Assize-Herring, which was paid. 61. The following years, what inter∣ruptions1617. happen'd, upon our Neigh∣bours desires of coming to an adjust∣ment for the Indugences they had found, is universally known, 'till the Year 1635,1635. when to prevent some in∣croachments, and disorders of those who Fished under his protection, the late King Charles of Blessed Memory is∣su'd out his Proclamations,See Mr Secre∣tary Ck's let∣ter April 16. 165. to his Majestie's Re∣sident at the . and gave Instructions to his Ministers abroad, signifying that no Strangers should presume to Fish in the British Seas with∣out
out his Majesties Licence; and that those who desired them, might be Pro∣tected, he thought fit to equip, and set forth such a Fleet, as became his Care, and Vigilancy for the good and safety of his People, and the honour of the Na∣tion: This was the Year, and the Oc∣casion of building several considerable Ships, and amongst others, that famous Vessel, the Royal Soveraign, which to this day, bears our Triumphant Edgar for its badge and Cognizance, and to mind the World of his undoubted Right to the Dominion of the Seas, which he had by this time asserted and secur'd beyond danger of dispute, had not a deluded people (as to their own highest Concern, Glory, and Interest) and the fatality of the Times, disturb'd the project of an Easie Tax as an imagi∣nary invasion of their Liberties, which that blessed Prince, design'd only to protect them; It is fresh in memory what were the Opinions of Attourny Noy, many learned Civilians, and near a Jury of grave Judges upon this Con∣juncture; and the Instaces of King Ethelred's having levy'd it many hun∣dred years before, shew'd it to be no such innovation; nor could there be a
more pressing Occasion than when all our Neighbours around us were (as now) in a state of Hostility: but I list not here to interrupt my Reader upon this Chapter, which has already suffer'd so many ore digladiations and Contests; only as to matter of Fact, and as con∣cern'd the Navigation, and improve∣ment of Commerce, I touch it briefly, and pass to what follow'd, which was the setting out no less than sixty tall Ships, first under the Earl of Lindsey,1635. and afterwards Northumberland,1636. by the Account of whose accurate Journal, it appears, how readily our Neighbour Fisher-men (though under convoy of eets superiour to ours in number) su∣ed for, and took Licences to the value of Fifteen hundred Pounds, Fifteen Shillings and two Pence, as I have perus'd the par∣ticulars: I do only mention the Licen∣ces, which were also taken, and accepted at Land, and they not a few, distributed by Sir William Boswell at the Hague it self, upon which his Majestie's Minister then at Bruxelles, adveris'd the Infanta, that the Dunkerkers should take care not to molest such of the Hollandes (though at that time in actual hostility with hem) as had his Majestie's Permission,
and accordingly, the Cardinal did grant them Passes, which they took without Scruple; so as we find it was not for nothing, that they came under protecti∣on, but receiv'd a real benefit; Nor was this a novel Imposition, but familiar, and Customary, as appears by the many precedents which we have recited; to which we may add, that of the Scotch Fi∣shery, under King Iames the first: 1424. 21. Act. of the first Parliament, having already spoken of what concern'd our own Princes, especially what Richard the Second impos'd, Henry I. V. VI. VII. Queens Mary, &c. with that of Edward the First Pro Hominibus Hollandiae &c, which protection is yet extant, and granted frequently by Treaties, as a priviledg only during the subsistance of such Treaties, and no farther, total∣ly resinding and abolishing the pre∣tences grounded by some upon the Intereursus magnus1495. made with the Dukes of Burgundy: So as to summ up all that has been produc'd to ortiie our domestick Evidences, we have many Acts of Parliament, we have the seve∣ral Successours of our Princes granting Licences to Strangers; we have the as∣siduous instances made by King Iames,
by his Ambassadours, and Secretaries of State; We have the Acknowledgments actually, and already paid, and ac∣counted for to the Exchequer, and have seen the occasion of the ate Inter∣ruptions of it, and the invalidity of mens pretences; and if these be not evidences sufficient to subvert the So∣phisms of a few mercenary pens, and dismount the Conidence of unreason∣able people, it is because there is so little rigour in our resolutions at home, and so little Justice in the World abroad: Nor has this been arrogated by the Monarchs of ths Nation, but a Right establish'd upon just reason; namely, that they might be enabl'd to clear the Seas of Rovers, and Pirates, and protect such as folow'd their law∣ful affairs: And for this effect, the ings of England, did not only take care to defend their own Subjects, but to Con∣voy, and secure all Strangers, so∣times (as we have seen) by Proclamati∣on, sometimes by Fleets, and Men of War, where they Fish'd by Agreement, upon Treaty, or leave obtain'd, yet restraining them to certain ▪ re∣taining the dominion of the Neighbou∣ring Seas, as in the Reign of Henry
Fourth, where we find an Accord made between him and the French King,Rot. Fra. Hen. 4. 29. that the Subjects of either Nation might fish in one part of the Seas, and not in ano∣ther; the Possession of all Privileges of this nature ever accompanying the Royal Licence, and Strangers having ei∣ther special Indulgences, or being un∣der protection of special Officers, ap∣pointed in former times for the safe Guarding of the Fishery,. 4. who were so impower'd by Patent,Rich. 3. and had certain dues appointed for that attendance,Henr. 7. which they levied upon all Forreiners, with the express Direction (in the reign of Henry the Seventh) that the Ac∣cknowledgment was to be so levied, notwithstanding any Letter of Safe-Conduct, which Stranger Fishermen might pretend from any King, Prince or Government whatsoever: So as by all the Arguments of Right, Claim, and pscription, the Title is firm; all o∣ther pretences of Right or possession interrupted, arrogated and precarious, or else extinguish'd by Infractios of Treaties, never since revived by any subsequent Act: 62. We ght here mention the Toll paid the King of Denmark at the Sundt,
and the respect which Strangers shew to his Castle at Cronnenburg, according to a Treaty made between them and the Dutch;1649. and to the Swedish King, whom they acknowledg Sovereign of the Bal∣tick, and Northern Tracts to an immense extent, where he receives Tribute, as well as those of Denmark, and Poland by impositions at Dantzick and the Pil∣lan, where they only enjoy for it a cold and hungry passage, whilst with us, we give them not only Passage, Harbours, and Protection through a dangerous Sea, but an Emolument accompanying it, which inriches our Neighbours with one of the most inestimable Treasures, and Advantagious Commerce under heaven: To this we also might add what has obtain'd the Suffrages not only of our own Countrymen of the Long Robe and others, but of almost all the dis-in∣terested Learned persons who have dis∣cuss'd this Subject; universally agreeing, that as to a pecnliar, and restrictive Right, Fisheries may, and ought to be Appropriated, and that as well in the high-Seas (as the Lawyers term them) as in Lakes, and Rivers, and narrower Consinements, and as the Republick of Genoa does at this day, let to Farm
their Fishery for Thunnies in their neighbouring Seas; and the Contract between Queen Elizabeth, and Denmark about the like liberty upon the Coast of Norway, and the Prohibitions made, and the licences given by that Crown at this present, do abundantly evince; namely that the Dane is, and hath of long time, been in possession upon the Coasts we have mention'd, and of as much as we asser't to be due to his Ma∣jesty in the British Seas
THE TABLE. A A Chaians. pag. 32 Accidents. vide Chance. 21 Action. 14 Actium. 33 Admiral v. Officers. 38. 70. 84. 95. 99 Adriatick. 35. 93. Adventurers, vide Mer∣chant. Adventures. v. Expeditions, Ex∣ploits, Voyages, Dis∣coveries. 4. 22. 65. 78. Aegean. 23. 29 Aegineta. 21 Aegypt. 39 Aemilius. 32 Aequator. 42 Aethiopia. 39. 41. 53 Africa. 9 Aggressor. 30 Albion. 58 Alcibides. 29 Aleppo. 39. 41 Alexandretta. 41 Alexandria. 36. 39 Alfred. 67 Almeida. 43 Alphonsus. 3. 42 Alvares. 43 Ambassadors. 116 Ambition. 8 America. 10. 34. 55. 111 Americus Vesputianus. 56 Anian, v. Streights. 77 Anker. 19 Antillias. 54 Antiquities, v. Medails. 93 Antipodes. 7. 34 Antwerp. 46 Anseatick-Towns. 8
Appius Claudius. 31 Aquitain. 84 Arabia, Arabs. 39. 41 Architecture Naval. 4 Argo, Argo-nauts. 25 Armada, v. Fleet. 21. 50. 74 Arms. 28 Arsenal, v. Magazine. 51. 52 Art. 4. 18 Artaxerxes. 29, 30 Arthur, Prince. 67 Asia. 9. 22 Astracan. 40 Astrolabe. 59 Astronomy. 21, 59 Athenian. 29, 30 Atlantick. 42, 59 Atlas, v. Books. 63. Avarice. 30 Augustus. 35 Azores. 60 B BAcchus. 23 Badges. 24 Bagdat. 41 Balearians. 32 Balsara. 41 Baltick-Sea. 119 Battels. v. Fights. 21. 32. 44. Bays, v. Harbours, Ports, &c. Bennet, Cap. 77 Beotia. 21 Bethen-Court. 42. 76 Biscayans. 55 Blake. 53 Boats, v. Ships, Vessels. 19. Books, v. Atlas, History. Bounds, v. Limits. 106. Brasile. 43 Britans. 46. 65, 66, 67 Britain, v. England. 24. British-Sea, v Sea. Broome. 63 Bruges. 101 Brundusium. 45 Bullion, v. Treasure. Burgundy. 69, 70. 116 Busses. 82 Button, Capt. 77 C CAdmus. 22 Caesar. 65. 86 Cairo. 39
Cales. v. Gades. 17. 27. 59. 74. 76 Calidonian-Sea. 87 Camus Sebastian. 58 Canaries. 77 Candy. v. Creete. 52. Canon, v. Guns. Canoos. 4 Canute. 48. 88 Cape of Good-Hope. 43 Captains. 54 Caravan. 39. 41 Carricks, v. Ships. 18. Carthagena. 58. 75 Carthage. 11. 17. 31 Carthaginians. 31 Cassiterides. 65 Caspian-Sea. 40 Cathaia. 76 Catharine, Promontory. 42 Cavendish. 57, 58 Ceilon, v. Zeilon. 17. Chabot Sebastian, Iohn. 57. 72. 77 Cham. 22 Chamber. 87. 106 Chance, v. Accident. 59. Channel. 385 Chao s. 53 Charles the I, II, VI. 14. 16. 78, 79. 106 Charles the Great. the Fifth. 71 108 Chinezes. 53. 76 Cicilians. 32 Cimbrians. 65 Cinque-Ports. 95 Circum-navigation. 57, 58 Claudius. 87. 93 Clothing. 70 Colchos. 25 Colours. v. Flag. 37, 97. Columbus. 34. 54 Commerce. v. Trade, Merchandize, &c. 4. 5. 8, 9, 10. 11, 12. 14, 15. 26, 27. 38. 47. 51. 54. 62. 64. 69. 78, 79. 86. 111. Companies. 43 Commissioners. 69 Comites Maritimi, &c. 87. 93. 95 Conon. 29 Conquest. 12. 94 Consalvo de Vaz. 42 Continent. 68
Convoys. v. Guards. 99. 100. 117 Coptos. 39 Corcyreans. 30 Corinth. 30 Covillan, Peter. 42 Creation. 1. 3 Creature. 4 Creet. 24 v. Candy. Cuba. 54 Custome, v. Law-Tax. 64. 97. Cyclades. 33 D DAne. 8. 48. 67. 88. 119, 120 Dane Gelt, v. Tax. 96. Darius. 29 Davis. 57. 77 Deck. 19 Defence. 68 Deluge, v. Flood. 17 Denmark. 10 Descents, v. Invasion. 9. 48. 94. Discoverers. 33. 57. 77 Discovery. v. Voyages, Exploits, 48. 57. 60. 63 Adventures. Dock, v. Harbour. 37. Domingo. 58. 75 Dominion. v. Empire, Soveraignty. 6. 29. 37. 38. 66. 82. 100. 102. 103. 114 Drake, Sir Fr. 57. 58. 75 Duillius, C. 31. 36 Duke of Florence, v. Flo∣rence. Dutch. v. Hollander. 80, 81. 103 E EArth. 2. 3 Edgar. 67. 88. 94. 114 Edwards, I, II, III, IV. 9. 69. 71. 77. 88. 90, 91. 96. 100, 102. 116 Egbert. 67 Elements. 47. 73. 78. 100 104. 120 Eliot. 57 Elizabeth, Q. 14. 47. 73. 78. 100. 104. 120 Emanuel, K. of Portugal. 43. 56 Empire, v. Dominion. 15. 83 Emporium. v. Port, Scale, Staple. 8. 44, 45
England. 64 English. 57. 76. 79 Essex, Earl. 74 Ethelred. 67. 114 Euphrates. 41 Europe. 8 Euxine. 39. 41 Exchange. 10 Expedition. v. Voyages, Adven∣tures. 22. 75 Exploit. 30, 76. 77 Exportation. 10 F FActories. 44 Faith. 56. 72 Ferdinand of Castile. 54 Friuli. 93 Ferries. 19 Fights. v. Battels, War. 21. 71. 76. 106 Fire-Ships. 37 Fishery. v. Herrings, Whales. 81. 85. 100. 102. 107. 110 Flag. v. Colours. 36. 81. 97, 98. Flattery. 84. 85 Flavio di Amalphi. 60 Fleece, Golden: v. Wool. 70 Fleets. v. Ships, Fregats, Ves∣sels, Armada's. 14. 16. 27. 48. 69. 81. 110. 114 Flemmings. 67 Flood. v. Deluge, Noah. 11. 21 Florence, Duke. 13. 48. Florentine. 51 Florida. 57 Forraigners. 9. 64. 101 France. 10. 27. 84 Francis the First. 46 Fregats, v. Ships. 22. French. 13. 46. 60. 95. 111 Frobisher. 57. 77 Frontires. 68 Frugality. 64 G GAin. 11 Gallies. 19. 50. 94 Gama, Vasco. Ganges. 19 Gardens. 19 Garison. 68 Gaules. 65 Genoa. 8. 46. 51 Genoeze. 39. 48
Gillan, Captain. 78 Goa. 13 Gold. v. Fleece, Treasure. 28. 70 Gottenberg. 49 Goths. 38. 44 Greece. 23. 65 Greeks. 28 Green-Land. 112 Grenevil, Sir Rich. 76 Grimbaldi. 91 Guard of the Seas. v. Convoy. 100, 103 Guardian. 89 Gulph, v. Persian. Guns, v. Canon. 74. H HAnnibal. 32 Hanno. 24. 59 Hanse-Towns. v. Anseatick. 8. 89. 111 Harbour. v. Port, Dock. 44. 80 Hasting. 97 Haukins, Sr. Io. 57 Hemp. 20 Henries, III. V, VI, VII, VIII. 56. 71, 72, 73, 89. 91. 94. 101, 102, 103. 118 Hen. III. of Portugal. 42 Hen. IV. of France. 47. 118 Heraclea. 32 Hercules. 22 Herrings. v. Fishery. 105. 113 Hippocrates. 13 Hispaniola. 55 History, v. Books. 67. Holy-War, v War. 71. Holland. 6 Holanders. v. Dutch. 3. 43. 61. 105 Horses. 9 Hudson. 57 Humility. 60 I IAgo. 58. 75 Iamaica. 54 Iames, K. 79. 90. 100. 104 Iames, Cap. 77 Iaphet. 22 Iason. 25 Iehosaphat. 27 Isles. 28 Importation. 10 Imposition. v. Tax. 116, 119
Indian. Indies. v. Companies. 15. 26. 30. 43. 77, 78 Industry. 3. 16. 64. 111 Ingratitude. 18 Innovation. 114 Inscription. 88 Insolence. 98 Intelligence. 9. 31 Intercursus Magnus. 96. 116 Invasion. v. Descents. 48. Iohn K. of England Portugal 42. 56. 69. 97 Iones, Cap. 77 Iunks. 53 Ioppa. 45. 50 Ioshua. 23 Iournals. 63. 97 Isabella of Castile. 54, 55 Iseland. 67 Italy. 8. 10. 17 Jurisdiction. 90 Justice. 14 K KEEL. 19 KINGS. 13 L LAcedemonians. 12. 29, 30 Land. 17 Laws. v. Oleron, Rhodes. 36. 44, 45. 96. 102 Lawyers. 98 Lawson, Sr. I. 53 Learning. 28 Lepanto. 50 Lesbia. 39 Libel. 72 Licences. 113, 114, 115. 120 Lindsey. 115 Licester, Earl. 82 Ligorn. 48 Liberty. 12. 114 Limits. v. Boundaries. 90. 92. 106 Longitudes. 21 Longobards. 38 Luxury. v. Sloth. 38. 44 Lycurgus. 12 Lydians. 11. 37 Lysander. 30 M MAdera: 42. 55 Magazine. v. Arsenal. 37 Maggellan. v. Streight. 58. 78
Magnes. 21. 53 Maltezes. 52 Man. 5 Manlius. 31 Manners. 10 Manufactures. v. Merchandize. 14. 64. 70 Mare Liberum. v. Sea, Dominion. 105 Manners. 27. 107 Marselles. 46. 49 Masts. v. Stores. 20 Materials for Ships▪ 10 Mathematicks. 21 Maxime. 68 Medails. 35. 88. 94 Mediterranean. 3. 8. 39. 59 Megarenses. 29 Men of War. v. Ships. 21 Merchants. v. Commerce. 9. 11. 13. 24. 26. 47. 49. 87. 103 Milesian. 39 Misenum. 35 Mole. v. Port. 37 Moluccas. 56. 77 Moors. 53 Mountains. 3 Monarchy. v. Empire. 16 Morini. 34 Muscovy. 8. 44 N NAssau, House. 82 Nature. 5 Naturalization. 42. 112 Navigation. 5 9. 10. 14, 15. 21. 23. 38. 52. 54. 59. 62. 72. 79 Navy. v. Fleet, Armada. 65. 74. 94 Necessity. 21 Negligence. 111 Neptune. 22 Newfound-land. 57. 112 Nilus. 40 Noah, v. Deluge. 22. Nobility. 11. 14 Nombre de dios. 58 Norborough, Sir Io. 78 Norman. 46 Normandy. 84, 85 Northumberland, Earl. 115 Norway. 8. 120 Nor-west-Passage. 74. 77
Nuptials. v. Venice 7 O OArs. 19 Ocean, v. Sea. Offa. 71 Officers. v. Admiral. 38 Oleroon. v. Laws. 44. 96 Ophir. 27 Ordnance. v. Guns. 81 Osyris. 22 Owen Gwynedd. 57 Oxenham. 75 P PArliament. 116 Parma Duke. 82 Pass-ports. 89. 116 Paulo, Vasco. di Gama. 42 Paulus Venetus. 60 Pelasgi. 39 Peloponnesus. 28 Permission. 101. 104 Persian. 28. 53 Persian Gulph. 4 Phoenicians 2. 2. 28 Philip the Fair. 96 Philip the Second. 16. 101 Philosophy. 54 Phrygia. 39 Pickling. v. Herring. 108 Pigeons. 41 Pilotage. 21. 60 Piracy. 48. 96 Pirates. 7, 8. 23. 33. 117 Pisa. 51 Pisistratus. 29 Plains. 3 Plantation. 112 Plate, v. Treasure. Plato. 12, 13 Plenty. 6 Poland. 119 Polity. 10 Pompey. 33 Pool, Cap. 77 Port. v. Harbour. 37. 49 Port-Cluse. 94 Portugal, Portugueze 32. 48 Possession. 93 Praeorio Praefectus. 35 Prerogative. 104 Prescition. 84. 9. 118
Proclamation. 100. 104. 113. 117 Prophesie. 106 Propriety. 92 Protection. 83. 99. 106. 114. 117 Punic-War. v. Carthage. 31 R RAfts. v. Ships, Vessels. 26 Raleigh. 57 Ravenna. 35. 37 Records. v. Laws. 102, 103 Red-Sea, 24 40 Regulus, M. 31 Religion. 10. 64 Rent. v. Tribute. 102. 108 Retailers. 13 Rhodes. v. Law. 52. 96 Richards, II. &c. 71. 91. 116 Riches. 15. 108. 110 Richlieu, Card. 47 Rigging. 21 ▪ 2. 85 . 11. 13. 17. 34. 87 Rome. 31 Rose-noble. 94 Rostrum. 19 Royal-Soveraign. v. Ships. 114 Rudder. 19 Russia. 10. 67 S SAils. 20 Sailing. 25. 53 Sanches de Huelva. 55 Saracens. 46. 48. 51. 71 Saxons. 48. 88. 93 Scale, v. Staple. Scanderoon. 42 Scarborough. 105 Scipio. 32 Sea. v. Mediterranean. 7. 10. 16. 34. 83. 85 Security. 68. 86 Sem. 7 Senators. 11 Servitude. 12 Sheriffs. 89 Shetland. 104 Ship-Mony. v. Tax. 96 Shipping. 3. 8. 10. 72. 80
Ships. 4. 18. 24. 31. 50. 65. 79. 114 Ship-Wrights. 37 Shoars. 2. 59 Sicily. 31 Silk. 46 Silver. 23 Situation. 16 Sloth. 15. 109 Smith, Cap. 77 Snake-pots. 37 Society. v. Companies. 14 Solomon. 26 Solon. 13 Soveraignty. v. Dominion. 69. 91 Spain. 28 Spaniard. 15. 48. 54. 78 Spoils, v. Treasure. Sprag, Sir Edw. 53 Squadrons. 34 Staples. v. Scale, Emporium. 10. 13. 39. 103 States. 62. 104 Stink-pots. 37 Stock. 10 Stores. v. Magazine. 10 Strangers. 93. 109. 113 Streights. v. Magellan. 90 Submission, v. Flag. Succession. 100 Summer-Islands. 77 Sundt. 118 Sweden. 8. 10. 49. 119 Syracuse. 31 T TAnais. 41 Tangier. 24. 45 Taproban. 27 Tarshish. 27 Tartarian. 53 Tartessus. 27 Tax. 96. 114 Territory. 15 Themistocles. 29 Thorn. 57 Thracians. 11 Thule. 17 Time. 21 Tissaphernes. 29 Title. v. Laws. 99. 100. 112. 118 Toll, v. Tribute. Tolleration. 64 Towns. v. Sea-Towns. 104
Trabizond. 28. 39 Trade. v. Traffick, Commerce, Merchandize. 11. 15. 61. 107 Treasure. 39. 56. 74. 107 Treasurer of the Navy. 29 Treaties. 116 Trees. 3 Tribute. 91. 101. 102. 118. 119 Tripoly. 41 Tristan de Vaz. 42 Trojan. 11 Tunis. 50 Turk. 52 Tyrians. 11. 28 Tyrus. 24 V VAigates. v. Streights. 77 Vandales. 44 Vasco de Gama. 42. 43 Venetian. 7. 39. 42 Venice. 43. 46. 59. 93 Vessels, v. Ships. 27 Victory, v. Fights. Villa Franca. 49 Violet. 103 Virginia. 57. 77 Ulysses. 22 Volga. 40 Voyages, v. Adventures. Use. 2 Usurers. 49 W WAftage. 108 Want. 6 War. 71. 32 Water. 33 Whale-fishing. 55. 77. 100 Winds. 4. 80 Winter. 59 Wisby. 44 Wool. 9. 70. 103 World. 15. 30 Wracks. 96 X XErxes. 29 Y YArds. v. Rigging. 20 Z ZEilon, v. Ceilon. Zembla nova. 7 Zeno. 55 FINIS.
ERRATA. Pag. 21. in Margent r. Vegetius. 25. l. 6. innumerae rates. 26. l. 6. Stanley shews us. 55. r. 54. 85. l. 26. 1. having been. 86. l. 9. r. than our case. 106. l. ult. immense. 110. l. 23. briskly. 117. l. 12. vigour. 119. l. 9. r. Pilla. With  mis-interpunsations.
BOOKS sold by Benj. Tooke at the Ship in St. Pauls Church∣yard. SKinneri Etymologicon Lingae Anglicanae. Fol. Waraeus de Praesulibus Hiberniae. Fol. Thorndicus, De Ratione a Iure. Fol. Bishop Sanderson's Sermons. Fol. Bentivolio and Vrania, by D. Ingelo. Fol. Dr. Heylyn's Commentary on the Creed. Fol. Usserius de Primordiis Ecclesiarum Britannicarum. 4o. Horae Hebraicae & Talmudice in Evangelium S. Johannis, Authore Johan. Lightfoot, 4o. The Controversial Letters, or the grand Controversie con∣cerning the pretended Authority of Popes, and the true Soveraign of Kings in their respective Kingdoms. 4o. A brief Account of some Travels in Hungaria, Servia, Bulgaria, Macedonia, Thessaly, &c. as also some Obser∣vations on the Gold, Silver, Copper, Quicksilver Mines, Baths, and Mineral Waters in those parts, with Figures. 4o. A Sermon preach'd at the Spittle by the Lord Bishop of Down. 4o. An English Inquisition for an Heretick: A Visitation Ser∣mon by R. Neville. 4o.
Chr. Merret, M. D. Pinax rerum Naturalium Britanni∣carum. 8o. The State of Christianity in England, and of its Decay and Danger from Sectaries as well as Papists. 4o. Some few Questions concerning the Oath of Allegiance, propos'd by a Catholick Gentleman, in a Letter to a Per∣son of Learning and Honour. Two Letters of Advice; I. For susception of Holy Or∣ders. II. For studies Theological, especially such as are Rational. 8o Poems and Songs, by Tho. Flatman. 8o. Elenchus Antiquitatum Albionensium, Britannorum, Sco∣torum, Danorum Anglo-Saxonum, &c. per D. Lang∣horn. 8o. The Colloquies of Erasmus, in English. 8o. The French Gardiner. Translated out of French by Jo. E∣velyn Esq 8o. DEUS NOBISCUM: A Narrative of a great Delive∣rance at Sea, by W. Johnson, D.D. 8o. Of Gardens, Four Books, first written in Latin Verse by Renatus Rapinus, and now made English by John Eve∣lyn Esq 8o. Phaedri Fabularum Esopiarum, Libri 5. in usum Schola∣rum Angliae. 8o. A Priest to the Temple, or the Country Parson's Character and Rule of Holy Life, by Mr. Geo. Herbert. 8o. A Letter of Advice to a Young Gentleman leaving the U∣niversity, concerning his Behaviour and Conversation in the World, by R. Lingard, D.D. 12o. Junii Juvenalis, & Persii Satyr. in usum Scholae Westem. 12o. FINIS.
