E934 18411138 107511
DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms By the Lords Justices, A PROCLAMATION. Tho. Cantuar. J. Sommers C. S. Pembroke C. P. S. Shrewsbury. WHereas We formerly received Information from the Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading to the East Indies, That one Henry Every, Commander of the Ship called the Phansie alias Charles, of Fourty six Guns, and One hundred and thirty Men, had, under English Colours, committed several Acts of Piracy upon the Seas of India or Persia, whereupon We Issued a Proclamation, bearing Date the Seventeenth Day of July last, for the Taking and Apprehend∣ing the said Henry Every, and such other Persons as were with him in the said Ship, in Order to have them Punished as Pirates and common Robbers upon the High Seas; And whereas We have since the Issuing the said Proclamation received further Information from the said Gover∣nour and Company of Merchants Trading to the East Indies, That the said Henry Every hath changed his Name, and now goes by the Name of Henry Bridgman, and that James Cray, Thomas Summerton, Edward Kirwood, William Down, John Reddy, John Stroger, Nathaniel Pike, Peter Soanes, Henry Adams, Francis Frennier, Thomas Johnson, Joseph Dawson, Samuel Dawson, James Lewis, John Sparks, Joseph Goss, Charles Falconer, James Murray, Robert Rich, John Miller, John King, Edward Savill, William Philips, Thomas Jope and Thomas Belisha, together with several others whose Names are not yet Discovered (amongst whom were Fifty two Frenchmen, Fourtéen Danes, and others of other Nations) were with the said Henry Every alias Bridgman, in the said Ship Phansie, when the several Acts of Piracy were committed, and were Aiding and Assisting therein, and shared in the Plunder so by them Piratically taken, to the amount of One thousand Pounds a Man or thereabouts; And whereas We are Informed, That the said Henry Every alias Bridgman, with several other Persons above named, have, since they committed such Acts of Piracy, left the said Ship in the Island of Providence, and are arrived in Ireland in Two small Sloops, and have there dispersed themselves, some of which Persons remain there, and others are come into this Kingdom and the Kingdom of Scotland, as Two of their Accomplices, who are now Taken and in Custody, have Confessed and Declared: We have therefore thought fit (by the Advice of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council) to Issue this Proclamation, here∣by Declaring, That the said Henry Every alias Bridgman, together with the said several Persons above named, and others, English∣men, Scotchmen, and Foreigners, to the Number of about One hundred and thirty, did Steal and Run away with the said Ship from the Port of Corunna in Spain; and that neither the said Henry Every alias Bridgman, nor any of the Persons abovenamed had any Commission or Authority from His Majesty to Command the said Ship, or the Men therein; but that the said Henry Every alias Bridgman, and the several other Persons abovenamed, and such others as were with them in the said Ship, are Pirates and Rob∣bers upon the High Seas. And We do hereby Charge and Command all His Majesties Admirals, Captains, and other Officers at Sea, and all His Majesties Governours and Commanders of any Forts, Castles or other Places in His Majesties Plantations, and all other Officers and Persons whatsoever, to Seize and Apprehend the said Henry Every alias Bridgman, James Cray, Thomas Summerton, Edward Kirwood, William Down, John Reddy, John Stroger, Nathaniel Pike, Peter Soanes, Henry Adams, Francis Frennier, Thomas Johnson, Joseph Dawson, Samuel Dawson, James Lewis, John Sparks, Joseph Goss, Charles Falconer, James Murray, Robert Rich, John Miller, John King, Edward Savill, William Philips, Thomas Jope, and Thomas Belisha, and such others as were with them in the said Ship, (who may probably be known and discovered by the great Quantities of Gold and Silver of Foreign Coins which they have with them) in order that they may be brought to Iustice, and suffer the just Punishment of the Law, as Pi∣rates upon the High Seas. And We do hereby further Declare, That in case any of the Persons abovenamed (except the said Henry Every alias Bridgman) or any other Persons who were in the said Ship with the said Henry Every alias Bridgman, shall Discover the said Henry Every alias Bridgman, or any other of the Persons abovenamed, so as they may be Seized and Ta∣ken, in order to be brought to Iustice, he and they making such Discovery shall have His Majesties Gracious Pardon for their Ofences. And We do hereby further Declare, That such Person or Persons, or any other Person or Persons who shall Discover the said Henry Every alias Bridgman, so as he may be Seized or Taken, or shall be otherwise Instrumental in Sei∣zing the said Henry Every alias Bridgman, he or they making such Discovery or Seizure, shall have the Reward of Five hundred Pounds promised in the said former Proclamation, for the Discovery and Seizure of the said Henry Every. And that in case any Person or Persons shall Discover any of the other Persons abovenamed, so as they may be Seized or Taken, or shall be otherwise Instrumental in Seizing any of the said Persons, he or they making such Discovery or Seizure, shall have a Re∣ward of Fifty Pounds for every of the said Persons, whom he or they shall so Discover or Seize, which said several Sums of Five hundred Pounds and Fifty Pounds, the Lords Commissioners of His Majesties Treasury are hereby Required and Di∣rected to Pay accordingly. Given at the Council Chamber in Whitehall, the Tenth Day of August, 1696. In the Eighth Year of His Majesties Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.
