F1407 12565781 63323
THE HISTORY OF THE OLD and NEW TESTAMENT, Extracted out of Sacred Scripture AND WRITINGS of the FATHERS To which are added The Lives, Travels and Sufferings of the APOSTLES; with a Large and Exact Historical Chronology of all the Affairs and Actions related in the BIBLE. The Whole Illustrated with Two hundred thirty four SCULPTURES, And Three MAPS. Delineated and Engraved by good Artists. Translated from the Sieur DE ROYAUMONT, By several Hands: Supervised and Recommended by Dr. Horneck, and other Orthodox Divines. The Second Edition, Corrected. LONDON: Printed for S. and J. Sprint, C. Brome, J. Nicholson, J. Pero, and Benj. Tooke. 1699.
TO THE WORSHIPFUL Jeffrey Jeffreys Esq OF Llywell, in the County of Brecknock, One of the SHERIFS Elect for the City of London and County of Middlesex. THE First Edition of this BOOK having receiv'd its Life, in a great measure, from the Generous Encou∣ragement of your Self and your Worthy Fa∣mily,
we take the boldness to place this Second Impression also under your favourable Patronage: Humbly hoping, that you'll be pleased to excuse this Presumption in Your most Humble Servants, The EDITORS.
The PREFACE to the READER. THERE is nothing more established by Consent of all the FATHERS, than the Respect and Veneration which Christians ought to have for the WORD OF GOD, and the Care wherewith they ought to search into it, for the Rules of their Salvation. And as those Holy Men were all acquainted with the depth of the SCRIPTURE, which is so full of Mysteries, veiled under Figures and Parables, they have made some di∣stinction between these Divine Works, which are not all alike intelligible, tho' all equally Holy. Wherefore they supposed, That the Historical Books, which represent to us the Lives of the Patriarchs, and the rest of those admirable Saints, that had an Apostolical Chari∣ty so many Ages before the Apostles, were very proper to awaken our Piety, and instruct us by Examples, proportion'd to the Capacity of the meanest Believers. 'Tis upon that account St. Basil tells us, That the Scripture (in recording the Lives of the first Saints, doth set before us so many living and animated Pictures, for a Rule to direct ours by. St. Chrysostom (for the same Reason) being desirous to teach his Auditors the Duties of a Christian Life, made it his Business to expound the whole Book of Genesis to them in his Sermons. St. Ambrose also wrote several excellent Discourses upon the Lives of the principal Patriarchs, to make Christians blush, who having before their Eyes the Life and Death of our Saviour JESUS CHRIST so divinely described in the Gospel, are notwithstanding less Followers of him, than those who lived so many Ages be∣fore him, and when the Face of the whole Earth was covered with the Darkness of Impiety and Idolatry. In imitation therefore of those Holy Teachers it is, that we again set forth the Lives of those very Saints, whom they have recommended with so many Elogies in this Abridg∣ment of the History of the Old and New Testament. They are here represented in short; but yet so, that care has been taken to deduce at large whatsoever was most proper to touch. the Souls of Men, and to inspire them with the Sentiments of Piety. And to the end this Work might be more proportion'd to the Capacities of all, and the Instructions it contains, made more useful by illustrating them with something that's pleasing, These Holy Histories are represented in SCULPTURES, accompanying each Discourse, which are generally concluded with the Explications of the Fathers, as containing most excellent Instructions for Christians, whatsoever State or Condition they are in. He who applies himself a little to the reading of the Book, will soon be convinced of its usefulness. He will find excellent Patterns for Kings and Princes, for Governours and Magistrates, for Ministers of the Church, and in a word, for all such as desire to lead a true Christian Life: And therefore St. Gregory saith, That from the Patriarchs we may take the perfect Models of all Vertues: Abel (saith he) teaches us Innocence; Enoch, Purity of Heart; Noah, Perseverance in Righteousness; Abraham, the Perfection of Obedience; Isaac, Chastity in Wedlock; Jacob, Constancy in Labour; Joseph, For∣getting of Injuries; Moses, Meekness towards the most Obstinate and Rebellious; and lastly, Job, an invincible Patience in the height of all his Sufferings and Afflictions. When the Scripture is read alone, it is not so easie for all Men, to draw from thence the edifying Instructions those Holy Histories contain; but here without pains they will find them applied to every History, being carefully gathered from the Works of the Fathers and Doctors of the Church. The Authors Thoughts at first were, to set down the very Words of the Saints, as re∣corded in Scripture, in a different Character; but they were oft found too prolix to be con∣tain'd in the small space which was left after the Relation of each History; neither would
they have had that brisk and lively Brevity, which is so necessary to Reflexions upon an Historical Discourse: Therefore he was obliged to abridge them; yet so, as to preserve all the Essential Terms, and exactly to express their Sense, without tying himself to the num∣ber of their Words. The Reflexions of the FATHERS upon the Examples and Words of Holy Scripture, are the more considerable, because they tell us, That they thought themselves obliged on these occasions to lay open, and apply the greatest Truths with all possible force and evidence. To this purpose St. Austin expresses himself in these following remarkable Words; When we converse with you (saith he to his Auditors) at other times, we rather bear with you, than instruct you; but when we are in this Holy Place, and expound to you the Books of GOD, in case the Truths we propound to you seem too smart, the necessity which lies upon us of expounding the Scripture, will plead our Excuse for the Liberty with which we represent what GOD himself speaks to you. If the Word of GOD doth astonish you, so it doth me; I am as apprehensive of its Threats as you are, and whilst I speak those things that make you tremble, I am affected with the same Passion my self. The Reader possibly may observe in the Sequel of the Book, that some of these Figures are not well chosen, and that some Histories are left out, which seem no less considerable than those set down; but this can be no prejudice to the whole Body of the Work, and the Sequel of these Discourses, care being taken to link them together as well as possible, without regard had to the Sculptures, many important Matters being touched at in the Reflexions which are not represented in the Sculptures, and chiefly to enlarge on these Circumstances of the Scripture, from whence the Fathers have drawn their Edifying Observations, which is the main End of this Work▪ In the Margin is added the Years from the Creation of the World, and those before our Saviour; which are to be understood according to the common Computation of the Years from the Birth of Jesus Christ. It has been thought fit to add the Contents or Summaries of the several Books of the Old Testament, that the Reader might have an Idea of the whole; as also that in those Books where Sculptures and Discourses are more rare, or altogether omitted; that Defect may be supplied, by giving a short Account of the Matter therein contained. At the end of the New Testament is Printed, as an APPENDIX, the Lives, Travels, and Voyages of the Apostles, with the Contents of each of their Books, as also an Histo∣rical Chronology; in which, if the Reader cast an Eye, he will without trouble discern the Order of the Time, and the Sequel of all these Histories. There is no reason but to hope, that the reading of this Book may make some Impression on the Hearts of those who desire nothing more than their advance and growth in Piety; because Truths ought never more to affect us, than when GOD himself teaches us them in his Holy Scriptures; and when the Holy Men of GOD (full of his Spirit) do from them point out to us the way to Heaven, which he has traced out for us in the Lives of those Saints of the Old Testament, and which he hath Sealed in the New with the Blood of JESUS CHRIST himself.
An Account of the SCULPTURES and DISCOURSES in this Volume, with the Names of the PATRONS to the same. 1 CReation of the World The King. 2 Creation of Adam and Eve The Queen. 3 Fall of Adam Prince George. 4 Adam's Punishment Princess Ann. 5 Murther of Abel William Duke of Glocester. 6 The Ark of Noah Jeffrey Jeffreys Esq 7 The Deluge Jeffrey Jeffreys Esq 8 Quitting of the Ark Mrs. Sarah Jeffreys. 9 Ham Cursed Sir William Robinson. 10 Tower of Babel Lady Mary Ratcliff. 11 Call of Abram Sir Gilbert Gerrard. 12 Lot parts from Abram Algernon E. of Hertford. 13 Abraham delivers Lot Mr. Edward Jeffreys. 14 The Flight of Hagar Mr. William Proctor. 15 Sarah's Conception Mrs. Ann Proctor. 16 Lot entertains two Angels Sir Robert Clayton. 17 Sodom burnt Algernon Earl of Essex. 18 Abimelech afflicted Henry Duke of Beauford. 19 Ishmael driven out John Rossiter Esq 20 Abraham's Sacrifice Lady Ann Franklyn. 21 Sarah's Death Mr. Thomas Lewes. 22 Marriage of Isaac Mrs. Elizabeth Child. 23 Jacob and Esau John Baker Esq 24 Isaac blessed Jacob Robert Squib Esq 25 Jacob's Ladder Mrs. Susanna Browne. 26 Rachel and Leah Mr. William Benge. 27 Jacob's Return John Jeffreys Esq 28 Jacob's Wrestling Col. Tho. Strangways. 29 Dinah Capt. Benjamin Poole. 30 Joseph sold Mrs. Elizabeth Jeffreys. 31 Joseph's Chastity Godfrey Kneller Esq 32 Joseph advanced Mr. James Craggs. 33 Joseph's Brethren James Mundy Esq 34 Joseph and his Brethren Richard Cheney Esq 35 Jacob goes to Egypt Sir Edwine Sadleir. 36 Egyptian Midwifes Mr. William Bailley. 37 Moses saved Mr. John Cage. 38 The Burning Bush Mr. Richard Powys. 39 Moses with Pharaoh Zachary Wells M. A. 40 Plagues of Egypt Mr. William Bailley. 41 Paschal Lamb   42 Passage over the Red-Sea Sir Henry Johnson. 43 Raining down Manna Thomas Ryves Esq 44 Water from the Rock Sir Tho. Cooke. 45 Amalek defeated Col▪ Jacob Richards. 46 The First Tables Elizabeth Lady Coriton. 47 The Golden Calf Sir James Tillie. 48 The Second Tables Hon. Bridget Noel. 49 Nadab and Abihu Mr. William Wekett. 50 Blasphemers ston'd Andrew Wheler Esq 51 The twelve Spies Godfrey Richards Esq 52 Korah, Dathan, and Abiram Mr. Richard Powys. 53 Brazen Serpent Mrs. Mary Barington. 54 Balaam's As Richard Cheney Esq 55 Moses Death Hon. Juliano Boyle. 56 Passage over Jordan George Cholmondeley Esq 57 Taking Jericho   58 Destruction of Hai George Cholmondeley Esq 59 The Sun stands still Sir Thomas Cooke. 60 Adonibezek's Punishment Mr. Francis Calvert. 61 The Death of Sisera. Mrs. Bridget Dawes. 62 Gideon's Sacrifice Hon. Rich. Onslow. 63 Gideon's Fleece Sir Richard Haddock. 64 Gideon's Soldiers Major John Cass. 65 Midianites defeat Major John Fuller. 66 Abimelech's Death Mrs. Susanna Strangwayes. 67 Jephtha's Daughter Algernon Earl o Essex. 68 Sampson's Birth   69 Sampson's slays the Philistins Mr. Edw. Hilder. 70 Gates of Gaza Thomas Vincent Esq 71 Samson's Death Mr. Samuel Lash. 72 Levites Wife abused Mrs. Elizabeth Leak. 73 The Benjamites Punishment.   74 Ruth followeth Naomi Mrs. Lucy Chauntler. 75 Boaz and Ruth Katherine Lady North. 76 Samuel given to Ely Mr. Nicholas Jeffreys. 77 Punishment of Ely Mrs. Ann Jeffreys. 78 Idol of Dagon Mr. William Proctor. 79 Ark sent back Ann Lady Wyndham. 80 Philistins Defeat Sir Samuel Gerard. 81 Anointing Saul Col. Jacob Richards. 82 Jonathan, &c. Hon. Susanna Noel. 83 Agag spared Sir William Thomson. 84 David plays on the Harp Mary Lady Thomson. 85 Goliah slain Sir Thomas Mompesson. 86 David's Triumph Mr. James Cragg. 87 Saul designs David's Death Rob. Baker Esq 88 David and Jonathan Peter Birch D. D. 89 Abigal treats David Mary Lady Goodricke. 90 David spares Saul Mr. Anthony Segar. 91 David flies to K. Achi Rob. Squib Esq 92 Saul and Jonathan's Death Sir Henry Goodricke. 93 Philistins offer Saul's Head Jo. Charlton Esq 94 Uzzah smitten Sir Thomas Littleton. 95 David danceth before the Ark W. Meesers Esq 96 David's Embassadors Christopher Musgrave Esq 97 David's Crime William Boulter Esq 98 David's Repentance Charles Berie Esq 99 Death of Amnon Mr. John Blake. 100 Absalom's Death Capt. Jonath. Andrews. 101 Death of Seba Mr. Samuel Crich. 102 Judgment of the Plague Mr. John Hooper. 103 Solomon made King Mr. Christoph Gardiner. 104 Solomon's Judgment Lady Cath. Cornbury. 105 Dedication of the Temple Richard Pierce Esq 106 The Queen of Sheba.   107 Fall of Solomon Peter Rycaut Esq 108 Rehoboam's Counsellors Lord Vic. Newport. 109 Disobedient Prophet Mr. Edward Hubbald. 110 Zimri burnt Mr. Thomas Smith. 111 Elijah fed by Ravens Mr. william Wekett. 112 Elijah's Sacrifice White Tichborne Esq 113 Flight of Elijah Mrs. Mary James. 114 Jehosaphat's Piey William James Esq 115 Death o Aab Thomas Vincent Esq 116 Elijah taken to Heaven Mary Lady Reve. 117 Children slain by Beas Lady Ann Morpeth. 118 Miracle of Elisha Mrs. Jane Jeffreys. 119 Healing of Naaman Mrs. Sarah Jeffreys. 120 Siege of Samaria Capt. Richard Leake. 121 Elisha's Predictions Mrs. Susanna Henshaw. 122 Jezebel devoured by Dogs Mr. Laur. Spencer.
123 A dead Man raised to life Sir George Rivers. 124 Zachary stoned Sir Robert Napier. 125 King Ahaz John Lethieullier Esq 126 King Hezekiah Mrs. Elizabeth Gerard. 127 Senacherib's Defeat Mr. Nath. Bromley. 128 Hezekiak restored Mr. Francis Forbes. 129 Josiah's Piety Gentilles Lady Tichborne▪ 130 The Siege of Jerusalem Robert Lord Lucas. 131 Jehojachin restored Sir Thomas Duppa. 132 K. Cyrus's Proclamation Josiah Child Esq 133 Jerusalem re-built Mr. William Fitch. 134 Queen Hester Lady Ann Franklyn. 135 Hester's Humility Alice Lady Royston. 136 Mordecai's Triumph Mr. John Hayward. 137 Haman's Punishment Mrs. Ann Johnson. 138 Job on the Dunghil Rachel Countess of Bristol. 139 Job's Friends Isabel Dutchess of Grafton. 140 King David Mrs. Lucy Wright. 141 King Solomon   142 Prophet Isaiah   143 Prophet Jeremiah Mrs. Bridget Peshal. 144 Prophet Ezekiel Mr. William Layfield. 145 Ezekiel's second Vision Mary Lady Reve. 146 Prophet Daniel Madam Graham. 147 Children in the Furnace George Courthorp Esq 148 Nebuchadnezzar   149 Belshazzar condemned Mr. Sam. Wolrich. 150 Daniel in the Lions Den Edw. Lord Ratclif. 151 Daniel's Visions Mr. James Oades. 152 Jonah cast overboard Capt. John Bromhil. 153 Ninevites repent Charles L. Visc. Fanshaw. 154 Jonas's Gourd Godfrey Richards Esq The New Testament. 155 THE Salutation Eliz. Lady Gerard. 156 The Visitation Sir Gilbert Gerard. 157 The Nativity Henry Duke of Beauford. 158 Appearing of the Angels Lady Eliz Gerard. 159 Circumcision Mr. William Benge. 160 Adoration Jeffrey Jeffreys Esq 161 Purification Mrs. Sarah Jeffreys▪ 162 Flight into Egypt Mr. Anthony Segr. 163 The Dispute with the Doctors.   164 The Baptism Juliana Lady Boyle. 165 Temptation Francis Lord Visc. Newport. 166 Marriage in Canaan Mrs. Charlott Rycaut. 167 Nicodemus Mr. Sam. Woolrich. 168 Samaritan Woman Mary Lady Goodrick, 169 Tempest appeased Mrs. Frances Mosley. 170 Possest man healed Sir Robert Clayton. 171 Sick of the Palsey cured Sir . 172 Sermon on the Mount Mrs. Henrietta Brown. 173 Judge not Archibald Primrose Esq 174 Leprous Person healed Andrew Wheler Esq 175 A dead man raised Mrs. Bridget Blake. 176 Mary Magdlen Mr Thomas Lewes. 177 Parable of the Seed John Rossiter Esq 178 Beheading St. John Ann Lady Morpeh. 179 Miracle of the Loaves Richard Whitworth Esq 180 St. Peter on the Sea   181 Canaanitish Woman Mrs. Eliz. Hubbald. 182 Transfiguration Jane Lady Spencer. 183 Type of Humility Mr. David Hamilton. 184 Lepers healed Eliz. Lady Onslow. 185 The Adulterous Woman Godfrey Kneller Esq 186 The Man born blind Mrs. Ann Brown. 187 Good Samaritan Mrs. Catherine Dormer. 188 Martha and Mary Gentilles Lady Titchborne. 189 Folly of Riches Eliz. Lady Coriton. 190 Prodigal Son John Jeffreys Esq 191 Dives and Lazarus Mrs. Eliz Jeffreys. 192 Pharisee and Publican Katherine Lady North. 193 The Labourers White Titchbourn Esq 194 Lazarus's Resurrection. Mr. Samuel Aubrey. 195 Zacheus Conversion Tho. Rawlinson Esq 196 Christ riding to Jerusalem Robert L. Lucas. 197 Buyers and Sellers Mrs. Bridget Daw. 198 Wedding Garment Mr. Henry Hayward. 199 Parable of the Talents Mr. Tho. Jenney. 200 Last Judgment Francis Ashenhurst M. A. 201 Last Supper. Sir James Tillie. 202 Christ in the Garden Mr. Edw. Jeffreys. 203 Judas's Treason Mr. Nicholas Jeffreys. 204 Christ's Examination Mrs. Ann Jeffreys 205 Christ's Scourging Mrs. Jane Jeffreys. 206 Ecce Homo Mrs. Sarah Jeffreys. 207 Carrying the Cross Mrs. Eliz. Cass. 208 Crucifixion Mrs. Mary Barington. 209 Christ in the Sepulchre Mr. Rob. Pierce. 210 Resurrection Lady Eliz. Seymor. 211 Disciples go to Emaus Mrs. Susanna Henshaw. 212 Ascension Kathërine Countess of Rutland. 213 Pentecost Mrs. Mary Forbes. 214 Lame Man healed Barbara Visc. Fitzharding. 215 Ananias and Saphira Mr. Samnel Cricke. 216 St. Stephen stoned   217 Eunuch baptized   218 Conversion of Paul Rachel Countess of Bristol. 219 Cornelius baptized   220 St. Peter's delivery Mr. George Spencer. 221 Lame man cured Mr. William Layfield. 222 St. Paul's Shipwreck Capt. John Nicholson. 223 Golden Candlesticks Sir Henry Goodrick. 224 The Heavens opened John Charleton Esq 225 The Seals of a Book Sir Thomas Littleton. 226 The Angels and Trumpets W. Meessers Esq 227 The Grashopper Christopher Musgrove Esq 228 Vision of St. John William Boulter Esq 229 Death of the two Prophets Charles Berie Esq 230 Beast of the Apocalyps Mr. Anthony Fist. 231 Dragon of the Apocalyps Mr. John Hooper. 232 Kingdom of Babylon Mr. Chr. Gardiner 233 Dragon chained Mr. Thomas Smith. 234 The New Jerusalem Dorothea Lady Rivers. Map of Jerusalem John Jeffreys Esq Map of the Voyages and Travels of the Apostles William Lowther Esq
The Terrestrial Paradise, and Neighbouring Countries. With a brief Discourse of the TRAVELS of the PATRIARCHS, From ADAM to JACOB. THE Eternal GOD having out of Nothing created the Heavens, the Earth, the Seas, and all things therein contained; He formed Man according to his own Image, and so dig∣nified and honoured him, that he made him Lord over the Fish of the Sea, the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Earth, and every Creeping thing therein; and gave him for his habitation the Garden of Eden, call'd Paradise, which for its beauty, pleasant situation, and fer∣tility, surpassed all the Countries on the face of the Earth; and therefore rightly call'd, The Garden of Pleasure. It was situated in the Land of Shinar, a Province in Asia, upon the River Tigris, which in Scripture is called Pison: This River divides it self into four Branches, and each hath its particular Name. Now the better to make out the true situa∣tion of this Garden, we must remember that Moses saith in Genesis, Chap. 2. vers. 8. That God had planted a Garden in Eden, Eastward; and in the 10th Verse, That a River went out of Eden to water the Garden, and thence divided it self into four Heads; that is, into four great Channels, or Capital Rivers. It is a certain demonstration, that it was situate Eastward of Pison, being the only River that water'd it, and retain'd that Name; and tho' one part of the Garden extended West∣ward, yet Adam had his abode in the Eastern quarter, as appears by Chap. 3. ver. 24. where it is said, Adam being driven out, God placed Cherubims at the East of the Garden, to hinder him from entring in again. And (according to Chap. 2. ver. 16.) it is related, That Cain went forth from before the Lord, and inhabited in the Land of Nod, which lay to the East of Eden; and that which renders this the more credible is, that this River, for its breadth, depth, and rapid Stream, (excelling the Rhine, or the Danube) must needs have hindred our First Pa∣rents from going out of the Garden Eastwards, if they had their habitation in the Western part thereof, since they had neither Bridge nor Boat, to cross over the River; for the Scripture speaks not a word of either▪ nor makes the least mention of any way they had for Navi∣gation before the Ark of Noah. Hence it fol∣lows, that several Ancient Geographers have been very much mistaken, in placing the Garden of Eden to the West of Pison. This River (as aforesaid) is divided into four Heads or Branches, viz. two to the North, or above the Garden; and two to the South, or below the Garden; and were call'd, Pison, Gi∣hon, Hiddekel, and Euphrates: And thus they are described in Genesis, Chap. 11. ver. 11, 13. and 14. The name of the first is Pison, and this compasseth the whole Land of Havilah, where there is Gold; the name of the second River, is Gihon, the same is that which encom∣passeth the whole Land of Ethiopia; the name of the third River is Hiddekel, which goeth towards the East of Assyria; and the name of the fourth, is Euphrates. The Euphrates takes its sourse from the Mochian, or Caspian Mountains, situate in Armenia the Great; the Hiddekel begins its course from a certain Lake seated at the first rising of Mount Ararat: These two Streams fall down together, and joyn in Pison, at the Upper-end of the Garden, which having washt, they separate again at the Bottom thereof, where the more Eastern part retains the name, and the more Western is called Gihon; hence they run towards the Persian Sea, into which they empty themselves. Our First Parents being placed in this Garden of Pleasure, had the free use of all things, except the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, Gen. 2.17. which was strictly for∣bidden them by God; telling them, That in the day they eat thereof, they should die the death: But the Devil envying the happy condition of Man, stirs up the Serpent to tempt Eve, to taste the Fruit of the said Tree; telling her, That they should not dye; but that their Eyes should be opened, and be as Gods. With these sly Enticements and Lies of the Serpent, Eve was prevailed with to eat thereof, and gave it to Adam to eat also, who was also infatuated to Transgress God's Com∣mand; and so fell by their Disobedience into Sin and Destruction, and were driven out of Paradise, and condemned to get their Living by the Sweat of their Brows; and for their Transgression the Earth was accurs'd, and
caused to abound with Thorns and Thistles. After this, they had their Habitation on the East of Paradise, in the Land of Nod, which was also called Susiana, and at this day Susan; where they employed their time in cultivating the Earth; and had two Sons, the elder named Cain, who was a Tiller of the Earth, and the younger named Abel, who was a Keeper of Sheep, and was murthered by Cain, as being transported with hatred against him. Cain being severely reproved, and accurst by God for this bloody Crime, and being con∣vinc'd of the heinousness thereof, falls into great despair and perplexity of Mind; and fearing lest every one that met him should kill him, goes forth from the presence of God into the Land of Nod, and there builds a City for his security, and calls it Enoch, after the Name of his first Son: Upon the Ruins of this City it may be presumed, that the Town of Susan was afterwards built, as being situate near Eden, Westward of the Mountains of Ararat, and upon the River Euleus, called Ulac; where Cain was palpably stopt in his flight from the Presence of the Lord, as not being able to pass over this River. Men increasing more and more in Wicked∣ness, were at last overtaken by Divine Ven∣geance, in the Year of the World 1656, by the Deluge, which drown'd all living Crea∣tures upon the face of the Earth, except Noah and his Family, and those Creatures which God caused to be taken into the Ark, for the replenishing the Second World. This Ark having floated up and down on the Wa∣ters, (above the highest tops of Mountains) for the space of about five Months, it pleased the LORD to let it rest at last upon the Mountains of Ararat; and after that the Waters were sunk, and retired into their pro∣per place, faithful Noah (and all that were with him in the Ark) went out, and betook themselves to the East of the River Hiddekel, from whence the Posterity of Noah disperst themselves East and West, denominating from their Names, the several Countries where they took up their habitations; and therefore we can do no less than adjoyn here their Ge∣nealogy▪ for the better adjusting the Names of the Countries set down in the Map with those of the several Families; and making out the more distinctly where each of the Descendents of this Patriarch planted themselves, with their Families, according to what we find in Scripture, and the Annotations upon it. Noah had three Sons, Shem, Ham (or Cham) and Japhet. The Children of Shem had for their Portion, the more Southern part of Asia and America; the Posterity of Ham had the Land of Canaan, Arabia, Egypt, and all Africa; and the Children of Japhet had Europe, with the North parts of Asia and America. The Sons of Shem were Elam, Assur, Ar∣phaxad, Lud, and Aram. Elam was the Fa∣ther of the Elamites, that is, of the Inhabi∣tants of the Lands of Susiana, Elymais, and Persia, Dan. 8.2. where the Prophet saith, that Susa, or Susari, seated on the River Ulai, is a City in the Lands of Elan; where (according to Strabo) the Persian Monarchs kept their Courts, as being the Imperial City of the Se∣cond Monarchy, and was reckon'd 15 Italian Miles in circuit. From Assur the Assyrians were descended, whose chief City was Nineveh, once a City of great Fame, first built by Nimrod, and afterwards so enlarged by several succeeding Kings, that it became at last to exceed Baby∣lon, as well in largeness as otherwise, its Walls being in circuit 60 Miles, in height about 33 Yards, and in breadth about 24; for its defence were on the Walls 1500 Turrets, or Towers. To this City the LORD sent Jonah the Prophet to preach Repentance to them; but afterwards (for their Sins) it was destroy'd by Astyages King of the Medes, out of whose Ruins was built Mosul, the chief City of Assyria, seated on the Tygris, of Note for being the Residence of the Nestorian Patri∣arch, where are founded fifteen Christian Churches: It is enclosed with a Wall, and is the Residence of a Basha. From Arphaxad descended the Babylonians and Chaldeans, called Casdim, who was the Father of Selah, and he of Heber, who gave name to the Hebrews; this Heber had two Sons, Peleg and Joktan; Peleg, because in his time the World was divided into Colonies; of Peleg was begat Rehu; of Rehu, Serug, of Serug, Nahor; of Nahor, Thare; and of Thare, Abram, Nachor and Haram, and Abram had Isaac, and Isaac, Jacob. From Nachor sprung Uz, Buz, Chemuel, Aram, Chesed, Hazo, Pildas and Bethuel, who was the Father of Laban and Rebecca; and from Haram sprang Lot. Joktan, Arphaxad's second Son, had a large Issue, viz. Almodad, Saleph, Hazerma∣veth, Jerah, Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, Obal, Abi∣mael, Sheba, Ophir, Havilah and Jobab: These spread themselves from Mesha to Sephar; as
is mentioned Gen. 10.25. Divers of the Learn∣ed understand by Meshah the Hill Masium, which is a part of the Mountains of Armani; and by Sephar the City Sipphara, seated in Meso∣potamia, on the River Euphrates: But there is more ground to believe, that their habitations were from the River Tygris towards the East, to the farthest parts of the East-Indies; yet nevertheless, Elam's Posterity inhabited also between the Borders of these large Lands: For the Land of Havilah borders towards the West, on the Spring-head of the River Pison, which is an Arm of the Tygris; and Ophir, the Brother of Havilah, is reckon'd to be the Father of the Inhabitants of Pegu, Sian, and Aurea Chersonesus, or the Golden Peninsula, where stands the City of Malacca, a place of great Resort and Trade, occasioned by its commodious situation on the River Gaza, and is a very large City. From the Land of Ophir, Solomon's Ships brought Gold, Precious Stones, and other rich Commodities, performing their Voyage in Three years, 1 Kings 9.26. and 10.12, 22. For this Reason Benedictus Arius Montanus understands by Sephar, and the Mountains to∣wards the East, the Land and Mountains of Peru; and saith, That the Gold that covered Solomon's Temple was therefore called, Gold of Peraim. Also the name of the Land of Jucatan, which lies between Mexico and the Island of Haitai, otherwise called Spaniola, sounds very like Joktan, who was Ophir's Father. From Lud, another of Shem's Sons, descended the Lydians, and other Countries in Asia▪ Minor. From Aram sprang the Syrians, as also those of Mesopotamia and Armenia. These great Kingdoms, and their particular Provinces, are in Scripture called the Land of Aram; altho' they are distinguished by several Names, as Aram Damasci, Aram Zobe, Aram Naharam, that is, Aram between the two Rivers Euphra∣tes and Tygris, which Lands the Greeks call Mesopotamia, 2 Sam. 8.3, 5, & 10. The Chil∣dren of Aram are Uz, who is thought to have built the City of Damascus; he was the An∣cestor of the Coelo-Syrians, or Inhabitants of Trachonitis, or some other People bordering upon Idumea; and of this Country was Job, Job 1. From Hull are descended the Inha∣bitants of Palmyrene, or Armenia: From Ge∣ther descended the Bactrians, or those of Apa∣mea; and from Mash descended the People of Periah, Comagena, and Cyrestica; others allot to him Mysia. Noah's second Son, Ham, had Issue Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan. Cush, from whom Arabia the Stony, and the Desart, was originally denominated. These Countries were afterwards overcome by the Posterities of Abraham, the Edomites, and the Israelites, and by them possessed. The eldest Son of Cush was Nimrod the great Hunter, and the first Tyrant in the World; he began his Reign in Babylon, built Nineveh, Gen. Chap. 10. he was the Father of Sheba, Havila, Suba, Rama, and Subtecha. From Sheba are descended the Dwellers of Arabia the Stony and Desart; as also the Saaeans from Havilah; not him of the same name before mentioned amongst the Children of Joktan, of the Race of Shm, Gen. 10.25. for he is thought to have possest the Golden Chersoneses towards the Ganges; whereas this had for his Lot Guinea in Afri∣ca, both the one and the other Havilah, abounding in Gold. From Sabtah were de∣scended the Inhabitants of Arabia the Happy, where there was sometime a City called Sab∣botha. From Rama were descended the People that inhabit that part of Arabia the Happy, that borders on the Persian Sea, where Ptolomy places the City of Rhegama: The Sons of Rama were Sheba, the Father of the Ethio∣pians and the Abyssms; and Dedan, who was the Original of the Troglodytes, as may be gathered by the Merchandize mentioned in Ezekiel 27.15. and 38.13. And from Sheba came the Queen of Saba, or Sheba, to King Solomon, 1 King. 10.1. and here Reigned the Mighty Queen Candaces, Acts 8.27. And from Subtecha descended those of Arabia the Happy. Mizraim, from whom are descended (beside the Egyptians, who in Scripture bear that Name) those of Ludim, or the Lydians of Mauritania; Hananim, the Inhabitants of Marmarica and Cyreneans; Lehabim, the People of Lybia; Napthuhim, those of Nu∣midia; Pathrusim, those of Pathros, and the adjacent parts in Egypt; Casubin, the Inha∣bitants of Cassiotes, lying in the Entrance of Egypt coming from India; and the Caphto∣rims, (that is, the Inhabitants of Siur and o∣ther adjacent Countries): From these People are descended the Philistins and Caphtorius, Gen. 10.14. and 32.3. Deut. 2.22. Put, who possest that part of Lydia, where there is a River that bears that Name; and also Numidia, and other Countries towards the South of Mauritania, and Africa the Less,
are now called Barbary, Numidia, and Bile∣dulgerid; and those Lands further Southwards are called Azamaga, Gualata, Guinea, or the Land of the Negroes. Canaan, from whom descended the Cana∣anites; the Sidonites, so called from Sidon the eldest Son of Canaan; the Hittites, Jebusites, Amorites, Girgasites, Hivites, Arkites, Sinites, Aradites, Zemarites, and the Hamathites; and their Countries extended from Sidon unto Gaza, &c. Gen. 10.19. but almost all this Land of Canaan was (for the many grievous Sins of its Inhabitants) by God's Command, gi∣ven for an Inheritance to the Seed of Abraham. Noah's third Son was Japhet, who had Issue Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Mesec, and Tiras. Gomer, whose Off-spring inhabited to the North of Asia Minor, were Askenas, the Fa∣ther of the Inhabitants of Pontus and Bithy∣nia; they were called Ascanians, and held by the Scribes to be the Father of the Ger∣mans and French. Riphat, the Original of the Findlanders, Laplanders, and the Inhabi∣tants of Condora, Obdora, and Jougoria; where are the Hills of Riphai, called by the Inhabitants the Girdle of the World; and Togarma, from whom are derived (according to some) the Capadocians, according to others the Armenians, and according to others those of Sweden, Norway, and Denmark. Magog, the Father of the Scythians and Tartars. Madai, the Father of the Medes, 2 Kings 17.6. Joshua 13.17. Jer. 25.25. Dan. 5.28. and 6.1. and 8.20. Javan, the Father of the Greeks, most especially from him first called Ionians; his Sons were Elisa; from whom sprang the Aeolians, and the Inhabitants of the Pelopo∣nesus, now called the Morea, Ezek. 37.7. Tarsis, from whom descended the Spaniards, others say the Cilicians, whose Capital City was Tarsus, the Birth-place of Saint Paul. Kittim, who (according to Scripture) are those of Cyprus, Macedonia, and Italy. Dodanim, from whom came the Dorians, comprehending those of Caria, Rhodes, and Sicily, or (as o∣thers will have it) the Ancient Gauls, inha∣biting along the River Rhine. Tubal, from whom descended the Iberians, Albanians, and (some say) the Spaniards. Mesec, the Father of the Mysians, or the Muscovites, Poles, and other People, that use the Sclavonian Language. Tiras, from whom came the Thracians, and the Turks. The Blessing which Noah gave to Japhet came upon him, when he said, God spread forth Japhet, and let him dwell in the Tents of Shem, and let Canaan be his Servant. Which Blessing is accomplished, God giving him the Third and Fourth Monarchy of the World. The first Descendents of Noah, and his Three Sons, having but one Language spo∣ken amongst them, undertook to build a Tower, whose Top should reach to Heaven; which the LORD being offended with, sent a Confusion of Languages amongst them, so that they were constrained (as not under∣standing one another) to quit their design; insomuch that the Name of that place was called Babel, because the LORD did here confound their Language, and from hence disperst them into all Parts of the Earth, Gen. 11.9. Not far from this Babel is the City of Ur, the Dwelling place of Terah, or Tare, who was the Father of Abram, and Grandfather of Lot; who all departed together from this City, and came to Haran, where Terah died, Gen. 11.31. And soon after that Abram (according to the Commandment of God) departed with his Nephew Lot, and came into the Land of Canaan, Sojourning about Sichem, near the Plain or Forest of Moreh▪ Not long after he removed from thence, and pitched his Tents between Bethel and Hai, where he built an Altar, and called on the Name of the LORD, Gen. 12.8. From thence he drew Southwards, and they took up their Dwelling between Be∣thel and Hai; but that Country being not large enough for him, and his Nephew, by reason of the abundance of their Cattle, they separated; Lot chusing the Vale of Siddim, along the River Jordan, pitching his Tents as far as Sodom, Gen. 13.12. and Abram went and dwelt near Hebron, in the Plains of Mamre, Gen. 13.18. Here it was that Ishmael was Born to him of his Handmaid; Isaac is promised, and his Name changed from Abram to Abraham, Gen. 16, 17. Thence Abraham drawing Southward, he planted himself between Kedish and Shur, and So∣journed as a Stranger in Gerar, Gen. 20.1. At Gerar, Abraham received a Command from God, to sacrifice his Son Isaac upon one of the Mountains of Moriah; but God ha∣ving
hereby made sufficient proof of his Faith and Obedience, hindred the execution thereof, and promised him his Benediction, and provides a Ram for a Burnt-Offering in∣stead of Isaac. From thence Abraham goes and inhabits at Beersheba, Gen. 22.19 thence to Kirjarth-Arba, which is Hebron; where his Wife Sarah Died, and was buried in the Cave of Machpelah, over against Mamre, Gen. 23.19. After this, Abraham taking an Oath of Fidelity of his Servant, sent him to Nahor in Mesopotamia, to seek from amongst those of his Kindred a Wife for his own Son Isaac, who obtained Rebecca (the Daughter of Bethuel) and brings her into Canaan; where Isaac met her near the Well Laharoi, which is about a League distant from his Abode, Gn. 24. Abraham at 175 years of Age dies, and is buried (by his Sons Isaac and Ishmael) in the Cave of Machpelah, near Sarah his Wife. Isaac till then having made his Abode in the Valley of Gerar, returned to Beersheba; but the Children of Ishmael (being Twelve Prin∣ces) possest the Land of the Desert of Shur, and extended as far as Havilah, Gen. 25.18. This large extent of Ground was extream barren, and therefore called Arabia Deserta, and was first possest by the Children of Cush, who were drove out by the Posterity of Ishmael. Isaac had two Sons and Twins, Esau and Jacob; and Jacob (who was the youngest) by his Subtilty and Artifice deprived Esau of his Birth-right for a Mess of Potage, and also of his Father's Benediction; whereupon Esau sought to kill him; but by the Counsel of his Parents he retired to Padan-Aram, unto Laban his Mothers Brother; and Tra∣velling by Night, took up his Lodging in the Fields near Luz, gathering up Stones for his Pillow, and lay down to sleep thereon; and then he Dreamed, or had a Vision of a Ladder, whose Top reached up to Heaven, and the Angels of the LORD ascending and descending: Here he received the Pro∣mise of God, and for a Memorial he reared up the Stone, of which he had made his Pil∣low, and poured Oil on it, and called the Name of the place Bethel, Gen. 27. From thence in the Morning he Travelled towards the People of the East, where he met Rachel, the Daughter of his Uncle Laban, near Haran, and declares to her his Affinity; who straitway runs to her Father, and informs him thereof; who came out to meet him, and kindly receives him, Gen. 29.13. Jacob served Laban 20 years, as well for his two Daughters which he had Married, as for the Sallary agreed on be∣tween them; which (by the Blessing of God) being wonderfully improved, procured him the Envy not only of Laban's Sons, but of himself also; upon which he resolved to get privately away, and retire into Canaan with his Flocks and his Family; and having past the Euphrates in that tract of Way as is set down in the Map, Numb. 18. and kept on his Journey as far as Mount Gilead, he was overtaken on the seventh Day by Laban, who pursued him: But Laban being admo∣nish'd from Heaven, not to hurt Jacob, he dealt kindly with him, and a firm League and Covenant was made between them; and here they rais'd an Heap of Stones in Memorial of the Covenant, and called the name thereof Gilead, and Mizpah, Gen. 31. and from thence Laban returned home in peace. Jacob having in an Amicable manner taken leave of his Father-in-Law, and going for∣ward of his Journey, meets two Hosts of Angels appointed for his Safeguard, and named the place Mahanaim, and afterwards there builds a Town of the same Name. From hence Jacob, and all his Family, pass over the Ford of the Brook Jabbock, Gen. 32.22. And here it was that Jacob wrestled with God, was again Blessed of him, and obtained the Name of Israel, wherefore he called the name of the place Peniel, Gen. 22. Here he met his Brother Esau, who came against him with 400 Men, nevertheless they Embraced each other, and parted Friendly, Esau to his Dwellings in the Mountain Seir, and Jacob passing the River Jordan went from Succoth, and took his Habitation near Sichem in Canaan; and after the Murther of the Sichemites, upon the account of his Daughter Dinah, Gen. 34. he came to Bethel, and there built an Altar unto the LORD. From hence he advanced towards Ephrath, which is Bethlehem, and within a little way of the Place, Rachel died with the hard La∣bour of her Son Benjamin, and was there Buried, Gen. 35.19. and 48.7. Israel parting thence, he pitcheth his Tents towards the Tower of Heder; from thence he goes to Visit his Father Isaac in Mamre, at the City of Arkak, Gen. 35. Isaac being 180 years old, Dies, and his two Sons (Esau and Jacob) Bury him by his
Father Abraham, in the Cave or Sepulchre of Machpelah. Israel being compelled by Famine, which sore raged in the Land, and being invited by his Son Joseph, goes into Egypt, that is, the Land of Ham; where Joseph receives him with Joy and Duty, and entertains him with great Kindness and Liberality, giving him and his Family, which were 70 Persons, (with the consent of Pharaoh) the Land of Goshen for an Habitation. And Israel being very Old, died here, and was carried by his Son Joseph, and the rest of his Brethren, together with a great Train of Egyptians, very Magnificently into the Land of Canaan, and Buried in the Sepulchre of his Father and Grandfather at Machpelah, as aforesaid, Gen. 50.13. And this is the Sum of what is requisite to be said, for the understanding and use of this Map. ☞ In my large Volumes of the History of the Bible, there are four Maps, as also the Map of Jerusalem; Viz. in the Old Testa∣ment, that of Paradise; and that of the 40 years Travels of the Israelites; And in the New Testament, the Map of Canaan; and that of the Travels and Voyages of the Apostles. Of these Maps, that of the 40 years Travels of the Israelites, comprehends all that of Canaan; and that of the Travels of the Apostles, all that of Paradise, which takes up the Eastern part from the Island of Cyprus. And considering that these four large Maps, with that of Jerusalem, to be folded up, can't well be bound in this small Volume: Therefore 'tis thought better to omit that of Paradise, and that of Canaan, than to engrave them all in small, suitable to this Volume; wherefore I shall insert in the Old Testament, that of Jerusalem, with that of the Israelites 40 years Travels, which being but thin of Words, will admit of a smaller Scale: And in the New Testament, that of the Travels of the Apostles, which is to be placed before their Lives. The Contents of the First Book of Moses Called GENESIS. THis Book is called GENESIS, which Word in Greek signifies Gene∣ration, Original, Birth, Genealogy; because in it are set down in the Beginning of all things, (which may be called their Genera∣tion, Gen. 2.4.) whether Visible or Invisible, which GOD in the Beginning created out of Nothing, by his Word; and particularly that of Man, adorned with the Image of God, and made him Lieutenant upon Earth, to govern his Creatures, and placed in Para∣dise, to live there happy and content; and to enjoy eternally (in case of his persevering in Obedience) the Felicity of that Life, whereof he had an assured Pledge given him in the Tree of Life. Here the first Reason is given of the Obser∣vation of the Sabbath, as also the first Insti∣tution of Holy Marriage. Here we find the beginning of Sin, of Death, and of all sorts of Miseries, which like a Deluge have over∣flown all Mankind, by the Disobedience of Adam and Eve, in Eating the Forbidden Fruit. Here we find also the First Promise of Grace and Redemption, by the Seed of the Woman, whom God would send of his meer Mercy, to bruise the Head of the Serpent, (who had tempted Man to this Transgression) to abolish Sin and Death, and to restore to us the lost Blessing of Righteousness and Life. We find also in this Book, the Beginning of the Doctrin of Salvation, of True Reli∣gion, and the Pure Worship of God, which was established by this First Promise; and consequently of the Church, not only care∣fully gathered by the Ministry of Adam, Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah, and Others; but also graciously preserved by God until Noah. Moreover, in this Book we meet with the Original of the Apostate Race of Cain, who
separated themselves from the Holy People by their renouncing the Truth, corrupting the Wor∣ship of God, and Contempt of Godliness; and lastly, by the Enormity of their abominable Crimes, drew down upon themselves the Judg∣ment of the Flood, from which Noah only, and his Family, escaped. We find here also the beginning of the Worlds Restauration, after the severe Judg∣ment of the Deluge; the Original of Nati∣ons; the first Promise of the Calling of the Gentiles; the beginning of the first Mo∣narchy; the Confusion of Languages; and the first Genealogy; in which Moses his principal Aim was, to set forth the Re∣establishment of the Church, which proceeding from the small number of Noah's Family, and afterwards continuing for some time in that of Shem, fell at last totally into Idolatry; and though Melchisedek, and his Family, were some▪ Remains of the Church, yet it pleased God to select one particular Family for himself, from amongst all the Posterity of Shem, to distinguish them from all other Peo∣ple, and to sanctifie and consecrate them to him∣self. To this purpose, of his meer Mercy he chose Abram and his Posterity, having called him to leave Ur of the Chaldeans, where he served Idols, to go to Canaan; promising him (amongst other Blessings) That the Mes∣siah should be born of his Seed, and making a Covenant with him, ratifying it by the Mark of Circumcision. After which Isaac was born to him, in whom his Seed was to be called; and not in Ishmael, who was born to him by Hagar, or the Children born to him by Keturah, After Sarahs Death. Notwithstanding this, God commands him to offer up his own Son; and tho' God did not suffer him to effect it, yet he shewed his per∣fect Obedience, which was recompenced by a renewing of the former Promises made to him. From Isaac, the Inheritance of the Promises passed to Jacob, to whom the Birth-right was designed by God, as well as sold to him by his elder Brother Esau, and ratified to him by his Father's blessing. From Jacob it passed to his Posterity, as appears by his Prophetical Blessing of his Sons. And God having chosen this Family to himself, maintained them in the Truth of his Doctrine, and Purity of his Worship, governed them by his Word and Spirit; pro∣tected them against their Enemies, exercised them with many Afflictions, comforted them under their Sufferings with his secret Com∣munications, and rescued them by unexpected Deliverances: Not but that many human Infirmities appeared sometimes in the best of them, which God graciously pardoned for the sake of the Messiah, whom they embraced with a true and lively Faith, accompanied with true and serious Repentance. These things are very lively represented in divers Rencounters of Abraham and Isaac in Canaan in Egypt, and in Gerar, as well as of Jacob and Joseph in Canaan, Mesopotamia and Egypt: And last of all they died, lea∣ving most evident Testimonies of their Confi∣dence in the Promises of God, both Temporal and Eternal. The last of them all was Joseph, who also is the last whose Death is recited in this Book, which contains the History of above 2300 Years,
The Creation of the WORLD. GOD Creates the Heavens and the Earth, and in Six Days doth People it with all sorts of Creatures. WHen GOD went about to Create the World, and all that therein is, the first thing he began with,Anno Mundi 1. before Jesus Christ 4004 years. was nothing but Matter with∣out Form; a confused and obscure Chaos, without that excellent Beauty, and that admirable Order, which afterwards appear∣ed in the World; For Darkness was upon the face of the Deep, and the Spirit of GOD moved upon the face of the Waters. The Scrip∣ture tells us, That God finished this great Work in six days. In the first Day, He commanded that there should be Light, and there was Light; and he divided the Light from the Darkness; the Light he called Day, and the Darkness Night. The Second Day he made the Firmament, which he called Heaven; dividing the Waters which were under the Firmament, from those above the Firmament. The Third Day he separated the Dry Land from the Waters under the Heaven, which he gathered together unto one place; the Dry Land he called Earth, and the Waters he called Seas. Then next, God commanded the Earth to bring forth Grass, and all sorts of Herbs yielding Seed, and all sorts of Fruit-Trees yielding Fruit after their kind, whose seed is in it self, that they might multiply and in∣crease, each according to its Kind. The Fourth Day, God made those two great Luminaries in the Firmament of the Heaven, which we call Sun and Moon; the Sun to Rule the Day, and the Moon the Night; and to be (by their Regular Motions) for Signs and for Seasons, and for Days, and for Years. He made also the Stars, which he placed likewise in the Firmament, to shine in the Night season. On the Fifth Day, God passed from the Crea∣tion of Inanimate, to that of Livng Crea∣tures; and it was in the Waters that he began with forming such Creatures, as were endow'd with Life and Motion: He produced an infi∣nite multitude of Fishes of all sorts, forms, and sizes; and bade them, to Increase and Multiply. Immediately after the Creation of Fishes, God proceeded to that of Fowls, which were also created out of the Sea, and the same Day that Fishes were; them also he commanded, to Multiply in the Earth, and would have them fly above the Earth in the open Firmament of Heaven: And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful and multiply. On the Sixth Day, God commanded the Earth likewise to produce the Living Crea∣tures after his kind, Cattle and Creeping Things, and Beasts of the Earth after their kind. The same Day he Created Man also, which (tho' the last) was to be the most per∣fect of all his Creatures, and for whose sake all other Things were Created; seeing of all the Terrestrial Creatures, Man alone is capa∣ble of the Knowledge and Love of his Crea∣tor. And. On the Seventh, God Rested from his Work, and therefore He consecrated that Day parti∣cularly, for his Worship and Service. Indeed, Moses mentions nothing concern∣ing the Creation of Angels; but yet the An∣cient Fathers are of Opinion, That they were then Created, when God speak these Words, Let there be Light: And S. Austin according∣ly does take the Separation which God made of Light from Darkness, to be nothing else than the Separation He made betwixt Angels and Devils. GOD design'd then to shew (in the very beginning of the World, and by the Example of some of his most excellent Creatures) That there is no true Happiness to be found, but in a constant Union with, and Dependence upon him; and that he would cast down from the highest Top of Happi∣ness and Glory, into the deepest Pit of Misery and Shame, those who ungratefully forgetting his Benefits, should attribute to themselves, that which they had received from him: And as he hath given us (in his Holy Angels) an excellent and everlasting Model of the inviolable Fidelity we owe to him; so the dreadful Punishment he hath awarded the Devils, is a standing Monument of his aver∣sion against Pride, and a never to be forgot∣ten Instance of what the Scripture saith, That God resisteth the Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble.
1 To the Kings most Excellent Majesty: &c•. This Plate in all humility is Dedicated, by yo•. Majestys obedient Subject, and Servant Richard Blome.
2 To the Queens most Excellent Majesty &c•. This Plate in all humility is Dedicated by yo•. Matys. Subject & Servant Richard Blome.
The Creation of Man, and Formation of Woman. GOD having Created Man, placed him in Paradise, and commanded him, Not to eat of the Fruit of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. AFter GOD had Created Heaven, the Earth, and the Sea; and that (to give a Master to the World) He had made Man after his own Image,Before Jesus Christ 4004 Years. of the Dust of the Ground, and breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life; He blest him, and said, Increase and Mul∣tiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue it. He gave him Sovereignty over the Fish in the Sea, over the Fowls of the Air, and over every Beast, and every Living thing that moveth on the Earth: He also gave him eve∣ry Herb bearing Seed, and every Tree bearing Fruit, for meat: He placed him in that Para∣dise, which he had planted himself, and  in he could plentifully enjoy all that could be imagined in a Garden most delightful to the Eyes, and most pleasant to the Taste. This Garden was Eastward in Eden, and a River went out of Eden to water the Garden, and from thence it was parted and became into four Heads; the Name of the first is Pi∣son, the second Gihon, the third Hiddekel, and the fourth Euphrates; which bears the same name to this day. There was in the midst of that Paradise the Tree of Life, and the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; which Trees the Lord God commanded him not to eat of, saying, That in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt die. GOD putting Man into that Garden to dress it, and to keep it (saith the Scripture) would give him an occasion to shew his Fidelity to his Maker, and his readiness to depend upon him, as his Supream Master, and only Bene∣factor: Therefore after that he gave a Com∣mand most just in it self, and most easie to be obey'd; Of every Tree of the Garden (saith God to him) thou maist freely eat; but of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shalt not eat: For in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die. Then afterwards the LORD brought be∣fore Adam, every Beast of the Field, and every Fowl of the Air, which he had formed out of the Ground, to see (saith Moses) what he would call them; And whatsoever Adam called every Living Creature, that was the Name thereof And Adam gave Names to all Cattel, and to the Fowl of the Air, and to every Beast of the Field; and that (without doubt) according to the several Natures and Properties which he had observed in them. But as Adam was still alone of his kind, and that there was not found amongst all other Creatures, which God had brought be∣fore him, an Help, nor a Companion meet for him; The LORD said, It is not good for Man to be alone, I will make an Help meet for him. And the Lord God caused a Deep Sleep to fall upon him; and while he slept, He took one of his Ribs, and closed up the Flesh instead thereof: And the Rib (saith Moses) which the Lord God hath taken from Man, made he a Woman, and brought her unto the Man. As soon as Adam saw her, he pre∣sently said, That she was Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh; That she should be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man; and that therefore Man in all future Ages, (from that time forth) should leave his Fa∣ther and his Mother, and cleave unto his Wife, and be both but me Flesh▪ And they were both Naked, the Man and his Wife, and were not ashamed. GOD gave in the First Adam, a plain and sensible representation of all that which should long after befal the Second: And the Ancient Fathers do tell us, That the Deep Sleep of Adam, was the Figure of Jesus Christ Sleeping upon the Cross, because it was then that the Church was formed by Jesus Christ: And that the Water and Blood, that issued forth from his Pierced Side, were the Foun∣tain and Spring from whence our Sacraments did flow. The Divine Bridegroom leaving in some manner his Father in Heaven, came down upon Earth, to joyn himself eternally to his Bride the Church; and having made us worthy to be joyned with him by a Spiritual and inexpressible way of Marriage: He may now truly say of his Church, what Adam said of Eve, That she is the Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone.
THE FALL OF ADAM. The Devil makes use of the Serpent to tempt Eve, to eat of the For∣bidden Fruit: She eats it, and gives it to Adam, to eat also. ADam and Eve had hardly begun to enjoy the Pleasures and Delights of Paradise, but the Devil (who was already fallen by Pride,4004 Years before Jesus Christ▪ and could not consequently see without En∣vy the Fidelity and Happiness of those two Innocent Creatures, which were more obedient and subject to GOD, tho' they were living upon Earth, and in Bodies made out of the Earth, than he had been with all the Advan∣tages of his Spiritual Nature, and of his liv∣ing in the Presence of GOD in Heaven) resolved to assault them, that so by undoing and vitiating them that were to be the Flock of Mankind, he might undo at once their whole Posterity. To that end, he made use of the Serpent, (the most subtil of all Beasts) and set upon the Woman, as judging her of the two, the most likely to be prevail'd upon, and the most easie to be drawn into a compliance: Yea, (saith he to the Woman) hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden? Now Eve, instead of shutting her Ears to his Seducing Words, answered him and said, We may eat of the Fruit of all the Trees of the Garden; but of the Fruit of the Tree which is in the midst of the Garden, GOD hath said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. The Devil having thus far insinuated him∣self into her Favour, made no more scruple to assure her, (against God's express Word) that they should not die; he boldly ascrib'd the Prohibition of God to a base Envy: God knows (saith he) that in the day ye eat thereof, that your Eyes shall be opened; and ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. Eve was easily seduced by these Promises, and then her looking too long upon the Forbid∣den Fruit, did soon after bring about the Devil's Design, and her own Destruction; for instead of keeping her Eyes off from looking upon the Fruit, which was forbidden her, she lookt upon it with delectation, and was well pleased to see, that it was pleasant to the Eye, and so fancying it was so too to the Taste; she put forth her Hand, took it, and eat it. Thus Sin entred into the World by a Wo∣man; for after she had eaten of that Fruit, she gave some also to Adam, who was not seduced by Satan, but prevailed upon by his Foolish and Uxorious Complaisance. He had not (as the Ancient Fathers do observe it) so much firmness and resolution in Paradise, as Job had afterwards upon his Dunghil; he chose to disobey GOD, rather than to disoblige his Wife. Such was the Fall that hath been ever since, and shall be to the End of the World, the Cause of so many Evils and Miseries. This was the Sin which the Fathers call, Unspeakable in its Greatness, which kil∣ling the Children in the Father, maketh us obnoxious to Death, and Slaves to Satan, even before we are born; for the Devil having made Adam his Slave, hath got a just Right now over all his Children. The Danger of this deep Wound, shews, that we cannot sufficiently cherish and ad∣mire the Grace of him, who is come among us to Cure it. The continual Thankfulness we owe to GOD for it, ought to inspire us with a generous abhorrence against all the Temptations of the Devil, who remembring always the success of his first Artifies, endea∣vours still every Day, to perswade us on all occasions, that we may innocently and safely do that which GOD hath forbidden us. But as Eve was made sensible at last, that the Threatnings of GOD were true, and the Promises of the Devil false; we ought also to be fully perswaded, that the Threatnings of GOD against Sinners are very true; and so we ought to look upon all the false Inter∣pretations wherewith the Devil endeavours to falsifie them, and so to frustrate God's design, as so many malicious and vain Artifices, by which he still attempts to deceive the Chil∣dren, as he then did the Father.
3 To his Royall Highness George Prince of Denmarke & c•. This Plate is most humbly Dedicated▪ by Richard Blome.
4 To her Royall Highness the Princess Ann of Denmarke &c. This Plate is most humbly Dedicated▪ by Richard Blome.
THE PUNISHMENT OF ADAM. GOD drives Adam and Eve (after their Fall) out of Paradise, and places the Cherubims to keep them out. THE first Effect which Adam and Eve did feel, as a Consequence of their un∣happy Fall,Before Christ 4002 Years. was to see that they were Naked; they were not sen∣sible, or at least not ashamed of their Na∣kedness, as long as they continued in the State of Innocency, because they were then pure like Angels, and their Body was perfectly subject to the Soul. It was then, immediately after their Fall, that they begun to be asha∣med, and to take Fig-Leaves to cover their Nakedness. As soon as they heard afterwards the Voice of God walking in the Garden, instead of rejoycing at it, as they had always done before, they fled from his Presence, and hid themselves amongst the Trees. And GOD calling Adam, saying, Adam, Where art thou? He answered and said, Hearing thy Voice in the Garden, I was afraid to appear before thee, because I was Naked, and I hid my self. And the LORD said, Who told thee, that thou wast Naked? Hast thou eaten of the Tree, which I commanded thee not to eat of? GOD having upbraided him with his Diso∣bedience, which alone had discovered his Nakedness to him, he excused himself, and accused his Wife; The Woman (saith he) whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat. The Woman being ask'd, why she had done so? excused her self in the like manner, and cast the blame of her Sin upon the Serpent; saying, The Ser∣pent beguiled me, and I did eat. But GOD admitting of no such Excuses, for their Vin∣dication in violating his Law, did presently curse the Serpent, the first Author of it; saying, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all Cattel, and above every Beast of the Field; upon thy Belly shalt thou go, and Dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy Life. And I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shalt bruise his Heel. He pronounced afterwards his Sentence against both Adam and Eve: In Sorrow (saith he to the Woman) thou shalt bring forth Children, and thy desire shall be to thy Hus∣band, and he shall Rule over thee. And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkned unto the Voice of thy Wife, and hast eaten of the Tree, &c. cursed is the Ground for thy sake, Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth to thee; in the Sweat of thy Face shalt thou eat Bread, till thou return unto the Ground, for out of it wast thou taken; for Dust thou art, and unto Dust shalt thou return. He made them also Coats of Skins; and then he said, Behold the Man is become as one of us, to know Good and Evil; Let us therefore prevent his eating of the Tree of Life, lest he live for ever. So the LORD drove the Man out of the Garden of Eden, and placed at the East of it Cherubims, and a Flaming-Sword, which turned every way, to to keep the Way of the Tree of Life. Thus they were expelled out of that De∣licious place, to lament their Sin and Misery in the other parts of the Earth: In which they saw every where the sad effects of their Rebellion; they remembred the Happiness they were formerly possest off; and being sensible of the Misery they had brought upon themselves, this Melancholy Comparison of their former and present Condition, (which they could make then by their own woful Experience, much better than we can now) cast them into a deep Sorrow. The Consideration of so many Children, of whom they were the Murtherers, before they were Parents, pierced them to the Heart; so that if they were the first Authors of Sin, they were also the first Patterns of Penitence. All Men are infinitely beholding to that Saviour, who hath repaired the Loss and Prejudice they all suffered by Adam's Fall, in such advantagious a manner, that the Church may now call his Sin an Happy and an Useful Sin. The Consideration of this Future, but certain Reparation, was the only comfort Adam and Eve had, to mitigate their Sorrow and Grief.
THE MURTHER OF ABEL. Cain being transported with Envy against his Brother Abel, enticed him into the Fields, and slew him. ONe of the saddest effects of Adam's Sin, was the Murther of Abel his Son. The Devil, not contented with the wrong he had done to Man,Anno Mundi 128. before Christ, 3872. by corrupting his Soul, and subjecting it to Sin, soon gave another instance of his Malice against his Body; for when he saw that Abel was careful of pleasing God, and of serving him faithfully, he presently filled the Heart of Cain with Envy against him. Abel being a Shepherd, offered always in Sa∣crifice the best of his Flocks; so Cain did some of his Fruits, as being an Husbandman: But God perceiving his Malice against his Brother, had no respect to his Sacrifice, but rejected it; and on the contrary, was well pleased with Abel's; which did so exasperate Cain, that the more Favour God shewed Abel, the more did he hate and envy him. Then was seen the first Figure and Representation of that which was to conti∣nue in all Ages of the Church; viz. That Good men should live amongst the Wicked, and be forc'd to suffer their unjust Dealings and Persecutions. God himself endeavour'd by his Word, to cure Cain's Heart, so impoyson'd with Envy; saying, Why art thou in wrath with thy Brother? Why is thy Countenance fallen? Why dost thou pine for grief and vexation? If thou dost well, shalt thou not be accepted? Shalt thou not be rewarded accordingly? And if thou dost ill, Sin (that is, the Punishment of this Sin) lies at the Door. Thou shalt reap what thou sowest; thou shalt re∣ceive the Retribution of thine own, and not be prejudiced by another Man's Works. But it is with great Reason, that even the Word of God proves ineffectual upon those Souls that are possest with Envy; and that this sove∣raign Remedy against all other Distempers of the Soul, do's rather enflame, than allay the rage of this. Cain's Passion, against his Brother increas'd more and more, notwithstanding he could see in him nothing but good; so the Wretch dissem∣bling his Hatred, went to Abel, and with all the Expressions of Kindness imaginable, desired him to walk with him in the Fields. Poor Abel, meaning and fearing no hurt, easily comply'd with his desire; for he was of too good and meek a Nature to suspect, that his Brother should have such an Hellish Design dgainst against him. But as they were both in the Field together, Cain rose up against him, and perfiduously slew him. His rage and fury was so hot and extreme, that even the committing of this barbarous Murder did not make him sensible of the hei∣nousness of his Crime; so that when God ask'd him, where Abel was? he could audaciously an∣swer, That he knew not, and said, Am I my Brothers keeper? But God having a mind to make the Punishment of Cain's shedding Innocent Blood, an Example for all future Ages, to deter all Men from the like Crimes; and to shew, that He would always be the Protector of Just Men, and the Avenger of all the Injuries done unto them by Wicked Men; He severely upbraided Cain with his Crime, saying, The Voice of thy Brothers Blood cries from the Earth unto me. The Lord condemned him to be Cursed upon the Earth, which his Hand had defiled with his Brother's Blood, and to be a Fugitive and a Vagabond upon the Earth, as long as he should live, putting a Mark on him, to the end that those that shou'd meet him, shou'd not slay him: And thus Cain went from the Presence of the LORD, and dwelt in the Land of Nod; where he took a Wife, had Children, and built a City which he called Enoch, from his First-born Son. The Fathers have always look'd upon the Death of Abel, as a Type of the Death of Christ, and of all those Christians, that fall as a Sacri∣fice to the Envy and Malice of their Brethren. They thought it worthy of their Admiration, that Cain (that was the first Child of Adam) should by his Example teach all his Posterity this important Lesson, That thô they do not fear God, yet they ought at least to take care, not to imitate the Envy and Hatred of Cain, by per∣secuting or hating their Brethren; seeing they may commit Murder in their Heart, by Envy and Hatred alone, without embroiling their Hands in their Blood. And if they be of the Number of the true Disciples of Christ, they will not fear the being exposed in this World to the Persecution of Men; seeing (as S. Gregory hath it) That that Man refuseth to be an Abel, who will not patiently suffer the hatred and violence of a Cain, when he cannot otherwise lawfully secure himself against it.
5 To his Highness William Duke of Glocester &c•. This Plate is most humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome.
6 Ieffrey Ieffreys of Llywell in Brecknock-Shire Esq. for Advancement of ye▪ Worke, Contributed this Plate.
THE ARK OF NOAH. GOD being moved with Anger for the Sins of Man, resolves to destroy the World by a Flood; and to save Noah, he commands him to build an Ark. THE same Evil Spirit which tempted Cain to kill his Brother, did not long delay to defile the whole World with all sort of Wic∣kedness and Vice.A. M 1536. before Christ 2468. As Men did multiply, so did also Impiety proportionably increase upon Earth: Adam was hardly dead, but the Wickedness of his Children grew up to that height, that GOD could no more bear with it. He saw with grief and indignation, that the Wickedness of Man was great in the Earth, and that every Imagination of his Heart (as Moses expresses it) was only evil continually; therefore seeing almost nothing remaining of his own Image in that degenerate Creature, It grived him at his Heart (saith the Text) that he had made Man on the Earth; because he was dishonouring and polluting it by his Vices, contrary to the first design of his Crea∣tion; which was, That he should be the Glory and chiefest Ornament of all Terrestrial Creatures. He resolved then at last to destroy and ex∣tirpate Man from the Face of the Earth, and with him all the Beasts of the Fields, and other Creatures which had been infected (in some manner) by the contagion of his Sin. But yet amidst that universal Corruption of Mankind, amidst that general Flood of Impiety, there was a Just Man found that had kept his Innocence and saved himself from the Pollution of the World; that Just Man was Noah, who found Grace in the Eyes of the LORD: It was he that pacified God's Wrath against the World, and reconcil'd him to Man▪ It was him GOD made use of according to Scripture) to preserve Mankind from an entire Destruction, GOD then told him, That he design'd to punish the Earth with a general Delge; but yet, that as he had observed, he had had always been careful to walk Uprightly before him, and to keep himself untainted from their Corruption; so he would not have him involved in the same Punishment with o∣ther Men, but would keep him safe from the Destruction that was ready to fall upon them. In the Year of the World 1556, and before Jesus Christ 2448, GOD ordered Noah to build an Ark, and withal told him exactly all the Measures and Proportions it was to have, to the end, that at the time of the Flood he might save himself therein with his Family, and the other Creatures which GOD should send unto him. Noah did all according to the LORD's Command. He was an hundred Years about building the Ark; and the Rapid Insensibility of the Men of that time, who both seeing the Ark a building, and knowing the design there∣of, yet never regarded to go about the re∣forming their Vices and dissolute Manners, is an exact Figure and Representation (as our Saviour himself observes it) of the Insensibi∣lity of the generality of Christians, who know∣ing the Punishments GOD threatneth to inflict upon them hereafter, in the great and terrible Day of Judgment, and their slighting these Threatnings, do not care to reform their Lives, shall on a sudden be surprized by God's Vengeance, as Men were then by the Flood. GOD, who never punisheth Men, but with a kind of regret and reluctancy, gives always some Tokens and Assurances of his Mercy, even when he is most in wrath and anger: Therefore we may discern here▪ That all his design (in forewarning Men of their future Ruin, so long before it fell upon them) was only to make them prevent it by their Refor∣mation. Thus he does still now-a-days under the Go∣spel, and that more plainly than ever he did before, invite Men to Repentance, by repre∣senting unto them the certainty and severity of his Judgment hereafter upon all Impenitent Sinners; and if Christians do slight his Threats and Warnings as Men did then, the multitude of Offenders cannot secure them∣selves from GOD's just Punishment. The Flood is a plain and dreadful Proof, that GOD will not spare wicked Men, tho' all were so; and that after we have long neg∣lected the Offers of his Mercy, he will at last deliver us into the Hands of his severe Justice.
The Deluge, and Entry into the Ark. The whole Earth, and all therein contained, was drown'd and destroy'd by the Flood, only the Ark, and those therein, sav'd. WHen the time was come that GOD had appointed for the purifying the Earth, by a Flood from the pol∣lution of Man's Crimes,Anno Mundi 1656 before Christ 2348. GOD ordered Noah to provide and carry into the Ark all necessary Provisions, both for him∣self and for all the Creatures that he was to take with him into the Ark. He commanded him to take to himself of every clean Beast by Sevens, Males and Fe∣males; and of every unclean, only by Two's. After these Orders had been executed, Noah, entred into the Ark himself, with his Three Sons, Shem, Ham, and Japhet, with his Wife and the three Wives of his Sons; and when they were entred, the Scripture saith, that GOD shut them in: which was no sooner done, but the Waters did break out from Heaven, and prevailed upon the Earth, the LORD causing violent Rain to continue for forty Days and forty Nights: and that Rain pouring down from Heaven in such an abundance, did soon overflow and cover the Face of the whole Earth: nay, the Scripture saith, that the Waters prevailed fifteen Cubits upwards above the highest Hills and Mountains; so that in this Innundation all Flesh (as the Scripture ex∣presses it) perished, both of Men, of Fowls, of Beasts, and of every creeping thing upon the Earth. But as all living Creatures were thus pe∣rishing and drowning in the Waters of the Flood, Noah was saved alive in the Ark, with all those that were therein with him; for the Waters and Storms of the Flood could never prevail against it to sink it; because the more they increased upon Earth, the nearer they brought it to Heaven. It was then that those Mn, who before derided the Builders and the Building of the Ark, began to bewail and accuse their own Folly; nay, their Destru∣ction, which was now become unavoidable, did the more afflict them, that they had not prevented it when they might. The Ancient Fathers have observed, that this Ark (wherein Noah and his Family was saved from perishing with the rest of Man∣kind) was an express Figure and Type of the Church, which is the sole Ark wherein we may find a sure Refuge and Salvation, and out of which there is nothing but Destruction and Perdition to be look'd for. The vast Great∣ness of that Building which was carried upon the Waters, and the gathering and mixture of all sorts of Beasts Clean and Unclean, did re∣present and signifie the extent and propaga∣tion of the Church throughout all the World; as also the calling and gathering of so many Nations and People, differing among them∣selves by the diversity of their Ways, Customs, and Manners, whom GOD (who will have all Men to be saved) would one day gather up together, and bring into that Sanctuary, to save them from the terrible Flood of his E∣ternal Wrath and Vengeance. The Wood and the Water do represent two great Mysteries of our Christian Reli∣gion: The Water signifies our Baptism, which cleanseth us from our Sins, as the Flood did purge the World from all its Abominations; and the Wood signifies the Cross of our Savi∣our, who by his Meritorious Death upon it wrought the Redemption of Mankind so per∣fectly, that this Cross, this Death, this Satis∣faction of our Saviour, is still the sole Object of the Hope of all good Christians, who expect no Salvation but from the infinite Me∣rit of Christ's Cross and Passion. Thus GOD was pleased to give a Figure of his Church in the Ark, which was the In∣strument he made use of to preserve his Ser∣vants, and to renew the World. We can never shew our selves thankful enough to GOD for his infinite Mercy in bringing us into the Ark of his Church, to save us from the general and dreadful Flood of Errors and Impieties, which prevail in the World. We may indeed in that Ark (according to the Ancient Father's Observation) be subject to some Fears, be obnoxious to some Troubles, Evils, and Scandals; but however, there is no other Refuge against God's Vengeance, no other Sanctuary than that Ark; so that those that do not belong to it, shall infallibly pe∣rish in the Floods of his Eternal Indignation.
7 Jeffrey Jeffreys of Llywell in Brecknockshire Esq{que}. for Advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
8 Madam Sarah Jeffreys the Wife of Jeffrey Jeffreys of Llywell in Brecknockshire Esq. For Advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
The Going out of the Ark, and the Rainbow. Noah goes out of the Ark, and offers a Sacrifice to the LORD, which was favourably received. The LORD promiseth to Drown the Earth no more, and gives for the Sign of the Truth of His Promise the Rainbow. AFter the Earth had been thus Over∣flow'd, and Drown'd by the Waters, for 150 Days, GOD at last remembred Noah,Anno Mundi 1657. before Christ▪ 2347. and every Living Creature that was with him in the Ark; He caused a great Wind to pass over the Earth, so that the Waters did soon abate, and 7 Months after (from the first Day the Flood began) the Ark rested upon the Mountains of Armenia. Noah, four Months after this, opened the Window of the Ark, and sent forth a Raven; which being in the Scripture set forth as the Figure of a Sinner, did not care to return into the Ark again: But the Dove, which Noah did also send forth seven Days after, having found no Resting-place, return'd unto him into the Ark; and seven Days after that, having sent forth the same Dove, she return'd to him in the Evening, and brought in her Bill a green Olive-Leaf pluckt off the Tree, which was a Sign of GOD's being reconcil'd to the World. Noah, by this green Olive-Leaf, understood that the Waters were abated; then he remo∣ved the Covering of the Ark, and saw that the Waters were dried up from off the Face of the Earth: And after he had received an Order from GOD, to go out of the Ark, wherein he had continued a whole Year, he went out with his Wife and Children, and all other Creatures that were therein. The first thing Noah did after his going out of the Ark, was to build an Altar unto GOD, and to offer unto him upon it an Offering of every Clean Beast, and of every Clean Fowl, in thanks of his favourable Pro∣tection of him amidst of that Universal De∣struction of the World. GOD accepted of his Offering, and promised to Curse the Earth no more for Mans sake: He blessed Noah and his Children, and commanded them to multiply, and to replenish the Earth: He promised them, that the Fear of them should be upon every Beast of the Field, and upon every Fowl of the Air; he gave them an absolute Dominion over them, and over the Fishes of the Sea; nay, he gave them leave then to eat the Flesh, which was never granted to Man before the Flood. He made an Eternal Covenant with Noah, and his Children, and establish'd the Rain∣bow as the Sign of it; to the intent, that when ever it should appear in the Clouds, he might remember his Covenant with them, and prevent a second Inundation of the Wa∣ters over the Earth. He hath always re∣membred it accordingly, and there was never seen (since the first Flood) any thing like it in the World; tho' there have often been as many, and as great Crimes committed by Men upon the Earth, But GOD is faithful to his Promises; he hath contented himself of having once ex∣erted visibly his terrible Vengeance, in inflict∣ing that general Punishment upon all Sin∣ners that were then, living upon the Earth; to shew, that it is always in his power to punish Sin, and to extirpate Sinners; tho' he seldom now inflicts any other than invisible Pains and Torments upon them. His Rainbow is to us, a Security of his Goodness to us; and he charges us in his Word, to bless and praise him whenever we see it. But GOD forbid (saith Ambrosius) that by that Celestial Bow, which GOD establish'd as the Sign of his Covenant with Men, we should only understand the Rainbow: It is the Church that this Bow did figure, which is already in some manner in the Heavens, and sheweth and spreads every where upon the Earth, the liveliness and variety of its Colours, amidst the Dark and Black Clouds that sur∣round it. Those bright and lively Colours (saith that Holy Father) are the several Graces GOD poureth down upon that Divine Spouse, who faithfully acknowledges, that she receives them all from GOD, whom she adores as her true Sun, that makes her shining in the World: It is that Church which is the true Bow of GOD's Covenant, and a standing Sign of his Reconciliation with the World.
HAM CURSED BY HIS FATHER. Ham (the Second Son of Noah) seeing his Father lying in an undecent Posture, Mocks or Derides him, for which he is Cursed by him. AFter the Curse of GOD was taken off from the Earth, and that Noah and his Children began to breath and recover them∣selves, of all the Miseries and Dangers they had undergone and weathered, by GOD's ex∣traordinary Providence over them; there was an Action committed in Noah's Family, which plainly shewed how far the Corruption of Man can go, and how ineffectual even the consideration of GOD's most dreadful Judg∣ments proves in the restraining of it, and in making Man wise. Of the three Sons of Noah, who had been so wonderfully preserved with him in the Ark, to re-people the World; there was one of them, who having deserved the Curse of his Father, drew also the Curse of GOD upon himself, and instead of being the Head of an Holy Race, was the Father of so wicked a Posterity, as was to be the Object of GOD's Anger and Reprobation. It is observed by Moses, that Noah (after the Flood) began to be an Husbandman; and that amongst other Improvements which he made of the Ground, he planted a Vineyard: But it hapned, that drinking of the Wine, without being aware of its intoxicating Vir∣tue, he fell into Drunkenness; during which he lay in an undecent Posture, having his Body uncovered, in his Tent, and so exposed to the Eyes of his Children. Ham, the Father of Canaan, was the first of them who spied his Father in that condition, and instead of doing that which the discretion of a wise and dutiful Son should have obliged him to do, he exposed the Shame of his Father, and made it the Subiect of his Derision and Railery: Nay, he was not contented thus to Laugh by himself at his Father, but to expose him the more, he would also have both his Brothers for Companions of his prophane and unnatural Mirth, and for Complices of his Crime: So he went out presently, to tell them what he had seen. But Shem and Japhet abominating his ill Nature and Prophaness, and withal being ashamed ad much concerned to see their Father thus lying in that immodest Posture, they took a Garment, and laid it upon both their Shoulders, and so went backward and covered his Nakedness, which their pious Mo∣desty did not allow them to look upon. After Noah's Fit of Drunkenness was over▪ and he understood what had past, and knew what his Son had done; not only condemned his Action, but presently cursed his Son Ca∣naan, and foretold, That he should for ever be the Servant of Servants unto his Brethren. And he said, Blessed be the LORD GOD of Shem, and Cannan shall be his Servant: GOD shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be his Servant: And promised them an happy and numerous Posterity, to continue in all Ages of the World. This Story which does plainly teach Chil∣dren to reverence their Parents, and to cover their Faults instead of exposing them, is (ac∣cording to St. Austin) an admirable Figure of the great Reverence all Christians ought to have, for the Humiliation and Sufferings of Christ Jesus, their true Father; the Ignominy of his Death, and the Nakedness his Sacred Body was exposed unto upon the Cross, was figured by the Nakedness of Noah; as the mysterious Drunkenness of that Holy Man, did represent the terrible effect of the Cup, which his Father gave him to drink, and the Fruit of that ungrateful Vine which he had planted himself. And altho' there is no Body so audaciously Impious and Prophane, as to laugh openly at the Humiliation and Ignominious Sufferings of Christ; yet that good Saviour (saith S. Austin) is derided and mocked, whenever any Disho∣nour is offered to his Truth, and to his Word. His Humiliations are despised by all those who chuse to live a voluptuous and worldly Life. His Sufferings and his Cross are scorned and laughed at by all those, who do insult over those that suffer as the Members of his Body. and the Imitators of his Patience.
9 Sr. William Robinson of Newby Hall▪ in the north Rideing of yorkeshire Baronet For Advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Place.
10 The Rt. Honourable Lady Mary Tudor Wife to the Rt. Honble.. Edward Lord Radcliff son  heyr to the Rt. Honble.. Francis Earle of arwent water. &c•. For ye Advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
THE TOWER OF BABEL. Men resolve in the Vanity of their Minds, to build a Tower reaching up to Heaven: GOD stops their Work, by confounding their Lan∣guages in such a manner, that they could not understand one another. THE Children of Noah beginning to mul∣tiply on the Earth, found themselves within a few years increa∣sed to so vast a number,Anno Mundi 157. before Christ 2247. that seeing they were not able any longer to continue together, they thought of di∣spersing themselves into divers Countries: But before their Separation they undertook an Enterprize, which was a pregnant Argument of their Folly and Vanity. And as the Scrip∣ture taketh notice of, That as they journeyed from the East, they found a Plain in the Land of Shinar, where they dwelt: And they said one to another, Go to, let us make Brick, and burn them throughly; and they had Brick for Stone, and Slime for Mortar. And they said, Go to, let us build us a City, and a Tower whose Top may reach unto Heaven; and let us make us a Name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the Face of the whole Earth. This extravagant Design of theirs was the effect of two Causes, equally vain; the one to eternize their Memory by this Superb and stately Structure; the other was, to se∣cure themselves against GOD himself, if he should ever again attempt to punish the World by a Deluge, which would not be able to hurt them, when once they should have finished their intended Building. But GOD willing even then to make it appear, that there is no way for Man to raise himself, but by Humility, and that he must rather think of appeasing the Wrath of GOD by Repen∣tance, than of defending himself against his Just Vengeance, by vain and successless At∣tempts: Came down (saith the Scripture) to see the City and the Tower, which the Chil∣dren of Men built; and mocking at their ridiculous Undertaking, said, The People is one, and they have all one Language, and this they begin to do; and now nothing will be restrained from them which they have imagined to do. Go to (saith the LORD) let us go down, and there confound their Lan∣guage, that they may not understand one anothers Speech. So the LORD scattered them abroad from thence upon the Face of the Earth, and they left off to build the City; therefore the Name is called Babel; for the LORD so confounded their Tongues and Words, that it was impossible for them to un∣derstand what they spake to one another. Thus were they forced to leave the Work of their Vanity unfinished, and to disperse themselves over the Face of all the Earth; and that was the occasion of calling that Tower, the Tower of Babel, that is to say, of Confusion. And this Proud Building has ever since (according to St. Bernard) been a Figure of what the World would do in all Ages after, who seem to think of nothing, but how to raise to themselves a Tower against GOD, to secure themselves from his Justice and to oppose themselves against his Majesty, endea∣vouring rather to immortalize their Names upon Earth, than to become truly Great in Heaven. GOD was willing then to punish the Vanity of Men in that Member, where it reigns most, that is, in the Tongue, which Man makes use of to express his Vanity, and to do∣mineer over others. And this diversity of Languages, which has since overspread the World, and continues to this day, is as a continual Voice, ecchoing throughout the whole Earth, and teaching all People (as St. Austin saith) That the shortest and surest way to mount Heaven, is not to raise great Edifices, nor to hatch vast Designs in a proud Heart; but by humbling ones self before GOD, and preventing his Wrath with re∣lenting Tears, and not by pretending to elude it by a vain and fruitless Resistance.
THE CALL OF ABRAM. GOD calls Abram, commanding him to leave the Land of the Chaldeans, and to go to the Country he had promised to give unto him. AFter that Men had taken so great pains to build Babylon, that rebellious City against GOD,Anno Mundi 2083. before Christ 192. which was to continue to the end of the World; GOD also from that very time thought of laying the Foundations of an Ho∣ly City; that is to say, his Church,; and de∣sign'd Abram to be the Head of a Race Elect and Faithful, which should never end. This Holy Man was the Son of Terah, and dwelt with his Father in the City of Ur, in the Land of the Chaldeans, which was an Idolatrous Country. It was there that GOD commanded him, saying, Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy Fathers House, unto a Land that I will shew thee: And I will make thee the Head and Fa∣ther of a great People; and make thy Name great and famous; and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and in thee shall all Families of the Earth be blessed. Abram, without any Hesitation, believed the Word of God, which promised him two such great Advantages; the first, to make him the Head of a Great People; and the o∣ther, to bless all the VVorld in him who was to proceed from his Loins. So he left his own Country, with Terah his Father, and came to Haran (a City in Mesopotamia) where Terah died; after whose Death, he departed from Haran with Sarai his Wife, and Lot his Bro∣ther's Son, and came into the Land of Canaan, where GOD again promised to give him all that Land; and Abram adoring that GOD, who with such Sovereign Power disposeth of Kingdoms, giving or taking them away at his pleasure, built an Altar to the LORD, there to call upon his Name. After some time of his stay here, there hapned a great Famine in the Land, which forced him to go down into Egypt, with Sarai and the rest of his Houshold. But fore∣seeing that the Beauty of Sarai his Wife might be prejudicial to him, and that the Egyptians being enamour'd of her, might  of killing him, to enjoy her without lett or hindrance, made use of that innocent Policy, and pray'd Sarai to say, She was his Sister, as indeed she might without telling any Lye, to the end, that instead of killing him (as they would have done had she passed for his Wife) they might on the contrary shew him all manner of Kindness, supposing her to be his Sister. What Abram had foreseen, so came to pass: For the Egyptians admiring Sarai, spoke of her before Pharaoh, who took her into his Palace, and treated Abram very kindly for her sake, as supposing him her Brother: But GOD knew how to deliver the Chastity of Sarai from the Hands of Pha∣raoh; and he afflicted that Prince with so many Plagues, that enquiring into the Cause of them, he came at length to know, that Sarai was indeed the Wife of Abram; whereupon he restored her to him again, complaining only, that he had not told him so at first. So much (saith St. Ambrose) did that Prince (though an Idolater) abhor Adultery, and fear to injure a Stranger, whom the Famine had forced to retire into his Dominions. Thus it was that GOD began to call to himself, him, whom he had chosen to be the Father of the Faithful. He dealt with him according to the firmness of Faith, making him to leave his own Country, where he was rich and powerful, to go and settle himself in a Land, where at first he meets with a grievous Famine, which forced him to run a thousand Hazards amongst strange Nations, without finding any other Com∣fort, but that of knowing, that he was come thither by the Order of him, to whom his Faith had yielded such an unreserved Obedience. However, GOD (by delivering him from all Dangers) gave him full Evidence, that we need not fear any thing in following of GOD, and that whenever we expose our selves to any trouble∣som Events, for being faithful to his Word, he himself becomes our Protector, and with ho∣nour and advantage delivers us from all the Evils that surround us.
11 Sr. Gilbert Gerard Cossine of Brafferton hall in yorkshire Baronet▪ Grandson of ye. Rt. Reverend Father in God, Iohn Cossine Late Lord Bishop of Durham &c•. For Advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
12 Mr. Edward Jeffreys, eldest son of Jeffrey▪ Jeffreys of Llywell in Brecknockshire Esq▪ For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
LOT PARTS FROM ABRAM. A Strife being risen between the Herdsmen of Abram and Lot, they part one from another, and Lot goes to Sodom. ABRAM being returned out of Egypt with Sarai his Wife, and Lot his Bro∣ther's Son, to the Place of their former Abode,Anno Mundi 2084. before Christ 1920. that is, to Bethel: He was soon made sensible of the Troubles which were always to attend Riches. For being both of them very wealthy, there oft arose Quarrels between the Herds∣men of their Cattel; which made it evident (as saith the Scripture) that they could no longer live together, and that one Land was not able to bear them both. Abram abhorring those Contests, and fore∣seeing the fatal Consequences, that these Divisions between the Domesticks of one Family were likely to produce, by passing at last from the Servants to the Masters them∣selves, resolved to prevent them by a sudden parting. Wherefore meeting with Lot, he said to him, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between thy Herdsmen and my Herdsmen, for we be Bre∣thren: that is to say, very near of Kin: Is not the whole Land before thee, to choose what part pleaseth thee best? Separate thy self, I pray thee, from me: If thou wilt take the Left Hand, then I will go to the Right; or if thou depart to the Right Hand, then I will go to the Left. But Lot was not so wise in accepting this Offer, as Abram was in making of it: for not sufficiently weighing, how vast a loss he was about to expose himself to, by parting with the Company of such an Holy Man, and a Prophet as Abram was; and not consider∣ing that he ought rather to have done or suffered any thing, than to consent to the Separation, without any considerable Oppo∣sition, gave way to Abram's Proposal, and thereby launched out too imprudently into a Sea of a thousand Dangers. He only apply'd himself to consider, which way he had best turn himself, and advising only with his Eyes about the Choice he was to make, he deter∣mines it for that Country which pleased and flattered them most: For as the Scripture tells us, Lot lifted up his Eyes, and beheld all the Plain of Jordan, that it was well wa∣tered every where, as the Garden of the LORD. This Allurement readily induces him to fix his Abode in the Cities of that fruitful and tempting Valley, and to pitch his Tent near Sodom. Thus he from the Company of the most Holy Person, that was at that time upon the Face of the Earth, precipitates himself into the Society of the most abominable Crimi∣nals amongst the Sons of Men; and by re∣tiring too unadvisedly from his Uncle, he comes to a City, which GOD look'd upon as the Object of his fierce Anger, as having by their Wickedness out-sinn'd the bounds of Di∣vine Mercy and Forbearance. We meet with in this History (as St. Ambrose observes) two important matters. We learn from Abram's Behaviour, the Horrour and Aversion we ought to have for Differences and Disputes, and how wary we ought to be of Servants in this Respect, who often are the first Cause of them, and take pleasure to fo∣ment them. And in Lot we see, of how great concern it is, especially for younger Persons, not lightly to quit them, in whose Company their Hap∣piness consists, and who are of greater use to them than they can imagine. A Separation here consented to without sufficient Circum∣spection, makes the Party concerned sensible of its pernicious Consequences, during the whole Gourse of his Life: And though Lot was a Righteous Man (as saith St. Peter) yet we tremble at the view of those Dangers, Sorrows, and Temptations into which he plunged himself, and from which the Charity of him, whose Company he had too lightly parted with, might have rescued him; and which he might have wholly prevented, by continuing in the Holy Company of his Uncle, that Man of GOD.
ABRAM DELIVERS LOT. Abram saves Lot (his Nephew) out of the Hands of his Enemies. The Great Priest Mechisedeck blesseth him. The King of Sodom offers him all the Spoil. NOT long after Lot had separated him∣self from Abram, an Accident hap∣ned,Anno Mundi 092. before Christ 1912. which fully eviden∣ced, that Abram had not propounded their parting from any want of Love, and that Lot had too unadvisedly con∣sented to it. Four Kings, to wit, Amraphel King of Shinar, Arioch King of Ellasor, Chedorlaomer King of Elam, and Tidal King of Nations, having joyned their Forces together, and ravaged all the Country about Sodom; the King of Sodom, with those of the four neigh∣bouring Cities; to wit, Bersha King of Go∣morrah, Shinah King of Admah, Shemeber King of Zeboim, and the King of Bela which is Zoar: all these were joined together in the Vale of Siddim, which is the Salt-Sea, and march to fight the aforesaid Princes. But the five Kings being defeated by the four, and Bera the King of Sodom (with his Allies) put to flight, the Victorious Kings hasten with their Army to Sodom, and plunder it, and amongst other Captives carry away Lot, with all that he had. A Man escaping from the Fight, brings the News to Abram; who being touched at Heart with his Nephews Misfortune, spends no time in fruitless Complaints▪ but casts about how he might best rescue him out of the Hands of his Ene∣mies, and without delay puts himself at the Head of three hundred and eighteen of his trained Servants, born in his own House, and pursues the four Kings unto Dan, and brought back all the Goods, with Lot and his Goods, and the Women and the People. GOD gives his Blessing to a War, which Charity had made this Holy Patriarch under∣take, trusting much more in the Divine Aid, than in the strength of his Forces. With this small number he stops the Course of the Victories of those four Kings, and succeeds in that wherein the united Force of five Kings had fail'd: for falling upon them by Night, he makes a great Slaughter amongst them, and pursuing them to Hoba, which is on the Left-hand of Damascus, he brought back all the Spoil they had taken, and in particular his Nephew Lot, and all that be∣longed to him. The King of Sodom having Advice of this glorious Action, goes out to meet Abram, and congratulates his illustrious Success. Upon this occasion also Melchisedeck appears, that famous Person, whom the Scripture stiles, The Priest of the most high GOD, and pre∣sents Abram with Bread and Wine; which all the Fathers have considered as a Figure of the Holy Eucharist, which Jesus Christ, the true Priest, not according to the Order of Aaron, but of Melchisedeck, was to establish in his Church to the end of the World. This Melchisedeck blesseth Abram, and blesseth GOD, for that he had delivered his Enemies into his Hand. And that nothing might be wanting to Abram's Glory, the King of Sodom would needs force him to take all the Spoil he had recovered, as of right belonging to him: which Abram generously refused, swearing, that he would not so much as take one Thread of the Spoil, lest he should give him occasi∣on to say, he had enriched Abram. Thus reaped he more Glory (as St. Ambrose notes) from the use he made of his Victory, than from the Victory it self; and taught all Christians, never to wage War, but on the account of Charity; and that they ought to have so much pity for the Sufferings of others, to hazard their own Lives to save their Bre∣thren: And that when GOD has blessed their great and glorious Undertakings with Success, in making them Saviours to others, they are not to look▪ for any other Glory upon Earth, except that of having been faithful to GOD, and In∣struments to effect his great Designs.
13 The Rt. Honourable Algernon Earle of Hertford▪ Eldest son of his Grace Charles Duke of somerset &c. For ye Advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate
14 M•r. William Proctor Cittizen, and stationer of London. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
THE FLIGHT OF HAGAR. Hagar despiseth Sarah her Mistress. Sarah chastiseth her Insolence with Severity. Hagar not being able to bear it, fleeth into the Wilderness; where an Angel perswades her to return to Sarah. ABRAM being return'd from the Defeat of the Four Kings, and the Rescue of Lot,The same Year. wanted nothing now to compleat his Happiness, but a Son, that might inherit his great Riches: GOD there∣fore was willing to gratifie his Desires in this Point also, and to reward the humble Sub∣mission he had exprest during his Wives Bar∣renness, with a Son, whom he promised him contrary to all outward appearance. Abram, who was assur'd of his Power, who had made him this Promise, believed it without wavering, or the least hesitation; and chose rather to renounce his Natural Reason, than to que∣stion the Veracity of him that spoke to him. Some time after, Sarai being troubled to see Abram without Children, wished him to make use of Hagar his Bondmaid,Anno Mundi 2093. before Christ, 1911. as his Wife, that the fertility of her Servant might sup∣ply the defect of her Barrenness. Abram perceiving (as the Fathers observe) that Sarai was moved to make this Proposal, by a Di∣vine instinct, agreed to her Desires: But she soon found, that what she had intended for her comfort, became her most sensible affli∣ction, trouble, and vexation; For Hagar see∣ing her self in her Masters Bosom, and ra∣vish'd with Joy, that she had Conceiv'd by him, was (upon the sudden change of her Condi∣tion) not longer able to contain her self within the bounds of Prudence and her Duty, but began to despise her Mistress, and forget the respect she owed to her. Sarai immediately makes her Complaints to Abram; who to testifie, as he had not already, so would not for the future contri∣bute any thing to the Insolence of Hagar, and that it was only to please her that he had taken her into his Bed, left her wholly to her dispose, to deal with her as she pleased. Whereupon Sarai making use of her Autho∣rity, dealt so hardly with Hagar, that not being able any longer to abide with her (by reason of her rigorous Carriage,) she left the House and fled. But as she was in the Desart, near a Foun∣tain of Water, the Angel of the LORD ap∣peared unto her, and asked her, Whence she came, and whither she would go? To which she answered. That she fled from the Face of her Mistress. The Angel commands her to return to Sarai, and to humble her self under her hands, acknowledging the just Authority she had over her; and at the same time as∣sures her of the Care GOD had of her, and that the hild she had conceived by A∣bram, should become the Father of a nume∣rous and powerful Nation. Thus GOD made use of the Ministry of an Angel, to restore things into their Natural Channel, whence Disorder and Passion had diverted them. He saw (as the Fathers take notice) That the Cause of Hagars flight, was not so much to be attributed to Sarai's Seve∣rity, as to the difficulty she found, to submit her self to the just Authority of her Mistress; and without condemning Sarai's Carriage in the matter, who was prompted to this Rigour by a Zeal of Charity, he contents himself to advise this Fugitive Servant, to humble her self under her Mistresses hands, and to appease her Anger by her lowly and dutiful Submis∣sion. For GOD, who never disturbs the Order of Justice, wills always, that those who are under Authority, submit themselves to those on whom they depend, notwithstanding any extraor∣dinary Favours and Graces they may have re∣ceived from him. And whereas Hagar lifted up her self, because she was become a Mother, He on the contrary will have our Humility to increase according to the degrees of our Elevation; because none de∣serve the Title of Great with him, but so far only as they are humble.
SARAI'S CONCEPTION OF ISAAC Abram entertains three Angels, who promise Sarai a Son within the Compass of a Year. HAGAR being return'd to Abram's House, soon after bare him a Son, who was called Ishmael.Anno Mundi 2107. before Christ 1897. But thirteen years after that GOD appeared to Abram, in order to renew his Covenant, and the Promises he had for∣merly made him. Upon this occasion he changed his Name, so that whereas before he was called Abram, he would have them from thence forward to be called Abraham; and that his Wife, who till then had been named Sarai, should be called Sarah▪ He instituted also Circumcision, as a Token of the Cove∣nant made between them; and promised him, that Sarah should bring forth a Son, upon whom he would heap his Blessings, and from whose Loyns many Kings, and great Nations should proceed. At which words Abraham fell on his Face, and laughed, saying in his Heart, Shall a Child be born to him that is n Hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is Ninety years old, bear? But GOD having assured him, that so indeed it should be; left him for that time. A while after, as Abraham was sitting in the Tent Door, in the Heat of the Day, he saw three Men coming towards him, which indeed were three Angels; and as his Charity would not permit any one, to pass by his Tent with∣out offering them a Friendly Entertainment, he ran to meet them; and having saluted them with a profound Respect, prays them to repose a while with him, to have their Feet wash'd, and to refresh themselves with a bit of Meat. He had no sooner obtained this of them by his instant Entreaties, but he hastens into the Tent to Sarah, and bids her make ready three Measures of fine Meal, and make Caks upon the Hearth; and himself runs to the Herd, and feheth thence a Calf tender and good, and having got it drest speedily, he sets it before his Guests. After they had eaten, they askt Abraham (who had stood by as one waiting upon them all the while they were eating under the Tree) where his Wife Sarah was? Abraham answers, She was in the Tent. Then the Angels assured him, that within a short time after, Sarah should conceive a Son. Sarah standing in the Tent Door overheard what was said, and laughed within her self, saying, After I am waxed old, shall I have pleasure, my Lord being old also? But the Angel demanding of Abraham, wherefore Sarah laughed, because he promised her a Son, and whether any thing were too hard for the LORD? Sarah being afraid, denied that she laughed; and the Angels having reproved her for not speaking the truth, rose up, and Abraham went with them to bring them on their way. The Fathers admire the Vertues which shine forth in this History, which the Scrip∣ture gives us so particular account of. And as they cannot, on the one hand, but commend the great Charity of Abraham in receiving his Guests, and pressing them in so obliging a manner to stay with him; so on the other hand, they no less admire the Modesty of Sarah, who being far estranged, as S. Ambrose notes, from the usual and modern temper of her Sex; who desire nothing more than to appear in publick, under pretence of doing Acts of Charity, continued all the while in her Tent, without so much as appearing be∣fore the Angels, which her Husband enter∣tained. This her Example, teaches all Christian Women, to place their delight within their own Doors, and in taking care of their Fa∣milies; for in living thus modestly retired, (as the same Father adds) GOD will vouch∣safe them the Grace to conceive the Fruit of Salvation, and to bring forth Jesus Christ himself as the true Isaac, who shall fill them with Peace and Joy for ever.
15 Mis. Ann Proctor wife of M•r. William Proctor Cittizen and Stationer of London▪ and daughter of M••. samuel skiner Cittizen and Hosier of ye▪ Royall Exchange London. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
16 Sr. Robert Clayton of Marden in Surrey. & of the Citty of London Knight. & Alderman, & Lord Major thereof Anno Domini 1680. For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
Lot Entertains Two Angels at Sodom. Lot receives Angels into his House. The Sodomites offer Violence to them. The Angels strike them with Blindness. AFter the Formal Promise GOD had made to Abraham, that Sarah should shortly bear him a Son,The same Year 2107. before he parted with him, he acquaints him, that he was going to destroy Sodom, be∣cause the Cry of their Sin was come up to Heaven; and Promises Abraham, upon his earnest Intercession for that City, for the sake of the Righteous that might peradventure be there, that if he found only Ten Righteous amongst them, he would spare them all for their sakes. Now two Angels being come to Sodom towards the Evening, Lot (who at the same time was sitting in the Gte of that City) no sooner perceived them, but he ran to meet them; and having lowly saluted them, en∣treats them to lodge with him that Night, making it appear by this his Carriage, that even in the midst of that detestable City, he still retain'd the Vertues he had learnt in the Company of Abraham. The Angels at first refused to accept his Offer, saying, they would abide in the street all night: But true Charity, which enflames it self by opposition and resistance, made Lot so earnestly to press his Guests, that giving way to his Entreaties, they entred his House; where he entertain'd them with all possible Marks of his Affection, making them a great Feast. But when they were ready to take their Rest, the Men of the City, pusht on by that detestable Passion, which was so common amongst them, compassed the House round; demanding of him, where the Men were that came to him that Night, and pressing him to bring them forth, that they might satisfie their abominable Lust with them. Lot being pierc'd with Sorrow, to see he was like to be forced to deliver up the Persons, whom by the Rights of Hospitality he was bound to secure, and in the heat of his Cha∣rity, which made him consider Guests▪ and Strangers as inviolable Persons, came out to them, and entreated them to quit that abo∣minable Design: But they pressing in upon him, reproach'd him, that being a Stranger amongst them, he carried it like a Judge, and were proceeding to commit the utmost Outrage upon him, had not the Angels put forth their Hand and pull'd him into the House to them; and having shut the Door, they smote the Men that were without with Blindness, who (as the Scripture takes notice) by all this were not reclaimed from the Fury that flam'd in their Hearts; but still seeking to satisfie it, wearied themselves to find the Door. The Fathers have consider'd this Event, as an admirable Figure of the Righteous, that live amongst the Wicked, and of the Sufferings they are exposed to. S. Gregory compares the Sodomites struck with Blindness, who notwithstanding endea∣vour'd to force Lots House, to Back-biters, who with a Spirit of Envy and Malice, seek an occasion to calumniate Good Men, whom they hate, tho' they find nothing but solid Walls opposing them on every side, without being able to find any Entrance for their Evil-speaking. Their Passion blinds them in such a manner, that they do not perceive those Vertues in Just Men, which all others do; but think they see Crimes in them, which indeed subsist only in their own Imagination. But when ever Calumny thus attacks them, GOD supports them, and the Angels protect them, because they prefer Godliness before all other things whatsoever; and choose rather to lade upon themselves the Anger of Men than to make themselves obnoxious to the Wrath of GOD.
SODOM BURNT. GOD being provoked by the detestible Sin of Sodom, destroys it, with the Neighbouring Cities, by raining down Fire and Brimstone from Hea∣ven upon them. THE Angels having delivered Lot from the Outrage of the Sodomites, acquaint him,The same year 2107. that GOD had sent him to destroy that City; that therefore, if he had any Sons, Daughters, or Sons-in-Law, he should perswade them to leave So∣dom, because the Cry of them being come up before the LORD, they were to receive the just Reward of their Abominations. Whereupon Lot immediately went out, and gave notice hereof to those he had design'd to be his Sons-in-Law; but he seemed as one that mocked unto them. When the Morning was come, the Angels hastned Lot to depart the City with his Wife and two Daughters, that he might not be consumed in the Iniquity of the City; and while he lingred, they laid hold on his Hand (the LORD being merciful to him,) and brought him out of the City, with his VVife and two Daughters, ordering him to escape for his Life, and not to look behind him, lest he should be consumed. But Lot having desir'd leave of them to retire to Zoar, they granted his Request, on condition that he should haste thither, for that they could not do any thing till he was arrived in that City, which they would save at his Request. Lot was no sooner entred into Zoar, but the LORD rained Brimstone and Fire upon Sodom and Gomorrha from the LORD out of Heaven: And he overthrew those Cities, and all the Plain, and all the Inhabitants, and that which grew upon the Ground. Lot's Wife frighted at the sudden Noise she heard, and forgetting the Angels Command, imme∣diately received an Exemplary Punishment, for looking back she became a Pillar of Salt, to serve as a Remedy for time to come, a∣against the Corruption of weak Souls, who after they have entred upon the strait VVay, make a halt to look back to the things they have abandon'd. Lot affrighted at what had hapned to the four Cities, and fearing lest the same might befal Zoar, where he then was, went up from thence and dwelt in the Mountain, ac∣cording to the first Advice the Angels had given him, and there dwelt in a Cave with his two Daughters; who imagining, that they and their Father were the only remains of all the Inhabitants of the Earth, thought it their Duty, not to suffer the whole Genera∣tion of Men to perish; wherefore having made their Father drink Wine, they did not stick to commit Incest, in hopes of being Mothers. And tho' we cannot think on that Action of them without horrour, yet the Innocence of their Intention did much lessen the guilt of it. Thus was Lot miraculously delivered out of the midst of detestible Sinners, at the Prayer of Abraham; and GOD punished their horrible Lusts by a proportionable Pu∣nishment, shewing by the Fire, the burning Lust of the Sodomites; and by Brimstone, the abominable Stench of their Filthiness. This unhappy People (according to S. Gre∣gory) were a lively Figure of the Punish∣ments of the Damned, and of those Eternal Burnings which the World mocks at, as Lot's Sons-in-Law made a Jest of the Vengeance he threatned them with. The Fear which seized Lot, in seeing so strange an effect of the Divine Anger, ought also to lay hold on us, since Jesus Christ assures us, That the Men of Sodom (how abominable soever they have been) shall be treated with less Rigor in the Day of Judgment, than those who having heard his Holy Word, have neglected it. But it seems, as if Men were become wholly insensible: For as that terrible Vengeance (as S. Bernard saith) doth not prevent the flying about of the Ashes of those Abominable Cities in most parts of the World: So neither doth the Comparison Christ made between these Cities, and they that despised his Word, open their Eyes, to prevent the Fire of Hell by sin∣cere Repentance.
17 The Right Honourable Algernon Capell Earle of Essex▪ Viscount Malden, and Baron Capell of Hadham Ld. Leiutent. of Hartfordshire For Advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
18 The Rt. Noble Henry Duke of Beauford, Marquiss & Earle of Worcester▪ Baron Herbert of Chipstow, Raglons & Gower, Knight of ye. most noble order of the Garter &c. For Advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
Abimelech Afflicted by GOD. Abimilech King of Gerar having taken Abraham's Wife by force, supposing her to be his Sister; being threatned by GOD, restores her to Abraham. ABraham being obliged, soon after the Overthrow of Sodom, to quit his for∣mer Abode,The same Year 2107. came to Gerar; where he was expos'd to the same danger by the King of that City, upon the account of his Wife, as before he had been by Pharaoh King of Egypt. For Abra∣ham was no sooner arrived there, but Abime∣lech King of Gerar sent and took Sarah, who call'd her self Abraham's Sister, as she had done before in Egypt. But GOD, who was the continual Prote∣ctor of Abraham's Life, and Sarah's Chastity; and who spared not Kings themselves, when they intended them any Injury, threatned that Prince in the Night time, telling him, He was a dead Man, if he offered to touch Sarah, for that she was the Wife of Abra∣ham. Abimelech was strangely surprized to see himself so likely to have fallen into the great Sin of Adultery, and represents to GOD the sincerity of his Heart, and innocency of his Hands in that Matter, she having declar'd her self to be Abraham's Sister. GOD ac∣cepts of his Apology for himself, and tells him, That for that Reason he had with-held him from committing so great a Sin, thereby sufficiently testifying the Judgment he makes of those, who defile the Purity of the Mar∣riage Bd, by unlawful Lusts, thereby pro∣faning and violating the Sacredness of that Divine Ordinance and Institution. Abimelech terrified by the Threats of GOD, and the Idea of the Crime he was upon the point of committing, rose early in the Morn∣ing, and called all his Officers and Servants, and told them what GOD had acquainted him with; he sent also for Abraham, and reproves him sharply for having concealed the Truth, asking him wherein he had offen∣ded him, to make him and his Kingdom guilty of so great a Sin? and continuing these his Complaints, Abraham tells him, that upon his coming to his City, he not knowing but that the Inhabitants were alto∣gether void of the Fear of GOD, and so might think of killing him for his Wives sake: This was the only Reason had induced him▪ to desire Sarah to say, she was his Sister, as indeed she was, as having hoth had the same Father, tho' not the same Mother; and that in that he had done no more, than what he had usually done in all other places, where he sojourned. Abimelech being satisfied with this Answer of Abraham, restored to him Sarah his Wife, besides the great Presents he made him in Silver, Herds, and Servants; and taking his leave of Sarah, told her, That he had given her Brother (as she called him) a thousand Pieces of Silver, to buy a Veil to cover her (as became a married Wife) that for the time to come, none might be so deceived in her as he had been, but all might know her to be what indeed she was, Abraham's Wife. He desired her also to remember the Sin and Mis∣chief she had like to have made him fall into, that so for the future she might take care, not to occasion the same to others. Abraham (before his Departure) prayed to GOD for Abimelech, and GOD healed him, and his Wife, and his Maid-Servants of the Plague he had laid upon them, because of Sarah. Thus exemplarily (as St. Ambrose saith) was GOD pleased to evidence his hatred of Adultery; and that as he was the Author of Marriage, he tooke care also to avenge the Violaters of the Purity of that Divine Ordi∣nance. And it is enough, that formerly he has expressed his abhorrence of this Crime; for though he does not so openly declare himself against it at present, we ought not therefore the less to apprehend his avenging Justice (as saith the same Father) nor think that he will be less severe in punishing Adultery, because Men commit it with less Scruple, and more daring Licentiousness.
ISHMAEL CAST OUT. Sarah seeing Ishmael (the Son of Hagar) mocking Isaac, desires Abra∣ham to cast out the Bond-woman and her Son, that Isaac alone might be their Heir, according to the Promise of GOD. GOD fulfilling his Promise to Sarah, she brought forth a Son in her old Age, at the set time of which GOD had spoken:Anno Mundi 2108. before Christ 1896. Abra∣ham gave him the Name of Isaac, and Cir∣cumcised him the eighth day, as the LORD had commanded. Sarah in suckling him her self, though she was look'd upon as a great Princess, gave the Lesson to all Mothers (as saith St. Ambrose) That they ought to esteem it their Glory and Joy to give suck to their Children; and that they are but Mothers by halves, who neglect this Duty which GOD and Nature have im∣posed upon them; and which doth greatly en∣force and encrease the reciprocal Love between the Mothers and their Children, during the whole course of their Lives. When the time of weaning Isaac was come, Abraham made a great Feast, to express his Joy;Anno Mundi 2113. before Christ 1891. which was a Fi∣gure of the great Joy the true Pastors of the Church receive, when they see their Children advance in Godliness, being able to digest strong Meat; and stand in need no longer of being fed with Milk. In the mean time, whilst Sarah had so great cause to rejoice, and that her young Son did now abundantly recompence the Grief and Reproach of her past Barrenness, Ishmael (Hagar's Son) becomes an occasion of as much Trouble to her, as his Mother had been some years before. This Lad finding him∣self frustrated in his great Hopes by the Birth of Isaac, whom he considered with regret, as the Heir of those vast Riches which he had already promised to himself, could not endure to see the Joy his Father and Mother took in him, without conceiving a secret Envy against him, which he evidenced by his outward Carriage, behaving himself abusively towards him. Sarah foresaw the fatal Consequences this Hatred might entail upon them, and being most tenderly concerned for her Son, whom she knew was design'd by GOD to be the Heir of all their Goods, she earnestly entreats Abraham to cast out the Bond-woman and her Son. This Request at the first greatly affli∣cted Abraham, as seeming very harsh and grievous to him; but GOD having advised him in all things to do as Sarah had said, he rose up early in the Morning, and took Bread, and a Bottle of Water, and gave them to Hagar and sent her away with her Son. Hagar thus turn'd out, wanders in the Wilderness of Beersheba; where her Water being spent, she cast her Son underneath one of the Shrubs, and sat down over-against him a good way off, that she might not see her Son die. But behold, as she lift up her Voice and wept, an Angel calls to her from Heaven, and speaking comfortably to her, commands her to take up her Son, for that GOD heard the Voice of the Lad, and would make him the Father of a great Nation; and opens her Eyes to discern a Well of Water, which was near her. Hagar com∣forted by this seasonable Refreshment and Di∣vine Support, educates her Son in the VVil∣derness, where he became a dextrous Archer; And his Mother took him a VVife out of the the Land of Egypt. St. Paul plainly tells us, That GOD did then (in Isaac and Ishmael) set forth a lively Picture of what was to happen in the Church in all Ages, where the Children of the Pro∣mise should be persecuted by their own Bre∣thren. He who will be Isaac, must always suffer the Envy and Insultings of Ishmael; and be so far from rendring Evil for Evil, that he rather bemoans the unhappiness of his Brother, who is for ever banished from his Father's House. 'Tis the Grace of GOD alone, and so we must own it, that makes us Sons of the Free-woman; and to chuse rather to be persecuted with Isaac, than to persecute others with Ishmael, because the Anger and Envy of Ish∣mael is only Temporal, whereas the Inheri∣tance of Isaac is eternal.
19 John Rossiter of Somerby in the County of Lincoln Esq. For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
20 The Rt. Honourable the Lady Anne Francklyn, daugh∣ter of Robert late Earle of Warwich, and wife to Sr. Richard Francklyn of the Moore in Hartford Shire Baronet. For advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
ABRAHAM's SACRIFICE. ABRAHAM Offers his Son ISAAC. IShmael being turn'd out of Abraham's House, Isaac continued there in peace, as sole Heir of his Father's E∣state;Anno Mundi 2145. before Christ 1859. but being now arri∣ved to the Age of 37 Years (as the Jewish Tradition tells us) GOD, to try Abraham, commands him take his Son, his only Son Isaac, whom he loved, and offer him on a Mountain he would tell him. Abraham, who remembred he had received his Son from GOD, made no difficulty to surrender the Gift to the Donor; and his great Faith stifled all the Thoughts which did arise in him about the Divine Promises, so often repeated to him, that from the very Isaac (whom he was now about to offer) his Posterity should be multiplied as the Stars of Heaven. Accordingly he rises early in the Morning, and keeping this great Enterprize secret in his Breast, takes Isaac his Son; and two Servants, cleaves the Wood for the Burnt-Offering, and goes to the place of which GOD had told him. Having spent two Days in his Journey, (during which, neither the sight of his dear Son, nor the Work he was sent about, having been able to shake his Faith) on the third Day lifting up his Eyes, he sees afar off the Place appointed for this wonderful Sacrifice; and having charged his Servants to stay at the Foot of the Mountain, while he and his Son went to worship GOD, he takes the Wood of the Burnt-Offering, and lays it on Isaac his Son: who going up this Mountain, laden with the Wood which was to consume him, was a most lively Figure of the true Isaac, who went up to Mount Calvary, bearing the Wood upon which he was to consummate the Offering of all Offerings, and the fulfilling of all Sacrifices. Whilst Isaac thus climbs the Mountain with his Father, who carried the Fire and Sacrificing-Knife in his Hands, he asketh him, where the Lamb was, that was design'd for the Burnt-Offering? But Abraham, in a transport of Faith, as one who had forgot that he was his Father, answers him without any emotion, that GOD would provide him∣self a Lamb. And being arrived at the place, to which GOD had directed him, he built there an Altar, laid the Wood in order, and binding Isaac his Son, laid him on the Altar upon the Wood, and stretching forth his Hand, took the Knife to slay him. But GOD seeing this unparallel'd and stu∣pendous Constancy in the Father, as well as Submission in the Son, and not willing that this great Sacrifice, which in his Eyes (who looks at the Heart) was already as good as accomplish'd, should be sullied with Blood, to represent the unbloody Christian Sacrifices of Self-denial and Resignation, stops his Hand by an Angel from Heaven, as knowing now that he truly feared him, seeing he had not with-held his Son, his only and most dearly beloved Son from him. Hereupon Abraham seeing a Ram caught in a Thicket by his Horns, offered him up to GOD instead of his Son, and returned to his House. This History (so full of Mysteries, and where∣of all the particular Circumstances are such live∣ly Figures of what was afterwards to befal Jesus Christ) contains a most excellent Lesson for Parents, teaching them to have no greater Passion for their Children, than to offer them up to GOD. And St. Chrysostom thinks, he cannot suffi∣ciently lament the Misery of those Christian Parents, who instead of offering their Chil∣dren up to GOD, like Abraham, sacrifice them to the Devil, by engaging them in the Vanity of the World, and corrupting their tender and flexible Disposition by their wicked Examples. An only Abraham (saith he) offers his Son Isaac to GOD, but whole Crowds offer their Children to Devils; and the Joy we have to see a small number, who take some care to e∣ducate their Children, is quite stifled by the Grief we receive from those vast numbers that destroy them, and who deserve for their Ambition or Negligence, to be accounted the Murtherers rather than Parents of their Children.
THE DEATH OF SARAH. Sarah dieth. Abraham purchaseth a Burying-place for her of the Children of Heth. ISAAC being restored to his Parents by the command of him who at first had bestowed him,Anno Mundi 2145. before Christ 189. (against the order of Nature) was the comfort of his Mother in her old Age, who being arrived at the Age of 127 years, died 37 years after she had born Isaac. Abraham having wpt over her for some time, considers of providing a Burying-place for her, and to that purpose addresses him∣self to the Children of Heth. He represents to them that he was a Stranger in the Land, and entreats them to grant him the possessi∣on of a Burying-place amongst them, that he might bury his dead out of his sight. The People of the Land receive his Re∣quest with all the Kindness and Civility ima∣ginable, giving him the Title of a Prince of God, and desiring him to take his choice of all their Sepulchers for to bury his Dead. Abraham, who (by a holy Generosity) would not be beholden to any Man, makes a becoming acknowledgment of their Civili∣ty; and bowing himself to the People of the Land, saith to them; If it be your mind that I should bury my Dead out of my sight, hear me, and entreat for me to Ephron the Son of Zohar (who was one of the most honourable and chiefest Men amongst them) to sell me his Field, in which there is a double Cave for a possession of a Burying-place amongst you. Ephron having heard Abraham's Proposal, would needs frankly bestow the Ground upon him, saying, Nay, my Lord, hear me, the Field I freely give thee, and the Cave that is therein, in the presence of the Sons of my People give I it thee, bury thy Dead. But Abraham being immovable in his Resolution, obliged Ephron at last to tell him, That the Field he desired was worth 400 Shekels of Silver, and still continuing to press Abraham to accept of it as his free Gift, he (in pre∣sence of the People of the Land) weighs out the Money Ephron had mentioned, and by this means the Field of Ephron was made sure to Abraham for a Possession for ever, and there he buried his Wife Sarah. 'Tis a thing we can never sufficiently ad∣mire, that this Holy Man, having so often received repeated Assurances from God, That all the Land where he then sojourned, should be his one day, yet should never think of making any Purchase there, save only of a Burying-place for himself and Children. It seems his continual eying of Heaven made him despise the Earth, where he lived only to die daily. And whilst God was think∣ing to give a long Posterity to Abraham, and to that Posterity, the best and most fruitful of all Lands, Abraham thinks of nothing but his Death and Burial, and of leaving no o∣ther Inheritance for his Children, but the same he had purchased for himself in his life∣time, viz. a Burying-place, thereby to en∣gage them also to the continual Meditation of Death, and consequently to a Contempt of all earthly and outward Possessions whatsoe∣ver; the enjoyment of which being only momentany, are not worthy enough or pro∣portioned to employ the Thoughts and De∣sire of an immortal an intelligent Creature, design'd for the Enjoyment and Contempla∣tion of more lasting, yea eternal and Hea∣venly Objects and Possessions. Thus this Holy Man did evidence, that he deserved the glorious Testimony S. Paul gives of him: That the Land of Caanan, which was the most goodly Country of the whole Earth, was either of no account at all with him, or at most, on∣ly serv'd him for a Looking-glass, in which he beheld the Reflection of another, that is, of a Heavenly Country; in the Contemplation of which his Spirit was so continually employed, and as it were entranced, that he could say with St. Paul, That in comparison thereof all the good things of this World were but Dung and Dross in his esteem, and so far from tempting him beyond the Bounds of his Duty, that they were not able to induce him to have any consi∣deration for them, any further, than they condu∣ced to the exercise of Charity, or the supply of Natural Necessity.
21 Thomas Lewes of the City of London Gentleman For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
22 Madam Elizabeth, the Wife of Josia Child of Wansted in Essex Esq and Daughter of Sr. Thomas Cooke▪ of Hackney in Midlesex Knight. For advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
ISAACS MARRIAGE. ISAAC Espouseth REBEKAH. ABRAHAM being old, and thinking to take a Wife for his Son Isaac, re∣solves not to Marry him to any of the Daughters of the Canaanites amongst whom he dwelt;Anno Mundi, 2148. before Christ, 1856. and therefore commands Eliezer his Steward, to go to Mesopotamia, there to take a Wife for his Son. Eliezer accordingly undertakes the Jour∣ney, and being come neer to the City of Na∣hor, prays to God, that he would be pleased to point out to him the Person he had design∣ed to be his Masters Sons Wife, by this To∣ken, that when the Damsels of the City came out to draw Water, she (who at his Re∣quest to draw some Water for him to Drink, should frankly offer to draw Water, not only for him, but for his Camels also) might be the VVife he had appointed for Isaac. Before he had made an end of Praying, Rebekah (a Damosel fair and lovely) the Daughter of Bethuel, the Son of Milcah, the Wife of Nahor, Abraham's Brother, came out of the City to draw VVater; and having fill'd her Pitcher, Eliezer ran to meet her, and desired some VVater to drink; which she rea∣dily gave him, and then hasted to draw Water for all his Camels. This Faithful Servant perceiving by this, that assuredly she was the Person whom the LORD had appointed to be his young Ma∣sters VVife, he immediately presents her with a Jewel for her Forehead, and Bracelets in ac∣knowledgment of her Kindness; demanding of her, whose Daughter she was, and whe∣ther there was Convenience in her Fathers House to lodge him and his Company? To which having return'd an Answer accor∣ding as he wish'd it, she made haste home to acquaint them with what had past. Laban her Brother having heard his Sisters Report, and seen the Jewels and Bracelets Abraham's Servant had given her, ran out to meet him, and desired him to come in. Eliezer being entred, and Meat set before him, protested he would neither Eat nor Drink, till he had received an Answer to the business about which he was sent. He ac∣quainted them, that he was Abraham's Ser∣vant, that GOD had blessed his Master, and made him rich and powerful, who resolving to take a Wife for his Son, had sent him to fetch one from amongst his Kindred; that be∣ing arriv'd in their Neighbourhood, he had prayed to GOD to give him a Sign, where∣by he might know this Damosel whom GOD had appointed for Isaac; and finding by the Divine Indication, that Rebekah was the very Person, he demanded of them, whether they were willing to let her go along with him, for that purpose. Bethuel and Laban perceiving a plain Fin∣ger of GOD in the whole Conduct of this Affair, gave their Consent; whereupon Elie∣zer brought forth Vessels of Gold and Silver, and Jewels, which he presented to Rebekah, and to her Relations, and the next Day pre∣pared himself to return to hs Master. But Rebekah's Relations, being unwilling to part with her so suddenly, urged him to tarry some Days with them, which he refusing, Re∣bekah was called for, whom they had dispos'd of without asking her Advice, as S. Ambrose observes, to know whether she were willing to go with Eliezer; which she affirming, returns with speed to his Master. As they drew nigh to the House, they see Isaac walking in the Field, whereupon Rebekah having understood who he was, lighted from her Camel to Veil her self. Eliezer gives an account of his Journey to Isaac, who took Rebekak for his Wife, and the Affection which immediately was kindl'd in him for her, com∣forted him against the Sorrow he had conceived for the Death of his Mother, who died 3 years before. We find in this Relation, an admirable mo∣del of an Holy Marriage, where the enquiry is not after Portion or VVealth, but into the Manners and Innocence of the Party, and is un∣dertaken with great Care and many Prayers, and by the Advice and Mediation of wise and holy Persons. S. Ambrose would have all young Women to learn of Rebekah, who Veiled her self o soon as she saw Isaac, to express their Modesty and Shamefac'dness even to their Husbands themselves, by endeavouring to gain their Hearts, not so much by their Beauty and Dres∣sing (which Rebekah might have done) as by their Modesty, and the holiness of their Manners and Conversation.
JACOB AND ESAU. Esau sells his Birthright to his Brother for a Mess of Potage. AFTER the happy consummating of Isaac's Marriage with Rebekah, Abra∣ham lived yet ma∣ny years,Abraham died 175 years old. Anno Mundi 2183 and before Christ 1821. 100 years after his coming into the Land of Canaan; and 15 years after the birth of Jacob. GOD at last calling him to himself, for to enjoy those good things which his great and unparallel'd Faith had al∣ways had in its Eye. He had the Happi∣ness to testifie his Faithfulness to GOD, even to his last breath, taking pleasure to look up∣on himself, as a Stranger and a Pilgrim in the Land of Canaan, without the least thought of returning to Chaldea. He always subjected his Reason to his Faith, and his tenderest Natural Affections to the Love he had for GOD. He followed GOD every where, without making a halt at the sight of Dangers. His Prudence delivered him from those to which Sarahs Beauty had expos'd him, and his Courage vanquish'd those he voluntarily ran into, to rescue Lot his Nephew. And at length, having spent 175 years in the continual exercise of all holy Vertues and Graces, and having received the highest Favours, Commendations, and Testi∣monies, that ever any meer Man received from GOD himself, he was by him at last transported to the possession of that better and Heavenly Country, which by Faith he had so often taken a prospect of. GOD (as the Scripture observes) after his Death multiply'd his Divine Blessings on his Son Isaac, to whom nothing now was wan∣ting to make him compleatly happy, but the fruitfulness of his beloved Rebekah; for they had been married 20 years without having any Children. But Isaac, who was now 60 years old, entreating the LORD for his Wife, GOD heard his Prayers, and she became great with Child of Male Twins, who strugling together in her Womb, Rebe∣kah (terrified at this Accident) enquired of the LORD what this Prodigy did presage. The Divine Oracle answered, That these two Children should be the Heads of two People, and that the eldest of them should serve the younger. Accordingly when her time was come, she was delivered of Twins. He who was first born came out Red and Hairy, and was called Esau, and immediately after came out his Brother, whose Hand took hold on Esau's Heel, which gave him the name of Jacob. When these two Children were grown up, it hapned that Jacob on a time sod Lentil-Potage,They were about 20 years of age accor∣ding to Saint Austin. Anno Mundi, 2188. before Christ, 1816. and Esau at the same time returning from Hun∣ting, (which was his ordinary employment) and being extreamly tired and hungry, with such greediness desired this Potage, that Jacob perceiving it, would not part with it till he had promised to sell him his Birthright in consideration thereof; to which he readily agreed. The Fathers tell us, That these two Chil∣dren represent to us two People, viz. the Good and the Wicked, who stand always at defiance together from their Birth. The first of these is represented by Esau, who seem to be the First-born, by reason of the advantages, they have in this VVorld, who notwithstanding proves himself the Servant of the younger; because the wicked (even by their wickedness) do good service to the Just, either by purifying them by their Persecutions, or by making them more humble by the sight of the Sins which o∣thers commit, from whom GOD has chosen and separated them, without any of their own skill or discerning, even from their Mothers Womb. Esau selling his Birthright for a Mss of Potage, may well make those tremble, who hast to enrich themselves with the contemp∣tible Wealth of this World, and who instead of rejecting them readily like Jacob, on the contrary renounce all the Happiness of Heaven, to possess them. But those who are in this state never bemoan themselves; for as Esau was little troubled that he had sold his Birth∣right, so those Persons he was the Figure of, little mind their loss of Eternal Riches, if they may but satisfie their Lusts in enjoying the pleasures of Sin, which last but for a season; thereby shewing themselves to be profane and wild Esau's, who neglecting their Heavenly Birthright in Jesus Christ, take up with the empty Husks of Vanity, and with the Swine of the World.
23 John Baker of Mayfield Place in the County of sussex Esq For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
24 Robert Squib of St Margarets Westminster in Middlesex Esq. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
ISAAC BLESSETH JACOB. Isaac intending to bless Esau, by the wisdom of Rebekah bestows his Blessing on Ja∣cob, to whom the same (according to Divine Appointment) dd belong. ESAU having sold Jacob his Birthright, Rebekah their Mother, who had a ten∣der Love for Jacob, rati∣fied the said Birthright to him many years after,Anno Mundi, 2245. before Christ, 1759. Isaac being then 137. years old, and lived after that 44 years. by an holy piece of Craft, and full of Mysteries. For Isaac being sensible of his great Age, and willing to bless his Children before his Death, called to him his Eldest Son Esau, whom he loved, and bids him take his Wea∣pons, his Quiver and his Bow, and go out to hunt some Venison for him, and make him Sa∣voury Meat, such as he loved, that his Soul might bless him before he died. Rebekah immediately acquaints Jacob with what passed, and bid him fetch her two Kids, that she might make Savoury Meat for Isaac, such as he loved; Jacob having herein obey'd his Mother, she makes hast to dress them after such a manner as she knew her Husband liked best. In the mean time she takes good∣ly Rayment of her eldest Son Esau, and puts them upon Jacob her younger Son; and she put the Skins of the Kids upon his Hands, and upon the Smooth of his Neck, to the end that his Father (whose Sight failed him) in perceiving the Voice of Jacob, might not∣withstanding (by the Hairiness of his Hands and Neck) suppose him to be Esau Jacob coming to his Father, with the Meat his Mother had prepared, and desiring him to eat of his Venison; Isaac was suprized to hear a Voice which resembled that of Jacob, rather than the Voice of Esau, bid him come near to him, that he might feel, whether he were his very Son Esau or no; and feeling the Hair of the Kids-skins, he said, the Voice is Jacobs Voice, but the Hands are the Hands of Esau. After he had eaten, as he went to kiss Jacob, he smelled the smell of his Gar∣ments, and blessing him, said; Behold the smell of my Son, is as the smell of a Field which the Lord hath blessed; therefore GOD give thee of the Dew of Heaven, and plenty of Corn and Wine. Let People serve thee, and Nations bow down to thee: Be Lord over thy Brethren, and let thy Mothers Sons bow down to thee. Cursed be every one that Cur∣seth thee, and blessed be he that Blesseth thee. Scarcely had Isaac made an end of these Words, but Esau comes in from Hunting, and having prepared his Savoury Meat, brings it in to his Father Isaac, and desires him to eat of his Venison, that his Soul might bless him. The Holy Patriarch perceiving what had hapned was extreamly surprized, insomuch that he trembled exceedingly. But perceiv∣ing a Divine Direction in the whole conduct of that Affair; so far was he from retracting what he had done, that he confirmed and ratified it, declaring that as he had Blessed, so he should be Blessed. Esau upon hearing these words from his Father, cryed with a great and exceeding bitter Cry, and said, Bless me, even me also my Father: And then reflecting and complaining of the Deceit of his Brother, he asked his Father, whether he had no more than one only Blessing? Being in this respect (as the Fathers observe) a figure of those who are desirous to unite GOD and the World together, cast about how they may enjoy the Comforts of Heaven, and the Pleasures of the Earth both together. Isaac moved with the bitter cries of his Son Esau, Blesseth him also, but so as to subject him to his Brother; which made him conceive such an implacable Hatred against Jacob, that he desired nothing more than his Fathers Death, that he might kill him. This Mysterious History throughout, represents to us in all the parts of it, Jesus Christ, cloa∣thed in the outward appearance of a Sinner, as Jacob here was in that of Esau. It is also an admirable Figure of the Reprobation of the Jews, who desired nothing but the good things of the World, and of the Election of the Church; which (like David) desires but one thing of GOD, and requests but one Blessing. We must have a care, (as S. Paul saith) not to imitate Esau, who having sold his Birthright to Jacob, and desiring afterwards, as being the Eldest, to receive the Blessing of his Father, was rejected, without being able to perswade his Father, to revoke what he had pronounced in favour of Jacob, notwithstanding his en∣treating it with many Tears. For as he had de∣spised GOD, GOD also despised his Cries and Tears, as not proceeding from a sincere Re∣pentance, nor from a true change of Heart.
JACOBS LADDER. Jacob fleeing from his Brother, sees in a Dream a Mystical Ladder. THe Anger of Esau against Jacob, who had beguiled him of his Fathers Bles∣sing, was too visible to be hid from Rebekah,The same Year. 2245. before Christ▪ 1759. Jacob then being 77 years old. and the tender Love she had for Jacob, made her very solicitous how she might best prevent the fa∣tal effects thereof. Having well weighed the matter, she thought it necessary for Jacob to absent himself, and give way to his Brother for a time, to the end, that avoiding his sight for some years, it might mitigate or quite efface the VVrath he had conceiv'd a∣gainst him: and therefore she chose rather to deprive her self of the sight and company of her dearly beloved Son, than to expose him to the direful Consequences of his Brothers Wrath, preferring herein the safety of her Son, before her own satisfaction. To make this her design the readier to be approved of by Isaac, she took an occasion to discourse with him about Jacob's Marriage, assuring him, that she should never be able to bear it, if Jacob should take one of the Daughters of the Land of Canaan for his Wife, following the lewd Example of his Bro∣ther Esau, who had married two of them, not regarding the aversion his Parents had against them. She therefore desires Isaac to send him into Mesopotamia to Bethuel her Father, that there he might provide himself a Wife Isaac readily approving of his Wives Pro∣posal, calls Jacob to him, and renewing all the Blessings he had formerly bestowed upon him, he charges him to take him a Wife of the Daughters of Laban▪ his Mothers Brother. Thus Jacob leaves his Native Country, ra∣ther like a poor Fugitive avoiding the Anger of his enraged Brother, than as a rich and wealthy Person, who goes a Woing with all the Ornaments and Accoutrements common in that case with the Men of the World: And when in this his state of Poverty and Deser∣tion (which admirably well represents to us the Difficulties and Tribulations that accom∣pany a Christian Life) he had lighted upon a certain place in the open Field, where (by reason of the approaching Night, he was forced to take up his Lodging, having no o∣ther Bed but the Earth, nor any softer Pillow to rest his Head upon, than what a Stone could afford him, he falls into a sound Sleep. But the meanness of his Lodging could not bar him from the Divine Presence and Favour; for GOD in a Dream represents to him how near he is to those who are poor and persecu∣ted by their Brethren for his Name sake, and what a particular care he has of them in this their sad and solitary Condition, as to out∣ward appearance. For this Holy Man in his Dream, beholds a Ladder, the foot whereof stood upon the Earth, and the top reached to Heaven, and the An∣gels of GOD ascending and descending up∣on it. He also saw the LORD himself standing above it, who said, I am the LORD GOD of Abraham thy Father, and the GOD of Isaac; the Land whereon thou liest will I give thee, and to thy Seed; and thy Seed shall be as the Dust of the Earth, and in thy Seed shall all the Families of the Earth be bles∣sed; and behold I am with thee, and will keep thee whithersoever thou goest, and will bring thee again into this Land, for I will not leave thee until I have performed all that I have pro∣mised unto thee. Jacob awaking from his Sleep, and being amazed at the Glory of the Vision that had been represented to him, could not contain himself from crying out, How dreadful is this place! for the LORD is here, though I knew it not. This Vision, and this Mystical Ladder, of which the Fathers tell us so many choice things, lively represents to us, the Care which the Di∣vine Providence in all Ages would take of those that are his, that he would be present with them in the time of their Affliction, and in the place of their Exile and Pilgrimage, and that they should never want the assistance and comfort of the Holy Angels. And that there∣fore they ought not to fear the Wrath of Men, nor the Conspiracy of their own Brethren a∣gainst thm; forasmuch as all those would but make them find GOD more present with, and ready to help them in all their Difficulties and Necessities whatsoever.
25 Mis. Susanna Browne, eldest daughter of Edward Brown of London Dr. in Physick. For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
26 William Benge of Cosely wood in Wadherst in ye. County of sussex Gentleman▪ For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
RACHEL AND LEAH. Jacob Serveth his Uncle Laban for Rachel his Daughter. JACOB being assured by this Mysterious Vision of the Divine Protection, went ve∣ry chearfully on his Way to Haran,The same year, 2245. and meeting with some Shepherds near a Well in the Field, which had a great Stone on the Mouth thereof, where they used to Water their Flocks, he asked them, whether they knew one Laban the Grandchild of Nahor? who having answered him, that they knew him very well; added, that Rachel his Daughter was coming thither with his Sheep to water them at the Well. Jacob no sooner saw her coming, but he went and rolled away the Stone from the Wells Mouth, and watered her Flock; and having made himself known unto her, and kissed her, Rachel hasted away to tell her Father Laban; who had no sooner heard these Tydings of Jacob, but he ran forth, and embracing and kissing him, brought him to his House. Jacob perceiving a manifest Divine Direction in all these particulars, acquaints Laban with the occasion of his undertaking that Journey, discourses to him the Fury of his Brother, and the necessity he was under to absent him∣self from him for a time. Laban readily complies with Jacob's desire of continuing with him; but forasmuch as he could not endure that Jacob should serve him for nothing, Jacob makes a bargain with him to serve him seven years for Rachel his youngest Daughter. These seven years being expired, Jacob ex∣pected Rachel, whom he so passionately loved, but found himself at last wholly frustrated of his hopes; for Laban not thinking fit to Marry his younger Daughter before the elder, took Leah the elder, and brought her to Jacob by Night; who not knowing but that it was his beloved Rachel,Anno Mundi, 2252. before Christ, 1752. Jacob being then 84 years old. took her to his Bed. Jacob in the Morning perceiving what Laban had put upon him, complains thereof with great resentment; but Laban endeavouring to appease Jacob's just Displeasure, desires him to allow seven Days for the Solemnity of his first Marriage, and that when they were en∣ded, he would give him Rachel also; but yet upon this condition, that he should serve for her other 7 years During which time Ja∣cob had six Sons by Leah, but Rachel continu∣ing barren for a great while, was so much grieved thereat, that envying her Sisters fer∣tility, she at last burst out into that passionate Expression of her sorrow to Jacob, saying, Give me Children, or else I die. Some time after GOD was pleased to ease her of this sore Affliction, and to hear her Prayers, so that she conceived a Son, whom she called Joseph. Jacob after the Birth of his Son Joseph, desi∣red leave of Laban to re∣turn with his Wives and Children into his own Coun∣try. He represented to him,Anno Mundi, 2259. Jacob being 91 years old. that having spent fourteen Years in his Service, during which time he had with all Care and Faith∣fulness discharged the difficult and laborious Employment of managing his Affairs, and improving his Estate, that therefore it was now high time for him to think of providing for his own Family. Laban having learnt by Experience, that the LORD had blessed him for Jacob's sake, earnestly conjured him to continue longer; which if he would agree to, he should be his own Carver, and have what Wages he would require; whereupon Jacob having mentioned the consideration he required (which was readily embraced by La∣ban) he continued to take the burthen and care of all his Flocks and Cattel upon him for six years longer. The Fathers, in taking a view of the Life of Jacob, could not sufficiently admire the Di∣vine Conduct towards this Holy Patriarch, whom he exposed to twenty years hard Servi∣tude, notwithstanding the Promises he had made unto him of being sole LORD and Possessor of the whole Land of Canaan. His Sons were to be the Princes of a numerous People, and their Father is fain to be a Servant, and by hard and continual Labour and Watching to supply the Necessity of himself and Family. GOD was willing, (say they) by this Exam∣ple, to shew that the glory of the Pastors and Teachers of the Church, is to be employed in continual Labour and Watching for the good of the Souls committed to their Charge, and in thoughts of providing for, and satisfying their Flock, rather than themselves.
Iacobs Return to his Birth-place. Jacob leaves Laban, to return to his own Country. THe Blessings that GOD so plentifully showr'd down upon Jacob, and on all that belonged to him, so excited Laban's Envy,Anno Mundi, 2265. before Christ, 1739. Jacob being then 104 years old. that he perceived it was his Prudence to leave Me∣sopotamia, for the same Reason, that before had obliged him to quit Canaan. Whilst these Thoughts were ruminating in his Mind, without daring to put them in execu∣tion for fear of undertaking any thing from a motion of his own Spirit, GOD himself commanded him to return to the place of his Nativity, and promises to be with him, and to defend him in his Journey. Jacob hereupon casts about, how to accom∣plish GOD'S Commands, and resolves to do it in the most secret manner, and to depart from Mesopotamia in the same manner, as he first came thither, that is, like a Fugitive. To this purpose, he calls for his two Wives, and discourses to them his design, which they approv'd of, and agree to follow him: So Jacob taking his Opportunity during La∣ban's Absence, went his way privately, ta∣king his Family and Possessions with him. Laban being inform'd of his sudden unex∣pected Departure, and missing some of his Idols, which Rachel without the knowledge of her Husband had taken with her, in a Tran∣sport of Passion pursues him seven days, and overtakes him on Mount Gilead; but before their coming together, GOD appears to Laban in a Dream by Night, charging him not in the least to hurt Jacob. As soon as they were met, Laban complains to Jacob, reproaching him for basely stealing away from him, and hurrying away his Daugh∣ters, as Captives taken by the Sword: He told him, it was ill done to conceal his Depar∣ture, and thereby to prevent him of taking his last farewel of his Children, and to shew his Peternal tenderness for them; and con∣cluded, that however he might exercise him∣self with the Possession he had to return to his own Country and Fathers House; yet that his robbing him of his Idols was a thing un∣just, and that he could have no Pretence or Plea for it. Jacob at these Words interrupted him, and having excused the Privacy of his Departure, absolutely deny'd the taking away the said Idols, so far as to give him leave to kill the Party with whom he should find them. La∣ban having fought them with great diligence, at last enters Rachels Tent; but before his coming she had carefully hid them in the Ca∣mels Furniture, and sitting upon them, desi∣red her Father, not to take it ill, that she rose not up to pay him her dutiful Respects, as being at that time indispos'd. Laban being forced to return without find∣ing them, Jacob begins sharply to expostulate with him for his most unjust and hard deal∣ing towards him; but at length, their Spi∣rits being calmed before their parting, they made a Covenant to observe reciprocally, and having Feasted together, lovingly take leave of each other. In this History, Jacob is to be admired as a perfect Model of that Wisdom and Justice which we are to observe in living in the World: He took care not to burthen himself with the possession of any thing, but what he could take along with him, to the end he might not be forced to depend upon any one. As he lost nothing of what was his own, neither took he ought that belonged to another. He had en∣riched himself not only without impairing o∣thers, but by procuring particular Profit and Advantage. Laban, who treated him so like a Slave, who wish'd him no good, but endeavoured to op∣press and injure him, yet in effect could do no∣thing to his prejudice, nor hinder him from departing from him with great Riches; For when he came to reason with Jacob, his bad Nature became good; because Jacob's Actions were season'd with Justice and Wisdom, and di∣rected by the guidance of GODS Spirit. Happy is he who with Jacob can say to the Devil and the World, Search, whether there be any thing with me that is yours, and take it: And who, with blessed Rachel, (tho' of an Idolatrous Family) treads under foot her Fa∣thers Idols. She (by her Example) teacheth Christian Daughters not to follow the sinful Cstoms of their Parents, who often desire nothing more than to sacrifice them to the Idol of Worldly Vanity; but having an Eye to the eternal and satisfying Delights of a Heavenly Country, to take care not to forfeit the same, by loving their Fathers more than GOD.
27 John Jeffreys of Llywell in the County of Brecknock Esq. For Advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
28 Collonel Thomas strangwayes of Melbury-Sampford in the County of Dorset. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
Iacob Wrestling with an Angel. Jacobs Wisdom in Appeasing Esau's Anger. His Wrestling with an Angel. JACOB having thus escaped the hands of Laban, thought of nothing now, but how he might escape those of Esau his Brother;The same Year. in order whereunto he sends Messengers before him unto the Land of Seir, to acquaint Esau in the most submissive way imaginable, that ha∣ving sojourned with Laban in Mesopotamia for several years, he was then upon his return to his Fathers House, and that the occasion of his sending to him was, That he might find grace in his sight. But the Messengers (upon their return) ac∣quainting Jacob, that as soon as they had de∣livered their Message to Esau, he had put himself at the Head of 400 Armed Men, and was already on his march to meet him, he be∣came seized with an extream Fear, which made him cast forth strong Cries to GOD, to deliver him from the Hand of Esau his Brother. Having thus first of all fixed his confidence in GOD, he proceeded to make use of all his Natural Prudence to calm his Brothers Anger, and to incline his Heart towards him, which he thought he could not so well do a∣ny other way than by Presents. Wherefore having set apart 200 She-Goats, 20 He-Goats, 200 Ewes, 20 Rams, 80 Milch Camels, with their Colts, 40 Cows, and 10 Bulls, 20 She-Ases, and 10 Foals, he delivered them to his Servants, every Drove by themselves, with Orders to leave a space between every one, and express Directions, how to behave them∣selves towards Esau, to the end, that his Spi∣rit seeing those Presents pass severally, might by little and little be mollified towards him, as well as by the humble submission of those who offered them to him in the Name of their Master. Jacob having given these Orders, which were not to be executed until the next day, caused his Wives and Children (with all that belonged to him) to pass over the Brook Jabbok by Night, whilst Jacob was left alone on the other side. Then Jacob betakes him∣self in earnest Prayer to GOD, for an happy issue of the Meeting between him and his Bro∣ther, whereupon a Man, (or rather an Angel in the shape of a Man) appeared unto him, and Wrestled with him until the Break of Day; and seeing that he did not prevail against him, he touched the Sinew or Hollow of his Thigh, and caused him to halt: But Jacob taking new Courage from this happy hurt, told him he had hurt him; and the Angel would fain have been gone, but Jacob would not let him go until he had blessed him. Then the Angel demanded what was his Name, and gave him the new Name of ISRAEL; withal assuring him, that as he had been so happy and strong as to prevail with GOD, he had no need to apprehend any thing of danger from Men, and in particular from his Brother Esau. Not long after Jacob seeing his Brother coming a far off, at the Head of 400 Men, and having ranged his Family in the order he thought best, he passed on before them to meet him; and as he came near he bowed himself seven times to the ground before him, and not being able to resist the powerful impression which Jacob's meek Submission made upon his Spirit, runs to meet him, falls upon his Neck, and kisses him; yea, his former Wrath was turn'd to that degree of Tenderness and Af∣fection, that he could not withhold himself from Tears. He with pleasure beholds the Wives and Children which GOD had given him, and could hardly be perswaded to receive the Presents that Jacob design'd for him. After this, Esau (to shew his Kindness to him) offered to keep Company with him, and with his Armed Men, to be a Guard to him and his Company, but Jacob having repre∣sented to him how necessary it was for him to go on softly, because of the tenderness of his young Children and the Herds with young, which if over-driven but one day, would cer∣tainly die, pressed Esau to march on before to Mount Sier, where he would not fail to wait upon him. Thus did he not only avoid the Anger of his Brother, who had sworn his destruction; but moreover changed it into Tenderness and Love. He did not fix his Thoughts upon the conside∣ration of his own Innocence, or Esaus Guilt and Blame-worthiness; he blotted out of his Heart all the Resentments he might have had against him; and if he was troubled for his Misdemeanors, 'twas rather (saith S. Ambrose) for his Brothers sake than his own.
DINAH. Dinah in going to see the Daughters of the Land, Shechem Ravisht her; her Bro∣thers, to avenge the Affront, kill all the People of Shechem. WHEN Jacob was return'd from Meso∣potamia, and dwelt peaceably at Sa∣lem, a City of the Sheche∣mites,Anno Mundi, 2274. before Christ, 110. Dinah being about 15 years old. where he had al∣so bought a parcel of Ground, an Accident hap∣ned, which occasion'd him a great deal of Sorrow. Dinah (his Daughter by Leah) being gone abroad to see the Daughters of the Land, Shechem (the Son of Hamor the Hivite, who was the King of that Country) having seen her, took her by force▪ and Ravisht her, and his Passion for her still increasing, he told his Father, that he design'd to Marry her, and desired him to get her to Wife. Jacob was strangely afflicted to hear this sad News of his Daughter Dinahs defilement, and his Sons dissembling their Resentment, that they might the better revenge the Violence done to their Sister, answered Hamor and She∣chem deceitfully, (who were come to desire them to approve of the Marriage of Shechem with Dinah, as well as of other reciprocal Marriages betwixt both People,) that no such thing could be, for that they were Uncircumci∣sed; but in case they would all consent to be Circumcised, then the mutual Alliances they had propounded, might well take place. Hamor and Shechem having made this Pro∣posal to their Subjects, they presently con∣tracted and were Circumcised: But on the third day, when their Pain was most sensible, Simeon and Levi (Dinahs Brothers) took their Swords, and came boldly upon the Ci∣ty, and slew all the Males, without sparing the King himself, or his Son, whose unlaw∣ful Lusts were the first cause of this Bloodshed. After this Bloody Execution, the rest of Jacob's Sons entred the City, pillaged it, and carried the Spils both of the City and Country along with them, taking all their little Ones, and their Wives Captives. Jacob was extreamly troubled at this their unheard of Revenge, complaining that they had made his Name hateful and abominable amongst the Inhabitants of the Land, by this their horrible Profidiousness, and that by their Abuse of the Divine Ordinance of Circumci∣sion to satisfie their Revenge, they had as far as in them lay exposed him, and his whole Family to apparent Ruine, for that he was but few in number, and not able to with∣stand them. Whilst Jacob was in no small apprehension of the Mischief, which the Violence of Simeon and Levi might bring upon him from the Neighbouring People, who had heard the Re∣port of their Inhuman Cruelty, GOD com∣mands him to go to Bethel, the place where he had appeared to him when he fled from his Brother Esau: And the Scripture takes notice, that GOD cast his Terror upon all the Cities round about them, that tho' their will was good, they had not the Courage to pursue after the Sons of Jacob. Soon after Jacob's Arrival at Bethel, Rachel (his Wife) died in Labour of her Son Benjamin,Anno Mundi, 2288. before Christ, 1716. and much about the same time Isaac his Father died also, being 180 years of Age, and was buried by his two Sons, E∣sau and Jacob; who soon after parted from each other, one Country being not sufficient to keep their vast Possessions or Herds of Cattel. This History of Dinah has always been con∣sidered by the Fathers, as a pregnant Exam∣ple, teaching us to avoid vain Curiosity, and the Affection of the Company of Strangers▪ And S Ambrose tells us, That if all ought from hence to learn this Instruction, Christian Vir∣gins are obliged to make this use of it before all others. Retirement (saith he) is to be considered by them as their part and portion, and they must avoid Seeing, or being Seen by the People of the World, and differ from them in all their Ways and Deportments. They ought greatly to fear their being overtaken with Dinahs Curiosity, in desiring (like her) to see the Manners of Strange Women, I mean, such as live indeed amongst Christi∣ans, and profess the Name of Christ, but in truth are Heathens, as to their Manners and Conversation; neither can they sufficiently tremble, when they reflect on the fatal conse∣quences of the Curiosity of this young Virgin of about 15 years of Age; who by this vain∣gazing, not only lost her Virginity, but also was the occasion of her Brother's Perfidiousness and Cruelty, the ruin of a whole City, and (if GOD had not prevented) of him and his Family.
29 Captaine Benjamin Poole of Blackwall in the County of Middlesex Gentleman, For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
30 Madam Elizabeth Jeffreys▪ Wife of Iohn Jeffreys of Llywell in the County of Brecknock▪ Esq For Advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
JOSEPH SOLD. Joseph is sold by his Brethren into Egypt. JACOB, who had lately escaped a War with Strangers, was fain soon after to meet with one in his own House,Anno Mundi 2276. before Christ 1728. 12 years before the Death of Isaac. which was the more grievous unto him, as be∣ing between those of his own Flesh and Blood. Joseph (the Son of Rachel) being the last of the Children that were born to Jacob in Mesopotamia at the Age of 16 years and up∣wards, accused his Brethren to his Father of some enormous Crime, which the Scripture doth not mention. This bold Undertaking of their younger Brother, and the tender Love his Father had for him, produced so great En∣vy against him, that they could not so much as speak one Friendly Word to him. This their Hatred was much increased by his ac∣quainting them with two of his Dreams; the one, that as he and his Brethren were binding their Sheaves, his Sheaf arose and stood up in the midst of theirs, and they worshipped it: And the other, that he saw the Sun, Moon, and Eleven Stars worshipping him. These two Dreams, which plainly presaged his future E∣levation, excited a most furious Hatred against him, which GOD made use of for his Ad∣vancement. Some time after, when Jacob had sent Jo∣seph to visit his Brethren, (who fed their Flocks in Shechem) they seeing him coming afar off, conspired against him to slay him. But Reu∣ben, his eldest Brother, abhor'd this their de∣testable Design, and hiding his resolution of saving him, counselled them not to dip their Hands in the Blood of their Brother; but to satisfie themselves by casting him into a Pit, hoping thereby to take him out, and deliver him to his Father. His Brethren approved of Reuben's Advice, and having stript him of his Party-coloured Coat, let him down into the Pit▪ and they sat them down to eat Bread; and they lift up their Eyes, and behold a Company of Ishmae∣lites that came from Gilead with their Ca∣mels, going into Egypt. And Judah said, what profit is it if we slay our Brother? Let us sell him, and let not our Hand be upon him▪ for he is our Brother; and they were content. And they took Joseph out of the Pit, and sold him to the Ishmaelites for 20 Pieces of Silver, and they brought him into Egypt. And they took Joseph's Coat, and killed a Kid, and dip∣ped the Coat in the Blood, and sent it to their Father. And Jacob at the first sight knew it to be Joseph's, and concluded that a wild Beast had devoured him; and being seized with a violent Sorrow, he rent his Garments, put on Sackcloth, and mourned many Days. And his Sons and Daughters rose up to comfort him; but he refused. Thus Little Joseph, who in his Dreams had had a foresight of his future Greatness, and E∣levation, yet did not foresee his being sold for a Slave: And GOD, who revealed to him the Dignity he was to arrive at, conceal'd the Afflictions that were to make way for them. He was fain to give way (for a time) to the Envy of his Brethren, that in this par∣ticular (as in many others) he might be a lively Image of Jesus Christ, and the comfort of good Men, who in all Ages to come should be exposed to the Envy of the Wicked, and the Conspirings of their own Brethren. The Grief of Jacob (which was so just) may nevertheless serve for an Instruction to all Fa∣thers; for though he sorely lamented his Death, yet probably that which was the chiefest Cause, was his loving him too well, which occasioned his loss, thereby stiring up the Envy of his Brethren against him. It is good to love ones Children; yea, it is but a piece of Justice, to love those better than others, who are most vertuous: But it is of dangerous consequence to give too open Marks of it, because this may be pernicious to the be∣loved, by exasperating their Envy to see him preferr'd before them; and Fathers ought in this case to consider, that they can scarce pro∣cure a greater advantage to their Darlings, than to make them to beloved of all their Bre∣thren. And we need not wonder, if we see that a piece of Land, or a particular Legacy given to a best-beloved Son, doth incite the Envy of all his Brethren; because we see here, that a Coat only which Jacob gave Joseph, was the occasion of this their great aversion and hatred unto him.
JOSEPH's CHASTITY. Joseph is tempted by Potiphar's Wife, and cast into Prison. JOSEPH thus sold by his Brethren, was brought to Egypt, and sold to Potiphar, an Officer of Pharaoh, and Captain of his Guard: But GOD, (who never abandons poor persecuted Innocents) made Joseph meet with more Kindness in a strange Country, than he had found in his own, from his Brethren. His Prudence, Modesty and Fidelity, gain'd him his Master's Heart; who perceiving that this young Bondman had nothing that was servile in his Manners and Deportment, he made him Overseer of his House, and committed all that he had to his Care and Management. Whilst Joseph was thus beloved and esteem∣ed by his Master, Potiphar's Wife (by her detestable Lust) came to trouble the Calm he had enjoyed:Anno Mundi 2286. before Christ, 1718. Joseph being about 27 years old. For having oft cast her Eyes upon Joseph, she became soon enflamed with unlawful Passion for him; which she being no longer able to contain within the Secret of her own Breast, it soon broke forth into Words, and from Words to urgent Solicitations, and last of all to open Violence. For finding Joseph always immoveable like a Rock, as having too much Fear of GOD, as well as Respect for his Master, ever to encline to that Crime: This lewd Woman being unable to overcome her Passion, or take Example by the Modesty of him who was her Slave, having found him one day alone in the House, she caught him by the Garment, and would force him to do what he had formerly with so much constan∣cy refused. Joseph seeing himself in this im∣minent and pressing Danger, leaving his Garment in her Hand got away. This Woman irritated by this rude Refusal, soon changed her Affection into a Hatred full of Rage and Madness against him; and ma∣king a loud Outcry, as if Joseph had come to tempt her to unlawful Lust, shewing to her Domesticks (that came in upon her Outcry) Joseph's Cloak, which she pretended that he, upon her Resistance and Outcry, had left in her Hands. With this feign'd Story she gain'd her cre∣dulous Husband, whose Wrath being extream∣ly kindled against Joseph, cast him into the King's Prison, shewing himself now as unjust and cruel, as before he had been kind, and just to his Merit and Virtue. Thus (saith St. Ambrose) the Voice of Cle∣mency is listned to, and Truth is silenc'd. A Woman spake, and that without either Evi∣dence or Witness: She sees that Joseph's chaste Deportment condemns her Lust: She undertakes threfore to sacrifice him to her Revenge, and to punish that Chastity in him, which she had trampled under foot in her self. Thus (adds that Holy Man, reflecting up∣on the Arian Persecution) it often happens, that Prisons become the Lot of innocent Men, and that those who employ their utmost Affronts to corrupt the true Faith, have put others into I∣rons, who would not commit Adultery by embra∣cing their Errors. However (continues that Father) let not the Righteous therefore afflict themselves, for GOD accompanies his Holy Ones in their Dungeon (as it is here said of Joseph, That GOD was with him) and is not ashamed of their Bonds, but comforts them, and gives them fa∣vour in the Eyes of all whom they have to deal with. As there was the time wherein GOD made bare his Omnipotence by visible Judgments; he made use here of a Woman's Hatred, to make Joseph a Ruler over all the Land of Egypt. But now in the time of the New Law (in imi∣tation of Jesus Christ, and the Martyrs) God∣ly Men, who are treated as this Holy Patri∣arch was, aspire only after his Patience, and not at all after that Greatness which seconded it: and in their Afflictions, which proceed both from the hand of GOD and Men, they eye GOD alone, and not Men. They know they are always guilty before him, though not of the Crimes they are accused of; and they heartily bless the Hand, which, at the same time it strikes, heals. They not only (like Joseph) entertain no Ill-will against those who have contributed to their Sufferings, but rather think themselves thereby obliged to love them the more. They rec∣kon the days of their Affliction amongst the hap∣piest days of their Life, and even when they are persuaded, that they can look for no liberty but from the Hands of Death, they comfort themselves with that which was Jacob's com∣fort in his distress, and say, I have in Hea∣ven him who is Judge and Witness of my Heart, and of him alone I expect the clear∣ing of my Innocence, and the recompence for what I now suffer.
31 Godfry Kneller of Lubeck in Saxony, and of St. Pauls Corint▪ Garden in Middlesex Esq▪ Principall Painter in ordinary to their Majestys King William and Queen Mary For Advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
32 James Craggs of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields in Middlesex Gentleman For advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
JOSEPH ADVANCED, JOSEPH being cast into Prison, made it appear (by the favour he found there) that places which are inaccessible to Men, are not so to the Divine Mercy and Love; and that the more we expose our selves by our Faithfulness to him, the more he loads us with the Marks of his Favour. Joseph in all his Carriage gave such pregnant Evidence of his Vertue and Wisdom, that the Keeper commit∣ted all the Prisoners to his Care, giving him full Authority over them. Whilst these things passed, two Officers of Pharaoh, the one his chief Butler, and the o∣ther his Baker, having offended their LORD, and being put into the same Prison with Jo∣seph, they hapned to dream two very signifi∣cant and presaging Dreams; The Butler, that a Vine was before him, and on the Vine three Branches, which budded, blossomed, and brought forth ripe Grapes, which he took and pressed into Pharaohs Cup, and presented it to him. The Baker, that he had three Baskets on his head, and that in the uppermost Basket were all manner of Bake-meats for Pharaoh, which the Birds came and eat out of the Basket that was on his head. Joseph at that time being a Figure of Jesus Christ, by the difference he made between those his two Companions in his Sufferings, assures the Baker, that within three Days he should have his Head cut off, and his Body hanged upon a Tree; and the Butler, that within three Days Pharaoh should restore him to his Place, and pray'd him to remember him in his Prosperity. But the Butler was wholly unmindful of Jo∣seph,Anno Mundi, 2289. before Christ, 1715. Joseph being 30 years old. until about 2 years after Pharaoh chancing to have a Dream, which none of his Magicians could interpret, this Officer call'd to mind the Dream which he had in Prison, and Joseph's Interpretation. Pha∣raoh in his Dream saw 7 very fat Kine come out of the River Nile, and feeding in a Mea∣dow, and afterwards saw 7 other Kine coming out of the same River, but extreamly lean, and ghastly to look upon which devoured the 7 fat Kine. After this (being fallen asleep again) he dreamt, he saw 7 Ears of Corn up∣on one stalk full and fair, which soon after were devoured by 7 others, that were thin and blasted. Pharaoh being much concern'd to know the Interpretation of his Dreams, the Butler pre∣sents himself before the King, and tells him of Joseph, who immediately sent for him. Jo∣seph having heard the King tell his Dreams, acquaints him, that they signified 7 years to come of great plenty, which were to be suc∣ceeded by 7 other years of the extreamest Fa∣mine; and to prevent the fatal effects thereof, he counselled the King to appoint great Store-houses throughout all the Land, to lay up all the Surplus of the Plentiful years, to serve for a supply during the 7 years of Famine. Pharaoh admiring the Wisdom of Joseph, presently concluded with himself, that no bo∣dy could be more fit to manage this Affair than himself; and accordingly conferr'd up∣on him full power over all the Land of Egypt, to order things as he should think fit, and rati∣fied this new Dignity to him, by taking a Ring from his own Hand, and putting it upon Josephs, and a Gold-Chain about his Neck, and making him ride in his second Chariot, the Heralds proclaiming before him, Bend the Knee. Thus this Holy Man began to enter upon his state of Glory, and to quit the Suffering cir∣cumstances wherein GOD before had placed him, that by them (as so many steps) he might mount him to the Pinnacle of Glory. Neither was he dazled by this sudden removal from a Dungeon Darkness, to the highest Meridian of Court-Glory; for as his Afflictions could not depress him, so neither could this high and un∣look'd for Honour lift him up. He received with an equal and indifferent temper from the hands of GOD the Good and Evil things of this World; and continually kept his Heart in that uniform Moderation, that in the midst of his great power, he never had a thought of revenging himself of those, who by their Ca∣lumnies had so unjustly afflicted him, and whom he thought but too severely punished by the Sole remembrance of their Crimes, and the despair and gnawing Checks of their own Conscience. These Changes visibly hapned here on Earth; but there are others that happen still every day invisibly by a Miracle incomparably greater, of which the Elevation of Joseph was only a Fi∣gure, when those who have (as it were) been trod under foot by Men, and made vile by Pri∣sons and Calumnies, do in an instant pass over from all their Sufferings, which have lasted but for a Moment, to that Eternity of Glory, which their Sufferings have prepared for them.
JOSEPH's BRETHREN. JOSEPH having received from the Hand of Pharaoh so unlimited a Power, made it appear, how happy that King is, that has a wise and godly Minister to rely on, and ad∣vise with; and that good Counsel is to be pre∣ferred before all Worldly Treasures: He ap∣plies himself with all diligence to employ his Authority for the good of the People and Neighbouring Nations committed to his Charge, and provided an abundant supply for the 7 future years of Scarcity, without cau∣sing a Want in the midst of Plenty. After he had with great care laid up the Products of the Years of plenty in Store-houses throughout all the Land, to that prodigious quantity, that it was beyond number, the 7 Years of Famine succeeding, began to shew their direful Effects. The People of Egypt, pressed by the irresistible focre of Want, ap∣pear before Pharaoh, crying out for relief in this time of their Necessi∣ty;Anno Mundi 2296. before Christ 1708. and he sends them to Joseph, whom he had en∣trusted with all that Affair, who very favou∣rably receiv'd their Complaints, and supplied them, without putting by any. The Land of Canaan, as well as other Neighbouring Countries, was made sensible of this extraordinary Famine: Wherefore Ja∣cob having heard that there was Corn in Egypt, bids his Sons go down thither, and buy Corn for his Family. Accordingly Jacob's ten Sons, being all, except Benjamin, whom his Father would not part with for fear any Mischief might befal him by the way, came (amongst many others) to buy Corn in Egypt, and presented themselves before Joseph, and bowed down be∣fore him with their Faces to the Ground. Joseph knew his Brothers at first sight, but carried himself strange towards them, and not seeing Benjamin with them, fearing lest they might have treated him as cruelly as they had formerly done him; and to be re∣solved hereof, he spake roughly to them, tel∣ling them they were Spies, and come to dis∣cover the weakness of the Land. His Brethren being much troubled at this unlookt for and harsh entertainment, to justi∣fie themselves from the Reproach he laid up∣on them of being Spies, assur'd him, that they were all of them the Sons of one Father, who lived in the Land of Canaan with their youngst Brother. Joseph told them, he was resolvd to try whether what they had told him was true, and therefore that one of them should continue as a Pledge till the rest of them returned to Canaan, and brought their youngest Brother (whom they had mentio∣ned) down with them into Egypt; threat∣ning, that in case of refusal, they should undergo the punishment of Spies, for such he took them for. It was in this Extremity to which they were reduc'd, that the memory of their cruel dea∣ling toward their Brother Joseph began to a∣waken in them, and fly in their Faces, inso∣much as they could not contain themselves from complaining to one another in their own Language, of the great Sin they had commit∣ted, for which their present Distress was just∣ly come on them, his Blood being now re∣quir'd at their Hands. Joseph understanding all they said, was touch'd at his Heart with Pity towards them, and turn'd himself from them, to give vent to his Passion by weeping; and soon after re∣turning to them, took Simeon from amongst them, and bound him before their Eyes, and gave the rest of them leave to return to their Father: he commanded also their Sacks to be fill'd with Corn, and their Money to be put in their Sacks. As soon as they were come to their Father, they told him all that hapned, and how they had been forc'd to leave Simeon bound in E∣gypt, till they brought their Brother Benja∣min before the Governour of the Land. Ja∣cob was sorely afflicted to hear this News, and remembring the Sorrow had seized him upon the loss of his beloved Joseph, told them plain∣ly, that he could upon no Terms resolve to part with his dear Benjamin, lest losing him also, it should bring his gry Hairs with sor∣row to the Grave, The Fathers cannot sufficiently admire through∣out the whole Sequel of this History, the wonder∣ful Providence wherewith GOD governs all things, the Effects whereof no Power can resist. Whatsoever Joseph's Brethren ever feared, came upon them. They had sold him to prevent and frustrate that Greatness which his Dreams seem∣ed to presage to him, and their very selling him becomes the sure means of his Exaltation and fu∣ture Glory; it was expedient they should humble and depress him, in order to his Elevation; and his Glory stood in need of their Hatred, which like a Harbinger made way for it.
33 James Mundy of the Jnner Temple London Esq. one of the Judges of the sheriffs Court London. For ye Advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
34 Richard Cheyney of Hamerton in the Parish of Hackney in the County of Middlesex Esq. For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
JOSEPH AND HIS BRETHREN. Joseph (after a long forced Restraint) makes himself known to his Brethren. THE Famine daily increasing in Canaan, forced Jacob to a resolution of sending Benjamin with his Bro∣thers into Egypt,Anno Mundi, 2298▪ before Christ, 1706. lest he should see him die with Famine, whose Absence he feared would prove his own Death. Judah contributed much to∣wards the inclining of Jacob to this consent, assuring him, that he would be responsible for Benjamin, and without fail bring him back to his Father. Thus they departed with the Presents their Father had ordered them to take along with them; for Joseph the Governour of Egypt, who having seen his Brothers, and Benjamin with them, ordered them to be brought into his House to Dine with him. They could not imagin the reason of this so unlook'd for Kindness, and fearing some new Troubles might be created to them for the Mony they had found in their Sacks; to prevent them (as far as they were able,) they told Joseph's Stew∣ard, that having found their Mony in their Sacks, they had brought it back with them, and desired him to receive it of them. The Steward very friendly assured them, that he had had their Mony, and having brought Simeon out to them, soon after Jo∣seph himself entred where his Brethren were; who bowing down before him, presented to him the Gifts their Father had sent him, which he very kindly accepted of; and dis∣coursing familiarly with them, asked how it was with their Father? But seeing his Bro∣ther Benjamin, he was moved at his Heart, and after he had blessed him, could not re∣frain from Tears, being forced to withdraw, to give vent to the Affection that seiz'd him at the sight of his younger Brother; and soon after returning unto them, he sat down at the Table with them. After this day was thus spent in Joy and Feasting, and that Joseph's Brethren were pre∣paring to return to Canaan, Josph commanded their Sacks to be fill'd, and their Mony to be restored as at first, and withal, that his Cup should be put into Benjamin's Sack. They were scarcely got out of Town, when Joseph sends his Steward after them, who reproach∣ed them for having rewarded Evil for Good, in stealing away his Masters Cup. They all with one Voice excused themselves of so base a Crime, and consented, that he who was found guilty should die, and the rest to be his Prisoner▪ In searching their Sacks, the Cup was found in tht of Benjamins; which strangely amazed them, and they rent their Cloaths, as a mark of their high distress and sorrow. But Judah, who had engaged himself to bring back Benjamin, boldly drew near to Joseph, and in the most humble manner re∣presented to him the Promise he had bound himself in, to bring him back; and that he was sure it would be the Death of his Father, if they should return without him, his Life being bound up in the life of Benjamin. Joseph's Bowels being moved with this pas∣sionate Speech of Judah, could no longer re∣frain himself, but commanding all to quit the Room he burst forth into loud Weeping, and told them he was Joseph their Brother. Up∣on which unlook'd for and amazing Declara∣tion they were all astonish'd; but Joseph (to divert them from this their consternation) told them, that GOD in his Providence had so or∣dered it, that his Selling should prove a means of saving their Lives from the present Scarcity; and embracing them, and weeping upon them, he bid them hast to their Father, to the end he and his whole Family might come down to Egypt upon the Chaiots which Pharaoh had sent to carry them. This History (as the Fathers observe) doth most emphatically represent to us, the incom∣parable sweet Temper of this Holy Patriarch, Joseph, and sets all Christians a Pattern, how far they ought to forget and forgive Injuries. He himself excuseth those who had cruelly of∣fended him, and so far was he from returning them the least Repreach, that he endeavours by all means to dissipate the dark Clouds of Fear, wherewith the guilt of their Crime had fill'd them. Having a full power to punish them at pleasure, he only employs it in Gratifi∣cations, and instead of Anger and Revenge, he melts them with the tenderness of his Love and Affection towards them. The Charity of this great Saint is an admira∣ble Figure of the unparall'd Goodness and Mercy of Jesus Christ, who being sold by his own Bre∣thren, not only forgave them their putting him to so painful a Death; but also made the very Blood which they so cruelty spilt, the price of their Redemption, and the Balsom to cure their Mortal Wounds.
JACOB GOES INTO EGYPT. Jacob, with his whole Family, goes down into Egypt, to Joseph his Son. AS soon as Joseph's Brethren were re∣turn'd to Canaan, and had brought the glad Tidings to Jacob, that Joseph was yet alive, and Governour over the whole Land of Egypt; that Holy Patriarch, struck with the strangeness of such unexpected News, was (between the agitations of Hope and Fear strugling in his Breast) cast into a kind of Fainting; from whence, as soon as he was recovered, he informed himself more particularly concerning all the Circumstan∣tials of the Divine Providence towards his Son Joseph: And being fully satisfied therein, not only by the Relation of those who had seen him; but also by the Chariots which Pharaoh had sent, and the Provision Joseph had made for their commodious Transpor∣tation into Egypt, his Spirit revived, com∣forting himself, that he was going to see his most beloved Son Joseph, whom so many years he had so disconsolately mourned for as dead. But yet notwithstanding his earnest desire to see his dearest Joseph, he could not on a sudden resolve to transport himself and his Family into Egypt, by reason of the Promises GOD had made to him, of bestowing upon him and his Posterity, the Land of Canaan; for he feared, lest his Children being charm'd with the Pleasures of Egypt, should never entertain a Thought of returning to the Land, that GOD had bestowed upon them for ever. But GOD de∣liver'd him of this Scru∣ple,The same Year, 2198. before Christ, 1706. At the beginning of the 3d year of Famin. by appearing to him in a Vision by Night, and assuring him, that as he would go down with him into Egypt, so he would in due time, bring his Posterity up from thence again. Joseph being informed by Judah his Bro∣ther, of his Father Jacob's coming, he made ready his Chariot, and went to meet him to Goshen; and being come near▪ he stept down, and presenting himself before his Father, embraced him, and fell on his Neck and wept, not being able for some time to move, by reason of the great Transport of Joy. After this their Passion of Joy and Tears, which so unlook'd for an Interview had forc'd from them, Joseph brings his Father to Pha∣raoh to salute him; and it being his desire, that his Fathers Family might live a part from the Egyptians, he was not asham'd in the midst of all his Grandeur, to declare to the King, that his Father and Brethren were Shepherds; a Calling the Egyptians look'd upon as the most detestable that could be. And having obtain'd a Grant of the King, for them to dwell in the Land of Goshen, they lived there in all Plenty, without being sensi∣ble of the least effects of that raging Famine. Thus the whole Nation of the Jews, which was then compriz'd in 70 Persons, was saved by the Divine Providence, and the Kindness and Industry of Joseph. Thus (as S. Chrysostom observes) does GOD dispose all the Affairs and Concerns of his own People, through an admirable variety of happy and sad Events. He afflicts them, lest a continued and uninterrupted course of Pros∣perity should lift them up; and again, He comforts them, for fear they might be cast down under the burthen of their Sufferings. It proved now Jacob's advantage, that he had lost his Son for a time; and Joseph's, that he had been a while separated from his dear Father's Company; because at this meeting they received such an extraordinary Incom of Joy, as quite effaced, and abundantly recompen∣ced all their past Sorrows. But on the other side, tho' the Children of Israel were well received by the Egyptians for a season, that Faithless People made them some years after suffer all that Inhumanity could inspire to a Barbarous People, and Haters of GOD. For Egypt, (as the Fathers tell us) that is to say, the World, ought always to be apprehended and suspected by true Israelites; whatsoever Caresses she might seem to make them, they ought not to trust her: For it is evident, that the People of GOD have always been forced (sooner or later) to acknowledge, that their entring into it has been of trouble∣som consequence, even then, when they have been forc'd to it by inevitable Necessity; and they find by Experience, (as saith S. Bernard) that the Famine which forces them thither, is always to be feared.
35 Sr. Edwine sadleir of Temple-Pnsley in the County of Hartford Baronet. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The CONTENTS of the Second Book of Moses, called EXODUS. THis Book in the Greek is called Exodus; that is, a Going forth or Departure; a Name retain'd almost by all the Interpreters of the Bible, as agreeing very well with that which is the principal Subject thereof. For after that the Holy Ghost hath given us an account, at the beginning of this Book, of the strange increase and multiplying of the Chil∣dren of Israel in Egypt, and how Pharaoh had contrived, to suppress and destroy them; he relates the Birth, with the miraculous Preser∣vation and Education of Moses; and how GOD call'd him, and sent him with Aaron his Brother, to deliver his People from the House of Bondage, that is, to bring them out of Egypt. Pharaoh being hardned, and continuing so, obstinately refuseth to let the Children of Israel go; whereupon GOD visits the Land of Egypt with ten sore Plagues and Judgments, and afterwards (with a stretched-out Arm) he brought them forth, by the Hand of Moses, from thence, laden with Riches, after that they had celebrated the Feast of the Passover, in memory of the Destroying Angels passing by the Houses of the Israelites, when he slew the First-born in all the Houses of the Egyptians. Having this brought them out of Egypt, he led them through the Red-Sea (in which Pharaoh, pursuing them, was drowned with all his Host) into the Wilderness, through which he conducted them with a Pillar of Fire by Night, and a Pillar of Cloud by Day; giving them Manna from Heaven, and Quails to eat, and providing them Drink out of the Rock. In this Wilderness they were set upon by the Amalekites, whom they vanquished and destroyed. Here also Jethro came to Moses, and gave him such wholsom Advice, as proved afterwards of great use to him. In the same Desert, GOD also gave to the Children of Israel (by Moses) upon Mount Sinai (in order to a more solemn Renewal of his Covenant with them) the Ten Commandments, writ with his own Finger in two Tables of Stone; as also several other Laws, Ordinances, and Statutes, as well Sacred and Ceremonial, as Civil and Politick, to consecrate them in a peculiar manner to himself, and separate them from all other People, and above all in giving them the Figures, Signs, Pledges and Seals of that full Propitiation, which was in due time to be accomplish'd by the promised Messiah, who was the Head and Foundation of the Eternal Covenant. GOD there also commanded Moses, to make the Tabernacle and Ark of the Covenant, and all other holy Utensils appertaining to his solemn Service, together with his Ordi∣nances concerning the Priesthood, who were to discharge those Holy Functions. Moreover, here is also recorded the Idolatry of the Israe∣lites, in worshipping the Golden Calf; for which Crime GOD was resolved to destroy them, yet suffered himself at length to be entreated by Moses; who desiring to see the Face of GOD, was told by GOD, that no Man could see his face and live; but however, consented he should see his Back-parts, and to let his Glory pass before him. After this GOD again renewed his Cove∣nant with the Israelites by Moses, a Faithful Servant in his House, whose Face hereupon became shining and radiant, insomuch as he was fain (whenever he spake to the People) to put a Veil upon his Face, because they were not able to bear the lustrous Glory that pro∣ceeded from it. And in the Sequel of this Book, Moses specifies the Gifts and Offerings, which the People freely contributed to the Construction of the Tabernacle: Which being finish'd (ac∣cording to the Command GOD had given to Moses, and in conformity to the Pattern he had shewed to him on the Mount) he anointed it, and was thereupon fill'd with the Glory of GOD. The LORD making it sufficiently evi∣dent throughout the course of these his Pro∣ceedings with the Israelites, that the whole course of this Covenant was of pure Grace and free Bounty, founded upon the alone Mer∣cy of GOD in JESUS CHRIST, who was the sole Mediator thereof. So that this Book contains the History of what hapned to the Israelites, during the time of 142 years, or thereabouts (according to the Compute of some;) which is a most excellent Image of the State and Spiritual Deliverance of the Church by our Saviour, from the Ty∣ranny of the Devil, and the Bondage of Sin and Corruption.
THE EGYPTIAN MIDWIVES. Pharaoh commands the Male Children of the Israelites, to be cast into the Ri∣ver Nile. JACOB, after he was come down into Egypt, lived there peaceably 17 years; and when he found him∣self at the point of Death,Anno Mundi, 2315· before Christ, 1689. he sent for his Son Joseph, and charged him to bury him with his Fathers; and having Blessed his Sons, he died, aged 147 years. Joseph (as soon as he was dead) fell upon his Face, wept over him, and kissed him; and having commanded his Servants (the Egyptians) to embalm his Body, he mourned for him Threescore and ten days: And when the days of his mourning were past, he de∣sired some that were near Pharaoh to obtain leave for him, to go and bury his Father in the Land of Canaan. Pharaoh having consented to this just Re∣quest of Joseph, he went up to bury his Father, being accompanied by all the chief Officers of Pharaoh, and other the most considerable Persons of the Court, and whole Land of Egypt; and buried his Father Jacob with his Fathers Abraham and Isaac, in a Cave of the Field of Macpelah, which Abraham bought of Ephron the Hittite. Joseph having buried his Father Jacob, re∣turn'd into Egypt, where he still continued in the same Authority which Pharaoh had con∣ferr'd upon him at first; and perceiving that Death began to make his approaches upon him, he demanded the same favour of his Brethren, which his Father had requir'd of him, viz. that they would take care to carry his Bones with them to Canaan; which they promised to do;Anno Mundi, 2369. before Christ, 1365. and soon after he died at the Age of 110 years, having continued in the Go∣vernment of all Egypt 80 years. They also Embalmed his Body, and put it into a Coffin in Egypt. But many years after the Death of Josph, a New King  arose in Egypt, who hated the Hebrews, and was so far from having the esteem and kindness for them, that his Predecessors had had▪ that he became jealous of their vast Multitudes, to which they were increased▪ and therefore took a Resolution to destroy them; not by open Violence, but by Craft and Address. To this end he employs them in the hard labour of making Bricks and Mortar, for some of his Buildings; but this Oppression making them to multiply the faster; as a Figure for time to come, that the Afflictions of the World would only serve to multiply the Church, Pharaoh took another way, which was, to de∣stroy all their Male-Children. Accordingly he charged all the Midwives, to kill all the Male Children of the Hebrew Wo∣men at their Delivery; but they abhorring to execute so barbarous an Order (for the Scrip∣ture witnesseth, that they feared GOD) pre∣served them alive, contrary to the cruel command of Phoraoh: Who being provok'd to see his Orders neglected, charged his Sub∣jects to take all the Male Children of the He∣brews, and cast them into the River. But GOD highly approved the carriage of the Midwives in this matter, and rewarded their holy Disobedience, by blessing and esta∣blishing their Families; and tho' he did not approve of the Lye they made use of to ex∣cuse themselves, yet he blessed them for the tenderness they expressed for his People, who groaned under so unjust and cruel an Op∣pression. It seems as if all the Humanity and Good Nature of Egypt, had been (at that time) confin'd to these few Women; who (when a whole Nation and Kingdom blindly obeyed the unnatural Commands of their Prince) only stood it out, as being more awed by the fear of GOD, than by any thing they could apprehend from Men; and dreading his Justice more, than the impotent Cruelty of Pharaoh. But too happy (saith S. Austin) would they have been, if joyning the Love of Truth to their Praise-worthy Compassion, they had rather have chosen to expose themselves to Death, than to save their Lives with a Lye: And if after having hazarded their Lives, to poor In∣nocents, they had once more ventured upon Death, rather than save hemselves by injuring the Truth. They might indeed in this Resolution, have seen their Houses destroyed upon Earth; but GOD instead thereof would have bestowed upon them those that are Eternal in the Heavens.
36 William Bailley of St. Margarets Westminster in Middlesex Gent. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate,
37 Mr. Iohn Cage of New-Market in Cambridgshire Gentleman. For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate
MOSES SAVED FROM DROWNING. Pharaoh's Daughter saves Moses from drowning, and adopts him for her Son. WHilst the Israelites suffered the most unjust Persecution in Egypt, and that ungrateful King set all his Wits at work how he might best extinguish a Race,Anno Mundi 2433. before Christ 1571. and 41 years after the death of Levi. to which his Pre∣decessors had been behold∣en for the preservation of their Life and Kingdom, a Man of the Tribe of Levi, na∣med Amram, had a Son by his Wife Jocka∣bed; who being a goodly Child, his Mother moved with his Beauty, and promising Looks, made a shift to hide him three Months. But forasmuch as Pharaoh's Orders were most severely executed, she was fain at length to expose her Son, for fear of forfeiting her own Life. To this end she made a Cradle of Flags, and daub'd it over with Pitch, and put her Son therein, and laid it amongst the Flags by the River side, and charged his Sister to con∣tinue thereabouts, to see what would be∣come of her Brother. It was about the same time that Pharaoh's Daughter came down to the River to wash her self, accompanied with all her Maids; and seeing the Cradle among the Flags, she sent one of her Maids to fetch it. As soon as she had cast her Eye upon this lovely In∣fant, who lay crying in his Cradle, she was moved with pity for it; and the goodly Aspect of the Child increasing the Affection she had conceived for it, she resolv'd at any rate to save it from perishing in the common Calamity. His Sister in the mean time, who had ob∣served all that pass'd, drew near to Pharaoh's Daughter, and demanded of her, Whether she was willing, she should go and call an Hebrew Woman to nurse the Child? To which she having consented, his Sister ran and fetch'd his Mother; who having received a Charge from Pharaoh's Daughter, to nurse her own Son, with promise of a Reward for so doing, return'd to her House with great Joy, blessing GOD for the Success he had vouchsafed her in preserving her Son. As soon as he was grown up, his Mother brought him to Pharaoh' Daughter, who adopted him  her Son, giving him the Name of MOSES, in the  Language  Water. because she had drawn him out of the Water. The Fathers have admired to find this Holy Man, who was the Minister of the Old Law, (as JESUS CHRIST was the Dispencer of the New) a lively Figure of him from his very Birth, in being divinely preserved, as well as our Saviour, from a Massacre, which involved so many Infants. GOD on this occasion made it as evident as the Sun at Noon-day, that he is the Sovereign Disposer of all Men, and that all their Designs and Devices are meer Vanity, when they clash with his eternal Purpose. GOD seems to oppose himself with more vigour against those that are so bold as to wage open War, and stand at defiance with him; and we cannot sufficiently be astonish'd, how his Wisdom sports it self with King Pha∣raoh, who being resolv'd to destroy the Chil∣dren of the Hebrews, doth in the mean time (in his own Palace) cherish and caress him for his Grandchild, who was to be the Instru∣ment of delivering the People, whom he per∣secuted, from his Tyranny and Oppression. And his Mother, who for fear of losing her own, had exposed his Life to the Waters, has the Care of nursing him recommended to her, and Pharaoh's Daughter rewards her for a Service, which she would (had it been in her choice) have purchased with all the Riches of the World. Besides, the very exposing of Moses, was the first step to his Greatness; and GOD saves him from the Waters of the River, to make him the Instrument of drowning the Son of that Prince in the Sea, who had design'd to do as much for him; and who had the chiefest of his Subjects for Companions in his Punish∣ment, whom he had made the barbarous Exe∣cutors of his inhuman and cruel Commands. After a mature consideration of all this, we must have very little Faith or Understand∣ing, if such a crowd of astonishing and mira∣culous Directions of Divine Providence, doth not force from us an Acknowledgment, that GOD indeed is All, and that all Men (how great, potent, and terrible soever they may seem to be) are in effect nothing: So that it is a Question. Whether we ought more to admire the Impiety, or the Extravagance and Madness of those, who dare oppose themselves against, and under∣take to attack Heaven it self.
THE BURNING BUSH. GOD appeareth to Moses in a Burning-Bush. MOSES being saved from the Waters in a Miraculous manner, and brought up in Pharaoh's Palace, as he grew up to Manly Age,Anno Mundi. 2473. before Christ, 1511. Moses being then 40 years old. made it appear, that GOD had called him to somthing else than World∣ly Greatness: For seeing the Affliction of his Brethren the Israelites, when he at the same time abounded with all manner of Court-pleasure, his Faith could not bear to see him∣self so distinguish'd from them; choosing rather (as S. Paul saith) to be Afflicted with the People of GOD, than to be happy with those, who were their profest Enemies. He cast about therefore how he might best get an opportunity of quitting the Kings Palace, to visit his Brethren in their Distress; and in his progress, seeing an Egyptian smi∣ting an Hebrew, he was immediately seiz'd with the Spirit of GOD, and slew the Egyptian, hiding him in the Sand; supposing that none had been witness of this effect of his Zeal. The next time he went forth amongst his Brethren, he saw two Hebrews quarrelling to∣gether; and endeavouring to reconcile them, by representing to them, that they were Bro∣thers; he who did the wrong, demanded of him, who had made him a Judge over them; and whether he did intend to kill him, as he lately did the Egyptian. These words assured Moses, that he was discover'd; and fearing Pharaoh's anger, he fled into the Land of Midian, where (resting himself near a Well) seven Daughters of the Priest of Midian, who was called Revel and Jethro, came thither to water their Father's Flock; but other Shepherds rudely driving them away, Moses stood up and helped them to water their Flocks; with which they having acquainted their Father, he was desirous to see the Egyptian that was so charitably come in to their help, and commanded his Daugh∣ters to call him in to eat Bread. Moses percei∣ving the good Temper of the Man, was con∣tent to dwell with him, and taking his Daugh∣ter Zippora to Wife, spent 40 years in feed∣ing his Father-in-Laws Flocks in the Desert. It hapned on a day, when he had led his Flock into the furthest and most solitary part of the Desert,Anno Mundi, 2513. before Christ, 1491. Moses being then 0 years of Age. near Mount Horeb, that GOD appeared to him in a Flame of Fire, out of the midst of a Bush. At this strange Appearance Moses had a desire stirr'd up to draw near, and take a more exact view of the wonder of a Bush burning without being consumed; but GOD calling to him out of the Bush, stopt his Cu∣riosity, by forbidding him to approach nearer: And then assured him, that he had seen the Afflictions, and heard the Cry of of his People in Egypt; and that he was come down to de∣liver them from the Tyranny of their Oppres∣sors; and, that he himself should be the In∣strument, by whom he would perform this great Work of Israel's Redemption. Moses at first excused himself, and would fain have waved the Employment; but GOD charging him therewith a second time, and to induce him the more readily to undertake it, he immediately shews him two Miracles, by changing his Rod into a Serpent, and that Serpent again into a Rod; and by making his Hand leprous by putting it into his Bosom, and restoring it again to its former state. Yet for all this Moses continued to oppose GOD's intent of sending him to Pharaoh, to that degree, as to kindle his Wrath against him; so at last Moses was fain to submit to the Divine Command; and thereupon took leave of Jethro his Father-in-Law, and with his Wife and Sons came to Egypt, to Visit and Comfort his Brethren in their Distress. The Saints of old have consider'd this Mi∣racle of the Burning-Bush, which was not consumed, as a true Emblem of the People of GOD, who commonly are afflicted in this World, as the Israelites then were by Pharaoh; and yet are not consumed by those Flames which incompass them on every side, as having GOD in the midst, who keeps the Fire from consuming them, and makes it only serve, to ren∣der them more pure and shining. S. Gregory looks upon this Call of Moses, as a Figure of that of the True Pastors of the Church: Moses (saith he) is an illustrious Example for all Pastors and Teachers, in re∣fusing at first (not without great firmness and obstinacy) to conduct the People of GOD, notwithstanding that he was charged with it by an express command from GOD; and that he had been itting himself for this difficult em∣ployment by 40 years Retirement and Meditation into the Wilderness.
38 Richard Powis of St. Martins in the Ffields, in Middlesex, Gent. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
39 Lachary Wells M.A. late Fellow of Kings Colledge in Cambridge, and Lecturer of St. Michael Basishaw London. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
Moses Addresses Pharaoh. Moses demands leave of Pharaoh for the Children of Israel, to go and sacrifice to the LORD in the Desert. PHARAOH having heard the first Propo∣posals Moses made to him in the Name of GOD, to let the Israe∣lites go and Sacrifice in the Wilderness to the LORD,The same year 2513. derided there∣at; answering Moses with a, Who is the LORD, that I should obey his Voice? and makes the ex∣press Command of GOD, to be nothing else but an effect of their Idleness; reproving Mo∣ses sharply for putting any such thing into their Head, and commands his Task-Masters, to double their Oppressions upon the Is∣raelites, by forcing them to deliver the same number of Bricks as was usual, without gi∣ving them Straw, The Israelites finding their Sufferings thus renew'd and doubled, bitterly complain to Moses and Aaron, whom they look'd upon as the Causes thereof; and were then an admi∣rable Figure of the Murmurings which in time to come would arise against the true Pastors of the Church, in their endeavouring to con∣vert Souls, and lead them out of Egypt. GOD taking compassion on the sad Con∣dition of his People, the Voice of their Af∣fliction having reach'd his Throne in Heaven, he sends Moses a second time to Pharaoh, to command him to let the People of Israel go. Moses obeys the Divine Command, and to give that Prince a token of his Mission, he in his presence chang'd his Rod into a Serpent; but Pharaoh's Magicians (by their Inchant∣ments performing the same, the King's Heart was hardned, and would not let the People go, notwithstanding that he had seen Aaron's Rod swallowing up the Rods of his Sorcerers. Hereupon GOD commands Moses to go again to Pharaoh, and meeting him near the River-side, without being in the least con∣cern'd at his Threats, he addresseth himself to him with an holy Boldness and Liberty: yet in conjunction with that humble Meekness, which was natural to him; once more de∣mands leave for the Israelites, to go and serve GOD in the Wilderness. Which when Pharaoh refused to do, Mo∣ses commands Aaron, to stretch forth his Hand upon the Waters of Egypt, and immediately the River Nile was turned to Blood, as well as all the other Streams, Pools, and Waters of Egypt, and all the Fish that was in them, died. This was the first Plague wherewith GOD punished Egypt; and was a lively Figure of that Plague wherewith GOD (in all suceeed∣ing Ages) would smite those that do not believe his Word, who instead of the pure and clear Waters of his Truth, should meet with no∣thing but Blood, that is, Earthly and Carnal Notions and Opinions. In considering more attentively this terrible Judgment, we cannot sufficiently wonder at the insensible Hard-heartedness of Pharaoh, who seemed to be little concerned at this great Pro∣digy. True it is, that his Sorcerers contributed very much to this his Insensibility, in imitating by their Inchantments this Divine Miracle wrought by Moses, giving thereby a specious pretext to Pharaoh, to look upon this Wonder no otherwise than as an effect of Magick Art, and not (as indeed it was) an immediate Pro∣duct of the Divine Omnipotence; though indeed this were not sufficient to render him excusable; because though his Enchanters could do mischief, yet it was not in their power afterward to re∣move and remedy it: they could in imitation of Moses change the Water to Blood, but could not, like him, transmute that Blood again into Water. Wherefore also, though the Plagues wherewith Moses smote Pharaoh and all Egypt, ought to have persuaded him of the Truth of his Mes∣sage; yet the ceasing of those Plagues at the Prayer of him who at first was the subordinate cause of them, ought more strongly to have con∣vinced him of the same Truth, by how much it is an easier thing to do hurt and mischief, than to change that mischief into good. But alas! the most powerful, and (one would think) irresistible Demonstrations, make no im∣pression on a Spirit that is once struck with Blindness, there being nothing upon Earth that is capable of softning a Heart, which like Iron is hardned by the very strokes it receives from Heaven, and which GOD in his just Judgment leaves to its own obstinate Wickedness.
THE PLAGUES OF EGYPT. The Nine Plagues of Egypt. THE First Plague, which turned the Waters of the River Nile, and all other Streams and Lakes of the Land of Egypt into Blood, not having met with the success of in∣clining the Heart of Pharaoh to comply with the Divine Command, to let Israel go, GOD sends the following Plagues in order. The second was the Plague of Frogs, which covered the Face of all Egypt, and filled the very Houses and Bed-chambers of King and Peo∣ple. Which Plague (as St. Austin observes) was a Figure of that Judgment wherewith GOD at present smites Men, who are too profuse of their Tongues, and place their Godliness in much Talking. The Third Plague was that of Lice, which represents the Plague wherewith in after∣times the Church would be afflicted, by the Disputes and Contests of those who would endeavour to trouble the Peace thereof, and unhinge and disquiet Souls. The Fourth, was that of Swarms of Flies: These most importunate and troublesom In∣sects, denote to us the Plague wherewith those Men are smitten, who are given up to a Restlestness of Spirit, which hinders them from tasting the charming Sweetness and Pleasure of true Divine Peace and Rest in GOD. The Fifth, was the Morrain of Beasts; which teacheth us, That all these who being within the Pale of the Church, do notwith∣standing live an Animal and Bestial Life, should be struck with an invisible and Spiri∣tual Plague or Pestilence, which would kill their Souls, tho' it might seem to spare their Bodies. The Sixth Plague passed from the Beasts to Mn themselves, filling them with dolorous Boils and Blains; which represented the a∣bominable filth and nastiness of Sin in the Soul, which is as loathsom as the filthy Matter that proceeds from an Ulcer in the Body; and those hot and fiery Blains, are an admi∣rable Figure of the Plague of those, who are overcome by their own Rage, Passion and Anger. The Seventh, was that of a prodigious Hail, mingled with Thunder and Fire, which kill'd Man and Beast that were in the Field; smote every Herb, and brake every Tree of the Field; which represents the Injustice and Violence of those who out of Envy spoil other Mens Labours, and in so doing perish in the mischief they do to others, even as Hail melts away after the Ruin and Destruction it hath caused upon the Earth. The Eighth, was the Plague of Locusts, which devoured all the Herbs of the Ground, and the Fruit of the Trees, which the Hail had left. These Locusts represent the Evils which happen to the Church by Detraction and Calumny; because the Locusts hurt only by their Mouths, and therefore do lively ex∣press false Witnesses and Detractors, whose Sting and Poyson is in their Tongues. The Ninth, was that of Darkness; denoting that terrible Darkness which is in the Hearts of the Wicked, whilst those who are Good, enjoy a most pure and clear Light. We are to take notice here (as the Book of Wisdom observes) That GOD did not punish the Hardness of Pharaoh all at once, but by degrees and intervals, that he might evi∣dnce his Mercy, even in pouring forth of his Wrath and Fury; and the desire he hath, that lssr Chastisements might prevent greater and exterminating Judgments. When GOD intends to punish like a GOD, he does not make use of Flies or Frogs: It was as easie for him to have sent at first Lions to destroy them all at once, as to send the Flies to warn them to look to themselves be∣fore it was too late; but he restrains the course of his Wrath, and contents himself at first to inflict a lighter Punishment, to the end that Mn being affrighted with those first Strokes, may judge how intolerable it will be to bear his Wrath, and to drink the Dregs of the Cup of his Fury. For GOD will have Men know, That he ought and will be feared; and when he meets with Pharaohs; that is, with Hearts altogether hardned, he makes bare his Arm against them; and after having made them pass through all the degrees of his Anger, without being able to soften them, he is (as it were) forced by their Impenitence, to proceed to extremity, and to be as firm in his Justice, as they are in their resolv'd Obstinacy.
40 William Bailley of St. Margarets Westminster in Middlesex Gent. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
41
THE PASCHAL LAMB. GOD commands the Jews to eat the Paschal Lamb; and slays all the First-born of the Egyptians, which was the Tenth Plague. THE foregoing Nine Plagues having proved ineffectual to overcome the Ob∣stinacy of Pharaoh; GOD (before he sent the Tenth) commands every Jewish Family to sa∣crifice the Lamb, which he had order'd them to have in a readiness, since the 10th day of that same Month, that is, before he sent the Plague of Darkness. He prescribes also the manner how they were to celebrate the Sa∣cred Feast, viz. they were to eat it standing, with their Staffs in their hands, and in haste, as Persons ready to take a Journey. But the Circumstance more particularly enjoyn'd than all the rest was, That in whatsoever House this Lamb was offered, they were to strike the Blood on the two Side-Posts, and on the upper Door-Post, that the destroying Angel (who was to slay the First-born of all the o∣ther Houses) might pass over and spare those which he should see mark'd with the Blood of the Lamb. The Children of Israel obeyed this Com∣mand of GOD, and being on the 15th of the same Month assembled in their several Fami∣lies to eat the Paschal Lamb in the Evening, GOD at Midnight slew all the Firstborn of E∣gypt, from the First-born of Pharaoh, who sat upon the Throne, to the First-born of the meanest Slave, and of all their Cattel. Pha∣raoh struck with the sudden and unlookt for Death of his Son, rose up at Midnight, and every Family finding themselves partakers of the same Plague, nothing was heard but Cries and Lamentations, besides the Horror that seiz'd them for fear of being involv'd in the same Disaster with their dearest Children. How sensible an Instance was this, that GOD disposes of Men as he pleases, and that he forces them (sooner or later) to comply to his Will and Commands? Pharaoh, who till then had stood it out against the Commands of GOD by Moses, was the first to entreat the Israelites to be gone, without any restriction, with their Flocks and Herds, and all that they had; the only thing he desired was, that they would make haste and be gone; as likewise did all the rest of the Egyptians. So they departed the day after the Passover, being the very same Day wherein the 430 Years,Anno Mundi 2513. before Christ 1491. which GOD had foretold to Abraham, that his Posterity should be Strangers and  in a Foreign Land, were ended, to  num∣ber of 600000. Mn, besides Women and Children. But before their deprture they had (in compliance with the Divine Command) borrowed of their Neighbours, the Egyptians, Vessels of Gold and Silver, which they lent them without any difficulty. Thus were they at last deliver'd from their long Bondage in Egypt, where they now con∣tinued 215 years. And they robb'd the Egyp∣tians at their Departure to recompence them∣selves for the hard Labour they had su∣stained in building of their Cities, and other Monumets of their Pride and Vanity: And it is observable, that they took along with them the very best and richest of their Goods, to hint to us, That GOD one day would be∣stow upon his Zion the Glory of the World, when the Kingdoms of this World should be∣come the Kingdoms of the LORD, and of his Son Christ Jesus. This Deliverance of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, was a lively Figure of the De∣liverance of GOD's People from the Lusts of the World, and the Tyranny of the Devil, which Deliverance they should owe to the Blood of the true Lamb of GOD. Before the offering up of this saving Sacrifice, they might in∣deed groan under their Bondage and arthens, but they could not get rid of them. This great Grace and Favour GOD will have his People to commemorate every year in the greatest Festival the Church has, as well as more fre∣quently in the Sacrament of the Holy Eu∣charist, to the end that having always in their Minds the Memory of him who has redeem'd them from their Bondage, as well represent∣ing to themselves the Tyrant that had enslaved them, they may be as thankful to the one, as they abhor the other; and that keeping close to Jesus Christ, as to him who alone can pre∣serve them in the dear bought Liberty he has procur'd for them, they may fear the least ap∣pearance of any thing that may be an occasi∣sion of subjecting them anew to the Devils Ty∣ranny, or entangling them in worldly Lusts and Corruption.
The Israelites Passing the Red-Sea. PHARAOH is drowned in the Red-Sea. PHARAOH seeing that the Children of Israel were escaped out of his Hands, and that the three Days they had demanded for to go and Sacrifice in the Wilderness were alrea∣dy past,The same Year 2513. and that there was no likelyhood of their Return; forgetting all the prodigious Judgments wherewith GOD had plagued him, and his habitual hardness of Heart getting the upper-hand of him, he resolves to pursue them. The Israelites seeing themselves in this danger, and engag'd in a Desert, where they had the Sea before them, and Pharaoh's Ar∣my behind them; these terrible Objects made that impression upon them, as made them forget their so late and miraculous Delive∣rance, together with the Divine Superinten∣dency, which led them in the Desert with a Pillar of Cloud by Day, and a Pillar of Fire by Night. So they gave themselves up to Murmurings and Complaints, demanding in a peremptory way, of Moses, Whether it were for lack of Graves in Egypt, that he had brought them into that Wilderness, that they might find them there? Moses endeavours the best he could to com∣fort an encourage them in this Extremity, by assuring them of the Divine Assstance: And as Pharaoh with his Army began to ap∣proach them, GOD commands Moses to stretch forth his Hand over the Sea; whereupon im∣mediately the Waters were divided, opening a Way for the Children of Israel to pass through. Thus they marched along this miraculous Way the LORD had cast up for them, the Waters standing as a Wall on each side, securing and guiding their Passage through it. The Egyptians without being daunted at this stupendious Miracle, and supposing that since it favour'd the Israelites Escape, it might as well befriend their Pursuit  venture upon this new Road. But GOD soon caused them to he sensible of the difference he made between them and his Pople; for glancing an angry Look upon them from the fiery and cloudy Pillar, he struck them with Terror and Confusion, who seeing their Error too late, began to call upon one another, to get out of the Sea as fast as they could, be∣cause the LORD fought against them, in fa∣vour of the Jews. In this their Attempt to make an Escape from the Mischief that had already overtaken them, GOD commands Moses to stretch forth his Hand again over the Sea, and the divi∣ded Waters joyning, came pouring upon the Egyptians, who soon after were seen floating on the Sea, not so much as one of them esca∣ping from that fatal Wreck. This hapned the 21st day of the first Month, that is to say the 8th day after Easter. These Miracles afford us a full view of the Divine Greatness and Power, he having testi∣fied by Moses, That his end in exerting these Prodigies was, that Men might acknowledge and reverence his Omnipotence; but that which grieved the Fathers of the Church, was, to find that Christians had only Eyes to behold such Miracles as these, that are outward, with∣out considering those, of which the former are only a Figure, and are far more considerable, be∣cause more spiritual and inward. We admire (saith St. Bernard) the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt; but we don't admire a Soul, who by a sincere Conversion and Repen∣tance, is delivered from the Slavery of this World: In the first of these it is only a Pha∣raoh thas is overcome; but in the latter, the Devil himself is vanquish'd, and put under the Conquerors Feet. There Chariots only were drowned, but here sensual Desires, and the impetuosity of Concupiscence is destroyed. The Jews had only to do with Men of Flesh and Blood; whereas the Soul must fight the Pow∣ers of Darkness, and contest with the Prince of the Air. And as it was for the Glory of GOD, to hear Pharaoh then cry out, Let us flee from the Face of Israel, for GOD fighteth for them; 'Tis much more for his Glory, when the Devils, sensible of a Divine Power engag'd against them, cry out, Let us get away from this Soul, for GOD fights for her.
42 Sr. Henry Johnson of Blackwall in the County of Middlesex Knight. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
43 Thomas Ryves of Ranson in ye. County of Dorset Gent. For Advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
The Raining down Manna. GOD rains Manna from Heaven, to feed the Jews during their forty Years wandring in the Wilderness. THis miraculous Passage through the Red-Sea, fill'd the most insensible amongst the Jews with Admiration and acknowledgment.The same Year 2513. They all joyn with Moses, who sang to GOD an ex∣cellent Hymn of Praise and Thanksgiving; which teaches us to beware of Unthankfulness under the manifold Mercies we receive from the Hands of GOD. Miriam (also the Sister of Aa∣ron took a Timbrel in her Hand, and all the Wo∣men accompanied her with Timbrels and Dances, and Songs of Joy. But soon after this their glorious Delive∣rance, and their thankful Acknowledgments of it, being prest with Hunger in the Wilder∣ness, they began again to murmur against Moses, whom they look'd upon as the Cause of all the Difficulties and Disappointments they met with. Whereupon this Faithful Minister of the LORD, having represented to them, That all these their Murmurings and Complaints did reflect upon GOD himself, he being only his Instrumont and Servant, pro∣mised them that GOD would grant their De∣sires, and give them Meat: Accordingly the same Evening the LORD sent a prodigious Flight of Quails, which covered the Camp, and the next Morning sent them Manna from Heaven, which like Dew covered all the Ground round about their Tents. And this miraculous Heavenly Bread, he afterwards continued to them during their forty years journying in the Wilderness. The Jews were surpriz'd the next Morning to see this Divine Food spread over the Face of the Earth, and admiring what it might be; Moses told them, that it was the Bread that GOD sent them from Heaven; and char∣ged them to go and gather it every Morning before the Sun-rising; to teach us, (as the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 16. ver. 28. saith,) That we must prevent the Sun-rising to give Thanks to GOD for all his Benefits, and pray unto him before break of Day; for as soon as the Sun was risen, it melted away, and was no more to be found. Moses also forbad them to keep any of it till the Morning, GOD be∣ing willing so early to teach the Jews, not to extend their care of necessary Supplies be∣yond the present Day, leaving the thoughts of the Morrow to the Divine Providence. And lastly he charged them, that for the more strict and religious Observation of the Sab∣bath, they should gather the Day before a double quantity of Manna, which did not pu∣trifie and breed Worms, as that which was on other days kept till the next Morning. This Figure doth most lively represent to us the Holy Eucharist, as Jesus Christ himself witnesseth in the Gospel; and we may boldly say, That how wonderful soever this Food of the Jews was, yet had not they in this, nor in any other of the miraculous Favours bestowed up∣on them any advantage beyond the Christians, who do more truly feed upon the Heavenly Man∣na, and the Bread of Angels, which Jesus Christ gives to those who are come forth out of Egypt, that is, from the Corruptions and De∣filements of the World, and wherewith he com∣forts and supports them in the Wilderness of this Life, until they enter into the true Land of Promise, as the Jews were maintained with Manna, till their entring into Canaan. Wherefore also, Christians ought to take great care to acknowledge and improve this Divine Grace and Favour better than the Jews did, and to tremble at the thought of falling into a distaste and dislike of this Heavenly Food, af∣ter their Example: who though at the first view of this Miraculous Bread, they were struck with wonder, yet being once accustomed to it, they pre∣ferred the Garlick and the Onions of Egypt before it. This disregard and loathing the Jews then had for their Manna, is an express and lively Figure of the Affront Christians offer to Jesus Christ in his Sacrament, when they are so hardy to approach that Holy Table, without a due Trial of themselves, and without discern∣ing the Lord's Body. They who still hanker after the Flesh-pots of Egypt, are not fit Guests to feed on these Heavenly Dainties, and their assisting at this most Religious and Mysti∣cal Solemnity, will only hasten their Condem∣nation.
The gushing of Water out of the Rock. Moses at GOD's Command striking the Rock, brings forth Water. ONE would think the Jews should never more have doubted of the Divine Care and Providence, which continually attended them after so signal a Miracle,The same Year 2513. as was that of Man∣na, which they having every Day renew'd to them, furnish'd them with continual visible assurances of the Faithfulness of him, who had charged himself with the Care and Con∣duct of them: Yet for all this a new Dif∣ficulty arising, by their want of Water, effac'd the remembrance of all the miraculous Assi∣stances the Divine Goodness had afforded them, and put them upon murmuring afresh against Moses, whose Hands they had so oft seen invested with the Divine Omnipotence. For being come to a place called Rephidim, where there was no Water for them to drink, they in a seditious and rebellious manner ad∣dress themselves to Moses, tauntingly demand∣ing of him, Why he had brought them out of Egypt, to kill them and their Children, and Cattel with thirst in the Wilderness? This meek and kind Governour of a most rebellious and stiff-necked People, had no other Re∣fuge to retire to, (besides him, who at first had put him in that station) than even GOD himself, and representing to him the extre∣mity to which he was reduc'd by the general Murmurings and Revolt of a People, that were ready to stone him. GOD, to comfort him, bids him take the Elders of Israel along with him, and the Rod (wherewith he smote the Waters of the River Nile, and turn'd them to Blood) in his Hand, and go to the Rock of Horeb, where he would give both him and them another Instance of his All-com∣manding Power, by making Waters to gush forth from thence, to satisfie the Thirst of that great People. This Promise was immediately follow'd by answerable effect; for Moses had no sooner  the Rock, (which according to S. Paul, reprsented Jesus Christ) but Torres of Wa∣ter  down the dry and parched Faith, and  gush'd forth from the flinty Rock. This Miracle was a visible representation of the verflowing of Grace, procedng from a crucifid JESS; for he is the true Rock from whence do flow forth those Waters of Life, which quench the Thirst of his People, during the weary Steps they take in the Wil∣derness of this mortal Life, which afterwards become in them a Fountain and Source of Living Waters, springing up into Eternal Life, making the Hearts of the most obdurate Sinners, to relent and gush forth into Tears of Repentance. Some time after this, when the Israelites were come to Cadesh, where Miriam, (Moses his Sister) died, and was buried; the Israe∣lites upon a like occasion of want of Water, murmured against Moses and Aaron, and the Thirst that pressed them, making them forget the Respect they owed to those two eminent Persons, they threatned to stone them. Where∣upon they both retir'd into the Tabernacle, to prostrate themselves before GOD, on the be∣half of these stiff-necked Rebels. By this their Example they gave an admi∣rable instance of that sweet and meek De∣portment which Pastors ought to use toward their Flock; for being so unjustly and despite∣fully persecuted, by these obdurate Revolters, they implored the Divine Mercy for those ve∣ry Persons whose Rage and Fury they were fain to avoid; they lov'd those that hated them, and became Intercessors for those that resolv'd to destroy them. In this second Miracle of Moses his drawing Water from the Rock, by smiting it with his Rod, he was fain to strike the Rock twice be∣fore the Waters gusht forth, which seem'd to proceed from some distrust in him of the Di∣vine Omnipotence. Wherefore also GOD re∣proved his Servant for this his want of Faith, and told him, That for a Mark of his Dis∣pleasure, he should not enter into the Land he had promised to give unto his People. From whence St. Gregory takes occasion to adore the Judgments of GOD, and to trmble in seeing him punishd, who had so often interceded with GOD, and obtain'd Pardon for an un∣grateful and rebellious People, and that GOD avenged one single Act of Distrust in him, who had been so faithful to him in all other Mat∣ters.
44 Sr. Thomas Cooke of the Parish of Haakney in the County of Middlesex Knight. For ye Advacement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
45 Coll Jacob Richards, Principall Enginier to their Majesties Traine of Artillery in Ireland, and third Enginier in England. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
AMALEK DEFEATED. Moses obtains the Victory against the Amalekites, by holding up his Hands to Heaven. SOon after the Israelites were thus comfor∣ted and refreshed with the Miraculous Supply of Water from the Bowels of a hard Rock,The same year, 2513. they met with a fresh occasion of Discou∣ragement, by being unexpectedly set upon by the Amalekites, who came with a great Force against them. They were the first that had the boldness to attack a People, whom GOD had but just now so miraculously deliver'd from their Bondage in Egypt. These cruel Enemies having observ'd the Jews to be tired with their continual March∣ings, and that besides their being expos'd to the hardship of Hunger and Thirst, were for the most part unarm'd, they were base and cowardly enough to design the destruction of a People, who never in the least had offended them, and who in the state they were in, were so many fit Objects of Mercy and Compas∣sion, rather than of Hatred and Cruelty. But Moses who always fix'd his trust and confidence in GOD, was not at all terrified with the number or strength of his Enemies; but commanded Joshua, to choose from amongst all the People a competent number of Mn of Courage, and to lead them on against the E∣nemy, assuring him, that he would not fail of doing his part towards the obtaining a hap∣py Victory over them, and to this end resol∣ved to take the Rod of GOD in his Hand, and retire to the top of the Mountain with Aaron and Hur. The next day, when Israel was engag'd with Amalek, and whilst Joshua performed all the parts of a Wise and Couragious Gene∣ral, Moses in Prayer addrest himself to GOD, in earnest Supplication for a Blessing upon his People. By this his Behaviour he taught the Jews these two important Lessons, that GOD is the only giver of Victory; and, that he bestows it in his Grace and Favour only upon those, who humble themselves under his powerful Hand, with the profoundest Submission and Humility, entreating it of him, who is the sole dispensor of it. Therefore this Holy Mn▪ ceased not from lifting up his Hands towards Heaven beseech∣ing GOD to grant a favourable success to the just Arms of his own People; and the great zeal he had for the glory of GOD, and the good of Israel, made him continue so long in that Posture, that he was forc'd at last for weariness to let them down. But Aaron and Hr having taken notice, that when Moses let down his Hands, Amalek prevailed against the Jews; they got him to sit down upon a Stone, and placing themselves on each side of him, they supported his Hands, by which means Israel obtained an entire Vi∣ctory over their Enemies: Whereof GOD com∣manded Moses to write a Memorial that might last for ever, obliging the Israelites, when entred into the Land of Canaan, to contribute to the Resolution he had taken of utterly ef∣facing the Memory of Amalek from under Heaven. This History chiefly informs us, that for to obtain the Victory over our Enemies, we must above all implore the Divine Assistance, and put our trust in his Aid, and that whatever effects an Army may make, all is to no purpose, if they be not at the same time supported by the Faith and continual Prayers of good Men. But the Fathers, as they consider this Figure, as an excellent Pattern of Perseverance in Prayer, and Wrestling with GOD for a Victory over all our Spiritual Enemies; so in a special manner they look upon it as an Instruction for Pastors, who with Moses ought to betake them∣selves to the Mountain of Retirement, there continually lifting up their Hands towards Heaven, even to fainting. If they love their Flock as they ought, they can do no less, and it is the best Service they can do for them. The care of outward things, they may lay upon others; but Prayer is their own peculiar Work and Task, and by it alone they can do more than others by all their outward endeavours: For Joshuh, notwithstanding all his Courage, Cre, and Conduct, had ben beaten, if Moses had not prayed. Amalek was able to with∣stand and vanquish too the whole Army of the Israelies, but could not withstand the Prayer of one Moses; and a single Person, all faint and tired as he was, prov'd too strong for a whole Army.
The first Tables of the Law. GOD giveth his Law to the Children of Israel from Mount SINAI. THree Months after GOD had delivered his People from the Tyranny of Pha∣raoh out of Egypt, being departed from Rhephidim hey pitched their Tents in the Wilderness or Desert of Sinai,The same year, 2513. before the Mount. The LORD called Moses unto him, and said, Tell the Children of Israel, ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I bear you on Eagles Wings; now therefore, if you will obey my Voice, and keep my Covenant, then shall ye be a peculiar Treasure unto me above all People; for all the Earth is mine, and ye shall be un∣to me a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nati∣on. Moses having communicated this to the People, they answered with one accord, that whatsoever the LORD had commanded them, they would do. When this Holy Man had return'd the Peo∣ples answer to GOD, he bid him go to the People, with an order from him to sanctifie themselves, and be in a readiness against the third day, at which time he would come down and speak to them from the top of Mount Sinai. He also commanded Moses, to set bounds to the People round about the Mount, and strictly to charge the People not to go be∣yond them, or come near it upon pain of Death. After that all this had been performed ac∣cording to GODS command by Moses, early in the Morning on the third day, nothing was heard but claps of Thunder, the Heavens seem'd all on a flame with Lightnings, and a thick Cloud cover'd the top of the Mount. There was also heard the sound of a Trumpet exceeding loud. With those amazing Ob∣jects the Eyes and Ears of the People were so seiz'd, that Moses could scarcely perswade them to come out of their Tents, to hear the Com∣mandments GOD was about to give them. At the same time GOD called Moses to him from the top of the Mountain, which seem'd all on Fire, and the Smoke thereof ascended like the Smoke of a Furnace; but the People stood at a distance, and heard the Ten Com∣mandments, which GOD by his own Mouth delivered to them. But they being seized with Fear and Trembling at these terrible Appearances, desired of Moses, that he would be pleased to speak to them, and tell them from GOD, whatsoever he should be pleased to command them, that so they might no longer be exposed to those Terrours which they apprehended might be a means of their Death. In this manner were the Ten Command∣ments publish'd at first, which even to this day are those Holy Laws, which Christians look upon as the unmoveable foundation of their Piety. The Fathers wished, that some part of that Terror and Trembling, which then seiz'd the Jews at the hearing of them, pronounced by GOD himself from the Mount, might also lay hold upon us, to the end, that we also might tremble and quake at the apprehension of any thing, that might in the least make us to offend against the Holiness of these Ordinances. Process of time, and the corruption of Manners amongst the Jews formerly, and since amongst the Christians, have made Men study several ways to elude the force and obligation of these Commandments, by false Interpretations and Equivocations, calculated only to favour the licen∣tious and loose Lives of Men: But Jesus Christ, who assures us, that the least jot or title of those Holy Laws shall not perish; at the same time teacheth us, to have always the same respect for them, as if they had but just now been delivered to us from the Mouth of GOD himself. For Christians are no more Slaves and Bond∣men as the Jews, who were Children of the Bondwoman, but are Children of the Freewo∣man; and therefore they do no more say with the Jews, Let not the LORD speak to us, lest we die; but on the contrary, they desire nothing more, than that GOD should speak to their Souls; forasmuch as the words which he speaks are the Words of Life, and are always accompanied with the Unction of the Holy Ghost, which makes them with joy and delight to perform those Com∣mands, which the Jews lookt upon as a Yoke that was insupportable.
46 Elizabeth Lady Coryton▪ relict of Sr. John Coryton of West-Newton-fferras in the County of Cornwall Baronet. & daughter & Chyress of S•. Ric: Chiverton. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
47 Sr. James Tillie of Pentillie Castle in the County of Cornwall Knight. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
THE GOLDEN CALF. Moses seeing the Calf of Gold, breaks the Tables of the Law, writ by GOD himself. THE Jews having declared, that they desired rather to hear Moses speak to them, than the LORD, GOD call'd him up to the top of the Moun∣tain,The same Year, 2513· Four Months after their coming out of Egypt. where he gave him all the Laws ac∣cording to which he would have his People go∣vern'd. The Divine Original of these Laws is evident to all, who consider the profound and transcendent Wisdom which appears in them, being a perfect Pattern for all wise Lawgivers and Governours to take Instructions from. Moses continued 40 Days and 40 Nights with GOD on the Mount, and when he had received the Commandments written on Tables of Stone by the Finger of GOD, containing the substance of what he had communicated to Moses on the Mount, he dismissed him. The Israelites in the mean time being a Stiff-necked and Unbelieving People, seeing that Moses delay'd coming down from the Mount, assembling themselves in a tumul∣tuous manner, went to Aaron, and insolent∣ly charged him to make them GODS to go before them, forasmuch as they did not know what was become of Moses, and whether they should ever see him again. Aaron perceiving their obstinate Resoluti∣on, and fearing the effect of their Anger, if he should provoke them by a peremptory re∣fusal, demanded of them the Golden Ear-rings of their Wives, their Sons and Daughters, and made thereof a Calf of Gold, which they worshipped, with a great deal of solemnity and rejoycing. Moses in the mean time, as he was coming down the Mountain with the two Tables, heard the noise of shooting for Joy; and as he drew near beheld the Calf of Gold, and the People dancing about it, which so kindled the zeal he had for GOD's Glory, and the In∣dignation he conceiv'd for this their horrid Sin and Unthankfulness, that he cast those Holy Tables out of his hands, and brake them at the foot of the Mountain. He supposed it would be of little use for them to have be∣fore them a Law  on Stone, which they had already effaced out of their Hearts, and that such inconstant Souls were unworthy to be honoured with the Commands of GOD, writ with his own Finger. After this Moses took the Golden Calf, and having burnt it, he ground it to Powder, and strewed it upon the Water, and made them all drink of it, to shew them, how contemptible a thing it was to which they had given Di∣vine Adoration. He also sharply rebuked Aaron for having given way to this their great Sin; and then placing himself in the Gate of the Camp, cried aloud, that all those that were on the LORDS side, should come to him; whereupon immediately the whole Tribe of Levi joyned with Moses, who com∣manded them to take their Swords, and to go from Gate to Gate throughout the Camp, and to kill all they should meet with, sparing neither Brothers, Neighbours, Friends or Com∣panions. The Levites with a praise-worthy Zeal, ex∣ecuted this difficult Command, and slew that day about 3000 Men. Moses afterwards bles∣sed the Family of Levi for their ready Obe∣dience, assuring them, that by this their shed∣ding of the Blood of their Brethren, they had consecrated themselves to the LORD, who would not fail to bless them for it. Saint Gregory admires this holy Zeal of the Levites, which he looks upon as an excellent Instruction for those too indulgent Fathers, who are afraid to reprove their Children, whom they see plunged in the Love of the World. These Levites (saith S. Gregory) tho' they loved their Children, yet did not spare them; yea, they did not stick at taking away their Lives, and we are afraid so much as to re∣prove them, because we love them with a fleshly Love. The most tender Love in the World, has an answerable Anger: No Fa∣ther could love his Son better, than Moses did his People; for to save them, he was willing his own Name should be blotted out of the Book of Life; and the mre he feared the Anger of GOD against his People, the more he endea∣voured to prevent it by this exemplary Pu∣nishment.
THE SECOND TABLES. GOD writes his Law a Second time upon Tables of Stone, which the Israelites re∣ceive with Respect. MOSES having searched the Sore of his People to the bottom, assembled them the next day, and re∣presented to them the heinousness of the Sin they had committed;The same year, 2513. and told them, he would present himself be∣fore GOD, and endeavour by his Intercession, to turn away the Divine Wrath, they had so justly deserved. He accordingly humbly pro∣strates himself before the LORD, as if he him∣self were guilty of the Sin they had commit∣ted, and as one that durst not open his Mouth, to beg pardon for this their abominable Sa∣criledge. But his Charity at last found out a Reme∣dy for this great Evil, he ranks himself a∣mongst these impious Criminals, and begs of GOD, that if there were no pardon for them, to blot him also out of his Book of Life: By this means he (as we may say) forc'd GOD, rather to pardon so many Criminals, for the sake of one Innocent Person, than to destroy one Innocent Person for the sake of so many Criminals. Thus GOD being overcome with the excess of Moses his Charity, sends him back again to the People, to tell them, that for the sake of their Fathers, and at his Intercession, he would give them the Land he had promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; but that he would not go up with them as formerly, for∣asmuch as they were a stiffnecked People, lest he should be found to consume them by the way. And having commanded them to lay aside all their Ornaments, as a mark of their Repentance and Sorrow for this Sin they had committed, he orders Moses to hew out two Tables of Stone, like to the former which he had broken. So Moses rose up early in the Morning, and went up to Mount Sinai with the two Tables, and prostrating himself before the Divine Ma∣jesty, who descended in the Cloud on the top of the Mount, most humbly beseeched him to pardon the Sin of his People. The 2 LORD favourably received this his Intercession, and assur'd him of his Protection; and when he had continu'd there 40 Days and 40 Nights in Communion with GOD, without Meat or Drink, he returned to the People with the two Tables of the Law. When Moses was come down to the Camp, the Jews were extreamly surpriz'd to see his Face all shining; and being affrighted with the glory they saw in his Countenance, they durst not come near him; which obliged himself to put a Veil on his Face, and then ha∣ving called the Rulers and all the People to come to him, he declared what GOD had charged him with on their behalf. Thus Moses having attain'd to a degree of Glorification by his long continued Commu∣nion and Familiarity with GOD, was forced always to veil his Face when he came forth to the People, which he took off again when he went into the Tabernacle before the LORD, to speak with him. Whereby he gave to all the Pastors of the Church this Lesson, That they ought to proportion the Sacred Truths, GOD has been pleased to communicate to them, to the capacity and weakness of their Hearers; and to hide the Revelation of surpassing Mysteries, GOD has favoured them with, in the secret of their own Breasts. In this manner were the two first Tables renewed, and GOD being touch'd with the punishment of his People, and the Intercession of Moses, wrote over again with his own Fin∣ger the X. Commandments he before had giv∣en them. Which favour of his to the Jews was a Figure of a greater, he bestows upon all Penitent Souls, when upon their deep Hu∣miliations, he by his Holy Spirit anew en∣graves in their Hearts, the Holy Law they had before effaced by the disorder of their Lives. But GOD at the same time would repre∣sent to Moses, how hard a thing it is to obtain this Grace, and therefore oblig'd him to hew these second Tables of Stone himself, which was not mention'd concerning the first Tables. For Man is so weak, that he is apt to lose what he has obtain'd without labour and pains taking; and therefore GOD is constrained to make him endure a great deal of toil and trouble before his Holy Law be fully repaired and restored in him, to the end the difficulty he has met with in this Process, may oblige him to a greater watchfulness over himself, and make him tremble at the very thought of forfeiting a Favour, he has at length ob∣tain'd of GOD with so many Tears.
48 The Honourable Bridget Noel, daughter of the Right Honourable Baptist Viscount Campden, For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate,
The CONTENTS of the Third Book of Moses, called LEVITICUS. THE Name of this Book is borrowed from the principal Subject whereof it treats; that is, Levitical Ceremonies, with their De∣pendencies: the Function and Observation whereof appertained to the Priests and Levites, who were both of the Tribe of Levi, and (by the Order of GOD) appropriated to his solemn Service. For in this Book are chiefly laid down the Ceremonial Laws, not only concerning all sorts of Sacrifices which are distinguished into Burnt-Offerings, Meat-Offerings, Offerings of the First-Fruits, Peace-Offerings, and Sin or Trespass-Offerings, as well with regard to the Persons for whom they were offered, (as for the Priests, for the whole Congregation, for the Prince or Ruler, or for any of the People, and the Cases in which they were to be offered) as for Sins of Ignorance, and wilful Sins, as to the Beasts, which were to be offered by distinguishing them into Clean and Unclean; with the Feasts and Days assigned to those several Services: As the Feast of the Passover, the Feast of Pentecost, the Feast of Tabernacles, with the Feast of Trumpets, and the day of Atonement; together with the Law of the Sabbath, of the Seventh Year, and of the Year of Jubilee; but also concerning the Priests themselves, with respect to their Persons as well as Functions. Moreover, amongst these Ceremonial Laws, are those of the Purification of Women after Child-birth: Their Offerings at their Purify∣ing; The Laws and Tokens the Priest is to observe in his Judgment about Leprosie, toge∣ther with the Rites and Sacrifices whereby it is to be cleansed; The Law concerning the Scape-Goat. To these are added Moral Laws concerni what we are to do, or leave undone, a Summa∣ry whereof we find in the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments. And besides all these, we find here also Civil Laws and Ordinances con∣cerning Punishments, which the Magistrate was to inflict upon some enormous Crimes, as of other Matters concerning the Civil Govern∣ment. Amongst these Laws we find also several Re∣lations inserted, as of the Inauguration of the Priests, the Anointing of the Tabernacle, and its Utensils, the actual Exercise of the Priestly Function, and its Confirmation by a Divine Prodigy of Fire coming down from Heaven and consuming the Burnt-Offerings on the Altar, and the Punishment of two Priests, Nadab and Abihu, who had transgressed the divinely appoint∣ed Rules of their Sacred Employment, by offering Strange Fire before the Lord; together with the Execution of a Blasphemer. Here also we meet with several Promises made to those that observe the Divine Laws, and dreadful Denunciations to those that transgress them; all which was done within a Months time, that is, from the beginning of the second year after the Children of Israel were come out of Egypt, to the beginning of the second Month of the same Year.
NADAB AND ABIHU. Nadab and Abihu (Aarons eldest Sons) having put strange Fire into their Censers, and offered it before the LORD, are consumed by a Fire from the LORD, in the Tabernacle. AFter that Moses had finished all that GOD had commanded him to make for his Worship and Ser∣vice,Anno Mundi 2514. he set up the Taber∣nacle, and consecrated it at the beginning of the second Year after their coming out of Egypt. GOD gave a visible Witness of his approving of whatsover was offer'd up to him (according to his Command) for his Glory, and a Cloud always covered the Tabernacle; to shew, that the Divine Majesty was present there, and dignified it with his Glory. This Cloud rested on the Tabernacle, as long as it pleased GOD it should continue in the place where it was, and when it removed from the Tabernacle, it was a Sign that the Divine Will was they should decamp, and remove elsewhere. Thus we see that an orderly and regulated outward Service began to be performed to the Divine Majesty, by offering up of Sacri∣fices, and other holy Observances appointed and determined by GOD himself, Aaron and his Sons being in particular set apart and con∣secrated to these Holy Functions. But GOD soon made it appear, by a dreadful Example, what exactness he expects in the performance of those Holy Duties, and with what severity he required, that his Ap∣pointments should be obey'd. He had made a Law, That the Fire was to burn continually upon his Altar, and that the Priests should take care to maintain it, by laying on of Wood every Morning and Evening. It was with this Holy Fire they were to kindle their Cnsers, whenever they did offer Incense before GOD; but Nadab and Abihu, the two eldest Sons of Aaron, neglecting this Command of GOD, and having taken strange Fire in their Censers, died in the Tabernacle, as they were offering up their Incense before the LOLD; for GOD darted into their In∣wards, a Fire like a flash of Lightning, which consumed their Inwards without touching their Bodies, or so much as their Garments. And Moses taking occasion from this sud∣den and terrible Judgment, to make the rest of the Priests fearful of falling into the like Sin, made them bring the dead Bodies of Na∣dab and Abihu from before the Sanctuary, and carry them out of the Camp, in the same con∣dition they found them, that is, in their Lin∣nen Coats. Moses also charged Aaron and his Sons, not to mourn for Nadab and Abihu, in sha∣ving their Heads, or rending their Cloaths; but that they should leave those Marks of Mourning to the rest of the People, from whom they ought to distinguish themselves as well in this point as all the rest, in Reverence to that Holy Anointing, whereby they had been consecrated to the LORD, and separated from the rest of their Brethren. GOD was willing to teach the Jews by this terrible Judgment, that the most holy seeming Service that Men offer to GOD, cannot in the least be acceptable to him, when it is not done in the way and manner he has appointed. The Divine Being is so wonderful and tran∣scendent, that it is impossible to honour him, but according to his own Prescription; and the Model he himself hath set down. He does not now, (it may be) so visibly and re∣markably punish those who transgress his Holy Ordinances; but he no less takes notice, and observes at this time, those who bring a strange Fire to his Altar, and present them∣selves before him, having another Fire flaming in their Hearts, than what he has kindled there by his Holy Spirit. This strange Fire which he has so great an aversion for, is (according to St. Gregory) the Love of this World, and that holy Man struck with the terrible Example shewed upon Nadab and Abihu, takes occasion earnestly to exhort all Believers, but especially those who serve at the Altar, to banish from their Hearts all unclean Lusts, and the love of Temporal things, to the end their Hearts may burn with the Love of GOD alone, who is a consuming Fire, and a jealous God; and who cannot suffer that any o∣ther strange Fire, should burn in the Hearts of those whom he has designed to be the Altars for his Holy Fire to burn upon continually.
49 William Weett of St. Margarets Westminster in Middlesex Gent. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The CONTENTS of the Fourth Book of Moses, called NUMBERS. THis Book is called Numbers, because it contains the several Numbrings of the Tribes of Israel, performed in the Desert by the Command of GOD, and particularly of the Levites. But besides this Numbring and Re∣gistring of the People, according to every par∣ticular Tribe, (but the Levites are exempted for the Service of the LORD, which both begin and conclude this Book) many other Matters are therein related. Here we find the Order, ac∣cording to which the 12 Tribes were to march in their Journey, as well as to encamp themselves about the Tabernacle. Here is set down the Charge and Duty of the Priests and Levites; their Maintenance, and their miraculous Confirmation in the Priesthood. Here are Laws Ceremonial, Mo∣ral, Civil, and Mixt. Herein is represented to us the wonderful and singular Conduct GOD was pleased to use towards them, in leading them through the Wilderness, to the Land of Promise. Here are also related several Events, that hapned in their Journey, the Occasions, Circumstances, and Success whereof, afford us many good Lessons, as well in Ecclesiastical as Civil Matters. We see here, that after the setting up and Consecration of the Tabernacle, the Heads or Princes of the Twelve Tribes, severally brought their Gifts and Offerings; and how that un∣grateful People were oft engaged in Murmu∣rings and Rebellions against the LORD, and against Moses, together with the dreadful Examples of terrible Judgments that succeeded them. We read here also, how Moses was eased of the burthen of his solitary Administration, by the Assistance of Seventy Elders; notwith∣standing which, he meets with much trouble both from Aaron his Brother, and Miriam his Sister; as also, how he having sent some to discover the Land of Canaan, by reason of the ill Report of the Spies, and the Murmurings thence occasioned amongst the People, several Judgments were inflicted on them, whereby some immediately perished, the rest being sentenc'd to wander up and down in the Wilderness forty Years from their coming out of Egypt, and to die in it at last. In this Book likewise are recorded several Sins both particular and common with their just Punishments, as well as the Vertues and Heroick Actions of good Men, with their particular Rewards. Moreover, the infinite Mercy of GOD is excellently set forth here, in his favourable acceptance of the Prayers of Moses, his faithful Servant; in the gracious pardoning of so many Crimes of such rebel∣lious and seditious Persons, and in the continu∣al pouring forth of his multiplied Blessings upon that People; whereof some were Spiri∣tual, in preserving the Truth of his Doctrine, and the Purity of his Service amongst them; and others Corporal, in delivering them from the hands of their Enemies, in giving them glorious Victories over them, and in graciously heaping upon them many other temporal Advan∣tages. Lastly, We have here an account, how the Children of Israel prepared themselves to take possession of the Land of Canaan, whereof the Borders and Bounds are described; whereupon the Tribe of Reuben, that of Gad, and the half Tribe of Manasseh, having taken possession of the Country on that side Jordan; it is by the Command of GOD assign'd to them for an In∣heritance. Here are also Rules and Orders set down about dividing the Land of Canaan, with the exception of several Places and Cities, some of which were to be appropriated to the Le∣vites, and others, were to serve for Cities of Refuge. This Book contains the History of the Events and Transactions of 38 Years and 9 Months, viz. from the second Month of the second Year, after the Departure of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, to the beginning of the 11th Month of the 40th Year.
The Blasphemer Stoned. GOD commands the Blasphemer of his Holy Name to be Stoned, and a∣nother that profaned the Sabbath, by gathering Sticks on that Holy Day. AFter that GOD had (by the terrible and sudden Punishment of Nadab and A∣bihu) given an evident Example,The same Year 2514. how dangerous a thing it is for those that minister at the Al∣tar, to neglect the Rules of their holy Function, and to disobey him, whose more immediate Ministers they are; he gave another Example of the exactness of his Justice towards the Common People. Two Jews quarrelling together, one of them in his transport of Rage and Choler blasphemed the Holy Name of GOD; the Ears of those that heard him being offended at those detestable Words, they seiz'd the Blasphemer, and brought him before Moses, who would not pronounce or determine any thing in the case, till he had enquired of GOD what was fit to be done. GOD, in answer to his demand, com∣mands him to put the Blasphemer immediate∣ly out of the Camp, and that those who had heard his Blasphemy, should lay their Hands on his Head, and that afterwards all the Peo∣ple should stone him. This Order was accord∣ingly forthwith executed with a Severity, which at this time may make all those trem∣ble, who are not afraid in their Passion to blaspheme that Holy Name; as well as make those blush, who are so regardless of the Glo∣ry of GOD, as to suffer and wink at those that do it. And upon this occasion, GOD made a Law, That all Blasphemers, for time to come, should be stoned by the People. Some time after their hapned another Ex∣ample of the Divine Justice and Severity. The Israelites being very exact in their out∣ward observance of the Holiness of the Sab∣bath-day, in which GOD had commanded them, but a while ago, with his own Mouth, not to do any servile Work, they chanc'd to find a Man gathering Sticks on that day, and brought him before Moses and Aaron, to pass Sentence upon him for that Transgression of the Divine Law, who ordered him to be put in Ward, till they had consulted the Will of GOD in that Matter. After Enquiry, GOD commanded them to proceed (as in the foregoing Instance) viz. to bring the Sabbath-breaker without the Camp, and that all the People should stone him there. Men at this time would take more care, and be more exact in keeping the Laws of GOD, if they saw themselves threatned with present Death, upon the breach of them; and the fear at least of so sudden and so severe a Punishment would put a stop to their rash Licentiousness. But those who have learnt to obey the Law of GOD from a Principle of Love, and not from any fear of Punishments, cannot sufficiently be∣wail and lament to see the Liberty those that call themselves Christians take, to violate with∣out Fear or Care, the most sacred and inviolable Laws and Commands of GOD. Their Faith presents them with a view of o∣ther Punishments, and much more to be feared than all Temporal Punishments whatsoever. And their Eyes gush forth with Tears, when they consider, That for the gathering of a few Sticks or Stubble (as all worldly things are no better) Men provoke the Anger of GOD against them, and draw down upon themselves Punishments that shall never end. GOD never slackens the Severity of his Laws▪ He has once declared to Men, what he would have them do, and what he expects from them; and having so done, speaks no more, but leaves it to them, and if they be disobedient, 'tis at their own peril. Men indeed may deceive themselves, and wrest the Law of GOD to their own Sense, and as they would fain have it; but however they may flat∣ter themselves, as this Sabbath-breaker probably also did: For what hurt was there in gathering a few Sticks? yet their excusing and acquitting of themselves will not prevent the Sentence of Death from being pronounced against them: And they will know, but alas too late (as saith St. Austin) That Man was vain in his Promi∣ses, but that GOD was true in his Threats and Menaces.
50 Andrew Pitcarne alias wheler of Datchett in the County of Bucks Armiger▪ For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
51 Godfrey Richards of St. Martins in the ffields in Middlesex Esq▪ Providour to their Majesties Traine of Artillery in Jreland. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
THE TWELVE SPIES. Moses sends forth 12 Spies to search the Land of Canaan. They make the People Murmur. GOD, to punish their Rebellious Murmurings, assures them, they shall not enter into the Land he had promised them. THE severity of so many Chastisements, wherewith GOD exercised his People in so many different manners, was not suf∣ficient to put a stop to their Rebellious Mur∣murings,The same year, 2514. from which Aaron himself, and Mi∣riam his Sister, were not exempt: For being jealous of that great Authority GOD had con∣ferred upon Moses, they in a taunting man∣ner said, Hath the LORD indeed only spoken by Moses, Hath he not spoken also by us? And for a pretext of their Murmurings against him, they uphraided him, with having mar∣ried an Ethiopian Woman. Moses, tho' he was sensible of the injustice of these their Reproaches, yet preserving his accustomed Meekness, seem'd not at all con∣cern'd at it. But GOD avenged Moses, who would not avenge himself, and sparing Aaron because of his holy Function, he struck Miri∣am with a Leprosie▪ Moses being afflicted to see his Sister in that condition, earnestly prayed to the LORD to heal her; but GOD told him it was but fit∣ting, that for the fault she had committed, she should be put forth of the Camp 7 days, after which she was healed, according to the Intercession of Moses. This particular Murmuring of Aaron and Miriam against Moses being past, there soon arose another of the whole People: For GOD having commanded Moses to send a Man of each Tribe, to search the Land of Canaan, and to bring a Sample of the Fruits thereof, these Spies returned and brought a bunch of Grapes, which was an abundant proof of the excellency of the Soil: But withal told them, that the Land was inhabited by so Giant-like a People, that they could not think ever to conquer them. The People had no sooner heard this dis∣couraging account from the Spies, but they began with one accord to murmur against Mo∣ses: They wish they had died in the Wilder∣ness, rather than to be put upon fighting a∣gainst Giants; and at last came to that wicked Resolution, to choose themselves a Leader, and return to Egypt. Moses and Aaron seeing them lash out into these detestable Exorbitances, prostrated them∣selves before the LORD, to appease his An∣ger from breaking out upon them; whilst in the mean time Caleb and Joshuah endea∣voured by mild words, and encouraging Re∣presentations of the Land, to calm them, and to efface the fears which these false reports had raised in them. They assured them▪ that it was a very excellent Land, and that as long as GOD favoured them, they should easily be∣come Masters thereof. But the People being strangely enraged, instead of giving ear to their Remonstrances, would needs have stoned them, had not they been stopt by the appearance of the Glory of the LORD, in the Tabernacle of the Congre∣gation; whence the LORD spake to Moses, commanding him to tell the People, that he had heard their murmurings, and that accor∣ding to their wishes he would deal with them; for as they had wished to die in the Wilderness, so they should all of them from 20 years old and upwards. Joshua and Caleb only were excepted from this punishment, as having endeavoured to still the Murmurings of the People; the rest of the Spies were struck with sudden Death, as being the Authors of this great mischief. GOD by this History seems to teach us, that when he promises us a great Reward, we ought not to discourage our selves with every small difficulty, that must be overcome before we can deserve it. We cannot enter into the Land of Promise without first overcoming the Enemies, which oppose our passage thither; but instead of being discouraged at the sight of thse Ene∣mies, we ought to stir up our Faith, and cast our care upon GOD, who has promised to fight for us. Thus Jesus Christ doth only promise his King∣dom to those who take it by force. We do re∣nounce the Kingdom of Heaven, by fearing to fight and strive for it; and they who instead of encouraging Souls in this Spiritual Com∣bat, do discourage them, shall be severely pu∣nished by GOD, as being the Authors of their Perdition.
KORAH, DATHAN, and ABIRAM. Korah, Dathan, and Abiram Murmuring against Moses, and affecting the High-Priesthood, the Earth opens and swallows them alive. THE Murmuring of the Children of Is∣rael, occasion'd by the report of the Spies, was soon after se∣conded by another,The same year, 2514. and the 2d year after their coming out of Egypt. which more heinously offended the Divine Majesty. Ko∣rah, Dathan and Abiram, with 250 Princes of the People, arose in a se∣ditious manner against Moses and Aaron; and envying the Dignity and Authority they had over them, said, they had long enough Lorded it over the Lords People who were as holy as they, and that it was high time to set bounds to their arrogated power. Moses having heard these their Words, fell upon his Face; and because he perceived that these Murmrers affected the High Priesthood, he rebuked their Ambition, representing to Korah (who was of the Tribe of Levi) that the LORD had highly honoured them, in separating them from the rest of the Con∣gregation to do the service of the Tabernacle of the LORD; that they ought to content themselves with that holy Function, without raising their desires higher. And after he had told them, that this their Murmuring was level'd at the LORD himself, he bid them be in a readiness against the next day, with their Censers, and charged Aaron like∣wise to appear with his. This done, Korah and his Party placed themselves on one side, and Aaron on the other; and at the same time the Glory of the LORD appeared to all the Congregation, and the LORD commanded Moses to bid the Peo∣ple, to get them away from those Rebellious Murmerers. Moses having given this Adver∣tisement to the People, told them, that GOD would now give them an undoubted proof, that he had done nothing but by express Or∣der from him; and that the extraordinary death of these Rebels, would justifie them in the eyes of them all. Scarce had Moses made an end of speaking to the People, when the Earth opened and swallowed them, and all that belonged to them. Thus descended they alive to Hell, and pe∣rished in a moment from amidst the Congre∣gation of the Israelites, who ran away at the hidous cry of them, and for fear of being overtaken with the same Ruin. At the same time a Fire came forth from GOD and consumed the 250 Partisans of Ko∣rah's Rebellion. Moses, by command from the LORD, order'd their Censers to be taken up, and beat into Plates, to cover the Altar, that they might be an eternal Monument of this severe Vengeance, and a warning to all, not to attempt the like for the future. And yet for all this, the very next Morn∣ing they fell again to their old custom of Murmuring, charging Moses, that he had kill'd the People of the LORD. GOD at the same time would have consumed them in a moment, but for Moses his Intercession; who seeing, that Wrath was gone out from the LORD against the People, commanded Aaron to take his Censer with Incense, and to make Attonement for them; whereupon the Plague was stay'd, after that it had destroy'd 14700 Men, besides them that died about the matter of Korah. After this the LORD, to ratifie the Priest∣hood to Aaron, commanded the Heads of every Tribe, to provide themselves Rods, and to write their Names upon them, and lay them up in the Tabernacle, the LORD being resolved to evidence to all, whom he had chosen to the Priesthood, by causing his Rod to Blossom. When the Rods were brought forth again, Aaron's Rod alone was found to have put forth Buds, Blossoms, and Almonds, which therefore GOD commanded should be kept for a Token, and laid up in the Ark of the Covenant, to prevent any such Rebellious pretences for the time to come. This great and dreadful Example has al∣ways been a restraint upon Wise Men, from lightly engaging themselves to Minister at the Altar, and from rashly handling the Holy Censer, without a sure and satisfactory Call from GOD. The punishment of these three Re∣bels, and their Company, who were buried alive, yea, went down so to Hell (as the Scripture saith) inspires them with an humble back∣wardness to Holy Things. They know GOD is so great, that he cannot be served worthily, but by those he makes choice of himself to be his Ministers, and whom he qualifies with Di∣vine Vertues, for so Great and Sacred an em∣ploy; and therefore in deep humility they are ready to cry out with S. Paul, who is sufficient for these things?
52 Richard Powis of St. Martins in the ffields, in Middlesex. Gent. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
53 Mary Barington, daughter of Thomas Barinton▪ of Barington Hall in Essex Esq, by his wife the Lady Anne Rich. daughter of the Rt. Honourable Robert late Earle of Warwick. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
THE BRAZEN SERPENT. The People murmuring against GOD, and against Moses, are punished with Fie∣ry Serpents, and are healed by looking up to the Brazen Serpent, which Moses erected at the command of GOD. THE Rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram being thus quell'd, some years after there hapned ano∣ther,Anno Mundi 2252· befre Christ 1452. in the 6th Month of the 40th year after their coming out of Egypt which GOD most severely punished; for the People having now wan∣dred for many years up and down the Wilderness, and being tir'd with so many Marches and Counter-marches, they began again seditiously to murmur against Moses, expressing their dis∣content in bitter and passionate Expostula∣tions and Complaints, not only against him, but even GOD himself; saying, Wherefore have you brought us up out of Egypt, to die in this Wilderness? we have no Bread, and oft want Water, and our Souls loath this light Bread. The LORD being provoked against them, for these their murmurings, he sent Fiery Ser∣pents amongst them, which caused a terrible destruction of the People, who died away soon after they were Stung by them. The most seditious and forward amongst them being terrified at this sudden and fatal Vengeance, changed their Complaints and Threats into Prayers and Lamntations; and coming to Moses, acknowledg'd their heinous Sin, where∣by they had provoked the Anger of the LORD against them, by murmuring against his Con∣duct and Guidance over them; and earnestly entreated him, to make intercession to the LORD for them, that they might be deli∣ver'd from this plague of the Fiery Serpents, forasmuch as the torment of their biting was altogether intolerable. Moses accordingly humbly presents their Request before GOD, making earnest Inter∣cession for them; who being appeased by the charitable Prayers of that Holy Man, commands him to make a Serpent of Brass, and lift it up upon a Pole; assuring him, that all those who were bitten by the Fiery Serpent, should be healed of their Wounds, by looking up to it. Thus it was that this Mortality ceased amongst the Peopl. Which History, whether we respect the Judgment it self, or the Re∣medy GOD in his Mercy appointed for it, doth afford us very important Lessons and In∣structions. For the Fathers have considered this murmuring here of the People, and the bitterness of their Spirit venting it self in passionate and ungrateful Complaints and Ex∣postulations, (by reason of their long and wearisom wandrings in the dry and solitary Wilderness) as a lively Figure of those dange∣rous Spiritual Temptations which sometimes happen to the most perfect, who are oft in danger, without a vigorous exciting of their Faith and Trust in GOD, of being born down and discourag'd with the multiplied Pains and Difficulties they meet with in the strait and narrow way to Life. If they consent to these secret murmurings arising in their Hearts, they cannot fail of being bit with Fiery Serpents. I mean, Evil Spirits, who watch only first to discourage, and then to destroy them. What remedy now is there for them in this dangerous Case? No other, but what is here set down; they must fix their Eyes upon the Brazen Serpent, which was a visible Em∣blem of JESUS CHRIST, as he himself as∣sures us in his Gospel. He did not disdain to assist our weak Understandings, in represent∣ing himself by a Serpent, yet not a common poysonous one, but a Serpent of Brass; because in taking our Flesh upon him, he did not par∣take of our Sin, which is, (and therefore may truly be called) the poyson of the Serpent, tho' he submitted himself to Death, which was the effect of Sin; not His, but Ours. To this Divine Object, JESUS CHRIST, (lifted up upon the Cross) it is, that Believers must continually recall their Eyes, for to stife their Complaints, for to refresh and comfort them during their wearisom steps in this vast and howling Wilderness; frequently encou∣raging themselves with these and like words: Has the Captain of our Salvation, who was the Holy one of GOD, suffered so much with∣out the least Complaint; and shall we Sinners murmur? Has GOD so dealt with the green Tree? and do we think it just, he should spare the dry?
BALAAMS ASS SPEAKS. Balaam the False Prophet blesseth the People of GOD against his Will, not∣withstanding that King Balak had sent for him to curse them. His Ass reproves him for beating her, because she stopt at the sight of an Angel, which Balaam perceived not. AFTER so many Afflictions and Dif∣ficulties which Moses had been tryed with,Anno Mundi 2553. before Christ 1451. in his Leading of the People; for a last proof of his Constancy, he was a little be∣fore his death to be exercised with Tryals, caused by the Artifices of a false Prophet. The Israelites being encamp'd near to the borders of Moab, Balak their King terrifyed at their approach, sends for Balaam to curse Israel. Balaam in the Night time asks Counsel of GOD, what he should do; who strictly forbad him to undertake any such thing, forasmuch as he himself had blessed them: whereupon Balaam dismisses the Prin∣ces, Balak had sent to fetch him, with this Answer. But this Prince being resolved not to be put off so, sends other more honoura∣ble Persons to Balaam, and with richer Pre∣sents. The covetousness of this false Prophet be∣ing awakened at the sight of these Presents, instead of firmly acquiescing in the first an∣swer GOD had given him, demanded again of GOD, whether he should go along with them, as if the Gold of these second Am∣bassadors could have the same power upon GOD, as it had on his Covetous Heart. So GOD leaving him to his desires, bad him go along with them. And as he was on the way, the Angel of the Lord met him and oppos'd him; yet Balaam did not see him; but the Ass on which he rode, saw the Angel, and stopping, fell down under him; and as Ba∣laam in a rage smote the Ass, GOD open∣ing her Mouth, she complain'd of his unjust Cruelty. At the same time also the LORD open∣ed Balaams Eyes, and he saw the Angel standing in the way, and as he threatned to kill him, Balaam humbled himself before the Angel of the LORD; and told him, that if his Journey were displeasing to him, he was ready to return back again. But the Angel gave him leave to continue his Jour∣ney, only charged him to speak nothing, but what he received from GOD. And accordingly he did; for notwithstanding all the Perswasions and Promises of Balak to make him curse Israel, GOD made him to bless them; which extreamly provoked that King. But Balaam being afraid of losing the Re∣wards he expected from Balak, made him endeavour by his Counsel, to destroy and fru∣strate the blessings he had pronounced to that People: For casting off his disguise of a true Prophet, he (like a wicked wretch) advised Balak to tempt the Children of Israel with the Moabitish Women, that being inveigled by them, and worshiping their Idols, GOD might in his Wrath deliver them into the hands of their Enemies. This Advice of his had a most fatal suc∣cess; for these Idolatrous Women, by their Allurements, soon gain'd this easie People, to defile their Bodies and Souls with them. Thus one false Prophet, who pretended to be a Man of God, was like (by his Artifices and Covetousness) to have been the cause of the ruin and destruction of all Gods People, if a true Minister of the Lord had not opposed it with an holy and highly commendable Zeal: For Phineas, the Grandson of Aaron, seeing a Jew committing lewdness with a Moabitish Woman, thrust them both through with his Sword, by which means the Plague was stayed, which the Wrath of God had kindled amongst them, whereof 24000 died. The Jews then (as saith S. Ambrose) were more miraculously delivered by one true Priest, than they had before been corrupted by one False Prophet; and the Zeal and Piety of the one was of greater force, than the Avarice or Artifices of the other. We find here, that the People of God are happy, when they have Persons amongst them, who by a wise zeal oppose the designs of those that would corrupt them. There will be always Balaams in the Church, that is, false Pro∣phets, who seek their own Interests, and not those of Jesus Christ. Wherefore it is greatly to be wish'd for, that the Church may not want such as Phineas, who were sensible of the least Evil that threatens it, and who aim at nothing but the Glory of God, and the Salva∣tion of his People.
54 Richard Chevney of Hamerton in the Parish of Hackney in the County of Middlesex Esq. For Advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
The FORTY YEARES TRAVLLS of the CHILDREN of ISRAEL out of EGYPT through the Red Sea, and ye Wilderness into CANAAN or the Land of PROMISE map of the Canaan showing the Exodus and wanderings
A brief Explication of the MAP, Representing the Journey of the Israelites from Egypt, to the Land of Promise. THE Land of Promise is called, by se∣veral ancient Authors, Palestine, as is conjectured from the Name of the Inhabi∣tants,This is mentioned in the 33d Chapter of the 4th Book of Moss called Numbers. who were cal∣led Philistines; a Peo∣ple descended from Cham, one of the Sons of Noah. It may not improbably be like∣wise called the Land of Promise, in regard of the Promise which the LORD made to Abra∣ham, Gen. 12.7. and 13.15. It takes the Name of Canaan from one of the Sons of Cham, who bore that Name, whose Descen∣dents (called Canaanites) inhabiting it, divi∣ded the Land into several Provinces, each whereof was denominated from one of the Sons of Cham, who were the first Possessors thereof. And lastly, this Land was called the HOLY LAND, because GOD had honoured it with his particular Presence, insomuch that Moses, Exod. 3.5. was commanded, to put off his Shoes when he approached the Bush, be∣cause the place whereon he trod was Holy ground. The Bounds length and breadth of this Country appears by the Map. It is watered with several Streams and Rivulets, whereof some run into the Sea, o∣thers fall into the River Jordan, which runs from thence into the Lake Merom, and from thence into the Sea of Galilee or Cinereth; from whence rising up again, it keeps on its course till it loseth it self in the Dead Sea, which of old was made what now it is from the Ruins of Sodom, Gomorra, Adama, and Ze∣boim, all seated in a Territory, which in the time of Lot was a very fertil Soil, and called the Vale of Siddim, being thereby likened to the Garden of GOD, or Terrestrial Paradise, Gen. 13.10. There are found floating in divers parts of this Sea, great pieces of a certain kind of Pitch called Asphaltus, from whence it hath also taken the name of Mare Asphalticam, or the Asphaltick Sea, or Lake. This kind of Pitch, or liquid Sulphur, serves to thicken or harden any thing; it is used in Physical Preparations, and by the Inhabitants for pitching of Vessels, altho when melted it is of a noysom stink. This Country hath great diversity of Moun∣tains, Valleys, Plains, Fountains, Rivers, Forests, and was well replenisht with Towns, Villages, and strong Holds; surpassing in goodness and agreeable situation most Coun∣tries in the World, and therefore assigned by GOD for the Habitation of his elect People, and promised to the Father of the Faithful, and his Posterity, as a Type and Figure of the Celestial Canaan, the Seat of perfect Bliss. The great number of the Towns and Vil∣lages that were in this Country is almost in∣credible; for an Essay therefore, let it suffice only to give a view of the Cities Royal, which Joshua by Lot divided to the Children of Israel; which are as followeth. To the Tribe of REUBEN, Heshbon, Ma∣dian, and Sulah or the Rock. To the Tribe of MANASSES, Gilgal, Endor, Taanach, Megiddo, Israel, Tirza, Ashtaroth, Damas∣cus, Edrehi, Gesur, Maachath, Zobe, The∣man, and Madon. To the Tribe of GAD, Rabbah. To the Tribe of BENJAMIN, Be∣thel, Gibeon, As, Jerusalem, and Jerico. To the Tribe of SIMEON, Debir, and Gerar. To the Tribe of ZEBULON, Jocknean, Shim, and Meron. To the Tribe of ISSACHAR, Aphek. To the Tribe of ASHER, Achsaph, Sidon, Tyre, and Lassaron. To the Tribe of NEPH∣THALI, Hazar, Kedeck, Haamath and Edrei. To the Tribe of DAN, Ekron, Gath, and Lachir. To the Tribe of JUDAH, Harad, Arab, Beseck, Eglon, Hebron, Libna, Mack∣edah, Medulham, and Tapnah. To the Tribe of EPHRAIM, Gaza, Samaria, Lassaron and Tappuah. In all the 12 Tribes these Royal Cities. Having thus spoken of the Names of the places, with the Nature of the Country, we shall now speak of the Journey of the Is∣raelites, how they passed towards it through the Wilderness of Paran, Zin, Kadesh, &c. their discovery thereof, and at last their pos∣sessing it, after GOD for the space of 40 years, for the hardness of their Hearts had caused them to wander up and down through the said Desert or Wilderness, as is at large taken notice of in Holy Writ. GOD having thought good, that the Poste∣rity
of Abraham should Sojourn for the space of 430 years, in a strange Country, as soon as the said term of years was expired, took compassion on them to deliver them from the miserable servitude which they suffered under the Egyptians; and hearing the Groans of his poor People, sent his Servants Moses and Aaron, to lead them out of Egypt, and to conduct them into the Promised Land; and because Pharah the King obstructed their going out of the Kingdom▪ the LORD sent amongst them sundry sorts of grievous Plagues, so that at last Pharaoh and his People were not only willing to let them go, but with great, importunity hastned their departure. The Israelites being assembled at Ramses, they eat the Paschal Lamb on the 14th day of the Month Abib, Exod 13.4. which with us is part of March, and part of April, and was by them Religiously observed as the first Month of their year, the Morrow after being the 15th day of the Month, Anno Mundi 2508: According to our account they en∣camped first at Succoth, from whence, 2dly. they come to Eham, at the end of the De∣sert; 3dly. they remove to Pihahiroth, be∣tween Migdol and the Sea, where the Egypti∣ans repenting they had let them go, and following them with a great force overtook them; but the LORD set his Angel behind the Camp to guard it; and having provided a Pillar of Cloud, and a Pillar of Lght, the one for their Guide by Day▪ and the other by Night; so that the Pillar of Cloud which was behind the Israelites became Darkness to the Egyptians, that they could not see them. The Israelites being thus beset on each side with high Mountains, behind with an E∣nemy, and before with the Red Sea, cried unto the LORD, who by the hands of his Servant Moses caused the Waters to separate, and they went over on dry ground; but when the Egyptians pursued them, the Wa∣ters returned again, and covered them and their Chariots, so that they were all drown'd in the Sea, not one escaping. This was an occasion of great rejoycing and triumph to the Israelites, and Moses and Miriam sang Praise to GOD for this happy deliverance. But 4thly. passing further, they come to the bitter Waters of Marah, where they mur∣mured against Moses, who thereupon (as he was ordered by GOD) sweetned them by cast∣ing therein a sort of Wood. From thence, 5thly. they passed to Elim, and encamped there, where they found 12 pleasant Foun∣tains, and 70 Palm-Trees. From thence, 6hly. they pass further, and came to the Coasts of the Red Sa, called in Hebrew, Gam-Suph, or the Sea of Weeds. Pursuing on further, they came, 7thly. to the Desert of Sin, and there encamped on the 15th day of the second Month after their departure out of Egypt; and here they again murmured against Moses for want of Fsh, calling for the Flsh-pots and Bread of Egypt, whereupon the LORD having compassion on them, gave them daily from thenceforth the Brad of Heaven, which they called Manna, and caused a great number of Quails to come to feed them with. From thence passing on they encamp, 8thly. at Dphkah; thence, 9thly. at Alash; thence, 10thly. at Rephidim; where having no Wa∣ter they again murmured, and stirred up a new Rebellion against Moses, and against GOD; wherefore that place was called Masha, or Mrbah, Exod. 17.7. Nevertheless GOD commanded Moses to strike the Rock with his Rod, upon which there sprung forth abun∣dance of Water. Here it was that Amalek set upon them; but Moses commanded Jo∣shua to oppose them with a select Troop, whilst he with Aaron and Hur went up to the next Mountain, where Moses lifted up his hands to Heaven, imploring the Assistance of GOD, and so long were the Israelites the stronger; but when Moses was tired and let down his Hands, Amalek prevailed; there∣fore Aaron and Hur got a Stone for Moses to sit on, and held up his Hands till such time as Amalek was quite defeated. Afterwards came Jethro the Priest of Midi∣an▪ and Father-in-Law of Moses to visit him, bringing with him Zipporah the Wife of Mo∣ses, and his 2 Sons Grshom and Eliezer, who were joyfully received by him: And Jethro seeing the pains that Moses underwent, in de∣ciding all cases and matters of Judicature a∣mongst the People, counselled him to choose out pious and understanding Men, to sit over them as Rulers over Thousands, Rulers over Hundreds, Rulers over Fifties, and Rulers over Tens; and what Causes were too great for them, should be brought before Moses; which Counsel Moses well approved of, and followed; and Jethro departed into his own Country.
After the departure of Jethro, Moses and the Israelites departed from hence, and made their 11th Encampment in the Desert of Si∣nai, near the Mountain of the same Name, only one part thereof is named Horeb. Upon this Mount Sinai or Sin, GOD came down and spake to the People, and gave them his Law, first by word of Mouth, and next in Writing in two Tables of Stone; which Moses received of him, written with his own Hand, after he had passed forty Days in the Mount with the LORD; which he brought down to the Children of Israel, Exod. 32.10. and Deut. 9.9, 10, 11. But Moses upon his co∣ming down, seeing the Idalatry of the People towards the Golden Calf, he was so enraged out of a Holy Zeal, that he threw the two Tables to the ground, and brake them in pieces, and took the Golden Calf, and burnt it in the Fire, ground it to Powder, and cau∣sed the Israelites to drink it in Water; never∣theless he prayed unto GOD, and obtain'd Mer∣cy for them; and GOD caused Moses to hew 2 other Tables, and wrote on them the Words that were in the former Tables. In this Mount Moses receives a Command from GOD to make the Tabernacle exactly in all parts according to the Pattern that had been shewn him in the Mount; and for the better carrying on of this Work, he demand∣ed of the People a Freewill-Offering, besides a Tax of half a Shekel upon every Male of 20 years old and upwards. In this Tax were numbred 603550 Men, Exod 39.26. and in the former Verse saith, it brought up in Sil∣ver 100 Talents, and 1775 Shekels of Silver, besides 100 Talents of Silver to cast Sockets; which makes 200 Talents, and 1775 Shekels, amounting in our English Coin at 2 s. 5 d. the Shekel unto the Sum of 72565 l. 6 s. 3 d. Besides there was freely offered in Gold 29 Talents, and 730 Shekels, which is reckoned to be 127208 l. 10 s.. To which, if the a∣foresaid 72565 l. 6 s. and 3 d. Silver is added, it makes the Sum of 199773 l. 16 s. 3 d. En∣glish Money. The Brass employed about the Tabernacle, and its Appurtenances, was 70 Talents and 2400 Shekels, which at our En∣glish Weight (at 16 Ounces to the Pound) is 6526 Pound 14 Ounces, which if reckoned at 8 d. a Pound (the usual price of Brass with us) comes to 217 l. 11 s. 3 d. Besides the Offerings of Blew Silk, Purple, Scarlet, fine Linnen, Goats-Hair, Rams-Skins died Red, Badgers-Skins, Shittim-Wood, Oil, Spices, sweet Incense, and precious Stones; all which must needs amount to a very great price. Nor is there in Scripture any mention made what the Workmanship of all these Materials cost. The Tabernacle being finished, was reared up, Exod. 40.2. the first Day of the first Month, in the second year after their depar∣ture out of Egypt, in which the Altar and all its Instruments was anointed and hallowed by Moses; and from thenceforth the Cloud of GOD rested upon the Tabernacle by Day, and in the Night Fire was in it; so that it became a Light to all the Camp, for the Glory of the LORD filled it. Now follows another Offering of all the Princes and Elders of the Tribes, who brought for a free Gift at the Consecration of the Al∣tar, 6 Chariots covered▪ and drawn by 12 Oxen; and in Vessels of Gold and Silver the weight of 120 Shekels of Gold, and 2400 Shekels of Silver, 36 Bullocks, Rams of a year old, and Kids of each sort 72, for Burnt-Offerings, for Sin-Offerings, and for Peace-Offerings. The People (as aforesaid) were numbred from 20 years old and upwards but not the Levites. Therefore GOD commanded Mo∣ses to number them from a Month old and up∣wards; also the Priests and First-born amount∣ing to 625850 Souls, besides Infants, and all under 20 years of Age, together with Maiden Children, which doubtless were a great number. And this obliges us to admire the wonderful Providence of GOD, that sustained for so long a time in such a Desert and barren place, so great a multitude of People. In the 20th Day of the 2d Month of the 2d Year, the Cloud was taken up from off the Tabernacle of the Testimony, Numb. 10 11. moving at the Head of the Israelites, to∣wards the Desert of Paran, and the Camp followed in the same Order as Moses had rank∣ed them, making their 12th Encampment at Tabhera, and the Fire of the LORD burnt amongst them, and consumed them that were in the Rear of the Camp; because the People murmured at the tediousness of their Journey, and began to express a loathing of the Manna that was given them for Food, crying out for the Flesh, the Fish, the Onions, and other Food of Egypt; where∣upon
GOD sent them such numbers of Quails, that they became surfeited therewith, and died with the Meat in their Mouths, and therefore the place was called Kibroth-Taha∣vah, that is, the Sepulchres of Covetousness, Numb. 11.24. and this so kindled the LORD's Anger against them, that he sent an exceeding great Plague amongst them. From hence they came to Hatseroth, being their 13th Encampment; and here Aaron and Miriam, for murmuring against Moses were chastised; he by words from the LORD, and she with the Leprosie; for which she was shut out of the Camp 7 Days; after which they removed to Rithma, in the Wilderness of Paran, which was their 14th Encampment; and from hence the LORD commanded Mo∣ses to send forth 12 Men as Spies to search the Land of Canaan, passing as far as Rehob, as you go to Hamath, near the Forest of Li∣banus, and at the end of 40 Days they re∣turned, bringing with them a bunch of Grapes on a Colt-staff or Bar, between 2 Men, with some other Fruits of the Country, for a de∣monstration of the goodness and fertility thereof, relating it to be a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; but at the same time fright∣ing the People with an ill report of the strength of the Country, and its walled Cities, and a suggestion of the Gigantick stature of the Inhabitants, which so discouraged them, that they again fell a murmuring, wishing they had died in Egypt, or that they were dead in the Wilderness, and were conspiring to choose themselves another Captain to lead them back into Egypt: But Joshua and Caleb, 2 of the 12 that were sent to search the Land, strove to appease and encourage the People, for which the Multitude were ready to stone them; whereupon GOD was provoked to Anger against them, and sware in his wrath, that except Joshua and Caleb, not one of the present Survivours of the deliverance from Egypt, should enter into the Land of Promise, and that he would detain them in the Wilder∣ness as many Years, as the Spies had spent Days in their Journey, till all the present Ge∣neration were dead who had seen all the won∣derful works he had wrought over the Egyp∣tians; but that their Children should enter into it, and possess it for an Inheritance, to∣gether with Joshua and Caleb, Numb. 14. wherefore the People were sorry for what they had done, and (as in despair) offered to go up to the place the LORD had promised them; but Moses would not consent unto it, counsel∣ling them to the contrary; yet obstinately they presumed to go up, though Moses and the Ark went not with them, and they were discomfited by the Amalekites and the Canaa∣nites, who pursued and slew them even unto Hormah Then the LORD ordered them, to turn a∣gain towards the South, leading them about the Mountain of Seir for the space of 38 Years; during which time their Encampments were as followeth, their 15th at Rimmon-Parez, their 16th at Libnah, their 17th at Rissa, their 18th at Kchelatha, their 19th at Mount Shapher, their 20th at Haradah, their 21th at Makheloth, their 22th at Tachath, their 23th at Tharah, where Korah, Dathan and Abiram, for conspiring against Moses and Aaron, and stirring up a Rebellion in the People, were consumed, the Earth opening and swallowing them up alive, and the Men that were with them, and all their Families and Goods, with 250 of their Abetters, that offered false Incense, were consumed by Fire that came down from Heaven, Numb. 16. Hereupon the People murmured against Moses and Aaron, charging them with the death of GOD's People; but the LORD laid a severe and exemplary Punishment upon them, inso∣much that he sent a Plague amongst them, that destroyed in one day no less than 14700 Persons; at which time the LORD command∣ed Moses, to cause all the Princes of each Tribe to bring every one his Rod, and write thereon his Name, and put them before the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and to write Aaron's Name on his Rod, and to put it there also, and the Mans Rod whom the LORD should choose for Chief Priest should Bud; so on the Morrow Aaron's Rod was budded, and brought forth Blossoms, and bore ripe Al∣monds, Numb. Chapters 16, and 17. When the Israelites departed from Tharah, their 24th Encampment was at Mithka, their 25th at Hasmona, their 26th at Maseroth, their 27th at Benejaakan, their 28th at Hor∣gidgad, their 29th at Jetbatha, their 30th at Abrona, their 31th at Hetsjon-geber, seated upon the Sea-shoar, where Solomons Fleet of Ships went to Ophir to fetch Gold, 1 King. 9.26. From Hetsjon-geber the Camp returned to the Desert of Zin, and made their 32d Encampment at Kadesh, where Miriam died
and was buried, and where the People com∣plaining to Moses for want of Water, GOD bid him speak to the Rock to produce it; but Moses, partly through weakness of Faith, and partly being disturb'd with the murmurings of the People, smote the Rock twice, and there came forth Water abundantly for them and their Cattle; but GOD being offended at him and Aaron for their Unbelief, told them, they should not bring the Congrega∣tion into the promised Land. At their departure from this place, they desired of the King of Edom passage through his Country, with promise to go peaceably without doing any injury; but being denyed, they made their 33th Encampment near the Mountain of Hor, where Aaron died in the 40th year from the Deliverance out of Egypt, being 123 years old, Numb. 13.38, 39. Whilst they were at Mount Hor, King Arad, a Canaanite, warred against them, but they overcame them, and destroyed their Cities. From Mount Hor they turned round Idumea towards the Red Sea, and made their 34th Allodgment at Salmona; their 35th at Pu∣non, where they again murmured against Moses, complaining, that they were glutted with Manna, for which they were chastised with Fiery Serpents; but GOD upon the ac∣knowledgment of their Offence gave them a present remedy against this sore Plague, which was the setting upon a pole a Brazen Serpent, made by Moses, and by looking upon which Serpent every Person thus plagued was healed of his Wounds. From Punon they passed to Oboth, where they took up their 36th Stage; their 37th upon the Coasts of Abarim, in the Confines of Moab; their 38th at the Brook Zered; their 39th at Dibon-gad; their 40th at Al∣mon-Diblathaim, near Beer, where Israel sang for Joy, that they had found out Water, Numb. 21.17. Their 41th Encampment was in the Desert of Mattana; their 42d at Nahalel and Bomoth, in the Field of Moab, even to the top of Pisgah; from hence Israel sent Messengers to Sihon King of the Amo∣rites, desiring leave to pass through his Coun∣try; but on the contrary he raised an Army, and fought against him; but he was overcome, his Country taken from him, and all his People put to the Sword. In this Encampment the Israelites com∣mit Fornication with the Women of Moab, and Idolatry with Baal-Peor, which so kind∣led the Anger of GOD against them, that 24000 Persons died of the Plague. After this GOD commanded Moses to number the People, and the Males of 20 years old and upwards, were 601630 besides the Levites, which were 23000, from a Month old and upwards, Numb. 26. But the LORD com∣manded Moses to revenge himself on the Midi∣anites, so he selected 1000 out of every Tribe, and he sent them against the Kings of Midian and slew them and all the Males, and took their Women and their Cattle, and all they had, and fired their Cities. He sent forth also and took Og King of Bashan, and his Country, and all the Land about Jordan, on this side. Their 43d Encampment was at Bethjeshi∣moth; their 44th at Abel-shittim, near Mount Pisgah, from the top whereof Moses being 120 years old, saw the promised Land, and there dying was buried by the LORD in a Valley over against Beth-Peor in the Land of the Moabites; Joshua the Son of Nun suc∣ceeding him in the Government over the Israelites. After Israel had mourned 30 days for Mo∣ses, GOD commanded Joshua to pass over Jordan, and to take possession of the Promi∣sed Land. Therefore Joshua sent out two Men to Jericho to spy the Land; who upon their return related all that they had seen, and all that had hapned to them; and then the whole Camp dislodged, and went from Sittim to Jordan, and there spent the Night. On the 3d day they received order to begin their passage over, and as soon as the Feet of the High Priests, who carried the Ark, were just upon the entrance into the River, the Water divided to make a path for them, and the Priests rested in the midst thereof, until all the People were past over. And Stones were taken up from the bottom of the River, one for each Tribe, which by the command of GOD were set up for a perpetu∣al Monument at the place where they En∣camped that Night, which was at Gilgal to∣wards Jericho. Joshua also commanded them to pitch 12 Stones in the middle of Jordan, where the Priests Feet stood, there also to re∣main for a Memorial for ever. The LORD having thus brought the Chil∣dren of Israel out of Egypt by his Mighty hand, through the Red Sea, and led them 40 years through several Deserts and Wilder∣nesses,
and now set them on the other side of Jordan, and gave them the Land of Promise; as to all the following particulars, how the Country was subdued, the Towns and Cities ta∣ken, the Inhabitants slain, &c. you will find in Holy Scripture. The Division which Joshua made amongst the Tribes, the Map represents, and according as GOD ordered by Moses, that as soon as the Land should come into their possession, there should be established Cities and Towns of Refuge, Exod. 21.13. Numb. 35.9. Deut. 19.1.2. Joshua giving notice to the People, dedicated to this use (Joshua 20.) Kadsh in Galilee upon the Mountain of Nephthali, and Sichem upon that of Ephraim, and Kiriath-Arbath, which is Hebron, in the Mountainous part of Judea, and beyond Jor∣dan to the East of Jericho, Bekar in the De∣sert in the Plain of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead, of the Tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan for that of Manasses. These Towns were for a Sanctuary to those who had slain any one by chance, or misfor∣tune, and there to remain in safety against the Persecution of the Avenger of Blood, till the death of the High Priest, after which they were to be set at liberty, and to have free permission to return to their own Habitations. These Towns are in the Map marked with a Cross on the Top, to the end the Reader may the more easily find them out. The promised Land was divided by Joshua into 12 Lots, according to the Names of the 12 Tribes, of which two and a half betook themselves beyond Jordan, and the remain∣ing nine and a half on this side of it, Jos. 13.7.8. Yet these Conquests were not so compleat, but that the Canaanites remained Canton'd in several places, as well for not having been subdued by the Israelites, as by a wise dispensation of the providence of GOD, who would by these Relicts of Enemies, keep his people in breath, and make them see the Rod, ready for their Chastisement, if they forsook their Duty. During the time of the Judges, the people of Israel were often dis∣turb'd in their possession of the Country, be∣ing sometimes Tributaries, and other while free; sometimes beating, and otherwhiles be∣ing beaten, according as they kept to their Duty, or wandred from it. David and Solomon brought it to its great∣est Perfection, as well for having absolutely subdued what remained of intestine Enemies, at least as far as the confines of Phoenicia, as for having enlarged their Borders on the side of Idumca, Arabia and Syria. But the Monarchy was dismembred under Reboam the Son of Solomon, only the 2 Tribes of Juda and Benjamin remaining firm to him, when the other 10 Tribes sided with Jeroboam, and admitted him for their King; whence arose a distinction of the two Families and King∣doms of Juda and Israel, which is taken no∣tice of in the Chronology printed at the end of the New Testament. This was ruined the first by Scalmaneeser King of Assyria, who transported the people elsewhere, and sent strange Colonies to possess it: The other was also overthrown by Nebu∣chadnezar King of Caldea, who transported the sorrowful Remnants into Babylon: But Cyrus King of Persia restored to them their liberty at the end of 70 years, permitting them to return into Palestine, and there to rebuild their Temple, which they performed with many difficulties, occasioned by the dis∣turbances from their ill Neighbours. They were much encreased under the Conduct of Nehemia and Esdras, to the time of Alexan∣der the Great; and when Manasses, Brother of Jaddo the High Priest, obtain'd by the cre∣dit of Sanballat his Father-in-Law, the con∣struction of the Temple of Garizim, which served for a Standard to the Schism of the Samaritans, who retain'd a great footing in the Country, with much Animosity against the Jews. After the death of Alexander, Judea be∣came a Scene of War, which arose and long continued between the Lagides and the Celu∣cides: And scarce was she delivered from both these, under the direction of the Maccabees; but by her own dissentions, and the Victori∣ous Arms of the Romans in Asia, she fell un∣der the power of these last, who transported the Crown to Herod the Great, who was as Crafty and Politick, as Cruel and Unnatural. In his time, which was that wherein our LORD and Saviour was born, Palestine con∣sisted of 6 particular Provinces, which were called Judea, Samaria, Galilee, Iturea, Tra∣chonite and Peree, or the Country beyond Jordan. All which Country is at present under the Turkish Government. We shall conclude this Discourse of Canaan, with an account of some Towns mentioned in the New
Testament which our Saviour honoured with his presence, and First, 1. Nazareth is the place where our Sa∣viour was conceived, and where 'twas decla∣red by the Angel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary, betrothed to Joseph, who had there his abode, Luke 1.26, 27. Hither was our Saviour brought back, being a Child, at his return from Egypt, and this was the Country where he had his Education in, and was in danger of his Life, Luke 4.16. &c. And on this occasion he was called a Nazarite. Now Nazareth was a Town in the higher Galilee, in the Tribe of Nephthali, and not far from Mount Tabor. 2. Bethlehm, called likewise Euphrat, a City of the Tribe of Juda, near which Rachel died, Gen. 35.19. Here our Saviour was born, and was worshipped by the Shepherds; and to this place the Wise Men from the East came with Presents. In this Town King David was born, and was here secretly anointed by Samu∣el in the place of Saul, 1 Sam. 16.13. 3. Jerusalem once the Metropolis of all Judea, where our Saviour was carried 40 days after his Birth, to be there preserved in the Temple, Luke 2.22. and from thence car∣ried into Egypt, to escape the fury of Herod, Matth. 2.13, 14. He here afterwards signa∣lized himself by several Miracles, and was there condemned to die, and accordingly Crucified, &c. 4. Bethabara is the usual passage from Jordan, and perhaps the place where the Is∣raelites past, to enter into the Land of Pro∣mise, Jos. 3.16. Not far off the Mouth of this River, which loses it self in the dead Sea, St. John baptized, and where our Saviour was baptized by him, Matth. 3.13. John 1.28. 5. Cana, a City in Galilee, where our Sa∣viour changed Water into Wine, John 21.7, 9, 21. Of this place St. Simon the Apostle surnamed the Canaanite, Matth. 10.4. As also of Nathaniel, John 21.2. We must not confound this place with two others of the same Name, the one in the Tribe of Asser, Jos. 19.3. The other in the Tribe of Ephra∣im, Jos. 16.8. 6. Capernaum, a City seated on the Tiberian Sea-Coast, where our Saviour frequently re∣sorted, and there paid the Tribute Money for himself and St. Peter, Matth. 17.14. He often taught there, and wrought several Miracles, on which account he sharply rebuked the Inhabitants, Math. 11.23. 7. Enon, a small Town near Salim, adjoyn∣ing to Jordan, where St. John baptized when he had left Bethabaa, as yielding Judea to our Saviour, and retiring towards Galilee, John 3.23. 8. Sichar, or Sichem, an ancient City of Samaria, where Dina the Daughter of Jacob was Violated, but cruelly revenged by her Brethren, Gen. 34. And here our Saviour in his Journey thro' the Country of Samaria to return into Galilee, had with the Samari∣tan Woman the great and important Dialogue which we read of, John 4. 9. Bethsaida, a Town of Galilee, seated on the Lake not far from Capernaum, which was as it were the middle between Bethsaida and Chorazin; whence it hapned that these 3 places are comprehended together in the complaint of our Saviour, Math. 11.21, 23. And 'twas not far from Bethsaida, where they caught that great and miraculous draught of Fish, mentioned Luke 5 6. 10. Near Bethsaida is the Mountain where our Saviour preached that famous Sermon, called the Sermon on the Mount, Matth. 5.6, 7. 11. Naim a Town in Galilee, where our Saviour raised to Life the Widows Son, Luke 7.11. 12. Gerasa and Gadara are seated near together beyond Jordan, which give Name to the Country of the Gadarenians or Gerge∣senians, where our LORD coming ashoar, after he had calmed that great Storm or Tempest which arose whilst he slept, he drove out from two possest Persons a Legion of Devils, which he permitted to enter into a herd of Swine, which violently ran into the Sea, and were drown'd, Math. 8.28. 13. Near Bethsaida is a Desert place, where our Saviour being retired, was followed by a great multitude, near 5000, which he fed with 5 Loaves, and 2 small Fishes, and there were left 12 Baskets full of Fragments, Mark 6.34. Luke 9.13. John 6.5. 14. Tyre, once a famous City for Traf∣fick, whose Kings were in League with Da∣vid and Solomon, and much contributed to the building the Temple at Jerusalem, there being oft mention made of this place in the Prophets, especially in Esau 23. and Ezek. 26.27. So there is also mention made of it in Math. 11.21, 22. Luke 6.7. Acts 21.3, 7.
15. Sidon a Maritime Town in Phaenicia, which is oft joyn'd with Tyre in the New Testa∣ment; on the Frontiers of this Town and Tyre our Saviour healed the Daughter of the Ca∣naanitish Woman, Matr. 15.21. And this Woman is termed a Canaanite, because the Tyrians and Sidonians were originally of Cana∣an, and were never dispossest by the Israelites. 16. Our Saviour leaving the Coast of Tyre and Sidon, past thro' the middle of the Pro∣vince named Decapolis, where he healed a Man Deaf and Dumb, Mark 7.31. and came to the Desert of Capernaum, where he fed 4000 with 7 Loaves, and some few Fishes, and 7 Baskets were filled with the Fragments, Matt. 15.32. Mark 8.1. &c. 17. Magdala, a Town seated on the Lake Genesareth, and probably that Mary Magda∣len drew her Sirname from this place; our Saviour came here by Water, after the se∣cond Multiplication of the Loaves, Matt. 15.39. 17. Cesarea de Philippi, seated on the foot of Libanus, and which before was called first Lais, afterwards Dan, a place very famous in the History of the Old Testament, and in particular for being one of the places where Jeroboam set up the false Worship, by which he made the 10 Tribes Revolt from the Ser∣vice of the true GOD. Our Saviour being angry at the Pharisees, requiring of him a Sign from Heaven, embarkt at Magdala, and came by Water as far as Bethsaida, where he gave sight to one that was blind, Matt. 16.1. But parting thence, he came into the Territo∣ry of Cesarea de Philippi. 18. Here it was according to the Report of Eusebius, that the Woman troubled with an Hemorrhoids, was healed by the only touch of our Saviours Garment, who had here raised a Statue, or Pillar after the Pagan manner,) in Memorial of this benefit. 19. Tabor, is a high Mountain in Galilee, not far from Nazareth, where Barac hereto∣fore made his Assembly of his Troops against Sisera, Judges 46. And our Saviour parting from Cesarea de Philippi, returned again 8 days after, and was there Transfigured in the presence of 3 of his Disciples, Matt. 17.1. Mark 9.2. 20. Bethany, was a kind of Suburb of Je∣rusalem, where Lazarus dwelt, with his two Sisters Mary and Martha, who was here raised up 4 days after his Death by Jesus Christ, John 11.1. And here was also made a Feast for our Saviour, and he was here Anointed for his Burial, John 12.1. 21. The Mount of Olives lies in the way from Bethany to Jerusalem, from which it was distant not above a Sabbath-days Journey, Acts 1.12. Our Saviour being come to the Feast of Tabernacles, retired at Night towards this Mountain, and in the Morning returned to the Temple, John 8.1, 2. From thence also he visibly ascended into Heaven, 40 days after his glorious Resurrection, Acts 1.12. 22. Jericho, called in Scripture the City of Palms, was the first that was possest by Jo∣shuah in the Country of Canaan, Jos. 6.1. &c. The Waters of it were made wholsom by Elisha, 2 Kings 2.20. And our Saviour here restored 2 Blindmen to their sight, Matt. 20.30. 23. Ephraim, according to John 11.54. is the name of a Town where our Saviour re∣tired after the Resurrection of Lazarus, to a∣void the Ambushes of the Jews. And near to this Town was Baalhatsor, where Absolom killed Amnon, who had Ravisht his Sister, 2 Sam. 13.23. 24. Six days before the Passover, our Sa∣viour return'd from Ephraim to Bethany, where the famous Supper was, as is mentioned in John 12.1. And the next Morning he came to Behphage, a Village in the cleft of the Mount of Olives, between Bethany and Jerusalem, whence he sets forth riding on the Foal of an Ass, to make his humble, tho' regal entrance into this great Town, Matt. 21▪ 8. Mark 11.8. John 12.12. The whole of the accomplish∣ment of what had been foretold, Zach. 9.9. 25. Gethsemane, or the Fat-Valley, Esa. 28.1. This was a Farme or Garden, at the foot of the Mount of Olives, beyond the Brook Ce∣dron, where our Saviour having eaten the last Passover, and instituted the Holy Sacra∣ment of the Eucharist with his Disciples, had retired to Pray, and where he was taken un∣der the Guidance of the Traytor Judas, Matt. 26.26. John 18.1. 26. Emaus, a Bourg distant about 60 Stades from Jerusalem, which is about 2 and a half hours travelling. Our Saviour the day be∣fore his Resurrection, joyn'd himself to two of his Disciples, who went thither, and was there known by them in breaking of Bread, Luke 24.13. And was called Nicopolis.
The CONTENTS of DEUTERONOMY. DEUTERONOMY in Greek signifies a Second Law, or a Repetition of the Law, which Moses doth in this Book, making use of holy Exhortations and perswasive Motives to that purpose; so that it may be called, An A∣bridgment of the Law. He wrote this Book during the two last Months of the 40th Year of the Israelites going out of Egypt, in the Plain of Moab, on the Frontiers of Canaan, and after that all the Rebellious were consumed in the Desert. This faithful Servant of the LORD spent the rest of his Life in representing to them the pas∣sages that hapned unto them in the Desert, there∣by to instruct them in their Duty. First, He re∣presents to them the great and manifold Benefits GOD had bestowed on them in their 40 Years Travels, with the just Punishments the rebellious Murmurers had drawn down upon them, there∣by to bring them to a careful observance of GOD's Laws. Then he reiterates and explains to them, not only the Moral, but also the Ceremonial Laws, respecting their Religion, and the out∣ward Service of GOD required of them, and the Judiciary or Civil Laws, with several Milita∣ry Ordinances, with the Duties of Magistrates and Judges; inserting here and there some new Laws, with a very remarkable Prophecy of the chief Prophet, to wit, Jesus Christ. Then con∣firming all these with excellent Promises of won∣derful Blessings if they obey; and with terrible Menaces and Curses, if they should break the Covenant he had made with them, until Chap. XXXI. And last of all, He appoints Joshua to suc∣ceed him, and solemnly delivers the Book of the Law to the Priests and Levites, ordering it to be laid up, and kept in the Sanctuary, and to be read at certain times to the People. He also com∣posed and taught the Israelites an excellent Pro∣phetical Hymn, wherein he foretels what should happen to them till the coming of Christ, and the calling of the Gentiles. He blesseth the 12 Tribes, and having taken a view of the Holy Land from the top of Mount Nebo; he dies, and is buried there by the LORD. The Israelites mourn for him, and JOSHUA (by GOD's Order) suc∣ceeds him. The CONTENTS of the Book of JOSHUA. IN this Book are related the wonderful Works which the LORD wrote in confirmation of the Truth and Faithfulness of his Promises, af∣ter the Death of Moses; in what manner he (under the Conduct of JOSHUA) brought the Israelites into Canaan, causing them to pass over Jordan dry-shod, and delivering into their hands all the Canaanitish Kings, with their Territories, Cities, and Towns, which Joshua divided a∣mongst the nine Tribes and an half. Here we meet with a Relation of Achan's Sin, in sa∣ving for himself some of the Spoil of Jericho, contrary to GOD's Command; for which Sin the Israelites were beaten by their Enemies, and he (with all that belonged to him) burnt with Fire. Here is also an account given, how Joshua set apart the seven Cities of Refuge as well as those allotted for the Levites; and likewise here is recited the Death of Joshua, who died aged 110 years, after he had denounced the Curse of GOD against the Israelites, in case they should be disobedient to his Law. This Joshua was as well by Name, as by Place and Calling, an express Figure of Jesus Christ, who introduceth his own (which Moses could not do, the Law bringing nothing to perfection) to the place of their true Rest, that is, the Hea∣venly Canaan. This History contains what past during the space of 17 Years, and bears the Name of Joshua, as chiefly treating of those il∣lustrious Acts atchieved by him. It is not cer∣tain who was the Penman of it; some think by some Prophet that lived after; others, by Elea∣zar the High-Priest; and others (with more pro∣bability) by Joshua himself, except that part which concludes the Book concerning his own Death and that of Eleazar, GOD having made use of him, as an Instrument to execute the great things herein related; and having also inspired and guided him by his Spirit in the recording of them, for edifying of the Church. The whole Book of Joshua may be fitly divi∣ded into three Parts; for the first 12 Chapters, set forth the great and miraculous Victories ob∣tain'd by Joshua, under the influence of Divine Blessing; and from the 13th Chapter unto the 22d, the Division and Allotment of the Land amongst the Tribes of Israel, is very particularly set down. And last of all, here is recited the So∣lemn Leave given by Joshua unto the two Tribes and half, to return to their Station and Inheri∣tance allotted them beyond Jordan, and likewise the pious and earnest Exhortation of Joshua to all the People, together with the History of his Death, as also of that of Eleazar.
THE DEATH OF MOSES. AFter that Balaam had made Israel to sin, GOD commanded Moses to avenge the Children of Israel of the Midianites before his death.The same year 2553 towards the latter end of the 40th year, after their coming out of Egypt. And accordingly he or∣dered a thousand of e∣very Tribe to be chosen for that Service, and Phineas to march at the Head of them; not questioning, but that the Zeal he had already witnessed for GOD, would draw down a Blessing upon the whole Army. Neither was he deceived in this his ex∣pectation; for these 12000 Men did entirely defeat the Midianites and their Princes, kill'd Balaam, who had been the Author of that detestable Counsel, burnt all their Cities, took their Women and little ones Captives, and the Spoil of all their Cattel and Goods. After this Victory thus obtain'd, Moses went out to meet the Army, and seeing that they had spared the Women, he was very angry with the Officers for not killing them, who had been the chief Cause of their Destructi∣on, and whom Balaam had made use of to ruin them. And therefore commanded them to kill all the male Children, and all the Wo∣men, saving none alive but such as were Vir∣gins; of whom there were found to the num∣ber of 32000. Moses afterwards gave to the Tribes of Reuben and Gad, with the half Tribe of Manasseh, a Possession on that side of Jordan: And because he was not to pass over that River, GOD commanded him to send for Joshua, and to give him the Charge of that Great People; which he did accordingly, and with many Words exhorted him, to be strong and of good Courage, in leading the People into the Land, which the LORD had pro∣mised to them for an Inheritance for ever. He also by many reiterated Discourses, decla∣red to the People the sum and substance of what GOD had order'd him to command them, in his Name, for the space of 40 Years, which he afterwards wrote down in a Book, which was put into the Ark of the Covenant, together with the Tables of the Law. Finally, Having blest the Children of Israel, he went up to Mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, which is over-against Jericho, where the Lord gave him a View of the Land of Canaan, that is, all the Land of Gilead unto aa, and all Naphtali, and the Land of E∣phraim, and Manasseh, the Land of Judah unto the utmost Sea, and the South, and the Plain of the Valley of Jericho, &c. And the LORD said, This is the Land which I swear, to give to Abraham and his Seed; but thou shalt not enter into it, but be contented with the Prospect thereof, Thus this great Saint died on that Moun∣tain, being 120 Years of Age, and was won∣derfully buried there; so that his Sepulcher was never known to this Day: And all the People mourned for so great and good a Prince, (who indeed had been no other than their common Father) thirty Days, and sub∣mitted themselves, and were obedient to Jo∣shua, whom GOD filled with the Spirit of Wisdom; but yet there never arose in Israel so great a Prophet as Moses, in whom a most incomparable Meekness and sweetness of Temper was joyn'd with a transcendent Zeal, and both of them under the Conduct of a Divine Wisdom. His Faithfulness in his Ministry has been admir'd by all Saints. He rendred to GOD all that was his due, without omitting any part of his Duty to the People, and discharged his Function with respect to the People, without failing in that which he owed to GOD: His Life was made up of danger and continual toil and labour, and it ended in a Death which was a kind of Chastisement, and by which it seem'd, as if GOD had a mind to purifie the Vir∣tue of that great Prophet to the highest degree. Yet let us not think (saith S. Austin) that GOD would punish this his faithful Servant in his Anger, or that it was any great Evil for Moses to die at the Age of 120 Years, with∣out entring into a Land, where so many wicked Men entred after his Death. He whom GOD thought worthy to see his Face one day in Hea∣ven, could he think himself unhappy for not en∣tring into that Land, which was only an out∣ward Image of it? But the Scripture (saith that Father) would hereby put us in mind, That those who are sla∣vishly bound up to the Law of Moses, shall ne∣ver enter into Heaven; and that we must pass over from the Law to Grace, if we ever hope to enter into the true Land of Promise, into which the true Joshua, that is JESUS CHRIST, o∣pens a Passage for us through the River Jordan: that is, through the Sufferings and Afflictions of this World.
55 The Honourable Juliano, wife of Charles Boyle Esq, eldest son of the Rt. Honourable ye Lord Clifford, son & heyre to ye. Rt. Honourable. ye. Earle of Burlington. &.c. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
56 The Honourable George Cholmondeley Esq Leiutenant Collonel of their Matys. first Troop of Guards▪ & son of the Rt. Honble. Robert Lord Viscount Cholmondeley deceased. For ye Advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
The Passage over Iordan. Joshua makes the People pass over Jordan; the Waters whereof were dri∣ed up as soon as the Priests, that carried the Ark, entred into it; the Waters, which came down from above, standing lifted up like a Mountain. MOSES being dead, the People promised to obey Joshua in all things, whom GOD magnified in the sight of them all,Anno Mundi 2553 the first Month of the 41st year after their coming out of Egypt. by their Mira∣culous Passage over the Ri∣ver Jordan; which was car∣ried on in this manner: Joshua rose early in the Morning, and they moved from Shittim, and came to Jordan, he and all the Children of Israel, and lodged there before they passed over; and Joshua having assembled the People, commanded them to put themselves in a readiness to pass the River Jordan after three days, and on the 4th day the Officers went through the Host, com∣manding the People, saying, When ye see the Ark of the Covenant of the LORD your GOD, and the Priests and Levites bearing it, that ye shall remove from your place, and go after it, yet so as to keep a distance of 2000 Cubits from it. After this Joshua commanded the Priests and Levites that bare the Ark, to enter into the River, and to make a halt at the Brink of it. Jordan had no sooner perceiv'd the Pre∣sence of the Ark, but the Waters which were below the Priests Feet, took their ordinary course to the Dead Sea; but those who were above them ran back towards their rise; and stood on heaps like a Mountain. Thus the People passed the River dry-shod, the Priests continuing in the River with the Ark till all the People were passed over. Joshua, who had learnt of Moses, of how great importance it is, to testifie our grateful Acknowledgments to GOD, for the Favours we receive from him, would not that this miraculous Assistance (GOD had afforded them) should be pass'd over without leaving an eternal Monument of their Gratitude to the Divine Majesty. Accordingly he com∣manded twelve chosen Men out of the twelve Tribes, to take each of them a Stone out of the midst of the River, in the very place where the Priests stood whilst the People past over; and that with those twelve Stones they should erect an Altar, to serve for a Memorial to all Posterity, of that miracu∣lous Passage. Besides this, Joshua order'd also 12 Stones to be set up in the midst of the River Jordan, in the place where the Feet of the Priests (which bear the Ark of the Covenant) stood, which continued there ever after. When these Orders were thus executed, and that all the People, and what belonged to them, were come over, Joshua commanded the Priests that car∣ried the Ark to pass over also; who no sooner had set their Feet upon dry Land but the Wa∣ters of Jordan (which had been thus long ar∣rested by the Omnipotent Hand of GOD) fell down with Violence, and took their accusto∣med Course to the Dead Sea. And thus GOD (by this great and stupendious Miracle) mag∣nified Joshua in the Eyes of all the People. This Miracle is a Figure of what GOD does throughout all Ages, when he makes his People enter into the Land of Promise, that is, into the Church: For this Passage of the River Jordan, is a Figure of Baptism, by the vir∣tue and efficacy of which, the same Miracle is to this day still effected in Man, which was then done in that River; for he who is baptized, and who seconds his Baptism by a true Conver∣sion, doth not permit his Waters, that is, the Affections of his Heart, to run in the ordinary Course and Channel they were went to run in. He will not suffer them any more to run into, and lose themselves in the Dead-Sea; that is, in the Bitterness and Corruption of this World; but on the contrary, the Change of his Heart, and of the Object of his Love, makes his Affecti∣ons and Desires take a very different course from what they formerly did. He finds by a miraculous effect of the Grace of GOD in him, that he is enabled to do vio∣lence to himself, by making the Waters of his Love and Affections contrary to their natural Inclination and Tendency, to bound back and re∣turn to their Source and Original; that is, to GOD, whose due they are, and who is the only Object, that deserves, as well as can satisfie, the Love and Affections of the immortal and highly dignified Soul of Man.
THE TAKING OF JERICHO. The Walls of Jericho fall down at the Sound of Trumpets, that went be∣fore the Ark of the LORD. THE first City that was to be mastered (after the passing of the River Jordan, was Jericho,The same Year 2553. before J. Christ, 1451. whither Jo∣shua had already sent Spies) to make report of the condition and situation of it; who being discover'd by some of the Inhabitants, were like to run great dan∣ger of their Lives, if the Charity of a Woman called Rahab, who had none of the best Re∣port, had not done her utmost for the saving of them. These Spies being return'd to Joshua, did not like those which Moses had sent 40 years before, discourage the People by their Report; but on the contrary greatly encouraged their Brethren, by telling them, that the City of Jericho was in so great a consternation, that it might be look'd upon as already theirs. The Fright wherewith they were seiz'd at the approach of the Israelites, and the Report they had heard of so many Miracles which GOD had wrought in favour of them, made them very careful to secure themselves by all possible Precautions, and supposing none more conducive to that end, than the strength of their Walls they endeavour'd to make them impregnable. But GOD shewed Joshua a way, whereby (without any Machines or Violence used) he should lay their Walls level with the ground. He commanded him to make all the People to compass the City for seven days together, the Priests going before them and blowing their Trumpets; that on the seventh day, when the Priests sounded louder and shriller than ordi∣nary, all the People should answer them with a great Shout, promising him, that immedi∣ately thereupon the Walls of Jericho should fall flat to the Ground; which came to pass accordingly. GOD charged Joshua also, that they should not meddle with any thing that was in the City; but it should be look'd upon as ac∣cursed; which Joshua gave also in strict charge to the People, lest any of them, by their Covetousness, might be the cause of mis∣chief to the whole Congregation. He took care also to put the People in mind of saving Rahab, and recommended that matter to the Spies, whose Lives she had sa∣ved, to secure her and all that belonged to her, and to bring her to the Camp, where she might meet with the same Kindness she had before shewed to them. This was the end of Jericho and her Inhabi∣tants, who trusted in the height and strength of their Walls, saw them to their unexpressible astonishment laid level with the Ground, at the sound of Rams-horns, and the Shouts of the Israelites. This Miracle was the Figure of a Mystery the Fathers oft insist upon: They tell us, that the sound of these Trumpets very lively sets forth to us, the sound of the Preachers of the Gospel, which at the same time cause a Joy in the Hearts of all true Israelites; but strike with Terror and Amazement all such as op∣pose them. Nothing (saith St. Ambrose) contributes more to the making of the People of GOD victorious over their Enemies, than when care is taken to animate them by the preaching of the Word of GOD, and by the Sound of the Trumpets of Jubilee; that is of the Grace of GGD in par∣doning their Sins. This holy Joy, shed abroad in their Souls and Hearts, by the preaching of the Word, is all their strength, as the holy Pro∣phets witness. Jericho continued impregnable, as long as the Priests were silent; but when once they began to blow their Trumpets, and that the People an∣swer'd them by their Shouts of Joy, immediately her proud Walls and lofty Towers were levell'd with the Ground. In like manner (saith St. Ambrose) will Chri∣stians be victorious over Devils, and all the Pow∣ers of Darkness, when the Priests of the New Law of Grace, sound forth to them the holy Truths and Mysteries of the Gospel, which fill their Hearts with Joy, which teach them to sigh and long for Heaven, and to trample the World under their Feet, looking upon it as another Jericho, that is as a City devoted and accursed of GOD, which therefore they cannot look upon any other way than with horror; so far are they from being in love with it.
57
58 The Honble. George Cholmondeley Esq Leiutenant Collonel of their Matys. first Troop of Guards, & son of the Rt. Honble. Robert Lord Viscount Cholmondeley deceased For ye Advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
THE DESTRUCTION OF HAI. Joshua after the Destruction of Jericho, sends out a Party to take Hai, who are beaten back with loss, because of Achan's Sin; but after Punishment inflicted upon him, he takes the City and sets it on Fire. SOon after the Taking of Jericho, followed the destruction of Hai. And forasmuch as this City was not near so considerable as Jericho,The same year, 2553. some of the Officers represented to Joshua, that it was needless to employ the whole Army to take so inconsiderable a place, two or three thousand Men being a suffici∣ent quantity for that service. Joshua satisfied with their Reasons, gave order accordingly; but he was strangely sur∣priz'd, when expecting to see his Troops re∣turn Victorious, he had the News brought him of their Defeat. Joshua being wonderfully afflicted with this Disaster, rent his Cloaths, and prostrated himself before the LORD, and not being able to bear this disgrace his People had sustained, which reflected upon GOD himself, he (in the bitterness of his Soul) made his Complaints thereof to GOD in Prayer; who answered him, that the Sin of Israel had been the cause of this their shameful Defeat, and that the Accursed Thing which was in the midst of them, had made him withdraw his favourable Assistance, and thereby expos'd them to their Enemies; that therefore he should take care to sanctifie the People, and to remove the Ac∣cursed Thing from amongst them, that he might afford them his Protection, as formerly. Whereupon Joshua assembled the People, and having acquainted them with the occasi∣on of their Defeat, he ordered Lots to be cast, and the Lot fell on the Tribe of Judah, and amongst all the Families of that Tribe, it fell upon the Family of Zerah, and at last upon Achan, whom Joshua exhorted to confess the Fact, and give glory to GOD. Achan seeing his Crime so miraculously dis∣covered, thought it was to no purpose any longer to conceal any thing; he confest (at the taking of Jericho) he had been tempted to take a goodly Babylonish Garment, with two hundred Shekels of Silver, and a Wedge of Gold, which he had hid in his Tent under ground: So Joshua sent some to fetch the things he had mentioned from thence, which was done accordingly; and at the same time ordered Achan, with his Wife and Children, and all that he had, to be brought to the Valley of Achor, where they were stoned, and their Bodies, and all that belong'd to them, afterwards burnt with Fire. GOD's Wrath being appeased by this Ven∣geance, he commanded Joshua to go up and take Hai, and advised him to lay an Ambush behind the City, and then to go forth with the rest of his Army, and be a feigned Flight, to draw the Inhabitants out of the City, that they might be enclosed between the Ambush and the Body of his Army. This Stratagem had an answerable Success, for the Inhabitants transported with Joy to see the Israelites flee before them, left the City to pursue them; but soon after looking back and seeing their City on Fire, and themselves enclosed between their Enemies, their Hearts failed them, and the Israelites returning upon them, destroyed them, not leaving one alive. Thus the loss and disgrace of GOD's Peo∣ple, was repaired by the Death of Achan, whose Covetousness had prov'd so fatal to many. S. Chrysostom upon this occasion laments the unhappiness of the Church, which often∣times by the Covetousness of one Man, who has violated the Law of GOD, is exposed to the effects of GOD's Wrath; and he looks up∣on them as obdurate and insensible, who (thô they see wicked Men abound every where) yet are without any fear, or the least apprehension of danger from them. Where∣fore he most earnestly exhorts all Chri∣stians, to be careful to separate themselves from Sinners▪ 'Tis now (saith that Father) a hard matter to to keep our selves clear of the Curse of Jericho. Indeed, happy are we, if we retain nothing in our selves of the Corruption and Lusts of the World: But thô Men can see nothing in or about us of the Accursed Spoils of Jericho, no more than the Is∣raelites could see in Achan; yet it is to be fear∣ed, that GOD, and his Holy Angels, may dis∣cover that in us, which Men cannot. And more∣over, we must take great care, that after we have put our selves out of danger of destroying our selves by our own Sins, we do not expose our selves to the hazard of perishing by the contagion of other Mens Crimes and Vices.
THE SUN STANDS STILL. Joshua pursuing his Enemies, makes the Sun stand still till their total Defeat. ALL the Kings of Canaan understanding how the Jews had dealt with Jericho and Hai,About the end of the same year 2553. leagued them∣selves together with a resolution to oppose the Israelites with their joint Forces, who were now become very formidable. But the Gibeonites (better advis'd than the rest) foresaw the insignificancy of all these their Leagues and Confederacies, by reason of the miraculous Successes always attending that People; and therefore not trusting in their Strength, they make use of their Wits; and accoutring some of their Inhabitants in old Habiliments, they sent them to Joshua; who appearing before him, pretended themselves to be Ambassadors come from a far Country, to make a League with them. Joshua at first, seeming to suspect some Deceit, enquir'd from whence they came; but they continuing in their former Story, (for proof whereof they shewed their old Shoes, mouldy Bread, and worn Garments) he was at last persuaded to make peace with them. Thus without asking Counsel of the LORD, he made a League with them, and confirm'd it by Oath. Three days after this Imposture was disco∣ver'd, and the Israelites finding that they were their Neighbour, began to murmur against the Princes, who had concluded the League, and would needs have exterminated them notwithstanding, had not Joshua and the Princes represented to them the Sacredness of the Oath they had sworn to them. So Joshua only condemned them to perpetual Servitude, making them Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water, for the service of the Tabernacle, and the whole Congregation. But the Gibeonites had no sooner by Craft thus saved themselves from the hands of the Israelites, but they were ready to be made a Victim to their Neighbours Revenge, if Joshua himself had not timely come to their assistance. For Adoni-zedek King of Jerusalem, hearing that the Gibeonites had made Peace with Israel, began to consider them as Enemies, and the rather, because Gibeon was a great City, and the Inhabitants, Men of Valour; wherefore he sent unto four of his Neighbour Kings, desi∣ring them to joyn their Forces with him, in order to destroy the Gibeonites, who had no other Refuge in this their extremity, except that of Joshua's kindness, and the Courage of the Israelites. Neither were they deceiv'd in their Hopes; for Joshua being inform'd of their Design, marched to their assistance, and defeated the five Kings; and because the declining of the Day was like to have hindred them from a further pursuit, Joshua commanded the Sun to stand still till he had avenged himself of his Enemies; the Sun immediately obeyed by a Miracle (unparallel'd before or after) and hasted not to go down till they had utterly defeated all their Enemies; for the LORD hearkned to the Voice of his Servant. Men are apt to admire these outward Mi∣racles, (say the Fathers) and that not without reason, forasmuch as they are visible Instances of the Divine Omnipotence. The Sun (saith S. Ambrose) acknowledg'd in Joshua the Power of Jesus Christ, who many Ages after was to make the true Sun stand-still; that is to say, the Light and Heat of Truth, which was decli∣ning very fast, and ready to be for ever extin∣guish'd, and to leave the World expos'd to the horrour of Eternal Darkness. But we are not to look for these sensible Mira∣cles in the Church now; the Pastors of the Church do not now endeavour to stop the Course of the Sun in the Heavens, but the Course of Concupiscence in the Heart. Of what avail was it to Joshua (saith that Father) to stop the great Light of Heaven, when at the same time he could not repress Covetousness upon Earth? He commanded, and the Sun obey'd, that he might have time to pro∣secute his Victory; but he could not command the Covetousness of Achan, who lost him a Victory, and made his Army shamefully to flee before their Enemies. We cannot but acknow∣ledge, that this is one of the greatest Mira∣cles of the Old Law; but those of the New, tho' they do not so much dazle the outward Eye, yet they are incomparably greater. As for In∣stance, When a Soul that has been possessed by Devils, and transported to abominable Excesses, by the Violence of his Passions, does all on a sud∣den return to GOD, like the Prodigal to his Fa∣ther, and having torn himself from the World and himself, entertains no Desires, but what serve to waft him towards Heaven.
59 Sr. Thomas Cooke of the Parish of Hackney in the County of Middlesex Knight. For ye Advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
The CONTENTS of the Book of JUDGES. THis Book contains an excellent History of the state of the Israelites, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, from the Death of Jo∣shua, till the Government and High-Priesthood of Eli, under the Conduct of the JUDGES, so called, not because they exercised the ordinary Jurisdiction amongst the People (as commonly the word JUDGE imports;) but because they were extraordinarily raised up by GOD, ac∣cording as the present state of things requir'd it (sometimes out of one Tribe, sometimes out of another) and endowed with his Spirit of Wisdom and Magnanimity, to maintain his Rights, and those of his People, and victori∣ously to vindicate and assert them from the Injustice and Tyranny of their Oppressors, as likewise to restore the Purity of his Worship, when it was alter'd or corrupted, to defend their Liberties, and the Holy Law they had received from GOD, and to assist them with Counsel and Deed, in all their Difficulties and Exigences. First of all therefore, in this Book are Re∣corded the several Wars the Israelites were engag'd in after Joshua's Death, by the express command of GOD, against the Gentil Inhabi∣tants, yet remaining in the Land of Canaan, in order to their utter destruction and exter∣mination; in which case they for the most part were so backward and neglectful, that the LORD being offended thereat, suffer'd many of those Gentil Nations to remain in the Land, for a Trial and Punishment of his People. True it is, that the Israelites for a long while retain'd the Purity of the Divine Wor∣ship amongst them, as long as those brave and pious Elders lived, who had been Eye-witnesses of the miraculous Acts of the LORD, by the hand of Joshua; but after their Death we find here recorded, how the People abusing their Liberty, Peace and Prosperity, fell from time to time into Heathen Idolatry, and a most prodigious corruption of Manners, as is oft mention'd in this Book, not only in general terms, but whereof also several abominable and tragical instances are set down in the 17, 18, 19 and 20th Chapters, to serve as a Mirror, not only of the Wickedness and Corruption of that People, but likewise of the just indignation of GOD, and the severity of his Vengeance. Moreover here is set forth, how that GOD being provoked at the frequent Backsliding of his People, did most sharply reprove, and severely punish them, actually delivering them up into the hands of divers of their Enemies; as of Cu∣sham King of Mesopotamia, Eglon King of Moab, Jabin King of the Canaanites; also into the hands of the Philistins; of the Midianites, Amalekites, and other Eastern People; and of the Ammonites, &c. who for a long time afflicted and oppressed Israel. But yet notwithstanding, when they in their anguish and sore distress did seriously return to the LORD (renouncing their Idolatry and Perversness, groaned after him, and fervently call'd upon him for his Grace an Assistance) he was mov'd with Compas∣sion, shewing himself as true and faithful in performing his Promises, as he had been in executing his Threats and Menaces, and often∣times delivered them by the Hand of the ge∣nerous Instruments of his own raising; such as were Othniel, Ehud, Shamgar, Deborah and Barak, Gideon, Jephtha and Sampson. And as they soon after forgat these signal Deli∣verances the LORD had wrought for them, and returned to their first dissolution and Idolatry, they were afresh chastized by the LORD, who notwithstanding most mercifully delivered them again, as soon as they returned themselves to him with all their Hearts. To the History of Gideon, we find here also joyned the Tyrannical and Unjust Government of Abimelek, who Reigned 3 Years; at the end of which he received his just recompence at the Hand of GOD. This Book also makes mention of 5 Judges, whose Wars are not set down; to wit, Thola, Jair, Ebsan, Edon and Abdon. This whole History may be of use to inform us, That tho' the Church of GOD may fall into divers Corruptions, yet he always takes a very particular care, to raise them again from their Apostacy, and that he oft makes use of those to punish and chastize his People, who have been the occasion of their Sins; and that he does not chasten them with a design to destroy them, but to make them return to him by true Repentance; and that he is always ready to help and deliver them when they do so. This Book (according to the account of some) contains the History of 299, or 300 years; that is, from the Year since the Creation of the World, 2511, or 2810. The Book of RUTH is only a continuation of Judges, and bears that name of Ruth as par∣ticularly treating of her, which being at large taken notice of in the Discourses, Numb. 74, 75. the Contents of that Book are here omitted.
The Punishment of Adoni-bezek. Joshua's Death. King Adonibezek being overcome by the Jews, they cut off his Thumbs and great Toes, as himself had done to 70 Kings. THus Joshua defeated his Enemies; the Heavens by a miraculous Solstice, contri∣buting to his Victory; and thus he proceeded in a continued course of successful Expeditions, as long as any of his Enemies were able to make any resistance against his Victorious Arms. In this manner the far greater part of these Idolatrous Nations were destroy'd in six years time, the Scripture counting no less than one and thirty Kings, that were conquer'd by this Couragious General of the Israelites. How∣ever, some of the ancient Inhabitants conti∣nued to dwell among the Jews, to keep them in Breath, that they might not degenerate through Sloth and Luxury, as also for a Trial of their Obedience to GOD, who made the Remnant of these Idolatrous Nations, the Instruments of his Vengeance against his own People, whenever they provoked him to An∣ger by their Sins. After that Joshua had thus made a Con∣quest of the Country, by the wonderful blessing of GOD upon his Arms and Valour, he distributed it amongst the Tribes, with so much Equity and Justice, as cannot sufficiently be admired: And having atchiev'd all these glo∣rious Actions, to which he had been appointed by GOD himself,Anno Mundi 2570. before Christ 1414. he assembled all the People together before his Death, as Moses also had done, and repeated to them the great things GOD had done for them, conjuring them in a most pathetical manner, to worship no other GOD, but the LORD alone; and concludes his Discourse with these remarkable Words; And if it seem evil to you to serve the LORD, chuse this day whom you will serve; whether the Gods which your Fathers served, that were on the other side of the Flood, or the Gods of the Amorites, in whose Land ye dwell; but as for me and my House, we will serve the LORD, And soon after died in Peace, being 110 years old, and all the People mourned for him. He had the happiness that during the whole time of his Government the Jews were not in the least tainted with Idolatry, nor transported to any Rebellious murmurings against GOD. The many Battels Joshua fought against divers Kings, to put the People of GOD into possession of the Land of Promise, gave the Fathers occasion to observe, That we cannot become the Heritage and Portion of the LORD, without destroying an Enemy we have within us. All of us are born Slaves and Tributaries to the Canaanites and Amorites, that is, to De∣vils; and therefore it is of necessity that we be Regenerated, to the end that all that belongs to the Devil may utterly be destroyed, and rooted out of us before we can become the Kingdom and Inheritance of the LORD. The Tribe of Judah was the first after Joshua's Death, that signaliz'd themselves in exterminating the Idolaters that remained yet amongst them; Caleb, who was a Prince amongst them, being their Leader in these Expeditions. Adoni-bezek was the first that felt the effects of their Courage; for having set upon him, they utterly defeated, and took him Prisoner in the pursuit. There was one thing remarkable in the Death of this Prince, viz. That the Israelites cut off his Thumbs and his great Toes; by which means he was compelled to confess the equity of the Divine Vengeance upon him, who had in like manner treated 70 Kings, and in this condition made them gather their Meat under his Table. After this his publick Acknowledgment of the Divine Justice, which as well lays hold on Crowned Heads, as on the meanest Subjects, he was brought to Jerusalem, where he died, leaving a Memorandum to all Kings (as the Fathers observe) how true that word of our Saviour is, That according to the measure we mete out to others, it shall be measured to us again; and that it is often verified upon Kings themselves, as well as their Subjects; and if they should chance to escape this Retaliation here in this Life, where Adoni-bezek justly met with it, they may have reason to fear it will be their Lot in the Life and World to come, where they will not fail of falling into the hands of that Judge, who here in this World has declared to them, by the Mouth of the wisest of Kings, That the great and mighty Men of the Earth shall be mightily tormented, if they abuse the Power they are intrusted with, for the glory of GOD, and for the good of their Subjects.
60 Mr. Francis Calvert Cittizen and Vphoulster alias Vphoulder of London. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
61 Madam Bridget Dawes, daughter of Nicholas Dawes of the Citty of London Gentleman. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
THE DEATH OF SISERA. Jael killeth Sisera, by driving a Nail into his Temples. AFter the Death of Joshua, and the Eldrs (which out-lived him some 15 years, or thereabouts) the Israe∣lites fell into great dis∣orders,Anno Mundi 2719. before Christ 1285. thereby making it appear, that the happiness of Souls doth oft depend upon the Wisdom of their Governours and Pastors, and that none are more unhappy than those who will needs guide themselves. For the Jews having no Commander in chief over them, e∣very one of them did what seem'd good in his own Eyes: And from this Licentiousness, fell into manifold Sins, and by means of them into Slavery and Bondage; whereupon when in this their sore distress they betook them∣selves in earnest Prayers to GOD, he in his Mercy raised up Captains to deliver them who were called Judges. After the Death of Othniel (who was Ca∣lebs Grandchild and Successor) Ehud and Shamgar, GOD conferr'd the Government of the People upon a Woman called Deborah; who made it appear, that every Instrument is good in the hand of the LORD, when he pleases to make use of it. During the Government of this Woman, Ja∣bin King of Canaan declared War against the Jews, and sent out an Army to fight them un∣der the command of Sisera his General. De∣borah on this occasion being fill'd with the Spirit of GOD, gave as great Marks of her Courage in War, as she had formerly given of her Prudence in times of Peace; and in the first place sent for Barak, whom GOD had made choice of to Head his People against Sisera; but Barak assured her, that he would never charge himself with that Command, except she would march along with him. As soon as the Day of the Battel was come, and that Deborah had commanded Barak to set upon Sisera with an Army of 10000 Men, GOD struck the Hearts of their Enemies with a Panick Fear, and general consternation, insomuch as Sisera himself, smit with the same Terror, was forc'd to flee away on foot, whilst the Israelites discomfited, and cut to pieces all his Army. As Sisera was thus endeavouring to save himself by Flight, Jael the Wife of Heber, seeing him draw near to her Tent, went out to meet him, and desir'd him to come and rest himself with her; which Invitation he gladly accepted of, and having drunk a draught of Milk, laid himself down to sleep, Jael perceiving him fast asleep, took a Nail, and struck it with a Hammer into his Temples, fastning his Head to the ground: And as Ba∣rak was in pursuit of him, Jael desired him to enter into her Tent, where she shew'd him Sisera lying dead upon the ground. Deborah after the Fight sang a Hymn of Praises to GOD, for the glorious Victory vouch∣safed to his People, wherein she highly extols and commends the Wisdom and Courage of Jael. Thus as one Woman began this War, so another finished it; and both of them were il∣lustrious instances, that GOD can bestow upon Women themselves (whensoever it pleases him,) as well as upon Men, the Courage and Conduct necessary for the Atchievement of the greatest Enterprizes. For we see Deborah here keeping that People in Obedience and full Subjection, whose murmurs even Moses himself (that won∣derful Man of GOD) could not appease; she had the honour of being the first Soveraign Go∣verness that ever GOD set over his People; during whose Administration they wanted none of the Advantages they might have expected under the Conduct of the greatest Heroes. She appointed Generals her self, determin'd the Numbers of their Forces, appointed Quarters for the Army, fix'd the Day of Combat, and sent forth Barak, not so much to a Fight, as to a cer∣tain Victory. And this General, who lookt upon this holy Widow as the Angel of the LORD, per∣swaded himself, that the happy Success of his Arms did depend upon her Presence, and therefore would not stir a foot without her. The Fathers in their Reflections on these great Examples, observe, that there is nothing truly great upon the Earth, but what is founded on the Spirit of GOD: That the most Coura∣gious Men, become weak as Women, when left to themselves; and Women more magnani∣mous than Men, when they are full of GOD; and that then that word of S. Paul is verified, that GOD oft chooses the foolish things of the World to confound the Wise, the Weak to con∣found the Strong, and the things that are not, to confound those that are, that no Flesh may glory before the LORD; who alone is, and there is none besides him; and to whom alone the glory of all that is Good or Great in the Creatures doth belong.
GIDEON's SACRIFICE. Gideon is called by GOD, to deliver the Jews from their Enemies. He offers a Sacrifice upon a Rock, from whence Fire coms forth and consumes it. AFter the Death of Deborah, the Jews continuing without any Government, gave themselves up to that Licentiousness in sinning, as caused GOD to deliver them into the Hands of the Midianites for the space of 7 years. The extreme oppression they suffe∣red from their Enemies, made them have re∣ourse to GOD, who hearing their Prayers, was mov'd with Compassion, and resolv'd to deliver them. Accordingly he sends an Angel to Gideon, to acquaint him, That he had chosen him to be the Deliverer of his People,Anno Mundi 2759. bfore Christ 1245. who saluted him with these Words, GOD be with thee, thou mighty Man of Valour. Gideon surpriz'd at this un∣look'd for Salutation and Message, represent∣ed to the Angel the meanness of his Con∣dition, and that his Family being one of the most inconsiderable Families in Israel, he was no ways fitted for so high an Employment. But GOD answered him, That he himself would be with him, and that the vast Army of the Midianites should flee before him as one Man. Gideon after this requested the Angel to give him a sign, whereby he might be assured of the truth of the things declared to him, and earnestly entreated him to stay till he had pre∣pared something for him to eat. The Angel having consented to his Request, Gideon im∣mediately made ready a Kid, and unleavened Cakes, and having put the Flesh in a Dish, and the Broth in a Pot, he brought it out unto the Angel under the Oak, and presented it to him. But the Angel ad Gideon take the Flesh, and the unleavened Cakes, and lay them upon a Rock that was hard by; which being done, the Angel touch'd them with the end of the Staff that was in his hand, where∣upon Fire came out of the Rock and devoured the Meat-Offering; and at the same time the Angel disappeared. Gideon perceiving by these Marks, that the Party he had been speaking with was an An∣gel of the LORD, was struck with Terror, as apprehending he must die, because he had seen an Angel: But GOD having assur'd him to the contrary, commands him to go and destroy the Altar of Baal, to cut down the Grove that was about it, and afterwards to build an Altar to the true GOD, upon the Rock, where he had seen his Offering▪ consu∣med, and offer upon it a Bullock of seven years old, for a burnt Sacrifice unto the LORD, with the Wood of the Grove he had cut down. Gideon executed this Divine Order in the Night time, for fear of being discover'd; and the next Morning, when enquiry was made, who had done this outrage to Baal, and that it was known that Gideon was the Man, they pressed his Father to deliver him up into their hands, that they might kill him: But his Father sa∣ved him from their hands, boldly telling them, that if Baal were a GOD, he had best avenge himself for the Affront done to him in pulling down his Altar, and not put Men to that Drudgery. Gideon being thus saved from the Malice of those who sought his Life, for the Contempt he had cast upon Baal, was ever after called Jerub-Baal. Gideon, by his Example, teacheth all Pa∣stors, That the first thing they ought to do, after they have taken upon them the conduct of Souls, is, to be ready to hazard their Lives in obedi∣ence to GOD, and for the destroying of Idols. And that wonderful Sacrifice, by which he was assured, that GOD had call'd him to be the Go∣vernour of his People, was an admirable Fi∣gure of the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ: And it is upon this account that the Scripture takes notice, that Gideon offered it upon a Rock, which was an Emblem of our blessed Saviour: For from this mystical Rock proceeds the Fire that consumes the Sacrifice, that is to say, the Fire of the Holy Ghost, which the Son of GOD has by his Death procur'd for us, to consume in us the Flesh of the Kid, that is, the Flesh of Sin; and the Broth of that Flesh, that is, the corrupt Affections that lie hid in our Hearts. The great Mystery (saith St. Ambrose) which this History of Gideon points at, is, That all Sacrifices were to cease one day, and that there should be no other, but that of Jesus Christ, which alone is abundantly sufficient to make ex∣piation for all our Sins; and which makes the Sacrifices that the Faithful offer unto GOD ac∣ceptable and well-pleasing to him, throughout all Ages, when they present their Bodies, Hearts and Desires, as a living and holy Sacrifice un∣to him, which is their reasonable Service.
62 The Honourable Sr. Richard Onslow of Clandon in the County of surrey▪ Baronet & etc. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
63 The Right Worshipfull Sr. Richard Haddock Knight Comptroller of their Majestyes Navy Royall. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
GIDEON's FLEECE. Gideon obtains of GOD the Miracle of the Fleece, for a sign that he had chosen him to be the Deliverer and Avenger of his People. WHen Gideon knew that GOD would make use of him, to be the Comman∣der of his People, by the Fire that came forth from the Rock, and consum'd his Offering, he began to cast about, how he might best ac∣complish the Deliverance of Israel, from the Tyranny under which they groan'd. Where∣fore being inform'd that the Midianites, Ama∣lekites, and other neighbouring Nations, were gathered together against Israel, the Spirit of GOD came upon him, and sounding the Trum∣pet, Abiezer was gathered after him: He sent Messengers also throughout Manasseh, Ashur, Ze∣bulon and Nephthali, and they came up to joyn with him: And thus without any op∣position, he who was but a private Person, and of a mean Family too, saw himself Commander in chief of a great Army, being obeyed and respected by all as their Prince. But Gideon perceiving himself arriv'd to this high degree of Power and Authority, was not thereby puft up in the least; but remembring that he held that Station, only from and un∣der GOD, he rather appeared so much the more humble; and the distrust he had of him∣self encreased even to excess; for not being satisfied with the first Miracle GOD had wrought in favour of him, or the Courage wherewith he found himself extraordinarily inspired, and fitted for the great Undertakings to which GOD had called him, he suspended the execution of his Designs, till GOD had given him fresh repeated Assurances of the Choice he had made of him, to command and deliver his People. In which thing, as St. Ambrose observes, he did not act more for his own satisfaction, than he did for our Instruction▪ and to teach us this important Lesson, That we must not too easily suffer our selves to be perswaded, that GOD has called us to far more holy Employments, than were those which Gideon was called to at that time. Gideon then earnestly begs of GOD, to give him a fresh assurance of his Divine Call, to be the Captain and Redeemer of his People, saying to the LORD, Behold I will put a Fleece of Wool in the Floor, and if the Dew be on the Fleece only, and it▪ be dry on all the Earth, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by my Hand, as thou hast said; and it was so: for when he arose in the Morning, he wringed out of his Fleece a Bowl full of Wa∣ter. But his humble Fear and distrust be∣ing not yet dissipated, he besought GOD once more (and said, Let me prove, I pray thee but this once with the Fleece; Let it now be dry only upon the Fleece, and upon all the Ground let there be Dew, GOD also performed according to his Desire, and by both these Miracles left him no shadow for a Doubt, but that he was indeed appointed by GOD to deliver Israel from their Enemies. These Miracles (according to the Judgment of the Fathers) were an apt and lively repre∣sentation of the Divine Dispensation and Con∣duct, with regard to the Jews, and afterwards to the Church of the Gentiles. Formerly his Grace and Favours were appropriated, and as it were, confined to the Jewish Church, which received the Dew from Heaven, whilst the rest of the Nations of the World continued in a barren dryness, burnt and scorch'd by the heat of their Lusts, and of the Divine Anger. Whereas now by means of a contrary Miracle, the Church of GOD, scatter'd over the Face of the whole Earth, hath in abundance received the Heavenly Dew, wherewith GOD hath wa∣tered it, whilst the Land of Judea is all dry and parched, and whilst her unthankfulness for the many Benefits GOD had bestowed upon her, (which only serv'd to make her proud and wan∣ton, instead of humbling her) has made her un∣worthy to partake of the Mercy of Jesus Christ. Moreover these Miracles teach us; That the Grace of GOD is a kind of Heavenly Dew, with∣out the continual supply of which our Souls are in the same condition, in which we see a dry and barren Ground is, that is parched with the scorching heat of the Sun, and without any re∣lief from the Rain and Dew of Heaven, and by this means is condemn'd to an eternal sterility and unfruitfulness. Wherefore Christians should make it their first and great business and care to obtain the Grace of GOD, without which all the Honours, Pleasures, and Riches of this World, cannot exempt them from being in the same con∣dition in the sight of GOD, as is a piece of Ground that is destitute of the Rain and Dew of Hea∣ven, that is altogether useless, barren and unpro∣fitable to GOD or Man.
GIDEON's SOLDIERS. GOD commands Gideon to lead his Army to the River Jordan, and gives him a Token whereby he might know those with whom he was to fight the Midianites. THese two sensible Miracles having assu∣red Gideon as well of his Divine all to command the People, as of Success and Victory against his Enemies;The same Year 2759. he could no longer re∣fuse to obey the Command of GOD, or to ex∣press as much readiness to execute his Designs, as he had shewed backwardness to undertake them at first. And having in a short time raised a great Army, consisting of 32000, he encamped himself near the Midianites, besides the Well of Harad, and on the South of them. But GOD seeing the great Numbers of the Jews, and foreseeing that this ungrateful and presumptuous People would be apt to attribute the Victory, which depended only on his Fa∣vour and Assistance, to the multitude and strength of their Forces: He told Gideon, that in case he did march with all those For∣ces against the Host of the Midianites, he would miss of the Victory, because he was re∣solved not to leave them the least ground to say or think, that they had overcome the Midianites by their own strength. Gideon therefore caused Proclamation to be made throughout the Camp, that whosoever was fearful or affrighted with the Numbers, or Warlike preparations of the Enemy, should immediately leave the Camp, and return home from Mount Gilead; and there returned no less than 22000 of the Army, who gladly embraced this Proposal; and there yet re∣mained 10000 of the Israelites. But this number being still too great in the Eyes of GOD, he commands Gideon to march with them down to the River Jordan, where he promised to shew him the Numbers and the Men he would allow him to fight the Midianites with. When they were come to the River, GOD ad Gideon to set those by themselves, who without stop or stay did take up Water in the hollow of their Hands, and laped it thence to quench their Thirst, and distinguish them from those who kneeled down on the Rivers side, to drink more at their ease and leisure. Of the former sort, there were but 300 in all, which GOD commanded him to lead on boldly against the Midianites, for that with them only he should obtain the Victory, Gi∣deon fully relying on the Word of GOD, sent home the rest of the People, keeping none with him besides the 300 Men, that had Lap∣ped Water out of the hollow of their hands, and with them couragiously advanced against the Enemy. GOD was willing by this Figure, to repre∣sent to us, what sort of Persons he would for all time to come account fit for his Service, and worthy to fight his Battles; and who those were whom he would for ever seclude from his holy Warfar. He teacheth us also, how very small the number of his true Soldiers are, when of an Army of Thirty two thousand men, he retains only three hundred. And the distinguishing Mark of their Election is this, they do not kneel down to drink of the Water of the River; but without stop or stay, only take up a little in the hollow of their Hand, a little to allay and qualifie their Thirst. GOD will have all his Soldiers to stand firm, with their Heads lifted up to Heaven, and will not have them to stoop downwards, but as little as may be. Being mortal Men, they must needs make use of the World; but they must so use it, as if they used it not, according to the Counsel of S. Paul, and supply the inevitable Necessities of this Life, which hasts away like the swift Current of a River, without any particular concern or care about them, and without hindring, by these fleeting Actions, their march towards Heaven, where their Hearts are already arriv'd and do inhabit. The numbers of such as these, are always very small and inconsiderable in the outward Church; and yet in them, the whole strength of the Church consists, as GOD very lively represents the same to us in this History; they only atchieve things wonderful and incre∣dible, they only obtain the Victory, because GOD himself is with them, and fights for them, against all their Enemies. They are the true Champions of the Church, they are Pillars of the World; they are the Intercessors not only for their Brethren, but for all Men, it is they (like Moses) stand in the Gap, and turn away the effects of the Divine Anger from a stiff∣necked and rebellious Generation.
64 Major John Cass of the Parish of Hackney in the County of Middlesex Esq For advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
65 Major John Fuller of waldron in the County of sussex Esq▪ For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
The Defeat of the Midianites. The Midianites are defeated by the Sound of the Trumpets, and the Light of Lamps or Torches. SO many Divine Assurances given to Gi∣deon were abundantly sufficient, one might think, to put the success of his Enterprize against the Midianites out of question,The same Year 2759. had not GOD been pleased to vouchsafe him one Confirmation more from the Mouth of his very Enemies. He com∣mands him to go alone by Night into the E∣nemies Camp, or if he feared to go unaccom∣panied, to take his Servant Phurah with him; and that there his Enemies themselves should give him a fresh Assurance of the success of the Combat. Gideon obeying GOD's Command, came by Night into the Enemies Camp, where he heard a Soldier telling this Dream to his Companion: I dreamed (said he) and behold a Cake of Barley Bread tumbled into the Host of Midian, and came unto a Tent and smote it, that it fell and lay along. To which his Fel∣low answered, That this his Dream signified nothing else but the Sword of Gideon the Son of Joas, into whose Hands GOD had delive∣red all the Host of Midian. Gideon having heard this Dream, and the Interpretation, he return'd full of Courage and Assurance into the Host of Israel, bid∣ding them to arise, and get ready, for that GOD had deliver'd the Midianites into their Hand. And having divided the 300 Men in∣to three Companies, he gave to each of them a Trumpet in one Hand, and empty Pitchers with Lamps in them in the other; with this Order, That as soon as they should hear him sound his Trumpet, they should eye him, and do as he did, and shout with a loud Voice, For the LORD and for Gideon, and break their Pitchers in which the Lamps were. As soon as they were come to the out-side of the Camp, and the Signal was given by Gi∣deon, they all at once sounded their Trumpets, brake their Pitchers, and shewed the Lamps that were hid in them, crying with a loud Voice, The Sword of the LORD and of Gi∣deon; whereupon the whole Camp of the Mi∣dianites being seiz'd with horror and amaze∣ment ran away and fled, and by a miraculous effect of the Divine Power, turn'd their Swords against one another. Thus were the Midianites humbled by the Jews, or rather by the Power of GOD, which so eminently was engaged for them. The more strange and extraordinary (saith St. Gregory) this way of fighting was, the more visible it is, that it points us to some hidden Mystery: For whoever went to fight without Arms: Or whoever presumed to oppose nothing but Earthen Pitchers, against the violence and efforts of a powerful Enemy? Reason (saith he) could not but look upon this Enterprize, as the most ridiculous thing that could be; and yet the E∣vent made it appear, that by this Method the Mi∣dianites were cast into that Consternation, which prov'd their total Overthrow. GOD then by this History was willing to o∣pen the Mystery to us, that the Gospel Sol∣diers were not to resist their Enemies by the force of outward Arms, but would become victorious only by sounding their Trumpets, and breaking their EarthenPitchers, that the Lamps hid in them might appear to the dazling and terri∣fying of their Enemies. For these Earthen-Pitchers represent the weakness of our Bodies, and Gideon (who was a Figure hereof) Jesus Christ, will have no Soldiers under him, but such as contemn and vilifie their Flesh, and o∣vercome their Enemies by dying, as Jesus Christ their Captain also did. Death to them is but the breaking of the Ear∣then Pitcher, and this Pitcher (which at best they always contemn'd and blush'd at) being broken; now nothing appears but a bright and shining Lamp, which strikes the Hearts of all their Persecutors with terror and consternation. The Holy Martyrs were an evident Proof of all this, who by their Patience and Constancy confounded and terrified the most resolv'd and cruel Tyrants; and by the dazling Lustre of their Graces, did either daunt or convert their very Tormentors and Executioners. Insomuch that those that hated and despised them, be∣gan to love, esteem and reverence them; and by the transforming Virtue of the Divine Light, which beamed forth from them, became the Ado∣rers of that Sovereign Truth, when as before, they had been the Murtherers of those, who had so boldly and generously defended it.
THE DEATH OF ABIMELECH. Abimelech is killed by a Woman, that brake his Skull by casting a piece of Milstone upon him. GIDEON dying after he had wisely go∣verned the People of Israel for many years,Anno Mundi 2768 bfore Christ 1236. left behind him Threescore and ten Sons, which he had by several Wives; but one of his Sons, called Abimelech, born of his Concu∣bine (a Woman of Shechem) was the cause of much mischief after his Father's Death. For having gained the City of Shechem to declare themselves for him, by means of his Mothers Friends and Relations, and by his represent∣ing to them, that it was much better for them to have him alone to Reign over them, than his Threescore and ten Brothers, they soon proclaimed him their King, and furnisht him with a Sum of Money, wherewith he raised some Vagabonds and vain light Persons, and with them marched to his Fathers House, where he most inhumanly kill'd his Threescore and ten Brothers, except the youngest of them all, called Jotham, who by hiding himself, hap∣pily escaped Abimelech's Fury. This young man being inform'd, that the Men of Shechem were assembled in the Field to make Abimelech King, he went up to the top of Mount Gerizim, from whence with a loud Voice he cried unto them, and by a Figura∣tive discourse reproached their horrid Ingra∣titude. He told them, that the Trees of the Forest being about to anoint a King over them, ad∣drest themselves first to the Olive-tree, desi∣ring him to be their King, and afterwards to the Fig-tree and Vine, who all refused to ac∣cept of their offer. The Trees being at a loss, at last offer their Sovereignty to the Bramble, who readily ac∣cepted the Dignity, promising to protect them, in case they would fully confide in him; but if not, threatning them, that Fire should come forth from the Bramble, and consume the Cedars of Lebanon. Which Jotham (con∣cluding his Allegory) told them, would be their case at last, and that for the horrid In∣gratitude they had shewed to Gideon, and his Sons, GOD would consume them by means of Abimelech, whom with so much joy they had now made their King. Sometime after it appeared, that Jotham had prov'd a true Prophet; for when Abi∣melech had Reigned three years over Israel, the Men of Shechem began to be weary of his Tyrannical Courses, and resolving to cast off his Yoke, they chose one Gaal to be their Prince; but Abimelech having notice thereof, and coming upon the City unawares, he took it, kill'd the Inhabitants, and afterwards de∣stroyed the City, and sowed it with Salt. After that GOD had thus avenged the Per∣fidiousness of the Men of Shechem, against Gideon, by means of the Tyrant they had chosen to be their King, he at last punisht the Tyrant himself, who had so unhandsomly butcher'd his Father's Sons: For Abimelech having taken the City Thebez, in which there was a strong Tower, into which all the Inha∣bitants of the City had retired themselves, as he went to put Fire to it, a certain Woman cast a piece of a Milstone upon him, and brake his Skull; who seeing himself mortally woun∣ded, cried to his Armour-Bearer to run him thr, that it might not be said of him, that he was kill'd by a Woman; and the young Man (his Armour-Bearer) did as he commanded him, and he died. This was the end of this cruel Fratricide; who probably had perswaded himself, that his enormous Crime had been forgot by GOD, forasmuch as he had not only gone so long unpunished, but had also been favour'd with success in his Undertakings. But we find here, that the Divine forbearance has its bounds. He suffers such Monsters to live and prosper for a time, that he might draw good from the Evils they commit; and when he has accomplish'd his Work, his Justice crushes them in a moment, and precipitates them headlong from the Pinnacle of their Pride and Glory. The Fathers have also observed from this History, that nothing pats Men more upon hating of their Brethren, than an ambitious desire of Reigning, which does so blind and dazle their Understanding, that they forget the respect they owe to the Sacred Names of Brothers and Fathers; and are so far from being struck with horror at the sight of the murther of their nearest Relations, that their Eyes feed on the Tragical Object with pleasure, rejoycing at the death of those, whom they con∣sider as lets and stops in the course of their boundless Ambition.
66 Susanna▪ the wife of Collonell Thomas strangwayes of MelburySampford in Dorsetshire, and daughter e heyrest of John Ridout of the citty of Bristol Esq▪ deceased. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
67 The Right Honourable Algernon Capell Earle of Essex. Viscount Malden, and Baron Capell of Hadham &cr. For Advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
JEPHTHAH's DAUGHTER. Jephthah Sacrifices his Daughter. AFter the Death of ungodly Abimelech, GOD raised up Thola and Jair to be the Captains and Judges of his People,Anno Mundi 2817. before Christ 1187. and after them Jephthah, who obtained that high Com∣mand on this manner: Gilead his Father had begotten him on a Harlot, for which reason the rest of his Sons refused to own him for their Brother, and thrust him out from amongst them, whereupon he retired to the Land of Tob, where he became the Captain of a Com∣pany of Vagabond vain fellows. Some time after, when the Ammonites made War against, and vexed Israel, the Elders of Gilead, who had experience of the Courage and Valour of Jephthah, sent after him to the Land of Tob, where he fled from his Brethren, when they turn'd him out of Doors, as being the Son of an Harlot, and desired him to be their General; who after he had reproached them, for their former ill usage of him, and had made them promise him, that they would make him their Prince, in case he should overcome the Ammonites, accepted of the Command. Jephthah, as soon as he found himself in this Station, sent Ambassadors to the King of Ammon, to represent to him the Injustice of his Pretensions against Israel; but that Prince lending a deaf Ear to all his Remonstrances, as being wholly resolv'd for War; the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah, who ha∣ving speedily raised a considerable Army, led them on against the Ammonites; and before the Engagement made a Vow to God, that if it should please him to bless him with Vi∣ctory, he would offer up to him for a Burnt-Offering whatsoever first came forth out of his Doors to meet him after his Return. Jephthah having utterly defeated his Ene∣mies, and obtain'd a glorious Victory, return'd home in Triumph; but his Joy was soon turn'd to sorrow; for as he drew near to his House, his only Daughter, transported with Joy, for the glory her Father had acquir'd, came out to meet him with Timbrels and with Dances: Jephthah seeing his Daughter, was pierc'd with Sorrow, and rending his Cloaths, acquainted her with the Vow he had made. Whereupon she, as a Person not at all dis∣may'd, exhorted her Father courageously to perform his Vow, assuring him she should die very contentedly, forasmuch as the LORD had given him the Victory over his Enemies. She only desired two Months time to go with some of her Companions to bewail her Virginity; which time being past, she return'd to her Father, who did with her according to his Vow. The Fathers considered this Vow of Jeph∣thah, as an instance of those indiscreet Vows some People engage themselves in, whereby they are put upon the unhappy necessity either of committing a Sin by breaking their Vow made to GOD, or of becoming Criminal by their per∣formance of it. 'Twere better (saith S Ambrose) not to Vow at all, than to Vow such things as GOD detests. Jephthah was very sensible of the sad effect of his indiscretion, and it was not without ex∣treme regret he performed that, which he thought himself absolutely bound to do. But if the Fathers Carriage in this matter were blame-worthy; on the other hand we can never sufficiently admire that of his Daughter. She comes with Joy, and casts her slf into his hands, who was to Sacrifice her, without suf∣fering her self to be stopt by the Tears of her Companions, or the Idea of a violent and im∣mature Death, in the very spring and flower of her Age, which continually star'd her in the Face. This her behaviour made amends, in some sort, for her Fathers indiscretion; as making that voluntary, which on his side was forced and of necessity; and made that which in it self was impious, to become a well-pleasing Sa∣crifice, by her Obedience and Resignation. She teaches by this her Example all tru Christians, who have their Hearts enflamed with the Love of Heaven, to offer up them∣selves with Joy to GOD, and to take patiently and chearfully from his hands, whatsoever Sufferings he is pleased to lay upon them and try them by, without reflecting upon the indis∣cretion or malice of those, who may have occa∣sioned the same. They think it their happiness and glory to suffer for his sake, to whom they are so infinitely obliged, and therefore are so far from having any aversion for the Instru∣ments of their Sufferings, that they rather con∣sider them as their Benefactors, who open a way for them to obtain an Eternal Crown of Glory.
THE BIRTH OF SAMSON. Samson killeth a Lion. AFter the Death of Jephtha, the Scrip∣ture gives us no particular account of some following Judges un∣til Samson,Anno Mundi 2848. before Christ 1156. whose History is very circumstantially related in those holy Records. He was of the Tribe of Dan, and his Birth was before declared by an Angel, who assur'd his Mother, that she should be no lon∣ger barren, but bring forth a Son. He advis'd her also to abstain from Wine and strong Drink, and all unclean Meats, during the time of her going with Child of him. As soon as the Angel was departed from her, she told her Husband Manoah what had hapned to her, who thereupon testified the great desire he had to see the Angel; who soon after appearing again to his Wife, she made haste and told her Husband, that he might now see and speak with the Angel. Manoah, after he had spoke with him would willingly have offered a Sacrifice to him: But the Angel knowing, that Sacrifices were due to GOD only, told him, that if he had a mind to offer a Sacrifice, he must do it to OD. So Manoah having prepared a Kid, with a Meat-Offering, offer'd it upon a Rock unto the LORD, and when the Flame of the Sacrifice went up towards Heaven, the Angel ascended in the Flame that proceeded from the Meat-Offering in the presence of Manoah, and his Wife. This Child being at last born, according to the Word of the Angel, was called Samson, and was educated accord∣ing to that direction the Angel had before given to his Mother.Anno Mundi 2867. before Christ 1137. Samson being then about 18 years of Age, And be∣ing grown up, he went down to Timnah, where he saw one of the Daughters of the Philistins, whom he had a particular inclination for, and desired his Pa∣rents to get her for him to Wife. His Father was very much averse to comply with his de∣sires, not knowing (as the Scripture tells us) that it was from the LORD, who by this means would avenge the Children of Israel on the Philistins, who at that time had Dominion over them. Samson also, who was a Figure of Jesus Christ, by his marrying one of the Daughters of the Philistius, very lively represented to us, that he who is the strong Man should one day e∣spouse the Church of the Gentiles, leaving the Jews in their obdurate Impenitency. Besides the Scripture seems to hint, that Samson (by marching among the Philistins) had hopes to meet with an occasion of quar∣relling with them, and delivering his Country from the Yoke of their cruel Oppression. As he went one day with his Father and Mother to visit this Woman, he met a young Lion, who came open-mouth'd roaring a∣gainst him; at which time the Spirit of the LORD coming upon him, he laid hold on him and rent him with as much ease, as if it had been a Kid; but he told not his Parents there∣of. Sometime after he returning the same way, with a design to marry the Philistin Wo∣man, he stept out of the way to see the Lion he had kill'd, and behold there was a swarm of Bees, and Honey in the Carkass of the Lion; and he took thereof and did eat, and came to his Parents and gave some to them, who did eat also, not knowing from whence it came. Samson being come to his Journeys end, was married to the Philistin Woman, and at the Wedding-Feast propounded this Riddle to the young Men his Guests; Out of the Eater came forth Meat, and out of the strong came forth Sweetness; and told them, in case they would explain it within the seven days of the Feast, they should have 30 Sheets, and 30 changes of Garments; and if they could not, he was to have the like. The Philistins seeing they could not unrid∣dle Samson's Riddle, threatned his Wife to de∣stroy her and her Father's House, if she did not procure the Solution of it from her Hus∣band. Samson tired and overcome by her im∣portunity, declares the Riddle to her, which she presently told the Philistins. This Figure (as the Fathers observe) did re∣present the Change which Jesus Christ was to make amongst Heathens and Idolaters; who be∣fore had been like furious Lions, that tore and rent the Christians, till Jesus Christ came and vanquisht them without Arms. The Heathen Emperors, who were the cruel Persecutors and Destroyers of the Christians, be∣came their Favourers and nursing Fathers; the Mouths of those who had devour'd them, were now fill'd with Honey; and a sort of People (more cruel than Lions) became as it were their Food and Nourishment, their Support and Pro∣tection, being through the Regeneration in Jesus Christ, become one Body with those they had former∣ly persecuted and devoured under one Head Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace.
68
69 Mr. Edward Hilder of London Cittizen. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
Samson slays the Philistins. Samson Slays a Thousand Philistins with the Jaw-bone of an Ass. SAMSON seeing himself deceiv'd by his Wife, who by her Artifice had made him unriddle his Riddle to her; which he had no sooner done,The same Year 2867. but she disclos'd it to the Philistins; he was very angry with her, and quitting her in some discontent, gave her Parents occasion to think, that he had taken distaste and quite left her, and therefore married her to another Man. And some time after Samson came to give his Wife a Vi∣sit, but her Father would not suffer him to go to her, telling him, that he had married her to another, as supposing that he hated her, and had quite left her; but that if he pleased he might take her young Sister to be his Wife, who was fairer than she. Samson not at all satisfied with this Excuse, protested, that now they might thank them∣selves, if they came to feel the effects of his Rage and Anger, for this their unjust dealing with him. In this Resolution he went and caught 300 Foxes, and tying them Tail to Tail, and fastning a Firebrand or Torch between their Tails, he let them go into the standing Corn of the Philistins, and reduc'd it to Ashes, with their Vineyards and Olive-Trees. The Philistins being strangely alarm'd with this loss, were very inquisitive to know the Au∣thor of it; and being inform'd that it was Samson, and what had provok'd him to do so, instead of endeavouring to avenge themselves of him, they turn'd all their Rage against his Wife and Father-in-Law, and burnt them with Fire. But Samson not thinking himself sufficient∣ly aveng'd of them, took his opportunity (not long after) to set upon them, and de∣droy'd them with a very great Slaughter. The Philistins at length rouzed by these repeated Violences of Samson, gather'd toge∣ther in great Numbers, and encamped them∣selves in the Lot of the Tribe of Judah, who being terrified with this approach of the Phi∣listins, demanded of them why they were come to invade their Country? And the Philistins having answer'd, that they were come to seize Samson: The Men of Judah to rid themselves of these unwelcom Guests, promised to deliver Samson into their hands; and as they soon after brought him down to them bound with two new Cords, and the Philistins began to shout for joy, as now thinking themselves Masters of him, who had done them so much mischief; the Spirit of the LORD coming mightily upon him, the Cords that were on his Arms became as Flax that is burnt with Fire, and his Bands loosed from off his Hands, and taking up the Jaw-bone of an Ass, he slew therewith a thousand of the Philistins, and said, With the Jaw-bone of an Ass, heaps upon heaps, have I slain a thousand Men: and when he had made an end of speaking, he cast away the Jaw-bone, and called the place Ramath-Lehi. The Heat and Violence wherewith he was carried forth to do this Action, had caus'd an extreme Thirst in him, which made him ear∣nestly cry to the LORD for Relief in this his extreme need. GOD immediately heard his Prayer, and opening an hallow-place in the Jaw-bone, by his Power, made a Spring of Water to proceed from it, wherewith (when Samson had quench'd his Thirst) his Strength return'd, and he revived: and he called the Name of the place Enhakker. These wonderful Events have been the Sub∣jects of the Meditation and Admiration of the Fathers, who consider'd them with the Eye of Faith and Godliness: whereas the People of the World, who eye things after a human manner, and pass their carnal Judgment on the most Ho∣ly and Spiritual things, are so far from being edified by the reading of these Holy Records, that they oft make them the Subjects of profane Jests and Drolls. St. Gregory takes occasion from this holy Fi∣gure, to admire how Jesus Christ (the true Sam∣son) did without Arms, or any outward Force, vanquish all the Enemies of his Truth, opposing no∣thing to their seeming insuperable force and malice, but the simplicity of a company of poor contemp∣tible Fishermen; as Samson encountred a whole Army of Philistins with the Jaw-bone of an Ass. And yet this Simplicity, and this Patience of the Saints, being guided by the Hand of GOD, did defeat and overcome all the Strength and Machinations of Men and Devils.
THE GATES OF GAZA. Samson being shut up by the Philistins in Gaza, plucks up the Gates of the City, with the two Posts, and carries them up to the top of a Mountain before Hebron. SAMSON having in so miraculous a man∣ner slain a thousand Philistins, one would think that so astonish∣ing an Instance of a Di∣vine Power assisting him,Anno Mundi 2880. before Christ 1124. should stop the course of their Malice, and hinder them (in love to themselves) from attempting ought against him for the time to come. But we must consider, that their Warring against Samson, was a representation of the Devils future Wars and Fightings against Jesus Christ, and his Holy Church; and therefore the con∣tinually renewed Persecutions of the Philistins against Samson, do very fitly represent to us, the obstinacy wherewith the Devils make War against the Faithful, and that unalterable Ma∣lice wherewith they persecute them, without being discourag'd by the many foils and falls they receive from the Saints, by means of the Power of GOD, that is engag'd for them, and manifest it self in them. The Philistins therefore, instead of letting Samson alone, upon Motives taken from their own Interest (as in all prudence they ought to have done) did on the contrary mind no∣thing more, than how they might best lay new Snares for him, and get him into their hands. And as they were very diligent and attentive in this enquiry, and had their Spies out conti∣nually, to observe his haunts, they were in∣form'd by some of them that he was got into the City Gaza; whereupon (without losing time) being egg'd on by their extream hatred and thirst for Revenge, they assembled them∣selves by Night, and compassed the City, resolving in the Morning to set upon him and kill him. Samson having notice of their design, seem'd to take little notice of it, and having slept till Midnight with an Harlot which he met with, he arose, and without fear went to the Gates of the City, plucking up the Doors, and two Side-posts of it, and laying them upon his Shoulders, carried them to the top of a Mountain, that is before Hebron, passing un∣concernedly by, through the midst of those who were laid in Ambush to seize and destroy him, who being amazed and daunted with seeing those prodigious effects of his Strength and Courage, let him pass unmolested. Thus were the Hopes the Philistins had conceiv'd (to surprize Samson once more) de∣feated, and they found (as formerly) that all their Designs and Projects to destroy him, tho' never so wisely laid, and warily conducted, did at length turn to their own confusion and overthrow. This Figure (saith S. Gregory) is so plain and sensible, that it cannot but be acknowledg'd, to be unexcellent Emblem of our Saviour Jesus Christ. He it was whom his Enemies having persecuted all his life long, they at last lodg'd him in a Sepulchre, seal'd him up there, and surrounded his Grave with their Guards; as the Philistins encompassed the City Gaza, whilst Samson was peaceably taking his Rest. But this true and glorious Samson, awaken∣ing and arising at Midnight by his glorious Resurrection, and delivering himself from the place, where his Enemies kept him shut up, not only came forth from thence himself, with∣out being ever after subject to the Laws and Power of Death; but at the same time re∣deemed all Mankind from that formidable Enemy, by destroying Death it self, whose Gates and Bars he has for ever broke and pluckt up, (as the Scripture mentions) and has carried them with him to the top of the Mountain, that is, to Heaven, which the Resurrection of our Blessed Saviour has open'd to Mankind, and whither his Members hope to follow him, according to his own faithful Promise, that where he is, they should be also, to see and eternally enjoy that Glory, which he had with the Father before the World was. For this reason it is, that all true Christi∣ans may cry out boastingly with S. Paul, O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law; but thanks be to GOD, who giveth us the Victo∣ry through Jesus Christ our LORD.
70 Thomas Ʋincent of Felcham in the County of urrey Esq. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
71 Mr. samuel Lash master Carriage maker to their Mat•s. office of ordnance, and master Block∣maker to their Matys. Navy at Chatham. For advancement of this worke. Contributed this Plate.
SAMSON's DEATH. Samson discovers to Delilah that his Strength lay in his Hair, which she cutting off he is seiz'd. IT had been well for Samson, if he had been as strong and powerful to resist the Charms of a Woman,Anno Mundi 2885. before Christ 1119. as he was in tearing of Lions, and encountring whole Armies alone. But alas! the Enticements of Delilah prov'd too strong for him, who was the strongest of all Men; and in her Embraces he met with the dis∣aster, he had so happily escaped in the most dangerous and threatning Encounters. The Philistins having observ'd, that Samson resorted often to Delilah, promised her a great Sum of Money, if she could get out of him, wherein his Strength lay. Samson at first (upon her enquiry) plaid upon her, as not thinking it needful, to tell her a Truth might prove so fatal to him: He told her, that for to level his Strength with those of other Men, they needed only to bind him with New Cords that had never been used, or to fasten his Locks to a Web; but Delilah soon found, that these were only delusory put-offs, to make her give over her Importunity: Wherefore being gaul'd with Samson's mocking of her, she set all her Artifices at work, and by continual urging and pressing of him, made him at last discover the truth to her; he told her, that from his, Birth no Razor had ever touch'd his Head; and that if he were shaven, his strength would leave him, and he become like another Man. No sooner had Delilah got this Secret out of him, but she sent for the Lords of the Phi∣listins, and having made him sleep on her Knees, she caused 7 Locks of his Head to be cut off. Samson soon after being awaked with the cry of Delilah, that the Philistins were upon him, he thought to go out as at other times, for he knew not that the LORD was departed from him. So the Philistins took him, and brought him down to Gaza, bound him with Fetters of Brass, put out his Eyes, and made him grind in the Prison-House. Whilst Samson was thus wretchedly employ'd by his Enemies in this hard and shameful labour, the Hair of his Head began to grow again: And the Lords of the Philistins gather∣ed themselves together, for to offer a great and solemn Sacrifice unto Dagon their God, for having delivered Samson their Enemy and destroyer of their Country into their hand; and when they were mer∣ry,Anno Mundi 2887. they sent for Samson to make them Sport, placing him between the Pillars. Samson touch'd to the Heart, at this their insolent treating of him, desired the Lad (that held him by the hand) to lead him to the Pillars on which the House stood, that he might rest himself against them. And as soon as he was come to the place, he prayed unto the LORD GOD, to give him Strength only this time, that he might be at once aveng'd of the Philistins for his two Eyes; and laying hold of the Pillars with both his hands, and shaking them with all his might, the House fell, crushing him and all the Lords of the Philistins, with about 3000 more of them that were therein, and on the Roof of the said House; so that he slew (as the Scripture observes) more at his death, than he had done in all his life. This History (as the Fathers tell us) is a lively representation of the effects of the Death of our Saviour, who by his voluntary Death confounded the Devils more, than they had been during all his Life-time: For then it was that the Devils-House was cast down to the ground, and that the Arrogance of those proud Angels was laid low. But the Fathers do not content themselves only in considering the Mysteries in this History, that have manifest reference to Jesus Christ; but they deplore also the unhappy chance, whereby this invincible Strong one was van∣quish'd and overcome of a Woman; he loses all his Locks, that is, his Vertues; they put out his Eyes, that is, they rob him of his Light and Understanding, and condemn him to work in the Mill, that is, abandon him like a Beast to the vain Pleasures of this World, where a Man meets with nothing but Trouble and Vexa∣tion, and where he continues fetter'd in the Chains of his own Will and Lusts. A Sinner in this condition has no other way left, but to call upon GOD, that his Locks may grow again, that is, that he may recover his lost Graces. 'Tis Repentance that recovers the Souls strength, and pulls down the Pillars of the Devils House, and overthrows and crushes the Enemies, that triumph over her, and ren∣ders the Soul victorious by her own ruin, making her die to her self, that she might live to GOD; and lose her self, that she might find him who is the only satisfying Object and Sovereign Good of rational and intelligent Creatures.
THE LEVITES WIFE ABUSED. The Benjamites of Gibeah, force the Wife of a Levite to Death. THE Scripture in the two last Chapters of this Book of Judges, relates a History, which prov'd of great and fatal consequence to the Israelites,Anno Mundi 2585. or thereabouts. as occasioning the destruction of a whole Tribe. A Levite dwelling on the side of Mount Ephraim, took to him a Wife out of Bethlehem; but upon some miscarriage of hers did occasion a Separation, so that she return'd to her Fathers House, where she continued for the space of four Months; and at the expiration thereof, her Husbands Affection returning to∣wards her, he resolved to go to Bethlehem to her Fathers, and fetch her home again. As soon as he was come to his Father-in-Laws House, he received him with much Joy and Kindness, forcing him to continue with him three Days; and then being very unwil∣ling to part with him, he both by his kind En∣tertainment, and pressing Invitation, endea∣vour'd to oblige him to stay longer with him than he intended; so that it was the fifth Day towards Evening, before he could get away from his Fathers; and having reach'd Gibeah a while after Sun-set, he was fain (with his Wife and Servants) to sit down in the Street, be∣cause there was none so kind as to offer them a Lodging; but soon after an Old Man coming from his Work out of the Field, seeing him stand in the Street, kindly invited him with his Wife and Servants to his House, giving them an hearty Entertainment. But as they were sat down at Table, and making merry, certain wicked Wretches of the City, beset the House round about, and knock∣ing at the Door, bade the Old Man (the Master of the House) to bring forth the Man that came to lodge with him, that they might satisfie their unnatural Lust with him. The good Old Man was struck with horror at this their demand, and endeavour'd with the softest words imaginable, to divert them from so great a Villany, offering rather to expose his own Dughter, that was a Virgin, than his Guests Wife to their Lust. But all that he could do not prevailing, the Levite brought forth his Wife to them, whom they abused all Night till towards the Morning; and about Break of Day, they let her go. The Woman after this Treatment had much ado to return to the Door of the House where her Husband was lodg'd; and was no sooner arrived there, but she fell down stone dead before the Threshold, with her hands stretch'd forth, as demanding Vengeance of her Husband for this inhuman outrage com∣mitted upon her. Her Husband arising in the Morning to re∣turn home, and finding his Wife without moti∣on lying at the Door, supposed she had been asleep; but finding that she was dead indeed, the extream grief wherewith he was seiz'd, and the detestation he conceiv'd for this abo∣minable Fact, put him upon a Resolution of cutting the Dead Body of his Wife into 12 Parts; and to send each Tribe a part, to pro∣voke them to take Vengeance of so execra∣ble and crying Abomination. Upon the receipt of this strange and terri∣fying Present, the Tribes unanimously resolv'd to avenge this unparallel'd Excess; they all acknowledg'd, that never was the like thing committed in Israel, from the time of their coming out of Egypt; and having assembled themselves together as one Man, they pro∣tested they would not return to their Homes, till they had punished and aveng'd this exor∣bitant Outrage. S. Ambrose admires this their holy Resolu∣tion, their Zeal shewing them not to be indiffe∣rent in a Case which so much concern'd the Glory of God. The Outrage done (saith that Father) to a Married Wife, enflames and pro∣vokes all Israel; and one Tribe▪ being guilty of the Crime, all the rest League themselves together to destroy and exterminate them, fearing lest by conniving at it, they might draw down upon all Israel the Divine Wrath which one of their Tribes had so justly deserved. The same Father blushes at the Corruption of the Age wherein he liv'd, by suffering the frequent Profanation of that Holy Ordinance, when he compared it with this most commen∣dable Zeal of the Israelites, who sought no frivolous Excuses to cover the Crime of their Bre∣thren, but aveng'd it with that extremity of Rigor, as was proper to prevent the like Licenti∣ousness for ever after: And that holy Man thinks, he can never sufficiently lament their unhappi∣ness, who only mind their own interest, being un∣concern'd at the greatest Profanation of the LAW of GOD.
72 Mis. Elizabeth, the wife of Captaine Richard Leake of the Tower of London▪ Master Gunner of England. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plat.
73
The Punishment of the Benjamites. The whole Tribe of Benjamin is destroy'd by the Israelites, except 600 Men. THE Children of Israel being gathered together as one Man at Mizpeh, and the Levite, whose Wife had been forc'd,At the same time. having laid his Complaints before them, they march'd against the Authors of this detestable Crime, to punish them accor∣ding to desert. But before they came to open force, they sent some Deputies to the Benjamites, to de∣mand those wicked Wretches that had com∣mitted this inhuman Outrage, that by putting them to death they might turn away the wrath of GOD from Israel; but the Benjamites (in∣stead of hearkning to these just and equal Proposals) declar'd, they would protect and secure them; and assembled themselves to fight the Israelites, to the Number of 26000 Men. The Israelites having ask'd Counsel of the LORD, the LORD approv'd of their going against the Benjamites; whereupon they went forth to fight them; but notwithstanding the good success they had promised themselves from the justness of their Cause, they lost that Day 22000 Men. They were strangly surpriz'd at this unex∣pected Defeat, but yet resolv'd to try a second Battel, for which they prepared themselves by a deep Humiliation before GOD, and asking Counsel of him, who again bade them go up against their Brethren, and yet for all this the Success was not answerable, for the Benjamites destroy'd 18000 more of them. All Israel being astonish'd to see 40000 Men destroy'd by 26000, and that too in so just a Cause, betook themselves to GOD, by Fasting, Weeping, and offering Sacrifices; and having ask'd Counsel of the LORD the third time, he not only bade them to go up against the Benjamites, but also assur'd them of the Victory. The Israelites encourag'd with this Divine Assurance, they march'd towards Gibeah, having appointed a great Party to lie in Am∣bush near the City. The Benjamites (like Men drunk with their two late Victories) made a furious Sally out of Gibeah, which was increased by the feign'd Flight of the Israelites, to draw them from the City; but soon after those that lay in Ambush near Gibeah, having set it on Fire, the Benja∣mites saw they were lost, being on all sides encompast by the Israelites, who kill'd 25000 of their Men, and burnt their Cities; only 600 of the Benjamites saved themselves by retiring and hiding themselves in the Rock of Rimmon, who were the means afterwards of recovering that Tribe. The Israelites after this Victory found themselves extreamly afflicted, for the loss of one of the 12 Tribes; and having sworn, that none of them would give their Daughters to the Benjamites for Wives, they went and slew all the Males and Women of Jabesh Gilead, because they were not come up with them to fight against the Benjamites, and only saved 400 of their Virgin Daughters alive, and gave them to the Benjamites for Wives. The Fathers have admired the depths of GOD's Judgments in this History. Never was there a War more holily undertaken, than this of the Israelites, and yet they were twice beaten with great loss. GOD was willing by this (Figure) to teach us, how pure they ought to be, who undertake to punish other mens Faults. It is a false Zeal that puts Men upon purifying others, without being first clean themselves. Moreover, GOD would inform us by this great Example, how great our Charity ought to be towards our Brethren. How detestable and flagitious soever the Benjamites might be, yet GOD will have the Israelites to bewail the sad necessity, that engageth them to destroy their own Brethren. Thus we see that all Israel were touch'd with inward Sorrow, for having exterminated them, and now wholly employ'd their Thoughts, how best to recover and restore those, who so lately they had endeavour'd utterly to destroy. It is a shame (say the Fathers) for Christians in this point to give way to the Jews, and not to be highly concern'd, not only when they see a Country or a Family lost from the Church; but even when they see so much as one single Soul cut off from their Society and Body; forasmuch as they ought to be as sensible of this loss, as they would be of cutting off one of their Mem∣bers. For (as S. Paul sath) when one Mem∣ber of the Body mourns, all mourn; and when one rejoyceth, all rejoyce: Because all true Christians are but the different Mmbers of one Body under Christ their Head.
RUTH FOLLOWETH NAOMI. Ruth will not be perswaded to leave her Mother-in-Law Naomi, but fol∣lows her into the Land of Judah. THE History of RUTH is so considerable, that it has pleased the Divine Wisdom to record it at large in a Book by it self. In the time when the Judges ruled Israel, there hapned a great Fa∣mine in Judea,Anno Mundi 2708. before Christ 1298. or thereabouts. which obli∣ged a Man of Bethlehem, cal∣led Elimelech, with his Wife and two Sons, to go and sojourn in the Land of Moab: And Elimelech dying not long after their Arrival there, Naomi was left there with her two Sons, whom she married to two Daughters of the Land of Moab, whereof she who was married to her younger Son, was called Ruth. And ten years after Naomi's two Sons died also; who seeing her self a sorrowful Widow, without Husband or Children, told her Daughters-in-Law, that she was resolv'd to return to her own Country, forasmuch as she had heard, that GOD had visited it with Plenty as formerly; and therefore desir'd them to continue in their own Country, and to look out Husbands for themselves to comfort their Widowhood. But her Daughters-in-Law could not en∣dure to hear of parting with her, and told her plainly, they were resolv'd to return with her to Judea. Whereupon Naomi representing to them her own desolate condition, and that she had no more Sons for them to marry, ac∣cording to the custom of the Jews, and that she should be much afflicted to make their Conditions worse by following of her; Orpha at last (who had been married to her eldest Son) took her farewel of her. Orpha's departure serv'd only to make Ruth's great Faith and strong Love the more illustri∣ous and visible; for notwithstanding all the pressing Instances of her Mother-in-Law, she would by no means hear of leaving her; but with an immoveable firmness and constancy of Mind, answered her in these Terms, Never think of perswading me to part from you, where∣soever you go, I will go, and where you lodge, I will lodge; your People shall be my People, and your GOD my GOD; where you die, I will die also, and Death alone shall be able to separate me from you. Naomi perceiving this fix'd constancy of her Daughter-in-Law Ruth, which was the Figure of the Courage and Resolution, wherewith the Church should one day follow Jesus Christ through all Persecutions, suffer'd her to come with her to Bethlehem, the place of her Birth, where they arrived at they beginning of Barly-Harvest; and because their Wants pressed hard upon them, Ruth desir'd her Mother-in-Law to give her leave to go to the Fields a gleaning; and having obtain'd leave, she lighted on a Field which belong'd to Boaz, the Kinsman of Elimelech, Naomi's Husband. Boaz soon after being come from Bethle∣hem, to visit his Reapers, demanded of them, who the young Woman was that gleaned after them; they told him whose Daughter she was, and gave a very good Character of her. Whereupon he exprest himself with much kindness to her, charging her not to go and glean in any other Field but to abide with his Maidens, and to eat and drink freely of what they had provided; ordering the Reapers also to drop Ears on purpose for her. This great kindness of Boaz has been lookt up∣on by the Fathers, as a Figure of the great bounty and condescension, with which Jesus Christ received his Church. He did not dis∣dain her mean Condition: neither her present Poverty, nor past Idolatry, could make him de∣spise her. Moreover, this holy Woman Ruth, gives a Lesson to all Christians, to renounce for ever their Father's House, and the Land of their Nativity; that is, the Vanity and corrupt Manners of this World: that they may joyn themselves to the People of Jesus Christ. Nei∣ther need they fear to lose any thing by this their happy renunciation: for they will find in the Love of our Saviour, ten thousand times more, than ever they could hope for from the deceitful shew of the false Pleasures of this World. The Poverty of Naomi, which Ruth with so much Constancy embraced, prov'd more advan∣tagious to her, even in this World, than all the Riches of the Moabites: And they who with a firm love and purpose of Heart cleave to the Church, when she appears as a desolate Widow upon Earth, shall at length find their Poverty re∣warded with all the Treasures Heaven can be∣stow upon them.
74 Mis. Lucy Chauntler, daughter of John Chauntler▪ of Laughton in the County of sussex Gentleman deceased. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
75 The Right Honourable Katherine. Lady Dowager North, and Grey For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
BOAZ ESPOUSETH RUTH. Boaz, near Kinsman of Ruth, Marries her according to the Ordinance of the Law. NAOMI being inform'd of Boaz his kindness to Ruth, cast about how she might best improve this Inclination of Boaz for the good of her Daugh∣ter-in-Law,The same year 1708. in order to procure her a quiet and advantagious establishment for the rest of her days. To this end she acquainted Ruth, that Boaz was her near Kinsman, and seeing he was to lie that Night in his Thresh∣ing-floor, near the Field where they were a Reap∣ing, she advised her to repair thither, so as she might not be perceived by any; and when he laid himself down to rest, she should mark the place, and lie down at his Feet, who would not fail to tell her what she should further do. Ruth, in obedience to her Mother-in-Laws Command, performed what of her self she would have been very backward to; and being favour'd by the darkness of the Night, came unperceiv'd of any, and laid her self down at Boaz his feet; who awakening at Midnight, was affrighted to find a Woman lying at his Feet, and demanded who she was. Ruth having disclos'd her self, represented to him, that he was a near Kinsman, who (according to the order of the Law) had a right to marry her. Boaz, who was then above 100 years of Age, exprest the esteem he had for her, in that she did not imitate the Behaviour of the Daughters of his Age, who (for the most part) followed the transports of a blind Love, and inconsiderately preferr'd young Men before wise and staid Husbands; but added, that before he could lawfully marry her, another Kinsman (that was nearer than he) was first to declare himself, whether he were willing to perform the duty of a Kinsman towards her or not. Accordingly the next day Boaz went to the Gate of the City, and being sat down with the Magistrates and Elders, who met there to do Justice to the People, he saw the Kinsman he had spoke of to Ruth, passing by; and having call'd to him, told in presence of 10 of the Elders of the City, that Naomi did intend to sell a parcel of her Husbands Land, of which he thought good to acquaint him; for, that in case of his Refusal, he would buy it himself: The Kinsman having answer'd, that he was willing to buy it; Boaz replied, that at the same time he bought the Land, he must also marry Ruth. But the Kinsman disliking this Proposal, past over his right to Boaz, who at the same time took the Elders and People of his City, to witness of his purchasing the Estate of Elimelech, and taking Ruth to be his Wife; who wished him all manner of Prosperity and Happiness with her, that she might be like Rachel and Leah, who built up the House of Israel, and that he might be famous in Beth∣lehem throughout all Ages. Thus was this Marriage consummated, which GOD soon after blessed with the Birth of Obed, who was the Father of Jesse, and Davids Grandfather; upon which occasion all her Friends and Neighbours came to congra∣tulate Naomi, upon this happy Fruit of her Daughters Marriage; assuring her, that she was more happy in such a Daughter, than if she had seven Sons. Naomi also overjoy'd with her little Grandson, laid him in her Bosom, and became his Foster-Mother. GOD would teach us by this Admirable Woman, that he does not value Persons by the Holiness of their Parents, but by their Vertues and Graces. We see here Ruth (a Mo∣abitish Woman) born of Idolatrous Parents, advanced by the holiness of her Manners to the highest Honour that was (at that time) attainable upon Earth, by entring into the Genealogy of our Saviour, and becoming a Mother of his Fore-Fathers, according to the Flesh. She teaches us (saith S. Ambrose) not to rest or rely upon any outward Profession of a Reli∣gion, nor on the meer Name of Christians, as the Jews did upon their Carnal Sacrifices, and upon the descent from Abraham, of which they boasted continually; but to endeavour to become acceptable to GOD, by doing violence to our own corrupt Inclinations, and by manifesting our selves to be living Members of that Body, whereof Jesus Christ is the Head. For our Saviour takes only those for his Spouses, that are recommendable by their inward Graces, and not by any outward Advantages; he chooseth those only that are meek and humble of Heart, which is the Character of the genuine Spouses of our Saviour, and the true Spiritual Vir∣ginity.
The CONTENTS of the First Book of SAMUEL. AT the beginning of this Book we have an account of the Birth of Samuel, and how his Mother Consecrated him to the Service of GOD, and the Hymn of Praise she sang upon that occasion. Next we find a relation of the insolent and vicious Behaviour of the Sons of Eli; who therefore is reproved by a Man of GOD, who foretells the ruin of his Family, and which was afterwards also told him by Samuel, whom GOD dignified with the high Calling of a Prophet, and is owned as such by all the People. Afterwards we see here, how the Israelites were beaten by the Philistins, the Ark of the Covenant taken, which as soon as Eli understood, he fell backwards from his Seat, and brake his Neck. The Philistins carry the Ark into the Temple of their Idol Dagon, which falls down, and is shatter'd to pieces before it; and the Philistins are grievously plagu'd by GOD; whereupon they send back the Ark with Presents, which comes to Bethshemesh in the Land of Judah, and from thence is brought to Kiriath-jearim; where Samuel begins a notable Reformation of the Worship of GOD, and assembles the Israelites at Mizpeh; the Philistins designing to surprize them there, GOD strikes a Terror into them by great and dreadful Thun∣derclaps, whereupon they are easily defeated by the Jews. The Sons of Samuel, being by him in his old Age appointed to judge the People, do not follow their Fathers steps, wherefore the Israelites demand a King, which displeaseth GOD, who commands Samuel to represent to them, how their King would treat them; but the People not∣withstanding continuing obstinate in their de∣mand, the Lord and his Prophet agree to it, and Samuel tells Saul (who was come to him at Mizpeh) that he was to Reign over Israel, and anoints him King. Saul, in the beginning of his Reign, beats the Ammonites; Samuel lays down his Authority he formerly had over the People as their Judge, having first given an honourable testimony of his Innocence and Integrity in that station. Saul and Jonathan his Son make War against the Philistins and others, and defeat them. Samuel declares to Saul, that GOD would take the Crown from him, and anoint David King, who fights with Goliah the Giant, and kills him. Saul being jealous of the Honours done to David for this Victory, seeks to kill him, who leaving the Court, comes to Samuel at Naioth, and contracts a strict and firm League of Friendship with Jonathan; he flees to Achish, King of the Philistins, where (to save his life) he counterfeits himself Mad, and retires from thence to Adullam, where his Friends and others joyn with him, who is fain to stray up and down to escape Sauls pursuit. Saul murthers Ahimelech, and all his House, with 85 Priests, and all the Inhabitants of the City Nob, only for having innocently entertain'd David, and furnish'd him with Bread. David hides himself in the Wilderness of Ziph, and from thence retires to that of Maon, whither Saul pursues him, till News is brought him, that the Phi∣listins were entred the Land, and having beaten them, he continues to pursue David; but at last acknowledging his fault, he prays David to spare his Family, when he should come to the Crown. After this, we have a relation of the Death of Samuel, and what past between Da∣vid and Abigail, the Wife of Nabal; and how Saul, beginning afresh to persecute David, he flees to Achish King of Gath, who gives him the Town of Ziklag to dwell in; from whence he makes excursions upon the Neighbouring People, killing many, and getting great Spoil. After this, the Philistins coming with a great force against Israel, Saul asks Counsel of the LORD, who does not vouchsafe to answer him; whereupon he addresses himself to the Witch of Endor. David making ready to joyn the Forces he had, with those of Achish, against Saul, is countermanded. In his absence Ziklag is spoiled by the Amalekites; but setting upon them, he recovers all the Spoil and Captives they had taken. And lastly, this Book concludes with the tragical Death of Saul and his Sons. This first Book of Samuel contains the Hi∣story of the Events of 80 Years, whereof 40 past under the Government of Eli the High Priest, Chap. 4.18. and the other 40 under the Government of Samuel and Saul, Acts 13.21.
This Book (as well as the following) bear the Name of Samuel, because they contain a rela∣tion of his Ancestors, his Birth, his Education, his Younger years, his Life and Actions, his Government and Death; as likewise the Lives of those Kings, who by the Command of GOD were by him Anointed over Israel. The Septua∣gint, and the old Latin Interpretation, joyn these two Books of Samuel with the two follow∣ing, and call them the four Books of Kings, because in these four Books are related the Lives and principal Actions of all the Kings that Reigned over the Jews, from the first to the last, in whom this Monarchical Government ceased, and was extinguish'd in Israel by a just Judgment of the LORD.
76 Mr. Nicholas Jeffreys, second son of Jeffrey Jeffreys of Llywell in Brcknockshire Esq. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
SAMUEL GIVEN TO ELI. Hannah Consecrates her Son Samuel unto the LORD, and delivers him to Eli the High-Priest. SAMUEL being to appear one day in the World with the lustre of a great and holy Prophet, GOD disposed him thereto from his tender In∣fancy.The first year of Eli's Government, at the same time that the Angel fore∣told the birth of Samson, Anno Mundi 2848. and before Christ 1156. Hannah his Mo∣ther, who was more glorious in having such a Son, than if she had been Mother of the greatest Prince in the World, after she had been a long time barren, was instant in Pray∣er to GOD, till at last she obtain'd this Child, which was the fruit of her Prayers, and the reward of her Faith. And this Holy Mother knowing that her Child was the Gift of GOD, made no difficulty to return him to the Donor. She did not content her self to re∣deem him with Money, or to offer him up for some years only; but she consecrated him to the LORD all his Life-time. She had no sooner weaned him, but her gratitude to GOD pressed her, to dedicate him to his Ser∣vice, from whom she had received him; and by a strange disengagement from all human Considerations, she in opposition to her natu∣ral tenderness for her only and long lookt for Son, and to all appearance of Reason, con∣secrated him to GOD in his first Infancy, deli∣vering him into the hands of Eli, when he was but about 3 years of Age, no more con∣sidering him as her own, but GOD's, to whom she had given him. Thus Hannahs Sacrifice did in some sort resemble that of Abraham, because in parting with her Son to GOD, she believ'd she did nothing else, but render to GOD what was his own, and what she could not (without a kind of Sacriledge) withhold from him. GOD rewarded this Devotion of the Mother in the abundant effusion of his Graces upon her Son.Anno Mundi 2861. And when in the 12th year of his Age he was employed in the Service of Eli the High-Priest, and the Mini∣stry of the Temple, where he lay also by Night, not far from the Ark, GOD favour'd him with a Revelation; from which it might be judg'd, how great a Prophet he was like to be, when arrived at his Manhood, to whom GOD ma∣nifested himself so remarkably in his early Childhood. GOD called to him thrice, as he was laid down to sleep; but Samuel supposing it to be the Voice of Eli the High Priest, arose each time and went to Eli, to know what his plea∣sure was; but the fourth time Eli having in∣form'd Samuel, that it was the LORD that called him, GOD spake to him, and foretold the terrible disasters that were to fall on Eli and all his House; he told him, he could no longer endure the unhappy negligence of that too indulgent Father, who knowing the disorders and crimes his Sons committed, and seeing in how many several ways they prophaned the Sacredness of his Temple and Altar, contented himself with giving them a slight Reproof, instead of being animated against them with an holy Zeal for the Glory of GOD; and fur∣ther declar'd unto him, that such were the enormous Crimes of that Family, that they should never be expiated by all the Sacrifices Eli did, or could offer. The next Morning Eli was very urgent with little Samuel, to know of him what the LORD had said unto him; which tho' he was very loath to do, out of the great respect he had for him, yet upon his solemn conjuring of him, he told him all. Eli acknowledging at last the justice of the Sentence past against him and his Family, found too late, that it is not sufficient for a Father to be good him∣self, if he does not use his utmost endeavours to make his Children so likewise, and with a most humble submission, disposed himself to undergo the Punishment he had deserved by the too indulgent Education of his Children. There are (saith S. Gregory) many Followers and Imitators of Eli, as well in the private Houses of Christians, as in the Church, I mean (saith he) those Pastors, who suffer their Spiritual Children to live in all manner of Disorderliness, by a cruel Complaisance and Compliance, being cruel to themselves, as well as to those whose Wounds they dissemble; when indeed they should, by searching them to the bottom, endeavour to heal them: Foras∣much as it plainly appears from this Figure, that in so doing they draw down upon them∣selves and their Flock, the just Anger and Judgments of an incensed GOD, who will not suffer himself to be mocked, and will in a more special manner be sanctified by those, who draw near unto him and serve at the Altar.
The Punishment of Eli. GOD, in order to punish Eli the High Priest for his negligence in Repro∣ving the Disorders of his Children, suffers him (upon hearing the News of their being slain, and the taking of the Ark) to fall down from his Seat, and break his Neck. GOD being about to fulfil the Judgments he had denounc'd against the House of Eli,Anno Mundi 2888. before Christ 1116. he stirr'd up a New War against the Jews, from their Neighbours the Philistins. This Nation were the open and profest Enemies of the People of GOD, and was made use of by him, as a powerful Instrument of his Ju∣stice and Vengeance, to punish the Jews for their Crimes and Disobedience against him. Accordingly at this time the LORD being highly provok'd (by the Apostacy and Back∣sliding of the Jews, and their great contempt and profanation of his Holy Laws and Ordi∣nances) hid his Face from them, would not assist them against their Enemies, but made them to be discomfited. The Jews being sur∣priz'd at this their unhappy Expedition a∣gainst their Enemies, thought they could force the LORD to be of their side, by carrying the Ark of his presence with them. But GOD, who will not suffer himself to be mocked, and when he is provok'd, withdraws his gracious Presence from all the most holy outward Things and Ordinances, suffer'd the Ark to go to the Camp, without concerning himself about its preservation. No sooner was it arrived there, but the Army receiv'd it with a general Shout, and joyful Acclamations, not knowing that the very thing from whence they expected their good success, would prove their Confusion, as well as their great Affli∣ction; and that those two wicked Priests, Hophni and Phineas, the Sons of Eli, who car∣ried the Ark, and whom GOD regarded with the Eye of his Wrath, would draw down more mischief upon them, than the Presence of the Ark would procure them favour. The Philistins understanding that the Ark was with the Israelites, concluded themselves beaten, and crying out▪ Wo unto us, for their GOD is come into the Camp; who should deliver us from those mighty GODS, that smote the Egyptians with all the Plagues? However at length, somewhat encouraging one another to quit themselves like Men, their fear having made them desperate, they fell like an irre∣sistible Torrent upon the Jews, took the Ark, kill'd the two Sons of Eli, that carried it, cut down 30000 of them, and put the rest to flight. Old Eli, all this while, who could not pre∣sage any great good to the Israelites, sat by the Way-side, impatiently expecting to hear the Event of the Battel, and the rather, because the Ark of the LORD was concern'd; that good Man (for so he was, notwithstanding all his failings) trembling at the apprehensi∣sion of its falling into the hands of the Phi∣listins, and being prophaned by them. At last, a Man of Benjamin having escap'd out of the Army, came to Shiloh, and gave Eli an account of the total defeat of the Army; who no sooner heard him say, that the Ark was taken; but (like a Man stunn'd with a violent Blow) he fell down from his Seat, and brake his Neck. His Daughter-in-Law, the Wife of Phineas, having understood the Death of her Husband, and the taking of the Ark, (with the Death also of Eli the High Priest, her Father-in-Law) she immediately fell into Labour, and died soon after she had brought forth a Son, whom she called Ichabod; because (by the taking of the Ark) the Glory was departed from Israel. Never was there a more remarkable Instance of GOD's Severity in punishing the prophanation of Holy things; never a more teaching Lesson, that nothing incenseth GOD higher, than the Sins and Disorderly Lives of Priests, whose Holiness ought to appease the Divine Wrath, when it is gone forth against the People. It teacheth also us Christians, not to put such confidence in the most Holy Eucharist, whereof the Ark was a Figure, as not at the same time to endeavour after Holiness, which only can dispose us to be meet partakers of that Heavenly Bread, and without which (by approaching to that Holy Table) we shall only seal our own Condemnation.
77 Mis. Ann Jeffreys▪ eldest Daughter of Jeffrey Jeffreys of Lywell in Brecknockshire Esq. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
78 Mr. William Proctor Cittizen and Stationer of London▪ For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Idol Dagon falls before the Ark. The Philistins having placed the Ark in the Temple of Dagon, near to that Idol, it falls down before it, and is broke to pieces. GOD smites the Philistins with the Plague of Emrods, and forced them to send back the Ark. THE Ark of GOD being thus taken, and in the hands of the Enemies of GOD's People, seemed now to have lost all that Honour and Glory,The same Year 2888. which till then GOD had ever dignified it with; but the Sequel of this Hi∣story will better inform us, and make it ap∣pear, that this holy Shrine of the Divine Presence, was never more illustriously glorious, than in this its Captivity amongst the Philistins. These Idolaters, as soon as they saw them∣selves masters of this Holy thing, carried it to Ashdod, and put it into the Temple, near their Idol Dagon, excellently representing to us, by this their Sacriledge and Profanation, the Crime of those, who in the same Heart endeavour to joyn GOD and Belial, and to make an Alli∣ance between his Holy Worship and the Service of Devils. But GOD by an illustrious instance made it appear, that as he is not at all like, so neither can he have any Communion with false Gods. Dagon could not stand his ground at the Presence of the Ark, and the next Morning they found the Idol fallen on its face before it. The Men of Ashdod being ex∣treamly surpriz'd and troubled at this shame∣ful fall of their Idol, did their endeavours to rear up this God again, who was not able to do so much for himself, and put him in his place as before; but the next day they had the affliction to see their Idol cast down once more, without either Head or Hands. Yet the Divine Vengeance did not stop here, but passing from the Idol to the Idolaters themselves, all the Inhabitants of Ashdod were smitten with a shameful and dolorous Plague, in the most secret parts of their Bodies, at the same time that all the Fruits of their Country were destroyed by a prodigious mul∣titude of Mice sent amongst them. This filthy Plague, which hindred them from sitting down, by reason of the extream Pain they endur'd in that part; and which was an admirable Figure of the shameful and secret Plagues of Sin, did so affright and daunt the Men of Ashdod, who were very sensible, that what they suffer'd was an effect of their Outrage done to the Ark; being in this respect more happy than they, who (when they are punish'd for their profanation of Holy things, are altogether in∣sensible, without taking any notice of the Hand of GOD, that strikes them. The Philistins therefore being no longer able to endure the Presence of that GOD, whose Power they had been made so sensible of, to their great sorrow, sent the Ark away to other of their Cities; but finding that it still drew the same Plagues along with it, and fearing in the end to be all destroyed by it, assembled their Priests and Divines, to give them advice what was best for them to do in this case; who gave them a Counsel whereby GOD was glorified, by an Eternal Monument of his Vengeance exerted against his Enemies. They order'd them to send back the Ark with five golden Images of the Emrods, and as ma∣ny of the Mice, wherewith the LORD had plagued them, according to the number of their Lords and Principal Cities, that had been afflicted with these sore Judgments. Thus we see, that the Divine Glory shone forth most conspicuously on this occasion, who without the intervening of any human help, forced the Enemies themselves to set free the Holy Ark from the Captivity wherein it had been detained. The Joy they were seiz'd with, by finding themselves Masters of it, was soon chang'd to extream Grief and Sorrow; the pre∣sent Evils they lay under, making them still fear and apprehend greater, yea, utter and final ruin and destruction. We ought to learn from this History, that the Joy Men sometimes have, from their being possest of that which indeed belongs to GOD, always proves a very short and deceitful Joy; and tho' they may not see the Plague, wherewith GOD smites them, because it is be∣hind them, and in a part that is out of their view (as S. Gregory observes) yet they must not doubt, but that GOD will sooner or later avenge the abuse and profanation of that which is holy and consecrated to him by the Exemplary and Eternal shame and reproach of those who unjustly have arrogated it, or made themselves Masters of it.
THE ARK SENT BACK. The Philistins send hack the Ark to Judea, to avoid the Plagues wherewith GOD had afflicted them. THe Philistins being no longer able to bear the Presence of the Ark of that GOD, who inflicted Plague upon Plague up∣on them,The same Year 2888. followed the Advice of their Divi∣ners, which was not to send it away empty, but with a Tresspass-Offering, which by their Orders were 5 golden Emerods, and as many golden Mice, according to the number of the Lords of the Philistines, to the end that ye may be healed; for one Plague was on you all, and on your Lords: And they also ordered to be provided a new Cart, and two Milch-Kine to draw it, whose Calves they shut up at home from them; to the end, that if the Kine (con∣trary to their Natural instinct) should take their way towards the Land of Israel, they might be assured from this supernatural Vio∣lence, that it was not by chance that these Plagues had followed them; but that they were a visible effect of the Divine Power, who had thus avenged the Prophanation of the Ark of his Presence. GOD was willing so far to comply with their weakness, as to make these Beasts (con∣trary to the Natural tenderness they had for their Young) to take the strait Way to Beth∣shemesh, lowing as they went, which was an evident Token, that their Natural love to their Young still continued, but that it was o∣veraw'd by Omnipotence it self. Thus they drew it along the High-way that led to Ju∣dea; and by this means became an admirable Figure to all true Christians, teaching them, That the only way to go to God, is by raising ones self above, and thwarting our Earthly Af∣fections and Passions. The Lords and Grandees of the Philistins followed the Ark, as being desirous to be Eye-witnesses of this conspicuous Miracle, and were struck with Admiration, when they saw the Kine stop as soon as they were come to Bethshemesh, which was the first City of the Jews they met with on their way. The Inhabitants of this City were surpriz'd with extraordinary Joy, to see the Ark return'd, as being the precious Pledge of the Divine Presence amongst them, for the absence of which all Israel had mourn'd for the space of 7 Months. But alas! this their Joy was soon turned to Tears and Sorrow, when they found that this holy Pledge spared the Jews as little now, as before it had the Philistins; for the Bethshemites out of curiosity opening the Ark to pry into it, the LORD smote them with a great Plague, whereof no less than 50000 died; because (saith the Scripture) they had looked into the Ark of the LORD. The horrour wherewith they were seized at this sudden destruction, made them cry out with fear and trembling, who is able to stand before this Holy LORD GOD? Or, Where shall we bestow this dreadful Pledge of his Om∣nipotent Presence? So they sent Messengers to the Inhabitants of Kiriath-jearim, to fetch the Ark of the LORD the Philistins had left with them. They of Kiriath-jearim came accordingly, and fetch the Ark of the LORD, and brought it into the House of Abinadab, on the Hill of their City, where (being the place which GOD had chosen for its abode) he did not only not Plague that Country, as he had done the Philistins and the Bethshemites, but blessed them with all manner of Blessings; making it apparent to all, that he (of whom the Ark was a Figure) desires nothing more, than to pour forth his Favours and Benefits upon all those, that do not some way or other op∣pose and turn their backs upon them; but withal, when his Justice is provoked, he shews the greatness of his Power, in the punishment of such, who despise and abuse his Goodness and Long-suffering. The Bethshemites seemed to honour the Ark by the great expressions of Joy, wherewith they received it amongst them after its 7 Months Captivity; but their Joy was a proud and vain Joy; they gloried in their being the pos∣sessors of this Sacred Pledge, without being careful humbly to obey the Law of that GOD, who thence dispersed his holy Oracles; and who in a signal manner had imprinted the marks of his Divine Presence upon it. Thus (saith S. Gregory) many drawing near to the Holy Eucharist with a too bold Confidence, do perish in the Sanctuary; because by their care∣lesness to examin themselves, ard neglecting to come with a pure Soul to eat of the Lamb with∣out blemish, they find their Death in that, which to the pure and worthy Receivers is a Spring of Life.
79 Anne Lady Wyndham, Relict of Sr. Francis Wyndham▪ Baronet. & Cahyre to Thomas Gerard. of Trent in somerset. shire Esq. In whose house his Majesty K. Charles the 2o. was safely preserved 19 dayes after his escape from worcester sight A.D For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate 1651.
80 S. Samuel Grard of Buxsteep in Sussex Knight, 2d. Son of Sr. Gilbert Gerard Baronet. deceased & Grandson to ye. Rt. Reverend Father in God Iohn Cossin late Lord Bishop of Durham. &c•. For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Defeat of the Philistins. Samuel sacrifices and prays to the LORD. The Philistins are defeated by Thunder from Heaven THE state of Affairs in Judea was such as hath been set down in the foregoing Relations; and GOD made it appear (by his raising Samuel to Honour and great Authori∣rity) that when he is inclin'd to favour a Peo∣ple,The same year, 2888. the first thing he does, is to send them good Pastors and Governours. This holy Prophet finding himself animated by the Spirit of GOD, preach'd to all Israel, representing their Sins to them, and promising them, that in case they would relinquish and destroy their Idols, and cleave to the LORD, they should be happy and successful for the time to come, and that GOD would deliver them from the Tyranny of the Philistins. Whereupon they having declared, that they would follow his Advice, in actually destroy∣ing the Idols of Baal and Ashtaroth from a∣mongst them; Samuel commanded them to assemble themselves at Mizpeh, that he might pray for them there unto the LORD. The Israelites being met there from all parts accordingly, they kept a solemn Fast to the LORD, humbling themselves before GOD, and confessing their Sins. Whilst they were engaged in these Acts of Devotion, they were surprized with the News which was brought them, that the Philistins had made an Inroad upon them, and were drawing near to give them Battel. These Enemies of GOD's People, puft up with their former Successes, and knowing that the Jews were all assembled at Mizpeh, thought they had now a fair occasion offered them to destroy them altogether in one day, and not knowing that GOD (who is the sole di∣sposer of Victory) was reconcil'd to his People, at the Intercession of Samuel, they made sure of the same Success they formerly had a∣gainst them. Samuel upon this unexpected Alarm, and the earnest Instances of the Jews, that he would cry to GOD, to save them from the Hand of the Philistins, took a sucking Lamb and offered it for a Burnt-Offering unto the LORD, which prov'd so acceptable to him, that thundring with prodigious Thunderclaps and Lightnings upon the Philistins, they were thereby struck into such a consternation, that they betook themselves to flight in great con∣fusion, and the Israelites taking this occasion to pursue them, kill'd vast numbers, and total∣ly defeated them. Thus Samuel (by this Sacrifice which he offer'd to GOD, to reconcile him with his Peo∣ple) restor'd to the Jews their Peace and Liber∣ty, and govern'd them afterwards with the care and love of a tender Father. But his old Age put a stop to the current of all this Pro∣sperity he had procur'd for them; for Samuel's Sons degenerating from the godliness and wis∣dom of their Father, aim'd at nothing more, than to satisfie their Covetousness by taking Bribes, and perverting Judgment. From this ill administration of his Sons, the Jews took occasion to demand a King of Sa∣muel, that might govern them, like all other Nations. Samuel was ex∣treamly troubled at this their demand;Anno Mundi 2909. Samuel being then 60 years of Age, and having govern'd the Jews (since the death of Eli) 21 years and an half. and com∣plaining of it to the LORD in Prayer, he an∣swer'd him, that the Jews by this demand had affron∣ted him himself, by rejecting him to be their King and Sovereign; but however, bade him do as they desired. Yet withal, he charged Samuel to set before them how their new King would behave himself, and what Treatment they might expect from his hands, tho' nothing of all this could alter the Resolution they had fixed, to be like other Nations, let it cost them never so much. We are apt to admire (as the Fathers ob∣serve) that the Jews should be so besotted, as to prefer the Government of a Man, before that of GOD himself, wherewith they were digni∣fied above all other Nations of the World; and yet at the same time we do not wonder so much, to see Christians preferring the Devil to be their Prince and Head, before Jesus Christ himself whose Members they are. For we say often of our Saviour, as they in the Gospel did; We will not have this Man to reign over us: And on the other side, we very frequently tell the Devil, not from our Mouths, but our Hearts; Thou art our King, and we are thy Sub∣jects. We do not care to acknowledge or submit our selves to the Empire of GOD over us; for our Law, as well as thine, is our own Will, and we do not care to depend upon any thing but our selves.
The Anointing of Saul. Samuel (by the Command of GOD) Anoints Saul to be King of the Jews. GOD having resolv'd to let the Jews have their Will, Saul was chosen their King after this manner: Kish his Father having lost his Asses,The same Year 2909. before Christ, 1095. he sent his Son Saul with one of his Servants to seek them; but not meeting with them after a long and tedious search, Saul was resolv'd to return home again: But his Servant having represented to him, that there was a Man of GOD, that is, a Prophet, near the place where they then were, and that they should do well to consult him, for that pro∣bably he would direct them to find the Asses; Saul consented to his Advice. Accordingly Saul and his Servant went to the City before them, to enquire for the Pro∣phet; and they were no sooner entred into it, but Samuel met them; the LORD having the day before told him, that about that time the next day he should meet with a Man, whom he was to anoint King over his People, Israel, as being the Person he had design'd to be the Deliverer of his People, from the op∣pression▪ and violence of the Philistins. As soon as Samuel saw Saul, the LORD repeated the same assurance to him, that He was the Man; whereupon Samuel invited Saul to dine with him, and told him, that he must stay with him that Night, wishing him not to be concern'd about his Father's Asses, because they were already found. Saul, after he had been entertain'd by Samuel with all manner of Honour and Respect, was call'd up by him the next Morning by break of Day, and ha∣ving accompanid him through the City, he bid Saul command his Servant to pass on be∣fore, for he had something from GOD to com∣municate to him. As soon as Samuel saw himself alone with Saul, he took a Vial of Oil and poured it upon his Head, and kissed him; adding, That what he had done was by express Order of the LORD, who had chosen him to be King over his People Israel. And for proof that what he had said was true, he told him, That on his Way, near to Rachel's Sepulcher, he should meet with those, that would tell him that the Asses were found, and that his Father was no more concern'd about them, but greatly grieved about his Son, not knowing what was become of him; and that soon after he should meet with a great number of Prophets, and should prophecy with them himself. This Man so happy according to the Eye of the World, who in his searching for Asses, had found a Kingdom, did not give the least hint to his Father of what had past. But GOD willing to have him publickly declar'd King in presence of all the People, ordered Samuel to appoint a General Meeting of them at Mizpeh. When they were assembled there, Samuel represented to them the great Evil they had committed in rejecting GOD, who had so miraculously preserved and deliver'd them, in desiring a King; and bade them cast Lots, that they might know whom GOD had appointed to that Dignity. When they had cast Lots, the Lot fell upon the Tribe of Benjamin, and in that Tribe, on Saul the Son of Kish: who having absented and hid himself, was brought forth and de∣clared King by Samuel; who shewing him to the People, told them, That the LORD had chosen him to be their King, who was the most comely and tall Person of all Israel. Saul being declar'd King, carried himself at first with a great deal of Modesty and Humility; but not long after he made it appear (and chiefly by the Sacrifice, he would needs himself offer to GOD, without staying for Samuel, to whom that holy Function did belong) that it is a rare and difficult thing for Men to continue humble, after they are arriv'd to the highest Pinnacle of Sovereign Power. The Fathers have always consider'd Saul, as the Figure of those who are chosen to high places either in Church or State, who ought alway to tremble when they see themselves rai∣sed above others; yea, even when they seem to have great Assurances, that GOD himself calls them to those Employments, because if once they lend an Ear to the Enticements of Pride and Ambition, without considering, that they are the Officers and Servants of that GOD, who resists the Proud, he at last rejects them, not∣withstanding the Choice he had before made of them, and takes that away from them, since they are proud, which he had bestowed upon them, when they were humble.
81 Coll Jacob Richards. Principall Enginier to their Majesties Traine of Artillery in Ireland and third Enginier in England. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate
82 The Honourable susanna Noel, widdow of the Honoura∣ble Baptist Noel of North Luffenham in Rutlandshire Esq. son of the Rt. Honourable Baptist Viscount Campden. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
Ionathan and his Armour-bearer. Jonathan, Saul's Son (accompanied only with his Armour-bearer) goes into the Camp of the Philistins, and puts them to flight. SAUL being establish'd King, and waging War against the Enemies of Israel, the Philistins gathered them∣selves together in great numbers to fight him.Anno Mundi 2911. before Christ 1093. Saul on his part was not idle on this occasion, but assembled what Forces he could, to oppose their designs: And as both the Armies were encamped near one another, after several Skirmishes and Attacks, Jonathan the Son of Saul took a most Heroick Resolution, founded upon his strong Faith and Confidence in GOD; for having call'd his Armour-bearer, he communicated to him the design he had formed of setting upon the Philistins, as being assured, that it was as easie for the LORD to deliver by few as by many, with whose Blessing even a single Man might be sufficient to defeat a whole Army. As soon as his Armour-bearer had declar'd himself willing and ready to accompany him, they both got up an high Rock, which was between the Camp of the Israelites, and that of the Philistins; and notwithstanding they were discover'd by the Enemy, they boldly ventured in the sight of them, to climb up another Rocky Precipice upon their Hands and Feet, before they could come to their Out-guards, whom they fell upon, and at the first Onset kill'd 20 of them; which Action ha∣ving alarm'd all the Camp, and GOD at the same time smiting them with Terror and Confusion, they turn'd their Arms each Man against his Fellow, routing and defeating themselves. The noise of this their Confusion and Dis∣order being heard by the Israelites; Saul made enquiry who was found wanting amongst them: and being told that Jonathan was ab∣absent he soon guessed what had hapned, and thereupon made all the haste he could to pursue the Philistins, and to finish a Victory his Son had so happily and couragiously begun. And to the end he might the better husband this happy opportunity of giving them a total defeat, and being fully avenged of them, he cursed those that should eat any thing until the Evening, The Israelites soon after being come into a Wood, where they found store of Honey, tho' they were very faint for want of Meat, and tir'd with the hard pursuit after the Philistins, yet durst not eat any of it, because of the King's Curse: But Jonathan who knew nothing of what had past, forc'd by extream faintness and weariness, dipt the end of a Rod he had in his Hand into an Honey-Comb; which he had no sooner tasted, but he found himself wonderfully strengthned and refreshed. In the Evening, after they had refreshed and rested themselves a while, Saul made a Proposal of falling again upon the Philistins by Night; but thought it adviseable, before he undertook that Enterprize, to ask Counsel of GOD, as he did, but receiv'd no answer; from whence he concluded, that some one or other of his Army had provok'd the LORD, and swore, that whosoever he was (tho' it were Jonathan himself) he should certainly die. Accordingly he order'd Lots to be cast, and the Lot fell upon Jonathan. Saul seeing his Son taken by the Lot, de∣manded of him what he had done? Jonathan told him, he had only tasted a little Honey, and bemoan'd himself, that for so small a matter he was to die; but Saul with a strange firmness persisted in his Resolution of having his Son put to death, because he had been the means of hindring the total overthrow of the Philistins. But the People, who were extreamly pleas'd with this Heroick Undertaking of Jonathan, swore, they would never suffer him to be put to death, by whom GOD had wrought so miraculous a Deliverance for them, and so rescued him from his Father's Hands. This History (say the Fathers) teacheth us, how dangerous a thing it is to taste never so little Honey; that is, the Pleasures of this World; and to let our selves be seduced by the sweetness of them, after the great and mira∣culous Victories we have obtain'd against the Devils, who are here represented by the Phili∣stins. This Honey (saith St. Ambrose) pleaseth us for the present, but at last brings Death with it, as Jonathan would have found by sad Experi∣ence, if the greatness of his former Actions had not been sufficient to obtain his Pardon.
AGAG SPARED. Saul (contrary to GOD's Command) spares Agag. GOD (by Samuel) denounces his Anger against him. Samuel himself kills Agag. THE Sins of the Amalekites being mounted to their Zenith, GOD (by the Mouth of Samuel) com∣mande Saul utterly to de∣destroy and exterminate that Nation,Anno Mundi 2930. before Christ 1074. sparing neither Man, Woman, or Child, together with all their Herds and Cattle, without saving any thing that did belong to them. Saul having received this Command, marcheth against that Idolatrous People with an Army of 200000 Men. But instead of simply obeying this ex∣press Command of GOD, he put an interpre∣tation upon it suitable to his Humour and Inclination; for he gave way to the sparing of Agag King of the Amalekites, and the best and choicest of their Flocks and Cattle; but every thing that was vile and refuse, that they utterly destroy'd, and cut off all the People with the Edge of their Sword. GOD being provoked with this rash and presumptuous Disobedience of Saul to his express Command, order'd Samuel to go and declare to him in his Name, That it repented him that he had elevated him to be King over his People. At this Command of the LORD's, Samuel was grieved, and cried to the LOD all Night; but early in the Morning he went to meet Saul, who was gone to Gilgal, to acquit himself of the Charge GOD had laid upon him; and was inform'd, that Saul had caused a Triumphal Arch to be erected for his late Victory, the Glory whereof he had sullied and obscured by his Disobedience and Rebellion. Saul having understood, that Samuel was coming towards him, went to meet him; and after Salutation, told him, That he had per∣form'd the Commandment of the LORD: But Samuel replying, ask'd him, What meant then the bleating of Sheep, and the lowing of Oxen, which he heard? Saul answer'd him, That the People had spared the best of the Flock and Cattle, for to offer them in Sacrifice unto the LORD. But that holy Prophet, enflam'd with a Di∣vine Zeal, represented to that proud Prince, his former low Estate, and the Favour and Bounty of GOD towards him, in raising him to that high pitch of Sovereign Honour and Dignity; and how, notwithstanding all this, he had (for to serve a base Interest, and to comply with the People) ventur'd to disobey an express and plain Command of GOD. He told him, what aversion the LORD had for such Sacrifices; that an humble and resign'd Obedience was the thing he above all others requir'd of Man, as highly preferable before all Victims and Offerings; That Disobedience was like the Sin of Idolatry, because he that follows his own Will, sets himself up for a God: And in conclusion assured him, that GOD had rejected him, and taken his King∣dom from him. Saul being touch'd at these Words, confest his Sin; tho' this his Confession has always been look'd upon as a Figure of false and hy∣pocritical Repentance, which is so far from effacing Sin, that it encreases it, and stirs up the Anger of GOD, rather than his Mercy. For this Prince, to shew how little he was con∣cern'd at GOD's Anger, desired only this Favour of Samuel, that at least he would honour him before the People. Thus his Am∣bition made it appear, how just it was with GOD, not to mind his Hypocritical Confession; for he who minds the Heart, found that of Saul, fill'd with a passionate desire to be honoured of Men. Samuel, after all this, commanded Agag (King of the Amalekites) to be brought before him; and being push'd on by a faithful Zeal, to execute the Orders GOD had given, he himself hew'd Agag in pieces before the LORD in Gilgal; thus by a holy and com∣mendable severity killing him, who had been the ruin of Saul, by the false Compassion he had for him. Saint Ambrose saith, That this memorable Example ought to teach the Pastors of the Church, not to make use of a cruel Pity, and perverse Tenderness, in sparing the Sins of those who are committed to their Charge, here represented by the Amalekites; but rather to imitate Samuel, who without doubt had a greater share of Charity than Saul, but who at the same time also was too clear-sighted not to know, that in flattering Sins by too much Indulgence, we destroy Sinners; and on the con∣trary save them, by healing the Wounds Sins have given them, by the sharp Remedy of severe and earnest Repentance.
83 Sr. William Thomson Knight, their Majestyes Sergeant at La. only Son & heyr of Henry Thomson of Kollin hall near Rippon in yorkshire Gent. by Elizabeth daughter & coheyr of Sr. Henry Blencow of Blencow in Cumberland Knight. For Advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
84 Mary Lady Thomson. Wife of Sr. William Thomson Knight. Sergeant at Law to their Majestys King William and Queen Mary. For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
DAVID PLAYS ON THE HARP. Saul being rejected by GOD, is troubled with an Evil Spirit. He sends for David to play on his Harp; who by his Harmony causes the Evil Spirit to depart from him. SAUL being rejected of GOD for his Dis∣obedience, GOD made choice of a∣nother King to govern his People,Anno Mundi 2943. before Christ 1070. David being about 15 years of Age, and Samuel 85. and sent Samuel to anoint him; and when that holy Prophet represent∣ed to the LORD, that in so doing he should extreamly enrage Saul, and expose himself to the hazard of being kil∣led by him; the LORD was pleased to put him into a way so to carry the matter, as Saul might know nothing of it. He bade him to take a Heifer with him, and go to Bethlehem, and offer Sacrifice there, making that the pre∣text of his coming▪ and that he should call Jesse to the Sacrifice, one of whose Sons he had pitch'd upon to be King over Israel. Samuel in obedience to this Command be∣ing come to Bethlehem, invites Jesse and his Sons to the Sacrifice, and afterwards to feast with him. Jesse being come to the Feast with his seven Sons, Samuel look'd upon them one by one, as supposing that one of them was to be King over Israel instead of Saul. But that holy Man soon found, that GOD sees not as Man sees, nor judges according to outward appearance, but eyes the Heart. For Samuel seeing Eliah (the eldest of Jesse's Sons) a tall Man and of a comely proportion, he concluded in himself, that he was the Man that was to be King over Israel, but GOD soon informed him otherwise. At last, when amongst those seven Sons of Jesse, he fail'd to find the Man he was to a∣noint, he demanded of Jesse, whether those were all the Children he had? who told him, he had one more, that was the youngest of them all, who kept his Sheep in the Field. Samuel wish'd him immediately to send for him, telling him, he would not sit down to eat till he was come. As soon as David was come, the LORD told Samuel, he was the Person he had cho∣sen; whereupon he took an Horn of Oil and anointed him in the midst of his Brethren, and from that time forward, the Spirit of the LORD came upon David, and departed from Saul. This deplorable Prince being abandon'd by the Spirit of GOD, became immediately seiz'd by an Evil Spirit, which cast him into furious Transports, and cruelly tormented him. This Accident, which was a just pu∣nishment of this ingrateful and disobedient King, and a sign that ere long he would be devested of the Royal Authority, prov'd the beginning of David's Elevation: For Saul being tormented with the furious Agitations of the Evil Spirit, his Courtiers and Officers advis'd him to look out for a Man that was skilful in playing on the Harp, that the Evil Spirit being forc'd to retire at the sweetness of that Harmony, he might be refreshed and come to himself again. Enquiry being made for a Person so quali∣fied, none was found more expert in that Art than David: and was besides of so beautiful an Aspect, that as soon as Saul had seen him, and felt the powerful effects of his charming Skill, in driving away the Evil Spirit that tormented him, he conceiv'd a great love for him, and preferr'd him to the place of being his Armour-bearer. The Fathers look upon this History as an ad∣mirable and lively Figure, representing to us how the true Ministers of the Church, pointed out by David, ought by the sweetness and energy of their Words and spiritual Discourses, to calm the Souls that are tost and agitated by the vio∣lent Whirlwinds of Passion. St. Gregory observes, that David some years after this stood in need of the same help from Nathan the Prophet (in delivering him from the tyranny of the Devil and Sin, by his divine and spiritual Remonstrances) which he had only figuratively afforded Saul, in giving him a short and unstable satisfaction and refresh∣ment by his sweet and harmonious touching of the Harp; which however powerful and charm∣ing it might be, yet was not able to dissipate the black design he had conceived to murther David, to whom he was so much obliged. The Psalms of this holy King and Prophet, are at this day of greater efficacy and energy than his excelling Harmony then was: and spiritual and well-disposed Souls, find them a never-failing help on all occasions, For (as St. Austin well observes) nothing can be more power∣ful and charming than the Psalms of David, and that Divine Harmony they convey to the open and well purged Ear; or more powerful to chase Evil Spirits, and attract the Holy Spirit of God.
GOLIAH SLAIN. David kills Goliah the Philistin, a Giant of a prodigious Bulk, with a Sling. SAUL waging War against the Philistins, and their Armies being encamped near to one another, Goliah (a Phi∣listin of a monstrous big∣ness of Body,Anno Mundi 2942. before Christ 1062. David being about 23 years of Age. and corre∣sponding Pride and Inso∣lence) came for forty days together, insulting over the Israelites, and challenging them to send forth a Man to fight with him; telling them, it was better thus to finish their Quar∣rel by a single Combat, than to hazard both the Armies (and that if he should chance to be overcome, the Philistins would submit to them and be their Servants; as (on the con∣trary) if he should have the better, the Isra∣elites must be theirs. But such was the vast∣ness of the Body of this Giant, and his Arms and Warlike Accoutrements so terrible, that the hardiest of the whole Army of Israel durst not take him up, and enter the Lists with him. It was at the same time, that Jesse sent his Son David to his three Brothers that were in Sul's Army, to bring them some Provisions. As soon as he was come into the Camp, he saw this proud Giant, and finding himself powerfully animated and stirr'd up with Zeal for the Glory of GOD, he demanded of those he met with, what would be the Reward of him who should undertake to fight and kill that prophane and proud Philistin, who had taken upon him to defie the Armies of the living GOD? Who told him, that Saul, be∣sides the Royal Presents and Immunities he would bestow upon him that should kill the Giant, would give him his Daughter to Wife. But his Brethren hearing him talk at this rate, reproached him for the Pride and Vani∣ty of his Heart, and bade him, go look after his Sheep, which he had expos'd to the rave∣nous Beasts of the Wilderness, only to please his vain Curiosity to see the Battel. But Da∣vid finding in himself very different Motions from those of human Pride and Presumption, and inflam'd with a Divine Zeal, declar'd him∣self openly in the Army, that he was ready to fight that proud Philistin, whom he did not fear at all. As David was talking at this rate with extraordinary Zeal and Resolution, several of the Army minding his Words and man∣ner of Expression, brought him before Saul, who comparing David (that was but a Strip∣ling) with the bulk and strength of the Giant, would never have consented that he should hazard himself in so unequal a Combat, and under such seeming insuperable disadvantages; but that David told him, that he had already kill'd a Bear and a Lion that came to devour his Sheep, and that he question'd not at all, but that the great and glorious GOD, who had deliver'd him from the Paws of the Bear and Lion, would deliver him out of the hand of that uncircumcised Philistin. Saul overcome by the force of David's Ar∣gument, agreed to let him undertake the Com∣bat, girding him with his own Sword, and putting his Armour upon him; but David finding himself cumbred with the weight of these Arms, quit them all; and betook him∣self to his accustomed defence of a Staff and Sling. Goliah seeing him draw near in this Equipage, was enraged to see himself so ser∣ved, and ask'd him, Whether he took him for a Dog, that he came to fight him with a Staff and Sling, threatning, he would give his Flesh to the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Field: But David boldly answering him in the Name of his GOD, ran to meet him, and having put a Stone into his Sling, he fixed it in the Philistin's Forehead, who fell upon his Face to the Ground, and then ran and stood upon the Philistin, and cut off his Head with his own Sword. The Philistins terrified at the death of their Champion, took their Flight, and the Israelites pursuing after them, gave them a great overthrow, and returning spoil∣ed their Tents. This Victory is an admirable Figure of the Victory which the meek and humble Jesus has obtain'd against the Angel of Pride. The Fa∣thers have also consider'd this Philistin as the Image of Pride, which is the Enemy the People of GOD ought to fear above all others, yea, tho' they have already overcome Bears and Li∣ons, that is the strongest Lusts. They have also taken notice, that this Enemy cannot be over∣come with any human Arms, but with a Staff, which is a Figure of the Cross of Jesus Christ; and a Stone, which is an Emblem of the firm∣ness and Omnipotence of Faith.
85 James Craggs of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields in Middlesex Gentleman For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
86 Sr. Thomas Mompesson of Bathampton in the County of Wilts Knight For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
DAVID's TRIUMPH. David having killed Goliah, the Jewish Women came forth to meet Saul and David, with Singing and Dancing, and Instruments of Musick. THE Joy and Surprize of the Jews at the defeat of Goliah was such, that they could not sufficiently ad∣mire,The same year 2943. neither the danger from which they saw themselves so happily deliver'd, nor the Courage of him who had been the blessed Instrument thereof. King Saul began to enquire more particularly who this wonderful Youth was; who was his Fa∣ther, and to what Family in Israel he be∣longed; Jonathan the Son of Saul, who had himself exploited such glorious Actions against the Philistins, was so far from bearing a base En∣vy to this wonderful Stranger, who by this one Victory had dim'd the Lustre of all his most Heroick Actions, that on the contrary he con∣ceived the greatest Affection for him, and lov'd him as his own Soul; and as a mark of his entire and unparallel'd Love, he stript himself of his own Robe, Arms, and Ornaments, and put them upon David his Friend. Neither were the People wanting to express the admiration and high esteem they had for David; for as he return'd from the defeat of Goliah, carrying his Head in one Hand, and his Sword in the other, the Women of Israel came forth in multitudes to meet him, and honour his Triumph with Singing and Dan∣cing, and all Instruments of Musick, repre∣senting to us (by these transports of their Joy) those Praises which the Churches represented to us by these Jewish Women, should one day give unto the LORD Jesus Christ, to honour his Victory and Triumph over the Devil. Nevertheless this Triumph (which was but a just acknowledgment of the Salvation David had wrought for all Israel) was the beginning of his Sufferings, and had lik'd to have prov'd fatal to him, if by his Prudence and GOD's Care over him, it had not been prevented. For the Women in their Songs of Joy declaring, That Saul had kill'd his Thousands, but David his Ten thousands, did so irritate and provoke that proud Prince, and so possest him with Jea∣lousie, that instead of imitating the generous Motions of his Son Jonathan, he abandon'd himself to cruel Envy, which made him ever after to look upon David with extream ha∣tred and malice, whom till then he had con∣sider'd as the only Person in his Kingdom, that deserv'd his Affection most, and to whom he (in some sort) ow'd his Crown. He complain'd highly of the bold Impertinence of his Sub∣jects, who attributed only the defeat of Thou∣sands to him, at the same time when they ex∣toll'd David for having slain his Ten Thousands: and the trouble and disorder that this Passion engaged him in from that time forwards to the day of his Death, may serve as an excel∣lent Lesson to all the World, but more espe∣cially to those who have Authority in the Church, that they ought to fear nothing more than Envy, tho' unhappy Experience makes it appear every day, (as S. Chrysostom observes) That as nothing is more ordinary in the World, so it is also frequently found in the Church of Jesus Christ. The more that Men of large Hearts, and ge∣nerous unbiast Spirits signalize themselves, and shine forth in great and glorious Graces and Acti∣ons, the less can we endure them; and the lustre of their Virtues scorches some, at the same time that it enlightens and cherisheth others. Men are apt to look upon these brave Souls as their Ene∣mies, and endeavour to destroy and ruin them for no other Crime, but their being guilty of none, and for living irreproachably in the World. But great reason have such as these to com∣fort themselves in the unjust Persecutions of their Adversaries, forasmuch as they not only have the Approbation of all good and pious Men, who not being blinded or biast by Passion, judge of things as they are in themselves, and accord∣ing to their just value: but also the favour and good will of GOD, who is the Patron and Pro∣tector of vertuous and gracious Souls; and who at the same time that they meet with envious haters and persecutors, does highly exalt them in the esteem of others, who honour Vertue where∣soever they meet with it, and respect it by so much the more, as it is persecuted and oppressed by the Wicked and Ungodly; as knowing that GOD will in his due time, sooner or later, crown all those that suffer for Righteousness sake.
Saul designs the Death of David. Saul full of Malice against David, throws a Javelin at him, as he was playing before him on his Harp. SAUL's Envy against David encreasing daily, he thought of nothing more now, than how he might best rid himself of a Person,Anno Mundi 2943. who was a continual Eye-sore to him: As David (on the other hand) who was very sensible of his designs, was not wanting to make use of all his Prudence, to avoid the Snares which that Prince laid for him. On a time when the Evil Spirit from the LORD was upon Saul, and David playing on his Harp before him, he with all his might threw a Javelin at him, with design to have struck him fast to the Wall; but David, who was always upon his guard, or rather, who had the LORD always watching over him, e∣scap'd the blow and fled. Saul seeing himself disappointed of his Aim, apply'd himself to other ways of contriving his ruin. He was oblig'd by his Promise to give his Daughter to David, as a Reward of his having kill'd Goliah; but his Envy and Hatred made him to neglect his Promise, and bestow his eldest Daughter Merab upon another. However (sometime after) being inform'd that Michal his second Daughter loved David, he was very well pleased with it, and told Da∣vid, that tho' indeed he had married his eldest Daughter to another, yet he had not so forgot his Promise, as not to intend still to make him his Son: Which Proposal David receiv∣ed with a great deal of submission and humi∣lity, representing his mean Condition, and how unworthy he was to be the King's Son-in-law. But Saul, who aim'd at nothing in this Pro∣posal of a Marriage betwixt David and his Daughter, but to have a fair opportunity to make away with him, told David, That he was very well satisfied of his worth, and that he would not have him think of providing a Dowry for his Daughter, who had enough: only if he would be pleased to express the Re∣gard he had for his Sovereign, and the Love he had for his Mistress, by presenting him with an hundred Foreskins of the Philistins, it would a∣bundantly satisfie him, and should be all the Dow∣ry he would require of him. David, tho' he was not so stupid, as not to perceive, that all this was levell'd only at his ruin, accepted of the Condition very readily, and making an excursion with his Regiment upon the Philistins, kill'd 200 of them, and deliver'd their Fore-skins to the King, being double the number he had requir'd of him; and thereupon was married to Michal his Daughter. Saul in the mean time perceiving that what∣ever he design'd for David's ruin and destru∣ction, turn'd to his great glory and advan∣tage, was strangely enraged, and endeavour'd again to strike him through with his Javelin, as he was playing before him: but David happily avoided the stroke and fled, as before. Jonathan seeing his Father thus vehemently bent to kill David, did his utmost endeavour by soft Perswasives and moving Arguments, to change the Heart of his Father towards him, but all in vain; for not long after, nothing being able to satisfie his Rage but David's Death, he sent armed Men to beset his House in the Night, in order to kill him the next Morning; but Michal his Wife, who loved him as well as her Father hated him, let him down through a Window, to make his escape; and when the Men came that Saul had sent to kill him, they found nothing in his Bed, but an Image Michal had laid there to deceive them, and give David time to get so far out of Town, that they might not be able to o∣vertake him. David having escaped this Danger, came to Samuel, who upon his coming retired to Naioth, where they dwelt together. But Saul being inform'd, that David was got to Sa∣muel, sent Messengers to fetch him thence; who as soon as they came amongst the Pro∣phets that were with Samuel, the Spirit of the LORD came upon them, and they prophesied. Saul wondring that none of the Officers he had sent to take David, return'd to give him any account of the matter he had charg'd them with, was resolv'd to go and see what might be the reason of it, and to do that himself which his Officers had been backward or neg∣ligent in; but he also no sooner came amongst the Prophets, but he prophesied likewise, and so return'd without harming David. Saul made it appear, by the frustration of all his designs against David, that the most powerful Men in the World can no farther make use of their Power, than as GOD permits, who when he pleases sets bounds to ther Violence, and stops them in the midst of their furious Ca∣reer, and with a wonderful facility delivers those he has a mind to save, from the hands of Men, either by making them love those he favours, as Jonathan, or unable to hurt them, as Saul.
87 Robert Baker of Birchden in the Parish of Rotherfield in the County of sussex Esq▪ For advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
88 Peter Birch DD. Chaplaine in ordinary to their Maiestyes, and Prebendary of St. Peters Westminster. For ye Advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
DAVID AND JONATHAN. Jonathan perceiving the obstinate hatred of his Father Saul against David, advises him to retire from the Court. JONATHAN, who with great grief per∣ceiv'd his Fathers bitterness against David, but however hoped, that Time and his Absence might allay it,Anno Mundi 2944. and inspire him with milder thoughts, advised David not to think of leav∣ing the Court for good and all, till he had better sounded his Fathers inclinations to∣wards him. To this end it was agreed between them, that David should absent himself from the Kings Table, on the Feast of the New Moon, at which time all his Officers did use to Dine with him; when Saul seeing Davids place empty, would not fail to enquire for him, and by his Carriage would give them suffici∣ent notice, how he stood affected towards him. Which hapned accordingly, for Saul (up∣on Davids absence from the Feast) was trans∣ported into such a Rage, that Jonathan could not but conclude, that he had formed a reso∣lution to kill him: Whereupon he went and informed David of all that had past, and ad∣vised him to escape for his Life; and so those dear Friends, after they had sworn a perpe∣tual Amity to one another, parted, Jonathan returning to the City: But David finding himself in this desolate condition, went to Nob, to Ahimelech the High Priest, and told him, that the King having charged him with some urgent Affair, he was oblig'd to depart in so great haste, that he had no time to take necessary Provisions with him, and therefore desired him to give him a few Laves for himself and his Company. Ahimelech having no other Bread at hand, but the Shew-Bread consecrated to the LORD, gave him as many of them as he desired, and bestowed upon him also the Sword of Goliah; but this Kindness of his cost him his Life; for Doeg the Edomite, one of Sauls Officers, who had seen David with Ahimelech, took occasion to tell Saul, as he was complaining, that not only all his Subjects, but even his Son Jonathan also, favoured David his Ene∣my; how Ahimelech had entertained▪ David, whereby he gave occasion to Saul, to make his Memory execrable throughout all Ages, by an unheard of Cruelty and Sacriledge; for having sent for Ahimelech the High Priest, who fully justified himself, by protesting, that he knew nothing of any Enmity there was be∣tween the King and his Son-in-Law; but the justice of his Defence was not able to rescue him from Saul's fury, who commanded him to be killed, which was accordingly perform'd by Doeg the Edomite, who besides Ahimelech, slew fourscore and five Priests of the LORD. David in the mean time (to secure himself from Saul's fury) put himself under the Pro∣tection of Achish King of Gath, where the Fame and Reputation of his former great Actions had like to have been the cause of his Death; for being told by his Officers, that the Person he so kindly entertain'd was Da∣vid, who had atchieved so great things against his Subjects, was resolv'd to kill him, if Da∣vid by feigning himself Mad, had not escaped the Danger: So that this appearing folly of David was indeed a most refined piece of Wis∣dom, whereby he sav'd himself from the im∣minent danger of Death that threatned him. The Fathers in this respect have considered David as a Figure of Jesus Christ, whose Life and Death seems to Worldly Eyes nothing but meer Foolishness; and Christians also (in imi∣tation of their LORD and Master) have not been ashamed to appear Fools to the Eyes of Men, when yet they were acted by the Wisdom of GOD; as knowing that the Folly the World accus'd them of, was the true Wisdom; and that the Wisdom of the World, was the height and top of all Folly. The horrid and execrable Cruelty of Saul in murthering Ahimelech the High Priest, with all his Family, and all the Priests of Nob, toge∣ther with their Wives and Children, their Flocks and Cattel, is a pregnant instance of the terrible condition of those Men who for their Sins are deprived of the Spirit of GOD, and instead thereof are wholly acted and guided by the Evil Spirit, who is a Murtherer from the beginning; for such as these being depriv'd of the restraining Grace of GOD, fall from one Sin to another, and proceed from one abomina∣tion to a greater, till they fill up the Measure of their Iniquity, and till the Earth be no lon∣ger able to bear them, and they become a bur∣then to themselves; as we find it hapned to this wicked King, who was always a torment to himself, and terror to others, and who at length forsaken of GOD and Men, desperately became his own Executioner, inflicting a just punish∣ment upon himself, for having so unjustly in∣flicted Punishments upon others.
ABIGAIL ENTERTAINS DAVID. Abigal the Wife of Nabal, by her kind and discreet Behaviour, appeaseth David's Anger. THE life David was fain to lead, after that Saul had declar'd him his Enemy' was very sad and deplo∣rable,Anno Mundi 2945· before Christ 1059. being forc'd to flee from one Mountain to another, and from one Cave to another to hide himself, still finding every where those that were ready to betray him; to the end, that being by all these Toils and Troubles prepared, he might be af∣terwards the fitter to wear a Crown, and more humble than Saul, who without any forego∣ing sufferings or hardships had been exalted to that Royal Dignity. One of the greatest Troubles David found in this his Vagabond state, was the care that lay upon him to provide for the six Hundred Men that always accompanied him: Where∣fore having lately escaped the hands of the Ziphites, who intended to betray him to Saul, he thought of providing some Refreshments for himself and his Men, who had been mi∣serably harassed with Marches and Countermar∣ches for many days together; and to this end, sent ten Men to Nabal, a rich and wealthy Man, but of a bruitish and insup∣portable Temper;Anno Mundi. 2947. being the year wherein Samuel died▪ being near 100 years of Age. who having represented to him (in the name of their Master,) that all the while that he and his Men had been in his Neighbourhood, they were so far from doing any hurt, that they had been a guard and de∣fence to his Servants, Shepherds, and Herds∣men, and therefore desired him (at this good and Festival time of his Sheep-shearing) to send him and his Men some Refreshments as he should see good. Nabal having heard this Proposal made to him in the Name of David, answered them very insolently, That he knew not who this David was they talked of; but that he knew there were abundance of Fugitive Servants a∣broad, who being run from their Masters, would ain have their Extravagance supplied by the sweat and labour of other Men; and that for his part they must expect nothing from him upon such an account. David being inform'd of Nabal's Reply, was seiz'd with a strange Indignation, at this insup∣portable Affront, and immediately having girt his Sword about him, commanded four hun∣dred of his Men to follow him, with a forward resolution to kill him and all his Family. But Abigail, Nabal's Wife, a Woman of an excellent Beauty and Temper, and who was as wise as her Husband was brutish and stupid, being inform'd by one of her Servants, what an unworthy reception her Husband had given to David's Men, made haste to go and meet him, and addressed her self to him with so much submission and prudence, that her Behaviour, and the Presents wherewith she backed her Discourse, did allay and calm Da∣vid's Anger, and made him seriously to reflect upon the horror of the Fact he was then go∣ing to commit, had he not been happily stopt, by means of this incomparable Woman. Abigail having thus obtain'd her Request of David, according to her hearts desire, and having overcome him, whom his Enemies ne∣ver could, return'd to her House with Joy and Satisfaction; but made no mention at all to her Husband of what had past, because she found him wholly overcome with Drink, ha∣ving kept a great Feast that day upon the account of his Sheep-shearing; wherefore she resolv'd not to communicate the thing to him till Morning; at which time Nabal under∣standing the danger he had exposed himself to, and all his Family, by his brutish Chur∣lishness, was seized with so great a fright and amazement, that ten days after he was struck with Death by a Judgment from GOD, who avenged David more innocently, than he could ever have avenged himself. David being inform'd of Nabal's Death, sent some of his Men to acquaint Abigail with the design he had to take her to Wife; to which her Modesty resisted for some time, as judging her self unworthy of that honour; but this resistance of hers serv'd only to make it appear, that she now deserv'd that for her Humility and Modesty, which before she had merited by her Wisdom and Prudence; and thus she became the Wife of a Prince, in the appeasing of whose Anger, she had a while before set us an excellent Pattern, How we ought to endeavour with Humility, sweetness, and submission, to calm and appease the Anger of Kings, even tho' it be unjust; as David (on the other hand) in letting fall his Anger upon the Remonstrance of a Woman, is a great Ex∣ample for Princes, not to think it their glory to accomplish their violent Resolutions, or sup∣pose it unworthy for Crowned Heads to give way to Reason, or to break a design, to which they have been hurried on by violent Passion.
89 The Honourable the Lady Mary Goodricke of Great Ribston in yorke shire, For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
90 Anthony segar of Tyford in Hantshire Gentleman▪ For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate▪
DAVID SPARES SAUL. GOD delivers Saul into Davids hands, who notwithstanding does him no harm, only contents himself to take away his Spear and Cruse. SAUL persecuted David with that violence, that to compass his ruin, he rais'd the Forces of his Kingdom,The same year 2947. before Christ 1057. and coming to the Wil∣derness of Ziph, where he had heard that Da∣vid was, encamped himself there with a re∣solution to take him, whatsoever it might cost, his Envy representing him as the worst and most formidable of all his Enemies. David in the mean time, having sent out his Spies, who brought him an account, that Saul himself was in the Camp, he thereupon went himself and took a View of Saul's Ar∣my, and the place of his and Abner's Tent; which after he had well observ'd, taking A∣bishai (Joab's Brother▪) along with him, he came down to the Camp, and found Saul and Abner, Saul's General, together with all his Officers and Soldiers, in a deep sleep, as be∣ing in pursuit of an Enemy, from whose hands they feared nothing, thô David at the same time had great reason to fear all from theirs. Abishai seeing so favourable an opportunity offered, for David to rid himself at once of all his Troubles, and to set the Crown upon his own Head, earnestly entreated him to give him leave to kill Saul, whom GOD had so providentially delivered into his hands; but David respecting in his Enemy the holy Oint∣ment, wherewith he had been Anointed King over Israel, by special Command from the LORD, would not suffer Abishai to touch him; contenting himself to take away his Spear and Cruse of Water, that stood at his Beds-head as he lay asleep. This done, David being return'd to his Men, called with a loud Voice to Abner, the Captain of Saul's Guards, and reproached to him and the whole Army their negligence in keeping their King; telling them, they had deserved to be punish'd with Death for this their Carelesness; and at the same time shew∣ed them the Kings Spear he had taken from his Beds-side, whilst they slept. Saul awaking with the Noise, and hearing David's Voice, called him his Son, and spake to him with a great deal of seeming Tenderness. Where∣upon David took occasion (with the greatest submission) to demand of Saul, wherefore he pursued one of his faithful Servants, with so much Animosity and Violence? He represen∣ted to him the Innocence of his Behaviour to∣wards him, telling him, that if the LORD had stir'd him up against him, he should hope to appease him with an Offering; but if they were Men that provok'd him to this persecu∣tion and pursuing of him, whereby he was driven from the LORD's Inheritance and his Sanctuary, that they were accurst for so doing. Saul had nothing to answer to these just Complaints of David, but openly confessed his Sin in what he had done, and acknow∣ledged his Folly; assuring him, that he might return to his home when he pleased, for that he was resolved never more to seek after him, to do him any harm. David hereupon shew∣ed the King his Spear, and desired him to send some one to fetch it; concluding with this wish, that GOD (who renders to every one according to his Works) would be pleased to let his Life be as precious in his Eyes, as the Life of Saul had been in his, whom he had spared, when GOD delivered him into his hands; and that in his due time he would be pleas'd to deliver him from all his Tribula∣tions. All the Fathers highly commend and extol this extraordinary goodness and sweet temper of Da∣vid. S. Ambrose is wrapt in Admiration to see a Man, who with one blow could rid himself of a mor∣tal Enemy, secure his own Life, and gain a Crown, insisting all the strong Reasons of his friend to do it, especially considering, that he might have done it without being perceived by any, and choosing ra∣ther to continue in daily trouble and jeopardy of his Life, than to procure his Ease at that rate. And that which doubles the glory of this Action is, that David could not expect from Saul the least Acknowledgment for this his strange and astonishing Kindness, as having but a little while before had a pregnant instance hereof, when coming upon Saul unawares, and without being perceived by him, he cut off the Skirt of his Robe, without doing him any fur∣ther harm, when it was in his power to kill him. For thô Saul at that time owned David's Gene∣rosity and Innocence, the evidence of Fact for∣cing that Confession from him for the present, yet soon after he return'd again to his wonted heat and eagerness, in pursuing of him, and thirsting af∣ter his Blood.
David flies for Refuge to King Achish. The Amalekites spoil and burn Ziklag, in the absence of David; who being in∣form'd what had past, overtakes, routs them, and recovers the Spoil. DAVID perceiving that the hatred Saul had conceiv'd against him, was irre∣concilable,Anno Mundi 2949· before Christ 1055. resolved to provide for his security by retiring out of his Dominions, and accor∣dingly went with the 600 Men that were with him, to Achish King of Gath, who very kind∣ly received him, and at his request frankly be∣stowed upon him the City Ziklag. But this kindness of Achish had like to have brought David into great Trouble; for the Philistins at the same time designing a War against Saul, Achish would needs engage David to accompa∣ny him in that Expedition, and to fight for the Philistins against his own Prince and People. But GOD, who with his favour and good will always accompanied David, by a happy Ac∣cident deliver'd him from the perplexing trou∣ble of being forc't, either to take Arms and fight against his own Countrymen the Jews; or in case of his Refusal, to fall a Victim to the rage of Achish; for the LORDS and great Men amongst the Philistins, fearing that David being a Jew, might in the Fight take occasion to betray them, or at least to run over to the Enemy, and thereby dishearten their Army, desired Achish to make him return to Ziklag. But Achish had entertain'd so good an opi∣nion of David, that he excused him to the LORDS of the Philistins; assuring them, that now for some years he had experience of his Faithfulness, and that they had no reason to fear any such Treachery by him; but the LORDS persisting in their former Resolution, oblig'd Achish to desire David to return, who dismist him with very high Commendations, and Assurances of the good Opinion he had of him, and that he was troubled, to see that his LORDS without any reason did dis∣gust and suspect him. This perplexity being overpast, another ac∣cident hapned upon the neck of it, which cau∣sed a most sensible Sorrow and Affliction to David, and all that were with him: For when they were come to Ziklag, they found the City burnt with Fire, and all their Wives and Children, and all that they had, carried away by the Amalekites. David and his Men being equally sharers in this sad Misfortune, were overwhelmed with grief and sorrow, weeping and lamenting till they were able to weep no longer; and, to increase David's di∣stress, the Men that were with him, in the des∣pair and bitterness of their Spirits, for the valu∣able loss they had sustained, spake of stoning him, as if he had been the cause of this Disaster. Yet notwithstanding all this David was not cast down, but comforting himself in the LORD his GOD, who had so frequently and so mi∣raculously deliver'd him from so many immi∣nent Dangers, he took courage, and calling to Abiathur the High Priest, to bring the Ephod to him, he enquired of the LORD, whether he should pursue the Amalekites? and if so, whether he should overtake and conquer them? The Divine Oracle having assur'd David of good success, he marches in pursuit of them with all his Men; but 200 of them were so faint, for want of Refresh∣ment, being tired with continual marching, and cast down with sorrow, that David was fain to leave them by the way, the other 400 following him, in hopes to overtake those Robbers. On their way they happily lighted on an Egyptian, the Amalekites had left behind them, being one of their Servants, who in∣formed David which way the Amalekites were gone, and guided him to the place where they were spread abroad upon the ground, eating, drinking, and dancing, because of the great Spoil they had taken out of the Land of the Philistins, and out of the Land of Judah. So David and his Men fell upon them, and killed every Man of them, except 400 young Men, who fled upon Camels and made their escape; and took all the Spoil they had ta∣ken, so that nothing was wanting to any of them, of all they had left in Ziklag; over and above which, they took a great Booty from them, which they had plundered elsewhere. But some of Davids Men being unwilling to let the 200 Men that staid behind, share with them of their Spoils, David reproved them, and told them, That it was all the reason in the World, that those who kept the Baggage, should share alike with those that went to Fight. Which Example may be a comfort to those that are weak and feeble in the Church of GOD; be∣cause as long as they continue living Members of that Body, they share and partake of the Graces and Advantages of all the other Members, as being all of them but one Body under Christ their Head.
91 Robert Squib of St. Margarets Westminster in Middlesex Esq. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
92 The Right Honourable Sr. Henry Goodricke, Leiutenant Generall of their Majesties ordenance, and one of the Lords of their most Honourable Privy Councell. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
Saul and Ionathans Defeat and Death. Saul's Army is defeated: Three of his Sons are slain in the Battle, and being sorely wounded he falls upon his own Sword, and kills himself. IT prov'd well for David, that the Lords of the Philistins would not suffer him to go along with them to fight against Israel,The same Year 2949. two years after the Death of Samuel. be∣cause Saul and his Sons being to fall in that Fight, he might other∣wise have been lookt upon as a Complice of the Philistins, and Accessory to their Death, and particularly to Jonathan's, whom he loved so dearly. This unhappy King being forsaken by the Spirit of GOD, was seiz'd with a presaging Fear and Trembling at the approach of the Philistins Army, and having several ways en∣quir'd of the LORD concerning the Event of the Battel, without receiving any Answer, he as one mad and desperate, addresses himself to the Devil, for that which he found he could not obtain from GOD; and notwithstanding the severe Laws he had made against Witches, went himself now to consult them. On this design, having disguis'd himself, he goes (being accompanied only by two of his Servants) by Night to a Witch, and prays her to raise up Samuel before him. But the Witch (at the appearance of Samuel) perceiving that it was King Saul, who was come to her in that disguise, and not doubting but that he was come on purpose to betray her, and have an occasion to condemn her in conformity to the Law he had made against those of her wicked Profession, was sorely affrighted; but being assured by Sauls Protestations to the contrary, she proceeded to gratifie his desire. Saul having enquir'd of her the Habit and Form of the Person she had rais'd, and being told by the Witch, that he was an Old Man cover'd with a Mantle, perceived that it was Samuel, and bowed himself with his face to the ground. But Samuel with a dreadful Voice asked Saul, why he had disquieted him, and raised him by Magick Art; seeing the LORD had forsaken him, and was now with David, who was to Reign in his stead? He told him, that this was the very time GOD would fulfil his denunciations against him, rend his King∣dom from him, and deliver him into the hands of the Philistins, and that the next day he and his Sons should be with him. Samuel at these words disappeared, and Saul struck with the horror of this denuncia∣tion, and the terrors of a guilty Conscience, fell down flat to the ground. The Woman seeing him in this condition, desired him to get up and refresh himself by eating a bit of Meat; but Saul (notwithstanding he was faint for want of nourishment, as having fasted all that day, and the night before) refused to eat any thing. The Idea of the Tragical Exit he and his Sons were to make the next day, had already wholly taken up his Spirit, and the time appointed by Samuel hastning upon him, he carried to the Battel a Heart assur'd of a certain defeat. In fine, his Troops were cut in pieces, his Sons killed, and him∣self expecting Death at every moment, which he knew was inevitable; and having receiv'd several Wounds, desired his Armour-bearer to kill him; which he refusing to do, he fell up∣on his own Sword and killed himself; his Ar∣mour-bearer following his Master's Example. Thus was the end of this unhappy Prince, who for having spared Amalek by an indis∣creet and ungodly Compassion, and without cause murthered so many of the Priests of the LORD, was forced to avenge these Crimes up∣on himself, by falling upon his own Sword: happy had he been, could he either always have continued in a private condition, or con∣stantly practis'd that Humility of which he gave some pregnant Instances at his first ele∣vation to the Throne: But the greatness of his Authority and Power dazled his Eyes, and lif∣ted up his Heart, and by stopping his Ears to the Voice of the LORD, and his Prophets, his fair and promising beginnings terminated in a most tragical End, and has made him a ter∣rible Example to all proud and ungodly Prin∣ces throughout all Ages. This made some of the Fathers say, That Saul in the Old Testament, does much resemble Ju∣das in the New; both of them being at first chosen of GOD, and afterwards rejected, the one for his Pride, the other for his Avarice, they both fell into despair; and may teach the stron∣gest always to tremble and stand in awe, and to be afraid of being raised up to Honour, lest be∣ing lifted up in their Minds, they should lose the Grace of Humility, without which no Man can be acceptable to GOD.
The Philistins offer Sauls Head to their Idol. The Philistins rejoyce for the Death of Saul, and set up his Armour in the Temple of their Idol. David laments his Death, and returning to Judea, is Proclaimed King in Hebron. THE Philistins overjoy'd at the Death of Saul, their great and dreadful Enemy, cut off his Head, and sent it in Triumph through∣out all their Cities,The same year 2949. and set up his Armour in the House of Ashtaroth their Idol, and fast∣ned his Body to the Wall of Beth-shan. In all which they did nothing but what the gene∣rality of Men use to do, who rejoyce at the the Death of those, who in their Life-time have vexed and oppressed them. But David, who was guided by other Prin∣ciples, conceiv'd very different Sentiments on this occasion; for shutting his Eyes to the Good the Death of Saul was like to procure him, as well as to the Fatigues and Troubles it would deliver him from, with an unfeigned Sorrow lamented the Death of Saul and Jona∣than, compos'd an Elegy or Song of Mourning for them, Cursing the Mountains of Gilboa, on which those two Mighty Princes had been unhappily slain. And afterwards having un∣derstood, that the Men of Jabesh-Gilead had by Night taken down the Bodies of Saul and of his Sons from the Walls of Beth-shan, and had solemnly celebrated their Funeral Obse∣quies with Fasting and Lamentation 7 days together, he by an honourable Deputation, testified the high esteem he had for them, for attempting so hazardous an Enterprize, and performing the last duty to the Bodies of their Lord and Sovereign, and his Sons, in Burying of them, assuring them he would never be unmindful of it, and would not fail to re∣ward this their Vertue, and acknowledge it upon all occasions. But the great and inward respect he had for Saul, appeared yet more illustrious on a∣nother occasion; for an Amalekite being come to Ziklag to David, two days after he had defeated the Amalekites, with his Cloaths rent, and Earth upon his Head, gave him an account of the Event of the Battel, and of the Death of Saul and his Sons; and to confirm that what he said was true, he told him, that hapning the same time to be on Mount Gilboa, he saw Saul leaning on the Point of his Spear, with design to run himself through; but seeing the Philistins ready to fall upon him, he desir'd him to kill him, that the Ene∣my might not take him alive, to insult over him; that accordingly in pity to him he had comply'd with his desire, and had brought his Crown to David. David, who found himself pierc'd with a sensible Grief at this Relation, was so far from thinking himself obliged to a Man, who tho' he brought him Saul's Crown, yet at the same time confest that he had contributed to his Death; that rending his Cloaths, he de∣manded of this Amalekite, how he durst be so bold to lay his hand on the Lords Anointed? And at the same time commanded one of his Attendants to kill him; leaving (by this his Behaviour) a great Example to us all, never to rejoice at the Death of our Enemies, or at the Evils that happen to them. After the Death of this miserable Prince, David having first ask'd Counsel of GOD, return'd to Judea, where the Tribe of Judah Proclaimed and Anointed him King in Hebron, when he was about 30 years of Age. Abner in the mean time (who was General of Saul's Army) set up Ishbosheth, Saul's Son, to be King over the other Tribes; but he being 5 years after murthered by two Ruffians, who brought his Head to David as a Present, which they supposed could not choose but be very accep∣table to him, David expresseth no more satis∣faction in the death of the Son, (which entred him into a peaceful possession of the King∣dom of all Israel,) than before he had testi∣fied for the Death of the Father, which put him into possession of the Crown of Judah: And having given the same Reward to these two Villains (who without doubt had already swallowed the hopes of great Treasures and Honours, as a reward for this their Villany) which before he had given to the Amalekite, who brought him the tiding of the Death of Saul and his Crown, he by this repeated Ex∣ample exhibited an illustrious Instance of his unparallel'd generosity and sweetness of Temper and Disposition; Who was so far from insulting over the Misfortune of his Enemies, or to make their Miseries (notwithstanding the great Admantages they procur'd to him) the matter of his Joy and Triumph, that on the con∣trary he heartily lamented and sorrowed for their Mishap, and severely avenged their Death.
93 The Honourable John Charleton Esq▪ surveyour Generall of their Majestyes ordnance▪ For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
The CONTENTS of the Second Book of SAMUEL otherwise called the Second Book of the KINGS. IN this Book are recited the Matters that hap∣ned since the Death of Saul, under the Reign of David. We find therein a lively representa∣tion of the incomprehensible Grace, and singular Favour of GOD towards him. First in regard of Temporal Blessings; GOD having raised him by his wonderful Providence, after manifold Troubles and Afflictions, to the Crown of Judah, and afterwards to that of all Israel, to the great comfort of his People; ha∣ving besides blessed him with a numerous Po∣sterity, brave Officers, valiant Soldiers, and adorned him in his own Person with a most Heroical Generosity, established his Kingdom, greatly extended and enlarged the Limits of it, and Crowned his Wars with many Victories, obtain'd against his Enemies, as well at home as abroad. Secondly, In regard of Spiritual Mercies, by governing him by the Spirit of Faith, Adopti∣on and Prophesie, inspiring him with an ex∣traordinary Godliness, and an unparallel'd De∣votion to his Service, by enriching him with all the Vertues and Graces of his Holy Spirit, with Wisdom, Justice, Clemency, Humility, and Patience, and other such like, which did shine forth most brightly in all his Behaviour and Government: And over and above all this, by making him a Promise (occasion'd by his intention to build him a House) concerning the Spiritual, Celestial, and Eternal Reign of the Messiah, our LORD and Saviour JESUS CHRIST, who should be born of his Seed, ac∣cording to the Flesh, of whom he had made him a Figure, as well as his Son Solomon af∣ter him. But on the contrary, here are also set forth very particularly, the great Sins wherewith this excellent Servant and Man of GOD was at times defiled, to the provocation of his great Benefactor, being overcome by the Deceit of the Devil, and the infirmity of his Flesh; above all, in the Matter of Uriah the Hittite, and in his proud Numbering of the People; of which he (by the Grace of GOD) most heartily and sincerely repented; yet notwithstanding was therefore most severely chastised and punished by GOD, for his own good and the edification of his Church. Amongst the Chastisements of GOD upon him for his Sins, we may reckon his Son Am∣non's Ravishing of his Sister Tamar, who two years after for that Fact was murthered by his Brother Absalom's Command, who for that purpose had invited him and all the Kings Sons to a Feast; as likewise that horrible Con∣spiracy and Rebellion of Absalom his Son against him, whereby he was forced in his old Age to flee before him, though indeed the LORD never forsook him, neither in his extremity or other∣wise; but on the contrary strengthned and sup∣ported him by a firm Faith and Confidence, and afforded him a good and favourable Issue; by giving him the Victory over his Enemies; by defeating and infatuating their Councils against him; and by turning all things in the end to his good and advantage; as on the o∣ther hand to the utter ruin of his Oppressors and Adversaries, that so he might shew him∣self a Holy and Faithful GOD, who notwith∣standing the divers defects, sins, and unwor∣thiness of his Children, doth inviolably keep his gracious Covenant with them, yet with∣out the least approving of, or indulging them in their Sins. This Book contains the History of about for∣ty years (Chap. 5. ver. 4.) from the beginning of David's Reign, to the end thereof; except only, that the last Conspiracy of his Son Ado∣nijah, and his Death, are not here inserted, but are set down at the beginning of the following Book, which is the first of Kings. It seems as if the former part of the first Book of Samuel, as well as that of Judges and Ruth, was writ by Samuel himself; but the rest of it, with this of the second Book of Samu∣el, (as well as the Books of Kings) were writ by other holy Persons and Prophets, inspired by GOD; such as Nathan, Gad, and others.
UZZAH SMITTEN BY GOD. David fetcheth home the Ark: Uzzah putting forth his Hand, and laying hold on it to keep it from falling, is struck Dead. IMmediately upon the Death of Ishbosheth, Sauls Son, King of Israel, all the other Tribes came to Hebron, and owned David for their King,The same year 2959. he being the Person who not only was by GOD appointed to the Royal Dignity, during Saul's Reign; but had also shewed himself (in all his Behaviour) very worthy of it; and having made a League with him, they Anointed him King over all Israel. David acknowledging the Hand of GOD in this his Establishment o the rone, (which he had promised to him so long since) took care to discharge the Duty, which that high Place required of him; and far from suppo∣sing, that now he was King, he might freely indulge himself in Pleasure, he puts himself at the Head of his Army, and lays Siege to Je∣rusalem, which was yet in the hand of the Je∣busites, and took it, together with the strong Hold of Zion, which was by him called the City of David, because he setled his Abode, and kept his Court there. No sooner had David made himself Ma∣ster of Jerusalem, and that the Affairs of his Kingdom began to be setled, but he expressed more Piety; that is, Love to GOD and his Worship, than ever Saul had testified during all his Reign. For whereas that Miserable Prince had no concern for the Ark, or any thoughts of fetching it from the House of A∣binadab, since the time that the Philistins sent it back about 70 years ago, David was so far from imitating him in this his Indiffe∣rence, that on the contrary having gathered together about 30000 of his Subjects, he went with them in Triumph to fetch the Ark of the LORD from the House of Abinadab, and to bring it to the City of David. This Solemnity was celebrated with all the Pomp and Magnificence, as well as with all the testifications of Joy and Gladness, which Davids great Piety could prompt him to. He himself play'd on his Harp before the Ark, at the same time when all his Subjects, in imi∣tation of their King, sounded forth their Joy from their Mouths, as well as from all sorts of Instruments, praising and magnifying the LORD, that dwelt between the Cherubims. Whilst this holy Pomp and Solemnity fill'd the hearts of all the People with great joy and satisfaction, to see that Sacred Pledge of the Divine Presence so happily restor'd unto them, (the happy effects of which they had been de∣prived of so long) an unlookt for Accident hapned, which immediately chang'd all this joy into sadness, and dampt the Spirits of the Jews with horror and amazement; for Uzzah the Son of Abinadab, who guided the Cart, on which they had placed the Ark, see∣ing one of the Oxen that drew it, stumble, and that the Ark thereby was in danger of falling, laid hold on it with his hand to prevent that mischance; but instead of hindring the Ark from falling, he himself fell down dead to the ground, being struck by GOD, for his rashness in laying hold on the Ark. For (as the Scrip∣ture saith) GOD's Anger was kindled against Uzzah, and he smote him for his rash Error in medling with the Ark. All those who were Witnesses of this ter∣rible Judgment and Instance of the Divine Se∣verity, were seiz'd with fear, and called the name of the place Perez-Uzzah; and David himself being strangely effected therewith, chang'd the resolution he had taken of bring∣ing the Ark to him, to the City of David; but instead thereof carried it aside to the House of Obed-edom the Hittite, where it con∣tinued three Months, during which time the LORD multiplied his Blessings upon the House of Obed-edom, and all that belonged to him. We see by this Example, that the Presence of such a terrible GOD, as our GOD is, frighted David from bringing the Ark to the place he had prepared for it in Jerusalem; and this Apprehension ought more justly to seize us, who are less righteous than David, for fear lest in these our days some Stranger like Uzzah, who is not called to the Ministry and Service of the Ark, might suffer himself to be deceived by an indiscreet Zeal, or some specious Pretext to put forth his Hand rashly to those Mysteries, which do not comport with the state and degree in which he is, and so provoke the Wrath of GOD against him, by a Service which he supposed most acceptable to him.
94 The Honourable Sr. Thomas Littleton Baronet, Clerke of their Maiesties Ordnance▪ For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
95 William Meeslers Esq, Store keeper to the office of their Majesties Ordnance. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
David danceth before the Ark. David being resolved a second time to bring the Ark to Jerusalem com∣mits that Charge to the Levites, to avoid the like Judgment as had hapned to Uzzah. He danceth before the Ark: Michal his Wife despiseth him for so doing. THree Months being past since the Death of Uzzah, who was struck dead be∣fore the Ark, and David's Fear being somewhat al∣layed by the Prosperity wherewith he was informed,The same Year 2959. GOD had blessed the House of O∣bed-edom, where the Ark had continued du∣ring this time; he resolved a second time to bring it to him to Jerusalem. And fearing that the Death of Uzzah was partly occasio∣ned, because there were no Levites nor Priests to attend the Ark, to whom that holy Functi∣on did particularly appertain, he ordered a great number of them to be in a readiness, not to guide it in a Cart, as before, but to carry it on their Shoulders. Thus with a very solemn and triumphant Procession, did David and all the House of Israel, bring up the Ark of the LORD, with shouting, and with the sound of Trumpets, and other Instruments of Musick; and when they that bare the Ark had gone six Paces, David sacrificed Oxen and Fatlings; and being him∣self clothed in a Linnen Ephod, he danced be∣fore it with all his might. In this manner the holy Ark entred into Jerusalem, being carried through a prodigious Throng of Peo∣ple, who from all parts of the Holy Land were come to assist at that Solemnity, and to partake of this universal Joy, to the Tent and Tabernacle David had caused to be erected for it. But Michal, the Daughter of Saul, David's Wife, as she was looking out of a Window, to see the Ark pass by, seeing David without his Royal Robes assisting at the Solemnity, and leaping and dancing before the Ark in a Lin∣nen Ephod, she despised him in her Heart, conceiving a great disdain for this his Behavi∣our, which to her seem'd so disproportionate to his Royal Dignity and Authority. Now when David had set the Ark in its Place, to wit, in the midst of the Tabernacle that he had pitched for it, and had offered Burnt-Offerings, and Peace-Offerings before the LORD, and had distributed to all the People, as well Women as Men, to each a Cake of Bread, a good piece of Flesh, and a Flagon of Wine, and was returned to his Houshold, to bless it in the Name of the LORD of Hosts, Michal his Wife meeting him, in a deriding way said to him; How glorious was the King of Israel to day, who laying aside the Marks of his Majesty, uncover'd himself in the Eyes of the Handmaids of his Servants, skipping and dan∣cing before his Subjects as one of the vain Fel∣lows, that openly exposes himself for the Laughter and Diversion of others? But David, whose Soul was raised far above these Female Sentiments and false Notions of Honour, and without being troubled, or blush∣ing at her disdainful Mockery, told her with some earnestness; What I have done this day▪ I have done to the Honour of GOD, and in his sight, who hath chosen me before thy Father, and before all his House, of whom I hold my King∣dom, and to whom alone I owe this peaceful E∣stablishment on the Throne of Israel: Wherefore if you think this a vilifying of my self, you are like to see more of it: for I am resolved to be yet more vile than this, and to be base in my own sight, and will raise my Glory by humbling my self before the LORD, in the presence of the meanest of my Subjects. Thus this Holy King, forgetting his Sovereign Dignity, and so many Victories he had obtained over Men as well as Beasts; over Monsters in bulk and strength; over all sorts of Enemies, and in all sorts of Dangers, being great and ho∣nourable in the Eyes of all, was only base and little in his own. He despiseth himself, and does not take it ill that others do so too. David (by this illustrious Example of his) teacheth all Christian Princes never to appre∣hend the abasing or lessening of their Majesty, by submitting themselves to GOD, and in gi∣ving their Subjects an Example of the humble Adorations and Service they owe to the Supream Majesty of Heaven. And 'tis a sign, That they are afraid of Womens Talk, who fear on such occasions as these, to prostitute their Gran∣deur and Authority. They must be like David, when they meet with a Michal, who dares so unjustly reproach them; who for her punishment was struck with Barrenness, That she might not trouble the World (saith St. Ambrose) with her proud Breed.
David's Ambassadors to Hanun. David sends Joab with an Army against the Ammonites, to avenge himself of the Outrage done to his Ambassadors by Hanun their King, who used them like Spies WHen the Civil Wars, which David had been engaged in a great while, aginst Israel and the House of Saul,Anno Mundi 2967. before Christ 1037. were happily ter∣minated by the death of Ishbosheth, being now free from intestine Divisions, as well as from Wars with those Gentiles, who till then had possessed some portion of the Holy Land, he hapned to be engaged in a War against the Ammonites upon this occasion. Nahash King of the Ammonites dying, Da∣vid (in acknowledgment of the Kindness he had received from him in his Life) resol∣ved to send Ambassadors to his Son Hanun, to condole the Death of his Father, and con∣gratulate his Accession to the Crown, as like∣wise to offer him his Friendship for his Fa∣thers sake, who had always been his kind Friend. As soon as David's Ambassadors were arriv'd at the Court of Hanun, King of the Ammo∣nites, his Lords perswaded him, that these Ambassadors of David were no other than Spies, and tho' they pretended to come to com∣fort him, and in honour to his Father; yet their true intent was only to discover their strength, that they might be the better pre∣pared to overthrow them upon occasion, and make themselves Masters of his Kingdom. Hanun, too flexible and easie of belief, suf∣fered himself to be seduced by these Insinua∣tions of his Lords, and supposing that what they suggested was true indeed, he treated them in the most villainous and outragious manner imaginable: he ordered the one half of their Beards to be shaved, and cut off their Garments below their Waists, and so sent them away. David being inform'd thereof, very highly resented this Affront done to his Repre∣sentatives, and being much concern'd for the shameful condition wherein Hanun had sent them away, he sent Messengers to meet them, and comfort them, ordering them by no means to shew themselves at Jerusalem in that condi∣tion, but to stay at Jericho till their Beards were grown, and that after that they might come up to the Court. David in the mean time resolved not to let this heinous Affront go unpunished; and the rather, because that he heard that the Ammonites were making great Warlike Pre∣parations and Alliances against him, with the Syrians, and other of their Neighbours, of whom they had procured very numerous For∣ces to assist them against Israel. David being informed of all this, thought it was no time for him to be an idle Spectator, but sent Joab with the choicest of his Forces to fight the Ammonites. Joab being come in sight of the Enemy, he found their Army so posted, that the Israelites, before they were aware, had an Enemy before and behind them; wherefore Joab (with the choice of the Army) resolved to fall on the Syrians, whilst Abishai his Brother, with the rest of the Troops, set upon the Ammonites, pro∣mising each other, that the stronger should come to the help of the weaker. Joab ha∣ving encouraged his Men, set upon the Syri∣ans with that Conduct and Valour, that they were soon routed; and the Ammonites seeing their Friends defeated, betook themselves to flight likewise. The Syrians, desirous to avenge this their shameful Defeat upon the Jews, assembled a vast Army, against which David marched in Person, at the Head of all his Forces, and de∣feated them a second time, killing no less than 40000 of their Foot, besides the Men that were in 700 of their Chariots. Upon this De∣feat, the Syrians fear'd to assist the Children of Ammon any more, and all neighbouring Princes began to stand in awe of David, who became every day more and more formidable, to all the Kings and Nations that were about him. This History of the unadvisedness of Hanun, King of the Ammonites, shews us very lively, how unhappy those Princes are, that are led a∣side by Evil Counsel, the whole ruin of his King∣dom being here occasioned by his indiscreet Credu∣lity, and inconsiderate listning to the false Sug∣gestions of his Lords. Neither is this the first or only Instance, that the safety or ruin of a State oft depends on good or bad Counsel; and that Prince is happy indeed, who being himself the Sovereign Arbi∣ter of his Kingdom, is so wise to discern who are fit to be his Counsellors, and the Instruments of his Royal Power and Authority, that he may not ru∣ine himself by the Counsel or ill Administration of his Officers.
96 The Honourable Christopher Musgrave Esq▪ Clerke of the deliveries of their Majesties Ordnance. For advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate
97 William Boulter Esq Assistant Surveyour of their Majesties Ordnance, For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
DAVID's CRIME. David from the Roof of his House seeing Bathsheba, the Wife of Uriah, bathing her self, conceives an unlawful Lust for her, and causes Uriah to be slain. DAVID now enjoying a profound Peace, after the great Defeat he had given to the Ammonites and the Sy∣rians their Allies,Anno Mundi 2969. before Christ 1035. David being then 50 years of Age. sent Jo∣ab at the Head of his Ar∣my to make an Inroad up∣on the Ammonites, to waste and spoil their Country, who having besieged Rabbah, the Capital City of the Ammonites, soon after took it and destroy'd it, and sent the Crown of the King of the Ammonites to David, which weighed a Talent of Gold, and was set with precious Stones. Whilst Joab was thus employ'd abroad, Da∣vid took his repose and enjoy'd himself at Je∣rusalem: and one day in the Evening, as he was walking on the Terrace of his Palace, he saw a Woman bathing her self, that was exceed∣ing fair and beautiful. David having con∣ceived a Lust for her, sent to enquire who she was; and being told that she was Bathsheba the Wife of Uriah, he sent for her, and commit∣ted Adultery with her. Bathsheba soon after finding her self with Child, and fearing lest her Husband's absence (who was in the Army with Joab) would be a means to discover her Adultery, and conse∣quently expose her to the Capital Punishment the Law ordained for Women guilty of that Crime, sent and acquainted David, that she was with Child, and the Fears she had justly conceived thereupon. David (upon this In∣formation) sends Word to Joab, the General of his Army) to send Uriah to him; who (when he was come) David askt him several Questi∣ons about the state of the War, and what pro∣gress they had made in the Siege of Rabbah, the Metropolis of the Ammonites? and then wish'd him to go home and refresh himself for a season. But Uriah instead of following the King's Advice, and going to his House, lodged that Night with the King's Guards. The next day, when David understood that Uriah was not gone to his House, he sent for him, and demanded of him, why he did not go home? who very generously answer'd Da∣vid with these remarkable Words: The Ark of the Lord, and all Israel and Judah, and my Lord Joab, and the Servants of my Lord are encamped in the open Fields; Shall I then go to my House to eat and to drink, and to lye with my Wife? As thou livest I will not do this thing. David seeing his Design thus frustrated by Uriah's Courage and Greatness of Soul, and that he was not to be removed from the noble Resolution he had taken by any Temptations of Rest or Pleasure whatsoever; and seeing Bathsheba exposed to the shame and hazard of her Crime divulged; he in these Circum∣stances form'd a Resolution very different and opposite to that sweetness of Temper, which till then had always appeared so natu∣ral to him; and by Uriah sent Letters to Joab, with Orders to post him in such a Quarter against the City, where he might be most expos'd to danger; and in case of a Sal∣ly, to retire from him, that he might fall by the hand of the Ammonites. Joab (in obedience to these Orders of the King) appointed Uriah's Post against a Quar∣ter of the City where he knew valiant Men were, where, upon the first Sally they made, he was slain, with some others of the Army. Joab sent the news of Uriah's death to David, who seem'd little concern'd at the loss of so couragious and faithful a Servant, whose Death he was the principal Cause of. Bath∣sheba being inform'd of her Husbands Death, mourned for him; and when the days of her Mourning were accomplished, David sent for her, and she became his Wife. This double Crime of so great and glorious a Saint, as David was, makes it appear, That Men, how great or Righteous soever they may be, are still but Men, and retain always some part of the frailty and weakness of the Clay from whence they were taken and formed at first. These terrible Falls of David (saith St. Au∣stin) ought to make all Men tremble, especially those that are weak, when they see the strongest them∣selves overtaken. The Scripture also sets forth these Examples, not to excuse those who follow these great Men in their Falls, and who will imitate them in those Actions, which themselves from their Heart have abominated and detested, but to keep all good Men in a saving Humility and Fear, and to teach all those who chance to fall with David, to rise again with David by sincere Repentance.
DAVID's REPENTANCE. GOD sends Nathan the Prophet to David, to represent his Sin to him, and denounce God's Judgments against him. David acknowledgeth his Sin, and humbles him∣self before GOD. DAVID having committed these two great Crimes, made it appear, by the small care he took to a∣rise again from his Fall,Anno Mundi 2970. before Christ 1034. with what thick darkness Sin overcasts and clouds the Souls of the greatest Saints. He continued in Peace for a whole year, under the guilt of these horrid Sins, if so be Peace may be said to be the Inmate of an Heart, which hath in so high and exorbitant a man∣ner offended GOD. Whilst David was thus forgetful of GOD and himself, GOD took pity of him, and sent Nathan the Prophet to him to open his Eyes, to lay his Sin before him, and to search his Wound to the quick, of which he had seem'd for so long a time altogether insensible. This Holy Prophet being charg'd by GOD himself with this troublesom and hazardous Commissi∣on, shews us (by his dextrous manner of Ad∣dress to him on this occasion) with how much Wisdom and Prudence Men of David's Rank ought to be reproved, for fear of offending them, and raising their Anger by too severe and keen Expressions. Nathan, in pursuance of the Divine Com∣mand makes use of a Parable of a rich Man, who having many Sheep, robb'd a poor Man of an Ewe-Lamb, which he had bought, and nourish'd up, and tenderly lov'd, as having no more but that one; and taking it from him by force, dressed it, to accommodate a Stran∣ger that was come to visit him, when as he might easily have furnish'd himself from his own Flocks. David, how blind soever he might be with respect to his own Guilt, was very clear-sighted in a Case which he thought did not concern him; and his Anger being kindled against the horrid Injustice of the Rich Man, he (un∣known to himself) pronounc'd his own Sen∣tence, and confirm'd it with an Oath, saying, As the LORD liveth, the Man that hath done this thing shall surely die. Whereupon Nathan laying aside the disguise of his Parable, told him with a gravity and earnestness becoming his Person, that he himself was the Man; and in the Name of the LORD represented to him all the multiplied Benefits GOD had heap'd upon him, and the Enemies, Perils, and Distresses he had deliver'd him from. He laid before him, in what an outragious a manner he had affronted the Divine Bounty and Be∣neficence towards him, by recompencing so many Graces and Favours with extream In∣gratitude and forgetfulness of his Duty to his great Benefactor. David at this Remonstrance turning in∣wards, and there taking a view of the heinous∣ness of his Offence, was not exasperated at the Truths Nathan had represented to him, notwithstanding that they condemn'd him, and expos'd him as a notorious Criminal. He was not incens'd at the Prophet, who held this Looking-glass before him, which instead of flattering him, shew'd him all his hidden De∣formities. He did not question him, how he who was but a Subject, durst undertake to talk at this rate to his Sovereign, but seem'd for this time to have forgot that he was King, that he might the better remember that he was a Sinner. Instead of flying out in a Passi∣on against the Prophet, he humbles himself be∣fore GOD and him, and cries out, I have sin∣ned against the LORD, which Words were the mark of a more sincere Repentance in him, than they were in Saul, or than they are at this day in many Christians. He embraced with an humble submission all the terrible Denunciations Nathan (in the Name of GOD) thunder'd out against him, and consi∣der'd that long series of Disasters by GOD's di∣vine Justice entail'd on his Family, as a means GOD in mercy would make use of, to satisfie his Justice and appease his Anger; and with bitter regret and extream sorrow taking a view of the State from whence he had precipitated himself, he cast himself down in the deepest humility before GOD, yet did not despair of his Mercy (as St. Chrysostom observes) who upon this occasion ad∣mires David's great Courage and Confidence in GOD: but as soon as he was made sensible of his loss, he without further troubling himself, endeavour'd to repair it with the assistance of the Divine Grace, by a Repentance which lasted as long as his Life: and which made St. Am∣brose to say, That there are many who imitate David in his Sins, but very few that follow him in his Humiliation, and continued course of Repentance.
98 The Honourable Charles Bertie Esq▪ Treasurer, and Paymaster of their Maiesties Ordnance. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
99 John Blake of the Tower of London Gentleman: For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
THE DEATH OF AMNON. Absalom causeth his Brother Amnon to be slain at a Feast, for ravishing his Sister. Absalom re∣bels against his Father David, and forces him to flee from Jerusalem. GOD having brought David to a serious reflection upon his Sin, and earnest Repentance for it by means of the Remonstrance made to him in his Name by Nathan the Prophet,Anno Mundi 2972. before Christ, 1032. he made it appear by his dealing with him after∣wards, that the greatest Favour can be shew'd to Sinners, is not to indulge or spare them. For first of all, he struck with Death the Child, that was the Fruit of his Adultery; neither could David's Tears and Fasting repeal the Sen∣tence GOD had past. His Son Amnon soon after ravishes his Sister Tamar; and Ab∣salom provok'd with this Outrage committed against his Sister, resolv'd to kill Amnon. He waited two whole years for a convenient oc∣sion to do it; and then inviting all the King's Sons to a Feast, in the midst of their Mirth and Jollity, caused his Servants to fall upon Amnon, and murther him. Absalom being fain to flee, and leave the Court upon this Murther of his Brother, retir'd to the King of Geshur; but Joab perceiving that the King had an inclination for Absalom's return to Jerusalem, he order'd it so, that about three years after he became reconciled to his Father. But the recalling of the Son, was like to have prov'd the ruin of the Father:Anno Mundi 2979. For no sooner did this ungrateful and graceless Son see himself re∣stored to his Father's Favour; but he began to form Designs against his Crown and Life. To this end Absalom made it his business to inveigle the Affections and good Will of the People,Anno Mundi 2980. by a feigned ex∣pression of Kindness for them, and readiness to serve them, and do them right; intimating, that if he was King, he would take care to oblige them all by a ready and speedy course of Justice,Anno Mundi 2981. and that none should have reason to complain of him. Ha∣ving thus for four years together labour'd to make himself popular, and draw a Party after him, he desir'd leave of King David his Fa∣ther to go to Hebron, upon pretence of paying a Vow he had made unto the LORD, during his Exile from the Court at Jerusalem. Absalom having obtain'd his Father's con∣sent, hasted to Hebron, where he immediately caused himself to be proclaimed King. David being inform'd of this unexpected Rebellion of his Son, and that the People from all parts flock'd to him: was forc'd to flee from Jeru∣salem on Foot, being now above 60 years of Age, accompanied only with 600 of his Guards that usually attended him, and passing the Brook Kedron, he went up Mount Olive bare-foot, weeping, and having his Head co∣vered: which was a Figure of what one day was to happen to the true David, that was to proceed from his Loins according to the Flesh. In this condition, he, with a strange and un∣heard of Humility, bore all the railing Re∣proaches and Curses of Shimei, who flung Stones at him and his Officers as he passed by; for looking upon this Rebellion of his Subject as a Looking-glass, which reflected the Image of his own Apostacy, he meekly accepted of his outragious Language as an effect of the Divine Justice, and receiv'd all his railing Ex∣pressions with the same submission, as if GOD had given a special Command to Shimei thus to curse and revile him. Absalom, in the mean time, having made his triumphant Entry into Jerusalem, began his Usurpation (according to the Counsel of Achitophel and Nathan's Prediction to David) with violating his Father's Concubines in the Face of the Sun. Thus David learnt by sad Experience, that when Man rebels against GOD, all other Crea∣tures rebel against him, to revenge the Affront done to the Divine Majesty▪ and saw his Crime punished by those horrid disorders in his Family; by the ravishing of Tamar; by the murther of Amnon; by the Rebellion of his dearest Son Absalom; by his Friends leaving him, and his Subjects rebelling against him; by the railing and high Abuses of Shimei; and lastly, by the imminent danger of Death, for the escaping of which he was fain to expose himself to a shameful Flight, accompanied with so many Ex∣tremities, that nothing less than the Divine Pre∣sence, and the hopes of seeing him at last ap∣peased by all those Evils he groaned under, could have enabled him to endure them. This Example teacheth us, That forasmuch as we are all Sinners, if we would be reconcil'd to GOD, we must judge our selves, and willingly take from his Hands all the Evils inward or out∣ward, which it pleaseth him to lay upon us; be∣cause Sin must certainly be punished sooner or la∣ter, either in this World, or that which is to come.
THE DEATH OF ABSALOM. Absalom fleeing from the Battel, is caught up by his Hair, and hung on the Boughs of an Oak. Joab strikes him through with three Darts. ABSALOM being thus become Master of the City of Jerusalem, consider'd how he might best circum∣vent and destroy the King his Father:The same year, 2981. before Christ 1023. And having assembled his Coun∣cil, Achitophel (who was the ablest Counsellor of them all) advis'd him without any delay to pursue and set upon David, before he could have time either to reinforce his Army, or put them into any order, and whilst the conster∣nation of this unlook'd for Rebellion was yet fresh upon them. But GOD happily overthrew and frustrated this Counsel, which without doubt would have prov'd David's ruin, by the means of Hushai, David's Friend; who being of intelligence with him, declar'd in Council, That he could not approve of Achitophel's Advice for this time. He represented to Absalom how dan∣gerous it was to set upon Men that were exasperated and desperate, as David and his Men were; and that his own Party being yet in a great measure wavering and unresolved, as Mns Spirits are apt to be at the beginning of any great Change or Revolution, if only a few of them should chance to fall in the first Onset, it would go near to dishearten them all, and to lose the Day; wherefore his Advice was, to summon all the Forces of Israel, and that Absalom should go in the Head of them, and give Battel to his Father and the Troops that were with him. This Counsel of Hushai prevailed, which did so provoke and vex Achitophel, that going home he hanged himself. Hushai in the mean time inform'd Zadok and Abiathar of what had past in Council, and wished them (by some means or other) to send word to David, to pass the River Jordan, lest he should be set upon by the Enemy at unawares. David be∣ing acquainted herewith, passed over Jordan, he and all the Forces that were with him that Night, before break of Day, and having got together all the Forces he could, prepared himself for a Fight, being resolv'd to com∣mand the Army himself, but his great Officers would not suffer it; and before he retired, he gave a strait Charge to Joab, and his other general Officers to spare Absalom. Both the Armies being at last engaged, that of Absalom was beaten, notwithstanding it was much superiour in number to that of David, and above 20000 of his Men kill'd. Absalom seeing the Day was lost for him, en∣deavoured to save himself by flight; but riding on his Mule under an Oak, his prodigi∣ous Head of Hair caught hold of, and entang∣led on the Boughs of it, and the Mule continu∣ing its course, left him hanging thereon. Joab being inform'd thereof by a Person, who had seen him hanging in that posture, was angry with him, that he had not kill'd Absalom; and finding all about him backward to this Service, for fear of incurring the King's displeasure, who in the hearing of them all had charged his Generals to spare the young Man, he went himself to the place, and stuck him with 3 Darts through the Heart, as he was yet hanging alive on the Tree, and then immediately caused a Retreat to be sounded, to prevent any farther effusion of Blood. The news of the success of the Battel, and of Absalom's Death, was immediately brought to David, who was not concern'd for any thing so much as the Life of his dear Son; and being at length told, that he was dead, he chang'd the Joy of his Victory into Lamen∣tation and Mourning. But Joab being greatly offended, that the King seem'd so little con∣cern'd for the Service he had done him, in keeping the Crown upon his Head, reproach'd him with a great deal of liberty, for that he loved his Enemies more than his Friends, and those that hated him and sought his Life, more than those that had hazarded their Lives, and all that was near and dear to them, to save it; and threatned him, that except he would come and shew himself to the People, and speak kindly to them, in acknowledgment of the great and inestimahle Service they had done for him, that before the next Light he should find himself abandon'd and forsaken of all, and plunge himself into a worse Mishap than ever yet had befallen him. Upon this sharp Remonstrance of Joab David shewed himself to the People, tho' his Grief for Absalom still continued. In which Carriage of his, he was a great Example to all Ghostly Fathers, to represent to them, how far their Love towards their Spiritual Chil∣dren ought to carry them. David here forgets all the horrid Outrages his Son had committed against him, and remembers only that he was his Son, and that he was dead not only corporally, but spiritually also.
100 Captaine Jonathan Andrews of Kenton▪ parke in the County of Middlesex Gent. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
101 Samuel Criche of the Tower of London Gentleman For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
THE DEATH OF SHEBA. AFter the Death of Absalom, the chief Men that had taken part with him in his Rebellion,The same Year 2981. before Christ 1023. made haste to make some reparation of their Crime, by their return to turn to David, and swearing Fealty to him, insomuch as they, who (during his disgrace) had most openly declar'd themselves against him, were now the first that came to meet him, and sue for Pardon. Shimei, who had so highly affronted and abused the Majesty of the King by his Words and Carriage, being sensible what his wicked∣ness would draw down upon him, came and cast himself at David's Feet, accusing and condemning himself; and when Abishai (Joab's Brother) could not well bear the King's par∣doningso great a Crime, to so wicked and profligate a Person, and desired leave to kill him, because he had cursed the King; David told him, that he would not sully the Victory GOD had given him, with the Blood of any one Person. At the same time also Mephibosheth, the Son of Jonathan came to meet. David, to congra∣tulate his Victory; and when David asked him, Why he did not come to him during Absalom's Rebellion? he represented to him, how unworthily Ziba his Servant had dealt with him, in slandering him before the King, and persuading him, that he staid at Jerusa∣lem in hopes of attaining (by means of that Commotion) the Crown of Israel; whereas in∣deed he had been so far from any such thoughts, and his concern had been so great for the Kings Safety, that he had neither trimmed his Beard, nor washed his Cloaths, from the day the King departed, till he came again in Peace. And yet David had so far given credit to this false Accusation of Ziba, that he had bestow'd upon him all his Master's Estate; but that which is yet more surprizing in this holy King is, that after he had heard how Mephi∣bosheth justified himself, and manifested Ziba's Imposture and Calumny, he contented himself with only restoring to Mephibosheth the Moiety of his Estate, leaving the other half in the possession of this Impostor and Betrayer of his Master. After this Defeat of Absalom, all things seem'd to concur to a peaceful State of the Kingdom, if one Sheba (a factious Spirit of the Tribe of Benjamin) had not cast it into new troubles, who at the same time when all Israel were assembled to renew their Obedience to David, insolently founded a Trumpet, de∣claring, that he would never submit to David, and exhorted all Israel to do the like; who generally followed this seditious Son of Belial, as the Scripture terms him, but the Tribe of Ju∣dah continued still faithful to their true Prince. David apprehending the sequel of this new Rebellion, and foreseeing that it might prove more dangerous than that of Absalm▪ and the rather because hapning so close on the neck of it, resolved to stifle it in the birth, and commanded Joab to pursue Sheba, who was strengthning himself in the City Abel. Joab in pursuance of David's Command, lays close Siege to the City, and would have destroy'd it, if a wise Woman dwelling there had not been a means of saving it, by perswading the chief Men and Elders of the City to cut off Sheba's Head, and cast it over the Wall to Joab; upon sight whereof he broke up the Siege, and return'd with his Army to Jerusalem. Thus the Death of one Man procur'd the Safe∣ty and Peace of a City, yea, of the whole King∣dom; and as it cannot de denied, that in this (as well as on many other occasions) Joab did great Service to the King; so (on the other Hand) it is evident, that he was a true Figure of those ambi∣tious Spirits, who are not afraid to hazard their Lives for the Service of their Prince, but exe∣cute their Orders with a great deal of Courage and Magnanimity; and yet by other Instances make it appear, that their grand Motive all a∣long, was nothing but their own Interest and Glory. That Joab was such another, appears by his base assassinating of Abner, Saul's Uncle, con∣trary to David's inclination, who was greatly afflicted for his death; as also by his murthering of Amasa, upon whom David intended to confer the Command of his Army, and to deprive him of it, because he had killed Absalom, contrary to the express Command he had given him. Da∣vid was fain to bear with the Pride of this his insolent Servant all his life-time, notwithstanding he was guilty of these and the like Exorbitances, as judging that it was but just that he should bear with the Insolence of a Subject, who in spight of him commanded his Armies, having himself revolted from GOD by a double Crime, af∣ter he had received so many Benefits and Favours from him.
The Iudgment of the Plague. David having caused his People to be numbered, by a motion of Pride and Vanity, GOD afflicts his Kingdom with a Plague, which in three Days time took away 70000 of his Subjects. DAVID had scarce taken breath since the manifold Troubles, GOD had in several ways excited to him in his own Family,Anno Mundi 2978. before Christ 1016. David being then 68 years of Age. as well as in his Kingdom, to punish him for the Sin he had com∣mitted, when the Repose he began to enjoy became the cause of his falling into new ones, and thereby became a teaching Instance of this great Truth, That a Man, how righ∣teous soever he may be, is but still a Man; and after all, continues to lie open to fresh Temp∣tations, and new Falls. His first Sin, was his being overcome by carnal Lust; but now he was seduced by his Pride and Vanity, which is an Inclination that ought to be al∣always fear'd by the most perfect, as being a Passion that most intimately cleaves to Man's Nature. 'Twas this corrupt Affection prompted David to take an exact account of the num∣ber of his People, that from thence he might make an estimate of his Grandeur and Power. Joab and the rest of his Officers, seem'd very backward and opposite to this his design, and told him, that they begg'd of GOD, that he would increase and multiply his Subjects, but did not see any necessity of taking the exact number of them. But David being resolved upon the Point, would be obeyed. So Joab and the rest of the Officers departed to execute the King's Orders, and were ten Months in taking an account of all the People of Israel and Judah; and when they had cast up their Ac∣counts, and brought them to David, there were found 1300000 valiant Men, bearing Arms in Israel, and 500000 of the like Men in Judah. But David being check'd in his Conscience for this Undertaking, humbly confessed his Sin before the LORD, declaring, that he had done very foolishly, and beseeching him to take away his Iniquity. Whilst David was engaged in humbling himself before the LORD, and im∣ploring his Grace and Pardon, GOD sent the Prophet Gad unto him; not to bring his Par∣don, but to give him his choice of three sorts of Punishments, viz. Whether 7 years of Fa∣mine should afflict his Land; or whether he would be expos'd to Wars for three Months, wherein he should continually be worsted; or to suffer a Pestilence of three Days? David having heard his Sentence from the Mouth of the Prophet, declared, that he was in a great streight about the Choice he had to make; because tho' he made his Choice never so well, it would still occasion much Mischief and Misery; but however desired, that he might fall into the hand of the LORD, ra∣ther than into the Hands of Men, because his Mercies were great. Thus having made choice of the Pestilence for three Days to infest his Country; GOD gave his Commission to the de∣stroying Angel, who smote 70000 Men with the Plague, that they died within the prefixed time, in the compass of his Dominions. David's Behaviour (during this affliction of the Plague) was a great Example for Kings, teaching them, how great Tenderness and Compassion they ought to have for their People and Subjects: And as it may serve as a Lesson for them, so also it is a good Instru∣ction for the Pastors of the Church, how they ought to offer up themselves as Victims in be∣half of the People. For this good Prince con∣sidering himself as the sole Cause of the dreadful Affliction which at that time devour'd his People, cried earnestly to GOD in their behalf, saying, I have sinned, O LORD, and done wickedly; but as for these Sheep, what have they done? Turn rather thine Anger against me, and against my Father's House, who am the cause of it, whereas they are innocent. Upon this Prayer and Humiliation of Da∣vid, GOD sent the Prophet Gad a second time to him, commanding him to erect an Altar unto the LORD in the Threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite, where he had seen the destroying Angel smiting the People. Da∣vid immediately obey'd this Divine Order; and having offered there Burnt-Offerings and Peace-Offerings, GOD was entreated, and the Plague was stayed. GOD made it appear by this Instance, (as the Fathers observe) That as he often plagues a People for the Sins of the Rulers; so he often turns away his Fury from them, and becomes re∣concil'd, when their Pastors and Governours stand in the Gap, and become Intercessors for them.
102 John Hooper of the Tower of London Gentleman For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The CONTENTS of the first Book of the KINGS, commonly called the third Book of KINGS. IN this and the following Book is set forth the History of the KINGS, who governed the People of GOD, from David until the time of the Babylonish Captivity; for which reason they are called the First and Second Book of Kings. The former of these begins with a relation of the Sickness and Death of King David, and the Succession of his Son Solomon to the Throne, who after he had received the good and holy Instructions and Admonitions of his Father, concerning his wise Conduct in administring and setling the Affairs of his Kingdom, that thereby he might establish him∣self in the Throne, and secure it to himself and Posterity; and over and above had been honoured by GOD, with an immediate mani∣festation and revelation of himself, he was in an extraordinary manner blessed by GOD, with the Gifts of Wisdom, Riches, and Honour, and in his Country with Peace, Trade, and all manner of Abundance and Affluence. And now (after that he had order'd all things relating to his Court and Family) he built and dedicated a Magnificent Temple to the LORD, besides some other Royal Edifices. All which effects of his Wisdom and great Riches rais'd him so high a Renown (both far and near,) that the Queen of Sheba came to visit him in great Pomp and State, and all his Neighbouring Princes, sent their Ambassadors to him with rich Pre∣sents, and proffers of Friendship and Alliance. Yet notwithstanding all these Blessings and Fa∣vours he had received from the Hand of GOD, he suffer'd himself to be corrupted and seduced to Idolatry, by the many strange Wives and Concubines, he had taken to himself; by which means the LORD being provoked against him, raised him up Enemies, and by the Prophet Ahijah denounced to him the rending and divi∣ding of his Kingdom. This Rent accordingly hapned, when his Son Rehoboam (by ill and unadvised Counsel) alienated the ten Tribes of Israel from him, who chose Jeroboam the Son of Nebat to be their King; Rehoboam retaining only his Do∣minion over the Tribe of Judah, and part of the Tribe of Benjamin; being expresly forbid by the LORD, to endeavour the reduction of the said ten Tribes to his Obedience by force of Arms, as he had intended to do. Moreover, because of his Sins, and of the Sins of the People, the Temple at Jerusalem was pillaged by Shishak King of Egypt. His Son Abiam after his Death succeeds him in the Throne, and imitates his Vices and Sins. But Asa and Jehosaphat being good and religious Princes, reform and re-establish the Worship of GOD. As to the Kings, who after the division of the two Kingdoms Reigned over Israel, and whose Histories are related in this Book, they were all Idolaters and corrupted the true Re∣ligion by divers Abominations: For Jeroboam, besides his setting up of the Calves of Gold, in a manner totally changed the outward order and way of Worship, and instituted Priests of his own, that were not of the Tribe of Levi, but of the Scum of the People; and by this means were the ten Tribes turn'd from the true Worship of GOD, to Idolatry. His Suc∣cessors followed his steps, and in particular Ahab; for besides his Idolatry, in which he out-did all his Predecessors, he exercised a tyrannical and cruel Persecution against those few good Men which feared GOD, that were left among his Subjects. And for this Reason it was, that the Crown of Israel did not con∣tinue in one Race, but past frequently from one Family to another, not without great Com∣motions and Blood-shed. And tho' GOD was not wanting to send his Prophets Ahijah, She∣maiah, Iddo Azariah, Jehu Hanani, Elijah and Micaiah, to the revolted Israelites, to exhort them to Repentance, and to return from their Idolatry and Apostasie; yet for all this they still went on in their Sins, notwithstanding that the foresaid Prophets frequently confirm∣ed their Divine Call, by great and stupendous Miracles. The pure Worship of GOD, and true Do∣ctrin, were somewhat better rooted in Judah, because there the good Kings put their hands to this Work, together with the Prophets, and with a great deal of fervour and Zeal endea∣vour'd a Reformation. So that in this Book we have a very lively representation of the mutability of the outward state and condition of the Visible Church in this World, as well as of the stedfastness and unchangableness of the Grace of GOD towards his own, tho' many times unknown and hid from the eyes of Men. This Book contains the History of 118 years, whereof the first 40 belong to the Reign of Solomon, and the other 78 concern the Go∣vernment of those Kings that succeeded him, as well in Judah as Israel, as far as this Book reacheth.
SOLOMON MADE KING. DAvid's Age and approaching Death, gave occasion to his Sons to contend about the Succession, by the ambition they had of rising to the Royal Digni∣ty;Anno Mundi 2989. and before Christ 1015. David being then 70 years of Age, and So∣lomon 18. but whilst all were in suspence, to know who would be the new King, Adonijah, his eldest Son, (Absalom's younger Brother) being impa∣tient to wear a Crown, made a great Feast, to which he invited Joab and other Grandees of the Court, whom he had gain'd to be of his Party; with intention, that after the Feast they should proclaim him King. When the Day appointed for this Conspi∣racy was come, Nathan the Prophet being inform'd of the whole Matter, and who knew that (according to the Divine Oracle) Solomon was to succeed his Father David, went to Bathsheba, Solomons Mother, and advis'd her to go to the King, and acquaint him with Ado∣nijahs Conspiracy, and to put him in mind of his Promise, to make Solomon his Successor. Bathsheba followed Nathans Counsel, and re∣presented these things to King David; and whilst she was yet speaking, Nathan came in also, and presenting himself before the King, he enquir'd of him, whether it were with his Consent and Allowance, that some of his Subjects had declar'd Adonijah King? David seem'd much surpriz'd at these Tidings, and not thinking it fit to delay the time, order'd Nathan the Prophet, to take some of his High Officers along with him, and to Anoint and Proclaim his Son Solomon King. Which being accordingly performed, and the Report of it spread abroad through the City, all those who had taken part with Adonijah, were fain to flee for it; and Adonijah him∣self apprehending Solomons Anger, went and laid hold of the Horns of the Altar, in order to save his life; the news of which being brought to Solomon, he promised to pardon him, in case of his good Behaviour for the future. About some six Months after this, GOD called David out of this World, after he had given to his Son Solomon good Counsel and necessary Instructions, how to behave himself in the Government, and communicated to him some private Orders, which he would have him to execute after his Death. Adonijah soon after his Fathers Decease, moved Bath∣sheba, to sue King Solomon on his behalf for Abishag, that he might marry her. This Abi∣shag was a beautiful Virgin, that cherished and attended King David towards his latter end, when his Natural heat began to fail him, so that they could not keep wramth in him: But Solomon smelling an ambitious design in this Suit of Adonijah, caus'd him to be slain. In like manner he also served Joab his Fathers General, according to the Command he had given him. Shimei also, who had so unpar∣donably affronted and abused his Father Da∣vid, in the time of his Flight from Absalom, was fain to submit to the same fate. Solomon being thus happily established on the Throne, made an Alli∣ance with the King of Egypt,Anno Mundi 2991. before Christ 1013. being the 20 year of Solomons Age, and the 3d of his Reign. and married his Daughter. Some time af∣ter, GOD appeared to him in a Dream in Gibeon, where he had been offering 1000 Burnt Sacrifices, and bade him ask what he would of him. Solomon consider∣ing that he was King over a great People, and that Sovereign Power could not well be ma∣nag'd without an extraordinary share of Pru∣dence and Wisdom, and that the greater his Ele∣vation was, the stronger his Obligation was to great and excellent Actions, though there was nothing he stood so much in need of as Wisdom, whereby he might be enabled to go∣vern his Subjects well and happily, and there∣fore made that alone his Petition of GOD. The LORD was so well pleased with this his Request, which shewed him already in a great measure possest of what he had beg'd of him, that he promised to bestow such a measure of it upon him, as never any Man had enjoy'd before him, or ever should have after him: And forasmuch as he had not asked either Riches or Honour, which he seemed to undervalue in comparison of Wisdom, he would as a Surplus give him so great a share of them, both as never any King had had before him, or any should be able to boast of after him. The Example of this young Prince, teacheth all Christian Kings to make small esteem of the Riches, Honours, and Pleasures of this World, and to place their chiefest glory in shewing themselves the true Images of that GOD whom they adore, by resembling him in Wisdom, which is the Spring of all good things; and in Justice, which is the true establishment of their Thrones.
103 Christopher Gardiner of the Tower of London Gentleman. For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
104 The Rt. Honourable Catherine Lady Cornbury▪ Wife to the Rt. Honourable, Edward Lord Viscount Cornbury, and Heyress to the most noble Charles Duke of Rich∣mond and Lenox. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate
SOLOMONS WISE JUDGMENT. Solomons famous Judgment between two Harlots, whereby he discover'd which of them both was the Mother of a Child, which they equally pretended to. SOLOMON having obtain'd of GOD, the gift of Wisdom, an occasion hapned not long after,The same Year 299. which made it appear in its full lustre and glory, and spread the fame of it far and near throughout the World. Two Harlots presenting themselves before Solomon, as he sat in Judgment, desired him to decide a Difference that was risen be∣tween them: And one of them opening the case, told the King, that both of them dwelling in one House, without any other Company, she was brought to bed of a Child, and that three days after her Companion was delivered of another, which she killed by overlaying it, and finding her Child dead, she arose at Mid∣night and took away her Child from her side whilst she slept, laying the dead Child in the room of it; so that when she arose in the Morning to give her Child Suck, she found it dead, and viewing it well, found it was none of hers. The other Woman strongly deny'd all that she had alledg'd, to prove, that the living Child was hers; and strongly asserted, that the dead Child she had found in her Bo∣som, was indeed her own Child. This intricate Case, which had hapned without Proof or Witness in a Lone-house, wherein there was no other Company, but the Parties concern'd, and in the dead-time of the Night, did indeed require a Head like Solo∣mons, to discuss and decide it; who upon this occasion gave a convincing Proof of the ex∣cellent knowledge of Nature he was endow'd with, as not only understanding the virtues and powers of Plants, Trees, and Animals, but also the most secret propensities and inclina∣tions of the Heart of Man, and amongst the rest, the tender affections and bowels of Mo∣thers towards their Children. For Solomon having heard the Plea of them both, commanded a Sword to be brought him, and pronounced this Sentence, which at first sight seem'd very strange and unjust, One of you (said Solomon) saith, The living Son is mine, and thy Child is dead, and the other saith, Not so, but thy Son is dead, and mine is living: Wherefore divide the living Child, and give the one half to the one, and the other half to the other. The true Mother having heard the King pronounce this Sen∣tence, her bowels being moved and yerning for her Son, earnestly entreated the King, by no means to kill the innocent Babe, but rather give it to her who falsly pretended to it, and had robb'd her of it: But the false Mother approved the Equity of the Sentence, and con∣sented, that since they could not agree about the Child, it might be divided, and each have half, since both could not have the whole. Solomon had no sooner heard their different reflections upon the Sentence he had given, but he adjudged the living Child to be given to her, who (by her desire and earnestness to save the Childs Life) had given an incontesta∣ble Proof, that it was her own, her Motherly bowels and affection evincing it beyond a pos∣sibility of doubting. Thus by Solomons great Sagacity and Wisdom was the true Mother discover'd, this difficult Case decided, and the Matter that had been so secretly handled without any Witnesses, laid open and ex∣pos'd to the view of all Men. By this means Solomon evinc'd the truth of what he himself saith in his Proverbs, That a King seated on his Throne of Judgment, has in some measure the Spirit of Divination on his Lips, and that it is a very difficult thing to impose upon his Prudence and great Sagacity, as having the clearness of sight, to discern between Truth and Lies. The Fathers take notice, that these two Women do excellently represent the difference there is between the true and false Pastors of the Church: The false Pastors accused the true one of killing and destroying the Souls com∣mitted to their Charge; whereas indeed they themselves are they that murther them; and make use of this Imposture, to sow Divisions and Dissensions in the Church: But the true Pastors (on the contrary) verifie themselves to be such by the Motherly Bowels they have for their Spiritual Children; they desire only their Salvation, and not at all their own Glory, and will rather suffer others to snatch from them the Souls they have nourished with the word of Life, than to give the least occasion of dividing the Unity of the Church.
The Description of JERUSALEM. THe City of Jerusalem, more famous for her Warlike Atchievements than Baby∣lon, or Rome, and far surpassing them for Sto∣ries Sacred and Miraculous; and for its Anti∣quity takes place of both, being but few years after the Confusion of Languages. This City, which in David's time was the place of publick Worship, the Seat of the Kings, and the Metropolis of the whole Coun∣try, was first built by Melchisedeck, that is, King of Righteousness, (for so the word sig∣nifies) Priest and King, and contemporary with Abraham, and call'd Salem, that is, Peace; both Names suiting well together, since in all human Societies, Peace can't be maintain'd but by Justice, nor Justice be ever better exe∣cuted than in the time of Peace. But it be∣ing afterwards possest by the Jebusites, they from their Ancestors gave it the Name of Jebus, from Jebus one of the Sons of Canaan, the Son of Cham or Ham, and Grandchild of Noah; for when Cham passed over the Eu∣phrates with the Canaanites, Mitfraimites. and Phutites, all following towards Egypt, whereof Canaan dropt by the way, and seated in the Holy Land; and in this most pleasant and fertile Country, the numerous Off-spring of these prophane Canaanites overspread themselves, and severing it in parcels amongst their Tribes, gave Names thereunto according to their Father; yet the whole Country re∣taining the Name of Canaan from their Grandsire. And here several of his Sons built Cities, amongst others, Jebus; which afterwards took the Name of Jerusalem, or Hierosolyma. For until this City was conquer'd by King David, (where he establish'd his Royal Seat) we find, it had no other Name than Jebus; from whence the Conqueror called it after himself Kiriath David, or the City of David, and under that Name was it called all his days, and after, until King Solomon enlarged and beautified it, and adorn'd it with the Sacred Temple of the LORD, which became more famous all the World over, than ever was that vast and rich Temple of Diana at Ephesus, one of the seven Wonders of the World. Now by reason of these Noble Addi∣tions of Solomon, and for that it was an Em∣blem of this Prince's most peaceable Reign, and for that it was enrich'd with the most Sacred Temple of Peace, wherein all People were to make Atonement for their Sins, in order to obtain their everlasting Peace with GOD, it was ever after call'd Hierosolyma in the Hebrew Tongue, that is, The Inheritance of Peace, or The Vision of Peace; and such espe∣cially was it in the time of our Saviour Jesus Christ, when the Peace of GOD, which passeth all understanding, was preach'd, and seen there reigning, Phil. 4.7. This City was held by the Jebusites, and called Jebus by the space of 80 years, who fortified it in such sort, that when King Da∣vid made preparations to attack it, they gave out, that they would oppose his whole Forces only with their Blind, Lame, and De∣crepit; but they were deceived in their Boast∣ings and Imaginations, for King David van∣quish'd them, took the City, and drove out the Inhabitants; afterwards he repaired the Breaches, fortified the Tower of Sion, and built round about from Millo inward, and named it as aforesaid by his own Name, 2 Sam. ch. 5. and made it the Capital City, not only of Judea, but of his whole Kingdom. Here David set up the Tabernacle upon Mount Sion, which some confound with the Coast of Gaban, and caus'd the Ark of the Covenant to be brought thither in great Joy. By this means he caused the blessing of GOD to come upon this Holy City, so that it im∣prov'd in strength, largeness and splendor in the Reign of King Solomon and his Successors, being enrich'd with magnificent Buildings; and in particular the Temple, full of rich Or∣naments, and in great part overlaid with pure Gold, insomuch that Jerusalem came to be one of the most famous Cities in the World, and chosen by GOD to be the place of his holy Worship, heaped with Prosperity, situate in the midst of a populous Nation, and envi∣ron'd with a most pleasant and agreeable Country, Ezek. 5.5. In the Division of the Land of Canaan, in the time of Joshua, it fell to the Tribe of Benjamin, as is described in the Map of the Land of Canaan. The Kings that Reigned here after Davids taking it from the Jebusites, were as followeth;
First, King David, who Reigned 33 years. 2ly. King Solomon his Son, 40. 3ly, Rehoboam his Son, 17. 4thly, Abijam his Son, 3. 5thly, Asa his Son, 41. 6thly. Jehosaphat his Son, 25. 7thly, Joram, 8. 8thly, Jehoahaz or Aha∣ziah, 1. 9thly, Athaliah his Wife, as Queen, 6. 10thly, Joash Son of Ahaziah, 40. 11thly, Ama∣ziah Son of Joash, 29. 12thly, Uzziah Son of Amaziah, 52. 13thly, Jotham or Joathan Son of Uzziah, 16. 14thly, Ahaz Son of Jothan, under his Father and after, 16. 15thly, Heze∣kiah Son of Ahaz, 29. 16thly, Manasseh Son of Hezekiah, 52. 17thly, Amon Son of Manas∣seh, 2. 18thly, Josiah Son of Amon, 31. 19thly, Jehoahaz or Joachaz, Son of Josiah, 3 Months. 20th, Jehojakim Brother of Jehoahaz, 11. 21th, Jehojakim Son of Jehojakim, 3 Months and 10 Days. 22th, Zedekiah, Brother of Jeho∣jakim, 11 years, and after one year more fol∣lowed the Captivity. Thus Jerusalem was governed by 21 Kings, and Queen Athaliah, for the space of 466 Years, 6 Months, and 10 Days, of which 390 years were from the Rebellion of the 10 Tribes unto the Captivity; and the 33 of David, the 40 of Solomon, and the 6 Months of Reho∣boam were before the Rebellion, the 10 Days were the excess of one year, wherein the Sun went backwards in the days of Ahaz. And in this time Jerusalem was grown to that bigness, that it had no less than 150 Furlongs in com∣pass, which is 18 ¾ English Miles, and num∣bring above 150000 Inhabitants. But at the end of these years, in the Reign of Eliakim, Nebuchadnezzer King of Babylon, and of the Chaldeans came, and utterly destroy'd both City and Country, Kingdom and People, bound the King in brazen Chains, and carried him Prisoner into his own Country, with certain Vessels out of the Temple, and placed them in the House of his Gods at Babylon. Jeho∣jakim succeeding him, was 3 Months after also carried away captive by Nebuchadnezzar, with the remainder of the rich Vessels of the Temple, and in the room of Jehojakim placed his Uncle Zedekiah; but he rebelling and defiling the Sanctuary of GOD, and contem∣ning his holy Prophets, and all the Instructions which they preach'd unto him in his Name, the King of the Chaldeans returned the third time, took the City, destroyed the People, burnt the Temple, with all the sumptuous Buildings, and razed the Walls to the ground, carried away captive all the rest of the People (except a very few) and took out of the Temple, and out of the Kings Palace all that he could find remaining of the Vessels and Treasure. After all this yet held out Gedalia one part of a year as Vassal to the Chaldeans, but he was slain by Ismael; the remainder of the People fled away into Egypt, and carried Jeremiah the Prophet with them, Jer. 43. Then sang the Prophet this lamentable Song, Jer. Chap. 1. Thus this miserable People remained Cap∣tive, and their Country ruin'd and lay uncul∣tivated, and their City lay ruinate, the Walls being pulled down, and the Houses demolish'd, becoming the Habitation for Bats and Owls for the space of 70 years, until the Land had her fill of Sabbaths, 2 Chron. 36.21. During the 70 years Captivity at Babylon, Nebuchadnez∣zar Reigned over these Coasts 25 years, Evil∣merodach his Son 28 years, and Belshazzzar his Grandson 17 years, 2 Chron. 36.20. At the end of the 14 years of Belshazzar, came Cyrus King of Persia, and Darius the Median Prince, and laid Siege to Babylon for 3 years together; at the end of which was Belshazzar carrousing Wine with his Concu∣bines, in the holy Vessels of the Temple in Babylon, when the Hand-writing appear'd on the Wall, which made him tremble for fear, and the Night after Cyrus having drained the River Euphrates dry, the City was taken, and Belshazzar slain, Dan. 5. And then Reigned Darius one year, and in that year it was that the Prophet Daniel set himself to seek the LORD by Prayer and Fasting, for that he had understood by Books, that the 70 years were clean run out, in order that the People might be restored again to their City and Country, and that the Temple and City might be rebuilt, Dan. 9. Immediately was this Prayer heard, and on the same year died King Darius, and Cyrus coming in his place, gave order for their Return out of Captivity, and accordingly the Gold and Silver Vessels of the Temple being delivered to Zorobabel, no time was lost with them, but immediately came away with great Acclamations of Joy. The 1st year they could do but little more than erect little Huts to lodge in, employing their time for the clearing and carrying away the Rubbish, for the laying the Founda∣tion of the Temple: The 2d year was also employed in Re-edifying the Temple, and the like was the 3d, until stopt by the Command of Cambyses, which lasted all his days, during these times the Jews built them Houses for their own dwelling, until reproved by the
Prophets Haggai and Zachariah. In the 2d year of Darius (after the Babylonian Rebel was overthrown) they began again to build the Temple, and were so encouraged by the King, that in 5 years the inward Temple was finisht, and in 2 years more the Courts were compleat∣ed. After 49 years more was this City still more and more rising in Beauty and Honour, until she began to come to her former Gran∣deur; but yet she had not her Walls of strength until Artazerxes (King of Persia) permitted them, and to that purpose Nehe∣miah came with Commission to see it done, and all was finish'd, and the Gates set up for its security and defence in 52 days, Neh. 6.15. Thus did this City arise again to its splen∣dour, and so continued until the coming of our Saviour; and during these times was go∣verned by Chief Rulers and High Priests, until the time came of the utter Subversion thereof. During the Persian Monarchy, the times were not frowning on them. In the Reign of King Artaxerxes Longhand there was one Haman, Son of Hamedatha the Aggagite, who endanger'd the undoing the whole Nati∣on of the Jews, not only here, but in other parts of the World; but by the Providence of GOD, and the means of Queen Esther and Mor∣decai, it was prevented: This was some few years before the coming of Nehemiah, for the raising up the Walls of Jerusalem, by the pro∣curement of Queen Esther. In these days lived Judith of Bethulia, famous for Behead∣ing Olofernes, who was a great Commander under Nebuchadnezzar, who rebelliously reigned at Babylon during the time of Darius King of Persia, and waxing proud, sent Olo∣fernes out Westward against Judea and others, whilst himself made head against the Persi∣ans; but this Olofernes perished, being out∣witted by Judith; Nebuchadnezzar was van∣quished by Darius, and being shut up in Baby∣lon, was betray'd by Zopyrus, and Darius reigned over all. And in the 2d year after this, was that second of Darius, when the building of the Temple went forward, Ezra 6. In the days of Artaxerxes Ochus, there was one Bagoses, who was Lieutenant to the King of Persia in these Parts, who came to Jerusa∣lem with Threats; occasioned, for that Jona∣than the High Priest, who had slain his Bro∣ther Manasseh, for Marrying a Daughter of Sanballat of Samaria, and contended with him for the Priesthood (Joseph. Antiq.) Nehem. 13.28. but when Alexander had got the Em∣pire, Sanballat got the start of the Jews, struck in with the Conqueror, and incensed him against them; but as Alexander lay before Gaza, Sanballat died before the Walls thereof, so that he had not the accomplishment of his ends; howbeit Alexander having master'd Gaza, came against Jerusalem in great wrath; but Jaddus (who was High Priest at that time) came out of the City in his Priestly Robes to meet him; and no sooner did Alexander see him, but his wrath was turned into Reverence, and doing him great Honour, left also noble Marks of his kindness behind him at Jeru∣salem. But Alexander being dead, Ptolomeus Lagus, Lord of Egypt, was not so civil; for he coming upon them on the Sabbath-day, (while they made no defence) took his advan∣tage of their Superstition, surpriz'd the City, made the Citizens his Captives, and carried away many of them Prisoners into Egypt: And thus it was an apt Prey unto whomsoe∣ver was Conqueror; sometimes the Syrians were their Lords, and otherwhiles the Egypti∣ans, until the end that Ptolomy having van∣quish'd Antigonus, enjoyed all Palestine in Peace. After him Ptolomy Philadelphus held it, who did the Jews much honour, and caused the famous Translation of the Old Testament into the Greek Tongue by the Septuagint. But Antiochus, called the Great, disturbed Palestine with Wars in the Reign of Ptolomy Philopater, and subdued the whole Country, yet shewed kindness to the Jews; but the Son of this Antiochus (called Epiphanes) was a bloody Persecutor, who polluted the Sanctuary of the Most High, took away the Daily Sa∣crifice, and set up the Abomination of Desola∣tion for the space of 2300 Days, Dan. 11.31. Chap. 8.11, 12, 13, 14. and made havock of the People, killing and carrying them away Captives, and compelling them to Sacrifice to Idols, until few of them were left. These were bitter times amongst 'em, until Judas Maccabeus, and his Brethren, with a small help stood up and adventured their Lives for the Service of GOD, and did won∣ders, cleansing the Altar of GOD, and resto∣red their Religion. This Judas spent his time in fighting the Battels of the LORD in which he was victorious; and after him Jonathan his Brother did the like, and became famous until he was murther'd by Tryphon: But Simon (another Brother) cast out the Gentiles from the Holy City, and restored Jerusalem and the Worship of GOD; and from this time forward
began the Jews once again to be their own Masters, and to give Laws to their Neighbour Princes. Yet this Simon was also slain by Treachery; but his Son (called John) revenged his Death, grew great, and prevailed against the Syrians, and left his Estate to Aristobulus his eldest Son. This Man would be called King, but died after one years Reign, and his Brother Alexander succeeded him, who had an unquiet Reign with the Syrians and his own Rebellious Subjects for 27 years. Before these times, the Jews were become famous for their knowledge, especially in Divine things. In the Jews return from Captivity, there was one named Ezra, a Famous Scribe, or Learned Man; after him was Simon the Just, a great promoter of Learning; after him rose up Antigonus Socheus, who was a great Zealot for Gods Laws, and had many follow∣ers; but from his corrupted Zeal sprang up the Sect of the Pharisees. There was also one Sadoc, who was Antigonus's Pupil, who in the end being tired with the strict Religious Life, fell off, and became the Father of the Sad∣duces; and John Hircanus (the High Priest) being troubled with the Insolences of the Pharisees became a profest Sadducee, and like∣wise his Sons after him. But in the Reign of this Alexander the Pharisees were so popular, that they gave Law even to the King, and occasioned great Troubles. After this Alexan∣der, his Wife Salome Reigned some years; but at her Death, Aristobulus the younger Son was very troublesom, even to the disthroning of his Elder Brother. In those days came Pom∣pey the Great into Syria, in pursuit of his Conquests, and taking advantage of the Dis∣orders amongst the Jews, took Jerusalem, pro∣phaned the Temple, and left them in Servitude to the Romans. A while after came Crassus by, in his Par∣thian Expedition, and robb'd the Temple; but in the end Herod (the Son of Antipater) an Edomite, a Man tho' of a base and mean Parentage, by his Subtilty and great Fortune gain'd the Kingdom, and reigned many years. In the latter end of whose Reign was our Saviour Jesus Christ born, and in these days the City of Jerusalem flourish'd in Wealth, Peace, and Honour, as well as in all manner of Wisdom and Knowledge; only the Jews could not be well satisfied in being under the Government of this Stranger, and to be sway'd by the Roman Power. But alas! their Pride was their greatest overthrow; for their not receiving the LORD of Life, they lost that Liberty and Blessing which he brought down from Heaven for them, had they not despised it, and contemned him and his Doctrin taught amongst them, and in the end Crucified him betwixt two Thieves; but they knew not the things that belonged to their Peace and Eter∣nal Happiness, they being hid from their Eyes; and therefore was it foretold what Calamities should befal them, and that one Stone should not be left upon another of all its Buildings she so boasted of, Luke 19, 43, 44. Chap. 21.6. and so accordingly it came to pass. Forty years (under the Type of so many Days) GOD had promised to bear the Iniquity of the House of Judah, Ezek. 4.6. and this seem'd to be fulfilled at this time, for so many years, bearing date from the Murther of our Saviour, until the total destruction of the Jews were fulfilled. In the year of Jesus Christ 32 finished, and 33 currant, was our Saviour Crucified; the Jews crying out to Pontius Pilate, His Blood be upon us and our Children, Matth. 27.25. And many years after this went away these Murtherers unpunish'd, as if they had done no hurt; and the Apostles and Dis∣ciples of Christ suffer'd much, some being Martyr'd, others Imprison'd, and persecuted from place to place: But as these forty years began to wax nigh, so Vengeance began to draw upon them, and first (like a gathering Cloud) it hover'd o're head, and shed its Drops round about Jerusalem, before the City it self felt the smart. The first that felt this Vengeance after the Death of Christ, were the Jews at Rome, who being detected in certain Treacheries upon Fulvia a Noble Romish Lady, and complain'd of to Tiberius the Emperour, by Siturnius the Ladies Husband; all the Jews that were there, for the sake of those few that were faulty, were banish'd, slaughter'd, and driven into Sardinia, being many thousands. Next unto these at Rome, were those at Alexandria, who upon a small Quarrel in the days of Ca∣jus the Emperour, for 3 years together, were continually persecuted with Scorns, Robberies Slaughters and Exile, to a great devastation. After this about the beginning of Claudius, the Jews at Babylon felt the same smart, thousands being kill'd, and the Survivors escaping fled into Seleucia; where (after two years respite) both the Greeks and Syrians fell upon them, and slew about 50000 of them; from thence the Remnant that escaped, fled to Ctesiphon;
but here all Nations joyned against them, and drove them away to the strong Holds of Ni∣silis and Nearda. And now Jerusalem began to be a Fellow-sufferer; for in the days of Cumanus the Go∣vernour, by reason of a quarrel with the Cen∣tinel at the Temple Gate, about 20000 Men were slain at the Passover time. The next that fell upon them was in the time of Foelix the Governour, where many were slaughtered both at Jerusalem and Cesarca. But as the 40 years grew near the accomplishment, Gessi∣us Florus in the Reign of Nero came to be Go∣vernour of Jerusalem, who gave himself who∣ly to Blood and Revenge against them, so that in the 23th of Nero, and the 65th of Jesus Christ, many thousands of them were slain by his means at Cesarca, and not long after the Persecution came to Jerusalem, where those Noble Jews that were honoured with the Ro∣man Knighthood suffered under this Florus, many of them perishing by publick Whip∣ping and Slaughter; but these were but the beginning of Sorrows, for presently the Wars broke out, and (as if all Nations had hated the Jews) they began in all places to make slaughter of them. At Cesarea, the Syrians slew about 30000 of them: At Scythopolis, the Inhabitants slew about 13000 of them: At Ascalon, about 10000: At Ptolemais, about 20000: At Tyrus a great many; the like at Gadara: At Alexandria the old grudge re∣vived, and the Greeks and Egyptians there slew about 50000 more. Cestius Gallus burnt and spoiled the City Zabulon; Cesinnius Gal∣lus slew about 2000 in Asamon, and Cestius slew about 8000 more in Joppa. At Damas∣cus were slain about 10000; Antonius, Go∣vernour of Askelon slew in Battle about 10000 at one time, and 8000 at another: After this came Vespasian into Galilee, and wasting the Country, took Gadara, where he killed with∣out mercy: Titus his Son at Japha slew a∣bout 15000; Vespasian took Jetapata, and slew there about 40000 Men. At Joppa perished by Shipwreck and Slaughter 4200: At Tarichaea upon the Lake, were slain and taken Captives above 13000; at Gamala perished near 9000 more, and at Giscala were slain and taken Captives about 5000 more. In the 13th year of Nero, Gadara was taken a 2d time, and near 15000 Jews slain and taken Captives: Next at Begabri and Caphariopha, about 10000 perished, and 1000 made Captives; and lastly, at Jericho and thereabouts were great slaughters made. For all which I refer the Reader to Josephus's History, where all is more largely handled. But now for some time these slaughters had some intermission, occasioned by Nero's Death, and Vespasian's Absence; yet great slaughters were amongst them. But the great destru∣ction hapned unto them in the 70th year of our LORD, when Vespasian (who Comman∣ded in the East, that he might restrain the frequent Seditions of the Jews.) after he had possest himself of divers places in Judea, en∣deavour'd to make himself master of Jerusa∣lem, and to that end blockt it up at a distance by several Forts, which cut off Provisions from the City, and incommoded the several ways; but hearing of the Death of Nero and Galba, together with Disorders that arose from the Contests between Otho and Vitellius, he retir'd to Cesarea, where he had an eye to all the Territories thereabouts, shewing more con∣cernment for the prosperity of the Empire, than for foreign Conquests; so that for his Vertue he was chosen Emperour, and maintained in that Dignity by the Forces he Comman∣ded. His Affairs in Egypt being set in order, and Preparations made for his Journey to Rome, his Son Titus return'd to Judaea, to finish there what his Father had begun; his design being very much facilitated by the Dissentions at Jerusalem, which was divided into three facti∣ons, cruelly warring upon each other within the Walls of the City, burning each others Houses, and setting fire to the publick Maga∣zines, to the destruction of a great quantity of Ammunition and Provisions, of which they were reduc'd to a most lamentable want when the City was besieged. So dreadful a confusion of Mischief and Slaughter there was amongst these wretched People, that they forbore not to kill one another even in the Temple. During these Strifes and Tumults there ap∣peared over this City a Comet in form of a Sword, which seemed to denounce further Ven∣geance to come upon these Impious People. Titus encampt himself round about, and laid a formal Siege: whereupon the Besieged think∣ing it then time to unite against the Common Enemy, stoutly defended themselves, and made frequent Sallies upon them; by which means, although they more and more exasperated the Romans against them, yet Titus forbore not to make several overtures of Treaty for Peace, offering them good Conditions, which they foolishly rejected with Insolence and Scorn.
The truth is, the Besiegers made but slow pro∣gress for a great while, and perhaps had been hard put to it, had not a new Dissention arose amongst the Besieged, only the three foremen∣tioned Parties were reduced to two, the Heads whereof were John and Simon; and they also, when they observ'd Titus at the Head of his Troops preparing for a General Assault, so far united; that they made a shift to beat them off, and rendred wholly successless this first Assault of the Romans, who nevertheless conti∣nued to batter the first Wall with their Batter∣ing Rams and other Warlike Machins, and at length made such a breach in it, that the Be∣sieged were forc'd to abandon it, and retire within the second Wall. Thus the Romans became Masters of the outward Wall the 7th day of May, and five days after they gained the second Wall; yet Titus strictly forbid the slaughtering of any that should be taken, as also the burning of their Houses, by which civility he so far won upon the generality of the Inhabitants, that they began to hearken to a Surrender; but the Mutineers opposed even to a threatning with Death any one that should dare to speak any more of it, though still Titus offered them very good Conditions. Upon this new Re∣solution of keeping the place, the Besieged sal∣lied out and drove the Romans from the 2d Retrenchment; but 4 days after the Besiegers retake it, raze down the Wall, and put strong Guards into the Towers. Titus preparing to attack the 3d Wall, to avoid the further ef∣fusion of Blood, sends a new Summons to the Besieged; but the obstinate Party infatuated to their ruin, will hearken to no Accommoda∣tion. Then an Attack is made upon the Tower or Fort Antonia, on both sides at once, and two high Batteries raised, to pour down from each side upon the Defendants: To whom ne∣vertheless, at the same time he sent Josephus, to represent unto them the desperateness of their Condition, in case they hearkned not in time to some reasonable terms of Agree∣ment; but instead of yielding to Reason, they drove back the Embassador with Arrow-shot, and a return of scoffing Messages to him that sent him, althô at the same time reduc'd to a most prodigious Famine, even very near to the devouring one another; however they burn and ruin'd the Batteries of the Assailants, and render'd them useless. On the other side, Titus blocks them up so close, that nothing could be carried in or out; moreover, they were so pester'd and annoy'd with the dead Carkasses, that they were forc'd for want of other convenience of Burial, to convey them (as well as they could) out of the Wall, to keep their Houses, Streets, and publick places free. A Deserter reported to the Romans, that at one Gate (where he kept Guard during the Siege) no less than 115880 Bodies had been carried out; and it is affirm'd for a Truth, that all the Gates of the City had sent out at least 600000 of the poorest sort, besides a great number of those that were not carried out, but were thrown on heaps in the out-places of certain great Houses, where they fell sick and died. Within the City a Bushel of Corn was sold for 600 Crowns; the poor fed upon such things as they could find, as Grass, Hay, Old Hides, and Cow-dung was a delicate Dish; yet could not all these dismal Accidents dispose these obdurate Wretches to a Surrender. At the beginning of July the Tower of An∣tonia being taken by force, the Besieged be∣took themselves to the Temple, where after Fire and Sword had raged for some time, to the slaughter of vast Multitudes, as well of the Assailants as Defendants, at length (much against the Will of Titus, who had a great mind to have preserved so noble a Structure) the Temple took fire the 10th day of August, being the very same Month and Day that the first Temple had been destroyed and burnt by the Chaldeans; being 1130 Years, 7 Months, and 15 Days, according to the most received computation after the said Temple was foun∣ded by Solomon, and 639 Years and 45 Days after the second had been rebuilt by Zorobabel. However this Computation agrees not altoge∣ther with that of the Jews, who allow but 410 Years duration to the first Temple, and 420 to the second. In this expugnation and destructi∣on of the Temple, there was so great a slaughter of the Jews, that fled thither for Sanctuary, (the fury of the Conquerour neither sparing Age nor Sex) that the blood of the slain flow∣ed like a River down the Steps; and tho' the grand Mutineers made their escape and defence from place to place for a few days, yet at last they served only to compleat the Number, and to fill the Streets and publick Places with their dead Carkasses. In this Siege, from the 14th of April to the 8th of September, there fell by the Sword and Famine 1100000 Jews, also 97000 taken Prisoners by the Romans, besides Millions that perished in silence. The remainder of this
miserable City being reduc'd to Ashes, what∣ever was sav'd of the Booty, was employ'd to enrich the Triumph of Vespasian, and his Son Titus: And after that, for the Ornament of the Temple of Peace, which was erected at Rome. In process of time, the Emperour Adrian having obtain'd fresh Victories over the Jews, who rebelled under the Conduct of Barcho∣chabas, had a fancy to rebuild it on Mount Calvary, calling it from his own Name Aelia; but at the same time expresly forbidding the Jews to inhabit there: In prosecution of which Prohibition, to render the place the more odious and execrable to them, he caused the Image of a Hog to be placed over the Gate, and from thenceforth the Christian Church of Jerus of Jerusalem chose not their Bishops, as formerly, from amongst those of the Circumci∣sion. Constantine the Great (out of his Devo∣tion, and partly excited by his Mother Helena) enrich'd it with many fair Edifices, and with a sumptuous Temple for the Christians, for the performance of their Divine Service, in the very place where the Sepulchre of Jesus Christ had been. Julian the Apostate, in hatred of Christianity, permitted the Jews to rebuild theirs; but as they were busie at work (in clearing the Foundations) flames of Fire issuing out of the Earth hindred their design, and de∣stroyed both the Workmen and their Work, as Ammianus Marcelinus, a Pagan Writer, (and therefore the more credible) upon this Subject recites. So long as the Roman Empire conti∣nued flourishing in the East, Jerusalem kept up its Grandeur in the Profession of Christian Religion: but after that the Saracens came in like a Deluge upon those parts, it remain'd some time in their possession; then it came into the hands of the Christians, till at length it fell under the Turkish Yoke, who possess it to this day, nevertheless give Toleration to the Christians; so that it is inhabited by a People differing as well in Language, as in Sentiment of Religion and Form of Worship. Jerusalem is seated 7 Leagues from Jordan, 10 from the Mediterranean, 50 from Grand Cairo, 72 from Antioch, 167 from Mecca, 171 from Niniveh, 174 from Babylon, 225 from Constantinople, 355 from Mosco, 388 from Na∣ples, 390 from Cracovia in Poland, 402 from Vienna, 411 from Rome, 430 from Venice, 541 from Amsterdam, 558 from Paris, and 592 from London. Now as the whole of this Ichnographical Map of Jerusalem serves to represent to us its Place, for the understanding of several places of Scripture, and in particular the 3d Chapter of Nehemiah: Moreover, the Ornaments which encircle it, have their references to divers o∣ther places of the Word of GOD; For Example, the Figures of the Ark of the Covenant, of the Table of Shew-bread, and of the Golden-Candlesticks, belonging to the 25th Chapter of Exodus; that of the Tabernacle, to the 26th and 27th Chapters; that of the High Priest in his Pontifical Habits, to the 28th Chapter; and that of the Altar of Perfumes, to the 30th of the said Book; that of Solomons Temple, and the Brazen Sea, to the 6th and 7th Chapters of the First Book of Kings. A brief account of all which here followeth, referring the Reader to the several Chapters abovesaid. The Tabernacle. MOses having brought to the People the Tables of the Law, and they being resolved to render to GOD a faithful Obedi∣ence;Anno Mundi, 2513. being 6 Months after their going out of E∣gypt; but this Taber∣nacle was not finish'd until the beginning of the next year. this Holy Man thought of nothing more, than to execute what GOD had commanded him during those 40 Days on the Mount. But be∣fore he undertook any Work, he assembled the People together, and declared to them what GOD had commanded him to do; to the end, that every one should freely offer what he was able towards so great a Work. Hardly had he made this Proposal unto them, but that they freely brought in all their pre∣cious Ornaments, even the Women did not spare their Pendants, Bracelets, Rings, and most rich Vessels; they gave also what they had of rich Stuffs and Perfumes. And Moses having chosen Persons enlightned with Wisdom from GOD, to oversee those Works, they found themselves in such manner overloaded with Gifts, that they were constrained to publish by an Herald, that no Person should bring in any more. The Work which GOD had ordained Moses first to begin, was this Tabernacle. It was 30 Cubits long, and 10 large; it was boarded on all sides, and covered within and without with Stuffs; those within were exceeding rich, and those without were of Skins fit to resist all the injuries of Weather. The embroidery of the Curtains within represented Cherubims and Feathers, and all the Skins were fastned to one another, by Rings and Buckles of ad∣mirable Art. There were four Stuffs one upon
another, the better to resist all sorts of Wea∣ther. There were fastned to the Boards Rings of Gold, through which past Levers, which were also covered with Gold, to carry it when they were to remove the Tabernacle, and there were Silver Bases to place them upon for the greater security. This was the construction of the Tabernacle, which (S. Austin saith) was full of Mysteries, and was a visible Figure of the Church. This Portative Temple, which was transported in several places, did denote the Church whilst it is yet here on Earth, and in a state of in∣stability and place of Passage; as since the Temple of Solomon figures the Church to be in its state of stability, and in its Heavenly Habi∣tation. The Boards which made the Walls in the Tabernacle, signified the strong Persons which uphold the whole Church by the solidity of their Vertue. The Silver Bases upon which they were placed, did denote the Purity of the Doctrin and Truth upon which she is fixed. The Golden Tapestries, adorned with Embroi∣dery of different sorts, which glistered on all sides of the Tabernacle, signified the different Vertues of the Elect, which altogether form an agreeable Variety to the Glory of GOD, and Ornament of the Church. But as the Fathers do very well remark, each particular part of this Tabernacle did not compose only a Dwelling-place where GOD did inhabit. It was only the whole, and the union of the Parts together; which marks unto us, That how excellent soever each parti∣cular Vertue appears in the Church, they are nevertheless nothing, if they are not united by Charity to the rest of its Children; for which Peace and Concord is the most holy Temple, which GOD can have here upon Earth. The Ark of Aliance. THe Tabernacle being made according to the Rules which GOD had prescribed to Moses,The same year· he began forthwith to work upon this Ark; which was (as it were) an Abridgment of the whole Religion of the Jews, and was chiefly made, to place it Honou∣rably. The Jews consider'd it as a thing they esteem'd most precious, and the Scripture calls it, the Glory of Israel, and the Strength of the Jews. It was two Cubits and an half long, one and an half wide, and as much in height. It was of incorruptible Wood, and covered both within and without with Plates of pure Gold; that which covered it above was not of Wood, but a Table of Gold of the same bigness of the Ark, and this Cover was called the Propitia∣tory, because it was from thence that GOD gave forth his Oracles to his People, at such times as he would be favourable unto them. There was upon this Propitiatory two Che∣rubims, which regarded each other, and which extended their Wings all along the Ark, as it were to serve for a Throne to his Majesty; which hath given occasion to those manner of Ex∣pressions so frequently used in Scripture, which represent unto us GOD seated upon the Che∣rubims. GOD also caused to be fixed on the four corners of the Ark, Golden Rings; and ordered Staves to be made of Shittim Wood, cover'd with Gold, which were always put through the four Rings, and served to carry the Ark when the Camp moved. GOD would have this Ark consecrated unto him, and that there should be nothing else put therein, but the Tables of the Law, which caused it to be called, The Ark of the Testimony, or the Ark of Aliance; because the Law in Scripture is called by these two Names They put also a Measure of Manna therein, with Aaron's Rod. 'Twas in this manner that GOD was pleased in times past, to give to this dull People an Object of Piety which should be visible unto them, and which had a correspondence to their Weakness; but the True Ark where GOD will now inhabit, according to the New Law, is the Soul of the Faithful, who keep his Command∣ments written in their Hearts upon two Living Tables, which preserve the Manna of Grace by which they are always nourished, and which have within them (like Aaron's Rod) through the inflexibility of their Vertue and Justice. The Propitiatory which cover'd it, represented Jesus Christ, which is our Propi∣tiation (as S. Paul saith) and who hath reconciled us to his Father, and dwelleth in the Souls of the Faithful. This Propitiatory had two Cherubims; but (as S. Austin often saith) Christians are Che∣rubins themselves through the fulness of their Charity, which renders them like unto the Seats and Thrones of GOD, thus considering the Honour to which GOD has been pleased to call them, they ought to despise the vain Greatness of this World, and to separate them∣selves from it as unworthy of them, and to be always as a Sanctuary where the LORD takes pleasure to inhabit; and not to imitate that which the Enemies of the Temple of GOD, have formerly done, in placing the Holy Ark by the Idol Dagon; which (S. Austin saith
we do at such time as we link the Vanity of the World with the Truth of GOD, and the Worship of Devils with that of Jesus Christ. The Table of Shew Bread. AS soon as the Ark of Alliance was made an end of, Moses made a Table accor∣ding to the command of GOD:The same Year 2514. It was of Incorruptible Wood, and co∣vered over on all sides with Plates of Gold; the length of it was two Cubits, its breadth one, and its height half a Cubit. GOD caused him to put a little Crown of Gold, which had a small rising both above and below; and there were 4 Wings of Gold underneath the said Crown, thrô which were put Staves cover'd with Gold, for the carrying it whereever the Camp moved. The use to which this Table was allotted, was continually to offer before GOD that Bread which was commonly called the Shew-Bread. There were 12 of them, 6 at each end of the Table, and made of the finest Flower, mixt with Oil; they were changed every Week, and new ones put in their room; the stale ones the Priests were only permitted to eat, and in the Holy Place, to shew the greater Zeal, GOD also ordered Moses to make little Basons of Gold, to put these Loaves in on the Table, and other little Dishes of Gold to cover them. GOD com∣manded that they put upon each of these two little Piles a Vessel full of the most excellent incense, that the Smoke might ascend up to Heaven, to the end that these Loaves might be consecrated to GOD. It was in this (as the Fathers observe) the continual Sacrifice, by which GOD would wit∣ness to his People a continual Acknowledgment; and that he did declare, that it was only from his goodness, it did possess what it had. He would for this reason, that there should be 12 Loaves, to make the 12 Tribes of Israel, that each Tribe might see into a just resentment of his Mercies, and that altogether they might look upon GOD as the Auhor of all their good. It is yet to this day the Acknowledgment which he requires from Christians, and by so much the more reason, as the favours which he hath done them are more excellent. They have another Shew-Bread, that is to say, Jesus Christ, upon the Holy Table, which is offered up to GOD for Thanksgiving; and who offers himself to his Fa∣ther, in acknowledgment of the Gifts which he hath poured down upon his Church. The Golden Candlesticks. NOtwithstanding that every thing was Magnificent in the Temple, which GOD had order'd Moses to raise for his honour; ne∣vertheless one may say,The same year, 2514. that one of those things that most shined was the Golden Candlestick, which GOD had comman∣ded Moses to make according to his particular Order, as is at large set down in the 25th of Exodus, Verse 31; the form of which in some respect, appears by the Figure thereof. Over this Candlestick with the 7 Branches, were put 7 Lamps, made also of pure Gold; and the Oil to feed these Lamps, was the purest Oil of Olives. It was the High Priest himself who had the order to light them every Day, that they might burn all Night in the Taber∣nacle. These 7 Lamps so mysterious, have great coherence with those we read of in the Apo∣calyps, where Jesus Christ (glorious after his Ascension) takes pleasure to say, that he dwells in the midst of the 7 Lamps, which he clearly saith to be the Churches. GOD marked it even in the ancient Law, what the Ministers ought to be in the New, to whom Jesus Christ has said himself, that he lighted them as Lamps not to be hid in an obscure place, but to shine in the House, (as he saith of S. John Baptist;) to the end, that that splendour which the Pastors cast forth to the eyes of Men, may spring from the interior Fire of that Charity with which they burn in their Hearts in the Eyes of GOD; and that their Lamps having been once lighted by the Fire of the Holy Ghost, they may never be extinguished, and raise themselves above all the endeavours that Men can make to extinguish them, (ac∣cording to the words of Paulinus) change often the order of GOD, and raise upon the Candle∣stick, Lamps which have nothing but Smoke; and hide under a Bushel the true Burning Lamps, which might be a Light to others. S. Gregory hath also admir'd in this Candle∣stick, the solidity of the Workmanship, which he look'd upon as a Figure of that Firmness which all the Pastors of the Church ought to have, lest GOD should change their Candle∣stick out of its place, as he threatned a Bishop in the Apocalyps: But this same Father very well remarks, That this Firmness can't come to them, but from Jesus Christ, which is the Stock that sustains all the Branches, which can't sub∣sist of themselves, and which have no strength, but that which they draw from our Saviour. As long as the Pastors remain fixt to Jesus Christ, they have nothing to fear. Men may well endeavour to shake them; but GOD (who hath placed them in his Church as Lamps, to
enlighten the Faithful) keeps them always so, that they remain firm and unshaken in the House of the LORD, in despight of all the Tempests and Agitations of the World. The High Priests Habits. THere remain'd no more (after so many Works) but the Ornaments of the High Priests and the Levites.Anno Mundi 2514. That which they had common to them all, is, that (besides the Under habits which GOD had ordained for Comliness) they had all of them a certain Garment of Linnen, somewhat like unto the Canonical Surplices, except that they had no Folds: And that was the only Garment which was common both to the High Priest and the Levites. But the High Priest had over that Linnen Garment, another of the colour of Jacinth, which was fuller, and hung down almost to his Feet; below which there was fastned Pomgranates, and little Bells of Gold intermixed, to the number of 72. Over this Robe the High Priest vested him∣self with the Ephod, which was a certain rich Stuff, Embroider'd, which reach'd but half way his Body. It was clos'd on each side, and open but above by the Breast, which was joyn'd to∣gether with 2 Clasps, on which were 2 Preci∣ous Stones of admirable beauty, upon which engraven the Names of the 12 Tribes, 6 upon each Stone. There was upon the fore-part of this Ephod a void place a foot square, which was fill'd up with a piece of Embroidery, call'd the Pectoral, enrich'd with 12 Precious Stones, on each of which were writ one of the Names of the 12 Tribes of Israel; these two words following were writ upon a little plate of Gold, viz. Doctrin and Verity. This Pectoral was fastned with 4 Golden Chains, 2 held it above, and 2 fastned it below to the Girdle. Altho, that this Ephod was very strait, ne∣vertheless the High Priest did not stick to girt it closer, with a Girdle of rich Embroidery. He had upon his Tyer or Head-Band a Plate of Gold, which cover'd his Forehead, on which were engraven these words, Holiness belongs to the LORD. All the Glory of these Habits, notwithstand∣ing the greatness thereof, were nothing, when we fix our Eyes on that Magnificence which was figured by it. The Gold sparkled (saith S. Gregory) to shew, that GOD chiefly demands Wisdom in those which approach his Altar, even a Wisdom of Godliness, which renders their Life more pleasing to him, than their Priestly Garments are to the Eyes of Men. These little Bells signifie to the Priests, that their Lives ought to speak, and that their Actions ought to dispose Men to think on GOD. These Bells made no noise when the High Priest mo∣ved not, and Ministers edifie not their People at such times as they advance not in Piety. This Pectoral, on which were writ the words Doctrin and Verity, did denote, that the Heart of the Priest ought to be employed, in casting away all vain Thoughts and Earthly Affairs. The 12 Names engraven on the 12 Stones, denote, that they ought always to be mindful of the Ancient Fathers, their Predecessors: For (according to the same Father) the Priest can't be unblamable in his Life, but when he treads the steps of these Saints, and hath always the Example of their Life before his Eyes, to follow them himself, and to cause others to do the like. The Altar of Perfumes, and Burnt-Offerings. TO accomplish all that GOD had com∣manded Moses to put into the Tabernacle, this Holy Man caused another to be made,Anno Mundi 2514. which they called the Al∣tar of Perfumes, because they offered conti∣nually upon it to GOD. It was of Shittim-wood, cover'd with Gold on all sides. It was square, being a Cubit long and broad, and two Cubits high, GOD himself had mark'd it out in what manner they ought to compose the Perfumes that were offer'd on this Altar. It was placed in the Tabernacle over against the Veil which GOD had caused to be set before the Ark, between the Table on which was put the Shew-Bread and the Golden Candlestick. Just before the Tabernacle, GOD had caused another Altar to be made, which stood in the Court, as it was appointed for the Burnt-Offerings, which was not covered. It was call'd The Altar of the Holocaust, that is, whole Burnt-Offerings. It was square, being 5 Cubits long, and as many broad, and 3 in height. It was made of Shittim-wood, but cover'd on all sides with great Plates of Copper. Its Super∣ficies was cover'd with a Grate, over which was a little Grate, which ascended a Cubit and an half unto the middle of the Altar. This Altar which was not solid, but hollow, was not in that particular like unto the other Altars, which GOD had commanded should be erected to him at such time as they should be in a fixt condition, which ought to be solid; that is, either of Earth, or of Unhewen Stone. This (on the contrary) was an Altar to be carried about, and to change place when the People did decamp to go elsewhere.
These two Altars (according to S. Gregory) did denote, during the Ancient Law, the state of Souls in the New Law, and the two different Orders which should be always in the Church; that is to say, that of Penitence, and that of Innocence. One of these two Altars was in the Tabernacle, and the other without, to signifie to the Penitent, that they are yet unworthy to enter into the Temple, one of these Altars was appointed, to burn the Flesh of Animals, which admirably represents the exteriour Actions of Repentance, by which the Penitent offers him∣self in some sort to GOD, and consumes as an Holocaust; the other was reserved to burn the Perfumes, to raise up to Heaven the Odour and Smoke of the Incense; which signified the heat of Charity in their Souls, and the fervour of their Prayers. So one of these Altars is for those that sigh as yet, in remembrance and resent∣ment of their Sins; and the other is for those that sigh no longer, but thro' the desire of Hea∣ven, and GOD, who there inhabits. The Priests raise the first Altar, when they represent to Sinners with vigour their Faults they have committed, to excite in them a wholsom Con∣trition: And they raise the second at such time, when they have brought these humble Sin∣ners to a Holy Repentance. These two Altars, althô so different in them∣selves, have nevertheless this of common, that both of them honour GOD by a holy Adora∣tion, and have both need of the Fire of his ho∣ly Spirit, to consume the Sacrifices offered. SOLOMON's Temple. THe Reign of Solomon was a time of great Peace and Plenty; for the infinite Riches of this Prince,Anno Mundi 3000. di∣lated it self over all his Subjects, who (as the Scripture saith) lived peaceably, each under the shadow of his own Figtree and Vine. They then had but a mean esteem of Gold by reason of the great plenty; and Silver was scarce regarded amongst them. All the Magnificence of succeeding Princes have not been equal to his, and they might pass for poor and private Persons in comparison to him. There was every Day used in this Kings House about 11 Hogsheads of sine Flower, and about 22 of ordinary, 10 Fat Oxen, and 20 others taken out of the Pastures, likewise 100 Sheep, besides an infinite number of Venison, with all sorts of Fowl both Tame and Wild. He had 40000 Horses for Draught, and 12000 for the Sadle; all which were fed and kept in a most excellent order. This great Plenty was occasion'd by reason of the Peace which all Judea enjoyed, and this occasioned Solomon to have the Name of Pa∣cifick. It was this Peace that was necessary for him for his design of building the Temple, first design'd by David, but could not be accom∣plish'd by reason of his many Wars. This young Prince used his utmost endeavours to accomplish this Undertaking, employing for the building thereof 80000 Stone-Cutters, 70000 Labourers, and 3600 Overseers. This Temple was begun in the 4th Year of Solomon's Reign, 480 years after the Israelites going out of Egypt, and it was finish'd in the beginning of the Year 3000, being just a 1000 Years before the Birth of the Messias, of which it was a Figure. So Solomon (who was not much above 20 years old when he began this Work) had the good fortune to raise the First Temple upon Earth, to the Name and Glory of the True GOD, and to accomplish in few years the most Magnificent Building, which until that time had ever been seen; which is at large set down in the 6th Chapter of the 1st Book of the Kings, as to its bigness, richness of Building, &c. to which I refer the Reader. Too happy (saith S. Ambrose) if Solomon had taken care by raising a Temple to GOD, so to fix himself in Humility, that his Soul might have been a Temple more acceptable, than that which he caused to be built! But after having Consecra∣ted to GOD a Temple of Stone in his Youth, he shamefully prophaned in his old Age (as we shall see hereafter) the Temple of his Body. And he learns others by his Example, that those who give Presents to GOD or his Church, must not over∣much depend on those Gifts, how splendid soever they appear to the Eyes of Men; but to remember, that the true Happiness of Man in this life (as S. Austin notes) is to be abased, not raised; since all that which Solomon had done, and possessed of Magnificence, did not hinder him at last to be o∣verwhelm'd by the access of his glory and happi∣ness. The Brazen-Sea. THe Building of the Temple of Solomon, altho' so admirable and mysterious in it self,Anno Mundi 2514. had been imperfect, if this Prince, of whom all these Works were Figures (as he himself was the Figure of the True Solomon) had not accompanied this Holy Building with all such Necessaries, as be∣longed to the Worship of GOD, and to the Ceremonies of his Sacrifices. After so many Works in Gold (which he caused to be made
with an infinite Expence) he made this Work, which by reason of its vast largeness, is par∣ticularly describ'd in Scripture, and deserves a particular Explication. It was a Brazen Vessel extreamly large, being 5 Cubits high, 6 large, and 30 about, so that it would hold about 300 Hogsheads of Liquor, according to our Measures. It was su∣stain'd by 12 Brazen Oxen, 3 of which regarded each quarter of the Heavens. It was enrich'd with all sorts of Ornaments, as Festoons, the re∣presentation of Animals, and of all such things as the most curious Artists could invent. The Brazen Sea was put by Solomons Order in the Temple, where it served to purifie the Priests when they went in to exercise their Priestly Functions. GOD had given this Order to Moses, and this holy Prophet had formerly caused a great Bason of Copper to be made, which was between the Tabernacle and the Altar, to the end that the Priests might wash their Feet and Hands, as they went in and out. It was this that gave occasion to many Per∣sons to believe, that when the Priests went to offer Incense to GOD, that they went Bare-footed, and GOD ordained them to wash themselves in that manner upon pain of Death, the Scripture commanding, that this Law be observed for ever; signifying very clearly even then (all those Sacrifices being then but the Figures of what was to come) what Purity he required one day from the Ministers and Priests of his Al∣tars of the New Law. Thus much shall suffice for the Ornaments about the Map; and althô this once so famous a City, is now bereaved of her former Beauty, and like a desolate Widow lies mourning in its ruinated Buildings; yet it is not so lost, but that there are in the City (which is begirt with a Wall about 3 Miles compass) several places worthy of Note: As on Mount Calvary, where our Saviour was Crucified, there is a rich mag∣nificent and large Temple, built by the Vertuous Helena, Daughter to Coilus, a British King, and Mother to Constantine the Great, which not only possesseth the Mount, but also the Garden below, where his Sepulchre was: And in this Temple there are several rich Structures, as one where Christ was imprisoned before his Crucifixion; also one where the Sepulchre was, the Altar of the Holy Cross, the Altar of Scourg∣ing, the Chapel of the Apparition, the Chapel of the Angels, the Chapel of the Division of his Garment, the Chapel of S. Helena (who built the Temple) the Chapel of S. John, the Sepulchre of Joseph of Arimethea, under-ground; the Castle of the Pisans, the Monastery of the Franciscans, the Church of S. James, the Church of S. Mark (where once stood his House,) a Mosque in the place of the House of Zebedeus, a Chapel where the House of S. Thomas stood; the Church of the Angels, in the place of the Palace of Annas the High Priest; the Church of S. Saviour, where stood the Palace of Caia∣phas; the Court of Solomons Temple, yet re∣maining, but in the room thereof is a Mosque. Near about the City of Jerusalem are also several Places of Note; as in the way between Jerusalem and Bethlehem, there are the Ruins of Davids Tower, the Tower of Simeon, Bath∣shebas Fountain, the Cistern of Sages, the Mona∣stery of Elias, Jacobs House, the Sepulchre of Rachel, the Cistern of David, the House of Joseph, the Monastery of Bethlem, the Mona∣stery of the Holy Cross. And at Bethlem, over the place where Christ was born, the Vertuous Helena erected another fair and goodly Tem∣ple, which is possest by the Franciscans of Je∣rusalem, being called by the Name of S. Ma∣ries of Bethlem. Nigh to Jerusalem is the Desert of S. John Baptist, with the Ruins of a Monastery over his Cave and the Fountain; as also the Moun∣tains of Judah, where is the Church to S. John Baptist, the Fountain and the House of Eliza∣beth; also the Sepulchre of Zachary, a part of the Pillar of Absalom, and the Cave of S. James. At Bethany (2 Miles from Jerusalem) is the House of Simon the Leper, the House of La∣zarus, as also his Sepulchre, where is the Mount of Olives, and where is the Sepulchre of the Virgin Mary; to which place our Saviour often resorted, and from which Mount he ascended up into Heaven. The Port of this City is Joppa, about 10 Miles distant, to which place the Wood and Stones (taken from Mount Libanus, for the building of Solomons Temple) were brought, and from thence convey'd by Land to the City: And from this Port Jonah embarked, to fly from the face of the LORD. To this City of Jerusalem there is a great resort of People, as well of Protestants as Pa∣pists, thô for sundry ends, that is, as well for Devotion as Curiosity, which bring in a great Revenue; none being permitted to enter with∣out paying some Money, which the Jews here inhabiting do farm of the Grand Seignior at a large yearly Revenue, making a great Profit by shewing the said places to Strangers.
The Dedication of the Temple. Solomon assembles all Israel, in order to the solemn Dedication of the Temple. AS soon as Solomon had finished all the Buildings of the Temple, and the Uten∣sils and Furnitures thereof,Anno Mundi 3001. before Christ 1003. he resolved solemnly to dedicate and consecrate the same, and to bring up the Ark from the City of David, for to place it therein. It will not be amiss to observe the several Removes of the Ark of GOD; so famous in Scripture. The Tabernacle and Ark being first made by Moses in the Desert, were afterwards by Joshua set up at Shiloh, the 7th year after that the Israelites had past through Jordan. This Shiloh was a City in the Tribe of Ephraim, and seems to have been the same with Sa∣lem, where Melchisedech reigned, and near to which St. John baptized. In this place the Ark continued 328 years, till the time that the Israelites carried it into their Camp against the Philistins, who took it and sent it back 7 years after. Upon its Return into the Holy Land, it was placed in the House of Abina∣dab in Kiriath-jearim, where it continued 70 years, and then translated from thence to the House of Obed-edom, where it abode only three Months; at the end of which David transport∣ed it to Zion, which was the Citadel of Jeru∣salem. It seems likely also that at the same time the Tabernacle, which had continued all this while at Shiloh, was set up at Gibeon, a City in the Tribe of Judah. But 40 years after this, at the time of the Dedication of the Temple, Solomon placed the Ark and the Brazen Altar there, where they continued 424 years, at which time Nebuchad∣nezzar took Jerusalem, and burnt the Tem∣ple; which being foreseen by Jeremiah the Prophet, he took care to convey the Ark to Mount Pisgah, where he was assured by GOD it should remain unknown till the return of the Children of Israel from the Babylonish Cap∣tivity; which makes it more than probable, that the said Ark was afterwards placed in the Second Temple, which was begun by Cyrus, and finished by Darius, Kings of Persia. But amongst all these Translations of the Ark, none was so famous as that which was performed at this time by Solomon, who to render this Solemnity the more august and glorious, invited all Israel to be present at it. He himself marched before the Ark, which was carried by the Priests, both he and all the People sacrificing Sheep and Oxen, that could not be told for number. As soon as they were come into the Temple, the Priests placed the Ark in the most Holy Place, under the Wings of the Cherubims; and when they were come out from thence, the Cloud of the Divine Presence filled the Temple, so that the Priests could not stand to Minister, because the Glory of the LORD had fill'd the House. Solomon was overjoyed, when he saw this pregnant Testimony of the LORD's appro∣ving of the Place which he had erected to the Glory of his Name; and kneeling down in this transport of Joy before the Altar, he said. Is it possible that GOD should condescend to dwell upon the Earth? behold the Heaven, and Hea∣ven of Heavens cannot contain thee, and how much less then this House that I have built? He entreated the LORD to bless his People, and to hear favourably the Prayers of those who should address to him in this Holy Place, which he had sanctified by his Presence; that when his People should be oppressed by their Enemies, they might find a sure Refuge and De∣fence against them in this Holy Place; that when their Sins at any time should make the Heavens to be shut up over them, that then the Prayers which should be offered up in this Temple, might open the Windows of Heaven, and bring down Rain upon the Earth; and in a word, That his Eyes might always be open, and his Ears attentive to all the Supplications of his People, that at any time, or upon any occasion should be made there, to avert from them all the Evils they feared, and to procure them all the Blessings they desired. This Solemnity lasted 14 Days, because it fell in with the Feast of Tabernacles, which added 7 Days to the Feast of the Dedication; which being ended, Solomon sent home the People full of joy and gladness of Heart, for all the good∣ness the LORD had done for David his Ser∣vant, and for Israel his People. Solomon having offered at this Solemnity 20000 Oxen, and 120000 Sheep. The Fathers observe, That Solomon's Be∣haviour on this occasion ought to imprint a pro∣found respect in all Christians, at their entring into the Church, as enjoying there the truth and substance of what the Jews had only a shadow and glimmering of in their Tabernacle and Temple.
105 Richard Pierce Esq. Receivr. of the Coale Duty granted by Act of Parliament for rebuilding the Cathedrall Church of St. Pauls. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
106
The Queen of Sheba. The Queen of Sheba comes to see Solomon and all his Glory, to hear his Wisdom, and to present to him her Royal Gifts. SOlomon having finish'd and furnish'd the Temple, which he had built for the Wor∣ship of GOD, and for the Glory of his Name,Anno Mundi 3013. before Christ 991. began to build a Palace for himself, about which he spent 13 years, the Magnificence and Sumptu∣ousness of which was beyond expression, be∣ing all shining and lustrous with Gold and Pre∣cious Stones, so as to dazle the Eyes of Specta∣tors; and all the Architecture and carved Work thereof was most curious and wonderful to behold. These astonishing Effects of his Wisdom, and Magnificence, soon proclaim'd his Fame and Renown throughout all the Corners of the Earth, and brought Ambassadors in crowds from all Princes that had heard of his Wisdom, to Jerusalem, to congratulate his great Glory, and to take a view of his more than Regal Magnificence; considering him as the Miracle not only of his Age, but of all that were past before him. But the Person that testified the most ear∣nest and impatient desire to see Solomon, and to be an Ear-witness of his Wisdom, was the Queen of Sheba, otherwise called Aethiopia; who came from the farthest part of the South, to see whether the advantagious and stupen∣dious Reports of that young King were true or not? She came to Jerusalem with a vast train of Guards and Attendants, and with a numerous Company of Camels bearing Spices, Gold, and precious Stones; of which she made a Present to the King, bestowing upon him 120 Talents of Gold, which amount to about 800000 l. Sterling, besides Spices, Perfumes, and peecious Stones, to a prodigious value. This great and wise Queen, after she had taken a full and exact notice of the unparal∣lel'd Magnificence of King Solomon, the wisdom of his Discourse, and his Sagacity in answe∣ring Questions, his penetrating insight into the deepest Mysteries; the order of his House, as to the Meat of his Table; the Attendance of his Ministers, Officers and Servants; and the transcendent Riches of their Liveries; their Sitting; his Cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up to the House of the LORD, she was quite transported, and (as the Scrip∣ture expresseth it) there remained no more Spirit in her: And addressing her self to Solomon, said, I find now it was true, O King, what was report∣ed to me in my own Country, of thy Wisdom and Heroick Acts: but thy Renown so far surpassing any thing that ever I had heard of, or could well imagine, it also surpast my belief, till now, that mine own Eyes and Ears have convinced me, that the one half has not been told me of thy Wis∣dom, Grandeur and Magnificence; and that common Fame, which I thought had been too lavish in setting forth thy Praise, has indeed detra∣cted from and obscured thy Glory. Blessed and happy are these thy Officers, Ministers, and Servants, that stand continually before thee, and hear thy Wisdom, and the piercing Sa∣gacity of thy Judgment; and blessed be the LORD thy GOD, which delighted in thee to set thee on the Throne of Israel. For because the LORD loved Israel, therefore made he thee King, to do Judgment and Justice amongst his People. Thus this great Queen return'd to her own Country with joy and gladness, being fully sa∣tisfied with what she had heard and seen, as well as with the Presents she received from So∣lomon, and the Answer of all her Desires and Questions, to the full content of her Heart. The Fathers tell us, That this Princess was a lively and excellent Emblem of the Church, and we have reason to fear, that (according to the Words of our Saviour) she will rise up in Judgment against us one day; for whereas she did not think much to come from the ut∣most parts of the Earth to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, and in a strange transport of Joy and Wonder, pronounc'd those blessed and hap∣py, that had the advantage of being near him, and of serving him; We Christians (on the contrary) who have GOD for our Master, the Wisdom of JESUS CHRIST for our Rule, Hea∣ven, and all the Riches and Glory of it for our Reward, do frequently prefer Men before GOD, the Wisdom of this World before that of Je∣sus Christ, and the possession of the Earth, be∣fore that of Heaven.
The Fall of Solomon. Solomon loving many strange Women, is by them seduc'd to offer Incense to Idols. His Death. SOlomon having atchiev'd so many great and wonderful things, as made him the Won∣der of the Age in which he lived,Anno Mundi 3023. before Christ 981. Solomon being a∣bove 50 years of Age. as well as of all those that came after; at last ter∣minated all the Glory he had acquired by his Wisdom and Vertue, with a shameful End; and by his Example, much more remarkable than that of his Father David, teaches us, Not to rely upon our selves, but the higher we are raised, the more to apprehend the effects of our own weakness. We see Women here deceiving the wisest of Men, and corrupting and defiling a Heart, which for so many years had been the Temple of GOD, and the Altar from whence continu∣ally ascended the Flames of Divine Love. From the love▪ of Wisdom, he degenerated to the love of Women, and from the love of Women to Idolatry. He had 700 Wives Princesses, and 300 Concubines, notwithstanding that the Law of GOD, tho' it permitted Plurality of Wives, forbad the multiplying of them to such an excess, and very expresly oppos'd the taking of the Daughters of strange Nations to Wife. Having built a Temple to the true GOD, he now builds Temples for Idols, and by a sin∣ful compliance with his Egyptian, Moabitish, Ammonitish, Edomitish, and Sidonian Wives, together with the Daughter of Pharaoh, he fails to flat Idolatry, worshipping their Gods and Goddesses; going after Ashtaroth the God∣dess of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the Abomination of the Amorites. He also built a High-place for Chemosh the Abomination of Moab, in the Hill that is before Jerusalem; and for Molech the Abomination of the Children of Ammon, with other like Abominations. This enormous Crime of Solomon, irritated GOD strangely against him. He now appear∣ed unto him, not as heretofore, to approve of his Behaviour, or to promise him whatsoever he desired, but to witness his just Indignation against him, for having so wickedly broke his Covenant, and so shamefully transgrest his holy Law, assuring him he would rend his King∣dom from him, and give it to his Servant, but that however for David's sake, he would leave his Son one Tribe. Solomon understanding that this Servant the LORD had told him should inherit his King∣dom, was Jeroboam, whom he had brought up from a Youth, and to whom Ahijah the Pro∣phet had foretold in the Name of the LORD, that he should be King over the Ten Tribes, did his endeavour to kill him, which obliged Je∣roboam to flee to Egypt, and to desire the Pro∣tection of Shishak, King of that Country, where he continued till the Death of Solomon; who having reigned peaceably forty Years,Anno Mundi 3029. before Christ 975. died when he was above sixty Years of Age, and was buried in the City of David his Father, and Rehoboam his Son reigned in his stead. If Solomon's Fall and Apostacy were fatal to himself and his Posterity, yet it may be of great use and advantage to those who shall seri∣ously, and with attention, consider of it with the Eyes of Faith. It is a strange thing to con∣sider, that he who had been a Person so highly beloved, favoured and dignified by GOD, that it should not be certainly known, whether his Con∣dition doth not deserve more to be lamented and deplored, than praised or commended. For his Sin is certain and evident, as well as David's was; but this is the difference between them, that tho' the Father's Repentance was very certain from express Words of Scripture, that of the Son is as uncertain and doubtful: Though many have supposed the Book of Ecclesiastes to be a kind of Retractation of his Apostacy, written by him, and left to Posterity for a testimony of his Re∣pentance. However it be, this dreadful Example ought to inspire us with the greatest contempt and disesteem of all worldly Grandeur, Pomp, nd Glory, yea, tho' we should receive them from the hand of GOD himself, as indeed Solomon had them no other way; especially when we see what a representation he himself makes of them in his Book now mentioned. Surely, if we would not deceive our selves, we must prefer Job's Dunghil before Solomon's Throne? be∣cause in the former we see the Model of that perfect Patience which crowns all the Saints, whereas in the other we see the Fall of a Man, who could not defend himself against the Poyson of Prosperity and Greatness, by the highest de∣degree of Wisdom that ever was bestowed upon Man.
107 Peter Rycaut of King Stephens Castle in Ospring in Kent Esq. only Son & heyre to Collonel Philip Rycaut. For Advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
108 The Rt▪ Honble. Francis Ʋiscount Newport, Baron of High Arcall L.d. Leiutenant of Shropshire. Treasurer of his Matys. House hold and one of the Lds. of their Matys. most Honble Privy Councell &.ca. For ye Advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
REHOBOAM's COUNSELLORS. After the Death of Solomon, his Subjects send their Deputies to Reho∣boam his Son; who preferring the Counsel of his young Men before that of the old Men, who had been of Counsel to his Father, thereby loseth the Kingdom of Israel. AS soon as Solomon was dead, and his Son Rehoboam was seated on his Throne, the whole Congregation of Is∣rael having sent for Jero∣boam,The same Year 3029. before Christ 95. who was fled into Egypt, appeared be∣fore King Rehoboam, and desired a mitigation of the Taxes his Father Solomon had laid up∣on them. Rehoboam desired three days to consider of their Demand, and accordingly he first advised with the old Men, who had been of his Father's Counsel; who with one consent advised him, to give them a favourable An∣swer, and to take off from them the Grievan∣ces and Burthens they complained of, and that were so uneasie to them; representing to him, that by thus gaining their Affections at the beginning of his Reign, he would not fail ever after to continue Master of them. But this young Prince forsaking this good Advice of the old Men, consulted the young Men that were grown up with him; who ad∣vised him to answer the People roughly, threat∣ning them, that they must expect to be go∣verned by him with more severity than his Father had ever done; that his little Finger should be thicker than his Father's Loins; that whereas his Father did chastise them with Whips, he would chastise them with Scorpions; and that he should be so far from lessening their Burthens, that he was resolved on the contrary to increase them. The Scripture observes, that this hapned by a special disposal and permission of GOD, who suffer'd Rehoboam thus blindly to follow the rash and giddy Counsel of the young Men, and to reject the good and seasonable Advice of the old Men, that he might perform the Word which he had spoken by Ahijah the Shilonite, unto Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, that he should be King over Israel. For all the People as soon as they had received this churlish and un∣welcome Answer from their new King, revolt∣ed from him, protesting they would never own him for their Prince. Rehoboam perceiving (when it was too late) the ill effect of his rash and indiscreet Be∣haviour, sent Adoram his Treasurer to endea∣vour to pacifie them, and offer them better Terms: But his Subjects Minds were so ex∣asperated by the outragious Reception and Answer he had given them; that instead of hearkning to him, and being perswaded by him, they stoned him to death: The Report of which no sooner came to Rehoboam's Ear, but he immediately got up into his Chariot and fled, for fear himself also should have fallen a Victim to their Rage and Fury. Thus all Israel (that is, the Ten Tribes) re∣volted from Rehoboam, and proclaimed Jerobo∣am King over them. And when Rehoboam had raised an Army of 180000 chosen Men out of the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, (which GOD kept true to his Worship, and faithful to their King) to fight against Israel, and re∣duce them to his Obedience by force of Arms, GOD sent Shemajah the Prophet, to charge Re∣hoboam, and all the People of Judah and Ben∣jamin, not to fight against Israel, because what had hapned was from him, and accord∣ing to what he had foretold by his Prophet should come to pass. This was the beginning of that famous Rent and Division of the Kingdom of Israel from that of Judah, which continued so long after through many Ages, as a lasting Monument of the Folly of a young King, who lost that by his Rashness and Indiscretion, which he might easily have preserved by his Wisdom, GOD also made it appear by this remarkable Instance, that he is the Master of Kings, and that he inspires them with good or ill Advice, according as they are the Subjects either of his Mercy and Goodness, or of his Wrath and Severity. We see here the wisest of all Kings, leaving his Kingdom in the hands of a stupid and indiscreet Son, GOD being resolved visibly to punish the Father in his Son, and to avenge the Disorders and Sins of Solomon's old Age, by the Folly and Rashness of Rehoboam's Youth.
THE DISOBEDINT PROPHET. A Prophet sent by GOD to reprove Jeroboam for his Wickedness and Idolatry, is kill'd by a Lion for disobeying the Word of the LORD, who had charged him neither to eat nor drink in that place. JEroboam seing himself King over the Ten Tribes of Israel, gave us an Instance, That irreligious Princes do often prefer Reasons of State before the Concerns of Religion.Anno Mundi 3030. before Christ 974. For this Pro∣phane Prince considering, that if his Subjects should continue to go up to Jerusalem to worship GOD, and offer Sacrifices, they might probably within a short time he prevail'd upon to return to the Obedience of their lawful King, which would redound to his in∣evitable ruin, he (to prevent this) resolved to make two Calves of Gold, the one of which he set up at Bethel, and the other at Dan; and then in presence of all the People declared, that these were the Gods that had brought them up out of the Land of Egypt. He also erected Altars to them with a great deal of Magnificence, and endeavour'd to establish the Worship of these his Idols, as much as might be in imitation of the Service of the true GOD at Jerusalem. Now it hapned, as Jeroboam was offering Incense on one of these Altars in Bethel, GOD sent a Prophet to him, who addressing his Words to the Altar, prophesied against it, That a Child who was to be born of the Race of David, named Josiah, should kill and offer upon that Altar, all the Priests that offered Incense upon it, and that for a sign, that what he had said should certainly come to pass, the Altar should be rent, and the Ashes upon it poured forth at the same instant as it also hapned. Which denunciation of the Prophet was accordingly accomplished by Josiah 250 years after. Jeroboam could not endure this holy liber∣ty of the Prophet, who prophesied against the Altar he himself had erected, and putting forth his Hand, he ordered his Officers to lay hold on him, but his Hand was immediately withe∣red and dried up, so that he could not draw it in again to him. Jeroboam greatly humbled by this remarkable instance of the Divine Vengeance, entreated the Prophet by his Prayers, to obtain his Cure of him, who so justly had smitten him; whereupon the Man of God having besought the LORD for Jeroboam, his Hand was restored. Upon this the King de∣sired the Man of GOD, to come home with him and refresh himself, and that afterward he would send him home with a Reward; which the Prophet utterly refused, declaring to the King, that the LORD had expresly forbid him to eat or drink in that place. As the Man of GOD was returning home∣wards, an old Prophet that dwelt at Bethel having understood what he had done that day, and the Words he had denounced against the Altar Jeroboam had set up, he sadled his Ass and went after him, and having found him sitting under an Oak, desired him to go home with him and eat Bread; which when the Man of GOD had refused, as being charged to the contrary by GOD himself; the other answered, I am a Prophet as well as you, and an Angel commanded me to bring you back, that you might eat with me and refresh your self. And with this Lie he made the Man of GOD come back with him to his House. But as they were sitting at Table, and eat∣ing together, the Word of the LORD came to the old Prophet (that had seduced the Man of GOD) and told him, That because he had disobeyed the Word of the LORD, and had eaten contrary to his express Command, he should not be buried with his Fathers. Which hapned accordingly; for as the Man of GOD was returning to Judah on the old Prophets Ass, a Lion met him by the way and slew him, without any farther devouring his dead body, or touching the Ass. St. Gregory observes, That probably this Man of GOD had taken some secret Complacency and delight in the great things which he had done, in afflicting the King with so sudden a Stroke, and as suddenly healing him again, as well as in speaking to him with so great liberty; and that this Vain-glory wherewith he was eleva∣ted, had so over-clouded and darkned his Soul, that instead of obeying without dispute the Word of the LORD (or without putting his own Interpretation upon an express Command of GOD) he suffered himself to be deceived by the Prophet, which prov'd the cause of his death; GOD re∣solving to inflict this short punishment upon his Body, that his Soul might be eternally saved.
109 Edward Hubbald of the Tower of London Gentleman. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
110 Thomas smith, of the Tower of London Gentleman For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plat.
ZIMRI BURNT. Zimri conspiring against Elah, the fourth King of Israel, is besieged by Omri in Tirzah, and seeing the City taken, retires to the Palace, and there burns himself. JEroboam having reign'd 22 years, died; in which time by his wicked Policy he was the cause of the Apostacy and Idolatry of the ten Tribes,Anno Mundi 3075. before Christ 929. by means of the Golden Calves he had set up at Dan and Bethel, and the super∣stitious Will-worship, he had established and annexed to them. He had continual Wars with Rehoboam, from whom he was revolted. Af∣ter his Death, Nadab his Son succeeded him, who reigned only two years: For Baasha the Son of Ahijah, of the Tribe of Issachar, con∣spired against him, and slew him at Gibbethon, as he was besieging that City; and not con∣tenting himself therewith, he went and slew all Jeroboam's House, without so much as sparing one of them, according to the Word of the LORD, which he had denounced against Je∣roboam, by the Mouth of Ahijah the Prophet. Baasha being thus elevated to the Throne of Israel, by the Murther of his Sovereign and all his Family, he began to wage cruel Wars against Asa the good King of Judah, who was the Son of the wicked Abijam, who succeeded Rehoboam his Father. But GOD willing to recompence the Devotion and Piety of this good King, who treading in the Steps of his Father David, removed the Sodomites out of the Land, and destroyed the Idols his Father Abijam had set up, made him victorious against his Enemies, and particularly against Baasha King of Israel, who was in continual War with this good King, and followed the wicked Ex∣amples of his two Predecessors, Jeroboam and Nadab. Wherefore also Jehu the Prophet of the LORD was sent to him, to denounce his An∣ger against him, for his continuing in the Wickedness of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who caused Israel to sin, and that all his Po∣sterity should be destroy'd and come to nought, like as he had destroyed that of Jeroboam; Baasha who died soon after this Denunciation of the Prophet, and left the Kingdom to his Son Elah, who began his Reign with the Murther of Jehu the Prophet of the LORD, because of the Words of his Prophecy, de∣clared to his Father, concerning the Ruin of his Posterity, whereby he hastned the fulfilling of it; for when he had reigned only two years, Zimri (the Commander in chief over one half of his Chariots) conspired against him as he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the House of Arzah, Steward of his Houshold. Zimri by his treacherous Cruelty having obtain'd the Crown of Israel, destroy'd all the Family of Baasha, with all his Kinsfolk and Friends, without sparing any of them. But he did not long enjoy the Dignity he had purchased with so much Blood; for the Israe∣lites having understood what Zimri had done, made Omri their King, who immediately went and besieged Zimri in Tirzah, and soon after having made himself Master thereof, when Zimri saw that he must inevitably fall into the hands of his Enemy, he became no less cruel to himself, than he had been a little before to his Master and all his Family; for setting fire to his Palace, he burnt himself, and all that belong'd to him; thus avenging upon him∣self and his Posterity the Murther of his Lord and Master, and his whole House. All which (as the Scripture observes) hapned unto him for the Sins which he had committed in doing Evil in the sight of the Lord, in walking in the way of Jeroboam and his Idolatry, where∣by he made Israel to sin. GOD made it appear by this Example, how hateful and abominable Tyrants are in his sight: He who might have liv'd happily, could he have contented himself with the degree of Honour, to which his Services and the Favour of his Prince had rais'd him, became most fatally miserable, as soon as his Ambition prompted him to aspire to the Crown, by the Murther of his Lord and Ma∣ster: For in seven days time he lost both his Life and Kingdom, which he had so unjustly and cru∣elly usurped; and his Conscience flying in his Face, and reproaching him for his Crime, he condemn'd himself to the Fire, together with his whole Posterity, to exterminate a Race so impious towards GOD, and faithless to their Prince.
ELIJAH FED BY RAVENS. GOD having smitten the Land of Israel with Drought for three years together, sends the Prophet Elijah to the Brook Cherith, where he is fed by two Ravens. OMRI being thus peaceably possest of the Crown of Israel by the death of Zimri, who had burnt himself, reigned 12 years,Anno Mundi 3092. before Christ 912. or thereabout. and left the Kingdom to his Son A∣hab, of whom the Scripture gives this Testimo∣ny, That he did evil in the sight of the LORD, above all that were before him, his natural Wick∣edness and Impiety being much increased by his Marriage with Jezabel, Daughter of the King of Zidon. This wicked Prince carrying his enormous Crimes to that height of Impiety, which none of his Predecessors had ever yet arrived to, GOD sent his Prophet Elijah to denounce his Judgment against him, assuring him, that the LORD would punish his Dominions, by be∣reaving them of the Rain and Dew of Heaven for three years together. During this time of Drought and Scarcity, GOD sent Elijah to the Brook Cherith, where he took care to feed him by the ministry of two Ravens, who brought him Bread and Flesh twice a day, Morning and Evening. But the long continued Drought having at length dried up the Brook, so that he wanted Water to drink, GOD commanded him to go to Za∣rephath, and to lodge there with a Widow Woman, whom he had commanded to take care of him. Elijah obeyed the Divine Command, and when he was come near to the Gate of the City, he met with the Widow Woman, to whom the LORD had directed him, who was gathering of Sticks, and prayed her to fetch him a little Water to drink; and as she was going to fetch some for him, he called to her, and desired her to bring a bit of Bread: But the Woman told him she had not a bit in the House, nor indeed any thing besides an hand∣ful of Meal, and a small remainder of Oil, and that she was gathering some Sticks, to bake a Cake of it, that she and her Son might eat it for their last Meal, and dye. But this Holy Prophet, who on this occasion was an illustrious Instance, that when GOD sends his Prophets and Servants to any House, 'tis rather with design to heap Blessings upon them, who are so kind as to receive them, than to procure Relief or Comfort to them∣selves, wished his Hostess, to make first a little Cake for him of the Flour she had, and bring it to him; and that afterwards she might prepare the like for her self and Son; assuring her in the Name of the LORD, that the Meal should not waste, nor the Cruse of Oil fail, till the time that the LORD should send Rain again upon the Earth. This good Widow was transported with Joy, to see this great Miracle wrought, as Elijah had foretold, to which her Faith also contri∣buted; and 'tis the more observable, that not∣withstanding she was an Idolatrous Woman, yet was willing in her great Necessity and Want to relieve this Holy Prophet, even before she served her self, when at the same time his own Countrymen persecuted him; being a Figure herein of the Gentiles embracing Jesus Christ, when the Jews at the same time (by Unbelief) rejected him. But the Death of her only Son hapning not long after; cast her into extrream Sorrow, of which she complained with so much passion and bitterness to that Holy Prophet, that being touch'd with her Grief, he took the dead Child, and having laid it upon his Bed, he stretched himself 3 times upon the dead Body, applying the parts of his Body to those of the Child; and cried unto the LORD, to let his Soul come into him again; which hapning accordingly, he restored him alive to his Mother. This Miracle of Elijah contains an excellent representation of the holy Mystery of the Incar∣nation, wherein the Divine living Body was applied to our dead Bodies, to quicken them from the death of Sin, to live the life of Righteousness and Holiness. This proceeding of the Prophet contains also an admirable Lesson for the Pastors of the Church, that they ought to proportion themselves to the littleness of their Hearers, and condescend to their Weakness; to measure themselves upon them, for so the Hebrew word signifies, by dispen∣sing the Truths of the Gospel to them, so as they are able to bear and digest them. Elijah propor∣tioned the posture of his Body to the littleness of the Child, but it was in order to raise it to life again. Thus the Ministers may allay and temper the high Truths of the Gospel in condescension to the Weak; but all in order to raise them, and not at all to sink and fall down with them.
111 William Weett of St▪ Margarets Westminster in Middlesex Gent. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
112 White Titchborne of Aldershot in Hantshire Esq▪ descended of the antient family of Titchborne of Titchborne in the said County. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
ELIJAH's SACRIFICE. Elijah having given the People a convincing Proof of the true GOD, by bringing down Fire from Heaven to consume his Sacrifice, commands them to kill the 450 Priests of Baal. WHilst the Prophet Elijah was safely lodg'd with the Widow of Zarephath, Ahab and Jezabel were ma∣king great search for him,Anno Mundi 3096. before Christ 908. to put him to death; and not being able to find him, they discharged their Fury upon all the Prophets they could meet with. Now when the time was come, that the LORD in pity to Israel resolved to put an end to this terrible Drought, which had lasted three years, he commanded Elijah to go and shew himself to Ahab. And accordingly he went to present himself before him, and by the way meeting with Obadiah, who was Ahab's High Steward, and a Man fearing GOD, he bad him go and tell Ahab he was there, and if he would he might speak with him. But Obadiah testi∣fying his Fear, lest the Spirit of GOD might transport him elsewhere, whilst he went to deliver his Message to his Lord, whereby he would be left exposed to the King's Fury; E∣lijah assured him, that he needed not fear any such thing, for that he was resolved to shew himself to Ahab that day. Obadiah having delivered his Message to Ahab, he immediately came to meet Elijah, and as soon as he saw him, told him with a great deal of bitterness, That he was the cause of all the Troubles and Miseries of Israel. But Elijah, not at all daunted with the Words or Presence of this wicked King, answered him with a Spirit of Fire (which was his peculiar Gift) and said; 'Tis not I that trouble Israel, but thou, O King, and thy Father's House, who have forsaken the living GOD, to sacrifice to Baal: Now therefore gather to me all Israel, and the Prophets of Baal at Mount Carmel. This being perform'd by Ahab, who could not resist the Spirit that spake in Elijah, that Prophet demanded of the People with a fiery Zeal, How long halt ye between two Opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him, but if Baal be God, then follow him. Behold (continued he) I am left alone of all the Prophets of the Lord, at a time when Baal's Prophets are 450. And then addressing himself to the Priests, said, Take a Bullock and dress it, and lay it on the Altar, but without Fire, and I will take another in like manner; and call ye on the Name of your God, and I will call on the Name of the LORD, and let the God that answers by sending Fire from Heaven to consume the Sacrifice, be own'd to be the true God. All Israel approving of this just Proposal of Elijah, the Priests of Baal began to dress their Bullock, and having laid it on the Altar, they called upon the Name of Baal from Morning to Noon, saying, O Baal hear us! but without receiving any Answer; which gave occasion to Elijah in a holy Zeal, to mock and deride them; saying, Cry louder, for may be your God is on a Journey, or engaged in some Pursuit, or a∣sleep, and must be waked. But they seeing that they prevailed not, cut themselves (after their manner) with Knives and Lances till the Blood gusht out upon them, but all to no purpose. Now when the time of Evening Sacrifice was come, Elijah built an Altar of 12 Stones and made a Trench round about it, and laid the Bullock upon the Wood on the Altar, and then ordered four Water-pots to be filled with Water three several times,The word the Scrip∣ture makes use of sig∣nifies a kind of Wa∣ter-pot, which con∣tain'd about 7 Gal∣lons of our Measure. and to be poured upon the Wood and Sacrifice, which running down from thence filled the Trench with Water. This done, Elijah praying to GOD, Fire came down immediately from Heaven, and consumed the Sacrifice and the Wood, together with the Stones and Dust, and lick'd up the Water that was in the Trench. All the People convinced by this evident Miracle, fell down on their Faces, crying out, The Lord he is God! the Lord he is God! And Elijah laying hold of this opportunity, said unto them, Take the Prophets of Baal and kill them, without letting one of them escape. Which having been perform'd accordingly, Elijah promised Ahab, that GOD would very sudden∣ly send down Rain upon the Earth; which hapned according to his Word, insomuch, that Ahab was overtaken with it before he got to his House. This Example (as the Fathers take notice) shews us the insuperable strength of Truth, which alone is able to keep up the Hearts and Courage of Men, when all human Considerations serve only to beat them down. Thus we see it made Elijah re∣solutely cleave to the true Worship of God, not∣withstanding he saw himself left alone, and perse∣cuted of all Men.
THE FLIGHT OF ELIJAH. Elijah threatned by Jezabel, who was resolved to revenge the Death of her false Prophets upon him, fleeth to Beersheba, where he is com∣forted by an Angel, who brings him Meat to eat. JEzabel (Ahab's ungodly Queen) being in∣form'd, how Elijah had slain all the Priests of Baal,Anno Mundi 3097. before Christ, 907. sent him word, that before a day came a∣bout, she would serve him in the same man∣ner, as he had served the Priests of Baal. The holy Propht fearing Jezabel's Rage, fled with all the speed he could to Beersheba, which be∣longeth to Judah, where he left his Servant; but he went a days journey into the Wilderness, and came and sat down under a Juniper-Tree; and by this strange vicissitude of Courage and Fear, which appeared in him at several times, gives us occasion (as St. Gregory observes) to see how inconstant frail Man is in this Life, who after the most heroick Exploits of an All-daring and All-surmounting Faith, comes many times soon after to experience how weak and frail he is. Elijah being fled into the Wilderness, found himself quite overwhelm'd with Grief and Trouble, so far that he earnestly begg'd of GOD to take away his Life; and being spent with weariness and despondency, he fell asleep; but soon after an Angel came and awakened him, bidding him arise and eat, and finding a Cake, and a Cruse of Water at his Head, he did eat and drink, and laid him down again: Then the Angel came and awak'd him a second time, bidding him eat again, because he had a great way to go. Elijah did so, and went in the strength of that Meat 40 Days and 40 Nights unto Horeb the Mount of GOD, and came unto a Cave where he lodged. Which miraculous Bread has been always lookt upon as a Figure of the Holy Eucharist, which supports and com∣forts us during our Pilgrimage in the Wilder∣ness of this World. Elijah being come to Horeb, GOD com∣mands him to go to Damascus, and anoint Hazael King of Syria, and Jehu King of Israel, and Elisha to be Prophet in his room, whom he met with on his way ploughing with 12 Ploughs, of which he himself guided one; and as Elijah passed by him he cast his Mantle upon him; whereupon finding himself transported with a violent motion, he left his Oxen and ran after Elijah, desiring only leave of him to take his farewel of his Father and Mother; which being granted him, he return'd to Elijah, and having kill'd a yoke of Oxen for a Sacrifice, he invited the People that were with him to the Feast, and afterwards arose and followed Elijah and mi∣nistred unto him. He left a Father (saith St. Ambrose) but he found another, and a better in Elijah, who ha∣ving for this his Spiritual Son Bowels of Love, far more tender than those of a fleshly Father can be, not only furnisht him with all Necessaries during this Life, but at his departure from him left him Heir of his Spirit, that is, of his Ho∣liness, Gift of Prophecy and Miracles, as we shall see hereafter. Thus GOD has given us Instances in the Old Testament, as well as in the New, that great Disciples are ordinarily the Spiritual Children of Men eminent in Holiness, who by their ex∣cellent Actions have deserved to leave behind them, as eminent followers of their Lives, and Heirs of their Vertues and Graces; only with this difference, that under the Gospel or New Law, we are not only the Disciples of the Men of GOD, but of him who is the Man-God, our blessed Saviour, who so tempered and allayed the admirable Actions of his Life (as St. Austin observes) to the end, that the Example of his Holiness, might not be too disproportionate to our weakness. Wherefore also (as the same Father observes) when Moses and Elijah in their time appeared in the World, with a profound Humility, which was the spring and source of all those Vertues which shone forth so gloriously in their Lives and Conversation: There was only one Joshua and one Elisha, found amongst all their Contemporaries, for to imitate and copy their unparallel'd Exam∣ples; because proud Men at that time did dis∣dain to follow the steps of humble Men. But now under the Gospel, the most exalted Pride cannot but be cover'd with shame and confusion, by seeing holy Humility (the sure basis and foun∣dation of all Graces) not only exalted and con∣secrated, but indeed deified in the whole Com∣portment, Life, and Death of our Saviour Jesus Christ, even in his Person, who was GOD him∣self blessed for ever.
113 Mis. Mary James, sole daughter of Robert James of Cowden in the County of Kent Gentleman. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
114 William James of Eightham in the County of Kent Esq, For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Piety of Jehoshaphat. Jehoshaphat (the Good and Pious King of Judah) makes all the Kings about him, to fear and stand in awe of him. He gives many Testimo∣nies of his Piety towards GOD, who made him Victorious over his Ene∣mies. WHilst King Ahab reigned over Israel, and that he and his Queen encouraged one another in commit∣ting all sorts of Impieties,Anno Mundi 3105. before Christ 889. good King Asa governed the Kingdom of Judah, who had given many pregnant In∣stances of his Piety in the several Stages of his Life, save that towards the end of it, he stained his former excellent Actions, by making a League with Benhadad King of Syria. GOD sent a Prophet to reprove him of this Fault; who demanded of him, in the Name of his Great Master, whether he thought the Divine Assistance not sufficient to make him Victorious over all his Enemies, without seek∣ing for Aid from Idolaters, who were an abo∣mination unto him? But King Asa not being able to bear this free, but just Remonstrance of the Prophet, caused him to be seized and put in Prison; and oppressed also some of his Subjects at the same time. The Scripture also takes notice, that being for a long time afflicted with the Gout, he put more confidence in the Skill of his Physicians, than in the Help and Power of GOD. Thus King Asa, after he had for a long time deserved the just praise of Men, and ap∣probation of GOD, by his Administration and Behaviour, worthy of a great and good Prince; at last dishonour'd his Life, and cast a blemish upon the Reputation he had so justly acqui∣red, by a mixture of Actions, which were ei∣ther injurious to GOD, or cruel to Men. Joshaphat his Son succeeded him, who by walking in the steps of his Father David, and fearing GOD greatly, drew down the Divine Blessing upon his Kingdom, upon his Arms, and all his Undertakings, the LORD making him formidable to the King of Israel, and to all the Princes round about him. This good King encouraging himself in the ways of the LORD, did not at all express the same Fear∣fulness and Backwardness, as his Predecessors had done, but took away all the High Places and cut down the Groves that were in Judah. He sent also some of his Princes to accom∣pany the Priests and Levites throughout all the Land, who taking the Book of the Law with them, went about throughout all the Cities of Judah, to teach the People the Law of GOD, which had been in a great measure disus'd and forgot, during the wicked Reign of some of his Predecessors. His desire also to enlarge and strengthen his Kingdom was extraordinary, and herein he shewed himself a great King indeed; who having in the first place endeavoured to settle those things which immediately concern'd the Glory of GOD, and the Spiritual good of his Subjects; in the next place took care to maintain the glory of his Crown, and to pro∣cure the Temporal safety and happiness of his People. Ahab King of Israel seeing Jehoshaphat so great and victorious a Prince, was loath to have him for his Enemy, tho' the Kingdom of Judah contained but the sixth part of that of Israel, having only two Tribes under it, whereas the Kingdom of Israel had Ten; and there∣fore made an Alliance with him, and perswa∣ded Jehoshaphat to accompany him in an Ex∣pedition, he intended to make against the King of Syria; where Ahab was slain, and Jehoshaphat himself was in great danger; but crying to the LORD in his distress, was wonderfully delivered by him. Yet the LORD afterwards sent Jehu the Prophet to reprove him, for entring into an Alliance with that wicked King; the Prophet demanding of him, whether it became him who had been so highly favoured, and blest by GOD, to help the ungodly, and love them that hate the LORD? Thus GOD made it appear by the Victorious Successes of this Prince, that he takes delight to make them formidable to all their Enemies who fear none but him alone; and to honour them that honour him, as well as to make them base and contemptible, who despise and lightly esteem him.
THE DEATH OF AHAB. Ahab fighting against the King of Syria, is slain by an Arrow shot at a Venture. THe Sins of Ahab and Jezabel daily in∣creasing, they at last arrived to their highest point by the hor∣rid Murther of innocent Naboth.Anno Mundi 3107. before Christ 897. This Man was owner of a Vineyard in Jezreel, near to Ahabs Palace, which he ma∣nur'd and took delight in, as an Inheritance descended to him from his Forefathers: Now Ahab designing to enlarge his Gardens, desired to have this Vineyard of Naboth, either paying him the worth of it, or giving him another in exchange. But Naboth would by no means part with it. Ahab, notwithstanding that he was despe∣rately wicked, yet thought he had no right to take it by Violence from him; but finding himself unable to overcome Naboths Resolu∣tion, his Refusal caus'd in him so high a dis∣pleasure and vexation, that he fell sick upon it, and refused to eat. Jezabel having understood from his own Mouth, the cause of his sadness and distemper, mocked at his simplicity, say∣ing, It is a sign you have great Authority over your Subjects; when one of them is able to put you into this condition! And immediately she sent Letters to the chief Men of the City where Na∣both dwelt, that they should suborn two false Witnesses, to depose against Naboth, that he had blasphemed GOD and the King, and that there∣upon they should condemn and stone him. Jezabel being punctually obey'd in all this, the false Witnesses were found, and Naboth Condemn'd and Ston'd the same day; and News thereof being brought to Jezabel, she acquainted Ahab, that now he might go and take possession of the Vineyard he had so much desired. Ahab recovering at this News, goes down to see the Vineyard, where Elijah meeting him, thunders out this Sentence a∣gainst him: Thou hast killed Naboth, and hast ta∣ken possession; but know, that Dogs shall lick thy Blood in the very same place where that Inno∣cent Man was murther'd; and Dogs shall eat the Flesh of Jezabel by the Wall of Jezreel. The War which Ahab soon after undertook against Syria, gave an accomplishment to this Prophecy; for Ahab having desired the King of Judah to accompany him; Jehoshaphat desired him to consult some Prophets about the event of the Battel. Ahab (to comply with his desire) sent for 400 Prophets who all with one Mouth promised Ahab the Victory; but Jehoshaphat not satisfied with their Predictions, demanded, Whether there were never a Pro∣phet of the LORD there besides, of whom they might enquire? Ahab answered, that indeed there was one, but that he hated him, because he always prophesied Evil to him. This Prophet was Micajah, whom Ahab however (at Jehoshaphats entreaty) sent for; who being come, boldly declar'd the unhappy Event of the Battel, and that Ahab should be kill'd in it. Ahab provok'd with this Predi∣ction, caused Micajah to be cast into Prison, with design to put him to death at his Return; at which Micajah was not at all concern'd, as being assured that he should never return. Ahab being advanced near to the Army of the Syrians, put himself into a Disguise; but Jehoshaphat entred the Field in his Royal Ac∣coutrements, and the King of Syria having given order to his Captains, to aim chiefly to kill the King of Israel, they took Jehoshaphat for him, and had like to have killed him; for if he had not discover'd himself by his Speech, that he was not King Ahab, he would have learnt by fatal Experience, how unhap∣py a thing it is for a good Prince to ally him∣self with such as are ungodly. In the mean time it hapned, that an Arrow shot at a venture reached Ahab, and pierced the Joynts of his Armour; of which Wound he died that Night. The Blood that gusht from his Wound had all stained his Chariot, and as they were washing it in the Pool of Samaria, the Dogs came and licked his Blood, according to the word of the LORD, denoun∣ced against him by Elijah the Prophet. So true it is, that the greatest and most potent of Princes, cannot avoid the just Doom of an incensed GOD, which they have deserved by their exorbitant Crimes and Excesses; and that Heaven with as much ease dischargeth its Thunderbolts upon Crowned-Heads, which have thunder'd against others, as upon their meanest Subjects; for those who seem Gods upon Earth, are nothing but Dust and Ashes before GOD.
115 Thomas Ʋincent of Felcham in the County of Surrey Esq. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The CONTENTS of the Second Book of the KINGS, commonly called the Fourth Book of the KINGS. IN this Book the History of the Kings of Ju∣dah and Israel is finished, which was be∣gun and carried on in the foregoing Book. As for the Kings of Israel, they and their Subjects continued obstinately wedded to their Idolatrous Worship; yet some of them much more than others. Wherefore also they were often called to Repentance by GOD, who to that end made use of the Ministry of his Prophets, as well as se∣vere Judgments and Chastisements, with which he visited them: And as a fore-running presage of their final Ruin, he suffered Tiglath-Pileser to lead away the whole Tribe of Neph∣thali Captive into Assyria; yet all this had no good effect upon them. True it is, that GOD always reserved a∣mongst them a small number, according to the Election of Grace, to which end the Holy Schools and Colledges of the Prophets were very conducive: But because the generality of these Apostate Israelites presevered in their Im∣piety and Defection, the LORD in his just Judgment at last wholly rejected and cast them off. For Salmanasar, King of Assyria, having Invaded the Land of Israel with a vast Army, took Samaria, after a three years Siege, and carried all the Israelites Captive into his own Country; which was the final Catastrophe of the Kingdom of Israel, having continued (ac∣cording to the Computation of some) 262 years, or thereabouts. The Kingdom of Judah also, not very long after, ended much in a like manner: For tho' the Jews had the true Worship of GOD gene∣rally continued amongst them, especially during the Reigns of their good and religious Kings, and the concurring administration of holy High Priests, who diligently employed their Autho∣rity for the casting down of Idolatry, and the Reformation and Re-establishment of Di∣vine Worship, when at any time it had suffered any Interruption or Corruption; yet the People were either very prone to mix the Leaven of Superstition with the pure Service of GOD, or to be careless and neglectful in attendance upon it, with that Zeal, Piety, and Sincerity, that GOD required of them: And notwithstanding that the serious Exhortations and earnest Admonitions of the Prophets, as well as the frequent Chastisements of the LORD, to recal them to Repentance, were not wanting all this while; yet the abominable Mixtures and Innovations, introduced by them into their Worship, and the depravations of their Manners, became so great and general, that GOD at length deliver'd this corrupt and incorrigible People into the hands of Ne∣buchadnezzar King of Babylon, who laid waste and destroyed their Country, took the City of Jerusalem, burnt the Temple, and carried the Jews Captives into Chaldea. All which came to pass after that the Kingdom of Judah had consisted (according to the Calculation of some) about 395 years from the Rent or Schism of the Ten Tribes. Yet for all that GOD did so moderate his Wrath against this unthankful People, that he (notwithstanding all their Provocations and Rebellions) still continued faithful and constant to his Word and Promise, and by his Fatherly Goodness, always kept up amongst them an Elect People, and preserved the Remains of the Fa∣mily of David (from whence the Messiah was to come, according to the Flesh) until the time of his appearing in the World, to accomplish the Work of our Redemption. The History of this Book contains the Events of 350 years, or thereabouts.
Elijah taken up into Heaven. Elijah is carried up to Heaven in a Fiery-Chariot, in the presence of his Disciple Elisha; who thereupon receives a double Portion of his Spi∣rit, and divides the Waters of Jordan with the Mantle of Elijah. AHab dying in the manner as hath before been related, left the Kingdom of Israel to his Son Ahaziah,Anno Mundi 3108. before Christ 896. who following the steps of his Father, and of his Mother Jezabel, prospered accordingly; for when he had reigned two years, he fell out of a Window, and finding himself in danger of Death, he sent Messen∣gers to enquire of Beelzebub the God of Ekron, whether he should recover of his fall, or no? GOD being provok'd, that a King of Israel should send to enquire of an Idol, about the event of his Sickness, sent Elijah to meet the Kings Messengers, and to bid them ask their Master, Whether he suppos'd there was no GOD in Israel, that he had sent them to enquire of Beelzebub the God of Ekron; and to assure him, that for this his sacrilegious and profane slighting of the GOD of Israel, he should not arise from his Sick-bed, but surely die. The Messengers returning to King Ahaziah with this Message, he enquired of them what kind of Man he was, that had charged them with it; and they replying, that he was a hairy Man, and girt with a Girdle of Leather about his Loyns; he presently concluded it was Elijah the Tishbite, and sent a Captain over fifty with his Company to take him; who (in obedience to the Kings Command) went up to Elijah, where he was sitting at the top of a Hill; and said to him, Man of GOD come down, and go along with me in the Kings Name: But Elijah told him, If I be a Man of GOD, then let Fire come down from Heaven, and consume thee and thy Company. King Ahaziah hearing no news of his first Captain, sent a second to seize the Prophet, who having commanded Elijah, to come down with him to the King, was consumed (together with those under his Command) like the for∣mer. Ahaziah, in the impatience of his Re∣venge, at last sending a third, who being ter∣rified by the dreadful end of the two former Captains, as soon as he came up the Hill, fell down on his Knees, and earnestly besought him to spare his Life, and the Lives of those that were with him. Elijah moved to pity with his humble Deportment, and being at the same time advised by an Angel, to go along with him to the King, not fearing any thing, accompanied the Captain into the presence of Ahaziah, to whom he denounced the Sen∣tence GOD had pronounced against him, That forasmuch as he had sent to Beelzebub, as if there was no GOD in Israel, he should never rise from his sick Bed, but die there. This was the last Action Elijah did in pub∣lick, for GOD soon after took him to himself; and Elisha being informed of the Day that his Master should be taken from him up to Heaven, would by no means be persuaded to leave him. Elijah himself tried him 3 several times, to see whether he might be induced to part from him; pretending, that he had busi∣ness elsewhere, and wishing him to stay there, and to leave him alone; but Elisha still pro∣testing, that he would never quit him, Elijah gave over, upposing that he had now suffici∣ently tried the Faithfulness of his Disciple; and as a reward of his Fidelity, bade him ask what he would of him; who thereupon demanding a double portion of his Spirit, Elijah told him. That he had demanded a hard thing, but that however, in case he did see him translated to Heaven, it should be granted him, else not. Soon after, as they went on and discoursed together, there appeared a Chariot and Horses of Fire, and parted them both asunder, and Elijah went up in a Whirlwind to Heaven. This holy Prophet (saith S. Chrysostom) mounting up to Heaven, left nothing to his Disciple, save only his Mantle; as if he had said to him, I have sought against the Devil, being covered with this Armour; and do thou also engage with him in the same Equipage. Elisha accepted of this mean and poor Mantle as the richest Inheritance, because the true Christian Poverty is an impregnable Tower, and inaccessible Fortress; and the true Disci∣ples of Christ look upon inward and spiritual Poverty, as the Well-spring of all good things, as the lovers of this World place all their con∣fidence in their Riches and outward Possessions.
116 Mary Lady Reve. relict of Sr. Robert Reve of Thwait hall in suffolk Baronet,  nw wife to Thomas Vincent of Fetcham in surrey Esq, For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
117 The Right Honourable Ann Lady Morpeth. daugter of the Right Honourable Arthur Capell, Earle of Essex deceased. For Advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
The Children devoured by Bears. The Children that mocked Elisha are devoured by Bears. AFter that the Prophet Elijah was tran∣slated out of this World, it appeared that he had been as good as his word to his Disci∣ple Elisha,The same year 3018. his Spirit not only resting upon him, but acting in him with more efficacy than ever it had in Elijah himself. The first effect hereof appeared in his crossing the River Jor∣dan dry-shod, without any other means, but of Elijahs Mantle he had left him, wherewith as soon as he had smote the Waters, and said, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? the Waters im∣mediately were parted, and he passed over. Elisha being return'd to Jericho, the Inha∣bitants thereof represented to him, that the situation of their City was very pleasant, but that all the Water about it was very bitter, and rendred the Ground barren. Elisha condes∣cending to their desire, bade them bring him a new Earthen Vessel with some Salt in it, and going forth to the Spring of the Waters, he cast Salt into it, and assured them in the Name of GOD, that from thenceforwards the Waters should be healed, and be no more the cause of sickness or death to any, or make the Ground bar∣ren, as formerly they had done. Which Words were no sooner utter'd by him, but the effect was there, and the Waters were healed ever after. This holy Prophet (as S. Ambrose observes) by the efficacy and power of his Word, not only changed the bitterness of those Waters which flowed upon the Earth, but he penetrated to their deepest and most hidden source and Spring, where he changed the very Nature of them, and that so throughly and effectually, that the Change he then made, continued to the end of all succeeding Ages, as the Scripture observes. By healing these Waters, he healed a whole People, who were af∣flicted with manifold Diseases, and Death, in drinking thereof, and in preserving those that were then, he (at the same time) was the pre∣servation of all those, who in succeeding Ages should proceed from them. This (adds that Father) was an admirable Figure of the Renovation and great Change which Jesus Christ (represented by the new Earthen Vessel fill'd with Salt) was to make one day, not in a City only or Country, but throughout the whole World, in scattering his Salt, that is to say, his Apostles, into the bitter and deadly Waters; that is, amongst the People corrupted and infect∣ed with Sin; in order to take away the barren∣ness of the Ground, and make it (for time to come) fruitful in all Vertues and Graces. But not long after this favourable and be∣neficial Miracle he had wrought, another suc∣ceeded, which made it evident, that this holy Prophet was fill'd with the same fiery Zeal, which was so signal and remarkable in his Master; for as he was going from Jericho to Bethel, near to that City he met with a Company of little Children, who seeing him bald, mocked him, crying out aloud, Go up thou Bald-pate, Go up thou Bald-pate. Elisha turning back look∣ed upon them, and cursed them in the Name of the LORD; which Curse was no sooner pro∣nounced by him, but two Bears came forth out of a Wood close by, and kill'd 42 of them. We may well say here, (what S. Austin speaks on another occasion) that this Anger of Elisha was a Prophetick Anger, representing to us be∣fore-hand, what was to come to pass in after-Ages, and lively setting forth to us the misera∣ble condition of those, who bearing the Name of the Children of the Church, do insolently make a mock and scoff at Jesus Christ, and all the sacred Mysteries of his sacred Life and Passion; and thô he suffered all manner of Outrage and Scoffing from the Jews on Mount Calvary, (as Elisha was mocked by these Children because he was bald) for which Crime they and their City were miserably destroyed and devoured by the Roman Eagles: Yet the Blasphemy and Sacrilegious abuse and profanation of his Holy Mysteries, which Christians are guilty of, is infinitely more exasperating, and must conse∣quently expect a Punishment and Judgment far exceeding, not only that of these Children, but of the Jews also, who so outragiously affronted and mocked him on the Cross; forasmuch as they have (as the Scripture expresseth it) troden un∣derfoot the Son of GOD, and counted the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing, and done despite to the Spirit of Grace. The Christian Church (as S. Austin saith) hath but too many such Children as these; and thô no Bears are seen outwardly to devour them; yet the Devils make no less havock of their Souls to whom they deliver themselves for a Prey by their disorderly Life, and the abuse of his holy Mysteries.
THE MIRACLE OF ELISHA. A Widow tormented by her Creditors, applying her self to Elisha for redress, he commands her to borrow Vessels of her Neighbours, which she fill'd with Oil, from a small Remnant she had left in the House, till there were no more Vessels for her to fill. AFter the Death of Ahab and his Son Ahaziah, Jehoram (Ahabs second Son) succeeded his Elder Brother in the Kingdom,Anno Mundi 3109. before Christ 895. and did evil in the sight of the LORD, tho' as the Scripture observes, not like his Father and Mother, for he put away the Image of Baal that his Father had set up; but for all that he continued in the worshipping of Jeroboams Golden Calves. He reigned at the same time that good King Jehoshaphat reigned over Ju∣dah, and these two Kings always continued in Alliance and good Correspondence together. Jehoram at that time being engaged in a War against the Moabites, who had refused to pay him the Tribute they had paid to his Fa∣ther Ahab, desired Jehoshaphat to come to his assistance, which Jehoshaphat did accordingly; and coming at the Head of his own Army, joyn'd his Forces with those of Jehoram. But as they were on their march towards their E∣nemies Country, having marched seven days to∣gether thro' a dry Wilderness, where they suf∣fered extream thirst for want of Water, Jeho∣shaphat in this extremity enquired of Jehoram, whether there were not thereabout a Prophet of the LORD, whom they might consult in this necessity, which threatned them and their Armies with utter destruction. Elisha at last being sent for, and appearing before the King of Israel, told him plainly, that he might betake himself to the Prophets of his Father and of his Mother; and that if it had not been in consideration of Jehoshaphat, he would never have come to him; but upon his account promised him both Water and Victory over the Moabites. And having order'd them to make the Valley, where they were, full of Ditches, the next Morning a torrent of Wa∣ter came from the Mountains and filled them, by which means the Army was saved. This Water, which was their preservation, became the ruin and overthrow of their Ad∣versaries; for the Moabites seeing this Water, to which the Rays of the rising-Sun had given a Red colour, supposed it had been Blood, and that their Enemies had kill'd one another: In this belief they came and fell upon Jehorams and Jehshaphats Army, whom contrary to their expectation they found not dead, but full of Life and Courage, insomuch as they soon put the Moabites to flight, and pursuing them to their Capital City, besieged it, whereupon the King of Moab in despair kill'd his eldest Son upon the Wall, and Sacrificed him; which cast so great a horrour upon the Jews, that they broke up the Siege, and re∣turned to their own Land. In the mean time there was a Widow (who being exceedingly troubled with her Creditors, that threatned in case of Nonpayment, to take away her two Sons and sell them for Bond-slaves) came to Elisha, and desired his assi∣stance and counsel in this extremity. Elisha having heard her Complaint, ask'd her, what she had in her House? who reply'd, she had nothing save a Pot of Oil; whereupon he bad her borrow a great many empty Vessels of her Neighbours, and having shut the Door of her House upon her, to pour out of her Pot into them till they were all filled. The Widow obey∣ing this Order of the Prophet, found her Oil hold out till there were no more Vessels to fill: And being astonish'd at this Miracle, came to give Elisha an account of what had hapned, who bade her sell so much of the Oil as was sufficient to pay her Debts, and to keep the rest for her self and Children to live on. This Miracle (saith S. Gregory) was a Figure of that abundant effusion of the Grace of the Holy Spirit, which should one day fill the Church, represented by this Widow, who had only two Sons, whom the Devils would take from her, and make them Bond-slaves; which design of theirs was prevented by the effusion of this holy and divine Unction. S. Bernard saith, we must without ceasing, desire and pant for this holy and wonderwork∣ing Oil, that our Hearts may be filled brimful with it; and to the end they may, we must keep them empty of vain Imaginations, and sensual Consolations. For the Unction of this Holy Spirit, represented by this Widows Oil, can fill no Vessels but such as are empty and void of all sinful and vain Prepossessions. 'Tis a vain thing for any Man to attempt an union between God and Mammon, Jesus Christ and this World, the Flesh and the Spirit; and it is impossible at the same time, to relish and taste the Pleasures of Earth and those of Heaven.
118 Mis. Jane Jeffreys▪ second daughter of Jeffrey Jeffreys of Llywell in Brecknockshire Esq▪ For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
119 Mis. sarah Jeffreys, third daughter of Jeffrey Jeffreys of Llywell in Brecknockshire Esq▪ For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
The Healing of Naaman. Naaman comes to the Prophet Elisha, to be healed of his Leprosie. ELisha the Prophet being willing to recom∣pence the charitable care the good Shu∣namite had taken of him,Anno Mundi 3110. before Christ 894. in entertaining and lodg∣ing him as he passed by that way, by deli∣vering her from the reproach of Barrenness, she had till then laid under, procur'd her a Son; but the Child sometime after dying whilst it was young, the Mother came in a great passion of Sorrow to complain thereof to Elisha, who (as soon as he had understood the Childs Death) sent Gehazi his Servant with his Staff, commanding him to lay it on the Child's Face; but the Mother would not be satisfied till Elisha came along with her; who finding that what he had commanded Gehazi had not brought the Child to life, he (as Elijah his Master did in a like case) ap∣plied his Body to the Body of the Child, ha∣ving prayed to the LORD, and thereupon the Childs Spirit return'd, and he deliver'd him to his Mother. Some time after he with a little Flower took away the poysonous quality of a Pot of Pottage, prepar'd for the Sons of the Prophets, and multiplied a few Loaves, so as they satis∣fied a great number of People. But one of the most famous Miracles wrought by Elisha, and which is recorded of him by Jesus Christ in the Gospel, was his curing Na∣aman the Syrian of his Leprosie. This Man was of great Authority with his Master the King of Syria, but was sadly afflicted with that filthy Disease: And his Wife having a Jewish Girl that waited upon her, she told her Mistress, that if her Master would but go to the Prophet Elisha in Samaria, he would cure him of his Leprosie. Naaman being acquaint∣ed herewith, told the King his Master, who sent a Letter by him to Joram King of Israel, importing that he had sent his General Naa∣man to him to be cured. Joram looking upon this his unreasonable Request, only as a design to pick a Quarrel with him, rent his Cloaths, asking Naaman, Whether his Master took him for a GOD, thus to require him to Cure his Disease? Elisha un∣derstanding what had past, sent to the King, to bid him direct Naaman to him, that he might know there was a Prophet in Israel. So Naaman came with his Horses and Chariot, and stood before the Door of Elisha's House, who without going out to him, sent word by his Servant, That he should go and wash himself seven times in the River Jordan, by which means he should be healed. But Naaman being in a rage at this usage and message of Elisha, went his way; but his Servants representing to him, how easie the thing was which the Prophet had prescrib'd for his Cure, desired him by all means to try, whether the Prophet had spoken true? Naa∣man at last yielding to their Reasons, went and plunged himself seven times in Jordan; whereupon his Flesh came again as the flesh of a little Child. As soon as Naaman per∣ceived the Cure wrought upon him, he re∣turned with all his Company to Elisha, to ex∣press his Acknowledgment, and to assure him, that from thence forward he would worship no other GOD, but the LORD only; he prest him also to receive his Presents, but Elisha utterly refused. Now after Naaman was departed, Gehazi, (Elisha's Servant) ran after him, and telling him a Lye, procur'd of him two Talents of Silver and two Changes of Rayment. Elisha knowing what had past, reproached Gehazi for his Covetousness, and told him in the Name of the LORD, That because he had done this, the Leprosie of Naaman the Syrian should cleave to him, and to his Seed for ever, which hapned accordingly, and the Leprosie immediately appeared over all his whole Body as white as Snow. The Cure of this General (saith S. Ambrose) is a Figure of the purification of Christians, of their inward Leprosie, by the Laver of Re∣generation. The Prophet Elisha would receive nothing in consideration of this Cure, to teach the Ministers of the Gospel by his Example, to part with and communicate freely to others, what they have so freely receiv'd themselves from the Author and Fountain of all good. And Gehazi's Leprosie shews us, what invi∣sibly happens to the Souls of those Ministers, who make a traffick of Holy things. It is not sufficient for Gospel Pastors (saith S. Ambrose) to be exempt from Avarice themselves, but they must take care that those who are under them to be so likewise; and they ought to use Severity, like Elisha, when they meet with any, who strive to enrich themselves with a Sacri∣legious Merchandize, dishonouring the reputa∣tion of their Profession, and exposing the Sa∣credness of their Ministry.
The Siege of Samaria. The King of Syria besiegeth the City of Samaria, and reduced it to a dreadful Fa∣mine. THE King of Syria having several times laid wait with his Army, to surprize Joram King of Israel,Anno Mundi 3116. before Christ 888. but all to no purpose, he became transported into a great Rage against his chief Officers and Ministers, as supposing that they disclosed his Designs to him: But one of them told him, He was much mistaken to suspect the Faithfulness of his Servants upon that account; and assured him, That it was E∣lisha the Prophet that frustrated his Designs, by acquainting the King of Israel with his most secret Counsels. As soon as the King of Syria had understood this, he was as much enraged against Elisha, as before he had been against his Servants, and resolved to seize him; and to that pur∣pose, he sent a great Party of his Forces to surround the City where Elisha then was. Eli∣sha's Servant arising in the Morning, and see∣ing the great Army of Syrians, that had in∣vested the City, he was sore afraid; but Eli∣sha, to rid him of his Apprehensions, prayed to GOD to open his Eyes; whereupon the young Man saw an Angelical Guard of Horses and Chariots of Fire, surrounding and guard∣ing his Master. And at the same time Elisha entreated GOD to strike the Syrian Army with blindness, that were come to take him; which the LORD ha∣ving performed at the request of his Servant, Elisha went down to them, and told them, That they had mistaken their way; but if they would follow him, he would lead them to the Man they look'd for; and so brought them into the midst of Samaria, and then prayed GOD to open their Eyes again, that they might see the danger in which they were.. King Joram seeing his Enemies thus mira∣culously made his Prisoners, demanded of E∣lisha, whether he should destroy them, since GOD had delivered them into his hand? but the Prophet check'd him for entertaining such a Thought, and on the contrary bade him set Meat and Drink before them, and send them back to their Master in Peace. Not long after this, Benhadad King of Syria raised a prodigious Army, and with it besieged the City of Samaria, which thereby was reduced to so dreadful a Famin, that an Asses-Head was sold for 80 Shekels, that is, for about 12 pounds sterling. But the Scrip∣ture gives us a more tragical Instance of the extream Famin then raging in that City, Which is this, As King Joram was walking on the Wall, a Woman cries out to him to do her Justice; and the King asking her what she desired of him, she told him, that she and another Woman (her Neighbour) had agreed to kill their Children and eat them; that ac∣cordingly she had given her Son, and they had eaten him; but that her Neighbour instead of dressing her Son the next day, according to their Contract, had hid him, and would not deliver him. King Joram astonished at the recital of so barbarous and unheard of Cruelty, rent his Cloaths, whereby the Sackcloth he wore next to his Skin was seen; but however, instead of reflecting upon his Sins, which were the cause of so dreadful a Judgment upon him and his People, he turns his Rage against Elisha, and swore he would have his Head that very day, and accordingly sent an Officer to his House, to execute his wicked design: But E∣lisha knowing of his Messag, commanded those that were with him to shut the Door against him, and lay hold of him; being as∣sur'd by the Spirit of GOD, that the Kings purpose of taking away his Life was chang'd. This behaviour of the King of Israel shews, how dangerous a thing it is, for a Man in Af∣fliction, to give himself up to Anger and Im∣patience. We see this Prince here dreadfully afflicted, and wearing Sackcloth upon his Skin, which one would think was a great sign of his being sensible of the Hand of GOD upon his Capital City; but for all that, we find him very far from being either humble or truly pe∣nitent; for losing his Confidence in GOD, and abandoning himself to Despair, he resolves to murther him, who alone by his Holiness and great Interest in GOD, was the Instrument of saving that City from utter ruin. But the true Servants of GOD, who look upon their Afflicti∣ons with the Eye of Faith, are humble and submissive under them, as knowing their Suf∣ferings are less than they deserve; yea, they bless GOD for them, because they do not consider him as a Judge that punisheth Criminals, but as a Father that chastizeth his Children for their good and benefit, who loves them whilst he chastizeth them, and would never take the Rd in his Hand, but because he loves them.
120 Captaine Richard Leake of the Tower of London. Master Gunner of England. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
121 Mis. susanna Henshaw, daughter of Charles Henshaw Esq, For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
The Prediction of Elisha. A Lord of Samaria questioning the Truth of the Word of the LORD spoken by Elisha, is trodden to death. JORAM having complain'd to Elisha of the extremity to which the Famine had reduc'd the City of Samaria,Anno Mundi 3119. before Christ 885. the holy Prophet comforted him and the People, who were quite spent and faint, assuring them, That the next day about that time, fine Flour and Barley should be as cheap as then it was dear and scarce, 'Twas a hard thing to believe this Prophesie, because all Ob¦jects of Sense did directly contradict it; and one of the Lords that were with the King was so bold to tell him, That what he had said could not prove true, except GOD should be pleased to open the Windows of Heaven, and rain down Corn upon them. But the Prophet replyed, He should see it with his Eyes, but should not eat of it. This Prophesie was verified in this manner: Four Leprous Persons being got out of the City, encouraged one another to go into the Camp of the Syrians, and deliver themselves to them, as knowing that the worst that could happen to them was to be killed by them, which they thought far more eligible than to pine away with Famine; but when they were come to the Camp, they were extreamly surpriz'd to find no body there; for GOD had struck the Syrian Army with Terror, by making them hear a noise of Chariots and Horses, as the noise of a great Army; whereupon they be∣took themselves to flight for their Lives, lea∣ving their Tents, Horses, and all their Baggage behind them. These Lepers finding themselves so unex∣pectedly Masters of the whole Camp of the Sy∣rians, fell to eating and drinking, and refresh∣ing themselves in the first Tent they entred into, and carried away the Silver and Gold they found there, and hid it; but considering how injurious they were to the poor Inhabi∣tants of Samaria, in concealing these good Tidings from them, they went to the Gate of the City, and acquainted the Guards with what they had been Eye-witnesses of. Joram being inform'd of the Lepers Report, suppos'd it was only a Stratagem of the Syrians, to draw the People out of the City, and by that means to have an occasion to destroy them; Wherefore he sent out some Chariots, to dis∣cover whether the Syrians were fled indeed, or no; who following them as far as Jordan, found all the way full of Garments and Vessels, which the Syrians had cast away in their flight. As soon as these Messengers had made a Re∣port to the King of what they had seen, and that the Enemy was certainly returned home, the almost starv'd Citizens of Samaria flock'd in crowds out of the City, to go and plunder the Tents of the Syrians, by which means Meal and Barley was sold in the City at the same price Elisha had foretold to the King, in the Name of the LORD. And about the same time the other part of his Prophecy was fulfill'd likewise; for the King having commanded the Lord, who had expressed his disbelief of what Elisha had pronounced to King and People in the Name of GOD, to have charge of the Gate, to prevent any Disorders that might hap∣pen on that occasion, he was trod under foot by the People, and died. It is impossible (saith St. Ambrose) not to ad∣mire the Wisdom and Power of GOD in these wonderful Events here set down, when we see that all contingent Futurities are present with him, which he discovers, when it pleaseth him, so clearly to his Servants, as if they were al∣ready done. We see him here saving Samaria after a miraculous manner, and alone fighting against her Enemies, whom he strikes with Fear and Terror, making them run away for their Lives, when none pursu'd them. We see a City deliver'd before they themselves were a∣ware of it. Four Lepers, whom the Prophet Elisha had not healed, tho' he healed Idolatrous Naaman the Syrian, were appointed by GOD, to publish and make known this Deliverance. And when all the People were transported with Joy, for this their unlookt for Deliverance and Salva∣tion, one Great Man is trodden to death by them, as they crowded through the Gate to plunder the Syrians Tents, that he might teach us by his tragical end, how dangerous a thing it is to have too high thoughts of the Power of Man, and too mean thoughts of the Omnipotence of GOD; that we affront him, when we disbelieve the Truth ut∣terered by the Mouth of his Servants, and that we cannot despise them, without despising him that sends them.
Iezabel devoured by Dogs. Jezabel being thrown out of a Window by Jehu's Order, is devoured of Dogs. ELisha being come to Damascus, Benhadad King of Syria sent Hazael to him, to know whether he should recover of his Sickness,Anno Mundi 3120. before Christ 884. with which he was then afflicted. Hazael having deliver'd his Message to Elisha, he told him at first, that the King his Master might recover; but presently added, that withal the LORD had shewed him he should certainly die; and at the same time fixing his Eyes upon Hazael, he fell a weeping. And Hazael having asked him why he wept? The Prophet reply'd, it was because of the Evils he foresaw that he would bring upon Israel, when he should possess the Crown of Syria. Hazael returning to his Master, told him, That Elisha said, he should certainly recover; but the next Morning he took occasion to sti∣fle him, and (upon his death) was proclaim'd King of Syria in his stead. This hapned when Joram the second Son of Ahab was King of Israel, and Jehoshaphat King of Judah. Jeho∣shaphat being grown old and crazy, placed his Son Jehoram in his Throne, who had nothing of his good Father's Piety, but followed the steps of the Kings of Israel, and imitated the wickedness of Ahab, whose Daughter he had married. After Jehoram's Death, his Son Ahaziah succeeded in the Throne of Judah, and was Contemporary with Joram the Son of Ahab King of Israel, whom he assisted in the War he waged against Hazael King of Syria, and Joram being wounded in the Fight, he went to Jezreel to be cured, whither Ahaziah King of Judah repaired to give him a Visit. Now whilst the King of Israel was ill of his Wounds, Jehu (one of the high Officers of his Army) ha∣ving been anointed King of Israel by one of Elisha's Disciples, with an express charge to exterminate the Family of Ahab, taking some Forces with him, immediately repair'd to Jez∣reel, where both the Kings then were. King Joram being acquainted by a Sentinel, that a great Party were drawing nigh to the City, he sent out Messengers on Horseback to enquire who they were; but Jehu suffering none of them to return, Joram began to suspect some Trea∣chery in the case, and notwithstanding his Sickness, commanded his Chariot to be made ready; and he and Ahaziah went to meet Je∣hu, whom they found in the Plot of Ground that belonged to Naboth, and Jehu having shot Joram through the Heart with a Dart, exposed his dead body there to be devoured by Dogs, to fulfil the Prophecy of Elijah against the House of Ahab; and Ahaziah endeavouring to make his escape in his Chariot, was pursued by com∣mand from Jehu, and killed also, and his dead Body carried to Jerusalem to be inter'd with his Fathers. Jezabel strangely alarm'd with these Ti∣dings, had recourse to the Artifices of her Sex, and having painted her Face and dress'd her Head, plac'd her self at a Window to be seen by Jehu; who was so far from being taken with her Beauty, that he commanded some Eunuchs that waited upon her, to throw her out of the Window; which being done, Jehu and his Officers made their Horses to go over her Body. Jehu having refresh'd himself af∣ter this Action, commanded some of his Ser∣vants, to go and take up Jezabel's Body and bury it; but when he came to look for it, they found nothing left, except her Skull, her Feet, and the Palms of her Hands, the Dogs ha∣ving devoured the rest, according to the Pre∣diction of Elijah. That was the End of this unhappy and mise∣rable Princess, who was a great Instrument of GOD's Severity, to purifie and refine his Ser∣vants by her barbarous Cruelty and Violence. She knew the Truth (saith St. Ambrose) and yet she persecuted it; and having taken a resolution, at any rate to support the Interest of false Pro∣phets, who flatter'd and indulg'd her wicked and Idolatrous Humour, she declared open War, and became a sworn Enemy to the true Prophets of GOD. Her Presumption engag'd her to be too busie and medling with Matters concerning GOD and Religion; and her bitter hatred a∣gainst the pure Worship of GOD, having put her upon endeavours wholly to extirpate the same, so that no Footsteps of it might be left. GOD in his just Judgment suffered her not only to come to a most shameful and tragical End, but that e∣ven after Death, scarce any remainder of her Body should be left, for a Terror to all that might hereafter be inclined to follow her steps.
122 Mr. Laurence Spencer▪ Clerke of the Works for the rebuilding the Cathedrall Church of Saint Pauls London. For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
123 Sr. George Rivers, of Chafford in the County of Kent Baronet, For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
A dead Man raised to Life. A dead Man being cast by chance into the Grave of Elisha, is raised to Life by touching of his Bones. JEHU knowing that he was raised to the Throne of Israel on purpose to destroy the House of Ahab, after he had made a good beginning with Joram and Jezebel,Anno Mundi 3120. before Christ 884. soon after caused 70 of Ahab's Sons to be killed, having sent or∣der for that purpose to the Magistrates of Sa∣maria; who for fear of displeasing King Jehu, executed his Commands, and having cut off the Heads of Ahab's Sons, sent them to him in Baskets. Soon after Jehu, that he might with the greater ease destroy all the Priests and Worshippers of Baal, pretended he would honour Baal more than ever Ahab had done, and proclaimed a solemn Assembly for Baal, whereat all his Prophets, Priests and Worship∣pers were to be present; and when they were all met together in the Temple of Baal, he caused his Soldiers to fall upon them, and kill them every Man; and then proceeded to break down and burn all the Images of Baal, and turn'd his Temple into a Jakes. GOD himself highly commended Jehu for this his Zeal, and promised him for a Reward, that his Children to the fourth Generation should succeed him in the Throne. But alas! he continu'd not long in this good disposition, but plung'd himself into all the Sins of Jero∣boam, and by maintaining his Idolatrous Wor∣ship of the Golden Calves, he drew down the Anger of GOD upon him∣self and all Israel,Anno Mundi 3148. before Christ 856. and at last died, leaving his Son Jehoahaz his Successor. Whilst matters were thus carried in Israel, Ahaziah King of Judah being sain by Jehu, Athaliah his Mother, being a proud and am∣bitious Woman, to assure her self of the Throne, caused all the Sons of King Ahaziah to be put to death, except Joash, whom Josheba his Aunt hid from Athaliah in the Temple of the LORD.Anno Mundi 3120. When Athaliah had now reigned 7 years, Jehojada the High Priest thought it was high time to declare to all Judah, That they had a lawful King in being, whom Athaliah had now for so many years deprived of his Right, by u∣surping the Crown of Judah; and having over and above contrived his Death, but that she had been happily prevented in the execution of her wicked and treasonous Design. And having sent for the high Officers of the Kingdom and Army, to meet him in the House of GOD, he shewed them Joash their lawful Sovereign, whom they with most joyful Acclamations proclaimed King. Athaliah surprized with these extraordinary shouts of Joy proceeding from the Temple, ran in haste thither, and rushing into the place where the King was, Jehojada commanded the Officers to seize her, and having dragg'd her out of the Temple to kill her; which being executed accordingly, Joash (who was then but 7 years of Age) peacefully succeeded in his Father's Throne. About the same time Elisha the Prophet died: and as he lay upon his Death-bed, Jo∣ash, the Son of Jehoahaz King of Israel, came to give him a visit, and to testifie the Sor∣row he had conceived at the apprehension of losing the best Bulwark of his Kingdom; whereupon the Prophet to recompence this his good Office, promis'd him as many Victories against the King of Syria, as he should give strokes to the Ground. Elisha died soon af∣ter, and it hapned that as some Persons were burying a dead Body, they discovered a Party of Moabites that were ravaging the Country; whereupon they in haste cast the dead Body into Elisha's Grave, which as soon as it touch∣ed the Bones of that Holy Prophet, was restored to Life. This was a great Miracle (saith St. Ambrose) but those of the Gospel are far greater, Elisha's dead Body raiseth a dead Body to life; Jesus Christ raised Lazarus, and many others, as well in his Life time as after his Death, from death to life; but the Resurrection of the Body is not near so considerable as that of the Soul. Bodies are raised from the dead to die again; but Souls that are raised to life, by leaving Death, Sin, and the Devil, never die again, but live the life of Angels, yea, of GOD himself. None of us dare be so arrogant to expect to be raised from death to life like Lazarus; and yet e∣ven those of us, who groan under the Egyptian Bondage and slavery of our Passions, may, and ought to hope for the Resurrection of their Souls, if with a lively Faith and sincere Repentance they rely upon the infinite vertue of the Blood of Jesus Christ, and the Omnipotence of his Grace.
Zechariah the High-Priest is stoned. Zechariah, at the Command of Joash King of Judah, because he had reproved him of his Sin, is stoned. JOash, the Son of Ahaziah, being raised to the Throne of the Kings of Judah, by the Care and Loyalty of Jeho∣jada the High-Priest,Anno Mundi 3126. before Christ 878. seem'd for a good while to be very acknowledging and thankful to him, to whom he was be∣holden for his Crown: The kindness he had for this Holy Man made him good also; and being extreamly concern'd for the disorders Athaliah had committed in the House of GOD, who had spoiled it of all its richest Ornaments and Utensils, to adorn and furnish the Temple of Baal; he gave command to have the same repaired, and that all the dedicated things should he returned to it. And because the expence of this Work was too great for the King alone to bear, he ac∣quainted the People with his design, that all those who found themselves inclin'd, might contribute to so good and pious a Work. But the Priests, who were to receive the Money that was given to this purpose, were not so exact in giving in their Accounts, nor so dili∣gent to forward the Work, as they should have been; wherefore Jehojada the Priest or∣dered all the Alms and Contributions of the People to be put into a great Chest fast lockt, which had a Hole in the midst of the Lid, or Cover of it, by which the Priests put in all their Money they received from the People; and whenever they found there was a consi∣siderable Sum of Money therein, they opened it in the presence of the King and the High-Priest, and having counted it, they put it in Bags, to be delivered to the Workmen. After that the House of GOD was thus re∣pared, and all things reduc'd to their ancient Order, Jehojada the High-Priest died at the Age of 130 years. Joash the King shewed him great Honour after his death, and would have his Body interr'd in the Sepulcher of the Kings of Judah, for the great Service he had done to the Crown and whole Kingdom: But it was not long he continued in this good disposition; for soon after the death of Jehojada, who had so wisely counsell'd and govern'd this young Prince, the Grandees of his Kingdom came to pay their Obeysance to him, who (being plea∣sed with their Flatteries) gave ear to them, and made them his Favourites; and from that very time he forgat the LORD, and in∣stead of his former religious Care for the Temple and true Worship of GOD, he now a∣dored Idols, and drew down the Wrath and Vengeance of GOD upon himself and his Kingdom. Zechariah, the Son of Jehojada, who had suc∣ceeded his Father in the High Priesthood, could not endure the sight of these Impieties; and being stirr'd up by the Spirit of GOD, he re∣prov'd the King to his Face, with a holy bold∣ness, as well as the Grandees of his Court; for that they had forsaken the LORD, and wor∣shipp'd Idols. But this Liberty cost him his Life; for Joash not considering the vast Obli∣gations he had to his Father, who had set the Crown upon his Head, caused him to be ston'd to death in the Court of the Lord's House, who dying, uttered these Words; The LORD look upon it, and require it. The LORD heard the Prayer of this holy Martyr, and made the remainder of the Life of this Prince as unfortunate, as the beginning of it had been happy. He stirr'd up the Sy∣rians against him, who with an inconsidera∣ble Force, defeated a vast Army, he had raised against them, and afterwards came to Jeru∣salem, and destroyed all the Princes of the People, and tortured Joash himself, leaving him in a sad and languishing Condition; and after all, was not allow'd to die a natural death, but was murther'd by two of his Ser∣vants in his Bed, for the innocent Blood he had shed; and had not the Honour (after his death) to be buried in the Sepulcher of his Fore-fathers, the Kings of Judah. GOD by this dreadful Example, teaches Princes to distrust those who by their base and selfish Flat∣teries, would persuade them they are GODS, and that whatsoever they will, is well; and on the contrary, to value and esteem those who freely and boldly tell them the naked Truth, from a sincere Af∣fection and Honour they have, for their Persons, whereas those Flatterers serve only to corrupt their good Inclinations, and to stir up the hatred of GOD and Men against them.
124 The Honourable Sr. Robert Napier of Puncknoll in the County of Dorset Knight and Baronet▪ For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
125 John Lethieu'llier Esq, son of sr. John Lethieu'llier. of Lewisham. in the County of Kent Knight▪ For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this▪ Plate.
AHAZ THE WICKED KING Wicked Ahaz (the King of Judah) greatly provoked GOD by his Abominations, is delivered into the Hand of his Enemies. AMaziah having succeeded his Father Joash, was frequently engaged in War against Joash the King of Is∣rael,Anno Mundi 3165. before Christ, 839. who took him Captive; but soon after dying Amazi∣ah was set at liberty by his Son Jeroboam, and reigned 15 year after that in Jerusalem: At the end of which understand∣ing that a Conspiracy was hatching against him by some of his Servants,Anno Mundi 3174. he fled to Lachish; but they sent after him, and kill'd him there, and Ʋzziah (who is also cal∣led Azariah) Reigned in his stead. This Ʋzziah, in the main was a good Prince, and consulted with the Prophets in all his Affairs of Importance, to know the Will of the LORD, and by this means he became Victori∣ous over all his Enemies, and very great and powerful; he repair'd the Ruins of Jerusalem, and restored the Kingdom to its former lustre and glory. But this continual course of Prospe∣rity and Success at last lifted up his Heart (as the Scripture observes) to his destruction; for he proceeded to that height of Presumption, to invade the Sacred Office of the High Priest, and to offer Incense upon the Altar of Incense: And when Azariah the High-Priest, at the Head of 80 Priests of the LORD, withstood him, and challenged him for so doing, and he en∣raged began to Threaten them, the Leprosie broke out upon him, which as soon as they had perceived, they thrust him out of the House of the LORD; and indeed finding himself smit∣ten with that unclean Disease, he hasted to get out of the Temple, that he might not defile that holy Place. Ʋzziah thus struck with Leprosie, and being thereby incapacitated for Government, Jo∣tham his Son took possession of the Throne, and in all things imitated the first Piety of his Fa∣ther; wherefore also GOD blessed him, and made him very powerful; and having Reigned 16 years, he left the King∣dom to his Son Ahaz,Anno Mundi 3261. who set up again all the Abominations of Idolatry in Jerusalem, wherefore also the LORD delive∣red him into the Hands of the Syrians, and in∣to the Hands of the King of Israel. In the mean time the Kingdom of Israel de∣scended from Joash to Jero∣boam,Anno Mundi 3233. and from Jeroboam to Zachariah, and from him to Shallum, and then to Menahem, who left the Kigdom to his Son Peaiah; but Pekah the Son of Remaliah conspired against him and slew him, after he had Reigned two years. 'Twas this Pekah that wa∣ged a most bloody War against Judah, killing at one time 120000 of them, because they and their King had forsaken the LORD, and be∣taken themselves to the worship of Idols. The Israelites at that time committed such extream Crueties against their Brethren the Jews, that as they returned with their Captives in tri∣umph to Samaria, a Prophet of the LORD re∣proved them for their great Cruelty, charging them at least to send back to their homes the 200000 Captives they had taken, which they did at the Prophets remonstrance, with a great many marks of Tenderness and Compassion for them, Cloathing them that were naked, and providing Wagons to carry those that were not able to go on Foot. But Ahaz was so far from being humbled by all these heavy Judgments of an incensed GOD, that on the contrary he sinned more and more. At the same time Ahaz having made an Alliance with Tiglath-Pileser King of Assy∣ria against Israel, he came with a great Army and took all the Israelites that dwelt beyond Jordan, and carried them Captives to Assyria, from whence they never return'd, no more than the rest of the Ten Tribes, who were afterwards transported thither by his Son Salmanassar. But King Ahaz was so far from being touch'd with the desolation of his own, or Neighbour Kingdom, or better'd thereby, that on the contrary he attributed all the Advan∣tages his Enemies at the time had over him, to the prevalent power of their Idols, above those he worship'd, He shut up the Doors of the Lord's House, and erected Altars to his Idols, in all the Corners of the Streets of Jerusalem, until GOD by Death put a stop to the Career of his Impieties. He was a dreadful Example of Princes for∣saken by GOD, who the more he punisheth them, the more their Spirits are set against him, and who at last by their unhappy ends proclaim this great Truth, That Kings are great as long as they continue in the Rank where GOD has plac'd them; but that they precipitate them∣selves into their Creatural Nullity, when they begin to challenge him, or make themselves his Equals.
KING HEZEKIAH. Hezekiah, King of Judah, applying himself to restore the true Worship of GOD destroys all the Idols and Images that were in the Land. PEkah having seated himself on the Throne of Israel, by conspiring against Pekahiah his Master, lost his Kingdom by the same way he had got it at first;Anno Mundi 3265. before Christ 739. for Hoshea conspired a∣gainst him and slew him, and succeeded in the Throne; but was scarce well seated in it, when Salmanassar King of Assyria came with an Army against him, and made his Kingdom Tributary. But as Hoshea was designing to cast off this Yoke, with the assistance of the King of Egypt, Salmanassar being informed thereof, came a∣gainst him with a great Army, and laid Siege to Samaria, which he took at the end of 3 years; and carried the Ten Tribes into his own Country, (that is, into Media and Assyria) from whence they were scattered throughout all the Eastern parts of Asia, without ever returning to their own Country. Thus ended the Kingdom of Israel, having continued 255 years after its separation from Judah. Whilst the Kingdom of Israel was thus harrassed with a long Succession of wicked Kings, who by a Series of Murthers and Con∣spiracies supplanted one another, the Kingdom of Judah had a Breathing time allowed it from the Miseries it groan'd under in the Reign of King Ahaz; for his good Son Hezekiah succeeding him,Anno Mundi 3277. before Crist 727. changed the whole Face of Affairs, and made Piety and Vertue to take place instead of that Impiety and Idolatry which had over-spread the whole Kingdom. The Scripture gives him this Character, That neither before nor after him, was there ever any King of Judah like him. He put his whole trust in the LORD, and cleaved to his Law, without turning from it to the right or to the left; He opened the Gates of the House of GOD, which his Father had shut up, with design to abolish the true Worship of GOD. He commanded the Priests and Levites to sancti∣fie themselves, in order to the purifying of that holy Place, which had been so abominably prophan'd. He cut down all Idolatrous Groves, and broke the Brazen Serpent which Moses for∣merly had made by an express Command from GOD; but was since become an Object of their Sacrilegious Adorations. He took great care to re-establish the Priests and Levites in their dis∣continued Functions, and to provide for their Subsistance and Maintenance, to which end he revived the Laws of the Tenths and First-fruits. And as this good King took pleasure and de∣light in the ways of GOD, and in procuring and establishing the purity of his Worship, so the LORD also took delight to Crown all his Enterprizes with Success, and to reward his Pie∣ty with the Victory that alway attended his Arms. He cast off the Tyrannical Yoke of those Kings, that had made his Predecessors their Tributaries, and particularly that of the King of Assyria. He waged War against the Philistins, took their chiefest Cities, and made them keep within their own Bounds. During the Reign of this Pious King lived Isaiah the Prophet, who was of the Blood Royal, and very familiar with this good King. GOD on several occasions sending him to be his Counsellor and Comforter. This Holy Prophet always encouraged Hezekiah to put his Trust more and more in that GOD whom he wor∣shipped; and as it pleased GOD, for to prove Hezekiah's Faithfulness and the Uprightness of his Heart, by stirring up very powerful and formidable Enemies against him; so this holy Prophet was always ready to comfort and en∣courage him, that he might not be terrified either by their Forces or Menaces. This was a very sensible Instance, how hap∣py that Prince is, who lends an ear to, and ad∣viseth with holy and good Men; as Isaiah also without doubt thought himself happy to live under the Government of so Religious a Prince. And it appeared by this remarkable Example, (as the Fathers observe) that when Kings truly fear GOD, they easily agree with those that are his true Servants, and are ready to comply with whatsoever they declare to them in the Name of the LORD; accounting it a greater and more real Honour to respect his Word in his Mini∣sters, than to be honoured and obeyed by all their Subjects.
126 The Honourable Mis. Elizabeth Gerard, sole daugh∣ter and Heyress of the Right Honourable Digby Lord Gerard of Gerards Bromley For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
127 Mr. Nathanaell Bromley▪ of London Cittezen. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
THE DEFEAT OF SENNACHERIB. GOD in Favour to King Hezekiah, destroys the Army of Sennacherib by an Angel, who in one Night killed an Hundred fourscore and five thousand Men. GOD being willing to prove the Faith∣fulness of King Hezekiah, stirred up a∣gainst him Sennacherib the King of Assyria,Anno Mundi 3291. before Christ 713. who pro∣vok'd by Hezekiah's refusing to pay the Tri∣bute his Predecessors were us'd to pay, sent Rabshakeh to threaten him in the presence of all the People, on purpose to discourage them, and make them Rebel against Hezekiah; ac∣companying his Threats with Scoffing refle∣ctions upon his Confidence in GOD, against the Forces of a Prince, whom no Power hi∣therto had been able to resist. Hezekiah having been Ear-witness of these proud Threats and Blasphemies, which reflect∣ed more upon GOD than upon himself, rent his Cloaths and cover'd himself with Sackcloth, and went into the House of the LORD, from whence he went to Isaiah the Prophet, to ac∣quaint him with what had hapned, entreating him to cry mightily unto the LORD for help in that time of distress. The Prophet in answer to his request, bade him not to be afraid of the proud Threats of Sennacherib because GOD would fight for him; assuring him, That the King of Assyria should never enter the City, but be forced to raise the Siege, and to return shamefully into his own Country by the same way he came, and be Murther'd there; because the LORD GOD had taken upon him to de∣fend and save the City of Jerusalem for his own Name sake, and for his Servant David's sake. Hezekiah received this Answer from the Prophet Isaiah, as he was humbling, and pour∣ing forth his Heart in Prayer before the LORD in his Temple: For having received the Blas∣phemous Threatning Letter from the King of Assyria, he presented it before the LORD, and holding it in his hands lifted up to Heaven, he said; O Lord God of Israel which dwellest between the Cherubins, thou alone art the GOD of all the Kingdoms of the Earth, for thou hast made Heaven and Earth▪ Lord▪ bow down thine Ear and hear, open thine Eyes and see, and hear the Words of Sennacherib, which he hath sent to reproach the Living God. True it is, O Lord, that the Kings of Assyria have destroyed other Nations and their Lands, and cast their Gods into the Fire, for they were no Gods, but the Work of Mens hands, Wood and Stone, therefore they have destroyed them. Now therefore, O Lord our God, save thou us out of his hand, that all the Kingdoms of the Earth may know, that thou only art the Lord God. The Prayers of this good King were not without a signal Effect; for when Sennache∣rib thought himself sure of Hezekiah and his Kingdom, GOD sent the Jews an invisible Suc∣cour, which yet produced most visible and sensible Effects: for he gave Commission to an Angel, who in one Night killed 185000 Men in the Camp of Sennacherib; who rising betimes in the Morning were extreamly asto∣nished and surprized, to find the whole Camp little else but a heap of dead Bodies. Thus with shame and confusion was he fain to hurry a∣way to Niniveh, where neither he was safe; for as he was Worshipping in the House of his God, he was killed by two of his Sons who escaped into Armenia. This was the end of Sennacherib, who being a Prince that lifted up himself above GOD, and dishonoured him with his Blasphemies, serv'd at last only to be a dreadful Instance of his Omniotence and Severity against such proud and obstinate Sinners, GOD opposed a∣gainst all the vast Army of this proud King no more than one single Angel, who (as S. Hierom observes) would not involve him in the same Slaughter with his Subjects, as Pharaoh was, but suffered him to escape his Hand that he might fall by those of his Sons. GOD by this History would teach the Kings of the Earth, That when they Rebel, and de∣clare themselves Enemies to him, from whom they receive their Being, and whatsoever else that makes them Great and Feared amongst Men, he sometimes permits them to find such Monsters amongst their own Children, who re∣nouncing all Natural Affection, are not afraid by a detestable Parricide, to deprive them of their Life and Crown, to whom they themselves were beholding for both.
HEZEKIAH RESTORED TO HEALTH. King Hezekiah being Sick to Death, is restored to Health, and has 15 Years added to his Life. NOT long after that Hezekiah was thus miraculously deliver'd from Sennacherib's Army, he fell Sick of a Mor∣tal disease.Before Jesus Christ 710 years. GOD, it seems was resolved to try this pious K. all manner of ways thereby to raise Hezekiah's Faith, and to display his own Power and Glory. Accordingly, after that Hezekiah had earnest∣ly besought the LORD, GOD sent Isaiah the Prophet (who had before declar'd the Sentence of Death to him) to assure him that the LORD had heard his Prayer, and retracted the Sen∣tence of death; That his Recovery should be so sudden, that within 3 days he should be in condition to go to the Temple of the LORD; and moreover that 15 years should be added to the years of his Life. And to convince He∣zekiah of the Truth of what he had declar'd to him in the Name of the LORD, he wrought a famous Miracle, by making the shadow of the Sun to return backward ten Degrees upon the Dial of Ahez. So many Miracles wrought in favour of He∣zekiah, did not meet with the answerable Ef∣fects that might be expected from them; and he made it appear, when he was restored to health, that it is sometimes advantageous for Good Men to die of their Sickness. GOD, to make the Pride that had insinuated it self into Heze∣kiah's Heart to appear abroad, suffer'd the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon to come to him with rich Presents, to congratulate his Recovery, and to enquire about the Miracle wrought in his behalf. Hezekiah pleasing himself with the Ho∣nour done to him by that great King, shewed his Ambassadors all his Riches, Jewels and Trea∣sury, and all that was Great and Magnificent in all his Kingdom, with all his stores of Arms and Ammunition. GOD, who had discover'd this Wound hid in the bottom of the King's Heart, snt Isaiah the Prophet to enquire of him who those Men were that were come to Visit him, and what their Business was? To which he answer'd, That they were Ambassadors sent to him from the King of Babylon, and that he had shew'd them all the Treasures of his Palace and Kingdom, without hiding any thing from them. Whereupon Isaiah declared to him in the Name of GOD, That all the Treasures that he had shewed to the Babylonian Ambassadors, should be carried to Babylon, and that his own Children and Posterity should be Eunuchs in the Palace of the King of Babylon. Which Prophe∣cy was afterwards verified in the Children of the Blood Royal of Judah, who were carried away Captives by Nebuchadnezzar. Manasseh, te Son of Hezekiah, who was but 12 years of Age, when he began to Reign, was himself carried Captive to Babylon, because of his Impiety, wherein he exceeded all the Kings that went before him. He set up again whatever his Fa∣ther had destroyed, and pull'd down whatever he had set up. He caus'd the Prophet Isaiah to be kill'd, without respecting his Holiness, his high Quality, being Prince of the Blood, or his great Age, being above 100 years old, and out-did (as GOD witnesseth of him by his Prophets) all the Abominations of the Amorites, whom GOD had driven our of the Holy Land. Wherefore also GOD raised up against him the King of Assyria, who took him Captive, and bound him with Chains and carried him to Babylon. This sad condition, to which by the just Judgment of GOD he was reduced, made him enter into himself, and Eying GOD, who so justly chastiz'd him, he beg'd for Pardon and Mercy with all his Heart, and gave full evi∣dence of a true and sincere Repentance. These deep and hearty Humiliations of this Captive Prince, joyn'd with most ardent Pray∣ers, mov'd GOD to have pity on him; and delivering him from his Captivity in Babylon, he restor'd him to his Subjects, and establish'd him in his Throne, where now his care was to serve the LORD, and to shew himself thankful for the great Mercy and Loving-kindness he had been pleased to show unto him. Neither was he content with serving the LORD himself, but he commanded all his Subjects to serve the Lord God of Israel, and to worship him alone. Thus (saith the Scripture) Manasseh knew that the LORD he was GOD; and indeed every one who read these wonderful Events cannot but own the same. And it is hard to determine where we ought to fix our Admira∣tion most, whether on the Omnipotence of GOD; who absolutely disposes of Men, or on his Ju∣stice, which does not spare Kings; or on his Mercy, which condescends to be entreated by so great a Criminal, and restores a Prince to his Throne, who had so outrageously contemn'd his Laws, and profan'd his Temple.
128 Mr. Francis Forbes of the Citty of London Merchant, For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
129 Gentilles Tichborne, wife of Sr. Benjamin Tichborne▪ of Woodwicks in Hartford Shire Knight▪ descended from the antient family of Tichborne of Tichborne in Hant Shire, For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
THE PIETY OF JOSIAH. Josiah (King of Judah) restores the Worship of GOD, and establisheth it throughout his Kingdom, and in Godliness exceeds all his Predecessors. KING Manasseh being dead, his Son Amon Reigned in his stead, who imitated his Father in his Crimes and Sins, but not in his true and sin∣cere Repentance;Anno Mundi 3361. before Christ 643. wherefore GOD having left him to himself, his own Servants conspired against him and kill'd him, after a short Reign, that lasted only two years. The People having kill'd the Murtherers of Amon plac'd his Son Josiah on the Throne, who was not above 8 years of Age when the Crown was set on his Head. This Josiah was a Prince of most rare emi∣nent Piety, of which he gave extraordinary In∣stances from his very Youth, and continued therein to the end of his Life. He destroy'd all the Altars of Baal, and brake in pieces all his Images, and burnt the Bones of his Prophets up∣on the Altars dedicated to that Idol, according to the Word GOD had spoken by his Prophet to Jeroboam 350 years before. Thus he purified and cleansed not only Jerusalem and Judah, but also extended his Zeal to a great part of Isra∣el, destroying and cutting down the Images and Groves, that he fond in the Tribes of Manasseh, Ephraim, Simeon, and Naphthali. Whilst this good King was imployed in these Works so worthy of a King, and Repairing of the Temple, which in his Fathers, and Grand∣fathers time had been so highly abus'd and profan'd, Hilkiah the High-Priest found the Book of the Law of Moses in the Temple of the LORD, and brought it to King Josiah, who when he had read therein the dreadful Threat∣nings pronounc'd against those who did disobey that Law, he rent his Cloaths in consideration of the heavy Curse of GOD which the Wicked∣ness of his Fore-Fathers had drawn down up∣on the Land. And sent Hilkiah the High-Priest with others of his Chief Ministers, to enuire the Mind of GOD in this matter of Huldab, the Prophetess; who sent them back with this Answer to the King, That all the Judgments pronounced by GOD in his Law, should cer∣tainly come upon Judah; but however, that GOD would do him the Favour, to let him die in Peace, because his Heart was tender, and did humble himself before GOD when he heard the Words pronounced against Jerusalem and the Temple of the LORD, and all the Inha∣bitants of Judah, rending his Cloaths, and trembling and weeping before the LORD, that therefore the LORD had heard him, and would delay the pouring forth of his Vengeance upon the profaners of his Law till he was laid in his Grave, that he might not see the evil that was to come upon Judah. Josiah having received this answer, assembl'd all the People in the Temple, read to them the Book of the Law; and engaged himself and all the People in a solemn Covenant before the LORD to keep his Commandments, Testimonies and Statutes, with all their Heart and Soul. This Covenant he had engaged his People in, together with his powerful Exhortations and edifying Example, had the good effect to keep all his Subjects faithful to GOD until his death, which was caused by a Wound he received in a Battle against Pharaoh-Necho King of Egypt. GOD made haste (saith St. Ambrose) to take this good King out of the World, to deliver him from those Evils he was going to shower down upon the Earth; and being unwilling to sur∣vive the Glory he had so justly acquired, by the Zeal he evidenced beyond any King before him, in celebrating the Feast of the Passover, with greater Solemnity and Piety than ever it had been celebrated before. The Example of this King ought to teach all Princes to make it their Principal care, to in∣form themselves in the Law of GOD, because we find the Spirit of GOD in the Scripture, attri∣buting all the Happiness and Success of Josiah, to that humble fear and trembling wherewith he heard the denunciations of GOD's Wrath a∣gainst the Rebellious Violators of his Ordi∣nances set down in the Book of the Law, which was wonderfully found in the Lord's House, in this good Kings Reign. But those Princes who would be happy with Josiah, must read the Scripture as he did; that is, with a full purpose not only to observe the same themselves, but to make it to be observed by all their Subjects: For they ought to consider that it would be unjust and unreasonable for them to expect that their Subjects should so religiously observe their Commands, when they at the same time give little or no heed to the Commands and Ordinances of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
THE SIEGE OF JERUSALEM. Nebuchadnezzar Besieges Jerusalem, and Takes it, and carries away with him to Babylon, all the Riches and Inhabitants of that City. KING Josiah dying lamented of all, Je∣hoahaz, his youngest Son was placed in the Throne by the People; but Pharaoh-Necho King of Egypt came to Jerusalem,Anno Mundi 3394. before Christ 610. and deposing him, carried him bound in Chains to Egypt, and having imposed a great Tribute up∣on the Land, he made his Brother Eliakim King in his stead, giving him the name of Jehojakim. This Prince Reigned 12 years; in which time there lived many great Prophets, and yet notwithstanding all their Exhortations and De∣nunciations, he fell into all manner of Crimes and Enormities. When some of his Officers had shewed him the Prophecy of Jeremiah (wherein were described the Judgments that were to come upon him, and all Judea,) he cut it in pieces with a Penknife, and cast it into the Fire. But GOD commanded the Peophet to write down those Denunciations in another Volume, and to add to them many others. It was in the 4th year of his Reign that Ne∣buchadnezzar came to Besiege Jerusalem, and took this unhappy King, and put him in Chains to carry him to Babylon; and from hence we are to begin the Account of the 70 years of the Captivity; tho' indeed Nebuchadnezzar released him afterwards, contenting himself to make him Tributary. But when at the end of Three years he Rebelled against Nebuchadnez∣zar, the Chaldeans came against him and slew him, not so much as affording him a Grave. After him succeeded Jehojachin his Son, who following the wicked Steps of his Father, Ne∣buchadnezzar came and took him Captive, and carried him with his Wives and Children, and all the Grandees of his Court, with 10000 of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, to Babylon. And at the same time he took along with him all the Treasures of the Temple, and of the Kings House, and all the Vessels of Gold which Solomon had made, and placed Zedekiah his Uncle on the Throne. This Zedekiah (without respecting Jeremiah who spake to him in the Name of GOD) lived in a continual course of Wickedness and Im∣piety; and his Subjects following his Exam∣ple, gave up themselves to all manner of Licentiousness, committing all the Abomina∣tions of the athn round about them, with∣out regarding the Warnings GOD gave them from time to time, by the Mouth of his holy Prophets; yea, as the Scripture witnesses, they mocked the Messengers of GOD, despised his Word, and abused his Prophets, untill the Wrath of the LORD arose against his Poeple without remedy. Wherefore in the 9th. year of this Kings Reign, Nebuchadnezzar came with his Army against Jerusalem, and after a Siege which last∣ed 2 whole years, reduc'd the City to a dread∣ful Famin. Having at last made a great Breach in the Wall, he entred the Ci∣ty in the Night.Anno Mundi 3416. before Christ 885. The Jews hereupon seiz'd with a ter∣rible Consternation, endeavour'd to get away, and make their escape, and Zedekiah himself fled through a secret Gate; but Nebuchad∣nezzar having sent some to pursue him, they overtook him near Jericho, and brought him before the King of Babylon, who by a cruel Order executed the Sentence GOD had in his Just Judgment allotted to that Prince: He caused his two Sons to be kill'd in his presence, and after this terrible Spectacle, he caused his Eyes to be put out, and loading him with Chains, carried him to Babylon. Nebuchadnezzar afterwards sent Nabuza∣radan the Captain of his Guard, to bring a∣long with him the rest of the people, and to seize all the Riches remaining in the Land, with orders also to burn the Temple and the King's Palace, and all other Princely Houses, and to cast down the Walls of Jerusalem, lea∣ving only a few poor People in the Country, that might take care to Till the Ground, and dress the Vineyards; at the same time also Ne∣buzaradan took the High-Priest, Seraiah, and Zephaniah the 2d. Priest, and several others of the Kings greatest Officers and Ministers of State, and 60 of the chief Inhabitants of the City Jerusalem, and brought them to the King of Babylon at Riblah, who put them all to Death. This was the miserable condition to which Jerusalem was reduc'd, for the Sins of its Kings and People; which the Prophet Jeremiah sets forth in so lively a manner, that a Man had need to have a Heart as hard as a Rock, not to be mov'd with it: For it is a good and holy thing to be afflicted for the severe Chastisements of Sin∣ners, if at the same time we have an utter ab∣horrence for their Crimes.
130 The Rt. Honourable Robert Lord Lucas. Baron of Shenfeild. Cheife Governor of the Tower of London and Lord Leiutenant of the Hamlets there vnto belonging. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
131 Sr. Thomas Duppa of Eardisley in Herefordshire Knight. Gent Vsher of the Black Rod to the late King Charles and King James  to their present Maiestyes King William and Queen Mary. For ye Advancement of this worke Contributed this Plate.
JEHOJACHIN taken out of Prison. Evil-Moderach King of Babylon, after the Death of Nebuchadnezzar, shews kindness to Jeho∣jachin, not only giving him his Liberty, but treating him with the Honour due to a King. THe Kingdom of Judah being thus destroyed by the Babylonians, the Jews continued in this Captivity 70 years, ac∣cording as it had been fore∣told by the Prophets.Anno Mundi 3417. before Christ 587. GOD, who never willingly afflicts the Children of Men, had long before threatned his People with this hard condition of Bondage, to the end they might avoid it by hearty Repentance, and reforming of their Lives. Jeremiah the Prophet had warned them very often of this state, and ventur'd to expose himself to the Persecutions of the Great men of the Court, rather than to withhold from his Brethren, what might be of so great use to them. He at the same time also admonish'd them, not to imitate the ways and manners of the Peo∣ple by whom they should be carried away Captive, but to continue firm in the true Worship of GOD, they had received from their Fathers. Neither was he wanting to comfort them under this affliction, by assuring them, That GOD would undoubtedly deliver them from their Captivity, at the time he had de∣clared by his Prophets. The Holy Prophet having found Favour in the eyes of Nebuzaradan, General of King Nebuchadnezzar, who had given particular Orders for his preservation and maintenance, tho' he was at liberty to go to Babylon and live there in peace, chose rather to stay in Judaea, to be a comfort and stay to those few of his Countrymen that were left there. He gave very good Advice to Gedaliah, whom Nebu∣chadnezzar had constituted Governour over the Jews that he left in the Land: But Geda∣liah not regarding what was told him concern∣ing Ishmael's Conspiracy, was soon after kill'd by that Rebel at Mizpah, together with all those that were with him. The rest of the Jews that were in Judaea, apprehending the Anger of the King of Ba∣bylon, for the Murther of Gedaliah, whom he himself had placed over them, resolved to secure themselves by fleeing into Egypt. Jere∣miah oppos'd himself against this their design, assuring them, that no Evil should happen to them by staying in Judaea, but that they should certainly perish and be destroyed, if they went to Egypt; but they notwithstanding these Re∣monstrances of Jeremiah, continuing obstinate in their Resolution of going down to Egypt; Jeremiah, and Baruch his Disciple, finding that they could not disswade them from their pur∣pose, chose rather to accompany them thither, than wholly to forsake them: And being ar∣rived there, they declared to the Jews, That the King of Babylon should conquer and de∣stroy Egypt as he had done Judaea. Whilst this People (formerly so highly fa∣voured of GOD) suffered so many Miseries in 3 several Kingdoms, viz. in that of Babylon, Egypt and Judaea, without being supported with any other comfort but the hopes of being deliver'd from this their Servitude at the end of 70 years according to the Word of GOD declared by his Prophets; there hapned an E∣vent in Babylon, which did somewhat comfort them and alleviate their Af∣fliction.Anno Mundi 3442. For Nebuchadnezzar (whom GOD had made use of as a Rod to cha∣stize others) being at last obliged to submit to Death himself, his Son Evil-Merodach succeeded him, who soon after his coming to the Crown, sent for Jehojachin King of Judah, whom Ne∣buchadnezzar had formerly carried away Cap∣tive to Babylon, before the Reign of Zedekiah their last King, out of Prison, and set him at full liberty. Thus this Prince, after he had been a Pri∣soner 37 years, was at last set at Liberty by the Clemency of this King; And (as the Scrip∣ture expresseth it) he spake kindly to him and set his Throne above the Throne of the Kings that were with him in Babylon, and changed his Prison-Garments, and made him eat Bread continually at the King's Table all the days of his Life, and settled an Allowance upon him, to maintain him in a condition suitable to his Royal Dignity. Thus was this King transport∣ed from the extremity of Misery and Bon∣dage, to a state of Glory and Happiness, which made him remember the Royal state he en∣joy'd before, and gave him occasion to adore the Divine Providence, with respect to Princes, whom he humbles and casts down and raiseth them again when it pleaseth him, and who sets bounds and limits to their Prosperity and Glo∣ry, as well as to their Sufferings and Adversi∣ties, according as they are the Objects of his Justice and Wrath, or of his Mercy and Favour.
The CONTENTS of the First Book of CHRONICLES. THis and the following Book are joyned by the Jews, and make but one; their Hebrew Title is, THE WORDS OF DAYS, and according to the Septuagent. PARALI∣POMENA; but the Vulgar Latin, and Mo∣dern Translations, call them, THE BOOKS OF CHRONICLES. The Jews call these Books, The Words of Days; that is, Of Times; because they contain the Memorable Things, which from time to time hapned in the Church of GOD, as well as in the Land and Cities of Israel. The Greek Translators give them the name of Paralipomena; that is to say, Things omitted or forgot; because in them are Recorded several Specialties, which had been omitted and lest out in some of the fore∣going Books of Holy Writ, which the Spirit of GOD (since that) thought fit should be set down in Writing, for the Information of the Church. But we call them the Books of the Chronicles, in imitation of the Latin and other Translations, which word imports as much as a Description, or an Account of Times; because therein are couched many Memorable things, which hapned in Times past, in the Church and Commonwealth of the Jews. 'Tis not certainly known who was the Composer of these Books; only it was com∣monly supposed, that Esdras himslf was the Author of them, who by the Inspiration and Guidance of the Holy Spirit, Penn'd them, and reduced the Particulars therein contained into the Method wherein we now see them, in order to transmit them to the Church in all after-Ages; making use to this purpose, not only of the Five Books of Moses, and of the ancient publick Registers and Records which the Priests had in their keeping; but also of the Books and Histories of many Prophets, his Predecessors, who had set down in Writing, and deduced at large the several Events and Passages of their Times, though it may be not all of them, with design to make a part of the perpetual and unalterable Canon of the Church; whence it is, that those Writings never reach'd our Times. That which we assert here, That these Books were compiled from the Writings of the Ancient Prophets, appears evidently from the Clause we meet with so often in them, that the rest of such Actions or Events are written in the Book of Gad, of Iddo, of Isaiah, &c. tho' it seem also very probable, that some of these Books so quoted, be no other than the Books of Samuel and of Kings, as having been succes∣sively continued and carried on from time to time by divers Prophets. As for what concerns this First Book, its Nine first Chapters contain the Genealogies of many Ancient Fathers, from Adam to Abra∣ham; and afterwards those of the Descendents of Abraham, which from Jacob were divided into several Tribes and Branches; which Gene∣alogies are not to be found in any of the fore∣going Books, in the same exactness and perfe∣ction, as we find them set down here. After the setting down of these Genealogies, we meet with an account of the Reign and Life of King David, and how (before his Death) by a particular Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, he laid down an excellent Order for the future Government of Church and State amongst the People of GOD; as also the vast Preparatives and abundant Provision he made for the Stru∣cture of the Temple, which Solomon his Son was to build in the City of Jerusalem, to the Ho∣nour, and for the pure Worship and Service of the LORD, the Alone and Great GOD of Israel. Insomuch that this First Book of the Chro∣nicles (which treats of matters from the Be∣ginning of the World to the Reign of Solomon) contains a short account of Things happned within the Term of 2985 Years, or there∣abouts. In this Book also is summarily set down the Beginning of the Church of GOD, and how she was Maintain'd and Preserved after the Deluge, in the House and Posterity of Sem; and afterwards in that of Abraham and his Posterity, from Jacob until David, of whose Seed JESUS CHRIST was to be Born, according to what had been foretold and pro∣mised to him by GOD.
The CONTENTS of the Second Book of CHRONICLES. IN this Book is carried on and continued, the History of the People of GOD, and of their Kings, from the Death of David, (which concludes the foregoing Book) until the Captivity of Babylon. And tho' mention be made herein of the Kings of Israel, parti∣cularly so called since the Separation of the Ten Tribes from Judah, and their Revolt from the Family of David; yet Esdras (who is taken for the Author of these Books) doth principally relate the History of the Kings of Judah, to which he seems to have been engaged by several Reasons: For, besides that Judah always retained in some degree, the sound Doctrine and Purity of Divine Worship, from which the Ten Tribes were so far Aposta∣tized, that GOD suffered them at last to be carried away Captives out of their own Coun∣try by Salmanassar, without any hope of Re∣turn; so that the Tribe of Judah only then re∣mained the People of GOD, whose History Esdras only design'd to set down. Besides, for∣asmuch as the Promised Messiah was to be Born according to the Flesh, not only of the Tribe of Judah, but in particular of the Po∣sterity and House of David; therefore Esdras thought fit to set down the History and Genea∣logy of his Ancestors, deducing it to his very Person, in order to make it more visibly appear, that the Promises of GOD are true. Wherefore as the former Book gave us a view of many Particulars concerning the Reign of David; so this begins with the Reign of Solomon his Son, who succeeded him in the Throne. He was a Prince favour'd by GOD with great Wisdom, which he had requested of him; besides which, GOD was pleased to confer upon him vast Riches, which he employed in Building of the Temple, and other of his Royal Structures, and great Ho∣nour, being Admir'd and Rever'd by all the Kings about him. Who notwithstanding, because of his Sins, his Kingdom was divided, soon after his Son Rehoboam came to possess the Crown; for the Ten Tribes separating themselves from Judah, made Jeroboam their King. From Rehoboam there descended in a Right Line the following Kings of Judah, viz. Abijah, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, Ahaziah, Joash, Amaziah, Ʋzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, Manasseh, Amon, Josiah, Jehoahaz, Jehojakim, Jehojakin, Zedekiah; some of whom were Idolaters; but others restored the True Worship of GOD, as Asa, Jehoshaphat, Joash, Amaziah, Ʋzziah, Jotham, Hezekiah, and Josiah; tho amongst all these also there was a great difference with respect to the fervour of their Zeal and sincere Godliness. Yea, some of these Kings by a slackening of their Zeal, turned from Good to Evil, as Joash and Amaziah; and some others, as Manasseh, repented of the Evils they had committed and became Good. In the mean time, the LORD was not wanting to invite and sollicite them, to repent and amend their Lives, as well the Kings as the People of the Jews, making use to that end of the Ministry of the Prophets, who during all this time followed one another in considerable numbers, from Elijah and Eli∣sha until Ezekiel and Daniel; yet because they were not minded by the greater part, but rather Mocked, Abused, and Persecuted by them, GOD permitted at last the Kingdom of Judah to be conquer'd and possest by Ne∣buchadnezzar King of Babylon, who carried the Jews Captives into his own Country, where they continued 70 years, until Cyrus (under whom the Monarchy was transported from the Chaldeans to the Persians) gave them leave to return to their own Country; an account whereof we find in the two following Books of Ezra and Nehemiah. So that (according to the Calculation of some) this Book contains the History of 424 years, to which if we add the 70 years of the Captivity of Babylon, we shall find the Account of 494 years, from the beginning of the Reign of Solomon to the First year of the Reign of Cyrus King of Persia; tho' some account no more than 484, and from the Creation of the World to the Return of the Captivity 3468 years.
The CONTENTS of the Book of EZRA. IT has pleased the Spirit of GOD to con∣clude the foregoing Book, being the Se∣cond of the CHRONICLES, with the very same Words that begin this Book, to shew us the Sequel and continuation of the History of the Church of GOD; wherein is represented to us (by the Pen and Ministry of EZRA, Priest and Scribe) how the LORD, according to his Promise, after 70 Years did miraculously deliver his People from the Captivity of Babylon by means of Cyrus (called in Hebrew CORES) King of Persia, who having made himself Master of the Empire of Assyria and Babylon; did (by Divine Inspiration) grant unto the Jews liberty and permission to Return to their own Country, and to Rebuild the Temple at Jerusalem, affording them to that purpose all manner of Favour and Assistance, and grati∣fying them with many rich and precious Presents in order thereto. Whereupon a considerable number of Jews, under the Command and Conduct of Zoro∣babel and Joshua the High Priest, returned to Judea, Rebuilt the Altar of the LORD, burnt Sacrifices upon it, celebrated the Feast of Tabernacles, and laid the Foundations of the Temple, in order to the Rebuilding of it: But not being in a condition at that time to carry on and finish it, because some of their Enemies (by their Interest at Court) effected so much that the Building of the Temple was put by and hindred all the following years of Cyrus, Ahasuerus, and Artaxerxes (in the Hebrew called Arthasastha) until the Second Year of Darius; at which time the Jews being excited and encouraged by the Pro∣phets, Haggai and Zechariah, they began vigorously to apply themselves again to Con∣tinue the Building; and being Protected by an express and favourable Edict made in their behalf, procured for them by the Kings Lord Lieutenant, they at last happily finished the Work, Dedicated the Temple, and per∣formed their Exercises of Piety and Divine Worship therein. Some time after this, when the Jews fell to a remisness and neglect of the Worship of GOD, Ezra the Priest, by a special Dispen∣sation of the Divine Providence, was (at his Request) sent by Artaxerxes, in the Seventh year of his Reign, with a considerable number of his Country-men, to Jerusalem, being liberally assisted by Order of the King, with whatsoever was requisite or needful for his Journey, with intention to settle and regulate all things according to the Law and Divine Ordinances prescribed by GOD. All which Ezra, upon his arrival at Jerusalem, with a great Zeal most punctually and faithfully performed: Wherefore there is good reason why this Book is called by his Name, as being not only the Pen-man of it; but because it, in a manner, wholly treats of what he per∣formed for the Glory of GOD, and the Good of his Country. As to the Calculation of Time, the Learned Chronologists do not altogether agree about it, because the Kings and the Years of the Persian Monarchy, are not computed by all after the same manner, the Learned differing in their Opinions about the Four Persian Mo∣narchies that followed after Cyrus; to Wit, Ahasuerus and Artaxerxes the First, during whose Reign the Building of the Temple was put by and hindred; Darius, under whom the Temple was finished, and Artaxerxes the Second, who first sent Ezra to settle and order all things according to the Divine Law; and afterwards Nehemiah, to rebuild the Walls, Gates, and whole City of Jerusalem. However, thus much is certain, and without dispute, that all these things hapned under the Monarchy of the Persians, which began with Cyrus; and that this History begins with the First year of his Reign in Babylon; and is continued to the Seventh year of Artaxerxes the Second, or a little farther; as the follow∣ing History of Nehemiah begins with the Twentieth year of the same King.
132 Josia Child of Wansted in the County of Essex Esq, For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
King Cyrus his Proclamation to Rebuild the Temple. Cyrus being inform'd, that the Prophets had foretold of him, That he should Rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem, gives leave to all the Jews that were in Babylon, to Return to their own Country under the Conduct of Zorobabel, and afterwards sends Ezra thither, to regulate Matters of Religion. THe Wrath of GOD against the Jews be∣ing at length appeased, and the 70 years of their Captivity being past and gone,Anno Mundi 3468. before Christ 536. that he might per∣form what he had promised by his Prophets, to restore them to their former Establishment by Cyrus, he to that end made him Emperour of the East, and raised him to the Throne of the Kings of Babylon. This Prince (to comport with the Prophecies concerning him) granted leave to the Jews, to return to their own Country, to rebuild their Temple and City, and bestowed upon them all the Vessels the Kings of Babylon had taken away. Accord∣ingly the Jews took their Journey to Jerusalem to the number of 42000, under the Conduct of Zorobabel, besides their Slaves, which amoun∣ted to above 7000 more. After some time spent in setling themselves there, in the 7th Month they assembled them∣selves at Jerusalem, where they began to build an Altar, and to offer Burnt-offerings to the LORD; and the next year began to lay the Foundations of the Temple; which was per∣form'd with great Solemnity. Upon this occa∣sion the generality of the People shouted for Joy; but the Ancient Men amongst them, who had seen the former Temple (built by Solomon) wept aloud, to see it so little corresponding with the Magnificence of that Structure. But some of the Neighbours of the Jews were much displeased to see them returned to Jerusalem, and carrying on the Building of the City and Temple with so much success; and at length (by slandering and mis-representing their designs to the Court) caused the Work to be hindred during the term of 16 years, till the 2d year of the Reign of Darius Hystaspes; at which time Haggai and Zachariah the Prophets, having exhorted the Jews to fall to Building again, they did so without regarding the Threats of their Enemies; King Darius himself having given order for the carrying on of the Building of the Temple, with Ex∣pences necessary for the Work; which was fi∣nished and furnish'd. Four years after the Jews celebrated the Dedication thereof with extraordinary Solemnity. About 48 years after this, Xerxes (the Son of Darius) gave Ezra leave to go to Jerusa∣lem, and to take along with him all the Jews that were willing to return thither, ordering his Governours and Officers to furnish him with whatsoever was necessary for their Sacrifices and Divine Worship. Ezra accordingly having undertaken this Journey, with a great number of his Countrymen, at the end of 4 Months arriv'd at Jerusalem, where he found (to his Sorrow) that the Jews, who were come thither 70 years before with Zorobabel, had a great many of them contracted Marriages with their Idolatrous Neighbours; and having in a full Assembly represented to them the heinousness of this Crime, and how expresly contrary this their practice was to the Law of GOD, the People resolved with one accord to send away their strange Wives, and for time to come, Religiously to avoid the like Alliances. This Sin of the Jews in Marrying strange Women, doth (as the Fathers observe) very well represent what the Christians are guilty of at this day, who do not live so holily and blamelesly as becomes the Children of GOD, and the Members of Jesus Christ; but on the contrary Ally themselves with strange Women, that is, with Worldly Passions and Affections, which are the Enemies of Jesus Christ, and taking possession of our Heart, will be ador'd there instead of him. And (as the Scripture observes) that the Children of these strange Women, confounded the Hebrew Tongue with the Language of Ashdod and Moab: So these People would joyn the Spirit of GOD and the Spirit of this World together, obey them both, and make a mixture of both their Languages. But as Ezra then roundly declared to the Jews, that they could not continue the People of GOD without utterly renouncing these Al∣liances with Idolatrous Women: So Christi∣ans ought well to weigh the import of that Oracle of the Gospel, which assures us, That we cannot serve two Masters: That GOD is a Jealous GOD, who will suffer no Rivals; and either wholly possess the Heart of Man, or not at all.
The CONTENTS of the Book of NEHEMIAH. NEhemiah the Author and Penman of this Book, was a Courtier in the Court of Artaxerxes the 2d King of Persia, and his Cup∣bearer. This good man having understood the lamentable condition of his own Nation, as also the ruinous state of the City Walls and Gates of Jerusalem, was greatly affected therewith, and in consideration thereof humbled himself before GOD by Fasting and Prayer. Not long after GOD so ordering it in his Providence, he obtained leave of the King to go to Jerusalem in Quality of his Lord Lieutenant of the Holy Land, and Governour of the City, with a par∣ticular Charge and Commission to reside there for some time, and to Rebuild the City and Temple, giving him full power to settle and regulate all things according to the Wisdom of GOD, vouchsafed to him. All which Nehe∣miah accordingly performed, being inspired by an extraordinary Zeal for the Glory of GOD, prudently and religiously, and with great con∣stancy and resolution, overcoming the many difficulties▪ which Satan (the Enemy of all Good) cast in his way to discourage him, by stirring up against him not only Enemies from a∣broad, but also False Brethren and Hypocrites from within; who corresponding and keeping Intelligence with the Enemy, endeavoured to hinder and put a stop to so good a Work. He al∣so took great Care to redress the Grievances of the People; and to this end he put a stop to a bad Custom the Richer sort had introduced, to oppress the Poor by unjust Usury. He also with great application and devotion▪ reformed the whole Service of GOD and after solemn Prayer and Fasting, he renewed a firm and strait Alliance between GOD and the People. This done, he also took care (after that he had made a considerable advance in Building of the City of Jerusalem) to furnish it with a sufficient number of Inhabitants, dispersing the rest of the People throughout the whole Country, to settle in the several places allotted for them. And thus, after that he had most praise wor∣thily discharged the high Office of the Kings Lieutenant in Judea 12 years together, he re∣turned to the King his Master in the 33d of his Reign; and was not long after sent a 2d time to Jerusalem by the King, where he very generous∣ly reformed and redressed divers Abuses that were crept into the Government of Church and State, during his Absence. This Book hears the name of Nehemiah; partly because it contains the History of Matters which happned in Judea during the time of his Government; and partly, because he was the Penman thereof, as it clearly appears from seve∣ral Passages in this Book, writ under the Con∣duct, and by the inspiration of the Spirit of GOD. Those who have call'd this Book, the 2d of Es∣dras, look'd upon it as a Continuation of his History; but not supposing it writ by him. The CONTENTS of the Book of ESTHER. THis Book bears the Name of Esther, because it chiefly treats of Her, relating how the Great King Ahasuerus having Divorced Vashti his Queen in a great rage, because she had refus∣ed to come at his Command, and shew her self to an Assembly of all his Princes and People, whom he entertained at a magnificent Feast, he chose Esther (out of a great number) to be his Wife and Queen, celebrating in honour of her a sump∣tuous Nuptial Feast. Some time after this, Insolent and Proud Haman being enraged a∣gainst Mordecai, (Esther's Ʋncle and Foster-Father) because he refused to bow to him, as all the Grandees at Court did, resolved in one day to cut off and destroy Mordecai, and all the Jews that were dispersed throughout the 127 Provinces of the Empire of Ahasuerus, mak∣ing use to that purpose of the Letters and Edict of the King, whose Ear and Favour he was Ma∣ster of. But when in this sad extremity and distress all the Jews at Shushan, together with Esther, did apply themselves to GOD by Fasting and Prayer, not only to put a stop to Haman's bloody Design, but also to make the Train he had laid to have a quite contrary effect: For he was soon after oblig'd by the Kings Command to give to Mordecai the Honors he had design'd, for himself; and upon Esther's discovery of his Conspiracy against the Jews, he was hanged on Gallows 50 Cubits high, which he had design'd for Mordecai; who instead thereof was raised to great Honour by the King. Ahasuerus also not contented to reverse the Edict Haman had procured for the Jews destruction, publish'd ano∣ther, giving them leave to defend their Lives and avenge themselves of their Enemies. Ʋpon which the Jews (in commemoration of this their Deliverance) instituted a solemn Festival, year∣ly to be observ'd on the Day called Purim, in me∣mory of this great and unexpected Favour vouch∣safed by GOD unto his People to all Ages. This History contains so clear a Representa∣tion of the particular Providence of GOD in protecting those that are his, and is (according to some) the Events of 20 years; tho others reduce it to 12.
133 William Fitch of high hall in Dorsetshire Gent. & Alice Fitch. Son & Daughter of Iohn Fitch of Henbury in the Said County Esq. by Melior his Wife daughter of William Russell of Kingston in ye. S. County. Gent. For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
134 The Rt▪ Honourable ye Lady Anne Francklyn▪ daughter of Robert late Earle of Warwick,  wife to Sr. Richard Francklyn of the Moore in Hartfordshire Baronet▪ For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
JERUSALEM REBUILT. Artaxerxes sends Nehemiah to Jerusalem, with Authority to rebuild the City and Walls thereof. THE Temple being already built by the care and industry of Zorobabel, and the Jews reduc'd to some form of Government by the diligence and endeavours of Ezra, in re∣gulating their Manners by instructing them in the Law of GOD, and rectifying their Ido∣latrous Marriages: GOD stirred up Nehemiah a Jew, and a Courtier of good consideration and repute in the Court of King Artaxerxes, to carry on this Work to perfection, by rai∣sing the Walls and Gates of the City, which till that time laid still in the Dust. This holy Man, informing himself very par∣ticularly of the state of that City, was extream∣ly grieved to understand by those that came from them, that the Walls thereof did lie in Ruinous heaps, and the Gates burnt down, in the same condition to which they were reduc'd by Nebuchadnezzar at his taking of that City. This News so sensibly affected Nehemiah, that he could not keep his secret Grief from mak∣ing such impressions on his Countenance as were soon perceiv'd by the King, as he was waiting on him at Table, in quality of his Cupbearer: who demanding of him the cause of his Sorrow? He told him, it was by reason of the ruin and desolation of his Birth-place, Jerusalem; and humbly desir'd him, to give him leave to go and rebuild the Walls and Towers, and raise up the Gates thereof. The King having heard his request, freely granted it, but Nehemiah being a Person whom he had a Kindness for, he asked him, how long he must be absent? And Nehemiah having set the King a time when he would be back a∣gain,'Tis from the time of this Edict of Artaxerxes, that we are to begin the Calculation of the 70 Weeks of Daniel. Now this Edict was publish'd the 20th year of the Reign of Artaxerxes, which was the 3550th year from the Crea∣tion of the World, and before Jesus Christ, 454. the King gave him leave to go to Jerusa∣lem, furnishing him with his Let∣ters Patents, and a Commission to carry on the Work. As soon as Nehemiah was come to Jerusalem, without making any mention of the design, for which he was come thither, he went by Night (be∣ing accompanied only by a few of his Friends) to view the condition of the Walls and Gates of the City; and after he had taken an exact survey thereof, he gathered together the Chief Men of the City, and discorered to them the design for which he was come, and his Com∣mission, with, full power which the King had granted him to carry on and finish the Work, and withal assured them, That the hand of God would be with them in the carrying on of so good a Work. As soon as the Chief Men and Elders of the Jews had heard this, they shewed themselves very ready and unanimous to set upon the Work; and dividing themselves into several Companies, whereof each took upon them to rebuild a certain part of the Wall with the greatest vigour and heat imaginable. But the Adversaries of the Jews were very much troubled to see the Work advance so fast, and Sanballat (who was the Head of them) stirred up the Samaritans, and other Neighbouring People, to hinder and put a stop to their un∣dertaking. Nehemiah, tho he was extreamly troubled to meet with this opposition, yet did he not at all lose his Courage, but opposed his Vigilance against their privy Conspiracies, and Force a∣gainst their open Violence. He charg'd the Nobles and Rulers to be always in a readiness to oppose the Enemy, and order'd all the La∣bourers and Builders to have their Swords by their sides, and as they wrought with one hand, to hold a Weapon in the other, to the end they might always be in a readiness to obstruct and fight those that should come to disturb them in their Work. And by means of this his ex∣traordinary diligence and application he ac∣complish'd his undertaking, and compleated the building of the Walls and Gates of Jerusalem. This holy Man affords us an excellent repre∣sentation of the manner how Christians ought to behave themselves in the Work of GOD, which is the Work of their Salvation. Nehemiah found himself here in the State that S. Paul speaks of, when he saith, That he saw nothing without him but Fightings, nor any thing within but fears: From without he was to fight with the Enemies of GOD's People; and from within he was pester'd with false Prophets, who were hired by Sanballat, to endeavour to discourage and affight him, to the end, that being daunted by so many Oppositions he might despond and leave off the Work. But neither the force nor artifices of his Enemies or false Bre∣thren were able to overcome him; he resisted their open Violence, and discover'd their hidden Snares and joyning an undaunted Courage with great Wisdom in all his Ʋndertakings, be fru∣strated all the designs of GOD's and his Ene∣mies.
ESTHERS HUMILITY. Esther presents her self before Ahasuerus, with design to save the Jews from the imminent Destruction that threatned them. AHasuerus, King of Persia, having raised Haman his Favourite to the highest de∣gree of Honour and Glory insomuch that all his Sub∣jects bowed their Knees be∣fore him,Anno Mundi 3495 before Christ 509. Mordecai only, (who was a Jew, and one of those who had been carried Captive out of Judea by King Nebuchednezzar to Babylon, above 90 years before, the first time that his Army besieged Jerusalem,) was resolved not to give that honour to a Man which he thought due to GOD alone. This Refusal, which was not the effect of Pride, as Human conceiv'd it to be, but rather of Mordecai's Piety, did not only bring upon himself, but upon all the Jews, the cruel Sentence of Death. For this proud Favourite not contented with Sacrificing Mordecai to his Revenge, who had offended him, was resolved to make the whole Nation of the Jews to fall a Victim to his rage; to which purpose he represented them to the King as a Seditious People, who being tied up to a distinct Religion from all other Nati∣ons, were always fomenting Seditions and Re∣bellions in all places where they lived. This Credulous Prince, without any farther enquiring into the matter, gave credit to this Impostor, and gave him leave upon this his Remonstrance, to draw up a Declaration, such as he thought good, containing an ex∣press Command to all his Subjects, through∣out his whole Kingdom, on a certain day pre∣fixed, to kill all the Jews, Men and Women, Old Men and Children, without sparing any. Esther, the Niece of Mordecai, who by a particular Providence of GOD was raised to be Ahasuerus's Queen instead of Vashti, whom he had Divorced, was very sensibly afflicted at this dreadful Calamity which was ready to involve all her People, tho' she her self were not in danger; because Mordecai her Uncle, whose wise Counsel she followed in all things, had always advis'd her to conceal her being a Jewess. As she therefore was casting about to find out some Remedy for this great Evil; Mordecai advis'd her to go and present her self before the King, to represent to him the horrid Injustice of the Declaration, he had given Haman leave to publish in his Name. But Esther told Morcedai, That this would be the way to expose her self to Death, which was unavoidable to those, who presented them∣selves before the King, without being sent for by him. Mordecai replyed, That she could not with Reason suppose that she should e∣scape in this Ʋniversal Calamity, wherein their whole Nation were involved, by being in the Kings Palace; and that if her Fear should stop her Mouth in this time of extremity, GOD would find some other way to deliver his Peo∣ple from the destruction that threatned them, but that she and her Fathers House should pe∣rish; adding, that probably for this very Ser∣vice GOD had raised her to the Throne. This holy Woman having attentively consi∣der'd the Advice and Reasons of her Ʋncle Mor∣decai, did no longer balance the matter; but resolved to Sacrifice her Life for the saving of her Nation; and having desired Mordecai to assemble the Jews that were in Shushan, that with Fasting and Prayer they might implore the Divine Blessing upon her undertaking, she in the mean time having prepared and dis∣posed her self by the like holy Exercises, the third day after went to the King's Chamber, and presented her self before him. The Glo∣ry of his Throne and the Magnificence of his Ornaments, but above all, something of An∣ger that appear'd in his Looks, made Esther to fall down in a Swound; and GOD having changed the Kings heart at the same time, he came down from his Throne to raise her a∣gain; and as he and all his Great Officers were comforting of her, as soon as she had recover∣ed her Speech, she said to the King, I thought my Lord the King, when I looked upon you, that I had seen an Angel, and the Glory that surrounds and attends you overcame my Heart, and made me faint for fear. But falling a second time down for dead, the King was exceedingly concerned for her, and as soon as she was come to her self again, he demand∣ed of her, What was her desire? assuring her, he would deny her nothing as far as the half of his Kingdom. Whereupon she desired the King and Haman to come the next day to the Banquet she had prepared for them.
135 Alce Lady Royston of Plaiston in Essex, Relict of Sr. William Royston Knight▪ For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
136 Mr. John Hayward Cittizen C Haberdasher of the citty of London. Master Carpenter to their Maiestys Office of Ordnance. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Triumph of Mordecai. Haman is fain to lead Mordecai his Enemy in Triumph through the City of Shushan. AHasuerus the Night after Esther's Visit finding that he could not sleep, which so hapned by a particular Di∣vine Direction,The same Year 3595. as will ap∣pear by the sequel of this History, employed those Hours of rest and si∣lence in a pastime well worthy of a King; for having order'd the publick Records of his Kingdom to be brought before him, he com∣manded them to be read to him: And taking notice of a Passage, which gave an account how Mordecai had discover'd a Treasonous Conspiracy of two of the King's Officers, to take away his Life, the King demanded of him that read the Book, what reward Mordecai had re∣ceiv'd for this extraordinary piece of Service? Who replying, that he had not receiv'd any. Ahasuerus asked again, whether there were any Person in the Anti-chamber? And the Kings Servants having answered him, That Haman was there; for he was come very early that Morning, to desire an Order from the King to hang Mordecai on a Gallows of 50 Cu∣bits high, he had prepared for him; the King commanded his Servants to bid him come in. As soon as Haman was entr'd, the King ask∣ed him what he thought fit should be done un∣to the Man whom the King delighted to Ho∣nour; Haman presently imagining, that he was the Person the King spoke of, and whom he did intend to honour; answered the King, That the highest honour that could be put upon any Person, was to aray him in the Royal Robes, to set him upon the Kings Horse, with the Roy∣al Diadem upon his Head, and that one of the most noble Princes about the King should lead him through all the Chief Streets of the City, holding his Horse by the Reins, and proclaiming before him, Thus shall it be done to the Man whom the King delights to honour. Haman had no sooner given this Answer to the King's Question, but he commanded him to make haste to execute the Advice he had given him, and to take the Royal Apparel, Crown and Horse, and do to Mordecai the Jew as he had spoken. Thus the Court and City of Shushan were Eye witnesses of the sudden and unexpected Change in the conditions of these two Persons; they saw humble Mordecai receiving the highest marks of Honour and Glory, by the advice and ministry of Haman, who was his sworn and most deadly Enemy; and at the same time saw proud and superci∣lious Haman forced to publish and proclaim the Glory of Mordecai, and to stoop and bow before him, whom he disdain'd and hated in his Heart. Haman having thus been forc'd to submit to this most unwelcome piece of Service done to his Enemy, was extreamly troubled thereat, and returning to his own House in a Mourn∣ful condition, and with his Head cover'd, he complain'd of his mis-hap to his Wife, and other of his Friends and Counsellors, who looking upon this Disgrace that had befallen him as a bad Omen, told him plainly, That they feared that Mordecai (who had already been an occasion of his Disgrace) would at last prove his utter ruin; for whereas Mordecai was one of that Nation, whom he had resolv∣ed utterly to destroy and root them out from off the Earth, and that he had been forced sore against his Will, to confer those Honours upon him he had design'd for himself, they could not but take it as a sign, that the mis∣chief he intended for Mordecai and all the Jews, would light upon his own Head. The sequel of this Story makes it appear, that they were not at all deceived in this their Conjecture, and that tho' God suffers some∣times that Injustice arm'd with Violence seems ready to oppress and overwhelm those, who fear and trust in none but himself, like Mor∣decai; yet he knows also in due time to make them experience his defence and protection when the Hour of their Danger is come, and to deliver them from the distress to which they were exposed for no other Reason, but because they were faithful to him, and fear∣ed his Displeasure more than the Rage of sin∣ful Men, whose Hatred, tho it be very vio∣lent, yet it is also very weak and impotent, without the Divine Permission, who sets bounds to the raging Sea of Mens Passions, saying thus far ye shall come and no fur∣ther.
HAMAN's PUNISHMENT Ahasuerus causes Haman to be hanged on the Gallows he had prepared for Mor∣decai, and reverses the Edict he had published to destroy all the Jews that were in his Kingdom. AHasuerus the King being come with Ha∣man to the Banquet Esther had prepa∣red for him, pressed her to declare what she de∣sired of him,The same Year 3595. assuring, That whatsoever her Request was, he would grant it to the half of his Kingdom. Esther having received this encouragement from the King, immediately changed the joy and plea∣sure of the Banquet into Sorrow, which the remembrance of the destruction prepared for her and her whole Nation, revived in her: And addressing her self to the King, with the looks and language of an afflicted and humble Petitioner, she beg'd only of him her own Life, and the Lives of her Countrymen; laying be∣fore him the Wickedness of Haman, who by his Lies and Impostures had surpriz'd the King, and insolently made use of his Name and Au∣thority Royal, to proscribe and destroy the whole Nation of the Jews. Ahasuerus, who was a Prince naturally in∣clin'd to Justice and Mercy, was astonish'd when he consider'd to what an excess his own Credulity and the Cruelty of his Favourite had like to have carried him; and was so much troubled at the Remonstrance the Queen had made to him, that rising up in haste from the Table, he took a Walk in his Privy Garden, to ruminate upon the cruel and inhumane de∣sign his Credulity had engag'd him in. Haman being sensible from the King's An∣ger of the extream danger that threatned him, cast himself upon the Queen's Bed, earnestly entreating her to become a Petitioner to the King for his Life. But the King entring at the same time into the Chamber as Haman was in this posture, became exceedingly enrag'd at him, as if he would have Forc'd the Queen in his presence, and immediately commanded him to be put to Death. But as the Divine Wisdom confounding the Vanity and Pride of Men, doth always observe a great proportion betwixt Crimes and Punishments, one of the Officers that was present told the King, that there was a Gallows ready (50 Cubits high) which Haman had caused to be set up with design to hang Mordecai thereon, who had done great Service to the King; whereupon the King commanded them immediately to hang Haman thereon. Notwithstanding (saith St. Ambrose) that the Authority of this Prince was already so far engag'd against the Jews for their destru∣ction, that he could not recal the same with∣out some blemish to the Royal Power; yet did not he esteem it any dishonour publickly to acknowledge, that an ambitious Minister had impos'd upon him and abus'd his Royal Favour to base and cruel ends; and instead of going thro with a barbarous violence, be∣cause he was already engaged in it, and his Royal Seal put to it, he reversed the Orders he had given, as soon as he understood the Injustice of them. And turning his just In∣dignation against those who had so wretch∣edly abus'd his Power, and who made use of the easie Access they had to his Person, only as a means to ruin those, as their Enemies, whom the Zeal of GOD, and the Reverence they had for his Laws, kept within the bounds of their Duty, not suffering them to give that Honour to Men, which they con∣ceived due to GOD alone. Accordingly King Ahasuerus publishing an Edict quite contrary to his former (which was the contrivance of Haman,) publickly own'd the esteem he had for the Jews, who had been falsely represented to him as a Rebellious and Factious People, and impower'd them to set upon those who should dare to attempt any thing against them. Thus by the Death of one Man was so great an Evil prevented, and Peace and Quiet established throughout all the Dominions of King Ahasuerus; who in∣stead of that wicked and insolent Favorite, took Mordecai (a wise Man and fearing GOD) to be his Chief Minister of State, which gave the Jews so great an Authority every where, that as the Scripture observes) many of the People of that Land turned to be of their Religion. 'Tis evident from this History, that the Heart of Kings is in the hand of GOD, who by this Book teaches them, That they must bear the burthen of the Crown themselves and see with their own Eyes; for fear lest leav∣ing their Authority to others, they should meet with those who abuse it, like Haman, to satisfie their own Passions and corrupt Inte∣rests, to the prejudice of Justice, and of their Princes Credit and Reputation.
137 Anna Johnson▪ daughter of Sr. Henry Johnson of Blackwall in Middlesex Knight. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The CONTENTS of the Book of JOB. THis Book is called the Book of JOB, a very Famous and Holy Man, whose most memorable History is here recorded, con∣taining an account of his great Trials, his in∣vincible Patience, his unmoveable Faith, and the happy end of all his Afflictions. Some suppose, that this Job flourished in the time of the Patriarchs. Others, whilst the Children of Israel were yet in Egypt, or at least, whilst they were Travelling through the Wilderness to the Land of Canaan, under the Conduct of Moses, who (by some) is supposed to have been the Author and Pen-man of this Book; the Historical part whereof in the He∣brew Original, is set down in Prose; but the Discourses therein contained, are expressed in Heroick Verse, suitable to the gravity and dignity of the Subject. The Book begins with a description of Job's extraordinary Piety and Uprightness, and of the happy and flourishing state of his Family and Children, which is followed with the sad and lamentable relation of divers dreadful Calamities, which by the instigation of Satan, and wise dispensation and permission of the LORD, suddenly and unexpectedly fell upon him in his Estate, his Children, and his own Body, besides the reproaches and insultings of his Wife. In all which he gave the highest Marks of a most Heroick Patience, which in∣stead of desponding, like the inflexible Palm-tree, hardned and raised it self under the heavy Load of these extreme Afflictions, silently ac∣quiescing in the Will of GOD. Being in this most deplorable Condition, he is visited by Three of his Friends, Great and Famous Men, to condole with and comfort him. At their first seeing of him, they sit down by him in silence, not speaking a word, as Men transported and overcome with the terrour of his Calamities, and the bitterness of his Suf∣ferings. But Job at last, by the Infirmity of his Flesh, breaking forth into violent Com∣plaints, to that degree as to Curse the Day of his Birth, his Friends take occasion from thence to enter upon discourse with him: They Re∣prove him at first for his too great Impatience, and grounding themselves upon GOD's Righ∣teousness, which suffers not wicked Men sooner or later to go unpunished, they will needs ar∣gue him to be such, and upon this Supposal en∣ter with him into a great and important Dis∣pute: For passing from their general Thesis That GOD punisheth the Wicked, to the Hy∣pothesis, That Job was so, they accuse him of Hypocrisie and Impiety, partly building this their Assertion upon the greatness of his Suf∣ferings, and partly upon some impatient and repining Expressions, which now and then e∣scap'd from him in the excess of his Grief. The main thing they endeavour to make Job sensible of, is, That GOD punisheth none but the Wicked, and on the contrary showrs down the choicest of his Blessings upon good and godly Men; and from thence conclude, That since Job by such remarkable Judgments was deprived of all his Children, and his Estate, and stript of all his former Advantages and Heavenly Blessings, and cast down into most horrible Calamities; which (thro human In∣firmity) stir'd up and irritated by their bitter Reproaches and sharp Reflexions, did at times force some Discourses from him too full of Heat, and not so well digested as they might have been; they from all these drew this unchari∣table Consequence, That without doubt he was either a very Wicked Man, or a most dis∣sembling Hypocrite. To this purpose they al∣ledge and produce many good and excellent Sentences, to confirm their Judgment; which tho they were all true in themselves, and with respect to the Legal Righteousness of GOD, who in all his Punishments supposeth Sin, yet could not be well apply'd to Job's Person or Condition. But Job all this while couragiously defends himself against their Attacks, and maintains himself innocent of the Impiety and Hypocri∣sie they laid to his Charge, protesting that his former Life had never been blemish'd with the one or the other. And as to that Maxim of theirs, upon which they grounded the Super∣structure of all their Accusations against him, he most clearly refutes it from daily Experi∣ence, which makes it apparent, That GOD in this World doth often exercise the best of Men with the rudest and hardest Trials and Afflictions; whereas wicked Men (on the con∣trary)
enjoy abundance of Prosperity, and do rather abound with all outward Blessings, than groan under the burthen of Miseries and Ca∣lamities. And thus supporting himself with the Witness and Seal of the Spirit of GOD in his Conscience, he boldly maintains, That he neither is, nor formerly was either a Profane Person or an Hypocrite. He owns indeed, that he cannot stand his ground before the Soveraign Majesty of the Great GOD of Heaven and Earth, as well in regard of his absolute Power, as being nothing in comparison of him, but a weak and despi∣cable Creature: as with respect to his just and severe Judgment, acknowledging himself a poor and miserable Sinner, who was not able to answer to one Point of a Thousand, the LORD might of right alledge against him. And yet, he most earnestly wishes, That as to the Cause, depending between him and his Friends, GOD would be pleased himself to take cognizance of it, try it and judge it at the Tribunal of his Justice. So fully was he per∣swaded and convinced in his Heart of his unfeigned Piety, and his sincere Uprightness according to the Covenant of Grace. In the mean time it cannot be denied, but that Job being provoked by the offensive, in∣considerate, and injurious Discourses of his Friends, he suffered himself at times to be strangely transported, so as to speak of GOD, of his Providence and Justice indecently, and not with that Reverence as he ought to have done: So that we may say with good Reason. That Job's Friends did very well, and with strong and acknowledged Truths defend a very bad Cause; and that he (on the contrary) did sometimes ill enough, and with excentrick Motions defend a very good one. However, he stood so firmly in his own defence, that he would never quit his just Cause, nor give it up to his Friends; who at last forbearing to answer him, Elihu takes up the Argument in their stead, and Answers him after another manner than they had done: For he doth not properly accuse him, for having in time past lived wickedly, but reproves him for some ex∣orbitant Expressions, and ill digested Asserti∣ons that had escap'd him in his Conference with them; as if GOD had injur'd him in so rudely handling of him, for secret Reasons only known to his supream Wisdom. Wherefore Elihu perswades and invites Job to Humility and Repentance, because GOD loves to give forth of his Grace and Mercy to poor and miserable Afflicted ones, that confide in him. He demonstrates (in opposition to what Job had alledg'd) That GOD never injures a∣ny Person by Chastizing of him, and that he is not accountable or responsible to any Man for what he doth. And against Job's Friends he proves, That GOD doth not only punish the Wicked, but also that he often chastizeth and visits with Afflictions such as are good and holy Men, and that he hath right so to do. He deduceth his Proofs of these Assertions from the Nature of GOD, which is All-wise, All-powerful, and All-just, and from his Sove∣reign Majesty, which gives him an incon∣testable Empire over all his Creatures, and which cannot but exactly agree, and go hand in hand with all the other Perfections of his Na∣ture and Essence. Job acquiescing in Elihu's grounded Dis∣course, and yeilding to his Reasons, holds his peace, not entring upon any further Contest; and then the LORD appearing in a Whirl∣wind, reproves Job for having spoke inconsi∣derately concerning him, proving this as well from his Divine Properties, as by his Won∣derful Works; partly respecting the Govern∣ment of the Universe in general, and partly the production and conversation of some great and wonderful Creatures in particular. After this Divine Censure pronounced a∣gainst Job, Job in all humility acknowledgeth his Sin, renders unto GOD the Glory due to his Justice, and discovers his sincere Humiliation and Repentance. The LORD afterwards very sharply Reproves Job's Friends, and com∣mands them to endeavour a Reconciliation with him, by procuring his Faithful Servant Job to intercede for them, whom he re-esta∣blisheth again in his former state, doubling all his Blessings upon him. It is not well known how long this severe Trial of Job lasted. The Jews say, it continu∣ed a whole Year: Some shorten the time, which again is prolonged by others; but it is not at all needful for us to define, what GOD hath not been pleased to reveal to us in his Word.
138 The Right Honourable Rachel, Countess of Bristol Baro∣nes of Sherborne in Dorsetshire, and daughter of Sr. Hugh Wind∣ham of Silton in the said County Knight. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
JOB upon the Dung-hill. Holy Job is tempted by the Devil, who deprives him of his Children, and of all that he had; and moreover afflicts him with painful Boils and Sores over all his Body, sparing only his Wife, whom he made use of to provoke him to Impatience. HOly Job, who is so famous in Sacred Writ, for his humble Patience, had in all the former part of his Life allied two things,'Tis not certainly known when this History hapned, tho it seem probable that it was whilst the Children of Israel wandred in the Wilderness. which are very rarely found to∣gether, viz. a great and extraordinary Ver∣tue, with vast Riches. He was (saith the Scripture) a Man perfect and upright, and fearing GOD. He did not content himself to avoid all manner of Evil himself, but re∣membring that he was a Father, he was very forward to instruct his Children in the Fear of the LORD, and often offered Sacrifices for any secret Sins, and unknown to him, that they might be guilty of. This Vertue of Job was a great Eye-sore to the Devil, and made him desirous to have a fling at him; yea, he was so bold as to ca∣luminate him in the Presence of GOD him∣self, and not being able to find any thing in his Life that he could justly blame, he slander'd his secret Intentions, maintaining, That he did not serve GOD, but because of the many outward Blessings and Advantages GOD had bestowed upon him. GOD, to confound this Arch slanderer, and to convince him of his Lyes, gave him leave to take away from Job all that he had. The Devil made use of this Power that was grant∣ed him, with the utmost Malice; and that he might at once overwhelm this holy Man with a whole deluge of Miseries and Calamities one upon the neck of another, he so order'd it. that at one and the same time his Herds of Oxen and Asses were taken away by the Sa∣beans, and his Herdsmen kill'd; his Flocks of Sheep consumed by Fire from Heaven, toge∣ther with his Shepherds that had the care of them; his Camels carried away by the Chal∣deans, and all his Children crushed under the Ruins of a House that fell upon them whilst they were a Feasting in their eldest Brothers House. Job received all these dismal Tydings from Messengers, that followed at the heels of one another, and came (as it were) all at once crowding in upon him, who with a strange Constancy and unshaken Vertue prostrating himself upon the Ground, worshipped and blessed GOD, uttering those words which since are become so famous; Naked came I into the World, and naked shall I go cut of it again; the LORD gave, and the LORD hath taken away, blessed be the Name of the LORD. The Innocence this holy Man (preserved in the midst of all these terrible and unheard of Trials, which only served to illustrate his Vertues, and to make them shine more bright) highly enraged this malicious Spirit, who saw himself confounded by him, whom he had in∣tended to confound and conquer: Wherefore he again desired power of GOD to afflict him in his Body; because he can do nothing against the Saints, but so far as GOD permits him. GOD granted him his demand, that he might the more confound his Maliciousness, and to make it appear, that there was nothing, but was sound and sincere in the Vertue of his Servant Job. So the Devil smote Job with terrible Boils and Ʋlcers over all his Body, insomuch that he was fain to sit down upon the Dunghill, and with a Potsherd to scrape off the Matter issu∣ing from the Sores, that cover'd his Body from the Crown of his Head to the Soles of his Feet. Of all his Family there was none left now, save only his Wife, whom the Devil seem'd to have spared, not that she might be the Comforter but the Tempter of her Husband to Impatience and Murmuring against GOD: For she judg∣ing from these Disasters that had befallen him that all his Piety was vain and hypocrital, en∣deavoured to provoke him to Blasphemy. But Job, as he had couragiously stood it out against all the dreadful Tryals and Temptati∣ons to Impatience, he had been expos'd to by the Malice of the Devil; so he constantly resisted the strokes of her bitter Tongue; telling her That she talk'd like a foolish Woman; for since they had received good things from the hand of GOD, they ought not to repine and grow impatient now that GOD was pleased to dispense Afflictions and Sufferings to them. Which made S. Austin to admire the Con∣stancy of Job on this occasion, and to declare That Job, by resisting the Temptations of his Eve, was incomparably more glorious on his Dunghill, than Adam was when surrounded with all the Pleasures and Glories of Paradise.
JOBS FRIENDS. Job instead of being comforted by his Three Friends that came to Visit him hath his Affliction increased by their means; They concluding him a great Sinner, because of the Disasters that had hapned to him. JOB being thus reduced to the condition be∣fore mention'd, seem'd to have as great a load of Affliction and Sorrow upon him, as was possible to fall upon Man; and yet, as if all this were not sufficient, a new Trouble is added to all his other Sufferings, which did as much oppress his Mind, as the other were sensible to his Body. Three of his Friends, viz. Eliphaz the Te∣manite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar, the Naamathite, coming to visit him, and to con∣dole with him for the heavy Judgments that had befallen him, and who seeing his Grief was so great, they rent their Mantles sprinkled Dust on their Heads, wept and sat down by him for 7 Days and Nights not say∣ing a word; at length when they spake, Job instead of receiving any solid comfort from them, as probably he might have expected, was fain to defend himself against their false Reasons and unjust Thoughts concerning him. He had nothing to support him under the rude Attack of their sinister Thoughts con∣cerning him, but the testimony of his Consci∣ence, and the innocence and integrity of his past Life; which was that his indiscreet Friends would rob him of, by mainatining, That it could not be, but he must needs be guilty of great Crimes, because GOD did so severely chastize him. They made an esti∣mate of GOD's dealings towards this holy Man, according to their carnal and human Judg∣ments; and they mingled very grave Dis∣courses with their Demonstrances, only to give the greater authority to their Reflections and Invectives against him. Holy Job seem'd to be more concern'd and troubled for this last Affliction from his Friends, from whose hands in the condition he was; he might have expected better usage, than for all the other Miseries that had overtaken him. He did his utmost endeavour to convince them of their mistake, and by Reasons and Instan∣ces to rectifie their misapprehensions; but all was to no purpose, they shewing by their Ex∣ample, how dangerous it is for Men to suffer themselves to he Leaven'd by bad Impressions and to entertain sinister Thoughts concerning the Innocence of good and holy Men. For suffering themselves to be carried away by out∣ward Appearances, that seem'd to favour their prejudicate Opinions, they were not to be re∣moved from their belief, that Job was guilty, because he was handled like one that is so. But GOD at last avenged the Quarrel of his Servant Job upon these his unjust Friends; for his Anger being kindled against them, he reproached them for the folly of their Dis∣courses, and declar'd, that he would not par∣don this their injurious dealing, or be recon∣ciled to them, but at the Prayer of him, whom they had taken so much pains to prove a Sinner and wicked Person. This Example (say the Fathers) ought to teach us, never to entertain any sinister Judg∣ments concerning good and righteous Men how great and extraordinary soever their Sufferings may be in this World; nor to conceive an high esteem for those, who being more corrupt and ulcerous in their Souls, than Job was in his Body, when he sat upon the Dunghill; yet abound with all the Honour and Good things of this World. The Judgment of Faith is ge∣nerally opposite to that of Sense. Those who seem to be outwardly Rich and Righteous, are frequently poor and sinful in the Eyes of GOD, and those who are despised, as being poor and reproached as Sinners, are often the more rich in Grace and Vertue in the Eyes of him, who searches the Heart and Reins, and from whom nothing is hid. GOD, at the upshot of all, justified his Ser∣vant Job in a most publick and illustrious man∣ner, restoring more Riches and Blessings to him, than ever the Devil had taken from him. But under the New Law, GOD often suffers his most faithful Servants to continue opprest and disgrac'd to the end of their Lives; because those who will be his Disciples and Followers, must (according to the Example of Jesus Christ and the Saints his Members) not be afraid of, or apprehend any Evils, save only those that defile and hurt the Soul; nor esteem any Good things or Rewards, but such as are Spiritual Invisible, and Eternal.
139 The Right Noble Isabella Dutchess. of Grafton &ca. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
140 Mis. Lucy Wright daughter of William. Wright▪ of Longsdon in derbyshire Esq. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The CONTENTS of the Book of PSALMS, THis Book has been always accounted (by the Church of GOD) amongst the rest of the Canonical Books of the Old Testa∣ment, as a rich Jewel, whose price and value cannot well be conceived, much less fully ex∣pressed in Writing, or by Word of Mouth. Some have called it, The Christians Garden of Pleasure, stored with most odoriferous Flowers and exquisite Fruits. Others have term'd it his Magazine and Armory, where he is furni∣shed with Arms of Proof, for all Combats what∣soever. Others again, his Exchequer and Trea∣sury, fill'd with choice Riches. Others, an Apothecaries Shop, stor'd with excellent Medi∣caments and infallible Remedies against the various Maladies of his Soul. Others have consider'd it as the Anatomy of a Believer, an exquisite Mirror of the inconceivable Grace of GOD; and a perfect and full Compendium of the whole Bible; that is, of the Law and Go∣spel, and of the true knowledge of GOD, and of his pure Worship. For it contains many saving Instructions concerning the Essence of GOD, and of the Holy Trinity, the Properties of his Nature, his Eternal Counsel, his Holy Word, his Wonderful Works; those especially of his Beneficence and Mercy towards his Church, and of his just Judgments upon the Workers of Iniquity. Here also is Treated, of the Person and Office of the Messiah, that is, Our Saviour JESUS CHRIST; of his Eternal Peity, his Incarnation, Sufferings, Death, Resurre∣ction, Ascension to Heaven, his Sitting at the Right Hand of his Father, and of the extent and propagation of his Kingdom throughout the Nations of the World, by the Preaching of his Holy Gospel: As likewise concerning the sad and deplorable state of Man under Sin, of the Nature and Condition of Rege∣neration, of True Repentance, of the Love and Fear of GOD; as also of the Nature of True Faith, of Trusting in Him alone, and how we ought not to glory, but in Him; of the Cer∣tainty of Salvation; of the continual War between the Flesh and Spirit; as also con∣cerning the Catholick Church, gathered both of Jews and Gentiles; of Ecclesiastical Disci∣pline; the Communion of Saints, the Forgive∣ness of Sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and of Life Eternal. Besides all which, we find in this Book all manner of Spiritual Exercises of Piety, as Patterns and Forms of Praising the Holy Name of GOD; of giving Thanks for his Benefits; of Promises and Vows, in acknowledgment and gratitude for Mercies received; of a great number of servent and earnest Prayers, for whatsoever can concern the Glory of GOD, and the Interest of Belivers, as well in general as particular, especially in all manner of Crosses, Calamities, and Afflictions; with abundance of holy Meditations, solid and powerful Comforts, and efficacious Arguments, to strengthen us in Faith, Patience, Hope, and all other Divine Vertues and Graces. Inso∣much that we cannot conceive any Condi∣tion a Believer may be in here in this Life, whether of Prosperity or Adversity, of Temp∣tation or Deliverance, of Fighting or Victory, of Health or Sickness, but he will meet with in this Book an Entertainment suitable to it, to the quieting of his Conscience, and advance∣ment of his Salvation. And whereas in the other Books of Holy Writ, GOD represents to us how he is pleased to speak to his Church; In this he teacheth us, how we ought to speak to him; there be∣ing no Counsel in time of Difficulty, nor Sup∣port in Affliction, nor Comfort in Sorrow, nor Praises and Elevations of Joy, wherewith he doth not fill the Hearts and Mouths of his Children, in the Meditation of these Sacred Poems, which, by the Efficacy of the Holy Spirit, accompanying the Musick and Expressions of them, excite in their Souls holy sallies and flights from these Houses of Clay, to the Mansion of Glory. Insomuch, that whatever hath been said of the Efficacy of Musick, in exciting all the different Passions and Affecti∣ons of Man, asswaging Grief and appeasing Anger, and all other Troubles of the Mind, may in a more eminent manner be attributed to the Divine Charms of David's Mystical Harp. There is no Evil Spirit, whom this Musick doth not drive away; no Stones, which it doth not move; no Forests, which it doth not shake, no Grief over which it doth not triumph. Wherefore every Christian, how eminent and prosperous soever his Condition may be ought to Read and Meditate this Book with great
Application in order to accustom himself to the pecular style and language of the Spirit of GOD, which is there made use of; being as∣sured that when he has once well relished the wonder-working effica and sweetness of it, that it will be to his Soul as a refreshing and reviving Dew, which will make him fresh and flourishing, and fruitful in all good Works; and will find no greater pleasure, than in carrying it in his Heart, Mouth and Hands, as an assured Preservative and never failing Antidote against the malignant Contagion of the World, and the Corruption that reigns in it. To which purpose also this holy Book is frequently recommended to us by the Holy Spirit in the Old Testament, as well as by our Saviour Jesus Christ and his Apostles in the New; which, by the special Wisdom and Goodness of GOD, has been consigned to the Church in the form of Hymns or Songs, to make them the more taking, as well as of a more familiar use, and more easie to be re∣membred. The Hebrews has given this Book the Title of TEHILLIM, or by way of Contraction TILLIM, that is to say, Hymns or Songs of Praise, because a great part of the Psalms are so; this Book indeed being nothing else, but a Collection of Songs truly Spiritual, which have been dictated by Divine Inspiration, to teach us to praise and celebrate the Name of the LORD, as we ought. The Greek Inter∣preters of the Old Testament, have called this Book by the Name of a Psalter or Psalms, which word the Sacred Pen-men of the New Testament have likewise retained, which af∣terwards has been also adopted by the Latin Translators, as likewise by those of all other Christian Nations; and particularly also by our last Translators of the Bible, tho' indeed the Greek word peculiarly denotes those holy Songs which were plaid with the Fingers on Stringed Instruments, according to the pra∣ctice of the Old Testament in the Tabernacle and Temple. These holy Hymns are common∣ly called The Psalms of David, because Da∣vid endowed by the Holy Spirit, with this particular Gift (as is said 2 Sam. 23.1, 2.) of Composing the Sweet Songs of Israel, was the Author of the greatest part of them; the rest of them having been composed by other Pro∣phets and Men of GOD, as Moses, Asaph, &c. The whole being since put together by Ezra (as it is supposed) after the Babylonish Capti∣vity, into one Body, in the same Method as we have them now, wherein the order of Time, when each Hymn or Psalm was made, is not observed. The Jews have divided this Book (which is also called the Book of Psalms by our Saviour Jesus Christ, Luke 20, 42.) into five Parti∣tions, whereof the first ends with the 41st Psalm, which is concluded with Amen and A∣men; the second with the end of the 72d Psalm, which also ends with Amen and Amen, with these Words, The Prayers of David the Son of Jesse are ended; the third ends with Psalm 89, and is likewise concluded with A∣men and Amen; the fourth with the 106th Psalm, whose Conclusion is Amen, Hallelujah; and the 5th Partition with the 150th or last Psalm, which ends with Hallelujah, this is to say, Praise the LORD. The Contents of the PROVERBS of Solomon. THis Book, as the Title of it imports, con∣tains a great number of exquisite Sen∣tences, Holy and full of Instruction, Pen'd by King SOLOMON, from the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit (who had adorned him with an extraordinary Wisdom, as well in Divine as Human matters) and which GOD, of his great Goodness, has been pleased should be preserv'd in Writing, for the common and perpetual Instruction of his Church. It treats of the Divine and True Wisdom; of the Fear of GOD, and of the Supream good of Man. In it we find many excellent Lessons concern∣ing our Duty to GOD, to our Neighbour, and our Selves, in whatsoever state or condition any may be in the World, together with con∣siderable Promises of Happiness and Life in this present World, as well as in that which is to come. And all this interlaced with faithful Warnings against all sorts of Sins contrary to the first and second Table of the Law of GOD and particularly against Whoredom and Adul∣tery. So that this Book may with good Rea∣son be accounted, An overflowing Fountain with saving Instructions, about all things that may serve to conduct and form us to a Life and Conversation, Wise, Religious, and Well-pleasing to GOD, in any Calling whatsoever, whether common or particular, publick or pri∣vate. Wherefore also this Book ought to be
highly and carefully recommended to all Chri∣stians, as containing the most perfect and ful∣lest Moral Instructions they can have, as infi∣nitely transcending whatsoever the Heathen Philosophers, and Wise Men of the World, have ever been able to comprize or set down in Writing concerning Wisdom, the Nature of Man, the Supream Good, Vertue and Vice, &c. As to what concerns the Collection of all these Sentences into one Book, it seems that Solomon, according as appears from the excel∣lent Introduction and Preface compriz'd in the 9 first Chapters, which contain little else but the Praises of the Divine Wisdom in general, and in particular of our LORD Jesus Christ, who is the Word and Eternal Wisdom of the Father, has Pen'd them himself as far as the 25th Chapter, and that the following Chap∣ters, from 25 to 30, were Collected and Transcribed by the Command of good King Hezekiah, whilst he was reforming Matters relating to Religion and Piety, which were fal∣len to decay during the Reign of some of his Predecessors, out of Solomon's own Memoirs, or of some other holy and famous Man, in∣spired by the Holy Spirit. The 30th Chapter contains the Words of Agur; and the last Chap∣ter, the Instructions which Solomon's Mother gave to him, which he not only received and approv'd of, but also thought fit to transmit them to the Church of GOD, for the general instruction of all. And tho' this Book do not contain all the 3000 Proverbs uttered by Solomon, of which mention is made in the First Book of the Kings, Chapter 4. Verse 32; yet it contains the Sum and Marrow of them, and all that GOD thought fit should be consigned to the use and perpetual Edification of the Church through∣out all Ages. The Contents of the Book of ECCLESIASTES. MAny Learned Men are of Opinion, that Solomon wrote this Book in his Old Age, towards the end of his Life, after that he had repented of his fearful Apostacy from the pure Worship of GOD, to that of Idols; and therein declares by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and before the whole Church of GOD, the great sorrow and regret he had conceived for his Life, most earnestly de∣testing it as mere Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, uncapable of affording a Man any true Peace, or solid content of Mind, much less of leading him to the Enjoyment of the Supream Good and Eternal Salvation. His aim and design also is, to conduct all others by his Example to Godliness and Vertue. To this purpose he first of all gives a description of the whole course of his Life, and that whereon he had chiefly founded his delight and satisfaction. Afterward he relates, how he also had been a great Observer of the Lives and Conversation of Men, and examined the several things they employ their Studies about, and for which they endeavour with the greatest application, as supposing to find Happiness and Content in them, and that he had found them all to be Vanity, and such as engaged Men in Sin and Prophaneness. Furthermore, he declares and positively asserts, That the World, its good things, Pleasures, Accidents, Vicissitude, Or∣ders and Customs being all Vicious, or at least corrupt and tainted by the Vanity Sin has introduced into it; That because all things in it are vanishing in their continuance, uncertain in their Conduct, unequal in their tenor, and devoid of any durable Felicity; a Wise Man must not place his hopes in them, or fix his Heart upon them, so as passionately to desire the good things in it, or think to a∣mend or avoid all its disorders and evils; but that he ought moderately to rejoyce himself, without vexation or covetousness, but yet with care and diligence in his lawful Calling, in the short and temporary Enjoyment of the Blessings he hath received from the Liberal Hand of GOD, conforming his Motions of Joy or Sor∣row, according to the variety of Times and Accidents, that happen in this Life by the Dispensation of the All-wise Providence of GOD, who governs and disposeth all things in this World as best pleases him; and that they are not at all subject to the uncertainty and hazard of Chance, as some most falsly ima∣gine. And last of all, he exhorts all Men to give up and resign themselves to the Conduct of true Wisdom, by fearing GOD sincerely, obeying him faithfully, and by constantly ap∣plying themselves to all manner of Good Works; setting continually before their Eyes, especially whilst they are yet young, vigorous and healthy, the uncertainty of this Life, the unavoidable certainty of Death, the terrour of the just Judgment of GOD, and the Joys of Eternity: So that this Book may well of
right be called, The Treasure of Maxims and Instructions concerning true Felicity, and the chief good of Man. As to what concerns the Title or Inscription of this Book, it is called Koheleth in Hebrew, and in Greek, Ecclesiastes. This word Kohe∣leth, which we do not meet with in the whole Scripture, except in this Book, comes from the Root Kahal, which signifies, To Assem∣ble or Call together: so that this word sig∣nifies a Person or Soul which Gathers or Calls others together: For indeed all Men are in their own nature, as poor Sheep that are wandring and lost; but GOD sends his Ser∣vants as so many good Shepherds, to assemble and call them together from their strayings. Some conclude this word to be one of the Names of Solomon, who was also called Jedi∣diah and Lemuel; and one thing that inclines them to this Opinion is, because this Word, tho' it be of a Feminine termination, is not∣withstanding joyned to a Masculine Verb, Amar Koheleth. And as to the Greek word Ecclesi∣astes, that signifies properly a Preacher; which is not to be understood, as if Solomon had publickly Preached before the People, but be∣cause in this Book he sets forth an excellent Sermon or Homily, full of most edifying In∣structions and Exhortations. Others again understand by this word, one who by a publick Discourse in the Church, publickly confesseth the Sins he hath committed, and testifies his sincere Repentance, which was the Custom of the Primitive Church. The CONTENTS of the Song of SOLOMON. THe Author of this Book is SOLOMON, who indicted it under the Conduct and Inspiration of the Holy Ghost. It is called by way of Excellence the Song of Songs; because it is the highest and divinest Strain of all those many Hymns which that Wise King composed in his life-time, and is a kind of Epithalamium or Nuptial Poem, made up of divers parts upon the Spiritual Marriage, which Christ has been pleased to Contract with his Church. It is made in form of a Dialogue between Jesus Christ as the Bride∣groom, and the Church as his Spouse, under the Type, or at least upon occasion of the Marriage consummated between King Solo∣mon and the Daughter of Pharaoh King of Egypt; as was also the 45th Psalm; and accordingly, sometimes we shall find here the Friends and Bridemen of the Bridegroom, as well as the Bridemaids and Companions of the Bride, brought in as Interlocutors in this Holy and Mystical Poem. By the Friends of the Bridegroom we may understand the good and holy Prophets of the Old Testament, the Apostles of the New, and generally all faithful Pastors and Teachers of the Church; and by the Brides Compa∣nions we may understand all those who sin∣cerely confess the Name of Jesus Christ, and profess his true Doctrin: But under the Names of Bridegroom and Bride is represented here in figured and allgorical Expressions, the great and ardent love of Jesus Christ towards his Spouse, which is the Church, and the great Benefits she receives from him, and how vehe∣mently the Spouse, the Holy Church, doth languish and pant after her dearest Bride∣groom, till she be indissolubly and eternally united to him in Heaven. In this Book is also represented the Condition and Constitu∣tion of the Church of GOD upon Earth, her Duties, Vertues, Blemishes and Defects. The Jewish Rabbies would not permit that any person, who had not attained to the age of Thirty years, should read the first three Chapters of Genesis, the beginning and end of Ezekiel, or this Song of Solomon: And tho' perhaps there may have been too much of Superstition in this their Prohibition; yet it is not without cause, that we are carefully warned by the Ancient Doctors, as well of the Synagogue as of the Church, that a man must strip himself of all sensual Thoughts, and carnal Affections, when he applies himself to the Reading and Meditating on this Book; and that he that would understand the deep Mysteries therein contain'd, to his Edification and Comfort, must come to it with a mature, setled and enlightned Judgment, and with spiritual Thoughts and holy Affections. For tho' the Expressions herein made use of, are drawn from the tender and honest Affections, which contrac and knit chast and holy ar∣riages here on Earth, and so (tho' more in∣directly) serve to recommend the same; yet because the Holy Ghost is pleased to represent to us (under these Notions) such high tran∣scendent and adorable Mysteries, we must have
141
a special care not to profane or defile them by a carnal and corrupt Sense. Wherefore he that is in good earnest de∣sirous to profit and edifie himself by this more than excellent and divine Poem, must bring along with him a great Purity of Heart, and a Soul wholly on Fire with the Sweet Love of Jesus; and if so, he will not fail to meet with the most illuminating Instru∣ctions and surpassing Comforts that can be, to his great and unutterable Joy and Satis∣faction. The CONTENTS of the Prophecy of the Prophet ISAIAH. ISAIAH is the first and chiefest of the greater Prophets, as well in regard of the excellent Matter he treats of, as of his admira∣ble, sublime and raised Style. In the 12 first Chapters of this Book of his Prophesies, he treats of several Heads which particularly concern the Jews, whom he Censures and Reproves boldly, Teaches excellently, Exhorts seriously, and Comforts pathetically. From the 13th Chapter unto the 29th, he sets down those Prophesies which regard Foreign Nations and People, that were Enemies to the Jewish Nation, as likewise some relating to the 10 Tribes, who had divided themselves from Judah and Benjamin, denouncing very severe Judgments and heavy Punishments against them: Amongst which notwithstand∣ing are mingled very comfortable Promises of the Grace and Mercy of GOD to those who Repent, whereof they should be made par∣takers by having an Eye to the Messiah, that was to come. From Chapter 29th to Chapter 36th, is spoken concerning the destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, and of the Captivity or Transportation of the Jews out of their own Country to Babylon; which are enterlaced with several excellent and comfor∣table Passages, concerning the Reign of Christ. From the 36th to the 40th Chapter, is Re∣corded the History of King Hezekiah, taken out of 2 King. 18. and 2 Chron. 32. From the 40th to the 49th Chapter, the Prophet foretels the Coming of Jesus Christ, and the Spiritual Deliverance of his Church; Figured by the Deliverance of the Jews from the Cap∣tivity of Babylon by King Cyrus, as also their Restauration and Settlement in their own Country. From the 49th Chapter to the End of the Book, are set down several very clear Prophesies concerning the Person and Office of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom, which should be extended throughout all the World; of his Passion, his Death and Glorification; as also of the Preaching of the Gospel, and the Calling of the Gentiles, who were to be joyning and incorporated with his People the Jews; in like manner, concerning the great Benefits and Priviledges Christ has purchased for his Elect and the Condition of the Church of GOD, as well here upon Earth, as in the Life to come. All which things the Prophet describes with so much clearness and evidence, that he seems rather to write a History of things past and done, than a Prophecy of things to come. Which is the Reason why some of the Ancient Fathers were of Opinion, That Isaiah might with as much right be called an Evangelist, as a Prophet, because in many places he speaks as clearly concerning the Person, Office and Miracles of Jesus Christ, many Hundred years before his Incarnation, as the Apostles and Doctors of the New Testament have done since; upon which account also he is called by some the 5th Evangelist. As to what concerns the Person of Isaiah, 'tis generally held, That his Father Amos was Brother to Azariah King of Judah; so that this Prophet, as to his Extraction, was an illustrious Person, as being a Prince of the Blood: GOD's method always having been to Call Persons of all sorts of Conditions to the Prophetical Office, as well those of the highest, as of the lowest Quality. As to the Time in which he Prophesied, it appears by the first Verse of the first Chapter of this Book, that he Prophesied in the days of Ʋzziah, Jothan, Ahaz and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah. And if we compute the years of the Reigns of these 4 Kings, we must con∣clude, that Isaiah Prophesied at least 45 or 50 years, beginning them with the last year of Ʋzziah (in which year he saw the Vision that is described Chap. 6.) and ending them with the 14th year of King Hezekiah; in which the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon came to congratulate his Recovery, as may be seen Chap. 39. and 2 King. 20. But if the Prophet Isaiah (as some affirm) lived till the Reign of King Manasseth, by whose Command he was Sawn asunder, it will follow that he Preached 60 or 64 years; and consequently, that he lived to a very great Age.
ISAIAH THE PROPHET. Concerning the Prophet ISAIAH. THe Prophet Isaiah, who is the first in order of all the Prophets, may also upon other accounts be esteemed the first and chiefest of them all:Isaiah began to Prophecy in the year of the World 3219. before Christ 785. and Prophesied above an hundred years. His Royal Ex∣traction, (being a Prince of the Blood) his excellent Piety, his inimtable and divine Eloquence, and his clear discovery of Things to come, do all agree to make him a Man altogether extraordinary. He speaks with that clearness and perspicuity of Jesus Christ and his Church, that he hath always been most justly esteemed to be an Evangelist, rather than a Prophet; and an Historian, who related Matters past and done, than a Man who foretold Things that were not to come to pass till many Ages after. Amongst other Visions this holy Prophet had, the following was one of the most con∣siderable. GOD appeared to him in his Majesty, and (to use the words of St. John the Evangelist) He saw the Glory of GOD, who sat upon a high Throne, surrounded with the Seraphims, who cried to one another, (or if you will, Answered to one anothe  as in a Consort, that Divine Hymn which  Church still sings in her holy Service) Holy ! Holy LORD GOD of Ests, Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory! Isaiah, at this clear and full view of the Divine Majesty, abased himself in the deepest humility, acknowledging himself to be a Man of impure ips, and therefore unfit either to see himself, or to declare to others the great things GOD had vouchsafed to shew uno him. Whilst he was thus complaining of his own Ʋnworthiness, one of the Sera∣phims that was about the Throne, took a Live-coal from the Altar, and flew with it to Isaiah, and touched his Lips therewith assuring him, that by that means his Iniquity was taken away and his Sins purged. As soon as he had received this Assurance from the Argel, and perceived in himself the effect of this Divine Fire, he perceived him∣self readily, to preach and delare to the People, whatsoever it should please GOD to charge him with. This holy Prophet (as the Fathers tell us) teaches the Ministers of the Gospel, how great a Purity they ought to be endued with, before they engage themselves in that Sacred Function, and how earnestly they ought to beg of GOD, That he would be pleased to send down from Heaven not only a Live-coal, as he did to this Prophet; but (as S. Bernard saith) A whole Fire, for to refine them, and make them as pure as they ought to be. Isaiah the Prophet (according to the Tra∣dition of the Jews and Fathers of the Church) died, after he had succeeded an hundred years, in the Persecution raised by King Manasseth, who caused him to be Sawed asunder with a Wooden-Saw, that he might take away his Life by the most violent Pains that could be invented. The Death of this Saint, so pre∣cious in the Eyes of GOD, is expresly recorded in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where the Apostle expresseth himself in these terms, con∣cerning the Vertues and Sufferings of the holy Prophets and Martyrs; They were tortured, not accepting of deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection; others had trials of Mockings and Scourgings, of Bonds and Imprisonment; they were Stoned, they were Sawn asunder, they were Tempted, they were slain with the Sword; they wandred about in Sheepskins and Goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented, of whom the World was not worthy. And Jesus Syrach, the Author of Ecclesiasti∣cus, gives Commendation of this holy Pro∣phet in these words; Hezekiah did the things that pleased the LORD, and was strengthned in the ways of David his Father, as Isaiah had commanded him, who was a great Pro∣phet, and faithful in his Vision. In his days the Sun went backward, and he lengthned the Kings Life: He saw (by an excellent gift of the Spirit) what should come to pass at the last, and he comforted those that Mourned in Zion: He shewed what should come to pass for ever, till the end of Time, and secret things before ever they hapned. But there is no need to add more Testimo∣nies in praise of this holy Prophet, they that read his Prophecy as they ought, will find the testimony of the Spirit of GOD, proclaiming him a great and true Prophet indeed, and con∣firming the truth of his Prophesies by an incon∣testable Evidence and Demonstration.
142
The CONTENTS of the Book of the Prophet JEREMIAH. THe Prophet Jeremiah has set down in this Book, by the Command of GOD and the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, not only the Prophesies which he declared or preached with an holy Zeal, extraordinary Boldness, and exemplary constancy, for the space of 40 Years, during the Reigns of Josiah, Jehoahaz, Jeho∣jakim, Jehojakin (who is also called Jechoniah, and Coniah) and Zedekiah, to the Jewish Na∣tion; but also many Events and Passages, proper to instruct and edifie the Church of GOD, as well as to confirm his rophesies. In his Preaching he generally reproves and censures the Jews, in a very sharp and free manner, because of their great and abominable Sins, and exhorts them very seriously and pa∣thetically to Repent and Turn to GOD. And forasmuch as they, from the highest to the least gave no hopes to expect their Conversion, as endeavouring rather by their Excesses to fill up the Measure of their Sins; he foretels and denounces to them the most Dreadful Judg∣ments of GOD, which were ready to overtake them, particularly the Destruction of Jeruselem, the Temple, and their Country, by the Arms of the King of Babylon; together with their Cap∣tivity in Babylon, the Continuance thereof, and all the Calamities annexed to that State; all which he most lively represents to them, as in a Looking-Glass, that flatter'd not, as well for the conviction of the Impenitent and Re∣bellious, as for the Instruction and Warning of the Just, with Words of a singular Emphasis and Energy, ratified and sealed by manifold Divine Signs and Tokens, by his Serious Mourning, Compassionate Lamentations, and earnest Prayers, mingled with bitter Tears, and sad Complaints, as foreseeing the ap∣proaching Judgments, which like a Deluge were ready to overwhelm them, and which (not long after, to his great Heart-breaking) he was fain to be a Spectator of. And, on the other hand he is not wanting to comfort and strengthen the small afflicted Remainder of Repenting and Believing Souls, partly by very comfortable and clear Prophe∣sies concerning their Deliverance from the Captivity of Babylon, their Return to their own Country, and other Favours GOD would bestow upon them; which he perspicuously sets before their Eyes, and backs with many Divine Signs, and Wonderful Visions; and also by many horrible Judgments denounced against their Enemies that had afflicted them, and especially against that Proud and Tyran∣nical Babylon, being an express Figure of the Mystical Babylon of the New Testament; but more particularly by very express and clear Prophesies, concerning the Spiritual Delive∣rance of God's People by the Messiah, Our Lord Jesus Christ; concerning whose Person, Office, his Covenant of Grace, the Preach∣ing of the Gospel, the Catholick Church compos'd of Jews and Gentiles, and of the Salvation and abundant Blessing of that Church (as well Triumphant as Military) he Prophesies amply, gloriously, and most com∣fortably. As to the Events and other Passages the Prophet relates in this Book, they partly re∣spect his own Person, viz. what Sufferings he expos'd himself to by these Preictions, from Kings, Princes, Priests, False Prophets and Common-People, and more particlarly from his  fellow Citizens of Anathoth; how GOD gracily strengthned him in his Weakness, preserv'd him in Dars, and lastly deliver'd him out of Pison by the Babylonians, and how not long after, when he was to go to Babylon with other of his Country-men that were car∣rying Captives thither, he was set at liberty by King Nebuchadnezzar's General, and very kind∣ly treated by him; also of his going to Prince Gedaliah whom the King of Babylon had made Governor over the Land; and how after Ge∣daliah had been traiterously Murther'd by Ishmael, he was (together with Baruch) car∣ried into Egypt by those Rebellious Jews that had kill'd Gedaliah, where he continued in much Sorrow with them, foretelling their ut∣ter ruine and destruction, because of their in∣corrigible Obstinacy and Rebellion; for which good Service, (as some ancient Writers tell us) they Stoned him at last. But besides these things concerning his own Person, he also sets down the actual accomplish∣ment of several of his Prophesies, as the Siege of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, the miserable
state of the City during the Siege, the taking and destruction of the City, of the Temple and Country, and the carrying the People Captive to Babylon, and what became of the Jews that were left in Judea and Egypt. The Prophet Jeremiah began to Prophecy the third Year of King Josiah (Chap. 1, 2.) who was the Grandchild of Manasseh, under whom some think that the Prophet Isaiah was Sawn in pieces, Amon's Reign of 2 Years only interceding between those two Kings, so that Jeremiah followed soon after Isaiah. But how long Jeremiah Prophesied after the Destructi∣on of Jerusalem, amongst the Jews, which re∣mained in Judea, and afterwards in Egypt, is uncertain. This only is remarkable, That Jeremiah under Zedekiah at Jerusalem, amongst the Jews which were left in Judea, and Ezekiel in Babylon, amongst those that were carried away Captives with Jehojachim, did both of them Prophecy at the same time the very same Things concerning the Destruction of Jerusa∣lem, the Temple, and whole Country, and both of them also survived to be Eye-witnesses of the accomplishment of their Prophesies and Denunciations. The Contents of the Lamentations of JEREMIAH. THis Book bears the Title of LAMEN∣TATIONS, which seems to be taken from 2 Chron. 35.25. and sufficiently informs us concerning the Subject Matter it contains, viz. the dolorous Complaints which the Pro∣phet makes in his own Name, and of the whole Church, upon occasion of the Lamen∣table Desolation of the Kingdom of Judah and City of Jerusalem, as well as the most de∣plorable state and condition of the Jews, who in vast Numbers were destroy'd by War, Fa∣mine and Pestilence. And is composed of such exquisite and Emphatical Words, and con∣ceived in so excellent, sublime and moving a Style, that no Writings whatsoever of the most Eloquent Heathen Authors, are worthy to come in comparison with it. We find indeed up and down in the Scrip∣ture other particular Lamentations, as 2 Sam. Chap. 1.19, &c. upon the Death of Saul and Jonathan; and upon the desolation of the City Tyre, Ezek. 28.12. But this Book of Jeremiah respecting a general Calamity which involved the whole People of GOD, doth alone bear and retain the Name of Lamentations amongst all Christian Nations; even as the Song of So∣lomon, only by way of Excellency bears that Title, notwithstanding that many excellent Hymns and Songs of Praise are set down in Holy Scripture, as in Exod. Chap. 15. we find the Song of Moses and the Children of Israel, with that of Miriam and the Jewish Women, for their Deliverance▪ and the Overthrow of Pharaoh in the Red Sea; that of Deborah in the 5th Chapter of Judges; of Hannah, 1 Sam. chap. 2. and the Song of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Luke chap. 1. 'Tis not certainly known when Jeremiah wrote this Book; some are of Opinion, that a part of it was written, immmediately after the Death of good King Josiah; after whose Death the Jewish State and Government suffered a manifest Eclipse and Decay, as may be seen, 2 Chron. 35.25. and Zechar. 12.11. But others think it was pen'd after the Destruction of the City and Temple by the Chaldeans, and after that the Jews, which for a time were left in Judea, had been carried Captives to Babylon, as the whole Sequel of this Book seems to im∣port. See Chap. 1.3. and Chap. 2.2. However it may be, we find that Jeremiah having undertaken to set forth the Lamentable Condition of Judea, and its Inhabitants, begins his Lamentation with this Exclamation; How doth the City sit solitary that was full of Peo∣ple, &c. but at the same time he represents to them their heinous and manifold Sins, and exhorts them to Repentance, and Prayers for Mercy, as also to Patience, and necessary confidence in expecting a favourable Issue. The intention of the Prophet not being to cast Men into excessive Sorrow, which dissolves the Natural Tye there is between the Patience and Silence of the Faithful; but to instruct us to acknowledge the Finger of GOD, in the Calamities which overtake the Church, to di∣spose us to an humble Submission of our selves under his Hand, to a patient and quiet bearing of his Chastisements, and to confidence and assurance in his Promises.
143 Mis. Bridget Peshall. daughter of Sr. John Peshall. of Horsely in staffordshire Baronet. For advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate
THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. Concerning the Prophet Jeremiah, THE Holy Prophet Jeremiah was a Man of admirable Vertue, as appears from the testimony GOD gives of him in these Words;Jeremiah began to Prophecy Anno Mundi 3375. before Jesus Christ 610. and Pro∣phesied 45 years. Be∣fore I formed thee in the Belly, I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the Womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee to be a Prophet to the Nations. And when Jeremiah endeavour'd to excuse him∣self of the Commission GOD had charged him with, by alledging that he was a Child, and could not express himself, nor speak as he ought or as became an Ambassadour of the Great GOD of Heaven and Earth, the LORD put forth his Hand and touched his Mouth, and said unto him; Behold, I have put my words in∣to thy mouth, and I have this day set thee over Nations and over Kingdoms, to root out, to de∣stroy, and to throw down, to build and to plant. He began to Prophecy when he was but Fif∣teen years of Age, and had many Visions and Revelations concerning the manifold Miseries and Calamities, that were to overtake the Jews for their manifold Sins and Rebellions against the LORD; and it is he of all the Pro∣phets, who as he was most deeply concerned in them, so he has exprest them in the most moving and pathetical Terms, as may be seen in his Lamentations. As he was very sensibly affected with these Calamities himself, so he foretold them to others with an extraordinary vehemence and earnestness; and with a great deal of authority and boldness founded forth the dreadful Denunciations GOD had charged him to declare to the People. This bold and generous Liberty soon pro∣cured him the hatred of most Men, who regar∣ding him as an object of their highest aversion, were industrious daily to stir up new Perse∣cutios against him. But this holy Prophet with an Heroick and insuperable Courage, endur'd all these cruel Outrages of his Enemies. He saw, without being concern'd, their wicked Designs against him, their Threats, and the Punishments they prepared for him; and was so far from being intimated by all these, that on the contrary, he declar'd the Messages he had from GOD with greater heat and bold∣ness than before. Some of the Princes at last being enraged against Jeremiah, because he had foretold that the Chaldeans would come and take the City, conspir'd his Death; and addressing themselves to King Zedekiah, who had a Kindness for Jeremiah, desired leave of him to cast him in∣to a Dungeon, which was in the Prison, very noysom and full of Mire; and this weak King, not being able to deny their Request, abondon∣ed the holy Prophet to the Rage of his Ad∣versaries, who immediately caused him to be let down with Cords into the Dungeon, where he stuck fast in the Mire, and could not have lived long there, especially considering the Famine which then was in the City. But one of the Kings Eunuchs having with a great deal of zeal and boldness represented to the King, the injury done to Jeremiah, which would infallibly be the cause of his Death, and that suddenly too, except he were removed thence; Zedekiah ordered the Eunuch to take thirty Men along with him, and to take up Je∣remiah out of the Dungeon, and ever after pro∣tected him from the rage and fury of his Enemies. S. Hierom admires, How a single Person and one abandoned of all Men, should be able to hold it out against a King, all the Princes, and Grandees of his Court, and a whole Nation; and acknowledgeth at the same time, That so great a Miracle cannot be attributed to the Weakness of Man, but to the Omnipotence of GOD. And accordingly we find, that in the beginning of his Book of Prophesies GOD pro∣mises to make him a Fortified City, that is, of proof to resist all manner of Attacks and As∣saults whatsoever; and to endue him with the constancy and resistance of an Iron-Pillar and Brazen-Wall, against the Kings of Judah, against the Princes thereof, and against all the People of the Land; that they indeed should fight against him, but should never prevail, because he himself would be with him. This alone is the inexhaustible Source of that extraordinary Courage, which has always ap∣pear'd in the Saints; the reason why no Vio∣lence could cast them down, nor Persecution oppress them, was, because their strength was from above. For as S. Cyprian saith) He that has GOD in his Heart, his Fear before his Eyes his Truth in his Month, may be kill'd, but can ne∣ver be overcome.
The CONTENTS of the Book of the Prophet EZEKIEL. THo' the LORD suffered Jechoniah or Je∣hojachim, with a great Number of Jews, and amongst them Ezekiel the Prophet, to be carried Captives into Babilon, yet did not he altogether forsake them in that their Exile con∣dition; but to evidence, that he was still resol∣ved to preserve his own Church amongst them, even in Babylon, and afterwards graciously de∣liver and restore them to their own Country, he raised up this excellent Prophet, by whom he declared to these poor Captives in many Visions, Prophesies and Exhortations, the same thing he had continually propounded by the Prophet Je∣remy to their Brethren, who still remained in the Country and City of Jerusalem under King Zedekiah; tho a like Incredulity and obstinate Impenitence, had seized those that were in Babylon, and their Brethren left in Judea. At Jerusalem they gave no credit to the words of Jeremiah, and made their Mocks of those who had delivered themselves up to the King of Babylon, and had suffered themselves to be carried away Captives, supposing that themselves now should be the sole Possessors of Judea, and that their Captive Brethren should continue deprived thereof for ever. Neither did the Jews in Babylon give any more heed or be∣lief to what Ezekiel the Prophet declared to them from the LORD, but murmured against GOD, supposing themselves more unhappy than their Brethren, that were left in the Land, notwithstanding that GOD by Ezekiel, as well as Jeremiah, did pronounce most terrible Judg∣ments against them, which they felt soon after in the total overthrow and desolation of their Country, City and Temple; yet always subjoyn∣ing to those Denunciations very glorious and comfortable Promises, to such as did repent of his Grace and Favour for time to come as well in Temporals as more especially in Spiituals; and severe Judgments against all their Ene∣mies and Persecutors. This is the sum and substance of this Pro∣phecy of Ezekiel; in the first three Chapters whereof he describes a most admirable and my∣stical Vision, by which GOD confirms, instructs and fortifies him in the Charge and Employ∣ment he had laid upon him; and in the fol∣lowing Chapters, until the 25th, the horrible Sins of the Jews, especially those who were left in Judea, and their approaching Punishments, are most lively set forth and represented by many divine Signs, special Visions, suitable Similitudes and Prophetical Censures. rom thence to the 33th Chapter, GOD foretels the ruin and destruction of many Neighbouring Nations, the Jews Enemies, viz. of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, (of whom also mention is made Chap. 35.) the Philistins, Tyrians, Sidonians, and the Egyptians. Afterwards, from Chap. 33, to 40. the Sins, Murmurings, and Hypocrisie of the Jews that were Captives in Babylon, are grievously cen∣sured by GOD, with an Exhortation to true Repentance, and an expectation in Faith of their approaching Deliverance, and the resto∣ring and blessing of his Church, not only by re-establishing them again in their own Country; but chiefly by that unutterable Grace and Mercy, which GOD would pour forth upon his Uni∣versal Church of Jews and Gentiles, by their only Saviour and King JESUS CHRIST, with a particular advance of the War, and ex∣tream Enmity they would be exposed to from Gog and Magog and their Adherents; but with the certain Promise of an happy issue of that Threatning Danger. In the Nine last Chapters, GOD ratifies, seals and concludes these Prophesies in Baby∣lon, by a great and most remarkable Vision of the Structure of a New Temple, of a New Divine Service and Worship; of a New Policy or Government of the People of GOD; of a New Inheritance and a New City; and all this for Israel and Strangers, representing by Figures comporting with the state of those Times, the blessed and happy future state of the Church of GOD, both Military and Triumphant, under their Head and King Jesus Christ, who with the Father and the Holy Spirit, the alone True GOD of Israel, is to be blessed and praised for ever and ever. Amen.
144 William Layfield of the City of London Gentleman For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. Concerning the Prophet EZEKIEL. THE Holy Prophet Ezekiel Prophesied du∣ring the space of 22 Years, whereof the Eleven first Years concide with the Eleven last Years of Jeramiah: he was of the Priestly Race, as shell as Jeremiah his Contemporary. He was amongst some of the first, that were carried away Captives from Jerusalem to Ba∣bylon, with Jechoniah King of Judah, and he Preached and Prophecied in that strange Country, to his Country-men that were carried away with him thither. When GOD at first Commissioned this Pro∣phet for the great Work he did intend to em∣ploy him in, which was to prophesie and de∣clare to his Country-men whatsoever GOD should think fit by Visions or otherwise, to reveal to him for their good, he encourages him much in the same manner as before he had done Jeremiah, by assuring him, That be∣cause he had to do with the House of Israel, who were an impudent hard hearted People, he should make his Face strong against their Faces, and his Forehead as hard as their Fore∣heads; yea, that he would make it harder than Flint, even as an Adamant, that he might be of proof against their impudent facing-down and abusing of him. This Prophet, of all others, was favour'd by GOD with the most profond and mystical Visions that we find in Scripture, and which al∣ways have been lookt upon to be of most dif∣ficult understanding and explication, insomuch that the Jews upon this account forbad the Reading of the Beginning and end of the Book of this Prophet, to all Persons that were under the Age of Thirty years. The Fathers say, that probably one cause of this obscurity of his Visions and Prophecies was because being then amongst an Idolatrous People, GOD did not thinking it fit, that the Babylonians should comprehend those Secrets, which he was plea∣sed to reveal to his Prophet, for the comfort of his People, who themselves could not un∣derstand them, without his particular Grace and Illumination. Some Christians (saith the same Father) have the strength and courage of a Lion in fighting against their Spiritual Enemies, and enduring all manner of Afflictions and Per∣scution. Some by their inward and outward Mortifications, and continual Resignation, dai∣ly present themselves as holy Sacrifices to GOD, and can say with the Psalmist, For thy sake are we killed all the day long, and are accounted as beasts appointed for slaughter; and these represented by the Ox. Others ele∣vating themseves in contemplation, upon the Wings of the Love to Divine Wisdom, with the Eagle fix their Eyes upon the Sun in its full glory; and lastly, others being of an excellent Spirit and understanding, excel all the rest, as far as a Man surpasseth all other Living Creatures. But yet all these (how different soever their Gifts or Graces may be) are still not but Body, linked and bound together by the indissoluble Band of one and the same Faith and Charity. The first Vision of this Prophet, which he saw by the River Chebar, in the fifth year of King Jehojachin's Captivity, concerning the four Living Creatures and the Wheels, is so full fraught with great Wonders and Myste∣ries, that S. Gregory, who endeavours to ex∣plain the same, makes it appear by what he hath said of them, that there remains much more to be said, before we can sound the full depth of the Wisdom that is couched in them. He observes amongst other things, that these Living Creatures, which had each of them four Faces, viz. the Face of a Man, of a Lion, of an Ox, and of an Egle, and yet were but one Living Creature, do represent the diffe∣rent Members of the Church, which yet make up but one Body; as also, the Union there is between Christians, by means of the agree∣ment in one Faith, notwithstanding so many outward appearing Contrarieties amongst them, which indeed is as wonderful to cosi∣der, as the mixture of the differing Faces of these Living Creatures, seem strange and uncouth to us, when represented to our Eyes.
THE SECOND VISION OF EZEKIEL. The Vision of the Prophet Ezekiel, concerning the Resurrection of the Dry Bones, which upon his Prophesying were covered with Flesh, and restored to Life. AMongst the rest of the Visions of the Pro∣phet Ezekiel, this here represented con∣cerning the Resurrection of the dry Bones,Anno Mundi 3420. before Christ 584. is most fa∣mous, and much taken notice of by the Fa∣thers of the Church. The Prophet tells us, That he was carried by the Spirit of the LORD, and set down in a Valley which was full of dry Dead-mens Bones, and having made him go round the Valley, to take a full view of the vast number and condition of them; the LORD demanded of him, Whether he thought those dry Bones could be restor'd to Life again? To which the Prophet having answered, O LORD GOD thou knowest. He commanded him to Prophecy to those Bones in his Name, That they should be joyned Bone to his Bone, co∣vered with Flesh and live. No sooner had the Prophet declared this to the Bones in the Name of GOD, to whom all things are alive, and whose Power nothing can resist, but he immediately saw the execution of it; for with a great noise all the Bones came together, and were covered with Sinews, Muscles, Flesh, and Skin, but there was yet no Life in them. Wherefore the LORD again commanded the Prophet to Prophecy to the living Breath, and to command it to come from the four Winds, and to breath upon those dead Bodies, that they might live; whereupon the same Spirit, which was in the Creation breathed by GOD into the first Man, after that he had made his Body of the Earth came into these dead Bodies, and immediately they stood upon their Feet and liv'd, and were an exceeding great Army. After that the LORD had shewed the Pro∣phet Ezekiel this wonderful Vision, that he might not be ignorant of the meaning of it, he told him, That the dry Bones which he had seen, were the whole House of Israel, who looked upon themselves (in the condition they were then in, being Captives in Babylon) as so many dry Bones, which had no hopes ever to live again, that is, to be restored to those ma∣nifold advantages they once enjoyed in their own County. But GOD farther commands Ezekiel to assure them, That notwithstanding all the Discouragements which at present they did lie under, he would as miraculously re∣store and deliver them, as the Prophet had seen him miraculously restore those dry Bones to Life, contrary to all human possibility or expectation. Now, as GOD himself here applies this Vi∣sion to the wonderful Deliverance he would one Day grant the Jews from the miserable state of Slavery and Captivity they were in, and that amongst an Idolatrous People, far from their own Country, without the comfort of those many Priviledges and Advantages they enjoyed there, above all other Nations of the World; so we may as truly apply it to the Church of GOD, which shall be as miracu∣lously delivered from her state of Deadness, Apostacy, Captivity and Bondage, wherein she is at present in Spiritual Babylon, as these dead Bones were contrary to all hopes and outward possibility joyned together Bone to his Bone, and raised to Life. GOD also would put us in mind by this Vision. That how desperate soever the condition of Sinners may seem to be, who have been a long time habituated to Sin, and grown old in Trans∣gressions, and are thereby not only become like a dead Body, but as dry Bones; yet that he to whom all things are possible, and who calls those things that are not, as tho' they were, can raise them again to the Life of Righteousness and Holiness, and bringing them out of their Graves, regenerate them again to a NewLife. For as GOD at first brought the Soul from tht Nul∣lity of Non-existence to a state of Being; so afterwards he brings it from the Nullity and Privation of Sin, to the Essence of Grace and Holiness: And this Second Creation is much more wonderful than the First; for the former GOD accomplished with a Word, whereas the latter was the fruit of the Death, and the price of the Blood of the Son of GOD. GOD also was willing by this Vision, to give the Prophet a Scantling of what his Omnipo∣tence will effect at the General Day of Judg∣ment, when the Dead shall arise, and receive according to what they have done in the Flesh, whether Good or Evil.
145 Mary Lady Reve, relict of Sr. Robert Reve of Thwait hall in suffolk Baronet,  now wise to Thomas Vincent of Fetcham in surrey Esq, For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The CGNTENTS of the Book of DANIEL. DANIEL was one of those who were carried Captive to Babylon, in the Reign of King Jehojakim, by Nebuchadnezzar, after that he had taken the City of Jerusalem, and subdued all Judea. He was of the Posterity of David, and a descendent of the Royal Line; very comely of Person, of a most quick and pe∣netrating Spirit and exemplary Piety. By the Order of Nebuchadnezzar he was chosen from amongst many, to be instructed in the Language, Arts and Sciences of the Chaldeans, that thereby he might be qualified to wait upon the King, and to attend at Court, in order after∣wards to be advanced to the high Commands of the Kingdom, as may be seen Chap. 1. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Whilst he was thus Educated amongst many other Noble Jewish Youths, GOD was pleased to endow him with an extraordinary Wisdom beyond his Companions, and particular∣ly with the Gift of Understanding and inter∣preting of Dreams, such as the wisest and most skilful of the Chaldean Magicians were not able to reveal or expound, as appeared by his revealing Nebuchadnezzar's Dream, and ex∣pounding the Hand-writing to Belshazzar his Grand-child, Chap. 2.4, 5. By which means Daniel was raised to an eminent pitch of Dig∣nity by those Kings, not only above his Compa∣nions, but above most of the greatest Princes and Officers of the King of Babylon: Which at last stirred up so great an envy and hatred of the Babylonian Princes and Grandees against him, that he was at last (by their Malicious contrivances) cast into the Lions Den, to be rent and devoured by them; and this only, be∣cause he would not (in obedience to the King's Edict) give over his accustomed Worshipping of the True GOD. But the Almighty, whom he served and fervently prayed to, miraculously preserved him from those cruel Beasts; and his Accusers and great Enemies, being by way of just retaliation cast in amongst them, were de∣voured alive with their Wives and Children, Chap. 6. Here is also related (Chap. 3.) how mira∣culously GOD preserved three of his Compa∣nions, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, in the Fiery Furnace, who refused to worship the Image King Nebuchadnezzar had set up, and had not so much as one hair of their Heads singed with the Fire, that instantly consumed those who cast them into it. Besides the Visions and Dreams represented to the Kings of Babylon, which Daniel ex∣pounded, GOD also was pleased to communicate to him many excellent Visions, concerning the state of the Church of GOD, and the King∣doms of the World, which the Angel Gabriel expounded to him; as particularly concerning the rebuilding of the City and Temple of Je∣rusalem, the manifestation of Christ in the Flesh; the destruction of the City and Second Temple by the Romans; the Preaching and Miracles of Jesus Christ, and the abolishing of the Levitical Priesthood; the exact time when Jesus Christ should be put to Death, and the manner how at last he should deliver and save his People, both temporally and eternally. Now that which greatly enhances the praise and commendation of this Prophet, and ought the more to incite the Pious Reader, to receive and read these Prophecies, with that reverence and attention which is due to the Word of GOD, is this, that he is highly recommended and dignified amongst all the Prophets of the Old and New Testament. For Ezekiel joyns him with Noah and Job, as being an extraor∣dinary Example of Zeal and Piety, Chap. 14. ver. 14, and 20. And the same Prophet Ezekiel expresses himself in these terms concerning his excellent Wisdom to the proud King of Tyre, Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel, there is no secret that they can hide from thee. And our Blessed Saviour Jesus Christ himself speaks of this Prophet, Mat. 24.5. and exhorts all to consider well his Prophesies; and S. John in the Revelation has not only set down many things agreeing with Daniel, but often makes use of the very same words, which he has in his Pro∣phecy: And tho' he never discharged the Fun∣ction of a Prophet, in quality of an Ecclesia∣stical Person, in Preaching to the People; yet hath his Book in all times been accounted Pro∣phetical, and received as such by the Church.
THE PROPHET DANIEL. The Prophet Daniel reveals to King Nebuchadnezzar his Dream, and gives him the Interpretion thereof. THE Prophet Daniel was of the Royal Line of the Kings of Judah; he was carried to Babylon in his Youth by King Nebuchad∣nezzar,Anno Mundi 3398. before Christ 606. the first time he besieged Jerusalem, and took Jehojachim, who was then in the 4th year of his Reign, from which time we are to begin the account of the 70 years of the Cap∣tivity, spoke of by the Prophets. Daniel (during this his Captive State) was very careful to observe the Law of GOD; for he and his three Companions, Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah, having a daily portion appointed them of the Kings Meat and the Wine which he drank, he resolved not to defile himself with eating thereof; but desired Mel∣zar, to whom the Prince of the Eunuchs had committed the Charge of them, to give him and his Companions Pulse to eat, and Water to drink; but he fearing lest by keeping to such mean Diet they would look lean, and worse than the other Jewish Youths, who are fed from the King's Table, made difficulty to consent to Daniel's Request. Wherefore Daniel desired him only to try them for ten Days with the Meat he desired; and that if at the end of them he did not find him and his Companions to look as well as any of those Youths who were fed with the King's Meat, he might do after∣wards as it seemed good unto him: To which when Melzar had agreed, he found them at the end of those days fairer and fatter in Flesh, than those who did eat the Portion of the Kings Meat. By this Instance GOD made it appear, how much he loves that Abstinence which is pra∣ctis'd in his Fear, and according to his Order; and that it is not properly the Meat that nourish∣eth us, but the Blessing he affords to it in those who denying their own Appetite and Lust, make him the sole end of all their desire. GOD, to make this Prophet more Illustri∣ous, made him to be sent for by King Nebuchadnez∣zar,Anno Mundi 3301. Daniel at that time being but 14 years of Age. to Interpret his Dream, which had put him into a strange trouble and consternation, and the rather, because he had forgot the par∣ticulars of it. Nebuchadnezzar being impa∣tient to know his Dream, and the Interpreta∣tion of it, sent for all his Magicians and Astro∣logers to satisfie his desire; but they having unanimously declared, That it was impossible for any Man to know what another had dreamt, and that all that their Art could effect, was to interpret the Dream when it was told them: He in great Rage commanded them all to be put to Death. Daniel having been inform'd of this cruel Sentence, in which he himself and his Compa∣nions were likely to be involved, as being Edu∣cated in the Arts and Knowledge of the Chal∣deans, and consequently reckon'd amongst the Wise Men, desired the Captain of the King's Guards, for a while to suspend the Execution of the King's Order; and presenting himself before the King, told him, he would declare it to the King, and interpret his Dream; which being soon after upon his earnest Prayer to GOD Revealed to him, he came and told the King, That he had seen in his Dream a great Image, whose Head was Gold, his Breast and Arms Silver, his Belly and Thighs Brass, and its Legs Iron, and his Feet partly of Iron and partly of Clay; and that a Stone cut out of a Mountain, without hand falling upon the Feet of the Image, broke it all to pieces. He told him, That the Head of Gold represented his own Kingdom; that of Silver another which should come after him, of less Glory than his, which should be followed by a third of Brass, and a fouth of Iron, which should break and bruise the three foregoing Kingdoms to pieces. Nebuchadnezzar having heard his Dream thus declared and interpreted by Daniel, fell down upon his Face and worshipped him, and commanded Incense and Oblations to be offer∣ed to him; and declared, That now he knew that Daniels GOD was the GOD of all Gods, and the sole revealer of Secrets; and raised Daniel to great Honour, making him his Lord Lieutenant over all the Province of Ba∣bylon, and Superintendent and Master over all the Wise Men of Babylon. And Daniel having requsted the King, that he might stay in the Kings Palace, and that he might depute his Three Companions to take care of the Govern∣ment and Peace of the Province, the King readily consented; by which means, as they had been partakers with Daniel in his Suffer∣ings, so were they now made sharers of his Glory.
146 Ann wife of Chichester, Graham of Norton in yorkeshire Esq. Sole daughter, and heyress of Thomas Thwenge of Kilton Castle in Cleaeland in the said County Esq. For advancement of this worke▪ contributed this Plate.
147 George Courthop of Wighlight in the Parish of Tishurst in the County of sussex Esq. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Three Children in the Furnace. King Nebuchadnezzar causeth three Hebrew youngMen to be Cast into a Fiery Furnace, from whence they are miraculously delivered by an Angel. SOme time after King Nebuchadnezzar made an Image of Gold, whose height was threescore Cubits, and the breadth thereof six Cubits,Anno Mundi 3417. before Christ 587. These young Men being about Thirty Years of Age. and set it up in the Plain of Dura, in the Province of Babylon; and having assem∣bled all his Princes, Governours, Captains, Judges, Treasurers, Councellors and She∣riffs, to celebrate the Dedication of the same Image; he commanded a Herald to proclaim to all his Subjects there assembled, That upon hearing the sound of the Musical Instruments appointed for that purpose, they should fall down and worship the Golden Image he had set up, and that whosoever refused so to do, should be cast into the Fiery Furnace. Some Malicious Spirits having observed that Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, when all the rest of the Company, that were present, fell down upon their Faces, and worshipped the Image, did not express any Adoration to the same, went and accused them before the King, for refusing to obey the Kings solemn and ex∣press Command, to worship the Statue he had erected. The King being put into an extream Rage and Fury, to see his Command contemn'd, sent for the Young Men, and demanded of them, how they durst be so bold, not to adore the Image he had commanded to be set up and worshipped; threatning them in case of Refu∣sal, to have them cast into the midst of the Fiery Furnace, and concluded his Threats with these insolent Words; And who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands? But this Transport of Anger they perceived in the King, was not in the least able to dis∣compose the serene Calmness of the Spirits of these Holy Men, who with an astonishing un∣concernedness represented to the King, That they were assur'd the GOD, whom they served, was able to deliver them from the Fiery Fur∣nace, and out of his hands; but that if it should not be his pleasure to deliver them, they were resolved, (let come what will come) not to serve his Gods, nor to worship the Image he had set up. Nebuchadnezzar seeing this their holy Con∣stancy, and the small regard they had for hi Threats and Anger, became transported to an excess of Rage and Passion, so far that the form of his Visage was changed thereby; and commanding the Furnace to be heated seven times hotter than it was wont to be, ordered the most Mighty Men of his Army to bind these Holy Men, and to cast them into it, which they performed with the loss of their own Lives; for the Furnace being so much over-heated, the Flame which proceeded from the Furnace, struck them down and kill'd them immediately. GOD, upon this occasion, verified to the Letter what he had promised in the Psalms, That he would be with those that love him, in their greatest distress and trouble; for the An∣gel of GOD visibly appearing in the Furnace, protected these young Men, and restrain'd the violence of the Fire, which only consuming the Cords wherewith they were tied, left them to walk at liberty in the midst of the Furnace, and found a sweet refreshing Dew in the midst of those Flames; for having a stronger Fire burning in their Hearts than what encompas∣sed them about, they sang Praises to GOD for so visible a Protection, calling upon all Creatures to do the same. The King more transported at the sight of this Miracle, than but a little before he had been with Passion and Fury, commanded these Young Men to come forth out of the Furnace, and blessing GOD, for that he had sent his Angel to deliver his Servants, he commanded all his Subjects, upon pain of Death, not to speak irreverently of the GOD of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, and promoted them to great Honour. The Fathers observe, That these young Men in the Furnace, are a true Image of the Saints, in their Affliction; for as that Fire consumed only their Bands, so Affliction consume only the Weakness and Impurities of the Saints, and GOD himself is with them in all their Suffer∣ings: And as the Flame of the Furnace consu∣med those only that only cast them in; so the E∣vils of the Righteous serve only to comfort and sanctifie them, and prove only fatal to those who are the cause of them.
Nebuchadnezzar turned into a Beast. Nebuchadnezzar the King, by a just Punishment from GOD for his Pride and Arrogance, is changed into a Beast. KIng Nebuchadnezzar being return'd to Babylon, after his Conquest of Egypt, and other his Victorious Successes against all his Ene∣mies,Anno Mundi 3434. before Christ 570. David being then 49. Years of Age. was no longer able to Stem the Tide of his Tri∣umphs and Prosperities, but suffering himself to be carried away with it to an excess of so insolent Pride and Arrogance, GOD resolved to make an Example of him, by which not only all Princes, but all other Men, might learn not to lift up themselves against him, remembring always that they are but Men. GOD; to this end, represented to him in a Dream the Judgment he was determin'd to bring upon him; and Nebuchadnezzar having declared the same to Daniel, he interpreted it unto him in this manner: Thou didst see in thy Dream, O King, a great Tree, whose height reached up to Heaven, and whose Branches reached to the Ends of the Earth; its Leaves were fair and flourishing and its Boughs loaden with Fruit; the Beasts of the Field did feed un∣der its shadow, and the Birds of Heaven made their Nest in its Branches. This great Tree, which thou hast seen, O King, is thy self, whose Majesty is lifted up to Heaven, and extended over all the Earth. And whereas thou didst see a Watcher, an Holy One, come down from Heaven, saying, Hew the Tree down and destroy it, yet leave the Stump thereof in the Earth, with a Band of Iron and Brass, in the tender Grass of the Field; and let it be wet with the Dew of Heaven, and let his portion be with the Beasts of the Field, until Seven times pass over him. This is the Sentence which the Most High has pronounced against my Lord the King! That they shall drive thee from Men, and thy dwelling shall be with the Beasts of the Field, and they shall make thee eat Grass as an Ox, and thou shalt be made wet with the Dew of Heaven, until that Seven times pass over thee; and thou be made to acknowledge, That the Most High ruleth in the Kingdoms of Men, and giveth them to whom he pleaseth. And where∣as they commanded to leave the Stump of the Tree Roots in the Earth, this signifies, That thy Kingdom shall return unto thee after that thou shalt have known, that the Heavens rule. This Prediction was fulfilled in the manner following: As the King on a time was walk∣ing in the Palace of the Kingdom of Babylon, and was admiring the wonderful Works that he had made, and the greatness and magnifi∣cence of Babylon, which he had built for to be the Palace of his Residence, and for the glory of His Majesty; there came a Voice from Hea∣ven, which told him, That the Kingdom was departed from him; and immediately thereup∣on he was struck by the Hand of GOD, which the same moment fulfilled the Sentence pro∣nounced against him; he was driven from Men, and did eat Grass with Oxen, and his Body was wet with the Dew of Heaven for se∣ven Years, even until his Hair was grown like Eagles Feathers, and his Nails like Birds Claws. GOD made it appear by this terrible Ex∣ample, how severely he punisheth secret Pride, and elevation of the Heart, casting them down to the state of Beasts, who lift up themselves by their Arrogance above the condition of Men. Nebuchadnezzar (saith S. Bernard) is the Image of Fallen Man, who by lifting up himself in Pride, lost his Heavenly Estate and Kingdom, and became like unto the Beasts that perish. But when Nebuchadnezzar, after he had continued seven Years in this sad and forlorn condition, did at last lift up his Eyes to Hea∣ven, GOD was pleased to return his Ʋnder∣standing unto him, and restored him not only to a human form, but to his State and Kingdom so that his Counsellors and Lords sought unto him, and he was established in his Throne with great Majesty and Glory. So when a Sinner sighs and longs for GOD in Misery, he not only is transported from the state of Beasts, in which he was before, but is restor'd to the Life and Enjoyments of Angels, and to the posses∣sion of all the Graces of Heaven. For (as one of the Fathers saith) as Pride did formerly change Angels, and doth still change Men into Devils, so Humility restores those to the Life of Angels, who did live as to their Bo∣dy like Beasts, and with respect to their Spirits like Devils.
148
149 Samuel Wolrich of the Tower of London Gentleman. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
BELSHAZZAR CONDEMNED. King Belshazzar, as he was Feasting, sees an Hand writing upon the Wall the Sentence of Death. BElshazzar King of Babylon, and Grand∣child of Nebuchadnezzar, having made a great Feast for a Thou∣sand of his Princes and Lords,Anno Mundi 3466. before Christ 538. was minded to joyn Impiety to his Luxury, and profanation of Holy things to his Excess; for he commanded his Servants, to bring him the Silver and Golden Vessels, which his Grandfather Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the Temple at Jerusalem, that he and his Princes, his Wives and his Concubines might drink in them. GOD being provoked by this Sacrilegious Contempt of his holy Worship, and the profa∣nation of the Vessels dedicated to his Service, terrified this wicked Prince, in the midst of his Luxurious Feast, with the appearance of an Hand, which in three Words, wrote the Sen∣tence of his Condemnation. Belshazzar being extreamly concern'd and affrighted at this amazing Prodigy, cried aloud to bring in the Astrologers, the Chaldeans and the Southsayers; but they could not so much as read the Writing, much less shew the Interpretation thereof. Then (as the Scripture tells us) was King Bel∣shazzar greatly troubled, and his Countenance was changed, and his Princes were astonished. Whereupon the Queen Mother (who was Nitocris the Wife of great Nebuchadnezzar) hearing of the Kings consternation, came in haste into the Banquetting-House, and told the King, That he had a Man called Daniel in his Dominions, in whom was the Spirit of the holy Gods, and whom his Father for his extraordi∣nary ability that way, had made Master of all the Magicians, who would shew the King the Interpretation of the Words which did so much trouble him. This holy Prophet, who had been so great and powerful in the time of Nebuchadnezzar, but had since that retired himself from Court during the Reigns of Evil Merodach his Son, and Belshazzar his Grandson; during which time of his Solitude, GOD vouchsafed to fa∣vour him with all those wonderful Visions we shall speak of hereafter, wherein GOD disco∣vered to him the Succession of all the Empires of the World, until the Blessed Kingdom of Christ. Daniel being sent for, and appearing be∣fore the King, seemed to slight the Honours and Presents the King promised him, in case he could give him the Interpretation of those Words; and told Belshazzar, That forasmuch as he had not humbled himself, nor taken Ex∣ample by his Grandfather Nebuchadnezzar, who for his Pride was chased from among Men, and for seven years together reduced to the state and condition of Beasts; but lifted up himself against the LORD of Heaven, and pro∣faned the Vessels dedicated to his holy Service, GOD being provoked by these his Crimes, had sent a Hand to write his Condemnation in those three Words, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN; whereof the first Word Mene signified, That GOD had numbred his Kingdom, and finished it; Tekel, That he had weighed him in the Balance of his Justice, and he was found too light; and that Ʋpharsin imported, That GOD had divided his Kingdom, and given it to the Medes and Persians. Belshazzar having heard this dreadful Sen∣tence from the Mouth of Daniel, however un∣welcome the Interpretation was to him, yet be∣stowed upon the Prophet the Honours he had promised him, causing him to be cloathed in Scarlet, with a Chain of Gold about his Neck, and to be proclaimed the third Person in the Kingdom. These Predictions were not long without their accomplishment; for Cyrus being at the same time before the City of Babylon with a great Army, whilst the Babylonians trusting to the strength of their Walls, were Feasting and making Merry, he made a shift with part of his Army to pass the River, and two of his Captains (by a Breach they had made) entred into Belshazzar's Palace, and killed him that very Night wherein Daniel had given his In∣terpretation of the Words. Leaving (saith S. Hierom) a terrible Example to those, who abuse things infinitely more Holy than were those de∣dicated Vessels; and who (except they repent) may be assured of a dreadful Sentence, tho' they see it not visibly writ before their Eyes, as Belshazzar did.
Daniel in the Lions Den. Daniel being cast into the Lions Den, is miraculously delivered thence. DArius the Mede being thus become Possessour of all the Dominions of Belshazzar, by means of the Victory of his Nephew Cy∣rus,Anno Mundi 3466. before Christ 538. Daniel being about 82 years of Age. greatly honoured Da∣niel, looking upon him as a Person fill'd with the Spirit of GOD, because he was informed what he had formerly foretold to Nebuchadnezzar, and Belshazzar his Grandchild, insomuch that he had thoughts of setting him over the whole Kingdom, and making him his Lord-deputy, or Vice-Roy. But the more the King was thus pleased to honour and heap his Favouors upon him, the more he stir'd up the envy and hatred of his great Princes and Officers against him, who were troubled to see Daniel, a Captive Jew, to outstrip them all. Their Envy made them narrowly to observe Daniel, in hopes of meet∣ing with some slip of his, whereof they might accuse him; but seeing his Life and manage∣ment of Affairs altogether irreproachable; they concluded, they should never find any thing to accuse him of, except in a case where the Law of his GOD was concerned. Wherefore they persuaded the King to set forth a Declaration, That whosoever should ask any Petition of ei∣ther GOD or Man, except of him alone, for thirty days, should be cast into the Lions Den. Daniel, notwithstanding that he was very sensible, that this wicked Law was only made to entrap and destroy him, yet he alone was resolved not to obey it; for preferring the Law of GOD before that of Men, he conti∣nued Thrice every day to pray to, and bless GOD in his Chamber, with his Windows open towards Jerusalem. His Enemies therefore ha∣ving observed him to pray, as before, presented themselves before Darius, and accused Daniel as a Rebel, and one that was disobedient to the King's Decree, and desired execution of the Sentence against him. But Darius, who had a great Kindness for Daniel, being sorely troubled that ever he had consented to the publishing so unjust a De∣cree, did his utmost endeavour to deliver Da∣niel out of their hands. But they represented to the King, that the Royal Decrees (accord∣ing to the Laws of the Medes and Persians) were unalterable, and that therefore the pe∣nalty he had incurr'd being irreversible, he must be cast into the Lions Den. The weakness of this King, being greater than the desire he had to save Daniel, oblig'd him at last to comply with their unjust desire, and to order him to be cast into the Den of Lions, tho sore against his Will, and expressing the hope he had, that the GOD whom he serv'd would not fail to delived him; neither was he at all deceived therein; for the next day, rising very early in the Morning, he went to the Mouth of the Den of Lions, and call∣ing upon Daniel, he found, to his great Joy, that he was yet alive; and as the King seem'd surpriz'd at this miraculous Preservation of the holy Prophet, he told him, That GOD had sent his Angel into the Den, who had stopt the Lions Mouths, and hindred them from doing him any hurt, because he had found him in∣nocent in his sight, however his best Actions might be misrepresented by Men. The King ravish'd with Joy to see the Per∣son he so highly valued thus wonderfully de∣livered, ordered him presently to be taken out of the Den; and at the same time command∣ed, That all Daniels Enemies that had accu∣sed him, and laid this Snare for him, should be cast with their Wives and Children into the same Den, from whence he was so mira∣culously saved, who seiz'd and tore them be∣fore ever they came to the bottom of the Den, and brake all their Bones to pieces. Daniel having thus escaped the Lions Mouths, blessed and praised GOD, and taught those, (as S. Hierom saith) who are saved from another sort of Lions, much more to be feared, than these the Prophet was delivered from, to praise GOD with their whole heart, for his gracious Assistance and Protection, without which they must have been devoured and de∣stroyed by them. Sin has the Teeth of a Lion, which make their impression, not on the Body, but on the Soul it self; so that it appears, That those whom GOD supports under Temptations and Afflictions, and whom he hinders from falling into Sin, are in a fuller sense than Da∣niel deliver'd from the Rage of Lions.
150 The Rts. Honourable Edward Lord Radcliffe, son and hegre to the Rt.. Honble. ffrancis Earle of Darwent∣water, Viscount Radcliff, and Langly▪ and Baron of Tindale. &ca. For ye Advancement of this Worke Contributed. this Plate.
151 Mr. James Oades Cittizen, and Stationer of London For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
DANIEL's VISIONS. Daniel's Vision of the Four Monarchies, viz. the Assyrian, Persian, Greek, and Roman. DANIEL is one of those Prophets, to whom GOD was pleased more particu∣larly to reveal in Mystical Visions,Anno Mundi 3449. before Christ 555. the whole course and sequel of the Government and Kingdoms of the World throughout all Ages to come. All which different Governments he has so ex∣actly described, and set forth with such clear distinguishing Marks, that he seems rather to be an Historian, giving an account of things that are already past, than a Prophet, foretel∣ling things to come. The Vision represented in this Figure, and which Daniel declares was shewed to him in the first Year of Belshazzar, is one of those just now mention'd. This Holy Prophet, as he lay on his Bed, saw in a Dream four different great Beasts come up out of the Sea, which was tossed and agitated by the four Winds, rushing out upon it. The first of these Beasts was like a Lion, and had the Wings of an Ea∣gle: the second Beast was like a Bear, and had three Ribs in its Mouth; the third Beast was like a Leopard, which had upon its Back four Wings of a Fowl, and four Heads; the fourth Beast was more dreadful and terrible than all the rest, and exceeding strong, having great Iron-Teeth, wherewith it devoured and break to pieces all it met with, stamping the residue with its Feet: It had also Ten Horns on its Head, in the midst of which came up a little Horn, before which three of the other Horns were pluckt up by the Roots, and in it were Eyes like those of a Man, and a Mouth speaking great Things. After this the Prophet saw the Glory of GOD, and the Ancient of Days seated upon his Throne, with many Millions of Angels at∣tending him, to judge those Beasts, and put an end to their Dominion, and he saw the fourth Beast slain, and his Body cast into the Fire. Daniel being desirous to know the Inter∣pretation of this Vision, asked one of the An∣gels what those four Beasts were which he had seen? The Angel, to satisfie his Repuest, told him, That the four great Beasts he had seen, were four Kings or Kingdoms, which should successively appear upon the Earth. But the Prophet having been much surpriz'd at the terrible shape, rage and strength of the fourth Beast, which was different from all the rest, desired the Angel in particuler, to give him some light and information concerning it. Whereupon the Angel told him, That the fourth. Beast he had seen, was a fourth King∣dom, which should be diverse from all other Kingdoms, and should devour the whole Earth, and tread it down, and break it to pieces; and that the Ten Horns were Ten Kings, which should successively have domi∣nion in that Kingdom. That the Little Horn which came up amongst the Ten Horns, was a King that should arise and subdue Three Kings, and should speak great Words against the Most High, and wear out the Saints of the Most High, and think to change Times and Laws, which should also be given into his hand for a Time, Times, and Half a Time; that is, for a Year, two Years, and half a Year, or Threee Years and an half. The Angel also told him, That after this Term was elapsed, the Great GOD would sit in Judgment upon him, and that his Do∣minion should be taken away, and consum'd and destroy'd for ever. And that after all those Earthly Kingdoms (fitly compared to Sa∣vage Beasts, and the last of them to a prodigi∣ous Monster) GOD himself would erect his own Heavenly, Beneficent, and Peaceful King∣dom upon Earth; during which, the Domi∣nion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, should be given to the Saints of the Most High; and that this King∣dom should never be supplanted by any other, but continue an everlasting Kingdom to the End of Ages, all other Kingdoms and Domi∣nions being subject to it. The most take these four Kingdoms to be the four Great Monarchies of the World, viz. the Assyrian, the Persian, the Greek and Roman Monarchy; and the Little Horn to denote An∣tichrist; and that the Kingdom which shall o∣ver-top, consume and out-last them all, is the Kingdom of our LORD Jesus Christ, who is the King of Kings and Lord of Lords.
The CONTENTS of the Book of the Prophet HOSEA. SAint Stephen, Acts 7.42. alledging a Pas∣sage out of Amos, quotes it as written in the Book of the Prophets; because in all A∣ges, and to this Day among the Jews, the 12 small Prophets (as they are called) were never accounted but as one Book, and constituted one Volume only amongst those of the Old Te∣stament, tho subdivided into 12 different Secti∣ons, according to the number and distinction of the Prophets, whose Revelations are therein contained. The first place amongst these is given to the Prophesies of Hosea, who as well as Amos and others, was in particular sent by GOD to the Kingdom of Israel, or the Ten Tribes, tho here and there also we find those of Judah censured and threatned in these Pro∣phesies, for an evident proof of GOD's Long-suffering, as well as of his Faithfulness in his Promises: For notwithstanding that by reason of a most condemnable Schism, extreamly pre∣judicial to the Church and State, they had se∣parated themselves from the Tribe of Judah, out of which the Messiah was to be born, and from the Communion of the true and due Ser∣vice of GOD; yet the LORD was not want∣ing to raise up Prophets, to declare his Word and Will unto them; partly, that they might be a support and comfort to the remainder of his Elect that were amongst them, to preserve them from the corruption and gross Idolatry of the Age wherein they lived, and to main∣tain and continue them in the Profession of his Holy Covenant; and on the other hand, to censure and reprove the Rebellious and Wicked, to call them to Repentance; and by this means leaving them inexcusable, and their Condemnation just. Now forasmuch as the Prophet Hosea Pro∣phesied a long time amongst the Ten Tribes, as appears from Chap. 1. ver. 1. so the Holy Spirit thought it necessary for the perpetual use and edification of the Church, that the sum and substance of his Prephesies and Revelations, should be recorded to After-Ages, as they are set down in this Book; which contains first of all an exact Description, and severe Prophetical Reproof of the wicked and corrupt Estate of the whole Kingdom of Israel, and particularly of the infamous Idolatry, which was in Vogue amongst them, in wor∣shipping the Golden Calves, which in the Reign of Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, were set up at Dan and Bethel by Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, their first King, under whom they se∣parated themselves from Judah, and the pure Worship of GOD, 1 Kings 12.27, 28. &c. Which Schism and Idolatry of theirs was fol∣lowed by a fearful and more than Pagan cor∣ruption and dissolution of Manners, and an universal Deluge of all sorts of Sins, both a∣gainst the first and second Table, and amongst all sorts of Men, of what condition or quality soever; which the LORD by his Prophet Hosea doth most vigorously check and reprove, with divers very pathetical Exhortations to a seri∣ous and ready Repentance. But forasmuch as the impiety and hardness of their Heart still encreast daily from the top of the Head to the sole of the Foot; from the Kings and Princes, to the least and meanest of the Peo∣ple; the Prophet in the next place denounces to them the total Destruction and Overthrow of their State and Kingdom, that they should be transported out of their own Country, and carried Captives into Assyria, where they should continue under a long and deplorable dispersion amongst strange and Idolatrous Na∣tions. And lastly, The Faithful and Penitent amongst them are comforted and supported by the sweet and saving Promises of the Favour and Grace of GOD in their Heavenly King Jesus Christ, to whom in due time all the Elect should be converted and gathered, not only of Israel, but also of the Gentiles, in order to be eternally Blessed in and through him.
The Contents of the Prophet JOEL. IN this Prophecy the People of Judah are first awakened throughly and attentively to consider the most deplorable state of their Country, which was visited by GOD with an ex∣traordinary Drought, and an incredible Swarm of Grashoppers, and other Insects; certain fore-running presages of a dreadful Famine; and consequently seriously exhorted to turn to GOD by Fasting and Prayer, and true Repen∣tance, with Promises of Grace, and the re∣moval of that sad Scourge, with abundant Blessings, in case they did follow the Divine Counsel, declared unto them by the Prophet. To which, according to the style of the Pro∣phets, there is added on this occasion, a full and exact Prophecy of the blessed and flourish∣ing state the Church should enjoy under the Messiah, of the sending of the abundant and liberal Communication of the Holy Ghost to the Elect and Believers; of the preservation and protection of the Church, in the last sad and calamitous Times; of her continuance and condition here upon Earth; of the just and severe Judgment of GOD against all her Enemies; and last of all, of her Eternal Glo∣rification and felicity in Heaven. The Contents of the Book of AMOS. AMOS who was a Shepherd of Tekoah in the Land of Judah, was called by GOD to the Prophetical Function, and in parti∣cular sent to the Ten Tribes or Kingdom of Israel, where by the Command of GOD, he joyntly with Hosea discharged the Function of a Prophet during the Reign of Jeroboam, the 2d. of that Name, Son of Jehoash. This Pro∣phet, after he had denounced to all the Na∣tions bordering upon Palestina, the just Judg∣ments of GOD, because of their enmity and animosity against his People; he comes Chap. 2. ver. 4. to those of Judah, and more par∣ticularly to the Ten Tribes, to whom through∣out all the following Chapters he foretels and denounces the heavy Judgments of GOD, and in very express terms declares to them the entire subversion of their State and Kingdom, by their Enemies Forces, their Captivity and Dispersion amongst strange and far distant Nations, because of the multiplicity and enor∣mity of their Sins, against the first and second Tabel of the Law, and their obstinate hard∣ning of themselves against all the Reproofs and Censures of the Word of GOD, and the many Warnings and Exhortations the Pro∣phets gave them in the Name of GOD to re∣pent and turn unto him, as may be seen by the Contents of the Chapters. All which Prophesies are back'd and confirm'd by several Visions, and many descriptions of the Power and Majesty of GOD. But amongst all these Threatnings and de∣nunciations the LORD promiseth of meer Grace to save some remainder of his People, and to establish the Kingdom of the Messiah, our LORD JESƲS CHRIST, for the good and eternal Salvation of all his Elect, Whether Jews or Gentiles, from Verse 8. of the last Chapter of this Propecy unto the end. Now tho the Greek Translation of the Septuagint, place Amos, between Hosea and Joel; yet the generality of Modern Translators have thought good to retain the same order which the He∣brew Original and Vulgar Latin do observe in the ranking of these Prophets. The Contents of the Book of OBADIAH. TIS much controverted amongst the Learn∣ed when this Prophet lived; but of all, theirs seems to be the most probable Opinion, who make him contemporary with Jeremiah and Ezekiel, when soon after the Taking of Jerusalem, the Edomites committed upon the miserable Jews, all those Cruelties whereof they are here reproved; there being no ground of probability for that Conjecture, who con∣found this Obadiah with that Person of the same Name, of whom mention is made 2 Kings chap. 18. ver. 3. Those who will make this Prophet the Father of Jonah, ought to re∣member, that Jonah, at the beginning of his
Book, calls himself the Son of Amittai, and not of Obadiah. His Prophecy contains first of all a solemn denunciation of the dreadful Judgment of GOD, which was to overtake the Edomites, the Capital and Implacable Enemies of GOD's People, because of their Pride, their Violence, their Inhumanity and Insulting over the Jews in their Calamity, ver. 1, &c. And secondly, a very comfortable and gracious Promise to the Church of GOD, as well of her Conservation and Salvation by JESƲS CHRIST her Redeemer, as concerning the total ruine and overthrow of all her Ene∣mies. The Contents of the Book of JONAH. THis Book contains the wonderful History of the Prophet Jonah, who being cal∣led by GOD to discharge the duty and office of a Prophet to the 10 Tribes or Kingdom of Israel, as may be gathered from 2 Kings 14.25. is here extraordinarily sent by GOD, to the shame and confusion of the Obstinate and hardned Israelites to those of Niniveh, Stangers to the Covenant of Grace, to de∣nounce to them their approaching ruin and subversion, in case they did nor repent. Which Divine Message he (by an evident weakness) endeavouring to avoid, resolves to flee to Tar∣shish; but GOD Chastizing him for his Dis∣obedience, miraculously obligeth him to return to his Duty, and execute the Commission he had charged him with; and by a most asto∣nishing Providence makes him an illustrious Figure of the LORD Jesus Christ, in that be∣ing cast Over-board, to appease the Wrath of GOD, and calm the violent Tempest which threatned Shipwreck to the Vessel in which he endeavoured to make his Escape, he was swal∣lowed by a Whale, who at the end of 3 Days and 3 Nights vomited him up again safe upon dry Land, whereby he was put into a condi∣tion of prosecuting the Commission he was charged with, to denounce the Divine Judg∣ment ready to fall upon the Inhabitants of Niniveh, and thereby to lead them to Repen∣tance. For in like manner JESƲS CHRIST having voluntarily sacrificed, and given up himself to Death, to please the Wrath of GOD awakened against us, and to preserve us, from Eternal Shipwreck, after he had been buried, and lain dead in his Grave, as in the Belly of the Earth, 3 Days and 3 Nights (Matt. 12.40.) came forth and arose from thence the 3d Day, that Repentance and Re∣mission of Sins might be declared and preach∣ed to all the World in his Name. Jonah thus Chastiz'd by GOD, and mira∣culously preserved in the Belly of the Whale, is sent a 2d time to Niniveh; but seeing the Repentance and Conversion of its Inhabitants, whereupon GOD was graciously pleased to spare them, he again shews his great weak∣ness, by being displeased and troubled at it; whereupon the LORD (to a Miracle of Long-suffering) most meekly reproves, instructs and convinces him by the Gourd he had raised in one Night for his Comfort and refreshment. Those Authors who make this Prophet the Son of the Widow of Sarepta, raised from Death to Life by Elijah, 1 Kings 17.22. speak without much ground; they might with more Reason have supposed him the Son of the Shunamite, raised from the dead by Eli∣sha, 2 Kings 4.37. if it did not appear from Sacred Writ, that Shunam (where that Child was born) belonged to the Tribe of Issachar, Josh. 19.18. whereas Jonah was of Gath∣hepher in the Tribe of Zabulun, 2 Kings 14.25. As to the time of his Call, his exerci∣sing the Prophetical Function, and the Mat∣ters here Recorded, it appears from the Pas∣sage we have just now alledged, that we must refer them to the time of the Reign of Jero∣boam the second King of Israel, who Reigned 42 years. The Greek Interpreters (commonly called the Septuagint) place the Books of Jonah and Micha differently from what the Hebrews and we do, for they place Micha before Joel, Oba∣diah and Jonah, and joyn Jonah with Nahum, because they both Prophesied concerning Ni∣niveh, notwithstanding that Jonah lived a great while before the other.
152 Captaine John Bromhill of Black∣wall in the County of Middlesex Gent. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
JONAH Cast Over-board. The Prophet Jonah being swallowed by a Whale, continues three Days in his Belly, and afterwards is cast up by it on dry Land. GOD having commanded the Prophet Jo∣nah to go to Niniveh, to denounce to that great City,Anno Mundi 3197. before Christ 807. That he was resolved to destroy it, be∣cause of the Sins of its Inhabitants, or (as the Scripture expresseth it) because their Wickedness was come up before him. Jonah instead of obey∣ing this Command of GOD went away to Tar∣shish, and being come there, embarked him∣self for Joppa. But GOD, to make it appear, that nothing undertaken against his Will can take effect, and that he accomplisheth his designs, even by the resistance and opposition Men make against them, raised a great Tempest, which endan∣ger'd to Shipwreck the Vessel in which Jonah was, and putting the Mariners into a great Consternation, they cast forth the Goods into the Sea, to lighten it. Jonah acknowledging the Hand of GOD in this extraordinary Tem∣pest, and being grieved for his Disobedience and Rebellion against the LORD, was gone down into the Hold, where he fell fast asleep, his sound Sleep being an effect rather of his Trouble and Sorrow, than of any satisfaction or assurance in the midst of so imminent a dan∣ger, into which he had not only plung'd him∣self, but all those that were in the Vessel with him. The Master of the Ship, not thinking it fit that he should lie and Sleep, whilst all the Ships-Crew and Passengers were either labour∣ing for Life to save the Vessel, or praying to their Gods, call'd upon him to arise, and call upon his GOD, that they might be saved from perishing. But at last perceiving that the vi∣olence of the Storm eluded and frustrated all their Endeavours, and that the fierceness of it still increased more and more; some of the Company supposing, that this unusual Storm was caused by the extraordinary Crimes of some that were in the Vessel, propounded to cast Lots, to know who was the Author and occasion of their Danger. This Proposal being generally approv'd of, it was put in practice, and the Lot fell upon Jonah; whereupon they earnestly demanding of him, Who he was, and what he had done, to stir up the Anger of Heaven against them and himself? Jonah very freely confest all, and that he was the only cause of the Storm that still tossed them. And demanding further of him, What they should do to him that the Tem∣pest might cease? He answered them, That if they desired good Weather and a calm Sea, they must throw him Over-board, and so by his Death procure their own Safety. The Master and Ships-Crew being not a lit∣tle surpriz'd at this free and unconcern'd Con∣fession, by which he doom'd himself to Death, conceiv'd more Pity for him than he seem'd to have for himself, and endeavour'd by Row∣ing hard to reach the Land; but seeing that all their Strivings were in vain, and that the Sea wrought high against them, they at last cast him into the Sea, (tho sore against their Wills,) and appealing to GOD, That they were not guilty of his Blood, whom they would so gladly have saved. The Mariners no sooner perform'd this, but the Sea ceased from raging; and the LORD at the same time had prepared a Whale to swallow Jonah, who being in the Whales-Belly, and calling to mind his own Disobedience, and the great and miraculous Mercy of GOD to∣wards him, Sung Praises unto the LORD from that living Grave; where after he had conti∣nued three Days, the Whale (at GOD's Command) Vomited him out upon the dry Land. Thus we see, that Life came forth victorious and triumphant from the very Entrails of Death, to be a lively Representation of that stupendous and ineffable Victory, which JESUS CHRIST, Eight hundred Years after, was to obtain against Death and Hell: When after he had freely offer'd himself to be cast into the Sea, for the Salvation of the World; and after he had been three Days and three Nights in the Heart of the Earth, he arose from thence full of Life, by a glorious Resurrection. And we may here very well say with the Fathers, How Miraculous must those Truths be, where∣of the Types and Figures only are such great Miracles?
The Ninevites Repent. The Inhabitants of Nineveh Repent, at the Preaching of the Prophet JONAH. AFter that GOD had so wonderfully pre∣serv'd Jonah in, and afterwards deli∣ver'd him from the Whales-Belly,The same Year 3197. he commanded him a second time to go to Nineveh, and Preach to that Great City, and to declare the Com∣mission he had charged with him. Jonah now no more cast about, how he might avoid the Command laid upon him, but by his ready Obedience made it appear, how much he had profited by the Affliction GOD had sent him, and that he had learnt never any more to op∣pose himself against the Divine Will, though never so difficult or thwarting of his own. In this disposition he went (contrary to the custom of all other Prophets) to Preach to a People that were Heathen Idolaters, that there∣in also he might be a Figure of Jesus Christ, who in time to come was to Convert the Gen∣tiles. Now Nineveh was a great City, which (as the Scripture tells us) was three Days Journey in length. When Jonah was advanc'd into the City about a Days Journey, he lift∣ed up his Voice, and declared, That yet forty Days, and Nineveh should be destroyed. The Inhabitants being terrified with this Denunciation, believed the Word of GOD by his Prophet, and with an humble Faith (which according to the Word of our Saviour Jesus Christ, will prove the condemnation of those Ʋnbelievers that do not Repent) they pro∣claimed a Fast, and put on Sackcloth, from the greatest of them to the least, to the end that their Sorrow and Repentance might be as ge∣neral, as their Corruption and Sins had been; and that as no Age, Sex, nor Quality had been free from contributing to the Guilt; so none might be exempted from the Penance, that might make Attonement for it. The King himself being strangely Alarmed with the News of this sudden Destruction, threatning Him and his Subjects, came down from his Throne, and quitted all his Royal Robes and Ornaments, to put on Sackcloth, and sit in Ashes: And not contented to ex∣cite his Subjects to Repentance by his Exam∣ple only, he published an Edict, and caused it to be proclaimed through the City, That neither Man nor Beast, Herd nor Flock, should eat or drink any thing; and that all his Sub∣jects should apply themselves to cry mightily to GGD, and every one of them turn from their Evil ways, and the Violence that was in their Hands: For who can tell (said he) but GOD will take pity of us, and turn away from his fierce Anger, that we perish not? Thus a whole City, and so great a City as Nineveh was, humbling and abasing them∣selves before the Eyes of GOD, from the King upon the Throne, unto the poorest and most contemptible Subject, moved GOD's Mercy and Bowels in Pity towards them; who seeing them changed from what they were, he also changed the Sentence of Death pronounced a∣gainst them, as having done it only for this end, to make them by their serious and hear∣ty Repentance to prevent the Punishment, where∣with his Justice threatned them. This Repentance of the Ninevites is a great and illustrious Example of sincere and hearty Repentance; and therefore we ought often to set it before our Eyes, that as we have been and still are Followers of them in Sin and Wicked∣ness; so we might endeavour to imitate and ex∣press their Repentance. And this the rather, because our Saviour JE∣SUS CHRIST assures us, That this Example of the Ninevites, shall confound and con∣demn all those, who living under the Preach∣ing of the Gospel, do still continue in Impeni∣tence and Ʋnbelief; because the Menaces he has pronounced in the Gospel against Impeni∣tent Sinners, ought without comparison to be more dreadful and terrible to us, than those of Jonah were to the Heathen Inhabitants of Nineveh.
153 The Right Honourable Charles Lord Viscount Fanshaw &ca. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
154 Godfrey Richards of St. Martins in the ffields in middlesex Esq. Providour to their Majestyes Traine of Artillery in Ireland. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
JONAH's GOURD. GOD shews Jonah by a sensible Example, how great a Love he has for Men, and how grievous it is to him, when they by their Sins oblige him to Punish them. JONAH perceiving that GOD had re∣peaed his Sentence pronounced against Ni∣neveh, and repented of the Evil,The same Year 3197. he had declared by him he would bring upon them, was exceed∣ingly displeas'd and angred at it, out of fear that he would be accounted a False Prophet, because the Judgment he had denounced a∣gainst the City, was not executed according to his Word. Tho' indeed he was very far from being a False Prophet; for in declaring that Nineveh should be destroyed in Forty Days, he declared nothing but the very truth: For (as St. Austin excellently observes) tho' that City subsisted still as to its Buildings and Walls, yet was it most happily destroyed by the Repentance and Conversion of its Inhabitants; for wicked, licentious, riotous and haughty Ni∣neveh was destroy'd and overthrown, and an humble, penitent, and self-denying City now supply'd its place. But the Prophet Jonah had suffered, the fear he had of being accounted a False Prophet, to take so deep an impression upon him; and upon this occasion had so far given himself up to Grief and Discontent, that complaining to GOD of this his unseasonable Mercy, (as his Passion represented it to him) he beseeched him to take his Life from him, because it seemed far more eligible to him to die, than to live. The LORD with great Long-suffer∣ing, bearing with this sinful weakness of his Servant Jonah, only demanded of him, Whe∣ther he did well to be angry? Appealing to himself about the unreasonableness of this his Sullen Temper. But Jonah (who was not yet cured by this mild Check the LORD had given him, to make him reflect upon his unseemly Carriage) being come out of the City, made himself a Booth on the East-side of it, and rested himself there under the Shadow of it, to see what would become of the City. And GOD (to make his little Hermitage more cool, and sha∣dy) caused a Guord to spring up in one Night, which by the next Morning covered his Bower, affording him a very cool and grateful shade. Jonah was very glad of this unexpected and seasonable Refreshment, but it prov'd very short; for GOD had prepared a Worm, which eating into the Root of the Gourd, it soon wi∣thered, and left Jonah expos'd to the violent heat of the Sun-beams; and that the more, be∣cause GOD sent a vehement East-Wind, which (together with the heat of the Sun beating upon his Head) made him faint, and increa∣sing his discontented Humor, he a second time earnestly desired of GOD he might die. But GOD taking occasion from this Passio∣nate transport of the Prophet Jonah, to make him apprehend, how▪ much grief and trouble it occasion'd to him, when he found himself forced to punish the Crimes of Mankind, and how great a Violence it would have been to his Goodness and Inclination to pardon and pass by Sins, had he been obliged to destroy that great City, demanded again of Jonah, Whether he did well to be angry? Who answer'd, That he did well to be angry unto Death. This peevish and froward Answer of Jonah did not hinder the LORD from mildly endea∣vouring to shew him his exorbitant Carriage in this point, by this most sensible and convin∣cing Remonstrance: Consider Jonah what thou dost, thy own Behaviour does condemn thee; Thou hast had pity on the Gourd, for the which thou didst not labour, neither madest it grow, which came up in a Night, and perished in a Night. And wouldst thou have me to have no Concern or Pity for Nineveh, that great City, wherein are more than Sixscore Thousand Innocent Children, that cannot discern between their Right Hand and their Left? This Relation is an excellent Looking-Glass, most fully representing to us the great Mercy and Long suffering of GOD, and the strange excesses that Pride and Passion carry Men unto; for it was Pride which transported Jonah to Anger, and which made him, that he could not endure to bear the imputation of a False Pro∣phet.
The CONTENTS of the Book of MICAH. THE Prophet MICAH Prophecied at the same time as Isaiah, and for substance treats of the same Matters as he doth, and sometimes in the very same Words, as will appear by comparing the first Verses of both their Books, and the Matters therein contain∣ed; it having pleased GOD, that these his two Servants should speak as from one Mouth, to the end, that by this means their Doctrin might gain the greater Authority, by per∣ceiving them inspir'd by one and the same Spi∣rit; and to the end that as by the Mouth of two Witnesses every word is ratified and con∣firm'd, so the common deposition of them both might suffice to render the Obstinate and Rebel∣lious inexcusable. The Prophet in this Book, on the one hand (as may be seen in the Contents of the several Chapters) doth very harshly censure and re∣prove the enormous and multiplied Sins of Ju∣dah and Israel, for which he denounceth a∣gainst them the just and severe Judgments of GOD, and particularly the dissipation and de∣struction they should suffer by the Forces of the Assyrians and Chaldeans; and on the o∣ther hand, turning himself to the true Belie∣vers, he comforts them with the Promise, That GOD in his time would deliver them from their Captivity in Babylon; and above all, by most clear and exquisit Predictions of their Spiritual Deliverance by Jesus Christ their King, whose coming he proclaims, specifies Bethlehem for the place of his Birth, represents the abundant Blessings, Graces, and Benefits he would vouchsafe unto his Church, which he was to gather to himself from amongst both Jews and Gentiles, by the Preaching of the Gospel, and the efficacious Operation of the Ho∣ly Ghost, assuring her (The Church) not only of her Redemption and Eternal Salvation, but also of the utter ruin and perdition of all her Enemies. The Contents of the Book of NAHUM. IT does not appear from any part of Holy Writ, when NAHUM the Prophet lived and Prophecied: Some Authors make him Con∣temporary with King Jotham; Others place him under the Reign of Manasseh, and others again under Josiah; but those seem to speak with most probability who refer his Prophecies to the end of the Reign of King Hezekiah, or to the beginning of that of Manasseh, about 90 Years after Jonah, at whose Preaching the Inhabitants of Nineveh being Converted, GOD had suspended the execution of his Threatning, and the effusion of his Judgments upon them. But being afterwards returned to their former Course, and relaps'd into Impiety and Cor∣ruption, and especially by their persecuting and oppressing the People of GOD, all the Prophecies of Nahum tend only to foretel the Ruin and Destruction of that City, and con∣sequently of the King and Kingdoms of Assy∣ria, whereof Nineveh was the Capital City, and accordingly the Deliverance of the People of GOD, from under the Tyranny of the As∣syrians, for to strengthen them under their Suf∣ferings, and comfort them by this Hope which the Name of this Prophet also imports; for Nahum in Hebrew signifies a Comforter. S. Paul alledges one Passage out of this Prophet, Rom. 10.15. And how shall they Preach, except they be sent? As it is written, How beautiful are the Feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad Tidings of Good things? The CONTENTS of the Book of HABAKKUK. THE Prophet HABAKKƲK having undertaken to justifie the Conduct of GOD, in the Government and Administration of the World, and the Judgments he dispenseth to his People, foretels that GOD was resolved to suffer the Jews (as a Punishment for their heinous and multiplied Sins and Iniquities) to fall into the Hands of the Chaldeans; but so as that they themselves, in their Turns, should not escape unpunish'd for their Wickedness and Cruelty. In the Third Chapter the Prophet joyns to these Predictions, a very ardent Prayer, in which he entreats the LORD, That the Ca∣lamities and Miseries which then began to in∣volve Israel and Judah, and which would in a short time be greatly increased, might prove to them only a Fatherly Chastisement, and not to their utter ruin and final destruction.
We cannot certainly determine in what time this Prophet lived and prophesied. Some refer him to the time of Hezekiah; Others make him contemporary with Josiah or his Children; but many think that he flourished under the long and unhappy Reign of Ma∣nasseth, because the Sins he reprehends in the Jews, are much of the nature of those that were in Vogue in that Prince's Reign; and as it appears from a Part of Chap. 1. ver. 6. that he prophesied before Nebuchadnezzar had taken the City of Jerusalem; so it is pro∣bable that he lived in those times, when the Long-suffering of GOD began to draw to an end with the Jews, and some short space before their desolation by the Chaldeans. We find some Passages of this Prophet, al∣ledged in the Books of the New Testament, as Acts 13.41. Rom. 1.17. Gal. 3.11. Heb. 10.38. The Contents of the Book of ZEPHANIAH. THE Prophet ZEPHANIAH is one of the lesser Prophets, who prophesied before the Captivity of Babylon, to stop and prevent, if it had been possible, the approaching ruin of the Jews, and to invite and exhort them to prevent the Judgments of God by their timely Repentance: For the three following Prophets lived and discharged their Functions about the time that the Jews returned from their Capti∣vity in Chaldea. This Prophet lived in the Reign of Josiah, about the same time when Jeremiah entred upon his Prophetical Office, and were both of them contemporary with Huldah the Pro∣phetess. In this his Prophesie he foretels to Jerusalem, and the whole Tribe of Judah, that because of their Idolatry, and other heinous Sins, they should be destroyed by the Chaldeans; and in the mean time he exhorts them to amend their Lives, adding also some Predictions and Denunciations against Foreign Nations; and afterwards falls again upon the enormous Crimes and perverse Obstina∣cy of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem; and the Judgments they were to expect from the Hand of GOD: And lastly, He exhorts all the good and faithful amongst them to Pati∣ence, and comforts them with Evangelical Promises concerning the gathering and ampli∣fication of the Church, in the time of the Messiah, by the Calling in of the Gentiles; declaring also how GOD would sanctifie, bless and glorifie them, by destroying and extermi∣nating all their Enemies. The Contents of the Book of HAGGAI. HAGGAI, ZACHARIAH and MALACHI, did all three of them live and prophecy at the time when the Jews were delivered from their Captivity in Baby∣lon. They exhort the People very earnestly to rebuild the Temple, and the City of Jerusa∣lem: For after that they had laid the Founda∣tion of the Temple, every one of them apply'd themselves to the building of their own Houses, and by a careless neglect left the Building of the House of GOD at a stand; besides which, other hindrances also hapning from abroad, did much stop the advancing of the Work, as may be seen Ezra 4.1, &c. and 6.1, 3, &c. But at last the earnest Instances and reiterated Exhor∣tations of these Prophets had so good an effect, that the people having taken in hand again the Building of the Temple (which had been stopt and interrupted from the time that they had laid the Foundations of it, full 42▪ years, accord∣ing to the Companions of some, tho others say not so long) they finished it within four years time. See Ezra 2.14, 15, &c. John 2.20. The principal Arguments and Motives the Prophet Haggai makes use of in this Book, to excite the Jews to set upon the Work again, and bring it to perfection▪ were first of all be∣cause it was but reasonable that Divine and Heavenly Things, which concern the Worship and Service of GOD, and his Glory, should be preferred in our Care and Endeavours, before all Temporal and Earthly Concerns whatsoever, and that in case of failure herein, they might expect that GOD would justly refuse them his Blessing upon their outward Affairs, which they preferr'd before his Interest. And in the next place he urges this Exhortation, because the dig∣nity and preheminence of this Second Temple would by far surpass the Glory of the First, chiefly, because Jesus Christ, the Son of GOD, would honour it with his presence in the Flesh, and his Preaching, and would continue from that time by his Spirit and Grace to dwell and take up his abode in his Church; And thirdly and lastly, because GOD would so favour and further the Work with his Blessing, that it should be finish'd in a short time. Two months after that Haggai had began to prophesie, he was second∣ed by Zachariah, who also very earnestly exci∣ted and exhorted his backward and fearful Countrymen, to continue and carry on the Work.
The Contents of the Book of ZECHARIAH. ZEchariah is the second in order of those Prophets, who preached to the Jews af∣ter their Return from the Babylonish Captivi∣ty; he began to Prophesie two Months after Haggai in the eighth Month of the second year of King Darius, He was joyned with Hag∣gai and Malachi in the same Commission, to animate the Jews couragiously to carry on the Building of the Temple, and the re-establish∣ing of the pure Worship of GOD, as appears from Ezra, Chap. 5. ver. 1. This Book treats of many excellent Matters, whereof these are the chief: First of all, he exhorts the Jews, who were returned out of Chaldea into Palestina, to repentance and amendment of their Lives. Secondly, He relates several exquisite Visions, by which GOD represents to them, how tenderly he had chosen them for his own People, and in parti∣cular, how graciously he had delivered them from the Babylonian Bondage, with Promises from time to come to take them into his holy Protection, in case they did seriously repent, and finish the Building of the Temple. Thirdly, He foretels the destruction of the Enemies of Gods People, the Coming of the Messiah, his Death and Passion, his Kingdom and Priestly Office, and the Blessings he would shower down upon his Church, now enlarged and increased by the Calling and Conversion of the Gentiles. Many Passages of this Prophet are found quoted in the New Testament, as well by Jesus Christ himself, as by his Evangelists and Apostles, Mat. 21.5. and 26.15, 31. and 27.9. Mark 14.27, Joh. 12.15. and 19.27. Ephes, 4.25. Rev. 1.7. Which ought the more to excite and animate to the reading and serious minding of this Prophet. The Contents of the Book of MALACHI. THis Word MALACHI signifies, My Angel, or My Messenger▪ from whence some infer, that he was not a mortal Man, but rather an Angel sent from Heaven, to conclude and shut up the Prophecy of the Old Law; as the Ministry of Angels had been often formerly employed, as well at the publication of the Law, as in many Revelations of old made to the Patriarchs. Others are of Opinion, that by this Name we are to understand Ezra the Priest and Scribe, who is so called, to express the Office and Function GOD had committed to him, and because of the excellent Doctrine he sets down in this Book. But because Haggai is also called the Angel or Ambassadour of the LORD, chap. 1. ver. 13. its most probable to suppose this Malachi to have been an holy Prophet, contemporary with Zecharia and Ezra; and (according to the order of Time) the last of the Lesser Prophets, and he who of all the rest came nearest to our Saviours coming in the Flesh; for he did not begin to Prophecy till after the finishing of the Second Temple, and that the City of Jerusalem was rebuilt and raised from its Ruins. In these his Prophesies, he at first reproves the hardned Jews for their Ingratitude towards GOD, who had bestowed so many and so great Benefits upon them, in bringing them back again to their own Country, and setting up his Service again amongst them: He reprehends and checks the Priests, for having corrupted the Service of GOD and all the People of the mul∣tiplicity and enormity of their Sins, and par∣ticularly by their profaning the Sacredness of Marriage, by joyning themselves to strange and idolatrous Women, in taking to themselves a great many Wives, and licentiously divorcing their lawful Ones; and in general, for their Blasphemies against GOD, and the hardness of their Heart, with a denunciation of those Cha∣stisements and Judgments of GOD, which be∣cause of all these Enormities did hang over their Heads, with an earnest Exhortation to Amend∣ment and Repentance. And to comfort the Good and Faithful, he foretels the Coming of Jesus Christ, and of S. John the Baptist his Fore-runner; and that Christ was to abolish the Sha∣dows and Firgures of the Law, and instead thereof bring in everlasting and essential Righ∣teousness, and throughout the whole World set up the Evangelical Worship of the New Cove∣nant in Spirit and in Truth. And as he exhorts the People of GOD to an holy Conversion, and a due perseverance in the true Service and Worship of GOD; so likewise every where, throughout this Book, he threatens the Profane and Hypocrites with severe Punishments. We find divers Texts of this Prophet alledged in the New Testament, Mat. 11.10, 14. and 17.10, 11, 12, 13. Mark 1.2. and 9.12. Luke 1.16, 17, and 7. ver. 27. Rom. 9.13. The End of the OLD TESTAMENT.
THE HISTORY OF THE New Testament; BEING AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE Incarnation, Nativity, Life, Actions, Death and Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of Our Lord and Saviour JESUS CHRIST. WITH A Summary of His Discourses or Sermons, His Miraculous Cures, &c. ILLUSTRATED WITH SCULPTURES, Aptly and Acurately Delineated and Engraven by Skilful Artists, for the better and more lively Representation thereof. Translated from the WORKS of the Learned LE SIEUR DE ROYAUMONT. LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCIX.
A Summary of the New TESTAMENT. THE Word TESTAMENT is of a Latin Original; and of greater ex∣tent in its first signification, than is that in which it is commonly now ta∣ken, in ordinary Affairs: It's often used in the Translations of the Holy Writings, to express the Greek Word Diatheke, which generally sig∣nifies in our Language, The Will of the Dead; but the Greek Interpreters of the Old Testa∣ment, and the Writers of the New, do com∣monly use it to answer the Hebrew Word Berith, which properly signifies a Contract or Covenant. Thus does this Word set forth the Covenant which GOD vouchsafed to enter into with Men, on performance of which, they were to have Ever∣lasting Life. Now GOD made two Covenants with Man, the Old and the New; the Old, is that which GOD made with the first Man; and in him with all his Posterity, before his Fall; in which he promis'd him Eternal Life, and gave him the Pledges and Seal of it in the Tree of Life; under condition of a constant Obedience and perfect Observance of his Law: And therefore 'tis call'd the Covenant of Nature, because GOD made it between him and Man, at the first Establishment of Nature; it being such as the Nature of Man, created after God's own Image, and his dependance on him, necessarily required. It's also call'd the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of the Law; because it exacted the Righteousness of Works, in a perfect performance of the Law. And GOD would have this his Law repeated, and represen∣ted to the Israelites by the Ministry of Moses; to the end, that observing that this Condition was generally violated by all, and from that time no body was able to accomplish it, they should be oblig'd to search their Salvation in another Co∣venant, term'd a New one; and which consists in God's vouchsafing to set up his own Son, to be a Mediator between him and us, to reconcile us to himself by the price of his Blood; pro∣mising everlasting Life to all those who shall ap∣ply it, and receive him with an obedient Faith; and this is called the Covenant of Grace. These two Covenants, the Old and the New, being oppos'd, as Hagar and Sarah, Sinai and Sion, do essentially differ from one another, For as the Law is the Contract of the first, so the Gospel is the Treaty of the second, to which the Name of Testament does more particularly agree in the strict signification of Lawyers; which becomes only of validity by the Death of the Testator, according as St. Paul says, Heb. 9.16. We may also distinguhsh it in respect of its different Oeconomies into Old and New; This comprehends all the Administration which preceded the Manifestation and Coming of the Mediator. The first Promise was made to our first Pa∣rents immediately after their Sin, Gen. 3.15. And 'tis not to be doubted, but the Sacrifices and other Holy Ceremonies, which were afterwards observed till Abraham's Time, were also subser∣vient to the Order of GOD; and by his Insti∣tution to this same Oeconomy, as well to prefi∣gure the promised Seed, as to denote the man∣ner in which it should bruise the Serpent's Head. And this is the cause why Abel's Sacri∣fice was approved of from his Faith, Heb. 11.4. and our Saviour Christ is called the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World, Rev. 13.8. This Promise was renew'd more particularly to Abraham and his Posterity, with this assurance, That the Mediator should be of it, and that in his Seed should be blest all the Nations of the Earth, which GOD wou'd signifie and seal to him by Circumcision, Rom. 4.11. To which Moses gave the last stroak by the diverse Ceremonies of his Establishment, which in their Evangelical use, were the Shadows of good things to come, Heb. 10.1. This denotes the Administration and Form, given to it by the Coming of Jesus Christ in the Flesh, the Son of GOD, and Mediator of the New Covenant, who has reconciled us to GOD, actually paid the price of our Redemption, and obtain'd for us an Everlasting Deliverance. And tho' that in sub∣stance they make but one, seeing that in both one and the other, the Remission of Sins, and Everlasting Life are promis'd by Faith in the Mediator; yet are they distinguish'd by diffe∣rent Dispensations; that of the New being far clearer, less clouded with Shadows and Figures, and of greater extent, seeing all People are indifferently therein received, and have a part: We may call the first, The Testament of Pro∣mise, and the other, The Testament of the Accomplishment. Moreover under these Names
of Old and New Testament, are often under∣stood the Books, Titles, and sacred Monu∣ments, which contain the Creation and Oeco∣nomy of the Covenant; according to which sense the Books of this Volume, which make the second Tome of the Holy Bible, are called in their Inscription the New Testament; in opposition to the Books of Moses and the Pro∣phets, in which the Mediator of the Covenant was promised, and in which was exactly describ'd, from what Stem and Tribe he was to be born, when he should take on him our Flesh; what he was to do and suffer to reconcile Men to GOD, to obtain for them Eternal Salvation, and to lead 'em thereunto. And it was most cer∣tainly foretold and prefigur'd in the Books of the Old Testament, That the Messias or Me∣diator, who was to reconcile Men to GOD, should be his only Son, GOD of GOD, Light of Light, Very GOD of very GOD, Psal. 45.8, &c. 110.1. Esa. 95. Jerem. 23.6, &c. That in the fulness of time he was to take our Nature on him, being to be born of a Virgin, Gen. 3.15. Esai. 7.14. and of the Posterity of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Juda and David, Gen. 21.12. & 22.18. & 49.9, 10. 2 Sam. 7.12. Esa. 11.1. Jerem. 23.5. That he should be born at Bethlehem, Mich. 5.1. in the time when the Scepter should be taken from Juda, Gen. 49.10. Esa. 11.1. Dan. 9.24. That being born, he should fly into Egypt, Hos. 11.2. should be af∣terwards brought up at Nazareth, Esai. 11.1. and should have Elias for his Forerunner: who was to preach in the Wilderness, and prepare his way, Esa. 40.3. Mal. 3.1. & 4.5. That he was to begin his preaching of the Go∣spel in Galilee, Esa. 9.1, 2. and seal and confirm his Doctrine by great Miracles, Esa. 35.5. That he should make his Entrance into Jerusalem, Riding on the Foa of an Ass, Psal. 118.25. Zach. 9.9. That he was to be betray'd by one of his Disciples, Psal. 41.10. & 55.14. sold for Thirty pieces of Silver, Zach. 11.12. beaten, scourged, derided, outragiously Spit on, Esa. 50.6. and treated as an Offender, Esa. 53.12. That he was to suffer all this for our Sins, Esa. 53.3, 4. Should offer himself for a propi∣tiatory Sacrifice to expiate them, Psal. 40.7, 8. Esa. 53.6.10. and should then feel great Ago∣nies in his Soul, Psal. 22.2. Esa. 53.11. That he should be shamefully Crucifi'd and Nailed to a Cross, Deut. 21.23. Psal. 22.17. Esa. 53.8. That he should be exposed on the Cross, to cruel Mockings, and have Gall and Vinegar offered him to drink, Psal. 22.8. & 69.22. That Lots were to be cast for his Garments, Psal. 22.19· That not one of his Bones should be broken, no more than those of the Paschal Lamb, Exod. 12.46. Psal. 34.21. And that his Side should be pierced, Zach. 12.10. That he should dye of a Death equally shameful and dolorous, to make the propitiation for our Sins, and to make us righte∣ous, Esa. 53.8. Dan. 9.24, 26. Yet was he to obtain a decent and honourable Burial, Es. 53.9. That he should suffer no Corruption in his Grave, Psal. 16.10. but he delivered thence the third Day by a Glorious Resurrection from the Dead, Esa. 53.10. John 1.17. That he should ascend triumphantly into Heaven, and there sit at the Right Hand of GOD, Psal. 68.19. & 110.1. Whence he was to send his Holy Spirit, Joel 2.28. Now all these things are recited, and descri∣bed by the Evangelists and Apostles in the New Testament, as hapning and accomplish'd pun∣ctually in our LORD and Saviour Jesus Christ. So that the Summary and Contents of this Book, consist chiefly in the Description of his Person and Office, the better to discover the Benefits we receive from him. As to his Person, we are taught, That he is very GOD, Coessential and Coeternal with the Father; and real Man, like unto us, Sin only excepted by the indivisible and inseparable Ʋnion of these two Natures, the Divine and Humane, in personal Ʋnity without mixture and confusion of their Properties. His Divine Nature is describ'd, and clearly prov'd by the Names and Titles given to him, of GOD; True GOD; GOD blessed over all; LORD, or Jehovah; of the only Son of GOD; of the Prince of Life; LORD of Glory; LORD over all, Sovereign Judge of the Quick and Dead; King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. It's confirm'd and denoted by the essential Pro∣perties of the Divinity, which are attributed to it; as Eternity, Immensity, Omnipresence, Omnipotency, and Omnisciency. It's prov'd from the Operations, and Divine Actions, of which its describ'd to be the Principle, the Source and Author; as are the Creation, and Preser∣vation of all things in their state; the Election of Men to Eternal Life, the Institution of Men to the Holy Ministry and Sacraments in his Church, the Communication of the Holy Spi∣rit to his Children; their Regeneration, their Redemption from the Power of the Devil; the Resurrection and Enlivening of all the Dead at his Voice; his sitting at the Right Hand of the Father; the general Judgment, for which
and he shall come again at the end of the World. To which we may add so many different and real Miracles, which he wrought by his own Power, and which his Disciples also perform'd in his Name, for the confirmation of the Gospel. Its also moreover prov'd by the sacred, religi∣ous, and Divine Rites, which are due to him, of aih, Reliance, Invocation, and Adoration; and therefore 'tis that we are baptized into his Name, as well as the Fathers, and Holy Spi∣rits. His Humane Nature is also sufficiently represented unto us in the Holy Writings; see∣ing he's there denoted to be Born of the Seed of David, according to the Flesh; conceived of the Holy Spirit in the Virgins Womb, whence he took his Humane Nature in a Supernatural manner; ended with a real Humane Body, like ours, and with a rational Soul; so that after the manner of other Men, he was liable to Hunger, Thirst, Heat, and Cold, pains of Body, and anxiety of Mind, exposed to all the perturbati∣on of Human Affections, Anger, Joy, and Sad∣ness. As to what concerns his Office, for the dis∣charge of which his Father sent him into this lower World, its Threefold, conformable to the Surname of Christ (which is to say) ANOIN∣TED; Prophetical, Sacerdotal, and Royal, according as under the Old Testament the Un∣ction did particularly belong to these three Dig∣nities of Prophet, Priest, and King. He exercis'd here below his Office of Pro∣phet, as well by himself as his Disciples; and especially by the Twelve Apostles, which he had chosen. In the Days of his Flesh he preach'd himself the Gospel, teaching, That he was the Messias, and the promis'd Redeemer, and that to have part in the great Salvation he brought, Men must believe in him by a lively Faith, and turn to GOD by a sincere Repentance. To this effect he cited the Law, and vindicated and cleared it from the false Glosses, and vicious Explications which the Scribes and Pharisees gave it; to the end, That in this Glass Men might the better discover their Imperfections and Failings, and be sensible of the necessity of a more exact Righteousness than that of Works, to stand before GOD; and learn to render him a more perfect Obedience, and more sincere than that which their hypocritical Masters had shewed them. He confirm'd the Truth of his Doctrine by so many Miracles; he purposed it with such Evidence, Grace, and Clearness; he grounded it▪ so firmly on the Authority of Moses, and the Prophets, that his Enemies could not contradict him, but by a Spirit of Fury, and Hardness of Heart. After his Assumption into Glory, and his Triumphant Ascension into Heaven, he sent his Apostles throughout all the World, to preach Faith and Repentance in his Name; and to call indifferently all People to the participation of his Benefits, and enjoyment of his Salvation. Of which they faithfully acquitted themselves as long as they liv'd, both by Word of Mouth, and Writing, especially in their Epistles, wich make up a great part of the Books of the New Testa∣ment, which are to be to the End of the World, a standing Rule of Doctrine in the Church. Our Lord has exercis'd his Priestly Office, when having duly sanctified himself on Earth, he of his own Will offered himself in our place, as a Sacrifice, without Spot or Blemish, and suffer∣ed for us both in his Soul and Body the punish∣ment due to our Sins, and Offered himself a Pro∣pitiatory Sacrifice to GOD his Father, for the Expiation of all our Transgressions, by the bit∣ter, shameful, and cursed Death of the Cross; And therefore as he bore our Sins, they being laid on him, to discharge us of them; so GOD will impute to us this his Satisfaction, and the Merit of his Obedience and Death, to Crown it in us with Immortality and Glory. And as the High-Priest under the Law, after the Oblation of the Sacrifice in the Outparts of the Temple, carried the Blood into the Holy place, to appear before GOD in the Name of all the People; so our great High-Priest having acquitted himself in every respect here below as in the Out-parts of the great Temple of the Universe of this first part of his Priesthood, (which consists in the Of∣fering up of himself on the Cross and in the en∣tire Satisfaction which he made to the Justice of GOD for all our Sins,) is entred into the Hea∣venly Sanctuary, by vertue of his Blood, and is set down at the Right Hand of his Father, to represent continually to him the efficacy and price of it, and to obtain for us the application of it by his Holy Spirit, to our entire Justification, for the Remission of all our Sins, and to make there perpetual Intercession for us. And as to what concerns his Office and Fun∣ction of King, he has partly acquitted himself of that here below; when by his Death, he has deliver'd us from the Tyranny and Violence of our Enemies, having given several Proofs of his Power and Royal Authority, when he con∣strain'd the Daemons to leave the Bodies of those they possessed; when he healed the Sick of
all Distempers, when he called the Dead out of their Graves; when he appeased the Storms, and calm'd the Tempests; when he drove out of the Temple those who polluted the holiness of that place by an infamous TRAFIC, and in fine, when he made his Triumphant (tho humble) entrance into Jerusalem. But especially in his glorious Exaltation, he now exercises this Regal Power from the highest Heavens; whence he guides and governs his Church, by his Word and Spirit; he gathers it, protects it powerfully and miraculously in the World amongst all its Enemies, and in despite of their rage and fury; the Gates of Hell not being able to pre∣vail against it: He rebukes and overthrows every Power which rises against it; he con∣strains the most Obdurate, who refuse to adore him, to become his Footstool, till at length he shall return visibly from Heaven at the last day in the end of the World, to judge the Living and the Dead, to put the last hand to the per∣fect Redemption and Eternal glorification of his Church in the Kingdom of Heaven; to de∣stroy by the Resurrection the last Enemy, which is Death; and to throw down all the wicked both in Body and Soul, with the Devils and Evil Angels, into the abyss of eternal Flames. And here is near upon the Summary of what's contain'd in the Books of the New Testament. Would we follow the Order, according to which they be rang'd, we may distinguish them into Historical, Didactic, and Prophetical; as are divided sometimes those of the Old Testa∣ment, into Historical and Prophetical. But to make Two Parts of them, we ought to divide them into Narratives or Histories, and into Dogmatics or Doctrinals; because some of them recide Histories and Events, and others treat of Articles and chief Heads of Doctrine. For al∣tho these do sometimes relate Events and Pieces of History, and those be also fill'd and sprink∣led with several Doctrines and salutary Instru∣ctions; yet is this division and partition made in respect of the Order which is respectively observ'd in reference to what is chiefly treated of. The Narrative Books or Histories of the New Testament, treat either of things which have been already done or hapned, or of those which were then to come to pass. The things done and hapned are of two kinds, for they are either of what has hapned to our Saviour. Christ himself (which is to say) of what he has done, what he has suffered, and whatever has befallen him since his Birth, to his Resurrection and glori∣ous Ascension; and all, or as much as was ne∣cessary for us to know in order to salvation, be∣ing contain'd in the Four Evangelists, written under the particular and immediate inspira∣tion of the Spirit of GOD by the Four Evan∣gelists, (S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. John;) or of what has hapned to his Holy Apostles, in the first establishment of the Chri∣stian Church, related by S. Luke in the Book of their Acts. The Events of uturity have been represented prophetically by S. John in his Revelations; which contains in divers Visi∣ons, a summary Revital of what was to hap∣pen to the Church of Christ, from his Ascension into Heaven, to the end of the World. The Doctrinal or Dogmatical Books, which principally treat of Points of Doctrine, are the Epistles of the holy Apostles, as well of S. Paul as of some others of the same rank. The Apostle S. Paul has wrote on divers occasions, 14 several Epistles; some of them being directed to particular Churches, One to the Romans, Two to the Corinthians, One to the Galatians, One to the Ephesians, One to the Philippians, One to the Colossians, and Two to the Thessalo∣nians; The rest to particular persons, Two to Timothy, One to Titus, and One to Philemon; to which is to be added the 14th, written to all the Nation of the Hebrews; and they have been most certainly to blame, who would have call'd into question, whether 'twas Canonical, and of the same Apostle. There have been also some other Apostle, who have written Circu∣larly or Catholic Letters, for the instruction of the whole Church, S. James One, S. Peter Two, S. John Three; and S. Jude One. These are all the several pieces of the New Testament, written as the Evangelist S. John declares, To the end we may believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of GOD, and that in believing we may have Life through his Name, John 20.31. which GOD in his mercy enable us all to do, Amen.
THE SALUTATION. THE Oracles of the Prophets being ac∣complished, and the time which GOD had appointed to shew forth his Mercy,Anno Mundi 3999. Before the common Aera of Jesus Christ 5. and give a Saviour to the World, being come; The Angel Gabriel was sent from GOD, First to Zacharias, when he offered Incense in the Temple, to tell him, that he should have a Son, who should be called John, whose Birth was to be the Joy and Glory of Israel. Six months after, GOD sent the same An∣gel to the Holy Virgin Mary at Nazareth, where she usually lived. She was espoused to Joseph, of the House of David, whom GOD gave Her for a Guardian, and Protestor of her Innocency, being both Married, as S. Austin saith, in a Reciprocal design of never Uni∣ting together, but by the Spirit. GOD, who acted invisibly in their Souls, led them by a secret and internal Law to em∣brace this Vertue of Virginity, of which there was not then any Example of Earth; for in espousing each other, they also at the same time espoused the Reproach of Barrenness. But GOD honoured this Angelical Marriage with the most Divine Fruit, that ever appeared on Earth: And to this end, he sent the Angel Gabriel to the Holy Virgin. He found her alone, as S. Ambrose observes, and saluted her with an Hail Mary full of Grace, she having been filled with it from her Mothers Womb; and this Fulness, still en∣creased in her, without any Interruption, in the whole Course of her Life. The Praises which the Angel gave her, in this Salutation, at first troubled her, as is ob∣served in the Gospel. She was apprehensive of the Angels of Darkness, who transform themselves into Angels of Light: She mused in her self at what she saw, and heard, and thus taught Holy Souls, not to be rash and hasty, but to take time to judge of all things. The Angel knew her trouble, and to ap∣pease her, thus said; Fear not Mary, for you have found Favour with GOD. And he af∣terwards declared to her his Message, as in S. Luke, Behold thou shalt conceive in thy Womb, and bring forth a Son, and shalt call his name Jesus; he shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the most highest, and the LORD GOD shall give to him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall Reign over the House of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, She heard without dis∣composure, this Message of the Angel Gabriel. She only askt of the Angel how, what he had told, would come to pass, seeing she knew not a Man; She ask'd this Question without Wavering in the Faith, and without Curiosity, that she might submit her self to the Will of GOD, and follow punctually, what he had Ordained. The Angel assured her, that Man should have no part in this Work, but that the Holy Ghost would himself form in her the Child of which she was to be the Mother. He at the same time shewed her, what had hapned to S. Elizabeth, assuring her, that that Holy Woman who past for Barren in the World, was already Pregnant six Months; by an effect of the powerful Operations of Gods Holy Spirit, to whom not any thing was im∣possible. When the Holy Virgin, had received from the Angel an Answer to what she had de∣manded, and had known the manner of Gods Operating in her so great a Mystery, she ap∣plied her self wholly to testifie to GOD her perfect Resignation to his Will; which she did by these humble Words, which admirably well shew the Pious Disposition of her Soul. Behold the Handmaid of the Lord, Be it unto me according to thy Word. And she said, my Soul doth magnifie the Lord, and my Spirit hath rejoyced in GOD my Saviour, for he hath regarded the low estate of his Handmaid; for behold, from henceforth all Generations shall call me blessed, for he that is Mighty hath done to me great things, and Holy is his name, and his is Mercy on all them that fear him from Generation to Generation, &c. The Angel immediately left her, endued with the same Humility, not being at all puft up at these happy Tidings. At this Moment the Son of GOD grew In∣carnate in her Holy Womb; And this Moment is one of the Times, which the Church has reason to Celebrate through all Generations.
155 The Right Honourable Elizabeth Lady Dowager Gerard, of Gerards Bromley, and daughter of the Rt. Honourable Charles Earle of Madesfield For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
156 S•. Gilbert Gerard Cossine of Brafferton hall in yorkshire Baronet, Grandson of ye. Rt. Reverend Father in God, Iohn Cossine late lord Bishop of Durham &c•. For Advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
THE VISITATION. AFter the Holy Virgin had humbled her self before GOD, for the singular fa∣vour,In the same Year of the World 3999. which she came from receiving, by the Incar∣nation of his Son; she learnt afterwards by humbling her self before Men, that those whom GOD most favours are most obliged to be humble, and that every new Grace from GOD brings along with it a new temptation to Pride, if we do not immediately resist it, by a perfect humiliation of Mind. For with∣out staying to consider the high condition whereunto she was now raised, she undertook a painful Journey to visit her Cousin Eliza∣beth, who dwelt in the Hilly Country in the City of Juda, and entring into the House of Zacharias, saluted Elizabeth; and it came to pass that when Elizabeth heard the Salu∣tation of Mary, the Babe leaped in her Womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost, and she spake with a loud Voice, and said, bles∣sed art thou amongst Women, and Blessed is the Fruit of thy Womb; and whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? for lo! as soon as the Voice of thy Salutation sounded in my Ears, the Babe leaped in my Womb for joy. And shewed her Joy, in that GOD had at length been gracious to her, by dilivering her from the reproach of a long Barrenness. Our Saviour, whom she already saw humbled in her Bowels, seem'd to learn her to say then, what he said himself since, That she must fulfil all righteousness, and submit her self to all the offices of Humility. But when she thought only on a profound abase∣ment, without discovering any thing to her Cousin, of the Favour which she had received; GOD himself did what her Modesty and love to Silence would out-do. The Presence of Jesus Christ which she carried in her Bosom had such a powerful in∣fluence on S. John, that he testified before he was born, to be capable not only of Reason, but of Adoration. For being become the first Adorer of our Saviour, he paid him this interior Worship with an exulting Joy; which having produced the same impression in his Mother, made him then enter into the exercise of his Office of Forerunner to the Saviour of the World. S. Elizabeth cryed out with Joy; and being abash'd to see her come to her, whom she began to respect as the Mother of her Lord, she offered her great Praises, and admired the firmness of her Faith. But the Blessed Virgin, who was not at all lifted up at what the Angel had told her, was no more elivated at what was said to her by her Cousin Eli∣zabeth. She considered GOD as the free disposer of his Gifts, and her Humility as the Channel by which they were conveyed to her, and she uttered that excellent Canticle, which may be called the glory of the Meek, and the confusion of the Proud. The Holy Virgin being thus become the Mother of S. John the Baptist, more than she was afterwards S. John the Evangelist's, and having sanctified him, and as it were spiri∣tually begotten him in the Womb of his Mo∣ther, by her word, enlivened by the ever-blessed Fruit she carried within her, she re∣mained for the space of three Months with S. Elizabeth, which being accomplish'd, and the Birth of S. John approaching the Holy Virgin, retired, when it might be thought more pro∣per to come, had she been absent, to partake of that great Joy which this Birth caused in the World, and of which the Church to this day conserves such great Marks. But the Holy Virgin then shewed, that she followed in all things the motions of Gods Spirit; and being come to St. Elizabeth at the time he appointed her, she also returned at the mo∣ment denoted, without any regard at the for∣mal Customs of the World, which are not sel∣dom contrary to the Laws of GOD. She also taught us by this, To retire and conceal our selves after Works of Charity to our Neighbour, not desiring to appear to have any part; that GOD may have his full due, and we that humiliation and trouble which is due to us in not being such pure and perfect Channels of his Graces, as to be free from mixtures of our own.
THE NATIVITY. THE Holy Virgin being returned home from her Cousin Elizabeth, soon learnt that the great Favours which GOD bestows here on his Saints,Anno Mundi 4000. before the common Aera 5. are oft at∣tended with great Afflictions; for the signs o her pregnancy appearing, Joseph was in a manner forced, notwithstanding the many Proofs he had of the Virgins purity, to attri∣bute to the work of Sin, that which was only the work of the Holy Spirit. This Blessed Virgin, who could not be ig∣norant of what passed, yet remained firm in her silence, shewing thereby of what impor∣tance it is to keep secret the works of the Spirit: she chose rather to be esteemed by her Husband an Adulteress, then to fail in her fidelity in this point unto GOD, to whom she committed as well the care of her Repu∣tation, as of her Life. But Joseph, who was a Just man, would not make publick the Fault, of which he supposed her guilty, and thereby gave a great example to Men, That we should keep secret the Failings of those to whom we owe love and respect. He resolved only to leave her, to shew by this means, at least, his dislike of the evil which a Person so dear to him had committed. But when he was ready to do this, GOD hindered him, advertising him in the Night by an Angel, to take along with him Mary his Wife, and discovered the Secret of this Divine Child, enjoyning him to give him at his Birth the Name of Jesus. Joseph being comforted by the words of the Angel, learnt how reserved a Man ought to be in his censure of others, and how much we are obliged to judge always favourably of pious Persons, notwithstanding all seeming ap∣pearances of their guilt. He believed what the Angel had told him, and he deserved to be called the Father of Jesus Christ, for ha∣ving imitated that great Faith through which the Holy Virgin became his Mother. When the time of her Delivery was near, the divine Providence (to bring the Holy Virgin out of Nazareth to Bethlehem, where the Prophets had foretold the Messias should be born) permitted, that the Edict of the Em∣peror Cesar Augustus (who desiring to satis∣fie either his Pride, or Covetousness, in the numbring the Families of his Empire) should in some sort disturb the whole World to make the Holy Virgin come to Bethlehem with Joseph her espoused Husband, who was of that Town, and of the Lineage of David, to be taxed. She considered not the troublesomness of so long a Journey, and the incommodiousness of the time, nor her condition; but obeying this Order of the Emperour, with the same respect as if an Angel, or even GOD himself had re∣quired her to make this Journey: By this she taught us to have an Eye to GOD in Men, who are only his Instruments, and in whom he conceals himself. When they were arrived at Bethlehem, eve∣ry one refused to lodge them, because their Houses were full: And thus did our Saviour hasten (as it were) to shew us at his very Birth an example of Humility, in suffering the re∣pulses of Men, disdaining not to be born in a Stable, to teach us to despise the glory of the World, by his aversion to it in his own Per∣son: And as the Scripture makes mention, That she brought forth her first born Son, and wrapped him in swadling Clothes, and laid him in a Manger, because there was no room in the Inn. This temper of mind did he infuse into the Blessed Virgin, who received the Repulses of those of Bethlehem, in the same manner as she received the Orders of Augustus, having in both these circumstances an Eye upon GOD, to whom she obeyed in the person of an Inkee∣per, as she had done in that of an Emperour. She was well contented to bring forth Jesus Christ in a Stable, understanding that this her Poverty would conceal her from Men and Devils, and that the unkindness of this People of Bethlehem was necessary to the designs of God. The Holy Fathers tell us, There is nothing so instructive as this abasement of the Son of GOD, and that all the beauty of the Crea∣tures do not so much oblige us to adore him, as this divine Humiliation of himself. We ought chiefly to learn from this Infancy of Jesus Christ, that we have no less need at all times of the assistance of GOD, than a Child newly born has of the succours of Man.
157 The Rt. Noble Henry Duke of Beauford▪ Marquiss & Earle of Worcester Baron Herbert of Chipstow, Raglons▪ & Gower, Knight of ye. most noble order of the Garter &cr. For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
158 Elizabeth Wife of Sr. Samuel Gerard of Buxsteep in Sussex Knight, daughter & Caheyr of Sr. Thomas Spencer of yarington in Oxfordshire Baronet For Advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
An Angel Appears to the Shepherds. OUR Saviour having Sanctified the World by his Birth, shewed by his choice of the first Persons,The same year of the Birth of Jesus Christ, before the common Aera. 4. to whom he would have it known; that he would hide his Mysteries from the great and wise, and only reveal them to the simple. Even in the same Night wherein the Holy Virgin brought him forth, there were near the place Shepherds in the Field watching their Flocks, and the Angel of the LORD came upon them, and the Glory of the LORD shon round about them, so that they were sore afraid; And the Angel said unto them, fear not, for behold I bring you good Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all People; for unto you is born this day, in the City of David, a Saviour, which is Christ the LORD; and this shall be a Sign to you; ye shall find the Babe wrapt in swadling Cloaths, lying in a Manger. And suddenly there was with the Angel, a multi∣tude of the heavenly Host, praising GOD, and saying, Glory to GOD in the Highest, and on Earth Peace, good Will towards Men. And this according to St. Gregory, shewed the Du∣ty of the true Pastors of the Church: And what our Saviours Exemple (who is the true Shepherd) would one day produce in it. 'Twas to these Persons, that an Angel ap∣peared on a suddain, surrounded with a great Brightness, which denoted this great Divine Light, which now began to appear in the World. He told them, he brought them such glad Tidings, or good News, that would fill all People with Joy; and at the same time de∣clared to them, that the Messias, who had been so long expected, was now Born. And to confirm their belief of what he said, he sent them into Bethlehem, which the Pro∣phets had foretold, should be the place of his Birth; And this humble Spirit, being not at all ashamed of the Humility of his Master, boldly told these Rustick People, that they should find in a Manger a Child wrapt up in Swadling Cloaths, and that this was he whom he meant, and who was the Expectation of all Israel. When the Angel had done speaking, there were joyned to him an Innumerable Compa∣ny of Angels, who sung Hymns of praise, and Adoration to GOD, and Proclaimed Peace to Men. These Shepherds recovering themselves at length, from the Astonishment or Trance, wherein they lay, occasioned at the sight, and Words of the Angel, determined to pass over to Bethlehem, to see there the Wonder that God had wrought; making haste in their Journey, to shew by their readiness, that our Saviour must not be sought with Coldness and Indiffe∣rency. And being come to the place, they found the Blessed Virgin with Joseph, and the Child lying in a Manger, according to what the Angel had related unto them. This outward Meanness did not surprize them; for 'tis observed on the contrary, that they were filled with Admiration, as were all those to whom they told what they had seen, and heard from the Angel. The Holy Virgin in this profound Humility, in which Jesus Christ himself lay humbled in that manner before her Eyes, (not expecting all these things) contented her self in that State of Meanness, wherein GOD's Providence had placed her. Let us then imitate this excellent Frame and Temper of Mind, not esteeming our selves the more for being beloved and honoured by Men; nor thinking our selves the less regarded of GOD, for the disrespects and slightings of them. For we are, or should be, the best Judges of our own worth. The best of Women is lodged in a Stable amongst Beasts; which shews us the Blindness and Ignorance of worldly Men, who will be sure to judge of Peoples worths, by that which does not belong to them, and is properly none of theirs; as fine Cloaths, Numerous Atten∣dants, yearly Revenues, and a House spacious and richly furnish'd: All which things dazle the Eyes of Carnal Men, and gratifie their sen∣sual, and vitiated Appeties. Whereas that which is truly desirable, is not to be known by any thing which is to be seen without Doors. 'Tis the Mind, not the Place, or any out∣ward Circumstance, that makes us happy. A man must find Content in his own Breast, or no where; and the way to Heaven is nearer from a Cell, than a Palace.
THE CIRCUMCISION. Our LORD and SAVIOUR Circumcised the Eighth Day, and was called JESUS. EIght days after our Saviours Birth, be∣ing accomplish't, the Blessed Virgin and Joseph thought of Cir∣cumcising him,The same year of the Birth of Jesus Christ 1, before the common Aera 4. and his Name was called JESƲS, which was so named of the Angel, before his Conception in the Womb; and when the days of her Purification, (ac∣cording to the Law of Moses,) were accom∣plished, they brought him to Jerusalem, to pre∣sent him to the LORD, as it is written in the Law of the LORD, every Male that open∣eth the Womb shall be called holy to the LORD, and to offer a Sacrifice, according to that which is said in the Law of the LORD, a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons; And this gives us the example of a true Christian, which does not too fondly Critizise on the Word of GOD, but places all its piety in a punctual observance of whatsoever it Com∣mands. For altho they were sufficiently per∣suaded, that this Divine Child, needed no Cir∣cumcision, yet they expected not a particular Command from GOD, to submit to this Order. They were so humble, that the very Cu∣stom it self became a Case of Conscience: Teaching us hereby, how much we ought to avoid our own Wisdom, and to follow with∣out Haesitation the Wisdom which is above. But if the Holy Virgin, and Joseph, are so greatly to be commended, in thus submitting themselves to the Law, 'tis more to be admi∣red that our Saviour himself, should submit to it, notwithstanding the sharpness of the pain, wherewith it was accompany'd, which caused many times the Death of the Patient. He would moreover, having assumed our sinful Flesh, take also in that Flesh the mark of Sin, for the doing away of which Circum∣cision had been ordained. The Innocent then appeared a Sinner, that Sinners might learn not to desire to be esteem∣ed Innocent, and find reason in this Prodigi∣ous Humiliation of Jesus Christ, to humble themselves before GOD, and Men, apprehend∣ing every occasion of Humility and patient∣ly suffering all Injuries. GOD began to discover, in this occasion, what afterwards hapned in the Life of Jesus Christ, which he intermixt with Humiliation, and Glory: And having abased our Saviour, by a Circumcision so dolorous, and mortify∣ing, he at the same time exalted him, by giving him the Adorable Name of Jesus; it being literally here True, what is said by St. Paul, That GOD hath exalted his Son to a sovereign Greatness; and that in Recompence of his deep Humility, he hath given him a Name above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should Bow, both in Hea∣ven and Earth, and that every Tongue should confess that Jesus is the LORD. The Devotion to this Holy Name, began with the Church, and the Fathers have taught their Children to put their Trust in it, and to call on it, with a faithful Love; And they that do it in this manner, according to St. Paul, shall be saved. For by invoking Jesus, as our only Saviour, we acknowledge, as the Fathers observe, That 'tis he alone that saves us, and that we save not our selves. JESUS CHRIST had this Name, because his Father gave it him, even before he was conceived in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin, as 'tis observed by the Evangelist. He neither usurpt, nor attributed it to himself. We must not therefore take from him, what his Father has given him, as his greatest Glory; But rather acknowledge with a deep Humility, that we bring him only Wounds, and Putrifying Sores, and that 'tis only he that can Heal us, by the Merit of his Life, and Death.
159 William Benge of Cosely Wood in Wadherst in ye. County of sussex Gentleman. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
160 Jeffrey Jeffreys of Llywell in the County of Brecknock Esq, For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Adoration of the Magi, or Wise-men. JEsus Christ being Born in Judea, shewed thereby, that he came not only into the World, for the People of the Jews;The same Year of the Birth of Jesus Christ 1. before the common Aera 4. But that his Grace was to be shewed abroad, on the Gentiles also; according to the promises of the Pro∣phets. To draw these People from Idolatry, and the Worship of Devils, (for only Judea Worshiped the True GOD;) he caused a Star to shine at his Birth, which should out∣wardly represent the Grace he intended, to shed inwardly in their Hearts. The Magi, or Wise-men having perceived this Star in the East, and knowing it de∣noted the Birth of the Sovereign of the Jews, they came with Presents into Judea, to pay him their Homage. King Herod who had usurpt the domination over these People, was troubled, when he heard of a new King of the Jews, and all the City of Jerusalem, which waited in great Expectation for the Messias, could not hear the News of his Birth but with vast Concernment. This Prince immediately Assembled all the Priests, and Elders of the People, and Demanded of them in what place Christ should be Born. These Interessed Persons, whose knowledge served only to make them more Criminal, shewed by the little care they afterwards took in searching after our Saviour, 'twas only to Sell him to Herod, that they discovered Beth∣lehem to him to be the place where he was to be Born; and Citing to him the passage of a Prophet, they Maliciously supprest the end of it, which would have clearly discovered to Herod, that this Child was GOD, and which perhaps would have taken him off from all thoughts of persecuting him. Herod having known this of the Priests, called secretly the Wise-men; And informed himself by them of this Star which had ap∣peared to them: They answered him fully to whatever he Demanded, without Fear. They were without any dread in the midst of a City which was wholly in an uproar and Confusion; because GOD, whom they had followed, in this Journey, sustained them, in an undertaking, which was set on foot by himself. But this Hypocritical Prince, con∣cealing the design he had of killing this Child, whom he was forced to acknowledge for a GOD, hid this Deicide, which he Meditated, under the Words of a pretended Adoration, bidding the Wise-men search after this Child, and having found him, to give him notice, that he also might come and Worship him. These Men departed from Jerusalem Igno∣rant of the base Designs of this Tyrant, and seeing again the Star, they were filled with Joy; And went into the House, where it gui∣ded them; where being entred, they found the Child, with his Mother, and fell down and Worshipped him, being not withheld by the outward Poverty they saw, and offered him Mysterious Presents of Gold, Myrrhe, and Frankincense. GOD would not suffer them afterwards to return to Herod according to their promise, because they knew not his wicked Devices; But derided the Cruel Policy of this Tyrant, and therefore warned the Wise-men in a Dream, to return another way into their own Country. Thus did the Light of the Gentiles, (as St. Austin observes,) discover the Blindness of the Jews; for Strangers came to seek Jesus Christ in a far Country, and to Worship him whilst yet a Child: and the Jews, who were his Peo∣ple, Outragiously use him, as soon as they knew of his Birth. Thus does our Saviour, rather hide than discover himself in this occasion; and we ought to beware, seeing he observes still the same Measures, lest he hide himself from us, whilst he discovers himself to others. This Star is gone, (says this Holy Father,) it has done its Work, and is no longer to be seen. But the Light of the Gospel hath succeded it. Those who are so faithful as to follow it, shall find our LORD Humble: They will Worship him in the midst of a People, who possess him without knowing him; and having suffered the Rage of those Enemies, which the Faith may draw upon them, they will enjoy in Peace, (like the Wise-men) the Blessings which GOD has be∣stowed on them, in choosing them from so many others, to make them pass out of Dark∣ness into Light, and from the power of Satan unto GOD, and Render them true Worship∣pers of Jesus Christ.
THE PURIFICATION. The Blessed Virgin Purified. FOrty Days after the Birth of the Son of GOD, the Holy Virgin, being too hum∣ble to dispense with the Law,The same Year of the Birth of Jesus Christ 1. before the common Aera 4. (which enjoyned Wo∣men in general, to Purifie themselves) was willing to submit to a Law, of which she had no need; even as JESUS CHRIST her Son, had submitted himself to that of Circumcision, who was Holiness it self. After such a Divine Birth, which rendred her more Pure, and more a Virgin; she went into the Temple with her Son, taking Plea∣sure to mix her self with the rest of ordinary Women; to learn all those that are willing to imitate Her, to follow in all things the e∣stablished Order, without seeking any Dispen∣sation from it. And as the Law obliged to offer to GOD all the First-born, and to Ransom them by the Offering of some Animals: So our Savi∣our Jesus Christ being Offered by his Mother, Offered himself inwardly to his Father, and presented him at this first time in his Holy Temple, a Sacrifice worthy of him. GOD permitted not that an Action so Di∣vine should remain hid: There was in Jerusa∣lem a most Holy Ancient Man, named Simeon, who was a Just Person, and filled with the Holy Spirit, and to whom the Gospel gives this Testimony, That he waited for the Conso∣lation of Israel. This Holy Man being urged to come to the Temple by a motion of the Spirit, which was in him, acknowledged Jesus Christ, when his Parents Offered him to GOD according to the Law, and saw thus accom∣plished the Promise which GOD had made him, That he should not die before he saw the LORD, whom GOD would send into the World. As soon as the light of his Faith had disco∣vered this GOD, hid under the weakness of so small a Body, he took him in his Arms, and being transported with an Holy Joy, he gave Thanks unto GOD, for what he saw, by this excellent Canticle, LORD, now lettest thou thy Servant depart in Peace, according to thy Word; for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all People; a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy People Israel. For this Light was to shine not only amongst the Jews, but moreover among all Nations. And whilst the Blessed Virgin and Joseph ad∣mired at what this Holy Man spake, concern∣ing what was to happen in its due time to the Son of God; an Holy Widow came moreover into the Temple, and added her publick Prai∣ses to those which Simeon had already given our Saviour. Her Exemplary Life gave Au∣thority to her Words: For being become a Pattern (as it were) to all Widows, after se∣ven Years Marriage, she had past the rest of her Life (to her Eighty fourth Year) conti∣nually in Fasting and Prayer, without depart∣ing from the Temple. And being so Holy in such a corrupt Age, as was that of the Jews; we Learn from her, That to serve GOD in a time wherein few do it with Sincerity, we must serve him perfectly, otherwise we shall not be strong enough to resist the Torrent of so many Ill Examples. Thus ended the Purification of the Holy Virgin, and the Presentation of her Son Jesus Christ in the Temple, in which she has given all Christian Parents an Instruction, which ought to be the Foundation of all their Piety. For having nothing more precious than their Children, they ought (if they truly love them) to offer them to GOD, especially those amongst them which are the compleatest, and whom they love with the greatest Tenderness. They ought to fear, lest all other Love which they may have for them, proves the loss of those they love; and they cannot well keep this Pledge which GOD has put into their Hands, and of which he will require so strict an Ac∣count, but by Offering it without ceasing, and testifying, That they regard their Children, as belonging and depending more on GOD, than on themselves.
161 Madam sarah Jeffreys the wife of Jeffrey Jeffreys of Llywell in the County of Brecknock Esq▪ For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
162 Anthony Segar of Twyford in Hantshire Gentleman. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Flight into Egypt. KIng Herod expecting still the Wise Men, to hear what Discoveries they had made, imagin'd when they came no more,The same Year of the Birth of Jesus Christ 1, before the common Aera 4. that they had mocked him, attributing to the disrespect of his Person, what they had done by the sole Order of Heaven. And therefore he entred into a strange Passion; and when he heard mention of the Wonders spoken of this Child, who had been offered in the Temple, he openly manifested his de∣sign of Slaying him, which he had hitherto dissembled. He resolved to destroy this Child, to whom already the Name of King had been given, lest the Jews acknowledging him for their Master, he should lose the Crown, which his Ambition had usurped. GOD, who foresaw the Transports of this Prince, suffered him to go on, choosing rather to confound his vain Wisdom, by rendring all his Designs fruitless: He sent an Angel (du∣ring the Night) to Joseph, when he thought of returning home from Jerusalem to Naza∣reth, to tell him, That he should immediately take the Child and his Mother, because He∣rod would use all means to destroy him. Joseph gave us, in this occasion, the Model of an admirable Obedience; for without rea∣soning on what the Angel told him, he took at the same moment our Saviour and the Holy Virgin; who excused not her self on the un∣seasonableness of the time, which was Mid∣night, nor on the difficulty of this troublesom Journey, to go into an unknown Land, and which was wholly given to Idolatry; nor on the Angels not speaking to her self, to shew her the Order. But both of them thought only how to save the Blessed Infant from the Fury of Herod; and their Love made them willingly undertake, whatsoever might secure him from danger. They went into this Foreign Country, to find that Safety, which was not to be had a∣mongst a People, whom GOD had delivered by so many Miracles. GOD then permitted this Flight, to comfort those of his Children, whom Fear might oblige to Fly in such occa∣sion: And he thus taught the Church, that when the Persecutions of the Great Men of the World are violent, we may after the Ex∣ample of Jesus Christ himself, steal from their Fury, and retire into any Foreign Country. Jesus being then in safety, GOD permitted Herod to proceed in the full course of his Fu∣ry; and this Prince by a Cruelty, which the most Barbarous People would abhor, put to Death all the Little Children of Bethlehem, and the Neighbouring parts, who were under the Age of two Years, to draw him into this common ruine, who (tho' unknown to him) yet already gave him such Fear. And this is the Sum of this Unhappy Prince's Policy, who was esteemed the greatest Politi∣cian in his time. A poor Child makes him tremble, and he in vain lays out all his Craft and Violence to destroy him. The Enterprize against this Child made him a Deicide; and he became the true representation of those, who stifle Jesus Christ in their Souls, to be thought Wise by Men. 'Tis in these great Passions, wherein GOD commonly exercises his great Judgments, and divinely punishes those who oppose him, and declare themselves openly against him. Thus did he triumph over the Cruelty of Herod. He made use of it, to render eternal∣ly happy those whom this Tyrant would have destroyed: And amongst this great Slaughter of Infants, he who alone was aimed at in it, was the only Child that escaped; never was it made more evident, That the wicked do no more mischief to the Righteous, than GOD gives them power. And Christians ought to learn from these Examples, to have an Eye only to God in Men, and to consider their hatred or love, as a means which he makes use of for the Execution of his designs: Should all the People in the World unanimously conspire together, they can do nothing against what he has determi∣ned. When we are so happy as to know his Will, we have nothing to do, but to follow it without fear; and if he permits any Evil to happen, this Evil shall turn to our great Good, even as the Cruelty of Herod became such an Advan∣vantage to these poor Innocents; seeing that in killing their Bodies, he has sanctified their Souls, and consecrated their Memory to all fol∣lowing Ages.
The Dispute with the Doctors. The Holy Virgin loseth JESUS CHRIST, and seeking Him with great Sorrow, she finds Him in the Temple Disputing with the Doctors. AFter the Death of Herod, who intended to have destroyed our LORD and SA∣VIOƲR in his Birth; GOD,In the Year of the Birth of Jesus Christ 2. before the common Aera 3. who sent Joseph into Egypt, to avoid this Persecution, sent him al∣so an Angel to command him to return into the Land of Israel; so that Jesus Christ was not an whole Year in Egypt. Joseph obeyed this new Order with the same readiness he had executed the first, and came and dwelt in the Town of Nazareth, to avoid the Fury of Archelaus, Herod's Son, who Reigned in Judea, and to accomplish the Pro∣phecy, which foretold our Saviour should be called a Nazareen. The Gospel does not take notice of any thing that past from our Saviour's Infancy to his Baptism, but only this one Action which he did at the Age of 12 Years. The Holy Virgin, who in that inward and invisible Worship which she rendred to GOD, and of which Men could not be Witnesses, o∣mitted none of the solid Customs of Devotion in her time, but went exactly every Year with Jesus and Joseph from Nazareth, (where she dwelt) to Jerusalem, at the Feast of the Pass∣over, according to the Ordinance of the Law. When then our Saviour was 12 Years old, after the Octave of the Feast was accomplished, his Parents returned to Nazareth; and our Blessed Saviour (whom they thought was with them) remained behind in Jerusalem, un∣known to Joseph and his Mother. They Travelled a Days Journey, and sought him at Night amongst their Kindred, and Persons of their Acquaintance, who were re∣turning Home as well as they, supposing he had been amongst them; but not finding him, they were extreamly troubled, and went back the Day following to Jerusalem, to seek him. And after three Days they found him in the Temple, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both Hearing them, and asking them Questi∣ons, and rather Teaching than Learning any thing that was in dispute; insomuch, that all that heard him were astonished at his Un∣derstanding and Answers. The Holy Virgin was surprized to see him in that place and cir∣cumstance; and the Joy which she had to find him, succeeded the trouble which the loss of him had given her: She gently complained at his using of them so; saying, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? Behold, thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing! And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's Business? And they understood not the saying which he spake unto them. Having said these words, he returned with his Parents to Nazareth, and was subject to them in all things. S. Austin often represents this Example to Children, to teach and make them in love with the Obedience they owe their Parents. All the World (says this Holy Father) was sub∣ject to our LORD; and yet our SAVIOUR (to whom all things were Obedient) obeyed his Earth∣ly Parents. He that enjoyed a Divine Liberty, makes use of it only to make him the more subject. Parents also may learn in this History, by the Blessed Virgins Sorrow for her Son, when she mist him, what they are to do when their Children forsake them, (not to go into the Temple with our LORD, but to lose them∣selves in the World) and with how many Tears and Prayers, they ought to endeavour the bringing back the Pledge wherewith GOD has entrusted them. They are to be blamed, if they Afflict themselves for any thing else, and they ought to leave all things (as tha Holy Virgin did) to entreat our LORD, That he would come and seek with them their Children, if they are strayed; and raise them to Life, if they be Dead.
163 Edward silvester Junior, of the Tower of London Gentleman▪ For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
164 The Honourable Juliano, Wife of Charles Boyle Esq. eldest son of ye. Rt. Honourable ye▪ Lord Clifford, son & heyre to ye. Rt. Honourable ye. Earle of Burlington &.c. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Baptism of our LORD. Our Lord and Saviour JESUS CHRIST, is Baptized by his Forerunner, John the Baptist. THirty and two Years being past since the Birth of our Lord Jesus Christ; and GOD determining to draw him out of his concealed State,The Year of the common Aera 28. to ma∣nifest him to the World, he began this by bringing S. John Baptist, (who was to be his Messenger) out of the Desert. This Saint then leaving immediately his Soli∣tude, where he had led an Angelical Life, having (as the Scripture saith) this Garment of Camels Hair, with a Leather Girdle a∣bout his Loyns, and his Meat being Locusts and Wild Honey; appeared on the Banks of the River Jordan, and in the Wilderness of Judea, Preaching Repentance, and Baptizing all those that came unto him; saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: For this is he that was spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, saying, The Voice of one crying in the Wilder∣ness, Prepare ye the Way of the LORD, make his Paths strait. I indeed Baptize you with Wa∣ter unto Repentance; but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire; whose Fan is in his Hand, and he will throughly purge his Floor, and will gather his Wheat into his Garner; but will burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire. The brightness of his Vertue, and the Au∣sterity of his Life, needed no Miracles to gain him Belief; for all People regarding him as something more than a Man, he was judged by some to be the Messias, and preferred be∣fore all other Prophets that had appeared be∣fore him. When therefore all Jerusalem went throng∣ing into the Desert, to hear this Holy Mes∣senger and Forerunner of our LORD and SA∣VIOƲR, and to be Baptized of him; our Sa∣viour went also, and hid himself amongst the Croud, by an Humility which we cannot read of without Blushing; seeing we are apt to use a thousand Arts and Tricks to distinguish our selves from the rest of Mankind, and to be pointed at by others as extraordinary Per∣sons. But when our LORD and SAVIOƲR abased himself in this manner, GOD raised him up, and distinguish'd him from those he had mix'd himself with: For S. John being struck with a profound Respect, could not without diffi∣culty resolve to pour Water on him to Bap∣tize him. He that caused the chiefest Doctors of the Law to tremble, and drove them away from his Baptism, said unto Jesus Christ, That he ought to be Baptized of him, and that he made him Blush, when he desired he should Baptize him, saying, I had need to be Baptized of thee, and comest thou to me? Our LORD only answered, That he must humble himself so far; and that in the Condition wherein he was, he must submit to every Ordinance, to fulfil all Righteousness. No sooner was he Baptized, but the Hea∣vens opened, and the Holy Spirit visibly de∣scended on him in the form of a Dove, and rested on his Head. And at the same time a Voice was heard from Heaven, giving this Te∣stimony; This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Our Saviour immediately after this, retired to Conceal himself; but S. John continued to speak of him to all People. He endeavoured with great earnestness to persuade Men, That Jesus Christ was the Messias so often promised, and so greatly desired: And as to his own particular, he was inconsiderable; plainly and frequently telling them, That he must decrease in his Fame, and be obscured by an infinitely surpassing Light. The Glory of Jesus Christ (as is observed by the Fathers) began to appear from this instant, when he humbled himself so far as to be Bapti∣zed by S. John. Our Saviour (who was the Greatest of all others) does humble himself be∣yond all others. He is Innocency it self, and yet will receive a Baptism, that declares him a Sinner. What a Les∣son have we here? How can we desire to be thought Innocent, when we are all Guilty; to pass for Righteous, when we rre Sinners? Let us rather by an humble Acknowledgment of our Faults, seek the Remission and Forgiveness of them.
CHRIST Tempted by the Devil. Our Saviour JESUS CHRIST Tempted in the Wilderness. AS soon as our Saviour was Baptized, he shewed all the Faithful (by his own Ex∣ample) what their Life ought to be after their Baptism,The same Year of the common Aera 30. and that they ought thence forward to prepare themselves for Sufferings and Temptations; he withdrew into the Desert, or was rather led there by the Spirit. Being in this place of Solitude, where he Fasted 40 Days, and 40 Nights, he was Tempted of the Devil. This Proud Spirit not imagining, that such a Divine Person could be concealed under such a mean Outside; having exhausted in vain all his secret Arts and Temptations to circumvent him, at last resolved to try what he could do by Attacking him under a visible Form. He approached him with the greater Craft, in that he put on a great Form of Simplicity; he said unto Jesus Christ, If thou art the Son of GOD, Command these Stones, that they be made Bread. Our Saviour at these Words kept himself as concealed, as the Evil Spirit would fain have been: He only answered him by this place of Scripture, That Man does not live by Bread alone, but by every Word that pro∣ceedeth out of the Mouth of GOD. And thus with admirable clearness taught us; That we need not fear either Hunger, or Death it self: But if we do not nourish our Souls with the Word of GOD, we are dead, or in great danger of Death, tho' we appear to the Eyes of Men to be Alive. The Prince of Darkness was not discoura∣ged at this Repulse; for considering that a Desert was not a proper place to Vanquish in, he drew our Saviour thence, and transported him on the top of a Pinacle of the Temple; bidding him, if he were the Son of GOD, to cast himself down to the Ground. And malici∣ously abusing the Holy Scripture, he added, For it is Written, GOD hath given his Angels charge over thee, and in their Hands they shall hear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy Foot against a Stone. The Son of GOD, who shewed us, that ha∣ving been Victorious in the first Temptation, we ought to hope the same in the rest; an∣swered the Tempter with the same Simplicity as at first, by a Passage of Scripture, Thou shalt not tempt the LORD thy GOD. This prudent Answer confounded the Pride of the Devil, and strangely provoked him: He observed no longer that outward Respect which he at first had shewed; and whereas before he had treated our Saviour as the Son of GOD, he would now have him to Worship him as GOD; and to persuade him to this, He took him up in∣to an exceeding high Mountain, and shewed him all the Kingdoms of the World and the Glories thereof; and said unto him, All this Power will I give thee, and the glory of them, (for that is delivered to me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it) if thou therefore wilt fall down and worship me, all shall be thine. The Devil's Insolency was never before so great; he never thus dealt with any of the Saints; he contented himself with annoying them, as Job, but never required they should Worship him, as he desired our Saviour to do; whose Excellency he knew, by the Resistance he made him. But this extream Impudence was also Rebuked by a Greatness of Mind, which caused him to utter these words, With∣draw Satan, for its written, Thou shalt worship the LORD thy GOD, and him only shalt thou serve. This Answer of our Saviour's put the Devil to flight, and the Angels came and Mi∣nistred unto him. This Temptation of our Blessed Saviour has always afforded great Instruction and Consola∣tion to all good Men. Let us love Retirement, Fasting, and Prayer, and the Devil cannot hurt us. Let us with a Lively Faith Meditate on the Word of GOD, and 'twill prove a Divine Shield, whereby we shall be able to resist the Fiery Darts of Satan. Put we our Confidence in Jesus Christ that was Tempted, and was Victorious over the Triumpher; and all his Temptations will serve only to strengthen our Vertue, and increase our Rewards.
165 The Rt. Honble. Francis Viscount Newport, Baron of High Arcall Ld. Leiutenant of Shropshire, Treasurer of his Maiestys House' hold, and one of the Lds. of their Matys. most Honourable Privy Councell &ca. For ye Advancement of this Worke, Contributed, this Plate.
166 Charlotte Wife of Peter Rycaut of King Stephens Castle in Ospring in Kent Esq. & Daughter of Sr. Gilbert Gerard Baronet deceased by Mary daughter to ye. Rt. Reverend Iohn Cossein late lord Bishop of Durham. For Advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
THE MARRIAGE IN CANA; Where our Saviour turned Water into Wine. OUr Blessed Saviour having Triumphed over the Snares of the Devil, left the Wilderness at the mo∣tion of the same Spirit that had led him thi∣ther;The same Year of the common Aera 30. and began to manifest himself to Men. He came from thence to Jordan, the place of S. John's usual Residence; who having observ'd what past at his Baptism, cried out to his Disciples That he was the Lamb of God, that took away the Sins of the World. Two of his Disciples, (one of which was S. Andrew) hearing their Master give such an advantageous Testimo∣ny of our Saviour, they immediately ap∣plied themselves to him. They ask'd him where he dwelt; and having shewed them the place, S. Andrew informed Simon his Brother with great Trans∣ports of Joy, that he had met with the Mes∣sias, and brought him to Jesus Christ; who looking on him, foretold he should be call∣ed Peter. The number of our Saviour's Auditors increasing, his Reputation began also to be spread abroad, altho' as yet he had wrought no Miracle. But a particular Accident, and the Exigences of some persons gave occa∣sion to this. A Marriage being made in Cana, a Town of Galilee, where the Holy Virgin was present; our Saviour also and his Disciples were there∣unto Invited. But the Wine not holding out, this want shewed the Tenderness of the Virgin Mary; for being persuaded of the All-sufficient Power of her Son, as well as of his Charity, she thought she needed only to in∣form him of the necessity these Persons were in, to procure his help; she was not de∣ceived in her Expectations: And tho' our Saviour seemed to answer her in a kind of a rough manner, saying to her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? Mne hor is not yet come. Yet he failed not of doing what she desired; for his Mother said unto the Ser∣vants, Whatsoever he saith unto you, that do. And there were set six Water-pots of Stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three Firkins apiece. And Jesus commanded them to fill them with Water; and they filled them to the brim. And having in∣sensibly changed this Water into Wine, he commanded it to be drawn out, and given to the Governour or Master of the Feast. This Man being surprized at the excellen∣cy of this Miraculous Wine, called the Bride∣groom, and told him, He had done contrary to the common Custom; For every Man at the beginning sets forth good Wine, and when men have well drank, than that which is worse; but thou hast kept the good Wine till now. Thus did our Saviour (as the Gospel ob∣serves) manifest his Glory, and his Disciples began to believe in him. Hence appears the Charity of the Holy Virgin, to whom it may be said, we are obliged for this Miracle. The two Wines here spoken of, are the Wine of the World, and the Wine of Grace. The Devil presents the first, which is of better taste to Carnal Men, who inebriate them∣selves with the Sweetnesses of Worldly De∣lights, which at first appear extream pleasant to them, but at last their Taste is bitter as Wormwood. 'Twere well if Men would consider Pleasures in their Farewels, as well as in their Approaches. They begin with Smiles, but end with Sighs; they embrace us, that they may strangle us; and always accost us with a Face of Friendship, when as indeed they are our mortal Enemies. We are safe if we renounce their Acquaintance, and keep them without Doors as Strangers; for being once let in, they never fail of doing us Mischief. The second Wine, is the Wine of Heaven, and the New Wine of the New Man, which sweetly inebriates the Soul, masters and pre∣dominates over the Carnal Reasoning, chan∣ging the heart of Man by a real and perfect Conversion, that being as it were dead to himself, he may live to none but to GOD, and only relish the Spiritual Food of Heaven.
Nicodemus rightly informed. Nicodemus comes to our SAVIOƲR by Night. THe first Miracle of Jesus Christ in Cana of Galilee, having been followed by several others, our Sa∣viour's Fame began to be spread about those Parts,The same Year of the common Aera 30. and to be taken notice of by the Great People of the World. One of the most considerable Persons a∣mongst the Jews, named Nicodemus, being much concerned at what he heard related of our Saviour, resolved to be informed of the Truth, by the Truth it self, and not from the Report of others. But foreseeing by his Human Prudence, that this new Prophet must meet with great Enemies, he thought it the wisest Course, not too openly to de∣clare himself, and therefore judged it the safest way to go to him by Night. He told our Saviour, That he really belie∣ved he was a Master sent from GOD; for the great number of Miracles he wrought, left no place to doubt thereof. But our Sa∣viour shewed in this occasion, That we ought not to suffer our selves to be blinded by the Praises of Men: For having received such a signal one from Nicodemus, he parted with none of his usual Freedom. And al∣though Nicodemus past for a very skilful Per∣son in the Law, yet he spake to him of Hu∣mility and Christian Simplicity, shewing him, That unless a Man were born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This Jewish Doctor could not understand this great Truth, and thereby plainly teach∣eth us, That nothing is so contrary to Faith, as Human Arguments. He enquired of our Blessed Saviour, How a Man could enter again into his Mothers Womb? But Jesus Christ de∣manded of him, How he (being a Master of Israel) could be ignorant of so weighty a matter? And he clearly shewed him, That he was only the Doctor of the Dead Letter, as S. Austin calls it. He reasoned with him a∣bout the marvellous effect of the Holy Spirit, who Breatheth where he pleaseth; like the Wind, which bloweth where it listeth, and we hear the sound thereof, but know not whence it cometh, nor whither it goeth. He told him several other things, which made this Learned Man comprehend, by the difficulty he had of conceiving and be∣lieving them, That God (to make us his Disciples) must pull down in us the foolish Edifice of our Reasonings, which will admit of nothing but what are objects of Sense. Our Blessed Lord ended this Conversation by Discoveries to him of the great Love of GOD to Men, who had given them his own Son, to make them thereby eternally happy. In fine, He informed him of the chief cause of Mens Misery, That they loved Darkness better than Light, because it condemned them, by shewing the madness of their ways, until GOD gives them other Eyes, which makes them hate the Extravagancies of their Courses, and love this Light which comes from GOD, and guides them to him. Thus did our Saviour dismiss this Eminent Person amongst the Jews; who afterwards shew'd, that this Entertainment had not been fruitless unto him, the powerful Word of God having made lasting Impressions in him. For having at first discovered a kind of Fearful Sagacity, in not daring to come to our Saviour, but by Night; he had the Cou∣rage afterwards to maintain publickly his Innocency in a full Council; and to declare at his Death, and after it, That he would have no part in the Injustice committed on his Person, when they made him suffer so cruel and shameful a Death. And so far was his Love from being lessened to our Saviour then, that on the contrary he increased the Signs of it; for he publickly brought Per∣fumes for to Embalm his Body, when it was to be laid in the Sepulchre. The Holy Fathers observe hence, That we must not despair of the Sincerity of those, whom Fear does at present with-hold from making an open Profession of the Truth. Those weak in Faith may hide themselves for a time, to be instructed privately in the Truths of GOD, and to be nourished by them in silence, that they may afterwards publickly appear in the World, when GOD shall offer them a fit Occasion.
167 Samuel Wolrich of the Tower of London Gentleman. For advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate
168 The Honourable The Lady Mary Goodricke of great Ribston Yorkeshire▪ For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Woman of Samaria. Our SAVIOƲR Discoursing with a Woman of Samaria, declares to Her the Mysteries of the Christian Religion. WHen our Saviour began to be fol∣lowed, and the Miracles which he wrought, together with the Testimonies of S. John,The same Year of the common Aera 30. drew after him a greater number of Di∣sciples, than his Holy Fore-runner ever had: The Imprisonment of this great Man now hapened, which obliged our Saviour to re∣tire apart. As S. John the Baptist seemed to have no∣thing more to do in the World, after he had Proclaim'd the Messias; so the Divine Pro∣vidence to take him speedily out of it▪ made him leave his Solitary abode in the Desart, and come to the Court of Herod. This Prince, who had heard of the Auste∣rity and Excellency of his Life in the Wil∣derness, respecting him as a Prophet, had a great Kindness for him, as is observed in the Gospel. Neither did his Love grow cold, for the freedom he used, in Reprehending him for his Incestuous Defilements. But the Devil, who could not quietly suffer the Reformation, which perhaps this excellent Person might have made in the Court of this Prince, betook himself to his usual Artifices; and envenom'd the Spirit of a Woman against him, who soon got him to be thrown into Prison, till such time as a fit opportunity offered it self, of doing fur∣ther mischief, and crowning the Life of this great Man with the Glory of Martyrdom. Our Saviour avoiding for a while the Malicious stroaks of the Pharisees, who had also counselled Herod to throw S. John into Prison, left Judea, and returned into Galilee. His Journey lay through Samaria, and by converting a Samaritan Woman, he shewed us, That oft-times in flying from the Rage of the World, we still may be profitable to Men, and that the Church generally increases by Persecution. For this Woman being come (as she was accustomed) to draw Water from a Well, she found our Blessed Saviour sitting there by; who asked her for some of the Water, to quench that Thirst which the Tiresomness of the way had caused in him; although this Thirst was more Divine than Natural. This Woman shewed him her Astonish∣ment, at a Jew's addressing himself to a Wo∣man of Samaria, which were a People that the Jews extreamly abhorred. But our Blessed Lord answered her, That if she knew the Gift of GOD, and whom he was that asked Drink of her, she would have ask'd of him, and he would have given her Living Water; that was not like the Natural Waters of the Earth, which hinder not those that drink of them, from being still Thirsty; but which would become in her a Spring of Living Water, never ceasing to refresh her, till she had attained to Eternl Life. This Woman at length began to grow at∣tentive to what he said, and being surprized at what our Saviour told her concerning her past Life, she knew thereby he was a Prophet. He made known to her all the Mysteries of the New Law, which is a Spiritual Ado∣ration, and the Worshipping of GOD in Spirit and Truth. At the hearing of this, the Woman replied to him, That the Messiah would come and teach them all things. To which our Sa∣viour answered, That He was the Person. Whereupon this Woman immediately go∣eth to the Town, and informs the People of what she had heard, and infused a Desire in all the Inhabitants of Samaria, to go out to see our Saviour. They entreated him to enter into their Town, where he remained two days. The Holy Fathers cannot sufficiently e∣nough admire the Conduct which the Son of GOD, held towards this Woman, to whom he presently discovered all the Secrets of the Gospel. He carries off her fond Devo∣tion from the Temple, and the Holy Mountain; tho' both Jews and Samaritans placed much of it in both these places. He shewed her, That the true Churches are not built with Hands, nor made of Stone; but that GOD's Temples are the Hearts of the Faithful, in which he continually resides by his Holy Spirit.
Christ appeaseth the Tempest. Our SAVIOƲR in the Storm is awakened by his Disciples, and appeaseth the Tempest. OUR Saviour being returned to Galilee, by reason of S. John's Imprisonment, began to Preach there publickly,The same year of the common Aera 30. and to ex∣hort Men (as S. John had done) to Repen∣tance, because the Kingdom of GOD was at hand. He went into the City of Capernaum, and discovered to those People (buried in Darkness) a Divine Light, but which served (as was afterwards seen) only to render them the more Criminal. He accompanied his Preachings with a Gravity and Authority which extreamly distinguish'd him from all the Doctors of the Law: He joined Actions to Words▪ and his Miracles every day gave fresh Testimonies to the Truths which he offered. He healed in Cana a certain great Man's Son, that was at the point of Death. He cast a Devil out of a Man possessed; and pas∣sing from the Synagogue where he had wrought this Miracle, he entred into the House of S. Peter▪ where he did another on the Person of his Wives Mother, whom he cured of a violent Fever. This Miracle no less engaged S. Peter to follow our Saviour, than that of the Fishing had done; which struck this Disciple with such an awe, that he threw himself at our Saviour's Feet, entreating him to retire from him, being a sinful Man. So many Signs and Miraculous Cures drew the Sick from all parts, who came to seek in our Saviour a Remedy for their Griefs: And the People came crowding about him, to have the double Joy of hearing his Ser∣mons▪ and being Witnesses of his Miracles. But his Disciples pleasing themselves with the Honour they received in following him, our Saviour instructed them by de∣grees, not to expect from him a Temporal Felicity. And therefore to signifie to them their Future State, he engaged them to pass over an Arm of the Sea with him; and there arose a great Tempest in the Sea, inso∣much that the Ship was covered with the Waves; and our Saviour being asleep, his Disciples came to him and awaked him, say∣ing, LORD save us, we perish. And he said unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? This was to be a clear Representation to them, of what was to befal the Church in all Ages. For the Winds roaring and the Waves arising, and beating violently against the Ship, filled the Disciples with Fear, cau∣sing them to cry out, and to awake our Sa∣viour as aforesaid; who (to shew his Assu∣rance in greatest Perils) slept peaceably in the midst of the Storm. He reprehended them for their Fearful∣ness, and shewed them, they had nothing to fear all the time that he was with them: And then immediately arising, he com∣manded the Winds to be still, and the Sea to be calm; who both obeying his Voice, the Fear of his Disciples was changed into Ad∣miration at so great a Power. This Ship (says S. Austin) denotes the Church, which is in this World, as in a Sea, always troubled. GOD suffers these Tem∣pests, lest our Faith lessen: and to prevent, that the Peace we may meet with in this World should not make us forget our Hea∣venly Country. 'Tis no marvel, if we be seized with Fear during the Storm; and 'tis no Fault, if we do not distrust the Assi∣stance from above. The Goodness of GOD having prepared this Vessel to pass over such a troublesome and dangerous Sea▪ we ought to commit our selves to his skilful Conduct, who will not fail to bring us to our desired Port. These Storms, instead of troubling us, ought to raise up our Spirits, seeing they have been foretold, and do bear Testimony to the Truth of our Saviour's Words. The Divine Providence (which tho conti∣nually busied, yet is always at rest) will guide in safety through the midst of the Storm, those that look upon him. He can∣not forget those for whom he has died; yea, even as a Father pitieth his own Children, so hath the LORD compassion on those that fear him.
169 ffrancis Mosley Rector of Wimslow in Cheshire, and ffellow of Manchester Colledge in Lancashire. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
170 Sr. Robert Clayton of Marden in Surrey & of the Citty of London Knight & Alderman▪ & Lord Major thereof Anno Demij 680 For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Possest Man Healed. Our Blessed SAVIOƲR casts out the Devil from one that was Possessed. AFter our Saviour had shewed his Dis∣ciples, the Power he had over the Ele∣ments, in calming the Sea by his Word;The same Year of the common Aera 30. he likewise discovered to them, the Authority he had over the unclean Spirits, by delivering several Persons that were possessed with them. But amongst all those which he cured, there was one most considerable, as is more par∣ticularly rehearsed in the Gospel; to shew us with great Horrour, the Empire which the Devils visibly exercised on Men, and with what Fury (when they tormented their Souls) they tore moreover their Bodies. It was a Man, who for a long time had left dwelling in Houses, and made his con∣stant abode amongst Graves, and such like solitary Places: He was Naked, and would endure no Cloaths. When Endeavours were used to tie him, he broke all Cords, yea, and Chains; so that no one could tame him. He kept Day and Night in these doleful Abodes; where he cast forth terrible Screeks and Howlings, mangling and disfiguring his Body with stroaks of sharp Stones. In fine, the Place where he dwelt was become inaccessible to all People; no one daring to be so bold, to pass by that way. But as soon as ever he saw Jesus Christ, tho' afar off, he ran to meet him, and changing this brutish Fierceness into an Adoration full of Respect, he fell prostrate on the Ground, saying with a loud Voice; JESUS, thou Son of the Most High GOD! Wherefore dost thou come to torment me before my Time? I conjure you to leave me alone. Our Blessed Saviour ask'd him his Name, not that he was ignorant of it, (say the Fathers); but to fill Men with Fear, in seeing how many Devils one Man might be posses∣sed with. For this Spirit answered him, That he was called Legion, because they were several in number; and he entreated Jesus Christ, That if he would cast them out of this Man, he would permit them to en∣ter into a great Herd of Swine, who were feeding not far off; which he did: And this Herd (to the number of 2000) imme∣diately ran down a steep Rock, and precipi∣tated themselves into the Sea. This Possssed Person was from that time perfectly cured, and the whole Town being gathered together at the News of this Mi∣racle, saw this Man (so furious heretofore) meek as a Lamb, lying at our Saviour's Feet, whom he desired to follow wheresoever he went, as his Deliverer. But our Saviour sent him back to his own House, to declare the Favour which GOD had shewed him; by this, learning us the Thankfulness we ought to shew to GOD before Men, for the Mercies we have recei∣ved from him. And when the Devil was cast out, and the Possest Man spake, the Multi∣tude marvelled, saying. It never was so seen in Israel. But the Pharisees said, He casteth out Devils, through the Prince of Devils. The Fathers tell us That this Demoniac was a Type of those Men, who before our Saviour's Birth were plunged into all sorts of Cries, and that groaned under the Ty∣ranny of the Devil. This Man was without Cloaths, to signi∣fie, That we have lost our Primitive Innocen∣cy and Original Righteousness, which were as a Garment of Light, that covered us in our State of Purity. Men that remained no longer in their Houses, no more than this Possessed Person; which is to say, They came not to them∣selves, nor found any Rest in their Minds. They remained only amongst Tombs, that is to say, in Dead Works; they broke all their Chains, which is to say, all Laws, both Di∣vine and Humane. These Swine wherein the Devil entred, are a Representation of Men immerst in filthy Pleasures, over whom these impure Spirits do exercise a peculiar Dominion; and the Deep wherein they plunged themselves, denotes the Bottomless Pit wherein the Devils have retired, since our Saviour has driven them out of the Hearts of the Incredulous, who from that time do enter into the glori∣ous Liberty of the Sons of GOD.
Curing the Sick of the Palsie. THE Doctrine and Miracles of our Savi∣our encreasing by degrees the number of his Disciples, St. Mat∣thew presently left the Office of a Publican,The same Year 30. to enter into that of a Disciple of Jesus Christ. Our Blessed Saviour came to him, as he passed by the Place where he was; and a∣mongst so many Persons who lived at Ca∣pernaum, he chose only this Man, leaving the others in their Incredulity; which ren∣ders them more Culpable (as our Blessed Saviour himself assured us,) than were the People of Sodom and Gomorrah. He cleansed immediately the Heart of this Disciple from all that greediness after Gain, which is too common amongst Per∣sons of that Rank; And made him with great Joy to follow a Poor Despised Man that was scorned, and set at Naught by the great People of the World. He only of all the Apostles who were cal∣led by our Blessed LORD, exprest the out∣ward Satisfaction he had in following him, by a Feast whereunto he invited him; by which he shewed us, That there is no Sa∣tisfaction, like that, which arises from a True Conversion. This new Convert, invited also to this Feast, several other Publicans; as if he would share the Grace he had received, with those, to whom he had been United in his former Life. The proud Pharisees were scandalized, to see our Blessed Saviour and his Apostles, eat publickly, with Persons whom the Jews abhorred. But our Saviour confounded their Pride, by telling them, he was the Soul's Physician, and that he could do no Good to any, but such as acknowledged themselves to be great Sinners. He moreover in Capernaum, wrought a famous Bodily Cure, on one troubled with the Palsie. The House wherein our LORD and Saviour entred, being so full of People, that those who brought this Paralytick, knew not how to bring him in before our Saviour: They at last fell on a Determination, which was an evident Mark of their great Faith. They ascended to the top of the House, and uncovering it, let down their sick Per∣son before Jesus Christ, who admiring their Faith, bid the sick of the Palsie, be of good cheer, for his Sins were forgiven him. This Man had certainly good reason to be Cheerful; For what better News can any Man hear, what Words can be more comfortable, than these of our Saviour? Which made the Psalmist cry out as it were with an Extacy, Blessed is the Man whose Transgressions are remitted, and whose Sins are covered: And in the Sense of this he exults, saying, Thou hast put Gladness into my Heart, I will therefore lay me down in Peace, and take my Rest. Thou shalt open my Lips, O LORD, and my Mouth shall shew forth thy Praise. My Song shall be always of the loving Kindness of the LORD; with my Mouth will I be ever shewing of thy Truth from one Generation to another. The Scribes and Pharisees took these Words, immediately for Blasphemy, Mutter∣ing to themselves, that 'twas only GOD that could remit Sins. But our Saviour to Con∣vince them that he was GOD, assured them of the inward Health of this Man, by the outward Cure which he had wrought on his Body; and shewed them, that he had effectually remitted his Sins, by delivering him from the Palsie. All the People admiring this double Effect of our Saviour's Power, and returning Thanks to GOD, in that he had given such great Power to Men. As our Saviour intended the Healing of this Man should be a Proof that he had re∣ally remitted his Sins; so the Cure of the Spiritual Sicknesses of the Soul, must be the Proof that our Sins have been forgiven us according to this Rule of our Saviour. Con∣siderable to this Purpose, are the Words of St. Cyprian, To daub over a Sinner's Wounds in∣stead of healing them, and to deprive him of the Remedies of a True Repentance, by a de∣ceitful Assurance of an hasty Reconcilation; This is not to be a Physician, but an Enemy of Souls. This Peace which is promised them is not a Peace; it is both dangerous to him that gives it, and unprofitable to him that receives it.
171 Sr. Thomas Mompesson of Bathampton in the County of Wilts Knight. For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate
172 Mrs. Henrietta Browne 2d. daughter of Edward Browne of London Dr. in Physick For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Sermon on the Mountain. OUR Saviour Christ's drawing Disciples after him, would have been of small Advantage to us, had not his Concern for the Church in future Ages,In the Year of the com∣mon Aera of Christians 31. second after Christ's Preachings. made him choose out of this number, twelve Persons, whom he designed for its Foundation, honouring them on this Account, with the particular Title of Apo∣stles, as being to be sent to preach his Name and Gospel throughout all the World. Having separated them once already from the rest of Men, he now again separated them from the rest of the Disciples; to make them understand by this double Separation, that they ought to have a double Perfecti∣on of Vertue; and to excel as much, the common Disciples, as those Disciples excee∣ded the common sort of Jews. They had this Advantage above the rest; That they were (as it were) the Domesticks of our Blessed Saviour, and lived with him in the same House; For we know he kept the Passover, and eat the Lamb with them alone; so that they were Witnesses, not only of his Actions, and publick Preachings, but of his private Life and Secrets, after he had discoursed to others in Parables. This Choice of the Twelve Apostles was preceded by Prayers, in which our Saviour is said to have spent the Night; to learn his Church what she ought to do in future Ages, in the Election of her Ministers; to distin∣guish those whom GOD had chosen. As soon as he had made this Choice, he led them up a Mountain, being followed by a great Croud of People: And then he made them that famous Discourse, commonly cal∣led the Sermon on the Mount; which contains the whole Gospel, and all necessary Rules of Behaviour, as well for the Ministers, as for the People: Saying, Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are they that Mourn, for they shall be Comforted. Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the Earth: Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filled. Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy. Blessed are the Pure in Heart, for they shall see GOD. Blessed are the Peace-makers, for they shall be called the Children of GOD. Blessed are they that shall be Persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of Evil against you falsely for my sake; rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. Having at the beginning of this Discourse, overthrown all the Judgments of Men, and all the Notices of Natural Reason; in cal∣ling those Happy, whom the World esteems Miserable; He afterwards shewed, how in∣considerable the Ordinances of the Jew∣ish Law, are in Comparison of the Precepts of his Gospel; plainly telling them he re∣quired of his Disciples, such a Righteous∣ness, as far exceeded that of the Scribes and Pharisees, without which he declared they could not enter into the Kingdom of Hea∣ven. He taught us by these Words: That he will not be pleased with our abstaining from things, which are apparently Evil to others Sight; nor with the doing of such things, as have the Face of good Works, which may gain us Esteem from Men; this being a ve∣ry common thing amongst the Pharisees. And therefore he enjoyns us toward the end of his Sermon, not to lay up Treasures on Earth, lest our Hearts be there where our Treasure is. That the Eye of our Intentions be Pure and Simple, that it may sanctifie the whole Body of our Actions. That we have but one Master, and that we do not share our selves betwixt Jesus Christ, and the World: And that we seek only the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof; to the end the rest may be given us as an Overplus. Which clearly shews us, That the end of the new Law, is to give a new Heart to the new Man; because our outward Actions must be regulated by the inward Principles of our Minds; for the River cannot be Pure, if the Fountain be corrupted.
Iudge not, lest ye be Iudged. AFter the general Maxims which our Blessed Saviour established on the Mount, where he instruc∣ted the People;The same Year 31. he de∣scended to particular Instructions, and shew∣ed, that to satisfie this Abundance of Righte∣ousness, which he required from his Disciples, he was not contented with their observing of the Decalogue, which forbids great Offen∣ces, but required the Avoiding the very beginnings of Sin. He shewed his principal Design was, to regulate the Heart, and to reduce it to such an Order, that it should abominate the least Inclination to Sin. Wherefore having for∣bidden the entertaining the smallest Desires to Revenge, he afterwards prohibits Injuri∣ous Words; because a peaceable Mind, and a well governed Tongue, are the best outward Signs of a True Christian Spirit. The Jews chief Endeavours were to satisfie the Eyes of Men; whereas True Christians seek only to do what is well pleasing in the Sight of GOD, who looks into the Heart So that our Saviour Jesus Christ seems to respect the Decalogue, as containing only Precepts of lesser Excellency; whereas he gives the Name of Great Commandments, to this keep∣ing of the Heart and Tongue; which stifle all Motions to Wrath and evil Speaking. Our Blessed Saviour, under the Prohibiti∣on of two such small things, conceals all the greatness of Christianity. It seems, as if he did not much value the Forbearance from Murther, because this may happen without any inward Vertue, Humane Rea∣sons often hindering it. But that which he most esteemed was, not to murmur inwardly against ones Brother; because the Forbearance of this, must hap∣pen from an excellent Principle. For the rise of Great Sins, comes from these small Beginnings, of which we take no Notice. It being certain, That he which fears to in∣jure a Man in Word, cannot fall into the Sin of Murther. And therefore do's our Saviour, in the lat∣ter Part of his Discourse, so greatly com∣mend to us the Love of our Enemies; by which he saith, we become like to his Fa∣ther, who causeth his Sun to shine, both on the Just and Unjust. But one of the Commandments, on which our Saviour do's most insist in this Sermon, is the Precept of not judging our Brother. For seeing a natural Inclination in the bottom of Mens Hearts of judging others, he bounds this Liberty, telling us, that by our rash Judments, we are like unto a Man, that having a Beam in his own Eye, yet would pull out the Mote out of his Brothers Eye: As the Scripture saith, Judge not, lest ye be Judged; for with what Judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what Measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. And why beholdest thou the Mote that is in thy Bro∣thers Eye, but considerest not the Beam in thine own Eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy Brother, Let me pull out the Mote out of thine Eye, and behold a Beam in thine own? Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Beam out of thine own Eye, and then thou shalt see clearly to cast out the Mote out of thy Brother's Eye. The World is full of Offences of this kind, say the Fathers; but the greatest Re∣medy they could find against them, is Hu∣mility: The having low Thoughts of our selves, which will hinder us from having mean Thoughts of others. So that either our Charity, or Humility must suppress in us, all these rash Judgings; and if neither of them will do it, then will Fear con∣strain us, by remembring the Day, in which Jesus Christ shall come to judge the smallest Defects, which are to be found in our good Works, which often deceive both our selves and others. He do's assure us, he will deal out to us, the same Weight and Measure, we have given others. He that seriously thinks on this Judgment, cannot judge his Brother, much less make himself a pleasant entertainment of his Faults. Charity makes us take all things by the best Handle, and practise the Advice of an Holy Bshop, who tells us, that if an Action had an Hundred Faces, we should always look upon it by that which is fairest.
173 Archibald Primrose of Deumenie in the County of Linlithgow in the Kingdome of Scotland Esq. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
174 Andrew Rcarne alias Wheler of atchet in the County of Bucks Armiger For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
A Leprous Person besought our SAVIOƲR to cure him of his Leprosie; and a Centurion that sent some Jews to request our SAVIOƲR to come and heal his sick Servant. OUR Saviour, being come down from the Mountain, where he had establi∣shed all the Rules of Christian Morality,The same Year 31. wrought two Miracles related in the Gospel. The first was the Leprous Person, who in the manner he approaches our Saviour, gives us an excellent Model of Prayer. For as soon as he had perceived him, he acknow∣ledged him his Saviour, and by Vertue of this Faith, he saith to him with an inward Humility of Soul, which he testified by his outward Gestures, LORD if thou wilt thou can'st make me Clean; Shewing on the one Hand, what was his Faith, and on the other his Submission to the Will of GOD. Our Saviour had Compassion on him, and stretching out his Hand to touch him, saith unto him, I will, be thou clean; to approve what this Man had declared, and to shew us, that his Will alone, is the Source of all those Graces which they receive, whom he has loved with an everlasting Love, when he saw nothing in them but Bruises and Putre∣fied Sores. Having Healed this Man, and forbidden him to make known this Miraculous Cure, (which teacheth us to conceal the secret Graces that he bestows on us,) as soon as he was entred into Capernaum, a Centurion, who was extreamly troubled at the Sickness of his Servant, who was at the Point of Death; sent some Jews to request him, to come and heal this Sick Person. The Jews came to him, to entreat this Fa∣vour at his Hands, and urged in his Com∣mendation, that this Centurion had built them a Synagogue: Our Saviour yielded to their Request, and went with them to the House where this Sick Man lay. But as he drew near, this Centurion, who had a more lively Faith, than all the Jews; sent his most intimate Friend to our Saviour, to entreat him, not to be at the trouble to come to his Lodging, because he was unworthy of so great an Honour; and that it was for that reason, he dared not wait upon him him∣self; That he knew, he needed but speak the Word, and his Servant would be Healed. Our Blessed LORD admired the Faith of this Centurion; and the Church has so admi∣red it, after his Example, that she offers it continually as a Model to her Children, and puts the Words of this Holy Man, into the Mouths of her Ministers and People, when they are ready to receive the same LORD, to whom this great Man spake. Wherefore to draw the Instruction which our Saviour Jesus Christ and his Spouse, would have us to draw from so great an Example, we ought to have in Imitation of this Centu∣rion, a profound Humility of Soul; and to believe our selves unworthy to offer up the least Request to our Saviour. For he must hear us, for his own Merits sake, and not for any thing that is in us, to make our Prayers acceptable. We ought also to believe, as say the Holy Fathers, That the least Word of our Saviour, can Operate, if he pleaseth, as great Effects in our Souls, as his Divine Body. For this Centurion, did in effect, receive by the sole Word of our Saviour, the same Grace, as if he had received his Presence. Our Blessed LORD would surrender him∣self, to his Humility; and in some sort, be Obedient to Him: He abstained from com∣ing to him, because he would not render him confused. But in not entring the House himself, says St. Austin, he made an invisible Vertue enter in, which cured the Sickness of his Servant; and if he visited him not in Per∣son, 'twas to visit him more happily by his Graces and Mercy. The ancient Fathers have taken occasion, from the Charity of this Centurion, towards his Servant; to recommend to all Persons in the World, the care of their Domesticks, especially when they are Sick. 'Tis in these Occasions, wherein they must testifie to GOD, that they know both Poor and Rich are equal; and that if they will have him to have pity on them as the Servants of GOD; they ought also to be Compassionate to those that serve them.
A Dead Man restor'd to Life. The Widows Son of NAIM restor'd to Life. AFter the cure of so many several Disea∣ses, our blessed Saviour did that which was more surprizing; which is,The same Year 31. the Miracle of the Resurrection from the Dead. The first, which the Holy Gospel denotes, that Jesus Christ raised up to Life, is a young Damsel, aged Twelve Years, who was Daughter to to a Ruler of the Synagogue, named Jairus. There appeared nothing extraordinary in this Miracle, nor in the Faith of the Father, who being on this Account, of a Temper different from the Centurion, suffered our Saviour to come to his House; nor in the Faith of this Damsel that was raised up, of whose acknowledgment, the Gospel makes no mention; nor in that of those, who were present; seeing on the contrary they derided our blessed LORD, for saying this young Damsel slept, and was not dead. The second Resurrection, we read of in the Gospel, contains something more parti∣cular, as will appear by what follows. When our blessed Saviour went into the City of NAIM, accompanied by his Disciples, and a great Croud of People, he met with a dead Corps at the Gates of the Town, that was going to be buried, which was the on∣ly Son of a Widow, who much lamented his Death. Our Saviour was moved with Compassion at the Sight, and though she spake not to him, yet her Tears called aloud for Compassion. He drew near to her, and id her hold her Peace; and then stopping those that carried this dead Body, he tou∣ched the Bier, whereon this young Man lay, and bid him arise, which he immediate∣ly did, and he delivered him to his Mother. This Miracle contains great Instructions, as is observed by the Ancient Fathers. We hence learn, that nothing happens by Chance; and that whatever appears to Men, to be a meer Accident, is a real Design in GOD; for our Saviour came by on purpose, to raise this dead Man to Life. We may here Remark, That these Bearers whom Je∣sus Christ stops in the Way, are the Devils, which carry the Soul into Hell, which is its last resting Place; and the Sinners Grave. These Bearers are really horrible; whence we may truly judge, that the Soul of a Sin∣ner is but a meer inanimate Corps, that is not able to stir it self, unless the Devils bear it up and move it, as they are said to enter into the dead Bodies of wicked Persons to appear visible to our Sight. And therefore this Circumstance of the Gospel, agrees with what is said in another Place of the same Writings: That Jesus Christ must first bind the strong Man, to spoil him of his Vessels, which is to say, the Soul, in which he inhabits, as in his com∣mon Dwelling. And in effect when we con∣sider the Difficulty there is in converting a Soul, that is a Slave to Lust; we find it so great, that it cannot be done, unless our Sa∣viour do's first tie up the Devils, to make this Man love that, which before he abhorred Our blessed LORD, having restored this young Man to Life, he gave him to his Mo∣ther, to whom he belonged; as well for that she had brought him into the World, as like∣wise, because she had restored him again to it by her Prayers, which shews us our great Obligation to the Church; and that we are not able sufficiently to requite the great care she has took of us. And therefore the Holy Fathers have said, That these dead be∣ing again raised up by the Prayers of the Church, ought after their Conversion, to be in Mourning with the Divine Mother, to obtain altogether the Resurrection of their Brethren, whose Death she still bewails. 'Twere well if People would consider the Ob∣ligations they have to their Parents, to whom, next to GOD they are most Indebted. We have more reason to love them, than they have to love us. But 'tis true, they are led by Na∣ture to be infinitely kind to us, and we should be led by Reason to be infinitely grateful to them. Yet we see, when Parents grow old, and need their Childrens Assistance, how seldom is it chearfully given them? For whatsoever they do for them, seems to be more Burdensom, than what they will do perhaps for those to whom they have no Obligation.
175 Bridget the Wife of John Blake of the Tower of London Gentleman For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
176 Thomas Lewes of the Parish of Hackney, in the County of Middlesex Gentleman. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
Mary Magdalen Washeth our SAVIOUR's Feet with her Tears, and Obtains Pardon of her Sins. THe Fame of the Resurrection of this young Man of Naim from the Dead; together with the other Miracles which our Savi∣our wrought,The same Year 31. spreading over all Parts; the Disciples of S. John, informed him of them in Prison, where Herod had thrown him. This Holy Man having no other intention than the discovering of our Saviour to the World, as knowing he had his Life for that purpose; he continued still, in some sort, to do the Work, he came for; at least, as much as he could; and therefore, he desig∣ned to force, as it were, our Saviour himself to declare, that he was the Messias, in the Presence of some of his Disciples, which he sent to him, not to entreat him, to deliver him from Prison; but to enquire of him, if he were the Person, the World had so long expected. Our Saviour knowing that the Disciples of S. John did, in some sort, envy him, as excelling their Master, he therefore would not say any thing, which might appear ad∣vantageous of himself, but rather chose to do some Miracles before them, and enjoyned them to relate to S. John what they had seen. When they were gone, our Saviour took occasion from this Deputation, to speak of S. John before the People, and to praise that Firmness and Constancy of Mind, wherewith he was endued; That is not like our Tempers, which are as Reeds shaken with the Wind. And as the Life of this Holy Man had been attended with great Austerities and Mortifi∣cations; so our Lord declared, that it must be with great Strivings and Watchfulness that a Man can be saved: That the Kingdom of Heaven, could not be taken, otherwise than by a long Siege, and violent Storm. He declared the miserable Circumstances, which some Cities lay under, where he had shewed great Joy, at the hearing of his Do∣ctrine; because they had not given any To∣kens of their Amendment; saying, that it will be more tolerable, for Sodom and Gomor∣rah, at the Day of Judgment, than for them. But the generality of Men, being strangely hardened, and bare Discourses not being suffi∣cient to work a Reformation in them; our Saviour therefore, would bring them to it, by a Famous Example, which was that of the blessed Mary Magdalen. This Holy Sinner, moved by the Divine Grace, came running to Jesus Christ, as the only Physician of her Soul. And therefore knowing that he had entred into the House of Simon the Pharisee, to Eat there; she came thither with an Holy Boldness; and without Blushing, at so many Witnesses, she threw her self at his Feet, Embraced them, Kissed them, Wash'd them with her Tears, and wiped them with the Hair of her Head. The Pharisees, who knew this Woman, (for the Irregularity of her Life, had made her infamous, throughout all the Town;) began to doubt, whether our Saviour Christ was a Prophet, seeing he knew not who she was, that had dared to touch Him; doubting not, but if he had known her, he would have re∣jected her. But our blessed Saviour, confoun∣ding the vain Imagination of this Doctor of the Law; learnt him, how much he prefer∣red the Fervent Love of this Sinner, to the Lukewarmness of those who had not com∣mitted such great Crimes. And having shew∣ed that the Multitude of her Sins were for∣given, because she loved much, he sent her away in Peace, after this holy Action. This Woman, as is observ'd by the Fathers, has given in her Person a compleat Pattern of Repentance, in which there is nothing wanting but Words; to shew, That GOD doth not much value them, in such a case; seeing they are only the Leaves of Repentance. She now employs to a Vertuous use, what∣soever she had before abused to Vice. She now offers to Jesus Christ, as many Sacrifices, as she before had made to the Devil; and now Sacrifices to Repentance, whatever she had heretofore offered up to Luxury. This so admirable a Conversion may be called the Glory of Repentance; for it shews us, that the greatest Sinner, becomes pure in the sight of GOD, when his Repentance is Sanctified by Humility: and that on the con∣trary, the Chastest Soul is impure in his sight, when this Heavenly Gift, which should ren∣der him the most humble of Men, does on the contray, make him Proud.
The Parable of the SEED. OUR blessed Lord, being one day sur∣rounded with great Crowds of People Entred into a Ship; and putting off,The same Year 31. some small distance from the Land, he sat down in it, and thence taught the People, instructing them by many Parables. He told them in that of the Sower, that the Husbandman sowing his Seed, part of it fell out of the Field, into the way side; and there was trodden under foot, or eaten by the Fowls. And afterwards Explaining pri∣vately this Parable, to his Disciples; he told them, that these Persons are those, who hear the Word of GOD, and from whose Hearts, the Devil at the same time comes and takes it away; lest they should believe, and be saved. For this Spirit of Darkness who often mixes his Tares with the Wheat, as our Sa∣viour observes in the following Parable, al∣ways endeavours at the same time that GOD Sows his good Seed in our Souls, to produce their Conversion, to destroy it, either by himself, or by Men that are his Instru∣ments, lest it should take deep Root in our Hearts. The second Parable of the Seed is, that which fell on Stony Ground; which not be∣ing able to take Root, soon withers at the Sun's Appearance. And these are those, says our Saviour Jesus Christ, who hear the Word with glad∣ness; but taking no Root, are discomposed, and lost, at the least Affliction, or Perse∣cution, which may happen, because of the Gospel. 'Tis easie for those Persons to be decei∣ved, and to be Ignorant, that notwithstan∣ding this delight which they have in the Word of GOD, yet their Hearts are as hard as Stone, and that they have need of softening them by continual Exercises of Faith and Repentance. The third part of the Seed, falls among Thorns, which grow up with the good Grain, and Choak it. And these Persons, says our Saviour, are those, who hear the Word; But the Cares and Troubles of this World, the deceitfulness of Riches, and an infinite number of inordinate desires, stifle this Word, and render it fruitless. For 'tis too evident, that the Cares of this World, make us apply our Minds with less Atten∣tion to what GOD, or his Ministers speak to us. We cannot sufficiently enough Lament before GOD, the mischief which these secu∣lar Concerns bring along with them; kill∣ing in us so frequently this Precious Seed, after several Acts of Devotion have made it spring up in us. For all the Miseries which respect the Body, as Plague, War, Famine, &c. are not Subjects worthy of our Tears, so much as the loss of this Divine Seed. In fine, the fourth part of this good Grain falls on good Ground, which soon springs up, and brings forth good Fruit, although not all alike; some Grains yield∣ing one Hundred fold for one, others Sixty, and others Thirty. These Persons, says our Saviour Jesus Christ, are those who have their Hearts not only good, but very good. If the Heart be simply good, it is exposed to two great Evils, to one, that it bears small Fruit, and the other, that it easily becomes Bad: Where∣fore we must endeavour, how good soever it is, to make it better; which is done by increasing in Charity. But our Saviour Jesus Christ doth him∣self observe, that 'tis only by Patience, that we bear much Fruit, that is to say, in en∣during many Afflictions, which do in some sort Cultivate our Fields, and renders our Charity more Vigorous. For she is the Root of all good Fruit, and the stronger that this Root is, the more excellent is the Fruit, which springs from it, proportiona∣ble to the Condition and Rank of each true Believer. Thus Afflictions overthrow the Weak, as 'tis observable touching the second Seed; but become, on the contrary, the Exercise and Crown of the Strong.
177 John Rossiter of Somerby in the County of Lincoln Esq For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
178 The Right Honourable Ann Lady Morpeth, daugter of the Right Honourable Arthur Capell▪ Earle of Essex deceased. For Advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
The Beheading of S. John the Baptist. WHen our Saviour's Fame was spread throughout all Parts; Nazareth being the Country where he chiefly resided,The same year 31. shewed more Incredulity than the rest of Judea. They could not reconcile what was said touching the great things he did, with what they beheld in his Person. They saw on one hand his Poverty, the mean condition of his Mother and Kindred; and on the other, the great Miracles which were publish'd of him; and the Applauses of the People. In fine, their Pride (being offended at this extraor∣dinary Fame of our Saviour) made them contrive to precipitate him from the Top of the Mountain whereon their Town stood. But our Saviour's hour was not then come, neither was it in the power of any Man to hasten it; so that passing through the midst of them, he rendred ineffectual their wicked design. Our blessed Lord well understanding the Aversion they had to him, would not im∣mediately preach in Nazareth, but in Caper∣naum, and other circumjacent Towns; as well to humble himself, as to shew us, that we ought to avoid all pompous Appearances in a place where we have before lived in ob∣scurity; as also to dispose by degrees those of Nazareth▪ by his Absence, to believe in him, as well as others, and to respect him for the time to come whom they had be∣fore despised. But the hardness of their Hearts being in∣superable, our Saviour contented himself with Working some few Miracles to shew that he did not slight them; and he did no more, lest he should make them more Cri∣minal. He past then from them, and leaving Nazareth▪ he had News brought him of the Death of S. John the Baptist, which hapned in this manner. The Devil having instigated Herod to cast him into Prison for having represented to him, how scandalous his incestuous Coha∣bitation was with Herodias, his Brother's Wife; (who not contented with this good mans Imprisonment, moved Herod to put him to Death:) He brought to pass whatsoever was necessary to this Design; and shewed, how well he could manage occasions, and dispose all requisite Circumstances, for the execution of his Malice, on this Holy Man. Hero's Birth-day being come, this Prince made a great Feast to all the Grandees of his Court; and the Daughter of this incestuous Herodias dancing in the midst of this Assem∣bly, she so extremely pleased Herod, that he at the same time commanded her to ask of him whatever she would, and he would give it her, tho it were half of his Kingdom. She went presently to her Mother, to know what she should demand; who preferring the gratifying her Revenge on S. John, above whatever her Ambition or Covetousness could desire, enjoined her to ask only of him the Head of S. John the Baptist. Herod was much troubled at this demand, as having a great esteem for S. John: But the Devil lessening the Reverence he had to this Holy Man, and encreasing his fond Affe∣ction to Herodias, caused him at length to yield, that he might not break his Word. S. John's Head was cut off in Prison, and delivered to Herodias's Daughter in a Charger; who immediately came, and brought it to her Mother▪ Thus did this truly great Man die; and thus at length ended the high Opinion which Herod had of him; who having been the great Admirer of this holy Person, became at length no less than his Murtherer. His first Enormities served him as a passage to this hainous Crime; and this barbarous Cruelty was the Punishment of his Incest. 'Tis strange, says S. Gregory, that such infa∣mous People should have that Power over so Divine a Person as S. John: But if his Life was precious in the eyes of GOD, it was not so in his own; and one may say that GOD seconding his Humility, and considering how little he valued it, gave it therefore for a Dance; by which, adds this Holy Father, the Servants of GOD may learn to despise their own Lives, and be willing they should be at the Mercy of cruel and wicked People; for in sacrificing them to GOD for and to whom alone they live, their Death, like S. John's, will be the more estimable, and acceptable in the sight of GOD▪ by how much it may appear more shameful in the Eyes of Men.
The Miracle of the Loaves. OUR blessed LORD and Saviour, having been informed of the Death of S. John the Baptist, withdrew thereupon into the Desert;In the year of the common Aera 32. the 3d of Christ's Preaching. taking his Disciples along with him, to learn his Church to retire to places of Retreat in times of Danger. And this was the more necessary, by how much the Miracles of Jesus Christ be∣gan to be taken notice of at Court: and He∣rod Antipater, the Son of him who had put the Innocent Children to Death, was in trou∣ble to know who this man should be that was so powerful, both in Word and Deed; Imagining some times, he was S. John the Baptist whom he had put to Death; who being Risen from the Dead, wrought all these wonderful things. Such Imaginations as these trouble the Repose of this wicked Prince; whilst our Saviour was Retired into the Wilderness, where Herod could not hinder the People from Running after him: for he was follow∣ed by near five thousand Persons, who were continually attentive to his Doctrine and Mi∣racles. Their Minds, were so taken up with what they saw and heard from him, that they forgot to take along with them their necessary Provisions. And three Days being already past since they left their Habitations to follow Jesus Christ in the Desert; our Saviour was moved with Compassion in see∣ing these Persons, and spake to his Disciples about the procuring of them Sustenance: They answered him, that the place, where they were, was a Desert, far distant from Towns, and that they had no other Provi∣sion than five Barly Loaves, and some few Fishes. Our blessed Saviour commanded the Dis∣ciples, to cause them to sit down, in divers Companies; and when this was done, lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, he blessed these Loaves and gave them to his Disciples, that they might share them amongst the People. These Loaves Multiplyed themselves in our Saviour's Hands; for all the People Eat of them, and were satisfied; and our Saviour commanded his Disciples to gather up the Fragments with great care, with which were filled Twelve Baskets. The Ancient Fathers, have ever regarded these five thousand Men that followed our Saviour Jesus Christ, as a Type of true Christians, who forsake the World, at least their Hearts, to follow Jesus Christ where∣ever he calls them. There is observable in their whole Con∣duct, an excellent Image, or Representation of the Church. They are attentive to the Words of our Saviour, and expect no relief on Earth, but from his Bounty. They all appear but as one single Man. They have all the same Affections, the same Inclinations, and the same end, whereto they tend by the same means. They continue in this Desert, and grow not weary of our Saviours Com∣pany. They persist therein, till they Faint, without Murmuring for Sustenance. And therefore our Saviour Christ seeing their great Faith, stays till the third day before he feeds them, and though his Charity was great, yet he would not do it presently. He then shewed that Pious Conflict, which oft happens between GOD, and Elect Souls; when on the one Hand, GOD will not yet succour them in their Distresses; because 'tis not the time; and on the other, his Elect feeling such Joy and Comfort▪ in the Accom∣plishment of his Will, remain Stedfast and Firm in that Condition, without desiring to get out of it. Prayer, in all other occasions, is the effect of Faith; but tis the effect of a very small Faith, to be earnest with GOD, to deliver one out of any Temporal Affliction. Ought not this to satisfie us, that GOD himself, keeps account of the Days and M∣nutes of our sufferings? He, I say, who as∣sures us, that he numbers the very Hairs of our Heads. We should let him alone, to do with us as he thinks fitting; for the best remedy in our griefs is to commit our selves wholly to his Will and Pleasure, and to remain quietly in the condition he has placed us, not desi∣rous to depart out of it, until his due time.
179 Richard Whitworth of Adbaston▪ in the County of stafford Esq For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
180
S. Peter's Faith fails him. S. Peter Walks on the Sea to Meet our SAVIOƲR, and sinking, Cries ut to him for help. WHen our Saviour had done this great Miracle of the Loaves, the People would needs lay hold of him,The same Year 32. and make him a King by Force; But our blessed LORD, though he presented himself of his own accord, when he was to die, yet Fled, when they offered him this Dignity: to teach his Disciples to Fly Ecclesiastical Promo∣tions, when Men do offer them; even as Jesus Christ would not receive Honour from Men, but from his Father. When 'twas night, he came to his Disci∣ples, at the place where this Miracle was wrought; and to put the Remembrance of it out of their Minds, which were puft up at the thoughts thereof, He made them en∣ter into a Ship, and pass the Sea, that the Tempest which soon after happened by his Order, might make them sensible of their Weakness in the absence of their Master; and that this Knowledge might keep them in Humility, which was to be (as it were) the Foundation, on which he would Erect this solid Vertue, which was to render them the Pillars of the Church. He left them for some time, in the midst of the Waves, being driven up and down the whole night by the Weather, without his hastning to deliver them. But when the day appeared, he drew towards them, Walking on the Surface of the Waters. When they beheld him, thus coming on the Floods, as on dry Land, they thought him to be a Spectrum, and their Fear made them send forth strong Cries. But our Saviour spake to them to Encou∣rage them, saying, Fear not, It is I. S. Peter was the first that felt the Efficacy of this Divine Word; and having his Heart full of an Assurance, which placed him above all fear of danger, he said to Jesus Christ, if it be thou LORD, Command me to come upon the Waters to thee. Our Saviour bad him come; and S. Peter leapt immediately into the Sea, with a Confidence which can∣not be sufficiently enough admired, and which then denoted, That GOD would make his Church in future Ages Victorious through∣out all the World; and that she should tread under Foot, whatsoever should oppose Her. But as S. Peter thus went to joyn himself to Jesus Christ, a great Wind arose, which put him into an Astonishment; Fear over∣whelmed his Spirits, and his Faith failing, he began immediately to Sink. Then did he Address himself to our Sa∣viour, who had already given him some power, entreating him to succour him. And Jesus Christ stretching out his hand, took hold of him, and blaming the Weakness of his Faith, bid him not be afraid. And when they were entred into the Ship, the Wind immediately ceased, and the Waves melted themselves into a Calm Smoothness. The Ancient Fathers who have always re∣garded the Actions and Words of our Saviour, as full of Mysteries; have admired, he should suffer S. Peter to be in danger of drowning, after he had Commanding him to come on the Waters He designed, say these Ancient Writers, to convince this good Disciple, by his own Experience, That 'tis he only can Save, lest his natural assurance should Tempt him to Pride. Even our Fears in the Service of GOD▪ are of use, when they be Moderate. They inform us of our Weaknesses, and make us depend more on him, and expect all our Safety from him. There are few sincere Christians in the World, for whom GOD has not done more than he did on this Occasion for S. Peter. There are other Depths, and Tempests, whence he has delivered them, and does yet daily and hourly deliver them by his powerful Word: And they cannot be wanting in the acknowledgment, which they ought to have of so sensible a Pro∣tection without the greatest Stupidity and Ingratitude.
Our SAVIOƲR admires the Faith of the CANAANITISH Woman, and Heals her DAUGHTER. OUR Saviour, having left the place where he had Miraculously Fed so great a Multitude of Peo∣ple;The same Year 32. these Persons were in great trouble the next Day, to know what was become of him. They knew there was in this place but only one Bark, or Vessel; and they also knew that Jesus Christ had not entred therein, nor his Disciples. Wherefore not finding him along the Rivers side, and having past over again the Water to go to Capernum; they ask'd him, when they had found him, when and how he came there. But our Sa∣viour not listing to satisfie their Curious Humour, and concealing the manner of his Walking on the Waters: only told them, who were so Zealous in their search after him, That they followed him, meerly for the Loaves sake, and not out of any real Love to his Person, or Doctrine. And there∣fore he Exhorted them, to Labour after other Food; and not to seek so greedily af∣ter the Meat which perisheth. He discoursed to them of the Eucharistical Bread, whereat many were Scandalized, even of his own Disciples. When they went away, Jesus Christ, without shewing any Concern, at the seeing himself thus Aban∣doned by his Disciples. Addrest himself to the Twelve Apostles, Demanding of them, whether they would also leave him? To which St. Peter answered with his usual Fervor; LORD, to whom shall we go, seeing thou hast the Words of Eternal Life. Our Saviour also plainly shewed, 'twas no wonder that several of his Disciples left him, seeing of the Twelve, which he had chosen particularly, there was one of them, which he assured them was a Devil. He left then Judea, to avoid the Rage of his Enemies, who began openly to declare themselves against him, and departed to the Coasts of Tyre and Sidon; where he did more than he had done in Judea. For a Canaanitish Woman (arriving from those Parts, where our Saviour Christ would not go himself, lest he should scandalize the Jews) came by a Secret Instinct of Jesus Christ, who called her to him, though un∣known to her, who shewed him with great Cries, that her Daughter was tormented with a Devil, and entreated him to have Pity on her. But our Saviour although so Com∣passionate to others, yet seemed to give no Ear to the Complaints of this Woman, to the end he might give us in her Person▪ an excel∣lent instance of the Prevalency of Prayer; and to shew us by her example, with what Humility we ought to persevere in it, when it seems to us that GOD Almighty in Deaf to our Requests, and rejects all our Petitions. This humble Woman, being not able to obtain any thing of Jesus Christ, Addrest her self to the Apostles, who interceded for her to our Saviour. But he answered, he was only sent to the lost Sheep of Israel, and not to the Gentiles. And they being urgent with him, because the Canaanitish Woman Impor∣tuned them, with her entreaties; our Savi∣our therefore to shew the Solidity of her Faith, would not yet yield to her. When at length she came up to him and cast herself at his Feet and Worshipped him, Imploring his Assistance, with great Lamentations. Our Lord still Repell'd her, and using her as a Dog, said to her, That it was not Lawful, to take the Childrens Bread, and cast it to Dogs. This usage which would have sufficiently provoked a Proud Spirit, served only to encrease her Confidence in our Saviour. She confest indeed she was but a Dog, yet that the Dogs were permitted to Eat of the Crums which fell from the Childrens Table, and that she desired no more. She put herself into the Condition of such a mean Creature, and acknowledged the Jews to be her Masters, and the Children of the true GOD. This humble Confession in the midst of such a rude Treatment in Appear∣ance, made our Saviour immediately Cry out, O Woman, great is thy Faith, and changing his Roughness into an Admiration of her Faith, immediately granted what she desired. The Holy Fathers have much extolled this Faith in a Pagan Woman; and S. Gregory the Great saith▪ that as this Idolatrous Woman confounded the Incredulity of the Jews, so it may often happen in the Church; That Persons who are engaged in Worldly Business, shall make those Blush, who make Profession of a more Heavenly Calling.
181 Elizabeth the wife of Edward Hubbald of the Tower of London Gentleman▪ For advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
182 Jane Lady spencer, relict of Sr. Thomas spencer, of yarington in oxfordshire Baronet. For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate,
The TRANSFIGURATION of our Saviour JESUS CHRIST on the Mountain, in the presence of his Three Disciples, St. Peter, St. James, and St. John. OUR Saviour Jesus Christ, being alone with his Disciples, and passing with them over most of the Cities of Caesarea,The same Year 32. deman∣ded of his Disciples, what the World said of him? They answered, that some thought he was John the Baptist; others that he was Elias; others, that he was Jeremiah, or one of the ancient Prophets. And you, said our Lord, whom think ye that I am? St. Peter then without Haesitating, answered; Thou art Christ the Son of the Living GOD. Our Saviour called him Blessed, because his Father had revealed to him this Truth, and assured him, he would so firmly establish his Holy Church, on this his Confession, That the Gates of Hell should never prevail against it. This was a proper and ingenuous Pro∣fession of St. Peter's Faith; yet this hin∣dred not our blessed LORD, from calling him Satan, when he would have disswaded him from suffering and yielding unto Death: Which shews us, that GOD seldom raises up his Saints, but he immediately abases them; for Humane Weakness is so great, that if the Divine Goodness dealt not thus with us, we should be puft up, either with our tem∣poral or spiritual Prosperity; which might prove of dreadful Consequence to us. Eight Days after this had hapned, our Saviour took Three of his Disciples, viz. St. Peter, St. James and St. John (who ever seemed to be the chiefest Favorites, and to whom he shewed most Tenderness.) He led them up a high Mountain apart, and when he Prayed there, he was immediately Transfigured: His Countenance shined like the Sun, and his Garments were white as Snow: At the same time Moses and Elias ap∣peared, who discoursed with Jesus Christ touching what was to happen to him at Je∣rusalem. The Three Disciples that Slept, immedi∣ately awaked; and were surprized at the Glo∣ry of our Saviour, and at the Sight of the two Prophets who were talking with him. St. Peter being transported with Joy, thus spake to our Saviour, Master, it is good for us to be here: Let us make here three Taberna∣cles; one for thee, another for Moses, and ano∣ther for Elias. But whilst he was yet speak∣ing, a Cloud came and o'er shadowed them, and a Voice was heard, saying, This is my B∣loved Son, hear ye Him. Whereupon the Disciples fell immediately on the Ground with Astonishment; when Jesus Christ draw∣ing near unto them, touched them, saying arise and be not afraid; they then arose, and saw no one save Jesus Christ, who strict∣ly charged them, as they were coming down from the Mountain, to tell no Body, what they had Seen and Heard. This Transfiguration full of Mysteries, was one of the Means which our Saviour made use of, to strengthen the Faith of his Dis∣ciples; and for a more sensible Perswasion to them that he was GOD, He intended by this Anticipation of his Glory, to shew them, what they should one Day be them∣selves at the Resurrection of the Dead; and that Maugre all the Labours, Tryals, and Suf∣ferings of this Life, they should certainly enjoy the Glory of which they had been Eye-witnesses on this Mountain. And 'tis this Sight which made them strong in their greatest Conflicts. When the Holy Spirit came upon them, he made this Vision more useful to them, than it then appeared, comprehending by its Light, that this ineffable Glory of Jesus Christ, which they had seen with their own Eyes, should be communicated to their own Body; so that we may say the Design of Je∣sus Christ in this Transfiguration, was not on∣ly to render his Apostles strong in the Day of his Passion, and to remember his Glory in the time of his Humiliation; but even to make them strong themselves in the time of their Sufferings, and to encourage them in their Afflictions, by the sight of the Glory with which they were to be attended.
Infants the Type of Humility. Our SAVIOƲR proposes to his Disciples a Child for an Exam∣ple of Christian Humility. OUR Saviour Christ being come down with his Three Apostles from Mount Tabor; found his other Disciples environed with a great Croud of People;The same Year 32. and a certain Per∣son, whose Son was vexed with an Evil Spirit, was entreating them to heal him, in the Absence of their Master. Now although our blessed Lord had given them Power over these Spirits, yet could not they drive out this; wherefore our Sa∣viour Christ having done it himself, and re∣stored this Son to his Father, his Disciples asked him privately, why they could not do it. He answered them, Because of their Unbelief; adding, That if they had Faith, they might remove the Mountains, and place them in the midst of the Sea. He afterwards informed them, that this kind of Devils, went not out but by Fasting and Prayer. Thus did he teach them their Mistake, in pretending to exercise an absolute Authori∣ty over the Devil, without using the ordi∣nary Means which GOD had prescribed, such as were Fasting and Prayer. Our LORD after this went to Capernaum, where those that gathered Taxes, ask'd St Pe∣ter, whether his Master was for paying Tribute; and he answered he was: And they had no sooner entred into an House, but our Savi∣our prevented Peter with this Question; From whom do Princes require Tribute; from their Children or Strangers? But added he, that we may give no Offence▪ Go thou to the Sea, and open the Mouth of the first Fish thou shalt take; and therein thou shalt find a piece of Money, give it for me and thee. Our Saviour teaches us by this Example, to submit to the Laws of the Place where we Live, and to obey Magistrates when the things they require of us be not sinful. Our LORD being seated in an House, with his Disciples, he demanded of them the Sub∣ject of their Discourse in the way; for he knew they had been disputing, which of them should be the greatest. And intending to overthrow in their Minds all proud Con∣ceptions, and Desires of Preheminency, he told them, that he that would be the first of all, should be the last: And to give them a more lively Image of this Dispositi∣on of Soul, he took up a little Child, and placed him in the midst of them, saying, That if they endeavoured not to become like this Child, they could in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. For the Scrip∣ture saith, that the Disciples coming to him, asked him▪ who was the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven? And our Saviour cal∣led to him a little Child, and set him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as lit∣tle Children, ye shall not enter into the King∣dom of Heaven, whosoever therefore shall humble himself, as this little Child the same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, and who so shall receive one such little Child in my Name, receiveth me: But who so offends one of these little ones which believe in me, it were bet∣ter for him that a Mill-stone were hung about his Neck, and that he were drown'd in the Sea. The Holy Fathers have much reflected on this Saying of our Saviour; and consider∣ing how difficult this is to the proud Spirit of Man, their only Hope has been, in the Grace of him who uttered this Sentence. Hence they have discoursed how neces∣sary it is to stifle all those ambitious Desires of appearing Greater than others; And that a true Christians Study ought to be to con∣ceal himself; and to be willing, that others should be preferred before him. One Man is no greater than another; but only as he has more Charity, or more Humility; for all the rest is meer Vanity before GOD. And should a Man extol himself above other Men, because he has more Charity, this Glo∣ry would Rank him amongst the Lowest. Our Blessed Saviour stifles Pride, and plucks it up by the Roots, by reducing his Disciples to the Condition of a little Child. And if a Man would judge whether he shall be of the number of the Blessed in the other World, he need only to consider whether he be hum∣ble as an Infant in this, and whether he en∣deavours by Christian Simplicity by Humility, by Obedience, and other Vertues, to be as lit∣tle in Spirit, as Children are in Body.
183 Mr. David Hamilton son of David Hamil∣ton of the Citty of London Dr. in Physick. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
184 Elizabeth Lady Onslow, wife of the Honourable Sr. Richard Onslow, of Clandon in surrey Baronet▪ &ca. For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
The Ten Lepers Healed. Our SAVIOƲR heals the Ten Lepers. OUR LORD taking occasion from his Disciples Disputes, to recommend to them the Practice of Chri∣stian Humility,The same year 32. and to make them respectful to Children, and to the Weak, whom he said to offend was extream Dan∣gerous, he left Galilee; and the Feast of Ta∣bernacles drawing nigh his Kindred and Bre∣thren exhorted him to go into Judea, whence he had Retired on the Death of S. John. They told him he had nothing to Fear, and speak∣ing to him as a Man that affected Popularity by his great Miracles, they shewed, as the Gospel Testifies, That they did not believe in him. Our Saviour did not set himself to Refute their Vain Imaginations? He only told them, their time was always ready, whereas his was not yet come, and that he would not go yet into Judea. His Kindred assisted at the Feast before him; But having remained some days in Galilee, he went into Judea, not Publickly, and with a Concourse of People as he was wont, but in Private. When passing through the midst of Samaria, he entered into a certain Village, and there met him 10 men that were Lepers, who stood a far off; and they lifted up their Voices, and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us. And when he saw them, he said unto them, go shew your selves to the Priests, in obedience to the Law: And it came to pass, that as they went they were cleansed; Thereby teaching those that should believe in him, what Respect they ought to have to the Customs and Practi∣ces of the Church; and how great a deference they ought to pay to the Rulers therein Esta∣blished. For no sooner had these Persons shewed themselves to the Priests, but they found themselves Cured of their Leprosy. One of the 10 immediately thereupon returned, loudly Glorifying GOD for so Miraculous a Cure; and went to our Saviour, throwing himself at his Feet, and Bowing his Head to the Ground, gave him thanks for the Mer∣cy, which he came from Receiving. Our LORD ask'd him whether they had not all been Cured and what were become of the other Nine? The Gospel tells us only one of the Ten returned to our Saviour to give him thanks, and he was a Samaritan. Our Blessed Sa∣viour sent him away, telling him his Faith had saved him, sufficiently shewing how greatly the Ingratitude of the rest did dis∣please him. The Holy Fathers considering this Exam∣ple, have ever taken hence occasion to ex∣hort Men to fly Ingratitude and to receive no favour from GOD, without shewing him, by all the signs they are able, how greatly they desire to make their acknowledg∣ments suitable to the Benefits they Receive. 'Tis not sufficient for us to rejoyce at the inward Cures of our Souls, seeing 'tis not to be Questioned, but that these 9 Lepers were thus Affected. They had beyond all que∣stion a perfect sense of their Cure, and even admired from their Hearts, him that was the Author of it. But this was not enough. They ought to have returned and prostrated themselves, giving him Thanks in a be∣seeming manner. These ungrateful Persons have become by their Ingratitude, Leprous in their Souls, in cea∣sing to be so in their Bodies; and have been in this particular like those, who forbearing sometimes to commit Gross Sins in the Sight of Men, increase by their Ingratitude their Secret Sins before GOD. Happy is he, says S. Bernard, who always lies prostrate at our Saviour's Feet, giving him Thanks for the smallest Graces; and who considering himself as a Stranger in Imi∣tation of this Samaritan, believes that all the Favours done him, are the more Ob∣liging, in that he deserves only Shame and Punishment.
The Woman taken in Adultery. Our SAVIOƲR wisely escapes the Snare, laid him by the Jews, concerning the Adulterous Woman. OUR Saviour Christ having Healed these ten Lepers, as he past along, found, when he arrived in Judea,The same year 32. all Jerusalem in trouble, in that he was not come to the Feast, and all the People were divided in the Judg∣ments they made of him; some saying he was a Good man, others maintaining he was a Seducer. But eight days after the Feast, our Saviour appeared in the Temple, and there Taught the People with such Wisdom, as Astonish'd all those as knew he had not been brought up in Human Sciences, and the Study of the Law. Speaking then publickly with great Free∣dom, those that heard him Admired, his Enemies that heard him, did not seize on him, Imagining sometimes they believed he was the Christ. But 'twas not long before Designs were laid against his Person, which yet proved Fruitless, because his Hour was not then come. For the Pharisees seeing the People speak of his Miracles with Admiration, loudly affirming, that when Christ came he could not do greater things: They could not suf∣fer this Testimony which was given him, wherefore they sent Officers to seize on his Person: But whereas hitherto he had often hid himself, he did not so now; to give Ex∣amples of the different motions which God's Spirit should produce in those who should be Persecuted in following Ages. Those then who came to take him, were with-held by a secret Stroak from GOD; so that instead of seizing him, they stood still and became his Auditors. And when the Pharisees, who sent them, blamed them for not bringing him, they answered, That ne∣ver man spake as he did. Our Saviour Retiring afterwards on the Mount of Olives to Pray there, he came thence the next Morning very early into the Temple, where a great Croud surrounded him; But whilst he was Preaching, the Pha∣risees laid a Snare for him, by presenting him with a Woman taken in Adultery, to the end, that if he Condemned her to Die, he might be decryed by the People as a Man ex∣tream severe; and if he condemned her not he might be charged as a Breaker of Gods Law. Jesus knowing their Malice, Stoopt down, and wrote on the Ground; and they per∣sisting to know his Opinion, he lifted up his Head, and said; He amongst you that is without Sin, cast the first Stone at her. Then began he again to write on the Ground, and in the mean time the Pharisees slunk one by one away, and the Woman was left alone, to whom our Saviour said, that see∣ing no one had Condemned her, neither would he; and thereupon immediately sent her Home in Peace, charging her to Sin no more. Whereby our Lord shews us, he would rather have Men to condemn them∣selves than accuse others, and to Examine their own Lives, rather than to Censure the Faults of their Brethren. Men generally abhor gross Sins because they make them uneasy; but make little regard of Spiritual Sins, which do more Of∣fend GOD, who is all Spirit: The Sin of the Faln Angels, and that of the first Man have more Offended GOD, than the Crime of this Adulteress. And this is that which ought to humble us in the sight of GOD, and make us Gentle and Moderate to those who fall into these Dreadful Excesses: This Gen∣tleness being many times a Means to with∣draw them from these Disorders. The mild∣ness wherewith our Saviour treated this Wo∣man, had perhaps a greater effect upon her to disengage her from this Evil Course, than all the Severity of the Law. Nothing does more effect, and perswade a good Natured Person than Meekness and Gentleness, where they expected Rigor and Severity. The Church therefore in Imitation of our Saviour, discourages not the greatest Sinner, from hopes of Mercy, on the least signs of Contrition. She has thought sitting, that this sentence of our Saviour, Let him that is without Sin cast the first Stone, should have at least as great effect on the Hearts of Christians, as it had on the Jews; and that the Piety of such should yield to those Words to which the others hardness was obliged to yield.
185 Godfry Kneller of Lubeck in Saxony, and of St. Pauls Covint Garden in Middlesex Esq. Principall Painter in ordinary to their Majesty King William and Q. Mary▪ For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
186 Mis. Anne Browne 3d. daughter of Edward Brown of London Dr. in Physick For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
The Man Born Blind, restored to his Sight by our SAVIOUR. OUR Saviour Christ having delivered by his Goodness the Adulterous Woman, and freed himself from the Snare which his Ene∣mies had laid for him,The same Year 32. he continued to Preach to the People in the Temple, several Important Truths, and reproach the Phari∣sees with their design of destroying him. He shewed them from whence they were the Devils Ministers, who delighted in Blood from the beginning of the World, and had Slain the Prophets. He ask'd them openly which of them could Convince him of Sin; and why they did not believe him, seeing he Preached the Truth. The Jews answered these just Reproaches, not with Reasons, but with Injuries, calling him a Samaritan, and one possessed with a Devil. Our Saviour answered these Blas∣phemies with great Meekness; But seeing them take up Stones to throw at him, he privately past out of the Temple. In his passage thence, he saw a Man who was Born Blind. His Disciples asked him, whether this Man had Sinned, or his Parents, in that he was Born Blind? But our Saviour answered them and said, that neither this Man hath Sinned nor his Parents, but that the Works of GOD should be made manifest in him; and told them, That he must work the works of him that sent him, whilst it is day; for the night cometh when no Man can work; and as long as he was in the World, he was the Light of the World. When he had thus spoken, he spat on the Ground and made Clay with the Spittle, and anointed the Eyes of the Blind Man therewith, and bid him go wash in the Pool of Siloam, which he no sooner had done, but he received his Sight. Those that knew him, were strangely surprized when they saw him. All who demanded of him in what manner so great a Miracle was wrought on him, were told, that a Man called Jesus had made Clay, and putting it on his Eyes, sent him to the Pool to wash them, which he had no sooner done but he recovered his Sight. He was hereupon carried to the Phari∣sees, who asked him the same Questions, and had the same Answers. Some of them would needs have it That a Man who had made Clay on the Sab∣bath-Day could not be a good Man. Others who were Astonish'd at the greatness of the Miracle replyed, that an ill Man could not Cure one that was Born Blind. Being thus divided one against another, they made the Blind Man speak again, and, demanded of him what he thought of this Man? To which he answered, That he was without doubt a Prophet. Angred with this reply, they would not believe he had been Blind. They therefore made his Parents come, who fearing such Passionate People, managed themselves with address, asser∣ting nothing else but that this was their Son, and that he was Born Blind; but as to the rest, they said, their Son was of Age to answer for himself. Having again made this Blind Man come to them, they spake to him with greater Earnestness, bidding him give Glory to GOD, for they well knew our Saviour Christ was a Sinner. I know not, answered he, whether he be a Sinner; but this I know, that having been Born Blind, I now see. The Jews said, That as for their parts, they were Moses Disciples, but they knew not what this Man was. This I cannot but wonder at, said he, that ye know not who he is, and yet he has opened mine Eyes. The Pharisees after this put him out of the Synagogue, and our Saviour having found him ask'd him whether he Believed in the Son of GOD? adding he was the Person who spake to him. The Man fell on the Ground and Worshipped him. An happy Blind Man, say the Fathers, who Discovered the true Light. He was not only the Worshipper of Jesus Christ, but his Defender. He confounded the Doctors of the Law, and shewed, that a Simple Faith which is Humble, is more Enlightned, than Sci∣ence which puffeth up. The Jews drove him out of their Synagogue, but our Saviour Christ received him into the Communion of the Faithful, and made his Heart his living Temple.
The Parable of the Good Samaritan. AFter the Cure of the Man Born Blind, the Gospel relates what Jesus Christ said to the Jews, of the Charity which the Pastors ought to have for the Flock committed to them;The same Year 32. in imitating that of the Sovereign Pastor of our Souls, who laid down his Life freely for the safety of his Sheep. He gave in the few Words which he spake on this Subject, all desirable Marks to know, whe∣ther one be of the number of the true Pa∣stors of the Divine Flock; seeing we need on∣ly to know whether we be ready to part with, not only our Estates and our Ease, but our Lives also, in losing them immediately, or by a long sequel of Sufferings. He shewed how greatly opposite in this Point to the true Pastor, is he that is an Hireling, and flies away, when he espies the Wolf coming, that is, who keeps a Cowardly silence, when he should Vigo∣rously oppose those who destroy the Flock of Jesus Christ. But having instructed the Pastors in this Discourse, of the Charity which they owe their People; he afterwards instructs all Men, in that which they ought to have for one another. For a Doctor coming to demand of him, tempting him. which was the greatest Commandment of the Law? Our Lord answered him in one Word, That it was to love GOD with all ones Heart, and ones Neighbour as ones self. This Doctor asked our Saviour, who are our Neighbours? and was informed by this Parable. A certain Man went down from Jerusa∣lem to Jerico, and fell among Thieves, which stripped him of his Rayment, Wounded him, and departed, leaving him half Dead. And by chance there came down a certain Priest that way, and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. A Levite did the same thing, both shew∣ing, that great Vertues are not inherent to the highest Offices; and that one may have the Dignities of the Church, without having that Charity which should always accompany them. In fine, a Samaritan, which is to say, a Pagan, and an Idolater, passing near this place in his Journey, saw this Man, and having Compassion on him, went to him, bound up his Wounds, pouring in Oyl and Wine, and set him on his Beast, brought him to an Inn, and took care of him; and on the Morrow when he departed, he took out two Pence and gave it to the Inn-keeper, saying to him, take care of him, and what∣soever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee. Our Saviour Demanded of this▪ Doctor, who of these three Men had been his Neigh∣bour, who fell amongst Thieves? To which he answered, That 'twas he who had Com∣passion on him. Go then, reply'd our Sa∣viour Christ, and do the same thing. Our LORD commands us in the Person of this Doctor to be always ready to succour those whom we see in Misery, and to spare neither our Cares, nor our Pains, nor our Estates, when an occasion of Charity offers it self. The Holy Fathers complain, that Men are too cautious in these occasions. This Priest and Levite thought they had good reasons to pass on: They were also seemingly affected in seeing this Piteous Ob∣ject; but this Ineffectual Compassion hindred them not from being Cruel, in being wan∣ting to so pressing a Duty of Charity. The Samaritan reasoned not much on the matter, he acted more Naturally and more Charitably than they; he thought the sight of this Pitious Object obliged him to use his utmost endeavours to assist him. Thus ought we to do; for how shall we be rea∣dy to succour those miserable People, who are at a distance from us, if we do not as∣sist such as lie languishing before our Eyes?
187 Catherine wife of John Dormer of Ascott in Oxford-Shire Esq, and Daughter and Coheyress of Sr. Thomas Spencer. of yarington in the said County Baronet, deceased. For advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
188 Gentlles Tichborne▪ wife of Sr. Benjamin Tich∣borne of Woodwicks in Hartfordshire Knight▪ descended from the antient family of Tichborne in Hantshire. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
Martha and Mary. Our SAVIOƲR enters into Martha's House, who busies her self in making Preparation to entertain him, whilst Mary her Sister hears his Holy Discourses. OUR Blessed LORD, did not only select twelve Apostles; but moreover chose seventy and two Dis∣ciples,The same Year 32. whom he sent two by two before him, wheresoever he was to go; and who living Content in their Condition, without envying the Apostles who were above them, they then gave us to un∣derstand, that those who should be one day in the inferiour Degrees in the Church, should live therein satisfied, without Grudging at those who are in higher Pla∣ces, where they must not think to ascend by their Pride, but remain with an humble resignedness in their Condition, unless GOD draw them thence, as he drew out Matthias from the seventy and two Disciples, to pro∣mote him to the Apostle-ship. Having sent them with Power to cast forth Devils they returned transported with Joy, telling our LORD, that these Unclean Spirits were sub∣ject to them by Vertue of his Name. But our Saviour Christ inspiring them with the Contempt of these lower Gifts, tells them, they ought not to rejoice at this Empire, which they had over the Unclean Spirits, but in that their Names were written in Hea∣ven. And thereupon immediately by a Motion of the Holy Spirit, he gave thanks to his Father, in that he had hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and revealed them to Babes. And turning himself at the same time to his Disciples he said unto them, Blessed are the Eyes which see those things which they saw; for many Prophets and Kings had desired that Sight but could not obtain it; whereby he shewed to those that had received from the Apostles, the know∣ledge of the same Mysteries▪ how great their Crime would be, in losing them; or not esteeming them as they ought for want of applying themselves to the serious and continual Consideration of them. And therefore Jesu Christ designing to give us an Instance, how Christians should spend their time, went into a Castle, where a Woman named Martha, received him, which Woman had a Sister named Mary; who lying at our Saviour's Feet heard atten∣tively his Holy Word, whilst Martha was busied in making Preparations for his En∣tertainment: She was also dissatisfied that her Sister did not help her, in the Perplexi∣ty she found her self in, and therefore she makes known her Complaint to our Saviour Christ, who was so far from sending away Mary, from this her important Attention, that he took her part against her Sister, and told Martha, that whilst she was employed with so great Earnestness about several Matters, Mary had chosen the better part, and which should never be taken from her. The Fathers have hence gathered, That though the external Actions of Charity, be necessary during this Life, yet those whom GOD gives Dispensations from them, for to keep them in a calm State of Life, wholly employed in the Meditation of his Word, are always in the most happy Condition. Nothing appears more beseeming, than to prepare fit Entertainments for our LORD himself; and yet Jesus Christ prefers the Repose of Mary before the Employments of Martha. This Saying of our Saviour, That there is but one thing necessary, has had a great Influ∣ence on the Conduct of the Saints. They have seen, that all things else are compara∣tively Superfluous, and that 'tis difficult to apply ones self to them, without Prejudice to this one thing. Wherefore they have affirm∣ed, that this Sentence should moderate the Activity of those, who place all their Piety in external Actions; and tho' these Works of Charity be excellent in themselves; yet they should fear, lest the Trouble and Passi∣ons wherewith they be circumstanced, do not insensibly lessen the inward Purity, and Union of Heart with GOD; in which doth properly consist this one thing necessary, which our Saviour Christ would have pre∣ferred before all things.
The Folly of Riches. OUR Lord having learnt us, by the An∣swer he made to Martha, how much he preferred the Life that was peaceable and always attentive to GOD,The same Year 32. before that which is active, and always employed in Works of Charity; he also shewed us, how greatly we may be deceived in these External Actions of Piety, by the Reproaches he made the Pharisees, who were very circumspect in the outward Actions of Religion, but neglect∣ful of the inward parts thereof. For the Holy Fathers considering the Conduct of these Persons, and what Jesus Christ says in the Gospel, have found that the Devil loves no∣thing more, when he has gotten sure Pos∣session of a Man, than to make him do seve∣ral good outward Works, which glister in the Eyes of Mn; provided that whilst he gives the outside to GOD, he become Ma∣ster of the inside. That if these External Engagements are always to be dreaded by all sorts of Per∣sons; Our Saviour shews how much more they are to be so, by those he has chosen to be his Ministers. For two Brethren having entreated him to accord them, and to divide to each his Portion, he said to them with a kind of Indignation, Who made me a Judge, or Divider over you? Shewing by this An∣swer, that he would not concern himself in the Affairs of this World; and that a True Christian, and especially a Minister of Jesus Christ, should avoid these secular Employ∣ments, and not deceive themselves by a Pre∣tence of Charity, with which they are covered. He took occasion from the Difference be∣tween these two Brethren touching the Di∣vision of their Estate, to warn Men to avoid Covetousness, and to assure them, that Man's Life consists not in the Abundance of these things which he possesseth; where∣upon he told them this Parable. The Ground of a certain Rich Man brought forth Plentifully; and he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, having no Room to bestow my Fruits? I will pull down my Barns and build greater, and there will I bestow all my Fruits and Goods, and will say to my Soul, Soul thou hast much Goods laid up for many Years, take thine Ease, Eat, Drink, and be Merry. But GOD said unto him, thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be required of thee; Then whose shall those things be which thou hast provided? So is he that layeth up Treasure for himself, and is not Rich to∣wards GOD. And our Saviour said to his Dis∣ciples, take no thought for your Life, what ye shall Eat; neither for your Body, what ye shall put on; the Life is more than Meat, and the Body more than Rayment; consider the Ravens, for they neither Sow nor Reap, nor have Store House or Barn, and GOD feed∣eth them; how much more are ye better than the Fowls? And which of you by ta∣king thought, can add to his Stature one Cubit? And again our Saviour saith, Consi∣der the Lilies, how they grow; they toil not neither do they Spin, and yet Solomon in all his Glory was not arayed like one of these. If then GOD so cloths the Grass which is to Day in the Field, and to Morrow is cast into the Oven; How much more will he Cloth you, O ye of little Faith. Our Saviour Christ will have those which belong to him, to labour after the acquiring of other Riches, than those which all Mn must leave behind them. He will have them to be Rich, but with the Goods of Heaven, which perfectly discover the Vani∣ty of the Goods of this World, for which he forbids them to have the least Thought. The Rich Man whom our Saviour calls Fool, intended not to enrich himself by un∣lawful means; his Folly consisted in making such Provision for many Years, when he was presently surprized by Death. So that our Lord would have us stifle in our selves, all immoderate Desires after things below, by the continual foresight of the Moment, wherein we must leave all these things. There is nothing, which a Man sooner forgets than his Mortality; nay scarce any Body thinks of it, as he ought, though no∣thing is more likely to make us renounce all things. Jesus Christ who knew the Importance of it, here learns us to have this Consideration perpetually in our Minds; and 'tis one of the chief Effects of Christian Humility, to nourish our Souls with the Meditation of Death, and to say with David, Lord make me to know my End, and the number of my Days.
189 Elizabeth Lady Coryton, relict of Sr. John Coryton of West-Newton-fferras in Cornwall Baronet▪  daughter and Coheyress of Sr. Richard Chiverton deeased. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
190 John Jeffreys of Llywell in the County of Brecknock Esq▪ For Advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
The Parable of the Prodigal Son; Who returning to his Father, was received with great Joy. THE Son of GOD often Exhorting Men unto Repentance, would shew them again by divers Parables, how pleasing this was both to GOD and his Holy Angels.The same Year 32. For he sometimes proposes the Rejoicing of a Shepherd, who had found a lost Sheep; o∣therwhiles the Joy of a Woman, who ha∣ving long searched for a piece of Money, in∣vites, (when she had found it,) her Neigh∣bours to rejoice with her. But the most cogent Instance which our Saviour has given us on this Subject, is that of the Prodigal Son. A certain Man, says he, had two Sons, the younger of them desired his Father to give him his Portion of goods that was fal∣len to him, and the Father divided his liv∣ing unto them; and not many days after the younger gathered all together, and took his Journey into a far Country, and there wasted his Estate with Harlots, and in other Debaucheries. And having spent all, a great Famine arose in the Land, so that he began to be in want: Whereupon he was con∣strained to Pin himself upon one of the Inhabitants of that Country, who sent him into the Field to feed Swine: And his Hun∣ger was so great, that although he earnestly desired to Eat what the Hogs did Eat, yet no body would give that unto him. And when he came to himself, he sighed at the Remembrance of his Fathers hired Ser∣vants, to think that they had Bread enough, and to spare, whilst he was ready to perish with Hunger. I will therefore arise, leave this Wretched Condition, and go to my Fa∣ther. His Father perceived him, when he was a great way off; and being moved to Com∣passion, he ran to meet him, and Embraced him; being not ashamed to acknowledge him for his Son; Suppressing, by the Joy, which he had in possessing him, the Resent∣ment of the injury he had done him in se∣parating himself from him. This Young Man being then more than ever, effectually sensible of the Offence which he had committed, in forsaking so good a Father, said to him, with the deepest Sorrow, Father, I have Sinned against Heaven and against thee, and am therefore no more worthy to be called thy Son. But this good Father, willing to Re-esta∣blish him in his former Condition of a Son, of which he acknowledged himself so un∣worthy, commanded his Servants to bring forth the Best Robe, and to put it on him, and to put a Ring on his Hand, and Shooes on his Feet, and to bring forth the Fatted Calf, and kill it, that they might Eat and be Merry; For this my Son, says he, was Dead, and is Alive, he was lost, and is found; and they began to Rejoice. Now his Elder Son was in the Field, and as he drew nigh to the House, he heard Mu∣sick and Dancing. And he called one of the Servants, asking him what was the meaning of this Mirth; who told him, that his Brother was come, and his Fathrr had killed the Fatted Calf for Joy. Whereupon he was Angry, and would not go in, there∣fore his Father came out and entreated him, saying, that although all he had was his, yet he might Rejoice at the recovery of his other Son from the Grave. 'Tis a difficult matter, say the Fathers, to add any thing to this Parable▪ seeing it ex∣plains it self in such a full and lively manner. The Eye sees therein, and the Heart there∣in feels what is above all Words. The Marks of a true Conversion are here admirably well exprest. This Son sees his Misery, and leaves it, he returns to his Father, and gives him∣self to him. Let us also forsake Sin, and turn we to GOD from the Bottom of our Souls, and he will have Bowels of Compas∣sion for us; Let us be sorrowful like this young Man, for having forsook our Father's House; and let us esteem our selves happy for having again been received into it. Thus will our Repentance be always Enlivened with a Regret mixt with Love, and accom∣panied with Peace and Joy.
The Parable of Dives and Lazarus. OUR LORD having Condemned the de∣sire after Riches, was not contented with the Maledictions he Pronounced against it,The same Year 32. but he produces also an Example of their Condition, which must needs make all those tremble that have but the least Grain of Faith. There was, says he, a certain Rich Man, that was Cloathed in Purple, fine Linen, and Fared sumptuously every day: And there was a certain Beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his Gate, full of Sores; and so Indigent was his Condition, that he Beg∣ged only for the Crumbs which fell from the Rich Mans Table; yet no body took Care so much as to procure him the least Comfort. The Dogs who were more Charitable than their Master, came and Officiously licked his Sores; which Lazarus permitted; to learn us not to disdain the Consolations, which GOD sends us by the meanest of his Creatures. But GOD at length Crowning his great Patience in so hard a Condition, and recom∣pensing a constancy which had suffered with∣out Complaints, Repinings, and Murmurings at so unworthy usages, took Lazarus out of this World, whose Soul having been therein Purified by Afflictions, was after his Death carried by Angels into Abrahams Bosom. The Rich Man also died, but his Con∣dition after Death, was as different from that of Lazarus, as it had been during his Life: For he was Condemned to the Torments of Hell, where lifting up his Eyes, he saw Abra∣ham afar off, and Lazarus in his Bosom; and he cryed, in the Anguish which posses∣sed his Soul, unto Father Abraham to have pity on him, and to send Lazarus, that he might dip the Tip of his Finger in Water, and Cool his Tongue, being horribly scorch∣ed with those Flames. But Abraham bid him remember, that he had in his Life-time received his good things, whilst Lazarus lived in Want and Misery; but that now Lazarus enjoyed in∣expressible Happiness, whilst he was enduring the saddest Torments. And besides, said he, between us and you, there is a great Gulph fixed, so that they which would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence. Then said he, I pray thee at least Father Abraham, that thou wouldst send him to my Father's House; for I have Five Brethren, who if they were certainly informed of the Hor∣rors of this place, would undoubtedly a∣mend their Lives, to prevent their falling into such a state of Misery. Abraham answered him, That they had Moses and the Prophets, whom if they did not hear, neither would they be perswaded, should one arise from the Dead to convince them. This Parable has two different Counte∣nances. Whatever concerns Lazarus is sweet and pleasant; and whatever relates to Dives, that is, the Rich Man, is dreadful and astonishing. The one was really happy in appearing miserable; and if he desired Consolations, 'twas only Crumbs, the better to bear his after-Miseries, not to end them. The other on the contrary was truly miserable, when he appeared happy; and he found Lazarus as constant after his Death, in refusing him the least Consolations, as he had been Hard-hearted himself in his Life-time, in refusing Lazarus the Crumbs which fell from his Table. After this Example which Jesus Christ himself proposes, The Faithful Poor do not at all envy the Rich: But on the contrary, they have a secret Compassion for them; and so far are they from murmuring against the Rich, and desiring their Riches, that they bless GOD for their Poverty, and re∣gard it as an excellent means to Humble them before GOD, for their Sins, which they have always before their Eyes, and which they feel as Lazarus felt his Sores. Poverty suffered in this World in this manner, is a Spring of Happiness in the World to come; and the Rich are very unhappy, if they place not their Happi∣ness in Succouring these kind of Poor, seeing that according to the Words of St. Ber∣nard, the Poors Friends, are the Friends of Kings; and the Voluntary Poor, are Kings them∣selves.
191 Madam Elizabeth Jeffreys Wife of Iohn Jeffreys of Llywell in the County of Brecknock Esq▪ For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
192 The Right Honourable Katherine Lady Dowager North, and Grey For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Pharisee, and the Publican. Of the Pharisee and the Publican who went to Pray in the Temple. OUR Blessed Saviour having shewed in so remarkable a Manner, the misera∣ble End of the Rich Man; he yet more amazed his Disciples,The same Year 32. by representing to them the Sur∣prize, wherein all Men would find them∣selves, when he shall come to judge the Earth. For he compares the Time in which he shall come, to that in which the Deluge drown'd the World; Men then, says he, Eat and Drank; they Married their Sons and Daughters, till the Day that the Flood hap∣ned, which Buried them all. To avoid a Surprize of this dismal Con∣sequence, our Saviour advises the Faithful to Pray without ceasing, and to do it with the same Earnestness and Constancy as a Widow, which is oppressed, entreats a Judge to do her Justice, and who importunes him in such a sort, by the assiduity of her Cries, that he is forced against his own Inclinati∣ons, to yield to her Requests, and do what she would have him. But in exhorting us to frequent and ear∣nest Prayer, and in giving us so excellent an Instance in this Widow he speaks of, he gives us in the same Parable, a double Mo∣del of two Persons that Pray, one of which he greatly dislikes, but the other's manner is very pleasing to them. Two Men, says he, went to the Temple to Pray: The one was a Pharisee, that is to say, of the Number of those, who made profes∣sion of a greater Vertue; and the other was a Publican, that is, one of those who were counted the loosest sort of People amongst the Jews, as well for their Rapines and Co∣vetousness, as other sort of Irregularities. The Pharisee standing upright, gave Thanks to GOD, that he was not like the rest of Men, who live disorderly, without any certain Rule of Life; or else like meer Formalists, void of the Spirit and Power of Godliness; nor as this scandalous Publican, who he then beheld in the Temple. He told God Almighty he fasted twice in the Week, and gave exactly the tenth part of his Goods. But whilst he offered to GOD these pre∣sumptuous Boastings, and laid before him his best Works; The Publican in a very dif∣ferent Temper of Mind, stood at the lower end of the Temple, and blushing at the Pra∣vity of his Nature, and actual Transgressi∣ons, shewed outwardly the Confusion he felt within. He dared not to lift up his Eyes to Heaven; he smote his Breast, and opened his Mouth only to say these Words, GOD be merciful to me a Sinner. This Publican our Saviour saith went down to his House justi∣fied, rather than the other; for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted. Our blessed Lord, shews us in the Rela∣ting of this Parable, how greatly different his Thoughts are from ours; and how greatly his Judgments are above those of Men. For Men would have been apt to have re∣garded this Pharisee with Admiration; where∣as GOD only looks upon him with Con∣tempt and Dislike: And whereas this Pub∣lican was despised by all the World, our Sa∣viour assures us, that his Humility rendred him honourable, and acceptable in the Sight of GOD; For GOD resisteth the Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble; and that he is cer∣tainly a Proud Man, that prefers himself be∣fore others, on the Account of any advan∣tageous Qualifications that they want. St. Austin observes, that this Pharisee's Crime was, not that he attributed the good Qualities he was endowed with, to himself, as purely his own, Independent from GOD; seeing he thanked him for them; but in that he extolled himself above those, who seem∣ed not to be so highly favoured of Heaven by the Participation of these Gifts. External Vertues are dangerous, if they be not at the same time accompanied with great Humility; and 'tis better to be sensi∣ble only of Faults in ones self, than to be∣hold like this Pharisee, a great number of good Works, which too often serve to in∣spire us with Complacency in our selves, and Contempt of others.
The Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard. Our SAVIOƲR by the Similitude of Laborers in the Vineyard, sheweth that GOD is Debtor to no Man. THE Son of GOD, intending to give to his Disciples, a Representation of what should happen to his Church in all Ages,The same Year 32. spake to them this Parable. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Man that is an House-holder, which went out early in the Morning, to hire Laborers into his Vineyard: And having agreed with the Laborers for a Penny a Day, he sent them into his Vineyard. And he went out about the third Hour, and saw others standing idle in the Market-Place, to whom he said, Go ye also into the Vineyard, and whatsoever is right I will give you, and they went their way. Again he went out about the sixth and ninth Hour, and did the like; and about the eleventh Hour, he went out, and found others standing idle, and saith unto them, Why stand ye here all the Day idle? They said unto him, because no Man has hired us; He saith unto them, go ye also into the Vineyard, and whatsover is right, that shall ye receive. When the Evening was come, the Lord of the Vineyard saith unto his Steward; Call the Laborers and give them their Hire, be∣ginning from the last unto the first And when they came that were hired about the eleventh Hour, they received every Man a Penny: But when those that were hired first came, they supposed that they should have received more; but they received the same Wages; which made them Murmur against the Good Man of the House, saying; These last have wrought but one Hour, and thou hast made them equal to us, which have bore the Burden and Heat of the Day. But he answered one of them and said, Friend I do thee no wrong; didst thou not agree with me for a Penny? Take that which is thine, and go thy Way. I will give unto this last, even as unto thee; Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own; or are you Wicked, because I am Good? Thus says our Saviour, The last shall be first, and the first shall be last; for many be called; but few chosen. What Encouragement and Comfort does this Parable yield to such, the greatest part of whose Lives has been consumed in Folly and Wickedness, if they do but at length heartily bewail their ill-spent Time, and seriously betake themselves to the working out of their Salvation? Who can sufficient∣ly enough admire and extol the Goodness and Mercy of the Lord? Who can shew forth all his Praises, as the Psalmist speaks; for he does not deal with us after our Sins, nor reward us according to our Iniquities. The ancient Fathers have taken occasion also from this Parable, to exhort Christians to fly Idleness, which GOD hereby shews to be disagreeable in his Sight. All Work in this Vineyard, though the Work be diffe∣rent; 'tis sufficient to do therein what the Father of the Family commands us, contenting our selves both with the Work and Wages, which he thinks fitting to allot us. We should also take care not to be puft up, or Pride our selves on the Account of the Excellency of our Work, and to ex∣pect thereof greater Recompence for it. We lose our Labour when we apply our selves too strictly to it; and consume our Strength in Vain, when we build our hopes thereon. It is from GOD alone, and his Bounty, from whom we are to expect what∣ever we may receive. Whatever Goodness we do, 'tis not properly we that do it, but GOD, for 'tis he that worketh in us both, to will and do of his good Pleasure; And GOD in rewarding us, will only Crown his own Gifts in us. Unhappy, saith S. Austin, would the best of Men be, should GOD leave them to themselves, and examin the best of Mens Works, according to the strict Rules of his Purity.
193 White Titchborne of Aldershot in Hantshire Esq▪ descended of the antient family of Titchborne of Titchborne in the Said County. For advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate▪
194 Samuel Aubery of the Parish of St. Martins in the ffields in Middlesex, Their Majestyes Coatchmaker For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
The Resurrection of Lazarus. THE appointed time of our Saviour's Death drawing near, it seems as if he in some sort advanced it, by the Resurrection of La∣zarus.The same year 32 And this being one of his most Fa∣mous Miracles, it stirred up a greater envy in the Minds of his Enemies. When Lazarus was sick in Bethany, his Sisters Martha and Mary, sent to our Saviour to give him notice of it. Our Lord who loved these two Sisters and their Brother Lazarus contented himself with saying then that this Sickness happned only for the grea∣ter glory of GOD. And that the Son of GOD might be glorified thereby. And there∣fore so far was he, from hasting to Cure him, that he remained 2 days on purpose in the same place, that Lazarus might Die; and to shew us at the same time, that his absence from us, is the cause of the Spiritual Death of our Souls. After these two days, he told his Disciples that he must go again into Judea: But they fearing the danger of that Journey, Remem∣bred him, that 'twas but a Moment since his Enemies, the Jews sought to Stone him, and take away his Life. Our Saviour said unto them, are there not 12 Hours in the day, in which if one walk, he stumbleth not as seeing the light of this World; but if he walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in him. Then he said unto them. that Lazarus sleepeth, but I go to awaken him; his Disciples answered, if he Sleep he shall do well; then our Saviour told them plainly that he was Dead, and was glad for their sakes that he was not there at his Death. It was on this occasion that S. Thomas said those Words, which have been as it were the device of all Christians in all Ages, when they have seen Jesus Christ persecuted in his Members; Let us go and die with him. When Jesus Christ was in Bethany, he found Lazarus Dead four days, and laid in the Grave. Martha understanding that our Lord was coming, made hast to meet him; and left Mary her Sister with those of the Jews, who came from Jerusalem to comfort her. Martha shewed her Grief to Jesus Christ, in that he was not present at her Brother's Sickness; and she shewed also her Faith, by saying, she was certain, That not∣withstanding the condition her Brother was in, our Saviour could obtain of GOD, what∣ever he desired of him; and confessed that he was Christ the Son of the Living GOD, who came into the World. She went also to Mary, and told her privately, that our Saviour was come, and asked for her. Mary arose at these Words, and ran to Jesus Christ, and the Jews which were with her to comfort her followed her, supposing the Violence of her Grief transported her to the Place, where her Brother lay Buried. Our blessed Lord seeing Mary drowned with Tears, as also the Jews, which accompa∣nied her, Wept also himself, and demanded where Lazarus was laid: They led him to the Sepulcher, where he made the Stone to be rolled away; and having given thanks unto GOD, in a Prayer which he offered him; he cried out with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth; And he that was Dead came forth bound Hand and Foot, with Grave-Cloths and his Face was bound about with a Napkin. Je∣sus Christ commanded them to unbind him, and let him go. The Holy Fathers have all of them respect∣ed this Resurrection of Lazarus as a Type, or Figure of the Resurrection of the Soul, and the Conversion of a Sinner. Our Saviour Christ draws near to the Soul, as he drew near to Lazarus, and calls it with a loud Voice, to raise it by the power of his Word, by the power of Binding and loosing, which he has given his Church, and by the impressions of his Holy Spirit, which form in Mens Hearts a sincere Regret, and makes them bring forth Fruits worthy of Repentance. These Tears, this Trouble, this Groaning, and this Prayer of Jesus Christ do shew, how painful a thing it is to raise up those Dead who have grown old in sinful Habits. But what difficulty soever there is in this Work, we ought not to despair of any Man, when we consider the Powerfulness of this Voice, which makes the Dead Rise out of their Graves, and the Bounty of him, who some∣times after makes him Eat at his Table who lay before in the Rottenness of a Sepulcher.
The Conversion of Zacheus. THE Pharisees being informed of the Resurrection of Lazarus, and seeing with sorrow, the Fame which this Miracle had procured our Saviour;The same Year 32. they thereupon im∣mediately assembled together, to deliberate amongst themselves, what they had to do. If we let this Man go on, say they, in this manner, all the People will believe in him; and the Romans will come, and seize upon our City and Estates. One amongst them, who was High Priest that year, being inspired of GOD, Prophesi∣ed, That 'twas expedient one Man should die for the People; and from that time they resolved on his Death. Which Jesus Christ knowing he privately retired, and would no longer remain in Judea. But a while af∣ter, the time of his Death approaching, he resolved to return to Jerusalem; and foretold as he was Travelling thither, what was to befal him. When they drew near to Jerico, a certain Publican named Zachaeus, hearing of Jesus Christ coming, had a great desire of a long time to see him, and therefore thrust him∣self amongst the Croud of those that went before him; but being a Man of low Sta∣ture, he was hindred, by those that attended our Saviour, whereupon he was forced to run before, and to get upon a Sycamore-Tree which stood in the way side, near to which our blessed Lord was to pass by. Our Saviour being come to the place where he stood, and lifting up his Eyes, bid Zachaeus to come down, for he would abide that day at his House. Zachaeus giving an Example of the rea∣diness we ought to use in obeying GOD's Commands, immediately came down, and Entertained the Son of GOD at his Habita∣tion with great Joy, although all the People murmured at our Saviour's chusing this Mans House for the place of his Retirement, when the Master of it, was of so Odious a Profession. But Zachaeus being fully con∣verted from the Bottom of his Soul; and Renouncing from that very Moment his past Life, came and presented himself be∣fore our Saviour Christ, saying, with an humble Confidence, and Gracious liberty, that he would now distribute half of his Goods to the Poor, and with the rest make Restitutions; and that if he wronged any body, he would restore them Four-fold. Our Saviour having heard this Holy Reso∣lution, which he himself had put into his Heart, said; that this day Salvation was come to his House; and that this Man, whom the Jews could not but regard with Horror, was of the number of Abraham's Chil∣dren. The Holy Fathers considered Zachaeus as an instance of a true Conversion. He seems to be beforehand with our Saviour; But our Saviour had indeed been first dealing with him, by the Invisible Motions of his Spirit, whence followed all those Visible Signs of Grace which he had received. Zachaeus was so full of Faith and Joy in be∣lieving, that he would willingly have part∣ed with all his Goods to the Poor; but only he considered, that necessity of reserving a part to make Restitution, to such as he might have wronged. For he knew that GOD did not approve of a Mans being Cha∣ritable, with what is not his own. He thought it not enough, to Restore what he had taken away, but he would make a Four-fold return: And therefore Jesus Christ immediately declares the happiness of his Condition. For when the Darling and beloved Sin is parted with, as Covetousness and Griping in these sort of People, all the rest do fall of course. The Gospel shews us, by this remarkable instance, that we must always begin our Conversion, by removing the greatest Obsta∣cles, such as are Restitution of Goods, or good Name. For GOD sooner pardons those Of∣fences which are committed against himself, than those committed against our Neighbours.
195 Thomas Rawlinson Esq▪ son and heyre of Sr. Thomas Rawlinson Knight, Alderman and Sheriff of London▪ and Middlesex Anno Domini 1686. For advancement of this Worke. Contributrd this Plate.
196 The Rt. Honourable Robert Lord Lucas▪ Baron of Shenfeild, Cheife Governor of the Tower of London, and Lord Leiutenant of the Hamlets therevnto belonging. For advancement of this Worke. Contributd this Plat.
Our SAVIOƲR Riding to Jerusalem, before the Passover of the Jews. OUR Saviour Christ having left Jerico, after the Conversion of Zachaeus, ad∣vanced towards the City of Jerusalem;The Year of the common Aera 33 The fourth of the Preaching of Je∣sus Christ. and six Days before the Passover, he went into Bethany; where Mary the Sister of Lazarus; which was raised from the Dead, received him, made him a Supper, and Martha served, but Lazarus sat at the Table; then took Mary a pound of Oyntment of Spikenard, which is very costly, and anoynted our Saviour's Feet, and wiped them with her Hair; and the House was filled with the odour of the Oyntment; for which cause Judas who bore the bag, was angry, saying, it might have been sold for 300 pence, and given to the poor: But our Saviour praised her Action, and said, that she had done it against the day of his Burial; and that the poor they had always with them, but him they had not. The People knowing that Jesus Christ was in this place, came crouding, not only to see him, but also Lazarus, that was raised from the Dead: which further discontent∣ing the Pharisees, they determined to put him likewise to Death; whose Resurrection encreasing the Fame of our Saviour, hindred the design they had formed of destroying him, and induced several among the Jews to believe in him. The next Morning our Saviour Christ be∣ing near the City, sent his Disciples from the Mount of Olives, where he was, to a Neighbouring Village and commanded them to loose an Ass with its Foal, and bring them both away; and to answer those that might offer to hinder them, that the Lord had need of them. The Disciples did as our Saviour had commanded them, and spread their Gar∣ments on this Ass, and set Jesus Christ thereon, as it is written, fear not Daughter of Sion, behold thy King cometh sitting on an Ass's Colt. When immediately, all the People who were come to Jerusalem on account of the Pass∣over, hearing that our Saviour was about entring into the City, they took Branches of Palms in their Hands, and went before him, with loud Acclamations of Joy: Several threw their Garments on the Ground, in the places where our Saviour was to pass along; and others strewed the Road with Boughs of Trees, and cried before him; Salvation and Glory to the Son of David; Blessed is he that cometh in the Name of the Lord. These Applauses and Acclamation of the Peo∣ple, more and more enraged the Enemies of our Saviour, which made them say a∣mongst themselves, what shall we do, for all the People croud after him? The Holy Fathers have made excellent Ob∣servations on this Miracle of our Saviour. He Triumphs, say they before-hand, as he died before-hand in the last Supper. He shews the real Power he was to gain on Mens Hearts, by the Merits of his Death, and by the Glo∣ry of his Resurrection. He does what he will with these People; he forces the Wicked to adore him, even as they shall one day, be constrained with the Devils, to bow their Knees before him, and confess that he is GOD. The Jews hate him; they would have de∣stroyed him, yet they cannot hinder his Glory. It hence appears, that 'tis GOD alone, that governs all things on Earth, as well as in Heaven; That the Wicked as well as the Good, are subject to his Power; and that we do in vain think to rule the Events of this World. We ought always to say, what∣ever happens, That GOD has thus ordained it, and after this, to lie down in Peace. This is the sole advantage of Christians, and the best course they can take in all their affairs; seeing this Temper of Mind raises them above the Earth and Hell; above Men, Angels and Devils, nay, Heaven it self; to make them enter into the Sanctuary of GOD, and to remain firm and unmoveable, whilst they are on Earth, amidst all the Storms and Tempests of it.
The Buyers and Sellers drove out of the Temple. WHen our Saviour drew near to the City of Jerusalem, the Joy of his Triumph could not hinder him from shedding Tears,The same Year 32. which the Tenderness of his Charity made him shed, at the prospect of those Miseries, which would soon come upon that unhap∣py City, as a Punishment for that Deicide, which she was ready to commit. He declared, the causes of those future Miseries were, for that she had known the time of God's Merciful Visitation; by this means, learning Christians not to despise the Grace of GOD, in letting it lie useless, and of none effect. That if they know not how great Punishment they make themselves wor∣thy of by this contempt they ought to tremble when they consider; that if Jeru∣salem was not punished immediately for its Crime, the delay which GOD used, hindred not the Sentence (which he in his Wrath had pronounc'd) from being punctually execu∣ted. Our Saviour thus Discoursing, and going from place to place, and shewing the Mise∣ries of great Cities, who almost, always re∣ject, or pervert the Truths of GOD; He at length entred into Jerusalem, which was all in a Tumult, every one asking, who it was that came in after that manner? Our Saviour went immediately into the Temple of GOD, and having found Persons that Bought and Sold, he drove them thence: He threw down all the Tables of the Money∣changers, cast down the Seats of those that sold Doves; and said unto them, it is writ∣ten, My House shall be called the House of Prayer, but ye have made it a Den of Thieves; And the Blind and the Lame came to him in the Tem∣ple and he healed them; and when the chief Priests and Scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the crying in the Temple, Hosanna to the Son of David, they were sore displeased; and said unto him, Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus saith unto them, Yea, have ye never read, out of the Mouth of Babes and Scklings thou hast perfected Prise? And our Saviour left them, and went out of the City into Bethany, and lodged there. The Ancient Fathers have much conside∣red this Circumstance, and admired that Jesus Christ, having foretold the great Mise∣ries, which were to happen to Jerusalem, should go immediately after to the Temple. But this was to shew without doubt, that 'twas the disorders which were there com∣mitted, and the neglect and irregularity of the Priests, that drew these Miseries on the whole Nation; and that to appease the Di∣vine Justice, these Guides should have lookt into themselves, to see whether there was nothing in them which might displease GOD. 'Tis enough to make any Christian trem∣ble, when he considers with what Severity the Son of GOD, (who was the mildest of all Men) used those who profan'd this Holy Place. He never entred into a Passion (as we read of) till this disorder, although this was only in the out-parts of the Temple and under the pretence of the Service and Wor∣ship paid to GOD in the Sacrifices. The Fathers have attentively weiged all the Circumstances of this History, and warned us from hence, to have a care of Violating the Holiness of our Temples, by the least thing that may displease GOD; seeing they are, or ought to be infinitely more Holy, than that of which Jesus Christ could not suffer the Profanation. Where∣fore they have ever recommended the Re∣verence which we owe to Churches; there being nothing▪ which doth more provoke GOD, than the disrespect which is shewed hm in a place, where he dwells, as in his Throne. They have exhorted the Faithful to stand in Awe, to watch over their Hearts and Eyes, when they meet in the Service of GOD. For GOD cannot be mocked, and if he for a time bears with the Indecencies, which are committed in these places, we must not doubt but that he will one day pour out his Fury upon such Persons; then shall they Cry seriously for Pity, but he will not hear them, for he shall laugh at their Calamities, and mock when their Fear cometh.
197 Madam Bridget Dawes, daughter of Nicholas Dawes of the Citty of London Gentleman For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
198 Mr. Henry Hayward of the Parish of St. saviours southwarke in the County of surrey. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
The Parable of the Wedding Garment; Or, The Marriage of the King's Son, &c. ALL the time from the entrance of Jesus Christ into Jerusalem, till his Passion, was spent in divers Con∣ferences which he had with the Jews,The same Year 33. in which he Reproached them with their Infidelity, and foretold them that the Pagans and Idolaters, should take their place in the Kingdom of GOD. But, to abate at the same time, the over∣weaning Opinion which the Gentiles might have of themselves, by being preferred be∣fore a People, who were heretofore so be∣loved of GOD; he shewed in the same Pa∣rable, in what manner he rejected the Jews, and with what Circumspection the Gentiles should now possess their Place. The Kingdom of Heaven, saith our Saviour, is like unto a King, who made a Marriage for his Son, and sent his Servants to call those which were bidden to the Wedding. But these Persons made light of this Invitation, and came not: He sent to them again o∣ther Servants, to tell them, he had prepa∣red his Oxen, and Fatlings, and that all things were in a Readiness: But they still forbore coming, for some went to their Farms, and others to their Merchandizes; and there were others more ungrateful and base, who outragiously handled the King's Servants, and slew them. And when the King heard of this, he was wroth, and sent forth his Armies, and slew these Murtherers, and burnt their City. Which being done, he said to his Ser∣vants, You see, I have gotten all things rea∣dy, but those I had invited are not worthy of the Entertainment; Go then into the Highways, and as many as ye shall find there, bring to the Wedding. The Servants obeyed their Master, and gathered together a great number of Persons, both good and bad, so that the Table was filled with Guests. When they were set down, the King en∣tred into the Room, to see those that were Bidden; and having observed one who had not a Wedding Garment, he said to him, Friend, how camest thou hither, not ha∣ving a Wedding Garment? and the Man was Speechless. Then the King commanded his Servants to bind him Hand and Foo, and to cast him into utter Darkness. In fine, he concluded this Parable with these dread∣ful Words; There are many called, but few chosen. Our Saviour by this Parable, which sets forth the Reprobation of the Jews, and the Election of the Gentiles, shews us, he ex∣pects we should use our utmost endeavours to make our selves worthy of his Grace: And though he be so kind as to prevent us by his Gracious Invitation to this Mystical Marriage; yet he expects we should hasten thereto, with such Ornaments, as have some Proportion to the Majesty of him that cal∣led us. The Ancient Fathers tell us, That this Nuptial Robe, is the New Man, which has bin created according to GOD, in true Righ∣teousness and Holiness. If we do not endea∣vour to Cloath our selves with this Robe, 'tis to be feared that God will reject us from his Feast; and that the Nakedness wherein he sees by the Corruption of the Old Man, with which we were Cloathed, will force him to bid his Servants to put us away from his Table, and cast us into utter Dark∣ness, that is to say, into such Darkness, as will hinder us from ever finding him. This Man according to S. Austin, doth represent a great many others, to wit, the whole body of the wicked, who are igno∣rant of the shameful Condition they are in; who are Naked without knowing it; and Blind, though they think they see clearly; who believe they understand all things, whereas in truth they understand nothing; The GOD of this World, having blinded their Eyes, and laid them in a deep Sleep. Wherefore, we should do well ever to remember the Words of our Saviour in the Revalations; I will come as a Thief: Bles∣sed is he that Watcheth, and keepeth well his Garments, that he walk not Naked, and expose his Confusion to the Eyes of others.
The Parable of the Talents. Our SAƲIOƲR by this Similitude shews the danger whereinto a Man falls, if he goes beyond the Measures set him by the Gospel, and also if he does not walk up to the Rules of it. BEfore our Saviour had ended his Preach∣ing, he was willing to lay before Men the severity of GOD's Judgments;The same year 33. and therefore proposes to them the Pa∣rable of the Foolish and Wise Virgins; to shew us, That how good soever our Con∣dition may be, and though our Works be never so Exemplary, denoted by those bur∣ning and shining Lamps; yet shall we be rejected of GOD, if we have not (as S. Au∣stin says) this Oil of a true and perfect Humi∣lity; which shews us, That we are nothing in the sight of GOD, and that 'tis his Grace that doth all in us. But the Parable of the Ta∣lents, related afterwards by S. Matthew, in∣structs us in many important Truths. The Kingdom of Heaven is as a Man Tra∣velling into a far Country, who called his own Servants, and delivered to them his Goods: Unto one he gave 5 Talents, to another 2, and to another 1; to every Man according to his several ability, and straightway took his Journey. He that received 5 Talents, went and traded with the same, and made them 5 more; and likewise he that received 2, gained 2 others; but he that received 1, went and hid it in the Earth, which rendred it useless. After a long time, the Lord of those Servants being return'd, called his Servants to account; and he that received 5 Talents, came and brought other 5 Talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst me 5 Talents, behold I have gained 5 more: His Lord said, Well done thou good and faithful Servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things, Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. He also that had received the 2, brought also 2 others to his Lord, who likewise recompensed his fide∣lity, as he had done to the first. But he that received but 1 Talent, coming near to his Ma∣ster, told him, Lord, I know thee to be an au∣stere Man, and that thou gatherest where thou hast not sowed; and therefore I was so afraid of thee, that I have hid thy Talent in the Ground, and lo here it is. His Master an∣swered him, O thou wicked and slothful Ser∣vant, seeing thou knewest I gathered where I did not sow, why didst not thou put the Money I gave thee into other Hands, that when I returned, I might have received my own with Usury? Take therefore the Talent from him, and give it to him that hath 10; for unto eve∣ry one that hath, shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him that hath not, shall be taken away even that which he hath; and cast the unprofitable Servant into outer Darkness, where shall be weeping and gnash∣ing of Teeth. The Holy Fathers have trembled in con∣sidering this Parable: They have seen the danger wherein a Man falls, if he goes be∣yond the Measures set him by the Gospel, and if he does not also walk up to the Rules of it. It was as dangerous to these Servants, to design the serving their Master, according to the Talent which he had given to others, as not to serve him according to the Talent which they had themselves received. For as there is no greater Humility, than not to set about works of Charity beyond the Grace that GOD has bestowed on us; so there is no greater Misery, than to keep the Gifts of the Spirit unemployed. For the Severity used towards that Person, who had hid his Talent in a Napkin, has so awed considering Christians, that it made them vanquish their own Natures, and humbly surrender themselves to the Decrees of Pro∣vidence. 'Tis certain, GOD is no hard Ma∣ster, yet is it not to be imagined, that he has given us our Lives to no other purpose, than to take in and let out the Air.
199 Mer. Thomas Jenney Cittizen and Mercer of London For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
200 Francis Ashenhust of Parke hall in Staffordshire▪ M. of Arts & Arch-Deacon of Darby, Grandson to Ralph Ashenhurst of Ashenhurst in Staffordshire Esq. For Advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Last and General Iudgment. OUR Blessed Saviour having advertiz'd Men of the dreadful severity of his Justice, by the Parable of the Virgins,The same Year 33. and that of the Talents; He after∣wards exhorted them to Watch over them∣selves, by representing and reminding them of the Last and General Judgment; saying, When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels with him, then shall he sit on the Throne of his Glory; and before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall sepa∣rate them one from another, as a Shepherd di∣videth the Sheep from the Goats: And he shall set the Sheep on his right Hand, but the Goats on the left. This Instruction was very necessary, to awaken us out of that drowzy Coldness, whereunto we are all too subject during this Life. For tho' our Saviour Christ has received from his Father a Sovereign Rule and Au∣thority over all the World; yet he seems to let Men loose, and to suffer all things to be confounded, as if he concern'd not him∣self with them. But 'tis certain, he exercises an Invisible Power over them, and which he will one day demonstrate with all Solemnity. And therefore 'tis, that he inculcates it to be a Man's greatest Wisdom in this Life, ever to remember this Judgment that is to come, and to be before hand with it, by judging our selves, that is, our Consciences. When (say he) the Son of Man shall come in his Majesty, attended by his Holy Angels, and all Nations shall come before his Pre∣sence; he shall then separate them as the Shepherd separates the Sheep from the Goats; for he shall set the Sheep on his right Hand, and the Goats on his left. Then shall he say to the one, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World: For I was an hungry, and you gave me to eat; I was a thirsty, and you gave me to drink: I was a Stranger, and you gave me entertainment; I was naked, and you cloathed me; I was sick, and you com∣forted me; I was in Prison, and you visited me. Having said these comfortable words to the Righteous, which will surprize them, and sensibly inform them, That when they did these actions of Charity to the least of those which belong to Jesus Christ, they did it to himself; neither will he less surprize the Wicked, in reproaching them with their hardness of Heart, in that having seen him an hungry and thirsty, and in other Extremi∣ties, they have not assisted him. They will ask of him, When saw we thee an hungred, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? And Jesus Christ will plainly tell them, with the severest Anger, That when they refused all Kindness to the Poor, they refused it to himself, saying, In as much as ye did it not to the least of these, ye did it not to me; there∣fore, Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Having thus publickly extolled the Cha∣rity of the one, and accused the Ingratitude of the others, he will bring the Good into everlasting Life, and throw the Wicked into everlasting Torments. Our Saviour shews us in these words, That this Judgment will be a great surprize to most People, and that 'twill then be made manifest, how much we are deceived in our Accounts of Salvation. For 'tis plain from what our Saviour says both to the Just and Unjust; that 'tis not sufficient to avoid Evil, but we must do Good; seeing Jesus Christ condemning the Wicked, doth not re∣proach them with Crimes, but only with the want of Charity. So that according as the Fathers have re∣marked from these words of our Saviour, Our greatest trust which we can have in the Mercies of GOD, must arise from the exercise of Charity towards our Neighbour, in all the occasions which do offer themselves. And those who set about the working out of their Salvation in good earnest, do easily find them. We can no where turn our selves, but we see some Object or other, that does e∣ven force our Pity and Compassion. The lewd and debauched do need our Prayers, That GOD would open their Eyes, and purifie their Understandings by Faith and Repentance, that they may not receive the wages of their Sins, which is eternal Death.
The Last Supper. Or, The Institution of the LORD's Supper. OUR Blessed Saviour having finished his Discourses to the People, and there remaining only two days to the Passover,The same Year 33. he com∣manded his Disciples to prepare all things in order to it. Which being done, and Judas having agreed with the Jews about the manner of betraying his Master to them, our Saviour went into a large Room, which he had enjoyned his Disciples to get for him; where being seated, he immediately declared to them the great desire he had to celebrate this Passover with them; and that in such a manner, as if that which he had already done for them was not worth mentioning, so great was his Love to them. Having eaten the Lamb with them, ac∣cording to the prescription of the Law; be∣fore he establish'd his Divine Supper, he so far abased himself, that he took Water in a Bason, to wash his Disciples Feet and wiped them with a Towel, with which he had gird∣ed himself; and finished this Act of a pro∣digious Humility with these words, which concern all the World, I have given you an Example, which every Man that will be my Di∣sciple, must follow. And being sat down with the Twelve Disciples, as they did eat, Jesus said, Verily I say unto you that one of you shall betray me. At which words they were exceeding sorrow∣ful; and began every one to say unto him, Lord! Is it I? And our Saviour said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the Dish, shall be∣tray me; but woe unto that Man that shall be∣tray me, it had been better he had not been born. Then Judas said, Master, Is it I? Our Sa∣viour said unto him, Thou hast said. And as they were eating, Jesus took Bread and bles∣sed it, and brake it, and gave it to his Di∣sciples, saying, Take, eat; this is my Body: And he took the Cp and gave Thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it; for this is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the Remission of Sins I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, until that day that I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom. He distributed it to them with his own hands, and he refused not Judas this Favour: And although he well knew his Treachery, yet he would not plainly discover it to the rest, to the end, that the mildness he used towards him, might (if possible) make some impression on his hard Heart. But he was an early Instance, that this Sacrament, which the Son of GOD then In∣stituted for the Comfort and Salvation of the Faithful▪ would only prove Condemna∣tion to those who should receive it unwor∣thily; and that the Devil would enter into their Souls at the same time, when the Holy Elements should enter into their Bodies. This Disciple, who was guilty of shedding the Blood of our LORD and SAVIOUR, still continued his hardness of Heart and Impenitency; for when each of the Disciples were dismay'd, and demanded of Jesus Christ, Whether he was the Man that should do this horrid Deed? Judas had the boldness to ask the same Question. And immediate∣ly after, he went forth to put in execution this his perfidious Contrivance. This Disciple's Treachery has made the Ancient Fathers admire and wonder at the goodness of our Saviour; who for all this desisted not from giving him his Body▪ even as to the rest, with the same patience where∣with he a while after suffered his Perfidious Salutation. The Church in all Ages has sighed and groaned, in considering that her holy Spouse doth every day suffer the same Indignity at the Altar, as he suffered then. She has testified her deep Sorrow, to see her self forced (as it were) to give our Saviour's pure Body to impure Souls; and has admired the Humility of Jesus Christ, that he doth not come down from Heaven▪ to punish those who thus unworthily receive him. He is present at this Day at our Altars, as an Example to us of Patience, and if we be faithful to him, we must endeavour in Re∣ceiving his Body, to be the Imitators of his ineffable Humility; and to lament the wret∣ched blindness of those who dishonour him by so many Sacrilegious Communions.
201 Sr. James Tillie of Pentillie Castle in the County of Cornwall Knight▪ For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
202 Mr. Edward Jeffreys▪ eldest son of Jeffrey Jeffreys of Llywell in Brecknockshire. Esq, For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
Our SAVIOƲR's Agony and Bloody Sweat, when he Prayed in the Garden, before his Betraying and Apprehension. AFter Judas had left our Saviour, to execute the design he had contracted with the Jews, our Bles∣sed LORD made an admi∣rable Discourse to his Apostles;The same Year 33. whereby he shewed us, in joyning the Word to his Body, that it also is the nou∣rishment of our Souls, and that we ought not to part them, according to our Savi∣ours own Example. He at the same time said to S. Peter, That the Devil had desired to tempt him; but that he had prayed his Father for him. This Apostle, instead of humbling himself at these words and prayers of the Son of GOD in his hehalf, grew conceited of himself, as it soon after too plainly appeared. For our Savi∣our Christ formally foretelling him, That he would Three times deny him before the Cock Crowed: He boldly answered him, He would never do it; and that he was so far from Renouncing him, that he was ready to go to Prison with him, yea, to die with him: so that the terrible prediction of his Fall, not being able to humble him, there was a necessity of doing it by the Fall it self. Our Saviour Christ then having said these admirable Truths to his Disciples, contained in this last Sermon, he commanded them to take Arms with them; and thus they past over the Brook Cedron, to go (as he was wont) to the Mount of Olives. His Disciples followed him, and being come to a place called Gethsemane, he caused them to tarry there, that he might go alone into the Garden not far off, to pray there, according to his usual custom, and on this occasion was well known to Judas. He took only Peter, James, and John with him, who were his chiefest Favourites, and who more immediately attended him. Be∣ing with them, he told them, That he was in great anguish of Spirit, even unto death, and therefore he desired them to watch with him whilst he prayed. He afterwards went from them about a Stones-cast, and falling upon his Face, he prayed, saying, My Fa∣ther, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt. And when our Saviour came to his Disciples, he found them asleep, and said, Could ye not watch with me one hour? watch and pray lest ye enter into Temptation; the Spirit indeed is wil∣ling, but the Flesh is weak. He went away the second time, and prayed as formerly, and returning he found them asleep, for their Eyes were heavy. Again our Savi∣viour left them and prayed the same words. Then he came to them and said, Sleep on now, and take your rest, behold the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of Sinners. Rise let us go, he is at hand that betrays me. Our Saviour's Agony was so great, altho' there was an Angel appeared to strengthen him, that he sweat drops of Blood. This our Saviour's Passion in the Garden, has been the admiration and astonishment of Christians in all Ages; especially when they considered, how many People have gone joyfully to suffer Death but this might well happen to them, seeing their Case and our Saviours extreamly differed. For our Savi∣our bore on him the Iniquity and Punishment of us all; the Sins of the whole World lay on his Shoulders, and he was to undergo the penalty of them. It is moreover to be considered, that be∣ing a Man, he was liable to all the infirmi∣ties of that state: For he was subject to Grief and Sorrow, to Hopes and Fears, as we are. For it behoved him to be in all things, like unto us, Sin only excepted. The Prayer he thrice offered up to his Father, to remove this Cup from him, con∣cluding at each time with submission to his Will, should serve as an excellent Instru∣ction to us in all our Prayers. Having shewed throughout his whole Life a perfect resignation to his Fathers Will, he seems to renew this Disposition at his Death. By which he learns us, That we ought chiefly to labour after this Tem∣per of Soul in all Afflictions and Suffer∣ings, but more especially at the Hour of Death; for then we shall have most occasi∣on to put his excellent Example in practice, and to say, Not my Will, but thy Will be done.
Iudas's Treason. Our SAVIOƲR being Sold to the Jews by Judas, is Betrayed and Taken by him with a Kiss. OUR Saviour being o'erwhelmed with Sadness, when he was in an Agony in the Garden, gave us a great instance of his Hu∣mility;The same year 33. for he came to his Disciples, to try, if peradventure he might find any Consolation in them, or any mitiga∣tion of his Grief. But he found not them in any sort disposed to wise Counsels, for they were fallen into a dead sleep. He came thrice to awake them, with these important Words, Watch and Pray, the Spi∣rit is willing, but the Flesh is weak. He had no sooner done speaking to them the third time, but Judas appeared at the Head of a great Company of People bear∣ing Arms. Judas had given them a Sign, whereby they should know, which was the Person they should lay hold on, to the end he might not make his escape from them, and so occasion more trouble in taking him. He came then boldly up to the Saviour of the World, and treacherously kist him, saying, Hail Master; which our Blessed Lord patiently endured, and with the same kind∣ness as heretofore, to teach us, To bear gently with such Persons as are like him, and not to be sharp and spightful at the ill usages of Friends and Domesticks. Yet he said to him, Wherefore comest thou hither? Dost thou betray the Son of Man with a Kiss? Which Words were rather spoken, to bring him to a thoughtfulness of what he did than to complain of his Ingratitude. After this Kiss of Judas, our Blessed Savi∣our (who had heretofore fled, when the Peo∣ple would have made him a King) went to meet those who came to take him, asking them, Whom they sought? and that with so powerful a Voice, as made them all to fall flat on the Ground; shewing by this means, That 'twas not want of Power made him suffer Death; but that he underwent it of his own free will. He then surrendred him∣self to these wicked People, having an eye to the Power which GOD had given them. S. Peter endeavoured to defend Him from them, drew out his Sword, and cut off the Ear of Malchus, who was a Servant to the High Priest: But our Saviour was so far from delighting in this Resistance, and permitting this just Revenge, that immediately he heal∣led the Wound, and reprehended S. Peter for making it; saying, Put up thy Sword into his place; for all they that take the Sword, shall perish by the Sword. He told him he needed not his Arm to deliver him; for had he not fully determi∣ned to drink of this Cup, He could pray to his Father, and he would presently give him more than 12 Legions of Angels, to assist him; But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? He suffered himself then to be bound on∣ly saying to the Officers, That they needed not to have come out against him, as if he were a Thief, or a Murtherer; seeing he was every day in the Temple, where they might have laid hold on him. Being then secured in their Hands, all his Disciples fled, and left him alone with them; And when they had laid hold on him, they led him away to Caiaphas the High-Priest, where the Scribes and Elders were assembled, and Peter followed afar off. Our Saviour de∣signed by this, To comfort those who should fall by surprize into the hands of their Ene∣mies. He knew, that they were to come to take him, and he did not avoid them, because he knew it was his Fathers Will; to the end, that those who should fall into a like condi∣tion, without knowing it, should adore (as he did) the Power of GOD in Men; and not suffer themselves to be carried away by fruitless Complaints and Repinings. For there is nothing comes amiss to him, who consi∣ders, That he suffers nothing, but what a most Divine Person suffered before him; and that the Sufferings of this present Life, are not wor∣thy to be compared to the Glory which shall be revealed.
203 Mr. Nicholas Jeffreys, second son of Jeffrey Jeffreys of Llywell in Brecknockshire Esq▪ For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
204 Mis. Ann Jeffreys, eldest daughter of Jeffrey Jeffreys of Llywell in Brecknockshire Esq▪ For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
Christ's Examination, and Peter's Denial. Our SAVIOƲR is Carried and Examined bfore Caiaphas the High Priest, and is Denied there by Peter. OUR Blessed LORD being in the Hands of the Jews, was carried before An∣nas, Caiaphas his Father-in-Law,The same Year 33. who was High Priest that Year. Annas interrogated him touching his Disciples and Doctrine; whereunto our Blessed Saviour replied, That he had not Taught in secret, so that he might be informed by every Body of that matter. But this freedom of Speech displeasing an Officer which stood near our Saviour, he gave him a blow on the Face, and ask'd him, Whether it became him, to answer the High Priest in that manner? Jesus Christ suffered this Indignity with a Divine Patience, and only bade this Person, to tell him what he had spoke amiss, other∣wise he that smote him would shew himself to blame. Annas after this sent him to Caiaphas, at whose House the Chief Priests were assem∣bled, to confer about the Charge they were to exhibit against him; and, if need were, to find false Witnesses; who being brought, they could make out nothing that was suffi∣cient to take away his Life: But at last, one amongst them accusing him for having said, That he would destroy the Temple, and build it up again in Three Days. The High Priest arose, and ask'd him, Why he made no De∣fence against this Accusation? Jesus Christ observed still a profound Silence, which made the High Priest command him, in the Name of the Most High GOD, to tell them, if he were the Christ? Tho' I should tell you (saith he) that I am he, ye will not be∣live me, neither will you let me go; but You shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds, and sitting at the right Hand of GOD. The High Priest having heard these words, rent his Cloaths, and cried out, He has spoken Blasphemy, What need have we of further Witnesses? You your selves have heard his Blasphemy. What think ye? They all answered, He had deserved Death. Then the Soldiers began to misuse him; for they spit on his Face, and blinding him, struck him, and then bid him prophesie and divine who it was. The Night being thus spent, in the Morning they led him to Pilate, to pro∣nounce Sentence on him. St. Peter, who had followed Jesus Christ at a distance into the House of the High Priest, and warmed himself by the Fire with the Officers, lost that Heat which he had shewed before, and his Courage changed into an excessive Fear∣fulness; when a Servant Maid asked him, Whether he had not been with Jesus Christ? He answered, No. And having a while after charged him with the same Question, he renounced him, (as he had done before) saying, That he knew not the Man. In fine, About an Hour after one of the High Priest's Servants, a Kinsman of him whose Ear Peter had cut off, positively affirmed, that he was with Jesus Christ. But Peter de∣nied it again the third time with horrid Oaths and Imprecations; and immediately the Cock Crew; and our Blessed Saviour looking on him, touched him to the Quick, and made him remember what had been said to him; and thereupon he went out and wept bitterly. Whence we learn, That those who turn to GOD, owe their Conversion to the graci∣ous Look of our Saviour. We have no know∣ledge of the wretchedness of our Conditi∣on, neither do we think of a Remedy, till GOD doth enlighten our Minds by his Grace. The Relation of St. Peter's Sin, and his Sorrow for it, has been of great Consolation to the Faithful in all Ages. His Repentance has no Words, because they are superflu∣ous when Works speak. I hear not St. Peter's Voice after his Sin, (saith St. Ambrose) but I see his Tears. Hap∣py Tears, which do not only beg Pardon, but do (in some sort) deserve it.
PILATE to asswage the Rage of the Jews, condemns our Saviour to be Scourged, and delivers him to them to be Crucified. JEsus Christ was led from Caiaphas to Pilate, who demanded of the Jews, What were the chief Heads of their Accusations against this Man?The same Year 33. But the Jews answered him confused∣ly, That if he had not been a wicked Man, they would not have brought him before him. Pilate not being accustomed to judge Peo∣ple upon such slight Grounds, would have remitted him into their Hands again, that they might judge him according to their own Law. But to satisfie him they produced false Witnesses, who making no mention of Religion, or Temple, as they did before the High Priest, affirmed, That he was a seditious Fellow; that he stirred up the People to Re∣bellion, and hindred them from giving Tri∣bute to Caesar, Calling himself a KING. Whereupon Pilate came to Jesus Christ, who spake freely to him touching himself, and of his Kingdom, and that 'twas not of this World; his only Business amongst Men being to instruct them in the Way to ever∣lasting Life. Pilate not being prejudiced with Malice against his Person, as the Jews were, easily discovered our Saviour's Innocency, and went to the Jews again to tell them, that he found him in no sort culpable. But the People being impatient at the hearing of this, he was constrained to re∣turn to Jesus Christ and question him again; but he remained in a deep Silence. Pilate shewed him what a great number of Accusa∣tions were laid against him; unto all which Jesus Christ answered nothing, so that he astonished the Judge with his Silence. This Governour understanding, that our Saviour Jesus Christ was of Galilee, he would make this a Pretence to be discharged of him, and sent him therefore to Herod, who was King of that Province, and was then at Jerusalem. Herod was at first over joy'd at the Sight of him; for having of a long time heard much of him, he was glad of this opportunity to Cnverse with him, and expected also, that he would do some Miracle before him. But having offered to him several Questions, to which our Saviour made no answer: This Prince therefore despised him, and esteemed him a Fool, and caused therefore a white Robe to be put on him, and sent him thus array∣ed back again to Pilate, with whom he was then reconciled, so that they became Friends. Pilate having received our Saviour, went out the third time to tell the Jews, That he found no Fault in him, and that Herod him∣self, to whom he had sent him, could not find him guilty of any thing. But the Jews being resolved to put our Saviour to Death, shewed by the Shouts and Uproars they made that they liked not Pilate's Opinion of him. Pilate therefore thinking to asswage their Rage, and to gratifie their revengeful Spi∣rits, condemned our Saviour to be scour∣ged, imagining that this Punishment might be a means to make him escape Death Then Judas when he saw how far the Ene∣mies of our Saviour began to carry their Re∣venge, came to himself; and considering the Crime he had committed, was seized with Despair, which made him bring back to the Jews the Thirty pieces of Money which he had received of them; telling them, He had sinned, in betraying Innocent Blood; and ha∣ving thrown his Money into the Temple, im∣mediately went away, and hanged himself. This Disciple, whose Heart the Devil had corrupted, and whose Malice GOD had made subservient to his Eternal Designs, is a terri∣ble Example of the manner of the Devil's imposing on Men. He disguises the Mischief whereunto he would cast them, he blinds their Eyes lest they should behold it, and so artificially colours it, that they cannot dis∣cern the ugliness of it. But as soon as they have committed it, he makes use of a quite contrary Course; aggravating their Sin, with the severe Justice of GOD; and thus brings them to Despair. Those Christians that would escape his Snares, must be sensible of their Sins, which are innumerable, and also be sensible of the Mercies of GOD, which knows no bounds; for there is no Malay incurable to the Om∣nipotent Physician.
205 Mis. Jane Jeffreys, second Daughter of Jeffrey Jeffreys of Llywell in Brecknockshire Esq, For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
206 Mis. sarah Jeffreys, third daughter of Jeffrey Jeffreys of Llywell in Brecknockshire Esq. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
PILATE shews our SAVIOUR to the People, saying, Ecce Homo! PILATE having delivered Jesus Christ to the Soldiers, they added cruel Mock∣ings to the punishment of Scourging;The same Year 33. and in de∣rision of his Royal Dignity, they put a Crown of Thorns on his Head, a Reed in his Hand, and cloathed him in a Purple Robe. They after∣wards bowed the Knee before him, and buf∣fetting him, said, Hail King of the Jews. In fine, They had so pitiously used him, that Pilate thought the shewing him to the People would be sufficient to mollifie them, and to make them lay aside their thirst after his Death. But he was much mistaken in his Expecta∣tion; for as soon as he had presented Jesus Christ hefore them, saying, Behold the Man! there arose such Cries and Clamours from all the People, that much troubled him. Even the offer which he made them of delivering our Saviour on the account of the Passover; at which time he was wont to set at liberty one certain Person; was by one common Voice rejected; so that our Blessed LORD saw Barabbas, who was a Thief, a seditious Per∣son, and a Murtherer, preferred before him. The knowledge that this Judge had of the innocency of Jesus Christ, held him in suspence, and hindred him from blindly following the fury of the People: He was also further di∣sturbed by the Advice of his Wife, who char∣ged him not to be any ways concerned in the Death of that Just Man, for she had been much troubled on this occasion with Dreams in the Night. In the mean while the Jews, who would not give over their prosecution; cunningly told Pilate, That he shewed but small affe∣ction to the Emperour, in taking such a Man's part, who had declared himself a King, in opposition to Caesa. This Governour, who was very careful of his Fortune, and very little concern'd for Ju∣stice, could not hold out any longer against these words. Wherefore finding all his un∣willingnesses were fruitless, and that the more he endeavoured to save him, the more he rai∣sed a Tumult, he caused Water to be brought him, and thought to do away the horrible Crime he was about committing, by washing his Hands before all the People, in saying, He was not guilty of the Blood of this Man. He soon after pronounced the Sentence of Death on our Saviour, delivered him into the hands of the Jews, and set Barabbas at liberty. There was never any greater instance than this Action of Pilate, to shew how far the desire which the People of the World have to satisfie their Ambition and Interests, will car∣ry them. He sets at naught whatever he knew of the Dignity and Innocency of Je∣sus Christ: He neglects the Advice of his Wife, which he ought to have respected as the warnings of Heaven; and treading un∣der foot all the equity and good inclinations which he had to protect a Just Man opprest; he condemned Jesus Christ, not out of Pas∣sion, as the Jews did, nor out of Covetousness, as Judas; but only out of a timerous humour, that he might not expose himself to the dan∣ger of being out of favour at Court. In the 27th. Chapter of Matthew, is set forth our Saviour's being delivered to Pontius Pilate the Governour; how Judas which be∣trayed him, when he saw he was condem∣ned, repented, and brought the 30 pieces of Silver which he received for betraying him to the Chief Priests, and Elders, telling them he had sinned in betraying Innocent Blood; they answered him, What is that to us? see thou to that. Then casting down the Silver in the Temple, he went out and hanged himself: That with this Silver they bought a piece of Ground, called the Potters-Field, to Bury Strangers in, which was cal∣led the Field of Blood. How Pilate was ad∣monished by his Wife, not to have his hands in the Blood of that Innocent Man, notwith∣standing the Clamours of the People prevail∣ed on him, that he pronounced Sentence of Death, which accordingly was Executed. The Holy Fathers have observed on this passage of the Gospel, That there's nothing but Charity which can make us prefer our Con∣science and Salvation, to whatever we may lose in the World. Words are vain, Thoughts are weak, Re∣solutions are too often broken; it must be GOD that works in us by the secret motions of his Ho∣ly Spirit, to keep us in any thing that is good. Let us then earnestly implore his Divine Good∣ness to guide us, to counsel us, and to stablish us; for without him we can do nothing.
Our SAƲIOƲR bearing the Cross to Mount CALVARY. THE Jews seeing they had at length gotten our Saviour into their Power, immediately put in Ex∣ecution the Sentence of Death▪The same Year 33. which they had with much difficul∣ty obtained. And their Fury being not a∣ble to admit of delays, they loaded him with his Cross, and made him thus depart out of Jerusalem, to go to Mount Calvary, which was the usual place where Malefactors suffered death. But seeing our Blessed Lord (whose Spirits were exhausted by the undergoing of so many Miseries) fainted under so great a Bur∣den (as was the Cross) which they had laid on him; they therefore constrained one Simon to carry it after our Saviour, who thus went to Calvary, attended by the in∣sulting Shouts of the People that followed him. Our Saviour suffered until he fainted, to each us, not to be discouraged in less Af∣flictions, and to persevere unto the end. His Cross is carried by himself and Simon; and this Mystery is an Instruction, and an ad∣mirable Consolation to all the Faithful, For this shews us, That the Cross, as well as the Yoke of Jesus Christ, is always born by two; by Jesus Christ himself, and by the Christian who suffers for him. Here is a Man given to the Son of GOD, to ease him; but 'tis GOD himself who eas∣eth us. And as in the Figure, Simon the Cy∣renian eased Jesus Christ in appearance (yet 'twas our Saviour himself that bore the greatest weight of the Cross, for he had a divine Strength, which suffered his Body to be weakened only as he thought fitting) so 'tis we that appear to carry the Cross which GOD lays on us; but if we suffer by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, 'tis he in effect that bears it, and hinders us from fainting, by proportioning it to our Weakness. The Son of GOD assures us, That whoso∣ever takes not up his Cross, and follows him, is not worthy to be his Disciple, for he hath first carried it himself, to the end we might be perswaded by his Example, if we could not be so by his Words. The holy Women that had followed Jesus Christ, and had assisted him during his Preachings, attended him when he thus carried his Cross to Calvary, shewing by their Sighs and Tears what a share they had in his Sufferings; and therefore the Son of GOD speaks only to them, saying, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but rather for your selves. He will not be lamented, though his Cross excessively deserved it; teaching us there by, That we ought not to bewail our selves in our Afflictions above measure, whe∣ther they be little, or great, nor suffer o∣thers to lament for us. The time, says he, will come, in which it will be said, Blessed are the Barren, and the Breasts which have not given Suck; Then shall they say to the Mountains, Fall on us; for if these things be done unto the green Tree, what will become of the dry? If any thing be able to stop the impati∣ence of mens Hearts, it must be these last words of our Saviour Jesus Christ. What Christian but must humble himself under the Hand of▪ GOD, when he considers who Jesus Christ was, and what himself is; what he has suffered, and what he suffers? A Man must acknowledge after this, That if he falls now into Impatiency and Murmuring, he is guilty of a more extravagant Pride than words can express, and makes himself infi∣nitely more faulty than the worst of Creatures. The Crucifixion of our Saviour, is thus taken notice of in the 27th. Chapter of S. Matthew. After the sentence of Death was past, the Soldiers took him into the Common Hall, Stript him, vested him with a Scarlet Robe, put on his Head a Crown of Thorns, and a Reed in his Right Hand, and bowing the knee in derision, said, Hail King of the Jews; then they Spit on him, and Smote him, with deriding Words, and disrobing him, led him to Golgotha, the place of Execution. Then they gave him Vinegar to drink, mingled with Gall; they set up over his Head his Accusation, which was, This is Jesus the King of the Jews. For his Garments they cast Lots, which fulfilled that which was spoke by the Prophet, They par∣ted my Garment amongst them, and upon my Vesture they cast Lots.
207 Madam Elizabeth, the Wife of Major John Cass of Hackney in Middlesex Esq. For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
208 Mary Barington, daughter of Thomas Barington, of Barington Hall in Essex Esq▪ by his Wife the Lady Anne Rich▪ daughter of the Rt. Honourable Robert late Earle of Warwick For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate.
The Crucifixion of our Saviour. OUR Blessed LORD being come to Mount Calvary (where this great Sacrifice was to be offered, which was prefigured in the Creation of the World,The same Year 33. and whose efficacious Vertue was from thenceforth to communi∣cate it self to all Ages,) he was first given to drink Vinegar, mingled with Gall; but when he had tasted it, he refused it. At length they strip'd him of his Rayment, and nailed him to the Cross between Two Thieves, who were led to Execution along with him, that he might the better pass for an Evil-doer. Our Blessed Saviour like a Sheep (that before his Shearers is dumb) opened not his Mouth, unless it were to pray for his Per∣secutors; because they knew not what they did. But whilst he was thus tenderly affected towards his Enemies, they forbore not their insulting over him, saying, shaking their Heads; Thou that destroyest the Temple of GOD, and rebuildest it in Three Days▪ now save thy self. If thou be the Son of GOD, come down from the Cross. All the People gazed on him, and mock∣ed him; also the Rulers and Chief Priests reviled him, with Reproaches of his weak∣ness in saving others, when he could not save himself. The Soldiers likewise mixed their Scoffs with the rest; and besides their cruel and brutish Speeches, they offered him Vinegar to drink. Neither did the Male∣factors spare him, who suffered with him, for one of them blasphemingly said; If thou be Christ, Save thy self, and us that suffer with thee. But the other being on a sudden en∣lightned in his Soul, and changed in his Heart by a Conversion, which has proved of admirable Consolation to Multitudes of Christians, and an Occasion of Ruin to many others; maintained our Saviour's Cause against his Companion, and loudly pronounced. That as for their parts they suffered justly; whereas our Blessed Lord had done nothing amiss. And addressing him∣self to Jesus Christ, (whom he knew to be King in another sort than Pilate did, when he caused that his Title should be fixed over his Head on the Cross;) he entreated him to remember him when he came into his Kingdom. Which Request of his our Saviour gra∣ciously granted, and promised he should be that Day with him in Paradise; then ex∣ecuting the Office of a Judge, he saved one of these Two Thieves, whilst he left the other in his Impenitency. Our Saviour Christ having seen the Bles∣se Virgin standing at the Foot of the Cross with S. John, said to her, pointing to this Disciple, Woman behold thy Son; and he said to S. John, shewing him the Holy Virgin, Behold thy Mother. About the 6th Hour there was Darkness over all the Land, unto the 9th Hour, and about the 9th Hour Je∣sus cried with a loud Voice, saying; Eli, Eli, Lamasabachthani? That is to say, My GOD, my GOD, why hast thou forsaken me? Some of the Spectators hearing these Words, said he calls for Elias, let us see if Elias will come to save him. And knowing he had accomplished all things to the least Circumstance of whate∣ver had been foretold by the Prophets con∣cerning him; for a Conclusion of all, he said, I thirst. And having tasted a little Vinegar, and recommended his Soul into his Father's Hands, he held down his Head, and yielded up the Ghost. The Holy Fathers tell us, That only the Saints are able to understand the Mystery of Jesus Christ Crucified, We may properly say concerning this Mystery, That Holy Things are for Holy Persons. The Holy Spi∣rit must himself take off the Veil from our Eyes, to give us entrance into this im∣penetrable Mystery to all Humane Wisdom, according to these Words of St. Bernard: Jesu Christ dies on the Cross, and he deserves to be beloved: He gives his Holy Spirit, who makes him be beloved. But if the Holy Spi∣rit be not given to a Man, he will see Je∣sus Christ Crucified, and he will not love him. What Shame and Confusion of Face will it be to a Christian, to see Jesus Christ dying, with ungrateful Eyes, without being devout∣ly affected towards him, who gave up his Life for us all?
Christ's Body begg'd and entomb'd. Our LORD and SAVIOƲR laid in the Sepulchre by Joseph of Arimathea. JESUS CHRIST having accomplish'd his Sacrifice on the Cross, and continued Obedient unto Death; there happened several things which plainly discovered who he was, and made the Jews to know what manner of Crime they had committed.The same Year 33. The Heavens were o'erspread with thick Clouds of Darkness, during Three Hours; the Veil of the Temple was rent from top to bottom; the Earth quaked; the Rocks split; and Graves were opened; the dead Bodies of many Saints which slept, arose and left their Burying-Places, and appeared to many in Jerusalem. So many extraordinary Signs made the Centurion, (who commanded the Soldiers) and they that were with him to watch our Saviour, say, That doubtless this Man was the Son of GOD. The rest affrighted at these Prodigies spake the same things; and this great Assembly of the People, which came to this Spectacle, beholding such strange things, changed their Insultings into Sighs, and returned back, smiting their Breasts. In the mean while the Jews (whose Tem∣per it was to be scrupulous in things of no Weight, yet forward to commit the most palpable Injustices) not being able to suffer, that these dead Bodies should remain on the Cross during the time of the Passover, en∣treated Pilate to cause their Thighs to be bro∣ken, and be taken down from the Cross; which Pilate granted. The Soldiers having found the two Thieves still alive, broke their Leggs; but our LORD being already dead one amongst them pierced his Side with a Launce, whence issued out both Water and Blood. At Night one of our Saviour's Disciples, tho' unknown, named Joseph, of the City of Arimathea, who was a good Man, and was not any ways concerned in the Death of Jesus Christ, but one of his Disciples, came oldly to Pilate, to beg our Saviour's Body, which Pilate granted; whereupon Joseph, together with Nicodemus, took the Body of our LORD, and embalming it with preci∣ous Spices, and shrouding it in a fine Linen Cloth, they buried it in a new Tomb, or Sepulchre, which he had hewed out of a Rock; and he rolled a great Stone to the Door of the Sepulchre, and departed. And there was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the Mo∣ther of James, and Joses, sitting over a∣gainst the Sepulchre. St. Chrysostom admires the Zeal of those two Persons, who having till then lain hid, discovered themselves in so important an Occasion. This Holy Father often exhorts his Hearers, to imitate them, and to strow (like them) Perfumes on the Body of Jesus Christ. He endeavours to confound those who are insensible of the Afflictions which our Saviour Christ still every Day suffers in his Members▪ who are the Faithful that are in Want, by the Love which these Two Men shew him after his Death. Their ge∣nerosity spares no Cost; they bring Per∣fumes in abundance; they expose themselves to great Dangers, in making themselves publickly known to be the Disciples and Protectors of a Man who had Enemies, whose Hatred was as lively after his Death, as it was during his Life. There is no Body (says this Father) but are apt to envy these two happy Persons, and are willing to render unto our LORD's Body the same good Offices of Charity. And yet (says he) we may do the same good Offices every Day with as much Sa∣tisfaction, and more Faith, in the Persons of his Members, in strowing our Perfumes; that is to say, in shewing our Compassion to the Poor and Miserable, who are the living Members, and real Bodies of Jesus Christ, and which he has loved more than that which he took of the Virgin, as is observed by S. Bernard, seeing he has yielded the one to the Cross, to save the other from Death and Eternal Destruction.
209 Mr. Robert Pierce, son of Richard Pierce. Esq, Receivr. of the Coale Duty granted by Act of Parliament for rebuilding the Cathedrall Church of St. Pauls. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
210 The Rt. Honble the Lady Elizabeth seymor, daughter to his Grace Charles Duke of somerset & For ye Advancement of this Worke Contributed this Plate.
The Resurrection of our Saviour. And his Appearing to Mary Magdalen, &c ALtho' our Blessed LORD lay buried in the Sepulchre, yet this did not satisfie the Jews; for they were afraid lest it should be publish'd,The same Year 33. That he was Risen; and therefore they went to Pilate, telling him, that this Impostor had said, when he was living, That he would Rise again after his Death. And therefore they en∣treated him to set a Watch by the Sepulchre, lest his Disciples should steal away his Body, and afterwards give out a Report amongst the People, That he was Risen. They blinded themselves with their own Wisdom; for designing to hinder before∣hand (as much as in them lay) our Saviour's Resurrection, they confirmed the Belief there∣of by notable Proofs. For the Sepulchre being thus guarded, and the Stone which secured it, sealed; there immediately arose a great Earthquake. The Angel of the LORD descending from Hea∣ven, roll'd away the Stone which lay before the Sepulchre, and sat thereon: His Eyes shi∣ned like Lightning, and his Garments were as white as Snow. The Guards that lay near the Sepulchre were struck with Terror, and became as Dead Men; wherefore they hastned to Je∣rusalem, and told the Priests what had hap∣ned. Whereupon they immediately as∣sembled, to consult together what they had to do in this Case. They could not find out a better Reme∣dy against a thing so evident, than to cor∣rupt these Soldiers with a great Summ of Mo∣ney which they gave them; for which they were to say, That whilst they slept, his Disci∣ples came and stole it away. In the mean time Mary Magdalen, and some other Holy Womn, whose Love was the same to Jesus both living and dead; being come early to the Sepulchre, to perfume our Saviour's Body with Spices, argued amongst themselves, who should roll away the Stone that shut up the Passage to the Sepulchre. But they were greatly surpriz'd, as they drew near to it, to see it open; and yet more, when they were entred in, not find∣ing him whom they searched for. Mary Magdalen ran immediately to give notice of this to the Apostles; and S. Peter being come to the Sepulchre with S. ohn, saw the Linen Cloaths wherewith the Body of Jesus Christ was wrapped. But they going away in an Astonishment; Mary Magdalen tarried behind, shedding Tears in the Sepul∣chre. When two Angels cloathed in white Raiment, one of which stood at the Head, and the other at the Foot of the Place where the Body of esus Christ lay, ask'd her, Why she wept? To which she answered, They had taken away the Body of her LORD, and she knew not where they had laid it▪ And the Angel said, Fear not, I know that ye seek JESUS that was Crucified: He is not here, but is Risen, as he said, Come, see the Place where the LORD lay, and go quickly and tell his Disciples, That He is Risen from the Dead; and behold he goeth before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him: Lo, I have told you. Turning about, she saw Jesus Christ in the Form of a Gardner, who ask'd her, What she cry'd for? She answered, That if he had taken her Master's Body, he would be pleased to tell her where he had laid it, Jesus said unto her, Mary; and immediately being transported with Joy, she ran to em∣brace our Saviour's Feet; who hindred her, charging her to go and tell his Disciples what she had seen. This is the first Appearance which the Gospel denotes of our Saviour's Resurrection; and thus happily was the persevering Love of this happy Sinner recompenced. Our Saviour's Resurrection hath appeared such a great Mystery to the Saints, that it has made them say, 'Tis better humbly to a∣dore the Greatness of it, than to pry over curiously into it. Nothing can sooner inspire us with an aversation to all worldly Glory, than the Circumstances which accompany it; seeing they all discover to Christians, that they be not what they are for this Life, but for ano∣ther, of which Jesus Christ arising, has open∣ed us the Entrance, in making us victorious over the Death, not only of the Body, but of the Soul.
The Disciples of EMAUS. AFter our Blessed Lord had shewed him∣self to Mary Magdalen, he appeared the second time to the Holy Women,The same Year 33. who having been informed by the Angels, that he was Risen, and that they should not search for the Living amongst the Dead, they went im∣mediately to give notice of this to the Di∣sciples. But whilst they were in the way, Jesus Christ appeared to them: They cast themselves at his Feet, who bad them go to his Apostles, and assure them of his Resur∣rection. But the Apostles took whatever they told them, for idle Tales. The third Ap∣pearance is, that to the two Disciples going to the Village of Emaus, which was about sixty furlongs from Jerusalem. When they were discoursing in the way, of whatever had happened to our Saviour; our Lord taking on him the form or habit of a Traveller, drew near to them, and dimm'd their Eyes, that they should not know him. He asked the Subject of their Discourse, and why they were sad? One of them answered him, He was asto∣nished that he alone should be ignorant of what had past at Jerusalem lately, touching Jesus of Nazareth, who was a Prophet mighty in Word and in Deed, before GOD and all the People, and how the high Priests, and Rulers delivered him to be condemn'd to Death, and have Crucified him: And we hoped, added they, that he should have delivered Israel; but this is the third day since this happen'd. Not but that, said they, some good Women have startled us, in affirming, That having been at the Sepulchre before day, they could not find his Body there: They also say, that they saw Angels there, who told them, That Jesus Christ was risen. And some from among us being gone to the Se∣pulchre, found what these Women told us to be true, and could not in effect find his Body. Our Saviour admiring the Disciples should tell him all that was necessary to induce them to believe, when as yet they persisted in their Incredulity, cried out, O insensible and incredulous to all which the Prophet has foretold! Ought not Christ to have suf∣fered these things, and thus enter into his Glory? And beginning from Moses, and go∣ing through with all the other Prophets, he expounded to them whatever had been said of him. Whilst he spake to them after this man∣ner they drew near to Emaus; and our Sa∣viour made as if he would have went farther, but they constrained him to tarry with them; it being already late, our Saviour yielded to their Entreaties, and entred with them into the Inn, and being at Table, he took Bread, blessed it, and gave it to them. At this instant their Eyes were opened, and they knew our Saviour, who vanish'd from them, leaving them full of astonish∣ment, and asking one another, Whether their Hearts were not inflamed, whilst he expounded to them the Scriptures? They arose at the same time, and went to Jerusa∣lem to find the Eleven Apostles, to whom they declared what had happened, and in what manner they had known Jesus Christ when he gave them Bread; and as they thus spake, Jesus stood in the midst of them, and said unto them, Peace be unto you. But they were terrified and afrighted, as sup∣posing him a Spirit. Our Saviour learnt these two Dsciples, that we should never lose our Hopes in ex∣traordinary Events. There could not be a greater Disorder than the Death of a GOD, yet 'twas by that, GOD prepared the reno∣vation of the World When we think that all is desperate, then 'tis we ought to raise our selves up by Faith, and consider the Wisdom of GOD, which is so much the more admirable, that it acts by the most opposite ways in ap∣pearance to what it designs to do. The warmth which Jesus Christ kindled in the Hearts of these Disciples by his Word, before he gave them his Body, is of great Instruction. It shews in what disposition one ought to be in Communicating; and that true Piety consists more in the Love of GOD, than in external Knowledge, see∣ing that these Dsciples sooner felt this heat in their Souls, than they knew Jesus Christ with their Eyes.
211 Mis. susanna Henshan, daughter of Charles Henshan Esq. For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
212 The Right Honourable Katherine Coun∣tess of Rutland▪ Daughter of the Right Honourable Baptist Noel. Viscount Campden &. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Ascension of our SAVIOUR. AFter the particular Appearances which our Saviour made to some of his Disciples, and the de∣vout Women,The same Year 33. Thursday May 14. he shewed himself to his Eleven Apostles, and immediately entred into the Chamber where they abode, when they were all at Table. He gave them his Peace, and reproached them with their not believing those who had seen him Risen. They were at first astonished, and thought they saw a Phantasm; but Jesus Christ corrected their Fears, by telling them that a Spirit had no Bones nor Flesh; and to put them out of all Doubts, he shewed them his Feet, his Hands, and his Side. When then they were o'erwhelm'd with Joy to see him, Jesus Christ, to persuade them more fully of the truth of his Resur∣rection, asked them, whether they had any thing to eat? and he did eat in their sight  morsel of broyl'd Fish, and a little Honey. S. Thomas was not then with them; but when he returned, the rest told him that they had seen their Master. He answered, That he would never believe it, if he saw not with his Eyes the marks of the Nails, and if he did not touch them with his Finger. Having remained firm in this his Incre∣dulity, which has prov'd since so useful to cure us of ours, eight days after our Savi∣our appeared again on a sudden in the midst of his Disciples, Thomas being with them. And having given them his Peace, he plain∣ly signified, that he shewed himself only to them to dispossess this Disciple of his Incredulity. For at the same time that he shewed his Feet and Hands, he said unto him▪ Put thy Finger into these Wounds, and thy Hand into my wounded Side, and be not incredulous, but believe. Thomas being immediately hereupon en∣lightned in his Soul, and believing more than he saw, cried out, my LORD and my GOD. But our Saviour Christ said to him. Thou hast believed Thomas, because thou hast seen; happy are they who have not seen, and yet believe. In fine, having appeared several times together for the space of forty days, either to all of them, or to some of them in par∣ticular, when the time of his Ascension was come, he stood in the midst of his Disciples, declaring to them, He had received from his Father all Power both in Heaven and in Earth, and he sent them into the World to preach the Gospel, to Baptize all Nations, and teach them to observe whatever he had told them, promising them to be with them to the end of the World. And said unto them, behold, I send the promise of my Father up∣on you, but tarry ye in the City of Jerusa∣lem until ye be endued with Power from on high. Having said this to them, He was taken up into Heaven before their Eyes. And in ascending he stretched out his Hand on the Apostles, and blessed them, and immediate∣ly a Cloud received him, and hid him from his Apostles. Whilst they stood gazing on him, two Men cloathed in white appeared to them, who asked them, why they held their Eyes thus fixed towards Heaven? assuring them, that this same Jesus who thus ascended up into Heaven before their Eyes, should one day in like manner descend to Judge the whole Earth. And they worshiped him▪ and returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the Temple, praising and blessing GOD. The Holy Fathers have wished, that the Faithful would imitate the Apostles in this attentive looking up towards Heaven, that the consideration of Christ's Glory may make them raise their Affections from things below, by remembring, that the Country whereunto they tend, that the Bread which nourishes them, that the Grace which up∣holds them, that the Happiness which they expect, and that the Head, whose Members they are, is in Heaven; and that he promises them the same Kingdom, which he has ob∣tain'd by the Holiness of his Life, and Merits of his Death, and by the Glory of his Re∣surrection.
PENTECOST. Or, the Descent of the Holy Ghost. OUR Saviour Christ Ascending up into Heaven, commanded his Apostles to wait in Jerusalem for the Gift of the Holy Spirit,The same Year 33. May 24. which had been so many times promised them, and which was to be the effect of his Glory. And therefore being returned from the Mount of Olives, where our Lord and Saviour had left them, they kept themselves shut up in an House, where they past the Day in continual Prayers to draw down the Holy Spirit, although they were already certain they should receive him. During this time, St. Peter being inspir'd of GOD, said to the other Disciples, that to fill the place of Judas, who had betray'd our Saviour, they should elect one from a∣mongst those who had been always with Jesus Christ since the Baptism of S. John, to his Ascension; And therefore two Disciples having been chosen from amongst others, Joseph surnamed the Just, and Matthias; they prayed to GOD, who presides over Lots, to shew which of these Two he had chosen to be an Apostle, and the Lot fell on S. Mat∣thias. When the time of Pentecost, that is to say, of Fifty Days after Ester, was accom∣plish'd Ten Days after our Saviour's Ascen∣sion; they were all with one accord in one place, and suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, as of a rushing mighty Wind, and it filled the whole House therewith; and there appeared (as it were) Cloven Tongues like Fire, which rested on each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak divers Lan∣guages, as the Spirit gave them utterance; at this time all erusalem was filled with a great number of different People, who were strangely surprized at this Miracle, in see∣ing Persons whom they knew to be of Ga∣lilee, to speak so many different Languages; Asking one another whence this Prodigy could happen; and others mocking them, said they were full of Wine. But S. Peter standing up with the other Apostles, lifted up his Voice boldly to refute this Calumny; telling them they were not Drunk, being but the third hour, and that what they saw, was the accomplishment of the Oracles of the Prophets, and the works of esus, whom they had Crucified. And this is that which the Prophet oel speaks of; In the last days (saith GOD) I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons and Daughters shall Prophesy, your young Men shall see Visions, and old Men dream Dreams; and on my Servants and Hand Maids I will pour out my Spirit, and they shall Prophesy; I will shew wonders in Heaven, and Signs on the Earth, Blood and Fire▪ Vapour and Smoak, the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into Blood. Then was known the truth of which S. John said in the Apocalypse, That the Church was really descended from Heaven, and that our Saviour Jesus Christ as an eternal High-Priest, as David calls him, built in this day a Temple to the Glory of his Father. He would make this Mystery sensible, that his Enemies who came in Crowds to Jerusalem, might not doubt of it. He then shewed himself Victorious over those that had Cru∣cified him, and that their Fury served only to accomplish his designs. He made his Church Holy, as an everlasting Monument of his Victory, which will shew to the end of the World, that Men and Devils shall be all confounded in the Enterprizes which they form against Jesus Christ, and against his Members. The Admiration which all the Saints have shewed, at the Gift which GOD bestowed this day on Men, will easily make us judge, That one ought to desire nothing on Earth, but the Holy Spirit; and the delays which GOD has used in sending his Holy Spirit on Earth doth clearly enough shew us with what earnestness we ought to ask it, when we have it not as yet, and with what care it ought to be preserved, when one has received it.
213 Mis. Mary Forbes▪ the Wife of Mr. Francis Forbes▪ of the Citty of London Merchant. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate▪
214 The Right Honourable Barbary Viscountess Filz-Harding &ca. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Lame Cured. St. Peter miraculously Cures a Man Lame from his Birth. WHen GOD blessed the first Establish∣ment of his Church by the divine Life of the Primitive Christians,The same Year 33. who immedi∣ately had all things in Common, that they might not be troubled with worldly Mat∣ters, but only attend to Prayer, and the Word of GOD; The Apostles, who diligent∣ly laboured to enlarge this Holy Edifice, wrought several Miracles in Jerusalem, which filled all the Jews with Astonishment, and increased the Number of the Faithful. One of the most Remarkable was that wrought by S. Peter, when going into the Temple to Pray, he saw a Man lying at the Gate of the Temple called Beautiful, who was Lame from his Mothers Womb, to ask Alms of those that entred into the Temple. This Man seeing S. Peter and S. John look∣ing on him, he looked also on them, ex∣pecting that they would give him Money. S. Peter told him, he had neither Silver nor Gold, but what he had he would give him, and thereupon bad him in the Name of Jesus Christ to arise immediately and walk. He took him at the same time by the Hand, lifted him up, and immediately his Feet and Ancle-bones received strength, so that he stood firmly, and walked steddily. He also leaped for Joy, and entred into the Temple with S. Peter, to praise GOD in the Sight of the People for this Favour, who were greatly surprized at the Miracle, as ha∣ving known this Man of a long time. S. Peter and S. John observing, that all the People gazed on them, asked them why they beheld them with such Admira∣tion, as if they had been the Authors of this Miracle; which made S. Peter to tell them, 'twas in the Name of Jesus, through Faith in his Name, that this Man is cured and made strong, which ye see and know; hence S. Peter took Occasion, to represent to them the Crime they had committed in putting our Saviour to Death; which he yet in some sort extenuated, in saying, They did it through Ignorance. He after∣wards exhorted them to Repentance, shew∣ing them, as an Encouragement, That 'twas to them GOD had first sent his Son, and that they were the Children of the Prophets. Five Thousand were converted by this his Discourse, and then the Rulers came, being much troubled at their Exhortations to the People, and preaching our Saviour's Resurrection. They seized on the Apostles, and threw them into Prison, till they had finished their Consultations. The next Morning they caused S. Peter to be brought before them, and ask'd him in whose Name they had done this Miracle? S. Peter boldly replied, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, whom they had Crucified. These Priests observing the Constancy and Wisdom wherewith they spake, whom they knew to be Illiterate and Ignorant Men, they caused them for a while to with∣draw, that they might have further time to deliberate what to do with them; and considering how publick this Miracle was, which they came from doing; they thought it best to have them recall'd, and to give them a strict Charge, never to speak in this Man's Name any more. But S. Peter and S. John appealed to themselves, whether it was more just to obey them than GOD, who had com∣manded them to declare what they had seen and heard. But these Priests making no reply, sent them away with great Threat∣nings. This Answer of S. Peter, when he was in the Hands of his Enemies, shews such an unshaken Courage, together with such Wisdom, as all the Saints have admired; who when they have seen themselves in such like Occasions, where GOD on the one hand, and Men on the other, command them contrary things, they have imitated the Wisdom of this Holy Man, in saying, with as great Humility as Constancy; We must not obey Men rather than GOD.
The Death of ANANIAS and SAPHIRA his Wife. SAint Peter being come out from the Assembly of the Jews came with Saint John, and the Apostles, to the Disciples,The same Year 33. who were in great Trouble for them. They informed them how all things had past, and the Threatnings which the Priests had used towards them; which the Disciples having heard, they all unanimously lifted up their Voices to GOD, entreating him to consider the Threats of these Men, who had conspired against his Son; and to give Grace to his People, to preach the Word with all Boldness. When they had ended their Prayer, the Place shook where they stood, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and preached the Word of GOD with great free∣dom. All those that received the Faith had but one Heart, and one Soul, no Body amongst them possessing any thing in private, all that which they had being in common, so that there were no Poor amongst them; for when any one of the Faithful had Lands, they sold them, and brought the Money, and laid it at the Apostles Feet, who afterwards di∣stributed it according as every one had need. The whole City had an extream respect for these first Faithful, and when they were in the Temple, no Body durst joyn himself unto them. In the mean time S. Peter (both by his Miracles and Preachings) increased the Number of the Disciples, healing the Sick with his Shadow only. All Jerusalem, and the Cities round about, came and placed their Sick in the Streets, to the end, that in passing by, his Shadow might light on them and heal them. Thus when the Faithful were filled with the Consolation of the Holy Spirit, there hap∣ned an Action which troubled their Joy, and shewed the Power of S. Peter in another manner than the miraculous Cures that he had hitherto done. Ananias having sold an Estate, resolved with his Wife Saphira, to retain secretly a part of the Money, and came and brought the rest, and laid it at the Apostles Feet. S. Peter was wounded at the Heart at the Sight of this Covetousness, joyned with a Dissimulation, which seemed to put upon GOD himself: He therefore demanded of Ananias, why he suffered himself to be so surprized by the Devil, as to lye to the Holy Spirit, in keeping back part of the Money. Could you not (said he) have kept your Estate without selling it; or keep the Money after you have sold it? You have not attempted to deceive Men, but GOD. These Words, were Words of Thunder for Ananias, and he fell down dead at the same instant. Three Hours after, his Wife Sa∣phira (not knowing of the Death of her Husband) entred in where S. Peter was, of whom he demanded, Whether 'twas true they had sold their Estate for so much? She answered, It was▪ S. Peter said the same to her as to her Husband; and added, that the Persons which came from carrying a∣way her Husband were at the Door, and would carry her away in like manner. This Woman fell down dead at the same instant, and these Men entring, carried and buried her with her Husband. What hapned to these Two Persons, cau∣sed a great Terror amongst the Faithful. They learnt from so visible a Judgment of GOD, how displeasing Covetousness is in his Sight, and how contrary to that Spirit of Charity, which he has spread among Christians. If the Process of Time, and the Corruption of Manners have introduced it since, the Church has no less Horror at it at present, than she shewed then in the Person of S. Pe∣ter. She strikes no longer with a Tempo∣ral Death those who are subject to her, be∣cause she would have too many Persons to punish. She knows that GOD speaks but one, and after this retires, to give place to Faith, who believes also as certainly what was seen but once, as if it should happen every Day. In the mean time, this Espouse of Jesus Christ laments continualy the invisible Death of so many covetous Persons, who dis∣honour her Spouse, and who make of the Church, (according to the Gospel, and Words of S. Bernard) a Den of Thieves, who live on Prey and Labour only to enrich them∣selves with the Spoils of Passengers.
215 Samuel Criche of the Tower of London Gentleman For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
216
St. Stephen (the first Martyr) stoned to Death. WHen the Church daily increased, the Sadduces were those who shewed most displeasure at it: They seized on the Apostles,The same Year 33. and caused them to be imprisoned; but at Night an An∣gel came and delivered them, and command∣ed them to go and Preach boldly the Gospel to the People. The next Morning the Priests being assembled, gave order to have the A∣postles brought before them; and were great∣ly surprized to hear, that the Prison-doors were fast shut, but that the Prisoners were not there to be found. At the same time other Persons came and told them, That they spake publickly to the People. Order was immediately thereupon given, to lay hold on them, and bring them into the Assembly. The High Priest demanded of them, Why they Preached in the name of Jesus? To whom S. Peter returned the same Answer as heretofore, That they ought rather to obey GOD than Men. At these Words they became furious, and consulted together, to put them to Death: But Gamaliel, one of the most considerable Persons amongst them, recommended to them the taking heed of what they did. He re∣membred them of some Passages which late∣ly hapned; by which he shewed, That if this Enterprize and Doctrine were of Men, they would dissipate of themselves; but if of GOD, all resistance would be in vain. They were somewhat cooled by these Re∣monstrances, contenting themselves with causing the Apostles to be Scourged, and for∣bidding them to speak ever hereafter of Jesus. The Apostles came out from the Council full of Joy, in that they had been judged worthy to suffer for the Name of Jesus. Some time after there arose a Misunder∣standing among the Faithful. The Greek Converts supposing their Widows were neg∣lected, and that only those of the Hebrews were admitted to certain Offices to which they were appointed, complained of this Slighting to the Apostles, who bad them choose seven Men amongst them who were filled with the Holy Ghost, that the burden of these Cares might be laid on them. Of these Seven (which were called Deacons) the most considerable amongst them was S. Stephen, who wrought a great many Mira∣cles, by reason of the greatness of his Faith. At the same time several Enemies rose up against them; but they were not able to resist the Holy Spirit, which spake by his Mouth. Being then too weak for him in point of Reasoning, they had recourse to false Witnesses, and gained Persons who pub∣lished amongst the People, That Stephen ceased not to blaspheme against the Law of the Temple. He was cited before the Assem∣bly, where he defended himself with words full of Zeal and Piety. He reproached the Jews with the hardness of their Hearts and Obstinacy, whereby they resisted the Holy Spirit, and persecuted the Prophets, who foretold the Coming of our Saviour, of whom they were lately the Betrayers and Murtherers. These Reproaches transporting them into Fury, they ran impetuously on S. Stephen; who having appeared (during this Dis∣course) with the Countenance of an Angel, cried out at length, That he saw Heaven, and Jesus sitting at the right Hand of his Fa∣ther. They haled him immediately out of the Town and whilst they were Stoning him, this holy Man kneeling on the Ground, pray∣ed GOD with a loud Voice, to forgive his Persecutors; and he gave up the Ghost in this Prayer. The Church has celebrated chiefly in this Proto-Martyr, the Charity he shewed for those who put him to Death. Herein he e∣specially appeared to be the true Disciple of Jesus Christ; and shewed, that the Aposto∣lical Liberty with which he spake, was only an effect of his great Love to them. 'Tis not to hate Men, to shew them with earnestness the great Abuses they commit. No Body loved the Jews better than S. Stephen, and yet he reproaches them boldly with their Obstinacy. Yet these Reproaches are with∣out bitterness, wrath, and clamor. He was a Dove (saith S. Austin) whose Passion was without any Gall: He speaks earnestly to them, to vanquish the hardness of their Hearts; but he at the same time burns with Zeal for their Salva∣tion, and offers to GOD his Blood, for those who shed it.
The Eunuch Baptized. St. Philip the Deacon declares the Christian Faith to the Queen of Aethiopia's Eunuch, and Baptizes him. ONE of the Advantages which the Church received by the Death of St. Stephen, was the encrease of the Persecution,The same year 33. which was begun against her, whereby the Virtue of her Children became more firmly established. The Faithful were dispersed throughout the most remote Pro∣vinces, and by this dispersion the Faith was planted in all parts of the known World. About this time S. Philip the Deacon went to Samaria, where he Preached the Gospel, and Converted several Persons, who were affected with the holiness of his Doctrine, and the great number of his Miracles. When they all came in Crouds to be Baptized, Si∣mon, who was a great Magician, and had for a long time seduced the whole Town of Samaria by his Enchantments, did also be∣lieve, caused himself to be Baptized, and became S. Philip's Disciple. The Apostles, who remained at Jerusalem during the Persecution, hearing that the Town of Samaria had embraced the Faith, sent thither S. Peter and S. John, to confer on them the Holy Spirit, which they had not yet received. Simon observing, that these two Apostles conferred the gifts of the Holy Ghost by the Imposition of Hands, came and offered them Mony, entreating them to give him this Power, to the end that all those on whom he should lay his Hands, should also receive the Holy Ghost. S. Peter was moved with a just Indigna∣tion against this Man; Thy money Perish with thee, answered he, who believest the Gift of GOD is to be purchased at that rate. This Holy Apostle thus struck with an Anathema, in the person of this Man, all those who would imitate him in any Age of the Church. S. Peter and S. John having finished at Sa∣maria what they had to do, returned thence to erusalem, and the Angel of the LORD bid Philip go the Way which led from Jerusa∣lem to Gaza; where being arrived, he saw an Eunuch belonging to the Queen of Aethi∣opia, who was a great man in that Court, returning from Jerusalem, where he came to worship the True GOD. He was in his Chariot, and read part of the Prophecy of Isaiah. The Holy Spirit commanded Philip to approach this Chariot; which having done he heard what he read, and asked him, If he understood it. The Eunuch returned this meek Answer to Philip, That he want∣ed an Interpreter. He therefore prayed him to get up into his Chariot, and expound it unto him. The Passage was this, He was led as a Sheep to the slaughter, and opened not his mouth: He remained silent as a Sheep before the Shepherds. Whereupon the Eunuch desi∣red Philip to inform him, of whom the Pro∣phet spake in this Place; whether of himself or of some other. Philip took thence an oc∣casion to declare Jesus Christ unto him. And the Eunuch believed what-ever was shewed him. The Chariot being then come to a place where there was Water, he caused it to stop, and demanded what hindred his be∣ing Baptized? Philip answered him, That if he believed, he knew no Impedient: Which the Eunuch affirming, they both descended into the Water, where Philip baptized him; who was, as it were, the first Fruits of his Gentilism, When he came out of the Water the Spirit took up Philip, and the Eunuch saw him no more, praising GOD, with great Transports of Joy, for the Grace he had re∣ceived, This seems, as if GOD intended in this occasion, to instruct such as do Idolize the Persons of those who have instructed them in the Faith. This Eunuch had no sooner received from Philip the knowledge of Jesus Christ, but GOD took him away from him; and so far was he from afflicting himself hereupon, that he continued on his way praising GOD, and rejoycing in believing. GOD makes use of Men, as Instruments to convert us, and does permit us to reverence them in a subordinate degree. But at the same time, he expects we should pass over from them to him, there to find our true Joy and Strength, remembring that he that plants, and he that wa∣ters, are nothing, seeing 'tis GOD who gives the increase.
217
218 The Right Honourable Rachel, Countess of Bristol Barones of Sherborne in Dorsetshire, and daughter of Sr. Hugh Wind¦ham of Silton in the said County Knight. For advancement of this Worke, Contributed this Plate.
The Conversion of S. Paul. Saul having received Letters from the Chief Priests, to go to Damas∣cus, was surrounded with a great Light, and struck to the Ground. THE Fruit which the Church gathered by the Death of S. Stephen, ended not in the Persecution which fol∣lowed it;The Year▪ 34. for it was the oc∣casion of the Conversion of S. Paul, who ha∣ving been one of S. Stephen's greatest Perse∣cutors, was one of those who felt with greatest efficacy the benefit of this Martyr's Prayers. For when Saul breathed nothing but Blood, and the slaughter of the Christians, and had obtained Letters from the Chief Priests to go to Damascus, to apprehend all the Christians he could find, and bring them bound to Jerusalem; he was immediately surrounded with a shining Light, which struck him to the ground, and he heard a Voice which said unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecu∣test thou me? Who art thou LORD? an∣swered he: I am JESUS, whom thou per∣secutest. And Saul trembling at this word, cried out, LORD, what wilt thou have me to do? Jesus Christ commanded him to arise, and to go into the City, where he should be told what should be expected from him. Those who accompanied him in this Voy∣age, or Journey, were surprized at this E∣vent. They heard a Voice, but saw not whence it came: And Saul arising from the Ground, opened his Eyes, but could not see, and therefore they led him by the hand as far as Damascus, where he was for three days without his sight, as also without eat∣ing or drinking any thing. There was in this Town a Disciple named Ananias, whom GOD commanded in the Night to go into a Street he named to him, and to enquire in the House of Judas for one called Saul, who was of Tarsus. Ananias shewed at first some unwilling∣ness, alledging, he had heard of this Man, and the mischief he had done at Jerusalem to all the Christians, and that he came only to Damascus to carry away Captives all those who called upon his Name. But GOD com∣manded him to do what he had enjoyned him; because Saul was a chosen Vessel, to carry his Name before Kings, and all the People of the Earth. He went then to seek him in the place related to him. He put his Hands on him, and said unto him, Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus that appeared to thee in the Way, has sent me to thee, to the end thou maist▪ recover thy Sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. At the same time things like Scales dropt from his Eyes, and he saw clear, and was Baptized: And having received Nourish∣ment, he recovered his strength, and remain∣ed some days at Damascus with the Christi∣ans, Preaching in the Synagogue of the Jews, That Jesus was truly the Son of GOD. All were astonished to see the most vio∣lent Persecutor of the Christians, become the most zealous Preacher of the Faith. The Jews at Damascus, whom Saul every day confounded, could not patiently suffer this change, and therefore they made several attempts on his Life. But the Disciples adver∣tised of it, let him down in the Night by a Cord from the Walls, whose Gates were shut that he might not escape. Being come to Jerusalem, he endeavoured to join himself to the rest of the Disciples. But when every one was afraid of him, as not knowing his Conversion; Barnabas took him, led him to the Apostles, and related to them whatever had happened to him in the Way, and what he had done at Damascus. He was then at length received as a Dis∣ciple of Jesus Christ, and having found at Jerusalem (by reason of his Zeal) the same peril as at Damascus, he was constrained to retire to Tarsus. The Conversion of S. Paul, which was heretofore the Joy of the Church, is now its Consolation; which makes her hope, GOD will bring into her Fold those, that heretofore persecuted her with the greatest Violence. For this Example teaches us, not to despair of any one. S. Paul says himself, That GOD has chosen him, to certifie all the World of this Truth, and to shew the riches of his Mercies, even to the worst of Men. It has been the Wish of the Fathers, to lie continually like S. Paul in a state of abase∣ment before GOD, and to say to him from the same disposition of Soul these words, which de∣note a true Conversion: LORD, what wilt thou have me to do?
Cornelius Baptized. WHen S. Paul began to make appear the first effects of his ardent Zeal for the Church, who was one day to bring into her Bosom such a great number of People by his Labours;The Year 39. S. Peter endeavoured for his part to gain more and more Souls to Jesus Christ. He wrought every moment conside∣rable Miracles: He Cured one Aneas, that was sick of the Palsie; and raised up (at the Disciples Request) an holy Widow named Tabitha, who had rendred her self Famous for her Charity; And had the happiness of first Preaching the Christian Faith to the Gentiles, of whom S. Paul was soon after to be the Apostle. And in this manner was car∣ried on this great Work, which was so diffi∣cult then, by reason of the Zeal which the Jewish Converts had then for the Law; but which yet was to prove of such happy con∣sequence to us in the ensuing Ages. Cornelius (famous for his Piety and Charity) being in Caesarea, where he commanded a Company of Soldiers, called the Italian Band, saw in a Vision (about the Ninth hour of the day) an Angel, who told him, That his Prayers and Alms were favourably heard and regarded by GOD; and therefore he orde∣red him to send to Joppa, to enquire out one Peter, who would tell him what GOD de∣sired of him. The Angel thus left him with∣out any further Instruction, in observance of the Order of GOD, who will have Men to depend on one another. Cornelius sent immediately hereupon some of his People to Joppa, and told them what he had seen. When these Persons drew near to the Town, S. Peter Praying, about Noon fell into an Extasie, wherein he saw Heaven o∣pened, whence came down a great Sheet, fast∣ned at the four Corners, which was full of all sorts of Four-footed Beasts, and Feathered Fowls; and a Voice said, Peter, Kill and eat. S. Peter at first excused himself, and said, He had never eaten any unclean Meats: But he was answered, That he must not call that unclean which GOD had purified. Whilst S. Peter was musing what this Vision might mean, which appeared at three different times, Cornelius his Servants entred into the House, who told him, That their Master had sent them, to entreat him to come and visit him. S. Peter lodged them in the House, and set out the next Morning with them, taking certain ews along with him. Whilst he was entring into Caesarea, Cornelius (who expected him, with his Friends and Re∣lations) went to meet him, and cast himself at his Feet: But S. Peter lifted him up, saying to him, That he was also a Man. When they were entred, S. Peter represented immediate∣ly by Cornelius, the aversion which the ews had to converse with the Gentil▪ and he asked of him, Wherefore he sent for him. Cornelius recounted to him his Vision, after which S. Peter declared esus Christ to him; and whilst he was yet speaking, the Holy Ghost descended on all them that were pre∣sent, whom S. Peter caused immediately to be Baptized. He tarried some days with them, and at his Return, the Jews murmured much at what he had done. But this humble Dis∣ciple of esus Christ, far from angrily Rebu∣king those, who so unjustly blamed his Con∣duct, would on the contrary give them an account of it. He repeated to them in or∣der his Vision, and also that of Cornelius. He added, That they might inform themselves of the Truth of these things by Six Witnesses, which he had brought along with him; and that in fine, he could not resist the Holy Spi∣rit, and that seeing it descended on these Per∣sons, he could not refuse to Baptize them. This modest Answer stopt these Com∣plaints, and became since to all the Church an admirable Example for its Pastors; which shews them, That they lose nothing of their Authority, when their Charity leads them to use Condescension and Moderation towards the People under their Charge. Altho' this Complaint of the Faithful a∣gainst S. Peter was uniust, (says S. Gregory) yet did he justifie himself before them with great Patience and Mildness; and far from stisting their Accusations by the Authority of his Com∣mission in that case, he referred even those who did not believe him, to the Witnesses he had brought along with them. This is the Example which the Holy Fa∣thers have proposed in like occasions, in which they have ever shewed, That the Authority of the Ministers of the Church, is herein different from that of Earthly Princes, it being always tempered with Sweetness and Charity, and has for an End not their own Glory, but the Salva∣tion of their People.
219
220 Mr. George Spencer son of Mr. Laurence Spencer, Clerke of the works for the rebuilding ye. Cathedrall Church of Saint Pauls London For advancement of this Worke▪ Contributed this Plate▪
Saint PETER delivered out of Prison in the Night by an Angel. THE Faithful, who having been disper∣sed in the prosecution of S. Stephen, planting by degrees the Faith,The Year 42. Converted many Peo∣ple in Antioch; which the Apostles having known at Jerusalem, they sent thither S. Barnabas, who was affected with great Joy, when he saw how gracious∣ly GOD had dealt with this Town. And being full of the Holy Spirit, he exhorted them to continue firm in their Holy Reso∣lutions. From thence he went to Tarsus, in search after S. Paul, whom he brought to Antioch, where they dwelt together for a Years space. They here instructed an infi∣nite number of People, and with so great success, that in this City the Faithful be∣gan to assume the Name of Christians. Then a Prophet named Agabus, Prophe∣sied, there would a great Famine happen throughout the World; and therefore the Christians of Antioch resolved to send as great Contributions as they could make, to Jerusalem, by the hand of S. Barnabas, and S. Paul. About this time King Herod persecuting the Church, having already killed S. James (the Brother of John) with the Sword; and because he saw it pleased the Jews, he pro∣ceeded further to put S. Peter to Death. Having then caused him to be apprehended at the Feast of the Passover, he delivered him to four Quaternions of Soldiers, to keep him in Prison the whole eight days, inten∣ding after Easter to bring him forth to the People, and publickly to put him to death. The whole Church interessing it self in the Death of so great an Apostle, drove on without intermission its Prayers and Cries unto GOD, who favourably heard them: For the Night before the Day that S. Peter was to be Executed, an Angel filled on a sudden the whole Dungeon with great Light, where this Apostle lay sleeping between two Souldiers bound. The Angel struck him, and awakening him, said, Make haste and rise; when im∣mediately the Chains wherewith he was fastened, dropt off his Hands; and the An∣gel said unto him, Gird thy self, and bind on thy Sandals, cast thy Garment about thee, and follow me; and he did as the Angel had com∣manded him, and followed him without knowing what he did, thinking he was in a Dream, or thought he saw a Vision: When they were past the first, and the second Ward, or Watch, they came to the Iron-Gate, which leads to the City which opened to them of its own accord; and they went out, and passed on through one Street, and then the Angel vanished from him. Then did S. Peter come to himself, and knew that GOD had sent his Angel to deliver him from the hand of Herod. He went thereupon immediately to the House of S. Mark's Mother, where there were many of the Faithful assembled, who spent the Night in Prayers. When he had knock'd at the Door, a young Damsel named Rhodias, who knew S. Peter's Voice, instead of opening, imme∣diately the Door to him, ran back, to tell those that were in the House the joyful News of S. Peter's deliverance. Some said, she was beside her self; others said, that per∣haps 'twas his Angel: But this holy Apostle continuing still to knock, they were strange∣ly surprized at the opening of the Door. S. Peter made signs to them to be still and told them how the Angel had delivered him from Prison; and having enjoyned them to give notice thereof to S. James, and the rest of the Brethren, he immediately departed from Jerusalem, to retire into another place. The Church then Experienced, That GOD is the Sovereign disposer of all Affairs in the World, and sets what Bounds he pleases to the Power of Men: He opens and shuts the Pri∣son Doors. Men only execute what he has be∣fore decreed; and therefore this Primitive Church, instructed by the Holy Spirit himself in these Truths, did not run soliciting after Men for the deliverance of S Peter, but utttered her Requests to GOD, whom she knew to be the Ma∣ster of Liberty and Captivity, as well as of Life and Death. Thus did she obtain of GOD what Herod would have refused her, and an Angel did whatever Men could not do.
The Lame Cured. Saint PAUL Cured a Lame Man, and obstructed the People that would Sacrifice to him as to a God. AFter the miraculous Deliverance of S. Peter, the History of the Acts scarce∣ly speaks any more of him, being wholly employed in relating the Actions of S. Paul.The Year 43. This Holy Apostle having carried to Jerusalem the Charity of Antioch, with which he had been entrusted, was chosen with S. Barnabas▪ by the Holy Spirit, to enlighten all the Provinces of Asia, and propagate the Faith throughout all Greece. He shewed in Paphos his Zeal against a false Prophet, who hindred the Proconsul Sergius Paulus from believing in Jesus Christ. For this Holy Apostle of the Gentiles being full of the Holy Spirit, beheld this Impostor, and said to him with an Apostolical Liberty: O thou full of all craft and subtilty, Child of the Devil, and enemy to all Righteousness, how long wilt thou pervert the ways of the LORD, which are strait? The hand of GOD is upon thee, and thou shalt become blind. He had no sooner said these words, but this Seducer was struck with Blindness; and he sought some body to give him their hands. Thus did he shew in his Person the folly of those, who instead of having re∣course to GOD in the Evils he sends upon them, search only humane Remedies. The Proconsul admired this Miracle, and believed in Jesus Christ with a profound ve∣neration of his Doctrine, and to shew, that 'tis the Holy Spirit who affects the Heart, and that all outward applications are of lit∣tle efficacy, unless seconded by the Impres∣sions of his Grace; the blindness which the Magician experienced in his Person, chan∣ged him not, whereas the only sight of this Prodigy converted the Proconsul. Some think that 'tis of this Sergius Paulus that S. Paul (called before Saul) has taken the name of Paul, which is ever given him since this Conversion, in the Book of the Acts. S. Paul Preaching afterwards at Antioch, ended his Preachings by dreadful Threat∣nings of the Anger of GOD, and shaked off against that People the Dust of his Feet. The Jews revenged themselves of these just Remonstrances in the City of Iconia, whose Inhabitants they so greatly animated a∣gainst S. Paul, that they threw Stones at this holy Apostle, who was thereby obliged to withdraw to Lystra. It was in this Town he found a Man Lame from his Birth, and observing he heard him speak with great Attention, he spake to him aloud, That he should arise and stand on his Feet, which immediately he did. The People affected with this Miracle, would needs Sacrifice to S. Paul and S. Barnabas, whom they respected as GODS descended from Heaven, and took on them the form of Men. But these humble Disci∣ples of Jesus Christ, rent their Cloaths, and represented to these People, That they were only Men like unto them, who ex∣horted them to give over Worshipping Idols, and adore the only true GOD, that made Heaven and Earth. The Jews came immediately hereupon into the Town of Lystra, and there stirred up the People, who changing according to their usual lightness, the Divine Honours which they would give S. Paul, into an excess of Fury; for they drove him out of the Town, stoned him and left him half dead. Then was seen the strange effects of Charity in a Soul when 'tis mounted to its highest degree. For S. Paul, tho' covered with Wounds, and black with Strokes, yet at that very hour betook him∣self to Preaching afresh, and to declare to the Faithful more by these bloody Marks, than by his Words, That we must through ma∣ny Tribulations enter into the Kingdom of GOD. S. Gregory admires the great Courage of this Apostle; They stone him, says he, and yet he leaves not off to Preach; They may kill his ody, but they cannot quench the Fire of his Zeal. So true is what is said by an holy Personage, That the smart and fear of Death are weak, when the Faith and Love of Jesus Christ reigns.
221 William Layfield of the City of London▪ Gentleman For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
222 Captaine John Nicholson of Blackwall in the County of Middlesex Gentleman. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Shipwreck of St. Paul, &c. SAint Paul being come to Jerusalem with∣out being terrified with the Miseries which the Prophet Agabus foretold he should suffer,The Year 46. the Jews were not long before they made him feel the effects of their Hatred. They seized on him in a great Tumult, which they made, and the Tribune being come to appease it, snatched S. Paul out of the hands of his E∣nemies. Altho' this Holy Apostle was batter'd with strokes, yet this hindred him not from desiring leave of the Tribune to speak to the People. But when he gave a publick account of all his Conduct, the Jews being encourag∣ed at his affirming, that he had a Call from GOD to Preach the Faith to the Gentiles, they cried out aloud, That such a Fellow was not worthy to live. And as the Tribune was ready to torment him, S. Paul demanded, Whether 'twas lawful to Scourge a Roman? and they immediately gave over misusing him. The next Morning the Tribune brought him before the Assembly of Priests, to know what they thought of him Then S. Paul ju∣stifying himself with great freedom of Speech, Ananias the High Priest caused to be given him a Box on the Ear; S. Paul told this Judge, That GOD would one day strike him in like manner. In fine, He escaped the ill Designs of this Assembly, by saying, That all his Crime was, that he believed the Resur∣rection of the Dead, which immediately cau∣sed a division amongst the Judges. A while after forty of the greatest Zealots amongst the Jews made a Vow, neither to eat nor drink until they had kill'd him. S. Paul was informed of this Conspiracy by his Ne∣phew, and advertised the Tribune thereof, who made S. Paul to depart from Jerusalem with a good Convoy, conducting him to Caesarea, to put him in the hands of Felix. S. Paul fully justified himself before this Governour, who knowing his Innocency kept him in Prison, only because he expected Mo∣ney to be given him for his liberty. The time of his Government being expired, he left Pon∣tus Festus in his place, who immediately re∣jected the artificial Addresses, and urgent En∣treaties, which the Jews made him, to send S. Paul to Jerusalem, choosing rather to Judge him at Caesarea, where he was. This Gove∣nour having spoken of him to King Agrippa; this Prince, with Queen Brenice his Wife, would needs hear him, and they concluded he was innocent, and that he might have been set free, had he not appealed to Caesar. A Captain then named Julius, was entru∣sted with the conducting of S. Paul to Rome, and after a long Navigation with contrary Winds, they arrived at length at the Isle of Crete, where S. Paul advertised them a Tempest would soon happen; but they did not believe him. And when it came, this Holy Apostle comforted them, assuring them, that not one of them should be lost. 'Twas known in effect, that the Revelation he had was true; for the Vessel being batter'd to pieces, they all got to shoar the best they could at the Isle of Malta, whose Inhabi∣tants received them with no small kindness. They immediately kindled a Fire to dry them, and S. Paul having taken up some of the Fewel, was bit by a Viper, which made these barbarous People think that he was a wicked Man, seeing the Wrath of GOD fol∣lowed him both by Sea and Land: But when they saw S. Paul shake off the Viper into the Fire without receiving harm, they soon changed their minds, and believed he was a GOD. He healed in this Isle the Father of Publius, the Governour thereof, with se∣veral others. In fine, having stayed there three Months, he departed thence, and ar∣rived at length at Rome, where he assembled immediately the principal Persons amongst the Jews, and gave them an account why he had appealed to Caesar. He endeavoured to bring them over to the Faith of Jesus Christ, but found them little disposed thereunto. The Acts end here, and inform us of no more, saving that S. Paul dwelt two years at Rome in an House which he hired, and where he Preached the Faith to all those that would come and hear it. S. Chrysostom, amongst all the rest of the Fathers, has had this Holy Apostle in greatest Reverence. His Life was his admiration, his Labours the mitigations of his Sufferings; and he told his People, that he would rather choose to be in Chains with S. Paul, than to be in Glory with the Angels in Heaven.
The Apocalyps. The Seven Golden Candlesticks, &c. The Revelations of S. John in the Apocalyps. How Jesus Christ shewed himself unto him. ALtho' that the Revelations which GOD made to S. John are all Mysterious, and very obscure in themselves, yet the Saints have found them to contain most ex∣cellent Instructions; as oft as they Read them with an humble frame of Soul, without prying too curiously into the depths of them. The first Vision which this Holy Apostle had in the Isle of Patmos, wherein he had been exiled, was, that being ravished in Spirit one Lord's Day, he heard behind him a Noise like the sound of a Trumpet, which comman∣ded him to write what he saw. And he be∣held seven Golden Candlesticks, and in the midst of them one like the Son of Man, cloathed with a long Robe, and girded with a Golden Girdle; his Hair was white as Snow, his Eyes sparkling like Fire, his Feet shining like the purest Brass, and his Voice was as the Noise of the great Waters. He had se∣ven Stars in his Hand; there came out of his Mouth a sharp Sword, and his Countenance was like the Sun at Noon-day. As soon as ever S. John beheld him, he fell at his Feet as one dead; but he raised him up, telling him, that the seven Stars which he held in his Hand, where the seven Angels, that is to say, the Bishops of the Se∣ven Churches. He commanded him to write what he saw, and to tell this in particular to these seven Bishops: To that of Ephesus, That he commmended him for his Vertue and Zeal against wicked Livers, and for his Patience in Adversity; but yet blamed him for having abated of his first Zeal; and admonished him, to remember whence he was fallen, and to Repent. To him of Smyrna; He should comfort himself, seeing he was Rich in his Poverty, and unreproveable in the midst of all the Calumnies published against him: That he should arm himself against fresh Persecuti∣ons which were ready to fall upon him, and to continue faithful to death. To him of Pergamus; That he praised him for his Faithfulness, but he did not vigo∣rously enough oppose Errors; that he should therefore repent of this and take new Courage. To the Bishop of Thyatira; That he knew his Charity to the Poor, his Constancy in Persecutions, and his uninterrupted Piety; but that he blamed his want of Courage, whereby he suffered a false Prophetess to seduce the Faithful. To him of Sardis; That he was as dead in the sight of GOD, altho' believed to be alive, and that his Works were imperfect; that he must repent, and remember what he had heard and received, otherwise he would come upon him, and surprize him like a Thief. To him of Philadelphia; That he loved him for his Fidelity, and Patience in Sufferings, altho' otherwise he had not much Strength. In fine, to him of Laodicea; That he could not suffer his Lukewarmness, and would therefore Spue him out of his Mouth: That he thought himself rich, though he was in∣deed poor, blind and naked: That he should therefore purchase Gold purified by Fire to enrich himself, and Garments white as Snow to cover his Nakedness. These Judgments which our LORD, when Risen, made in Heaven of those who serve him on Earth, have fill'd the Holy Fathers with astonishment, S. Gregory, (amongst o∣thers) seemed to be much startled at them. He recites, says he, all the good which these Bishops have done, and yet declares to them, he will not pardon the Ill which they have done, till they have throughly repented of it. He strictly observes what progress every one makes in Vertue; and how he draws back from his first fervour. He marks out one single default amongst many great Ver∣tues, and represents them as soil'd by this mixture. One only Omission, and one on∣ly want of Vigour in a just occasion of∣fends him, and makes him threaten Persons otherwise vertuous, to remove their Candle∣stick, and give away their Crown to others. In fine, says this Holy Prelate, our Saviour Christ shews us by this divine Revelation, what great Reasons the most just have for Humiliation; for should he shew them the bottom of their Hearts, they would find such stains, as would make them have a low e∣steem for whatever appears commendable in them, and would fill them with an holy Indignation against themselves.
223 The Right Honourable Sr. Henry Goodricke▪ Leiute∣nant Generall of their Majesties Ordnance, and one of the Lords of their most Honourable Privy Councell For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
224 The Honourable John Charleton Esq. surveyour Generall of their Majestyes ordnance▪ For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
Heaven Opened. Saint John sees Heaven opened, and relates what he saw therein. OUR Lord having discoursed to S. John, in his 1st Revelation, the Secrets in his Church on Earth; he afterwards mani∣fested to him what continually passes in that of Heaven.S. John wrote his Reve∣lations before his Gospel, when he was banish'd in∣to Patmos by Domiti∣an, about the Year 94. having been released by Nerva in the Year 96. He was snatcht up there in Spirit, saw a Throne, and him that sat thereon, who appeared in bright∣ness like a Jasper Stone, and Sardine Stone, and there was a Rain-bow round about the Throne, whose colour resembled the Emerald. Round about the Throne, were 24 Seats or Thrones, and upon the Seats were 24 Elders, sitting clo∣thed in white Rayment, having on their Heads Crowns of Gold; out of the Throne proceed∣ed Lightnings, Thunders, and Voices; and there were seven Lamps of fire burning before the Throne which are the 7 Spirits of GOD. And before the Throne, there was a Sea of Glass like unto Crystal. There was in the midst and round about the Throne four Beasts full of Eyes before and behind! The first Beast was like a Lion, the second like a Calf, the third had a face like a Man, and the fourth was like an Ea∣gle; these 4 Beasts had each of them 6 Wings, and they were full of Eyes within, and they re∣peated incessantly this Canticle▪ which the Church has since made use of; Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almightly, which was, and is, and is to come. When the 4 Ani∣mals sang this Song, the 24 Elders fell down before him that sat on the Throne, and cast down their Crowns at his Feet, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory and Ho∣nour and Power; for thou hast created all things, and 'tis thro' thee they do subsist. S. John saw afterwards in the right Hand of him that sat on the Throne, a Book, but sealed with 7 Seals, and an Angel cried with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the Book, and to break the Seals thereof? but no one could open it, or look upon it. S. John was so troubled at this, that he shed Tears, when one of the Elders bid him cease Weeping, because the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, that is to say, Jesus Christ, had obtained by virtue of his Death pow∣er to open this, and to break open the Seals thereof. He beheld at the same time in the midst of the Throne of the 4 Animals, and the 24 Elders, the Lamb which lay slain, and had 7 Eyes, and 7 Horns. The Lamb took after∣wards the Book out of the right Hand of him who sat on the Throne, and immediately the 4 Animals, together with the 24 Elders fell down before the Lamb, having each of them Harps, and golden Cups full of Incense and Perfumes, which are the Prayers of the Saints. They said to the Lamb in their Can∣ticles, Thou Lord art worthy to take the Boo, and open the Seals thereof, because thou hast suf∣fered death for us, and redeemed us unto GOD by thy Blood out of every Nation. At the same time an infinite Company of Angels joyned in this Song of Praise, and said, To him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb, be Honour and Glory World without end. These blest Spirits, who remember in the midst of their Joy, that their happiness comes only from GOD, are too humble to attribute their Victories to themselves; and therefore they give GOD the glory of them, as the only Author, from whence all good things do flow. The Holy Fathers have admired in the pro∣found Adoration, which they render to Jesus Christ, denoted by the Lamb, that one of the chief subjects of their Praises is, the open∣ing of the Book and breaking open the Seals; which is to say, that he has opened to us the sense of the Holy Scriptures by his Death and Resurrection. We had this Book before, but it was sealed, and we had it, as not having of it. Now that the Mysteries are unveil'd, 'tis very reasonable we should adore him, who has given us this Light, and that we continually nou∣rish our Souls with the words of Eternal Life.
The Book with Seven Seals. What hapned at the Opening of the Book Sealed with seven Seals. WHen the Lamb had received the power of opening the Seven Seals, at the opening of the first, S. John saw a white Horse, and he that rode thereon had a Bow, a Crown was also given him, and he went out conquering, and to conquer. At the opening of the second Seal there appeared another Horse representing War: He was of a reddish colour, and he that rode on him, had power to banish Peace from the Earth, and to make Men kill one ano∣ther, and there was given to him a great Sword. At the opening of the third Seal there appeared a black Horse, which denoted Famine He that rode thereon had in his Hands a pair of Scales; and S. John heard this Voice coming from the four Animals, a Measure of Wheat for a Penny, and three Measures of Barly for a Penny, and ee that thou hurt not the Oyl and the Wine. At the opening of the fourth Seal there appeared a pae Horse, which represented Mortality and Pestilences; and he that was mounted thereon was called Death, and Hell followed him. There was power gi∣ven him over the fourth part of the Earth, to put Men to death by the Sword, by Fa∣mine, by contagious Distempers, and by wild Beasts. At the opening of the fifth Seal, S. John saw under, the Altar the Souls of them that were slain for the Word of GOD, and for the testimony which they held, and they cried  with a loud Voice, saying, How long O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and aveng our Blood on them that dwell, on the Earth? and whte Robes were given to each of them, and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season until their fellow Servants also, and their Brethren, that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled. At the opening of the sixth Seal was seen, what will one day be the Terror of the Wicked, in the day I say of the Lamb's wrath. For there was a great Earthquake, the Sun became black as Jet; the Moon red as Blood; the Stars fell from Heaven on the Earth; even as a Fig-tree casteth her untimely fruit when she is shaken by a mighty wind: And the Heaven departed as a Scrowl, when it is rolled together, and every Mountain and Island were moved out of their places. And the Kings of the Earth, the Grandees of the World, the chief Captains of War, and every Bond-man, and every Free∣man hid themselves in the Dens and Caverns of the Earth; and they said to the Rocks and Mountains fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? The Holy Fathers have admired in these Mysterious Visions the excellency of this Divine Book, wherein they are represented. For when they discover to us these terri∣ble Plagues, wherewith GOD in his seve∣rity doth strike Men, and relate to us the dread wherewith they will appear before him in the Day of his Wrath, it doth it with most lively and piercing Imaginati∣ons; for altho' the Spirit only regards these things confusedly, yet a mans Heart is struck by them with an holy Awe, and feels it self carried to reverence these Truths in the obscurity which accompanies them, in∣structing it self by the little Light discove∣red therein. This is that which made S. Denys of Alexandria say, according to the relation of Eusebius, I am perswaded that the Book of the Revelations is as admirable, as 'tis little known: For altho I do not understand the words of it, yet I know they contain great sense under their obscurity and profoundness. I make not my self the Judge of these Truths, neither do I measure them by the smallness of my Under∣standing; but giving more to Faith than Reason, I believe them so much raised above me, that 'tis not possible for me to attain unto them; so that I esteem them not the less, when I do not comprehend them, but I reverence them so much the more; in that I do not comprehend them.
225 The Honourable Sr. Thomas Littleton Baronet, Clerke of their Majesties Ordnance For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
226 The Honourable Christopher Musgrave Esq, Clerke of the deliveries of their Majesties Ordnance. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The seven Angels with the seven Trumpets: What happened when the Seventh Seal was opened. WHen the Lamb had opened the seventh Seal, there was silence in Heaven for the space of half an hour; and there was given to the seven Angels, which waited about the Throne of GOD, se∣ven Trumpets At the same time there appeared another Angel, who stood before the Altar, having a Golden Censr in his hand, in which was a great quantity of Perfumes, that he might offer the Prayers of all the Saints on the Golden Altar▪ which stood before the Throne. And the Smoke of the Perfumes of the Prayers of the Saints arising from the Hand of the Angel, ascended up before GOD. The Angel afterwards took the Censer, and filled it with Fire from the Altar, and having cast it on the Earth, there was heard a noise in the Air of Thunder and Earth∣quakes. Then the seven Angels, which had the seven Trumpets, prepared to sound with them. The first Angel sounded with his Trum∣pet, and there arose a great Storm of Hail, mingled with Blood, which fell on the Earth; and the third part of the Earth and Trees were burnt, and the Fire consumed every green Herb. The second Angel sounded with his Trum∣pet, and as it were, a great Mountain burn∣ing with Fire, fell into the Sea; and the third part of the Sea was changed into Blood; the third part of the Fish died, and the third part of the Vessels thereon were lost. The third Angel sounded, and there fell from Heaven a great burning Star, like a Torch, which fell on the third part of the Rivers and Fountains. This Star was called Wormwood; and the third part of the Waters having been changed into Wormwood a great number of Men died, having drunk there∣of, because they were become bitter. The fourth Angel sounded, and the Sun, the Moon▪ and the Stars having been struck with darkness in their third part; The third part of the Sun, of the Moon, and of the Stars was obscured, and the Day was deprived of the third part of its Light, and the Nght likewise. Then S. John saw and heard the Voice of an Eagle, who flew through the midst of Heaven, and said with a loud Voice, Wo, wo, wo, unto the Inhabitants of the Earth, by rea∣son of the sound of the Trumpets, with which the three other Angels were to sound. It appears from all these Plagues with which GOD strikes Men invisibly, that his Patience is not always long abused; and that he sets bounds to that gentleness wherewith he suffers them (during some time) in expectation of their amendment, when at length they have provoked his Anger, every thing serving as Ministers of his Vengeance; and the An∣gels themselves, who are so ready to do all good Offices to the Just, and rejoyce with so great Charity at the Conversion of Sinners; are the first who arm themselves against the Impenitent▪ to revenge the Glory of the GOD of Heaven, against the outrages of the Earth. They sound with the Trumpet, and call the Mischiefs with a mighty Voice, which is al∣ways followed by the Effect; because they ne∣ver speak, but by the Orders of GOD, whose Will they think only of accomplishing, to which their own is submitted. These Explications of these Holy Figures, may be uncertain and different in this great obscurity which environs them. But it is cer∣tain, they tend all to imprint on us a greater horror for Sin, by the consideration of the visible and invisible Plagues wherewith GOD punishes them, to make us despise the Goods of this World, which vanish like Smoke, and fear the Miseries of the other, which are Inevitable, as well as Eternal; and to say often unto GOD with David, in the awful consideration of his Justice, tempered with great confidence in his Mercy: Who knows the Power of his Wrath, and who is sufficiently afraid of his Terrors.
The Locusts. The fifth and sixth TRUMPET. THE fifth Angel having sounded with his Trumpet, S. John saw a Star which fell from Heaven unto the Earth: and to him was given the Key of the Bottomless Pit; and having opened it, there arose a Smoke like that of a great Furnace, and the Sun, and the Air were darkened by reason of the Smoke of the Pit: and there came out of the Smoke Locusts upon the Earth, to whom was given the same Power as the Scorpions of the Earth had. And it was commanded them, that they should not hurt the Grass of the Earth, neither any green thing, or Tree, but only those Men which had not the Mark or Seal of GOD on their Fore heads: And to them was given Power, not to kill, but to torment them for five Months. The hurt which they did them was like unto that which the Scorpion doth when he strikes a Man. And in those days the Scripture tells us, that Men shall seek Death, and not find it; they shall wish for Death, and Death shall flee from them. Now these Monsters, in form of Locusts, were like unto Horses ready for Battle; and on their Heads were (as it were) Crowns like Gold; their Faces were like the Faces of Men, and their Hair like that of Women, and their Teeth like unto the Lions; and they had Breast plates, as it were of Iron, and the sound of their Wings, was the sound of Chariots and many Horses running to Battle. They had Tails like Scorpions, and there were Stings in their Tails, and their Power was to hurt Men five Months. And they had a King over them, which is the Angel of the Bottomless Pit called the Destroyer. One Wo is past, and there shall come two Woes more hereafter. And the first Wo being past, the sixth Angel sounded his Trumpet; and S. John heard a Voice from the four Cor∣ners, or Horns of the Golden Altar, which is before GOD, saying to the sixth Angel which had the Trumpet, Loose the four An∣gels which are bound in the great River Euphrates. And he unbound those four Angels, who were prepared for an hour, a day, a month, and a year, to slay the third part of Men. And the number of the Army of Horsemen were Two hundred thousand thousand. S. John saw also Horses in the Vision, and them that sat thereon had Breast plates of Fire, and of Jacinth and Brimstone; and the Heads of the Horses were as those of Lions, and there came Fire, Smoke and Brimstone out of their Mouths. And with these three things, the third part of Men were killed. The strength of these Horses were in their Mouths, and in their Tails, which were like unto those of Serpents, and had Heads, and with them they did great Mischief. And the rest of the Men which were not killed by these Plagues, yet repented not of the works of their Hands, that they should not worship Devils, and Idols of Gold and Silver, and Brass and Stone, and of Wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor Walk; neither repent they of their Murthers, nor of their Sorceries, nor of their Fornication, nor of their Thefts. S. Gregory says, That this fifth and sixth Plague denote these Men which persecute the Saints. The first are like to Locusts, which sting with their Tails; And such, saith this Father, are those that poyson Men with Flatteries, and who smiling in their Faces kill them with their Tails, who under a pretence of Friendship, seek only an occa∣sion to destroy them. The sixth Plague of the Horses, which hurt with their Mouths and Tails, denotes according to the same Father, those who use their Tongues to corrupt the Doctrine and Truths of the Gospel, and who doing mischief thus with their Mouths, do moreover en∣deavour, says this Holy Father▪ to do mis∣chief with their Tails, in relying like the Arians heretofore, on the Power of Great Men, that uphold them; whereby, though they are contemptible of themselves, yet by these Props they render themselves for∣midable to the Church.
227 William Meeslers Esq, storekeeper of the office of their Maiesties Ordnance For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
228 William Boulter Esq Assstant Surveyour of their Majesties Ordnance. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Vision of S. John. Of another mighty Angel which came down from Heaven, whose Face was as it were the Sun, his Feet like Pillars of Fire, which he set the one upon the Sea, and the other on the Earth; having on his Head a Rainbow. The Explanation of this Vision which S. John had. SAint John saw another mighty Angel come down from Heaven, cloathed with a Cloud, and a Rainbow was upon his Head; and his Face was as it were the Sun, and his Feet as Pillars of Fire. And he held in his Hand a little Book open, and he set his right Foot on the Sea and his left Foot on the Earth. And he cryed with a loud Voice, like as when a Lion roareth; and when he had thus cryed, seven Thunders uttered their Voices; And when the seven Thunders had uttered their Voices, S. John was about to write their Words; but he heard a Voice from Heaven, which said unto him, seal up those things which the seven Thunders uttered, and write them not. Then the Angel which S. John saw stand upon the Sea, and upon the Earth; lifted up his Hand to Heaven, and swore by him that liveth for ever and ever, who crea∣ted Heaven, and the things that therein are, and the Earth, and the things that therein are and the Sea, and the things which are therein, that there should be time no longer: But in the Days of the Voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of GOD should be finish'd; as he hath declared to his Servants and Prophets. This Voice which S. John heard from Heaven, directed it self again to him, saying, Go and take the little Book, which is open in the Hand of the Angel, which standeth on the Sea and the Earth. And he went to the Angel and said, Give me the little Book. And the Angel said, Take it, and eat it, and it shall make thy Belly bitter, but it shall be in thy Mouth as sweet as Honey. S. John took the little Book out of the Angels Hands, and eat it; and found in effect, that it was in his Mouth sweet as Honey; but having swallowed it down, it proved bitter in his Belly. And the Angel said unto him, Thou must Prophesie again before many People, and Nations, and Tongues, and Kings. This Book, according to the Holy Fathers, and especially S. Gregory, is the Holy Scripture, which is the true Food of our Souls. We cannot digest it of our selves, says this Father, GOD must give us his assistance, as he gives it here to S. John, and elsewhere to the Prophet Ezekiel. We devour this Book, says he, when GOD discovers to us the Mysteries of it; and this understanding which he gives us of it, is sweet to our tast as Honey. But at the same time, this Book which is so sweet in the Mouth, becomes bitter in the Stomach; which denotes, That weak and carnal Minds cannot relish the Truths, which are the delicacies of the Just. This Figure further signifies, according to S. Gregory, that when the Word of GOD begins to become sweet in our Mouths, and we begin to find our pleasures in it, our Stomach, or Belly, which is to say, the bottom of our Hearts, whose defects this Word discovers to us, is filled with bitter∣ness; because that the more we know GOD, the more we know and understand our selves, and bewail the Misery rooted in us, altho' before we did not perceive it; that we may often say to him, with the Royal Prophet: Lord, All my desires are to∣wards thee, and the sighings of my Heart are not hid from thee.
The Death of the Two Prophets. The Vision which S. JOHN had of the Two Prophets slain, who afterwards rose again. The seventh Trumpet. AFter that S. John had taken the Book out of the hand of him which presen∣ted it to him, there was a Reed given him like unto a Rod, with which he was ordered to go and measure the Temple of GOD, and the Altar, and them that worship therein. But he was not to measure the outward Court of the Temple, because it was given unto the Gentiles, who were to tread the Holy City under foot forty and two Months. And I will give power, said GOD, to my two Witnesses, who shall Prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore Days, cloathed in Sackcloath. These two Prophets are the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks, standing be∣fore the GOD of the Earth; And if any Man will hurt them, a Fire will proceed out of their Mouths, which shall devour their Enemies; And if any Man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. They have the power of shuting Heaven, that there may fall no Rain during the time they shall Prophecy; and they have recei∣ved the power of changing the Waters in∣to Blood, and striking the Earth with all sorts of Plagues as oft as they will. And having finished their Testimony, the Beast which ascends out of the Bottom∣less Pit, shall make War against them, and vanquish and kill them. Their Bodies shall lie in the Streets of the great City, which Spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was Cruci∣fied, and Men of several Nations, Tribes and Languages, shall see their dead Bodies lying on the Earth for three Days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead Bodies to be put in Graves. The Inhabitants of the Earth shall rejoyce to see them in this condition make Feasts, and send Presents to one ano∣ther, because these two Prophets much tormented those that dwelt on the Earth. As future things are already present, or rather past in the sight of GOD, so S. John, according to the custom of the Prophets, hav∣ing related the beginning of this History as a thing to come, continues it as if 'twere alrea∣dy past. And after three Days and an half, adds he, the Spirit of Life from GOD entred into them, and they stood upon their Feet, and great fear fell upon them that saw them. And they heard a great Voice from Heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither: And they ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud, in the sight of their Enemies. And at the same time there was a great Earthquake, and the Tenth part of the City fell, and Seven thou∣sand Men were kill'd by this Earthquake, and the Remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the GOD of Heaven. The second Wo is past and behold the third Wo cometh quickly. And the seventh Angel sounded his Trumpet, and there were great Voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingoms of this World were become the Kingdoms of our LORD, and of Jesus Christ: And he shall Reign for ever and ever, and the 24 Elders that sate before GOD on their seats fell upon their faces, and worshiped GOD. The Nations of the Earth were at wrath, but the time was come to extirpate the wicked, and recompence the Saints and the Prophets. The Church (according to the Observati∣on of S. Austin) will end as it began. She was persecuted in her first Birth, and she shall be more towards the end of the World. For not only these two Saints mentioned in this part of the Revelations, but an infinite number of others shall then suffer Martyrdom with an invincible Constancy. And there∣fore S. Austin says on this Subject; what are we in comparison of those admirable Men which shall then be; seeing we think it so painful to resist the Devil, altho' he be at present Chain'd, whereas these great Saints will combat and tread him under their Feet in a time when he shall be let loose, and wherein he shall set upon them with his utmost strength and fury? Yet will it then be as true as 'tis now, That the Devil, will have no more power than Christ shall give him, and that he will only give him as much as shall be necessary to try and manifest the more the Virtue of his Elect.
229 The Honourable Charles Bertie Esq. Treasurer▪ and Paymaster of their Majesties Ordnance. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
230 Anthony Fist of the Tower of London Gentleman For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The Beast of the Apocalyps. Saint JOHN sees a monstrous Beast. SAint John saw a Beast rise out of the Sea, that had seven Heads and ten Horns, and on his Horns ten Crowns, and on his Heads the name of Blasphemy. She was like to a Leopard, and her Feet were as the Feet of a Bear, her Mouth of a Lion, and the Dragon gave her great power, and his seat, and great Authority. S. John saw one of these seven Heads, as it were wounded to death; but this mortal Wound was healed, and all the World wan∣dred after the Beast. And they worshipped the Dragon, which gave power to the Beast, and they worshiped the Beast saying, who is like to this Beast? Who is able to make War with him? And there was given to him a Mouth speaking great things, and Blasphe∣mies against GOD, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, and power was gi∣ven to him to continue 42 Months. There was also power given him to make War with the Saints, to vanquish them, and power was gi∣ven him over all Kindreds, Tongues and Nations, to vanquish them whose Names are not writ∣ten in the Book of Life, of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World. S. John saw afterwards another Beast which came out of the Earth, and he had two Horns like a Lamb, yet he spake as a Dragon, and he exerciseth all the power of the first Beast, before him, and causeth the Earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the first Beast whose deadly Wound was healed; and he doth great Wonders, so that he maketh Fire come down from Heaven on the Earth in the sight of Men, and deceiveth them that dwell on the Earth, by means of those Mi∣racles, which he had power to do in the sight of the Beast, saying, to them that dwell on the Earth, that they should make an Image to the Beast, which had the wound by a Sword, and did live. And she had power to give life to the I∣mage of the Beast, that the Image of the Beast should both speak, and cause as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast to be killed. And he causeth all, both rich and poor, small and great, bond and free to receive a mark in their right Hand, or in their Fore∣heads. Neither was any man to buy or sell, save he that had the Mark, or Name of the Beast, or the Number of his Name. But at the same time S. John saw the Lamb standing on Mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty four thousand, having his Fathers Name written in their Foreheads: And a Voice said, that in their Mouth was found no guile, for they are without fault before the Throne of GOD. Another cried at the same time, That if any one worshipped the Beast, and his Image, and received his Mark on his Forehead, and in his Hand, he should drink of the Wine of the Wrath of GOD, which is poured out without mixture, and be tormented with Fire and Brimstone, the Smoke of whose tor∣ment ascendeth up for ever and ever, they ha∣ving no rest Day nor Night, who worship the Beast, or his Image, and receive the mark of his Name. S. Gregory enlargeth himself much on these mysterious Beasts, and this last above all made him tremble. He was like unto a Lamb, said S. John, but he spake like a Dra∣gon, which admirably well denotes, says this Holy Father, the Hypocrites and Seducers which are in the Church. They come out of the Earth, which is to say, they establish themselves by an Earthly Power, and de∣ceive Souls by the appearances of a Lamb, to make them fall into the snares of the Serpent and inspire them with a mortal Poyson. We should pray GOD to preserve us, lest we be of the number of those mentioned by S. Paul, who shall be delivered by the just Judgment of GOD unto the power of the Devil, and the malignity of Error, because they would not receive the Truth but with∣stood it as an Enemy; whereas they ought to love it, as the remedy of all their Miseries, and the true life of their Souls.
The Dragon of the Apocalyps. The Vision which S. JOHN had of the DRAGON. SAint John saw another Wonder in Heaven. He saw seven Angels, having the se∣ven last Plagues; which contained the ful∣ness of God's Wrath: And a Voice at the same time said to the seven Angels, go and pour out on the Earth the seven Vials of the Wrath of GOD. And the first went and poured out his Vial on the Earth, and the Men which had the Mark of the Beast, and adored his Image, were struck with a noysom and grievous Sore. And the second Angel poured out his Vial on the Sea, and 'twas changed into Blood, and all the living Creatures died therein. The third Angel poured out his Vial on the Rivers, and Fountains of Waters, and they were changed into Blood, and an Angel said at the same time, Thou art Righteous, O Lord, for they have spilt the Blood of the Saints, and Prophets, and thou hast given them Blood to drink. The fourth Angel poured out his Vial on the Sun▪ and Power was given him to scorch Men with Fire, which made them Blaspheme GOD, and not repent. The fifth Angel poured out his Vial on the Throne of the Beast, and his Kingdom became dark, and Men gnawed their Tongues for pain. The sixth Angel poured out his Vial on the great River Euphrates, and its Water was dried up to make way for the Kings which were to come from the East. Then S. John saw three unclean Spirits like Frogs, come out of the Mouth of the Dragon, and out of the Mouth of the Beast, and out of the Mouth of the false Prophet; for they are the Spirits of Devils, working Miracles, which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and the whole World to gather them to the Battle of that great Day of GOD Almighty, and they gathered them all in one place. The seventh Angel poured out his Vial into the Air, and there came a great Voice out of the Temple of Heaven, from the Throne, saying, It is done. And there were heard great Thundrings and Lightning: And the great City was divided into three parts, and the Cities of the Nations fell, and great Baby∣lon came in remembrance before GOD, to give unto her the Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his Wrath. Then an Angel took S. John to shew him the great Whore, with whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication, and the Inhabitants of the Earth have been made drunk with the Wine of her Fornication. And he carried him away into a Desart, where he saw a Woman sit on a Scarle co∣loured Beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, that had seven Heads and ten Horns; and on her Forehead was written MYSTERY; The great Babylon, the Mother of Fornications and Abominations of the Earth. S. John saw this Woman drunk with the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs, and he wondred with great admiration at the sight: But the Angel which shewed him these things, asked him, wherefore he was asto∣nish'd? and he explain'd to him the My∣stery of this Whore, and the Beast on which she sat. The Fathers have imagin'd, that this Wo∣man was a Type of the World, which ine∣briates all Men by its delightful Pleasures, which draws down the Wrath of GOD upon her. This Name of MYSTERY, which this Woman bears in her Forehead, shews that the Lovers of the World do not conceive here the Miseries which are ready to fall on them. They are led away by their Passions, en∣chanted with their Pleasures. But this En∣chantment will end with their Lives; and they will then comprehend by a clear Knowledge, that they have laboured here in this Worl only to undo themselves, and that they have acquired a dear Purchase, when for the sake of this transitory Life, they have parted with all the lasting Joys of Heaven, and chosen to suffer everlasting Miseries in the Life to come.
231 John Hooper of the Tower of London Gentleman For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
232 Christopher Gardiner of the Tower of London Gentleman, For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate
The Ruin of Babylon. SAint John saw (after these things) ano∣ther Angel come down from Heaven, having great Power, and, the Earth was lightned with his Glory. And he cried with a loud Voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, she is fallen, and is become the habi∣tation of Devils, the hold of every foul Spi∣rit, and the Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird. For all Nations have drunk of the Wine of the Wrath of her Fornication, and the Kings of the Earth have committed For∣nication with her, and the Merchants of the Earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her Luxuries. S. John heard afterwards another Voice, which said, Come out of Babylon my People, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive none of her Plagues; for her sins have reached unto Heaven; and GOD hath re∣membred her Iniquities. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her, double according to her works; and in the Cup which she hath filled to you to drink, give to her double. How much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her; for she saith in her heart, I am in the Throne as a Queen, I am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her Plagues come in one day, Death, Mourning, and Famine shall fall upon her, and she shall be utterly burnt with Fire. But the Kings of the Earth, who have committed Fornication, and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see the Smoke of her burning, and standing afar off for fear of her torments, say Alas alas! that great City, Babylon, that mighty City, thy Condemnation is come in a mo∣ment. The Merchants of the Earth shall weep and mourn over her, for no Man buyeth their Merchandize there any more; viz. the Merchandize of Gold, Silver, Pearl, and pre∣cious Stones, fine Linen and Purple, and Silk and Scarlet, and all sweet Wood, Vessels of Ivory, and all manner of Brass, Iron and Marble, Cinamon, Odours and Oyntments, Frankensence, Wine and Oyl, fine Flour and Wheat, Sheep and Horses, Chariots, and Slaves, and Souls of Men: The Fruits that thy Soul lusted after are departed from thee, and thou shalt find them no more. The Mer∣chants of these things which were made rich by her, shall stand afar off for fear of her torment, weeping, and wailing▪ and say Alas, alas! That great City that was cloathed in fine Linen, Purple and Scarlet, and Deckt with Silver, Gold and precious Stones, in one hour is come to nought. All Mariners, and all those that pass the Seas to Traffick, shall keep at a distance from her: They shall la∣ment at the sight of her burning, saying, What City is like unto this great City? And they shall cast Dust on their Heads, saying, weeping, Alas, how has this great City been ruined in a moment! Then a great Angel took up a Stone like a great Mill-stone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more. And the Voice of Harpers and Musicians, and of Pipers and Trumpeters, shall be no more heard in thee, neither any Crafts∣man of whatever Craft he be; and the light of a Candle shall shine no more in thee, nei∣ther shall the Voice of the Bridegroom; nor the Bride be any more heard in this City. Thy Merchants were the great Men of the Earth, and by thy Sorceries were all Nations deceived. And in her was found the Blood of Prophets and Saints, and all that were slain upon the Earth. These Lamentations at the loss of Babylon, have made the Holy Fathers say, That Jesus Christ bewailed Jerusalem when as then it subsisted, and that we ought also to bewail the Miseries of Babylon, when she appears in all her Glory. And therefore St. Austin considering the words of the Wicked in the Book of Wisdom, when they complain with a Repentance full of despair, that their Riches have left them in a moment, adds with great reason; Let us now say Brethren, by a foresight which will prove advantageous to us: Every thing passes like a shadow, lest we say when 'twill not avail us, like those aforementioned wicked Persons, with fruitless Tears and Lamentations; All is past as a shadow.
The Dragon Bound by an Angel. AFter the Ruin of Babylon, S. John heard the Songs of the Saints, who adored GOD, because of his Judgments which he had exercised against this Whore. He saw afterwards Heaven opened, and therein ap∣peared a white Horse, and he that rode there∣on was called the Faithful and True that judgeth and combateth justly. His Eyes were as a flame of Fire, and he had several Crowns on his Head; and he was cloathed in a Vesture dipt in Blood, and his Name is called the Word of GOD. And the Armies which were in Heaven followed him upon white Horses cloathed in fine Linen white and clean, and out of this Mouth goeth a sharp Sword having this Name on his Vesture and Thigh▪ King of kings, and Lord of lords. S. John also saw an Angel come from Heaven, having the Key of the Bottomless Pit▪ and a great Chain in his hand, and he laid hold on the Dragon that old Serpent, which is the Devil and bound him for 1000 years; and having cast him into the Bottom∣less Pit, shutting up, and setting a Seal upon him, that he should deceive the Nations no more till the 1000 years were accom∣plish'd, after which he was to be unbound for a little while. Afterwards S. John saw Thrones, and they that sat upon them, and Judgment was given to them; and he saw the Souls of them that were Beheaded for the Testimony of Je∣sus Christ, and for the Word of GOD, and which had not worshipped the Beast, nor his Image, neither had received his Mark on their Fore-heads, or in their Hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ 1000 years; but the rest of the Dead lived not until the 1000 years were finish'd, and this is the first Resurrection. After the accomplishment of these 1000 years, Satan shall be unbound, and deliver∣ed from his Prison, and go out to deceive Nations, which are at the four Corners of the World, to gather them to fight, and environ the Camp of the Saints, and the City beloved of GOD: But Fire came down from GOD▪ and devoured them, and the Devil who seduced them, was cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the Beast and the false Prophet shall be tormented Day and Night for ever and ever. S. John then saw a great white Throne, and the Majesty of him that sat thereon, from whose face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and disappeared. He saw the Dead small and great stand before GOD; and another Book was opened, which was the Book of Life, and the Dead were judged out of what was written in this Book, according to their Works. And the Sea, Death and Hell gave up their Dead; and Death and Hell were cast into the Lake of Fire with all those whose Names were not written in the Book of Life. S. Gregory tells us, That this Dragon which the Angel binds in the Bottomless Pit, is the Devil, whom GOD casts out from the Hearts of the Faithful, and keeps chained in the Hearts of the Wicked, who have ill designs against the Servants of Jesus Christ, though they cannot execute them. But GOD gives afterwards (says this Ho∣ly Father) power to this Dragon to come out of the Pit, when he permits for the good of the Saints, that the Malice of the Wicked should shew it self outwardly, and set upon the Good with open Violence. It is hard to find a clear Explication of the other Circumstances which these Represen∣tations set before us. But this is certain, That they denote to us either the Power of Jesus Christ in his Glory, or the power of the Devil over the Wicked, or the Terror with which they shall appear before the Throne of Jesus Christ, or the severity with which this great udge shall examine the most hidden Secrets. Thus all these Instructions, whose very ob∣scurity is edifying, should carry us to un∣derstand with more respect, and to practise with greater care this so clear Advice of Jesus Christ in the Gospel. Take heed lest your Hearts be over charged with the Cares of this Life, and this Day sur∣prize you. Watch and Pray continually, that ye may be thought meet to avoid all these Miseries which shall then happen, and to appear with good hope before the Son of Man.
233 Thomas smith of the Tower of London Gentleman For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate
234 Dorothea Lady Rivers, daughter & Chyrss of Sr. William Beversham of Holbrook hall in suffolck Kt. master in Chancery deceased, and wife to Sr. George Rivers of Chafford in Kent Baronet. For advancement of this Worke. Contributed this Plate.
The New Ierusalem. S. JOHN sees the New Jerusalem. AFter the Ruin of Babylon, S. John saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth. He saw the Holy City, the new Jerusalem, which coming from GOD, descended from Heaven like a Spouse, which adorns her self for her Bridegroom. He heard a great Voice which came from the Throne, and said, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with Men, he will dwell with them, and they shall be his People and GOD dwelling with them shall be their GOD; and he shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and Death shall be no more; labour and sorrow shall ease, because that which is past shall be no more. Then an Angel transported S. John in the Spirit on a high Mountain, and shewed him the Holy Jerusalem, which descended from Heaven; coming from GOD; being envi∣ron'd with the Divine Brightness, having an high Wall, wherein were 12 Gates, and 12 Angels, one at each Gate, whereon were the Names written of the 12 Tribes of the Chil∣dren of Israel: on the East three Gates, on the North three Gates, on the South three Gates, and on the West three Gates: And the Wall of the City had 12 Foundations, and in them the Names of the 12 Apostles of the Lamb. He that spake to S. John had a Golden Reed to measure the City, the Gates, and the Walls. The City lieth four square, the length and breadth being equal, and he measured the City with the Reed, and found it 1200 Fur∣longs; and he measured the Wall, which is 144 Cubits, according to the measure of a Man, that is, of the Angel. This Wall was built with Jasper, and the City was pure Gold, like unto clear Glass: The Foundations of the Walls were garnish∣ed with all manner of precious Stones, and the 12 Gates were 12 Pearls; each of these Gates was made of one of these Pearls. S. John said, he saw no Temple therein, because the LORD GOD Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it. This Temple had no need of the Sun nor Moon to shine in it, for the Glory of GOD did enlighten it, and the Lamb is the light of it. And the Gates of it shall not be shut at all by Day, for there shall no Night be there. Nothing unclean shall enter there nor any of those who com∣mit Abominations, and speak Lyes; but those only who are written in the Lambs Book of Life. He saw also a pure River of the Water of Life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of GOD, and of the Lamb. In the midst of the City, and of either side the Ri∣ver, was the Tree of Life, which bare 12 manner of Fruits, which yields its Fruit eve∣ry Month the Leaves of the Tree are to heal the Nations. And there shall be no more Curse, but the Throne of GOD and the Lamb shall be in it, and his Servants shall serve him; they shall see his Face, and his Name shall be writ on their Foreheads. Immediately after our Saviour said to S. John, I come quickly, and bring my recompence with me, to give to every one according to his Works. Blessed are those that wash their Garments in the Blood of the Lamb, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and enter into the City by the Gates. As the representation of the punishment of the Wicked is so dreadful and various in all this Book, so nothing is more consolatory than the description of this Heavenly Jerusalem and the everlasting recompence which GOD bestows on the Good. How precious ought the Labours of this Life to be to us, say the Holy Fathers, seeing they are as Gold, whereby we purchase this Glory, so great that it cannot be comprehended! The true Chri∣stians have always sighed towards this Hea∣venly Jerusalem; and knowing that their Souls (according to the Scripture) are the living Stones of this sacred Building, they have been willing to have them cut, and as it were polish'd in this World with the Sheers of Affliction and Sufferings. They have ever had one Eye on this Bottomless Pit of Fire and Brimstone, mentioned in the several places of this Book, and the other lifted up towards this everlasting City, where Men shall enjoy the same happiness which GOD does, often calling to mind these excellent words of S. Austin. Love the Good things which Christ promises you; fear the Evils wherewith he threatens you, and then you will slight as well the Promises as Threatnings of this World.
AN APPENDIX, In Two PARTS: The First, An Abridgment of the LIVES of the Apostles, (Collected from the Holy Fathers, and other Ancient Ecclesiastical Writers.) To which is added, The Contents of each Book wrote by them. And for compleating the same, is likewise added, A MAP of the Travels and Voyages of the Apostles in their Missions: Illustrated with their Effigies. The Second, An HISTORICAL CHRONOLOGY Of such Matters as are related in the Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, according to the Division of the Seven Periods or Ages of the World. A Work of great Use for the better Understanding and Reading of HOLY SCRIPTURE.
map of the missionary journeys of the apostle Paul and others (left half) The Worshipfull William Lowther of swillinaton in yorkeshire esq. eldest son of S.r William Lowther of Preston in the said County Knight and Baronet For advancement of this worke. contributed this Plate. Saint Peter. effigy of Saint Peter Saint Paul. effigy of Saint Paul Saint Andrew. effigy of Saint Andrew Saint Iames Major. effigy of Saint James the Greater Saint Iohn. effigy of Saint John Saint Philip. effigy of Saint Philipr
A MAPP of the TRAVLES and VOYAGES of the APOSTLES in their Mission and in particular of Saint PAUL. map of the missionary journeys of the apostle Paul and others (right half) Saint Bartholomew. effigy of Saint Bartholomew Saint Mathew. effigy of Saint Matthew Saint Thomas. effigy of Saint Thomas Didymus Saint Iames Minor.. effigy of Saint James the Less Saint Simon. effigy of Saint Simon Saint Iude. effigy of Saint Jude Saint Mathias. effigy of Saint Matthias
An Exposition of the MAP of the TRAVELS and VOYAGES of the Apostles in their Missions, (and more especially of those of St. Paul) for the clearer understanding of the Book of the Acts. AFTER the Triumphant Ascension of our Saviour into Heaven; and that his Apostles had receiv'd in a sensible manner the Holy Spirit, in the day of Pentecost; they courageously set about the work of their Ministry, committed to them; and omitted no occasion of advancing (by the Preaching of the Gospel) the Kingdom of GOD. Their labours in this great Work, and particularly those of S. Paul, described in the Acts are represented in this Map, in which the Pro∣vinces, where they Preached the Gospel, are mark'd with great Letters, and separated from one another by Points or Pricks. The course of S. Paul's Voyage to Rome is also denoted by Pricks; and the Towns through which they past, and where they sojourn'd are taken no∣tice of in this following Discourse. We have moreover mark'd by a * e. of the Seven Churches of Asia mentione in the Book of the Revelations; and by a Cross ✚ the Isle of Patmos, where St. ohn was banish'd. The first Assembly of the Apostles was at Jerusalem, where such things happen'd as are recited in the 6 first Chapters of the Acts; as were the substitution of S. Matthias in the place of Judas; the emission of the Holy Spirit on the Apostles, and the successful Preaching of St. Peter; The Cure of the lame Man by S. Peter and St. John in their going up to the Temple; the remarkable pu∣nishment of Ananias and Saphira his Wife, for having lyed unto the Holy Spirit; the Im∣prisonment, and miraculous deliverance of the Apostles; and the election of the 7 Deacons S. Stephen, who was one of them, is stoned, and the Persecution waxes hot against the Church; which causes a great dispersion of the Faithful, as well in Judea as in Samara; Acts Chap. 7. and 8. by reason of which, S. Philip Preach'd at Samaia, where are sent from Jerusalem, St. Pter, and St. John to im∣part by the laying on of their Hands the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit to those who had been Baptizd amongst which was Simon the Magician, whom the Apostle sharply reprehended for his Cme. St. Philip having left Samaria, baptizes the Queen of Aethiopia's Officer in the way to Jerusalem, at Gaza, where the Spirit of GOD takes him up and carries him to Azote. From thence he goes into Arabia to perform the same Office, where he continued about three Years. From whence being returned to Damascus, find∣ing himself in great danger, he departs by Night, being secretly let down the Town-Wall in a Basket. Then he comes to Jerusa∣lem about the Feast of the Tabernacles, 2 Cor. 11.32, 33. Acts 9.25 to find some of the Apostles, having all this while seen none, and here he meets with S. Peter, Gal. 1.16.17. At first they shuned him, until such time that Barnabas introduced him amongst them, and so continued 15 days, labouring (though in vain) to convert the Jews to the Faith of Christ; after which both Peter and Saul departed; Saul to Caesarea, whence tra∣versing Phoenicia, Syria, and Cilicia, he arrives at Tarsus his Birth-place, Acts 9.26, 27. S. Peter in the mean time went from Town to Town over all Judaea▪ until he came to Lydia, where he Preaches the Gospel, and by a Miracle cures one Aeneas of a Palsie. And after some abode there, he was called to Joppa, where miraculously he raised from Death Tabitha, an holy Woman, Acts 9.32, to 56. He continued sometime here, sojourning at one Simon the Tanner's▪ where he saw the Vision of the Sheet let down from Heaven, filled with Beasts and Fowl, both clean and unclean, which is taken notice of in the 219 Discourse, viz Cornelius baptized. At the same time Barnabas of Cyprus, and Lucius of Cyrene, with others, being in remote parts, and moved by the Holy Spirit, Preached to the Gentiles, who were converted to the Faith. The Apostles taking to their assistance cer∣tain Evangelists, began to divide the World into 12 Parts, each taking one. St. John went into Asia, Dacia, and Panonia. St James the Brother of John into Egypt and Marmiria. St. Philip Northwards, into Cappadocia, Ionia, and so into Scythia. St. Andrew went East∣wards, as far as Scythia and Sogdia. St.
Bartholomew Southwards into India; and S. Thomas through Persia into China. St. Jude went to Chaldaea, Macedonia, and Arabia; and Simon Zelotes Southwards into Mauritania. St. Matthew tarried at erusalem until he wrote his Gospel in the Hebrew Tongue and then went after St. James into Egypt, and so into Ae∣thiopia. St. Matthias sailed over into Mace∣donia, and Greece, and from thence into A∣frica. St. James tarried at Jerusalem, but St. Peter went towards Antioch, the Capital Ci∣ty of Syria. About this time died Tiberius the Emperor at Rome, and Caius Caligula suc∣ceeded him. St. Thomas about this time, with Jude his Brother, and an Evangelist going out Eastwards, sent Jude into Edessa, who miraculously cured King Agbarus of a Di∣sease which long troubled him, and also converted him, with a great many of his Subjects. Barnabas went also to Antioch, and after Easter St. Peter followed, and ha∣ving here gained many Converts, Barnabas went to Tarsus, to bring Saul thither, and by these three there were so many Converts baptized to the Faith of Christ, that they were here first called Christians, which Name hath spread it self over the World. By that time these Apostles had stayed at Antioch a Year, came Agabus the Prophet from Jerusalem, and foretels a great Famine to hap∣pen over the World, Acts 11. In the mean time St. ames the elder is at Jerusalem be∣headed by Herod Agrippa; and St. Peter is mi∣raculously delivered out of Prison. About this tme Saul being in an Exstasie, as he was praying in the Temple, was caught up into the third Heaven, and heard words unspeak∣able; and finally was commanded quickly to depart Jerusalem, for that the Jews would not adhere to him, and therefore to go amongst the Gentiles. Now, according to this Com∣mand Saul and Barnabas, went back again to Antioch, accompanied with one Titus a Greek. About this time Saul seems to be made an Evanglist, and from henceforth is called Paul. In the Spring of the Year 41. Paul and Barnabas left Antioch, with one ohn, sir∣nam'd Mark, as their Deacon, and went to Cilicia, or Seleucia, near the Sea on the River Orontes, where they embark for Salamis in the Isle of Cyprus, and after some stay tra∣velling about the Isle came to Paphos, where Bajesus the Sorcerer is punished with blind∣ness and Sergius Paulus the Proconsul or Go∣vernor, was converted to the Faith. From thence in the Year 42. they pass to Perga, a City in Pamphylia, where St. John, sirnam'd Mark▪ leaves them, and returned to Jerusalem; But St. Paul and Barnabas went as far as An∣tioch in Pisidia, where great Crowds of the Gentiles were baptized; but they were driven thence by the Faction of the incredulous Jews, and came to Iconia, the chief place of Lycaonia, where they gained abundance of Converts, especially of the Gentiles, and here they staid some time, Acts 13. And St. Peter before his departure, committed the Care of the Church, as Bishop, to one Erodius, himself departing by Land through Cappa∣docia, Galatia, and the rest of Asia, Pentus, Bithynia, 1 Pet. 1.1, 2. This Year hapened the Famine spoken of by Agabus. In Anno 44. St. Mark published his Gospel at Rome, and then was sent to Aegypt to go∣vern the Church of Alexandria: About this time Paul and Barnabas was finally driven out of Iconia by a tumultuous Rabble of factious and envious Jews, and went on Preaching to Lystra, where an impotent per∣son healed by Paul, procured them so great a respect amongst the Idolaters, that they took them for Jupiter and Mercury, and would needs have sacrificed to them, which they having with no small difficulty hindred, the Tide soon afterwards strangely turn'd, for the Jews of Antioch and Iconia being come thither, stir'd up the People of Lystra against them, so that Paul was drawn out as dead: but being surrounded by the Disciples he came to himself, and departed the next Mor∣ning with his Companion Barnabas to Derbe. In Anno 45. Paul and Barnabas having setled the Church at Derbe, and ordained Elders, returned to Lystra. In 46. having ordained Elders at Lystra (amongst which Timothy was one) they retur∣ned to Iconium, where they did the like; then they came to Antioch. This Year died the blessed Virgin Mary aged about 60 years, having surviv'd her Son's Ascension 14 years. In 47. Paul and Barnabas returned to Per∣ga, and from thence went to Attalia, where they likewise setled a Church, Acts 14.4. a Town on the Mediterranean Sea, where they embark'd for Antioch in Syria, and gave the Brethren an account of the success of their Voyages, Acts 14. In Anno 48 they return through Cicilia and Syria unto Antioch, Preaching the Gospel. In 49 some being come from Judea to An∣tioch,
would perswade the Gentiles converted to the Faith, to admit of Circumcision, and to observe the Ceremonies of the Law, St. Paul and Barnabas are sent to Jerusalem on occa∣sion of this Controversie, which was decided in favour of the Christian Liberty, and the Decrees were carried to Antioch▪ not only by these 2, but by Jude, the Brother of Thomas, sirnamed Barsabas, and by Sila, or Sylvanus, who were joyned to them; at which the Church was much comforted, Acts 15. It seems that some time after, St. Peter also came to Antioch, where he had some Contest with St. Paul, who withstood him boldly, Gal. .11. In Anno 50. After these things Paul and Barnabas were about to make a second Voyage into Asia, and to visit the Churches which they had planted in their first course; but not agreeing they separated, but not with∣out some bitterness; Barnabas with Mark sayl∣ing for Cyprus; and Paul with Silas traver∣sing Syria and Silicia, and confirming the Brethren, came to Derbe and Lystra, where Timothy was taken into Company, and passes through Phrygia and Galatia, where they were forbidden to Preach in Asia; and com∣ing to Misia they attempted to go into Bithy∣nia; but were diverted from that Journey by the Holy Spirit, and therefore went down to Troas, where Paul being commanded in a Vi∣sion to go into Macedonia, they drew on strait to the Isle of Samothracia, and the next Mor∣ning arrived at Neapolis, a Port Town in Ma∣cedonia, whence they went to Philippia, where Lydia was converted and baptized, through the occasion of a Servant, out of whom Paul drove a prophesying Spirit, which cruelly tormented her. The People rose up against them, and he and Silas thrown into Prison, and the Gaoler being converted, they were dismissed the next day, Acts 16. Being parted from thence, they took their way through the Towns of Amphipolis and A∣pollonia, and came to Thessalonica, where Paul teaching in the Synagogue for three Sabbath-days together, brought over to the Faith seve∣ral, both Jews and Gentiles; but the malicious Jews being attended by a sort of rascally Peo∣ple, stirred up the Town against them, where∣upon they came to Beraea, and there made several Disciples; But the seditious Jews of Thessalonica followed them thither, and also there stirred up the People against them, for which cause the Brethren conveyed Paul out of the Town, as if he were to go by Sea, but he turned to Athens, where he had famous Dispu∣tations with the Learned of all Sects and Reli∣gions, and converted Dionysius, and one Da∣maris a famous Woman, with divers others, Acts 17. From hence Paul wrote the first and second Epistle to the Thessalonians for the confirmation of that Church; and from A∣tens he went to Corinth in the Isthmus, where he stayed about a year and a half, because GOD had great store of People there. Anno 51. St. Paul had a Vision at Corinth, to encourage his Preaching; Silas and Timo∣thy he sent to Macedoni to confirm the Churches, and tarrying at Corinth, wrought for his Living by making Tents with Aquila and Priscilla, and yet Preached constantly in the House of one Justus, and Sosthenes the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, being also converted, joyned himself to St. Paul: But when Gallio was made Deputy, a Tumult was raised, and Sosthenes was chastised, yet Paul continued still, Acts 18.7. Anno 52. St. Paul left the Government of the Church of Corinth to Silas, and so sailed to Ephesus. Here after some Reasoning with the Jews, he converted many of the Gentiles; and after some stay leaves Timothy to govern the Church, and sails to the Isle of Creta, now Candia, where having also setled a Church, he left it to the care of Titus; and sailed di∣rectly to Caesarea in Canaan, and from thence ascends to Jerusalem, and after some stay there (to salute the Brethren) he descends to Antioch, Acts 18.18. Here he also made but a short stay, and began a third Voyage through Galatia and Phrygia, confirming the Churches as he went, but made little stay in a place until he came to Timothy at Ephesus, where he Preached 2 years in the School of Tyrannus unto the Gentiles, and instructed certain Disciples of St. John Baptist's; as also one Apollos an eloquent Man and full of Zeal, although he was acquainted with no more than the Baptism of St. John. Paul earnestly labours and distributes the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit, by the laying on of his hands on 12 Men, who had been before bap∣tized with the Baptism of St. John. He also separates his Disciples from the Rebellious Jews, and teaches every day the Word of GOD, and that with such success (his Doctrine being attended with Signs and Miracles,) that by this means the Word was known through∣out all Asia, and several of those who had applied themselves to vain, curious, and un∣lawful
Sciences, which were in great request in that City, being struck with sorrow at heart▪ freely renounced those Magical Amusements, and burnt their Books of that kind▪ whose price amounted to a considerable value; but by an Uproar excited by Demetrius, he had been brought into danger, had it not been wisely appeas'd by the Town-Clerk, Acts 19. Anno 53. St. Philip having preached the Gospel in Cappadocia, Armenia, Colchis, and Iberia, came to Phrygia, where preaching at Hierapolis, the unbelieving Jews and Hea∣thens stoned him and crucified him. Anno 54 Philip being dead, Paul was cal∣led to be one of the 12 Apostles. Anno 55. From hence Paul wrote the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and sent it by Ti∣mothy, Acts 19.22. But Timothy being retur∣ned, Paul left him at Ephsus, and went in∣to Macedonia, embarks at Philippi for Troas, where he remains 7 days, having restored to life a young Man named Eutychus, who fell down to the ground from the third story. Anno 56. From thence he comes by Land to Asson, which some suppose to be Apollonia, and having there met his Company which came by Sea, they take Shipping together for Mitylene, a Town in the Isle of Lesbos. The day following they arrive in sight of Sa∣mos, and casting Anchor at Trogillum, which is a Creek of Mount Mycales, about 40 Fur∣longs distance; weighing Anchor they came the next day to Miletum, where Paul sends for the Pastors of the Church of Ephesu▪ and exhorts them to their duty, Acts 20. Having left Miletum, they came to Coos, and the day following to Rhodes, and from thence to Pa∣ra, where having found a Vessel bound for Phoenicia, they went on Board, leaving Cy∣prus on the left hand, and came to Tyre, where Simon, one of the 7 Deacons, was Bishop; here the Ship was to unlade. From whence they set sail for Ptolemais, where having saluted his Brethren and tarried a day, they came to Caesarea, where Philip the Deacon was Bishop; and here he stayed much longer; and from thence went to Jerusalem by Land, about the time of Pentecost, Acts 21.21. where the Church gladly received them. But a while after Paul being found in the Temple, was apprehended by certain Jews in a Tumult, and buffeted; but being rescued by Lysias the chief Captain, and found to be a Roman, was sent safe away to Caesarea; where at a hearing before Felix the Prefect of Judea, the High-Priest and his Orator accused him of great matters, but could make out nothing, Acts 21. Here Felix condescended to hea Paul preach the Gospel; but after 2 years Felix going out of place, left Paul in Prison. About this time Peter was in Egypt, and from Babylon wrote his first Epistle to the dispersed Stran∣gers, 1 Pet. 1.1. Chap. 5.15. Anno 58. Portius Festus was put into the place of Felix, before whom Paul was afresh accused; but he appealed to Caesar. After this, King Agrippa heard him preach, Acts 25.26. and judged him innocent; and in fine, about the end of the year was shipped away for Rome, under the conduct of a Centu∣rion named Julius, who had also the charge of several other Prisoners, to the Emperor Nero. Taking shipping at Caesarea in a Vessel of Adrimytte, a Town in Phrygia, they arrive the next Morning at Sidon, where the Centu∣rion permits him to visit his Friends, and to be assisted by them in his Voyage; from thence having a contrary Wind, they pass North∣wards beyond Cyprus, and arrive at Myra, where meeting with a Ship of Alexandria, which was bound for Italy, they embarkt therein. This Voyage being likely to hold long, they were several days before they could make sight of Gnidus, and afterwards they make over against Salmona, and from thence to a place called the Beautiful Haven, near the Town of Lasea in Creta, where Paul ad∣vised them to tarry, the Season for Naviga∣tion being past, so that no good Weather could be expected. But the Centurion being desirous to Winter at Phoenix, some distance from thence, being a better Port, made them put out again, but they were disappointed, for being soon overtaken with a Tempest, and an impetuous North-East Wind, they could not reach this Haven, so that they were carried under the Isle of Claudia. They drew in the Long-Boat, and under-girded the Ship▪ fear∣ing they shou'd have faln on Syrtes, which is a moving Sand, and very dangerous on the Africk Coast. The empest continuing, they began on the third day to lighten their Ship, to let down the Sail, and abandon themselves to the Winds and Waves; and when neither Sun nor Stars in many days appeared, all hopes of safety being laid aside, on the 14th. day they began to discover Land; but know∣ing not where they were, they sounded and found it 20 Fathoms, and a little further 15; whereupon they threw out 4 Anchors, and the
day beginning to appear, Paul having com∣forted them, they threw out the Tackle of the Ship; and altho' it was day, they knew not the place where they were, only obser∣ving a great Gulph with a Shoar, where they endeavoured to bring in the Vessel; having for this end weighed their Anchors▪ and hoist∣ed their Sails, and falling into a Place where two Seas met, they thrust in the Ship, and the forepart stuck fast, but the hinder part was broken by the violence of the Waves; then every Man endeavoured to save himself, some by swiming, and others on Planks and Wrecks of the Ship, so that without the loss of any Soul (there being 276 Persons on Board) they got safe to Land, Acts 27. Being escaped this Danger they found it was the Isle of Malta, whose Inhabitants re∣ceived them with great kindness. Paul, who was at first taken for a Murtherer, because a Viper fastned on his Hand; but seeing he had no hurt, and shook it off into the Fire, they adored him as a GOD; here he signalized himself by the healing several sick Persons, especially Publius, a Man of Note in the Isle. From hence they went in a Ship of Alex∣andria, named Castor and Pollux, which had Winter'd there, and came to Syracusa, then to Rhgium, where favoured by a Southern Wind they arrive at Buzzol, where they found Brethren, with whom they tarried 7 days, whence parting for Rome, the Brethren came and met them at Appii-forum, and thus they arrived at Rome, where the Centurion con∣signed the Prisoners to the Prefect of the Prae∣torium; but Paul obtained liberty to lodge in what House he pleased, having a Soldier to guard him. He thus dwelt 2 years, preach∣ing the Gospel with full liberty, and wrote from Rome the Epistles to the Philippians, Colossians, Hebrews and to Philemon. It may be gathered from Holy Writ, that Paul left Rome after his enlargement, in the year 63. in Spain, or in his way thither; but whether he was forcibly brought back again, or whether he was bound to return, is not known; and in this year St. James suffered Martyrdom at Jerusalem▪ in whose place Si∣mon his Brother was chosen Bishop. Anno 64. Paul took shipping out of Gallia and sailed into Greece. Anno 65. Paul visited the Churches in Macedonia, and landed at Troas, where Carpus was Bishop. Thence he went up into Phrygia unto Laodicea, and from thence wrote his first Epistle to Timothy at Ephesus, promising shortly to come to him; but it fell out otherwise; for a Persecution hapning at Rome, he hasted thither, and accordingly go∣ing from Laodicea to Miletum, he sailed for Corinth, and so away for Rome. In the mean time the poor Christians were torn with Beasts, crucified, and burnt in the Fire; but these Apostles greatly encouraged them. Now was St.  Paul clapt in Prison. Anno 66. Timothy and Trophimus came to Rome to St. Paul. Anno 67. St. Peter was crucified with his Head downwards, and Olympas and Rhodion his Companions suffered with him. St. Paul was beheaded, and with him suffered his Com∣panions Aristarchus, Trophimus, and Pudens. An Account of the Places mentioned in this Discourse, and which are taken notice of in the MAP, by Figures, Letters, or other Marks of distinction. 1 JErusalem. 2 Samaria. 3 Gaza. 4 Azote. 5 Damascus. 6 Caesarea. 7 Tarsus. 8 Lydia. 9 Joppa. 10 Caesarea. 11 Antioch. 12 Salamis. 13 Paphos. 14 Perga. 15 Antioch. 16 Iconium. 17 Lystra. 18 Derbe. 19 Attalia. 20 Troas. 21 Samothracia. 22 Neapolis. 23 Philippia. 24 Amphibolis. 25 Apollonia. 26 Thessalonica. 27 Beraea. 28 Athens. 29 Corinth. 30 Cenchrea. 31 Sicyon. 32 Ephesus. 33 Asson. 34 Mitylene. 35 Chios. 36 Samos. 37 Trogillum. 38 Mycales. 39 Miletum. 40 Coos. 41 Rhodes. 42 Patara. 43 Tyre. 44 Ptolemais. 45 Antipatris. 46 Rome. 47 Adrimytte. 48 Sidon. 49 Myra. 50 Alexandria. 51 Gnidus. 52 Salmona. 53 Beautiful haven. 54 Lasea. 55 Phoenix. 56 Claudia. 57 Syrtes. 58 Malta. 59 Syracusa. 60 Rhegium. 61 Puteoli. 62 Apius. a Judea. b Samaria. c Arabia. d Syria. e Cilicia. f Phoenicia. g Cyprus. h Pamphylia. i Pisidia. k Lycaonia. l Phrygia. m Galatia. n Asia. o Mysia. p Bithynia. q Macedonia. r Achaia. s Greece. t Italy. u Creet, or Candia. x Africa.
The Lives of the APOSTLES. The LIFE of St. MATTHEW the Evangelist. SAint Matthew, otherwise called Levi, was an Hebrew of the Hebrews, the Son of Alphaeus, and Mary, Kinswoman to the Blessed Virgin, though the Ara∣bick Writer of his Life, calls his Father's Name Ducu, and his Mothers Karutias, both Originally descended of the Tribe of Issachar. He was the first of the Evangelists, that wrote the Gospel and History of our Saviour, in which great Work he was assisted by the Holy Ghost. The place of his Birth is not cer∣tainly known, but that he was a Galilaean is not doubted, and by some 'tis said that he was Born at, or near Capernaum, though the Arabick Author aforesaid, affirms him to be Born at Nazareth, belonging to the Tribe of Zebulun. He was a Publican, and by Pro∣fession an Officer employ'd in the gathering the Emperor's Toll, or Customs, being an em∣ployment of great Reputation amongst the Romans, however vilified among the Jews; and without doubt very profitable, which he quitted to follow Christ in all his meanness. After his being Elected to the Apostleship, he continued amongst the Apostles, till our Saviour's Ascension, and then for about eight Years Preached up and down in Judaea; Af∣terwards which way he steer'd his Travels, for the Conversion of the Gentiles, is not cer∣tainly known; but Aethiopia is the place most generally assign'd him for his Province, tho' some affirm, he went first into Parthia. His Gospel is said to have been written at Jerusalem at the Entreaty of the Jewish Con∣verts, and as Epiphanius adds, by the appoint∣ment of the Apostles about eight Years after our Saviour's Death. Nicephorus makes it 15 after his Ascnsion: At least it must needs have been written before this dispersion of the Apostles▪ if S. Bartholomew carried it along with him into India, and there left it; for Pontenus Preaching the Faith in the Indies, found there a Copy of St. Matthew's Gospel written in Hebrew, which he brought to Alex∣andria, and was preserved to his time in the Library of Caesarea, which Original being lost, we have only the Greek Version, whose Author is unknown, though several do attribute it to St. James, or St John; Another Copy was found by the Nazarenes, at Beraea, in the time of St Hierom, as he himself affirms, adding withall, that he obtained leave of the Naza∣rens to transcribe theirs, and that he after∣wards Translated it into Greek and Latin; and another was found by good Testimonies in the digging up the Grave of St. Barnabas, Anno Dom. 485. being a Transcript of the Apostles own writing: But of all these Copies we hear not of any extant; however the Greek Translation done by S. John or S. James, hath been all along generally received as Au∣thentick, and therefore reckoned among the Canonical Books of Holy Scripture. It is agreed by ancient Writers, that he suffered Martyrdom at Naddaber in Aethiopia, but as to what sort of Death, and where he was Buried, we are to seek; only Dorotheus will have it, that he was honourably Buried at Hierapolis in Parthia, one of the first places where he Preached to the Gentiles. St. Austin observes, that S. Matthew is ex∣act in his Account of the Royal Extraction of our Saviour, and in his describing the Life he led amongst us; whereas St. John soars higher, and immediately declares the Divi∣nity of our Saviour. His Writings also seem more Pious and Instructive to the Capacity of the meanest, since he more particularly tou∣ches on the Actions and Discourses with which our Saviour did (as it were) qualify his Di∣vine Wisdom, and Majesty; that his Exam∣ple may be in some measure imitable, and proportionable to our weakness. 'Tis not to be questioned, but GOD had great reasons to cause his Laws to be written; yet we may say, Christ's chief design has ever been to write them in our Hearts, to the end our Actions might be visible Characters, of that invisible Love he bears us, and which we ought to shew each other. For the principal design of our Savior is not to instruct us by written Words, but by the Example of his Life, which was continually to be renewed in our Minds, by the Operations of the Holy Ghost,
to the end his Vertue, as well as his Verity, might be represented from Age to Age, by lively Actions, and not by dead Works; and therefore though it be necessary to read con∣tinually the Hoy Scriptures, if we should un∣derstand them all, yet this knowledge alone will not make us Christ's Disciples, and we do not at the same time feel this knowledge influencing our Actions, and regulating our behaviour under all conditions. Having given you the Life of this Evan∣gelist and Apostle, I shall conclude his Life with the Contents of his Gospel, which me∣thod I shall take to the Lives of the rest of the Apostles, that are Pen Men in the History of the New-Testament. The Contents of the Gospel according to St. Matthew. THis Gospel chiefly treats of these two things, viz. of the Person of the Mes∣siah and Mediator, who is Jesus Christ, and of of his Office or Charge, how he set about it at first, afterwards continued in the same, and last of all fully acquitted himself there∣of and discharged it. As concerning his Person, our Evangelist sheweth, that he was the true Emmanuel, promised in the Old Testament, that is to say, true GOD, and true Man, in Unity of Person. As to his human Nature, he sets down his Genealogy, his Conception by the Holy Ghost, his being born of the Virgin Mary, and the name which was given to him by the ngel, Chap. I. That certain Wise Men from the East, being wonderfully informed of his Birth by the appearance of a new Star, came to worship him; that Herod terrified with the Report of the Wise Men, concerning a Great King that was Born, caused all the Children of Bethlehem from two Years and under, to be put to Death; but that Joseph and Mary, be∣ing warned by GOD in a Dream, fled with the Child Jesus into Egypt, and afterwards returning thence with him, went and dwelt at Nazareth▪ Chap II. Concerning his Office, he declares, how he was at first prepar'd for it; and how after∣wards he discharged it. That John the Bap∣tist his Fore-runner prepar'd the way for him, by his Preaching, and the Character he gave of him, that he baptized him; and how he was solemnly inaugurated and install'd in the same by the Father and the Holy Ghost, from the Highest Heavens, Chap. III. That he was yet further prepar'd and dispos'd for the great Office he was to undertake by a miraculous Fast of 40 days, as well as by several Combats with the Tempter in the Wilderness; that after this he betook himself to the discharg∣ing of his Office and Function, not only in his State of Humiliation, but also in that of his Exaltation. That in his State of Humiliation, he began with the Exercise of his Prophetical Office, and that in order thereto he left Naza∣reth, and came and dwelt at Capernaum, Preaching in the Synagogues of Galilee, and confirming his Doctrine with many Miracles, Chap. IV. Our Evangelist gives us a par∣ticular Account of a most Excellent Sermon, which Jesus Christ Preached upon the Mount▪ in which he declares, wherein the Happiness of his true Disciples doth consist, and purg∣eth the Doctrine of the Law, from the cor∣rupt Glosses and Interpretations, the Pha∣risees had put upon it, Chap. V. He teach∣eth how we are to behave our selves, in our giving of Alms▪ in our Prayers, and that we are not to be solicitously careful about the necessities and maintenance of our outward Life, Chap. VI. As also that we ought not to judge our Neighbour, to beware of False Prophets, and not only to be Hearers, but doers and keepers of the Word of GOD, Chap. VII. Moreover he relates his healing of a Leper, curing divers Maladies; his appeasing of a Tempest at Sea by rebuking the Winds and Waves, and his casting out of Devils, Chap. VIII. His curing of one sick of the Palsey, his calling St. Matthew from the re∣ceit of Custom to the Apostleship, his healing a Woman of her Bloody Issue, his raising a Rulers Daughter to Life, and calling out a dumb Devil from one that was possessed. Chap. IX. His sending out his 12 Apostles before him, to Preach the Gospel, giving them Power to cast out unclean Spirits, and Instructions how to behave themselves in their Mission, Chap. X. He gives an Account of the Ho∣norable Testimony given by our Saviour to John, the Baptist who had sent two of his Disciples to be inform'd by him, whether in∣deed he were the true Mssiah, that was to come; sets down the dreadful denunciations pronounced by him against those Cities, that
had rejected his Gospel, as also his gracious invitation to all labouring and heavy laden Sinners, Chap. XI. His Apology for his Disciples, plucking and eating the ears of Corn on the Sabbath-day; his ridding him∣self of the Snares laid for him by the Phari∣sees; his casting out a Blind and aumb Devil; his accusing and convincing of the Pharisees, of their Sinning against the Holy Ghost, for which he threatens them with Eternal Dam∣nation; and his declaring who spiritually and in truth are his Mother, his Sisters and Bro∣thers, Chap. XII. His representing and de∣scribing the condition of his Church here on Earth, by divers Similitudes and Parables, as of the Sower, the Mustard-seed, the Trea∣sure hid in the Field, the Merchant and Draw∣net cast into the Sea, and his being disregar∣ded and despis'd in his own Country, Chap. XIII. Our Evangelist also gives us an account of the Imprisonment and Death of John the Bap∣tist, with the causes of both; of Jesus Christ's feeding 5000 Men, with 5 Loaves and 2 Fishes; his going upon the Water, appeasing the Tempest, and healing many Sick Persons in the Land of Genezaret, only by touching the Hem of his Garment, Chap. XIV. As likewise how he defends his Disciples, accused by the Pharisees for eating with unwashed Hands, declaring what it is that really defiles a Man; delivers the Daughter of the Canaa∣nitish Woman, vexed with a Devil, and sa∣tisfies the Hunger of 4000 Men, besides Wo∣men and Children, with 7 Loaves and a few Fishes, Chap. XV. How he reproves the Pharisees, who demanded a Sign of him from Heaven, and warns his Disciples to beware of their and the Sadduces Leaven: how St. Peter having honourably confess'd and own'd him, not only for himself, but in the name of his Fellow-Apostles, he promiseth him the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and foretells his Sufferings and Death, as also his Resurrection and Assumption to Glory, Chap. XVI. How upon a very high Mountain, he gives a view of his Glory, by being transfigured in the pre∣sence of 3 of his Disciples, teacheth them that John the Baptist was the Eliah that was to come; healeth a Lunatick Person, by cast∣ing out the Devil that tormented him, fore∣telleth a second time his Death and Resur∣rection, and payeth Tribute, Chap. XVII. How he exhorteth his Disciples to Humility, to avoid Offences, to resist evil Lusts, not to despise little ones, by a Similitude drawn from a Lost Shep; teacheth, how they ought to behave themselves towards a Brother that has offended them, and how often to forgive him, illustrating his Doctrine with the Parable of a King, who having forgiven 10000 Talents to his Servant, punisheth him for shewing no Mercy to his Fellow Servant; Chap. XVIII. Teacheth that a Man may not divorce his Wife but for the cause of Adultery, to whom Marriage is necessary▪ blesseth the little Chil∣dren brought unto him; sheweth a young Man what he ought to do to inherit Eternal Life; how difficult it is for rich Men to be Saved; and the great Reward they shall re∣ceive, who have forsaken all things to follow him, Chap. XIX. By the Similitude of La∣bourers sent to work in the Vineyard, he de∣clares that the Reward GOD gives to his Ser∣vants, is wholly gratuitous, and of meer free Grace; he foretels his approaching Passion, and reproves the Mother of Zebedes Children, for her ambitious demand, and warneth his Apostles not to aspire after greatness or Su∣periority; and restores 2 blind men to their Sight, Chap. XX. He maketh his Royal Entry into Jerusalem; curseth the Barren Fig Tree; disputeth in the Temple with the Priests, concerning his Authority and Person, Chap. XXI. By the Parable of persons in∣vited to the Marriage of the King's Son, he sheweth that the visible Church is never with∣out Hypocrites, and that all the true Members thereof must have on the Wedding Garment; that Tribute must be paid to Caesar; that in the Resurrection there is neither marrying, nor giving in Marriage; that the Summ and Substance of the Law consists in loving GOD and our Neighbour; that he is not only the Son of David, but also his LORD, Chap. XXII. He teacheth his Disciples, with respect to the Pharisees, that they ought indeed to hear what they teach conformable to the Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, but not to do ac∣cording to their Works, nor to imitate their Hypocrisie, Pride and Blood thirstiness or perse∣cuting Spirit, Chap. XXIII. He foretels the Destruction of the Temple and City of Je∣rusalem, with the Signs that should be the Fore-runners of it, and of his coming to Judg∣ment; and exhorteth to Watchfulness and Prayer, Chap. XXIV. He propounds the Similitude of 10 Virgins going forth to meet the Bridegroom; and of the Servants to whom their Master had variously distribu∣ted his Talents, to be improved by them, and
describes his last coming to Judgment, and the grounds upon which men shall be either acquitted or condemned at that day, Chap. XXV. He foretelleth again his Sufferings, which he was now entring upon. The Evangelist relates how the Chief Priests and Scribes take Counsel together to seize him; Judas treats with them about Betraying him into their Hands, and the Lord discovers the Traytor, to his fellow Disciples; he celebrates the Feast of the Passover with them, and in stead there∣of substitutes his Holy Supper; foretels his Disciples Flight and leaving of him, and Peter's denial. He sets down the beginning of his Sufferings in the Garden, his Agony and Prayers; his being betrayed and taken, led bound to Caiaphas, examined, and pro∣nounced worthy of Death: S. Peter denies him thrice, Chap. XXVI. Judas repenting, hangs himself, Christ is brought before Pilate, who in vain strives to save him, and at last delivers him to be Crucified, after that he had been Scourged. The Souldiers Crown him with Thorns▪ mock and revile him. He is led out of the City bearing his Cross, and being come to the place, he is stript of his Cloathes, for which the Souldiers cast Lots; and nailed to the Cross between two Thieves: He dies (after that by many Wonders and Prodigies he had evidenced himself to be the Son of GOD) and is buried, Chap. XXVII. How the third Day after he arose from the Dead, with the Prodigies attending his Resurrection, and presented himself alive to some devout Women, and to his Disciples, whom (being met together for that purpose) he Authori∣zeth and chargeth to go and Preach the Go∣spel to all Nations, promising to be with them to the end of the World. The LIFE of S. MARK the Evangelist. SAint MARK, tho' by Name a Roman, in appearance is certainly acknowledged to be of Jewish Parents, and descended from the Tribe of Levi, and according to Nice∣phorus, Sisters Son to Peter, tho' some have confounded him with John, Sirnamed Mark the Son of Mary; others with Mark, Sisters Son to Barnabas: That he was one of the 70 all the Ancients agree; yet not a Follower of our Saviour, but a later Convert by some of the Apostles; most probably S. Peter, whose Attendant, Amanunsis, and Interpreter he is thought to have been. For he was sent into Egypt by Peter, to plant the Gospel in those parts, and spent his time chiefly at Alexandria, where he founded a Church, which was the second Episcopal See; And in this City and parts adjacent he Converted great Multitudes, not only to the embracing the Christian Faith, but the Profession of a more than or∣dinary strict and even Monastick Life; and these Eusebius, and after him Epiphanius, S. Hierom, and of later days Baronius think to be the same which those Therapeutae, or Sect of People living about the Maraeotick Lake in Egypt, whom Philo Judaeus describes at large, as a Sect of Men of a most severe Life, and wholly devoted to Studious Soli∣tude. From Alexandria he went more West∣ward to Marmorica, Pentapolis, and other parts of Libya, and having absolutely made a Spiritual Conquest of the People of those places, he returned to Alexandria; where notwithstanding the long stay he there made, with the great pains he took, the Inhabitants were so much concern'd for their old Pagan Idolatry, that it was an occasion of hastning his Martyrdom; for being about the time of our Easter, that they celebrated the solem∣nities of their God Serapis; they enraged at his aversion to their Religion, and his maintaining another so contrary to it, broke into the place where he was at his Devotion, and tying Cords to his Feet, dragg'd him through the City, to a place a little out of the Town called Bucelus: By which dragging over the Stones and rough places, his Body was so torn and bruised, that he died there∣of, and the remainder of his torn Body was then removed, and carried to Venice, and lies interr'd in the Church of S. Mark, one of the most magnificent Buildings perhaps in the World: and is accounted the Patron and Tutelar Saint of Venice. His Gospel was written by him, at the in∣stance of the converted Jews at Rome, when he was there with Peter, they being desi∣rous to have in writing what the Apostle had so often declared to them in his Preach∣ing. There is some Dispute, whether it was writ in Greek or Latin; those that would have it
in Latin alledge, that it was for the use of the Inhabitants at Rome; the others say that the Greek being the then modish Language there, 'tis probable it was the Tongue there chief∣ly spoken by Strangers; and the Venetians have an Old Greek Copy, which they confi∣dently affirm to be the Original Copy of his own Hand, at Aquileia. S. Chrysostom demands why our Saviour having Twelve Apostles, there were but Two of them that undertook to write the Gospel, and that S. Mark should write it as well as S Luke, altho' they were only the Apostles Disciples? To which he answers himself, That such Holy Men did nothing through a Desire of Glory, but guided themselves in all things by the Motions of God's Spirit, and by a Prospect of the Good of the Church. This Evangelist has followed S. Matthew in several Places, and often epitomiz'd him; yet there are Histories which he relates more at length, and of which he describes the particular Circumstances. 'Tis observable, that whatsover care our Saviour took to teach his Apostles during his Life, by making them Spectators, not only of his publick Actions, but of his se∣cret and private Life, and by discovering to them the Mysteries and Parables which he spake in publick; yet they have said no∣thing of our Saviour, and his Holy Verities, of which they were so perfectly informed, till they were renewed by the Holy Spirit, and were become in some sort Divine Men, as S. Chrysostom calls them. S. Mark writ his Gospel in the third Year of Claudius his Reign, that is to say, the forty third after the Birth of our Saviour, being ten Years after his Passion. The Contents of the Gospel according to S. Mark. THE Contents of this Book or Gospel, are much the same with that of S. Mat∣thew, as containing the same Matter, tho' shorter and more abridg'd. He describes how our Saviour exercised his Office here on Earth, and first, how he behaved himself in the dis∣charge of his Prophetical Function, wherein he had S. John the Baptist to be his Forerun∣ner, preparing his way, and by whom also he was baptized: How after having defeated the Devil's Temptation, he began to preach the Gospel, calling Four of his Disciples, cast∣ing out an unclean Spirit, healing S. Peter's Mother-in-Law of a Fever, with many others of their Maladies, and cleansing a Leper, Chap. I. How afterwards he healeth one Sick of the Palsie; calls S. Matthew to the Apo∣stleship; excuseth his Disciples for not Fast∣ing, and for plucking the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath Day, Chap. II. He restores the Man that had his Hand Wither'd; is followed by great Multitudes, chooseth his 12 Apostles, maintains the Truth of his Miracles against the Calumnies of his Enemies, and sheweth who are his nearest Relations, Chap. III. He teacheth by the Parable of the Sower, how the Word of GOD must be heard saving∣ly, and preach'd openly: as also how the same encreaseth and groweth imperceptibly, like a Seed Sown in the Ground; and from the Parable of a Mustard Seed, sheweth how from a small Beginning it proceeds to a wonderful greatness and encrease; he appeas∣eth a Tempest, Chap. IV. Casts out a Legion of Devils, healeth a Woman of a Bloody Issue, and raiseth Jairus his Daughter to Life, Chap. V. He teacheth in his own Countrey, where he is contemned, and sends his Apostles to preach the Gospel; the Opinion of Herod (who beheaded John the Baptist) and others concerning Jesus Christ; he Feeds 5000 Men, with 5 Loaves and 2 Fishes, walketh on the Sea, and healeth all that touch him, Chap. VI. He censures the Pharisees for making void the Law of GOD by their Traditions; shew∣eth what it is that defiles Man; Casts out a Devil from the Daughter of a Syrophaenician Woman, healeth one Deaf and Dumb, Chap. VII. He again Feeds 4000 Men, with 7 Loaves and a few Fishes; refuseth to give a Sign to the Pharisees; admonisheth his Disciples to beware of their Leaven, and of that of Herod; restores Sight to a Blind-man, foretels his Suffering, and exhorteth his Dis∣ciples to Patience in Persecution raised against them, for the Profession of the Gospel, Chap. VIII. He gives a view of his Glory upon the Mount, to three of his Disciples, by being transfigur'd before them; answers his Disciples Question concerning the coming of Elias; Casts out a Deaf and Dumb Spirit; foretels again his Passion; exhorteth his Dis∣ciples
to Humility, not to hinder such as he not against them, and to avoid offences, Chap. IX. He Disputeth with the Pharisees touching Divorcement; Blesseth little Chil∣dren, brought unto him; resolveth a Rich Mn how he may inherit Life Everlasting; sheweth how great an obstacle Riches are to Salvation; promiseth Eternal Life to those that forsake any outward enjoyments, for his sake; foretels his Death and Suffering, a third time; rejects the ambitious Petition of Zebedees Sons; exhorteth his Disciples to Humility, and to avoid all affectation of Superiority, and restoreth to Bartimeus his Sight, Cha. X. He Rideth with Triumph into Jerusalem, curseth the Barren Figtree, purgeth the Temple of Buyers and Sellers; exhorteth his Disciples to stedfastness of Faith, and to forgive their Enemies, and justifies his Actions by the witness of John the Baptist, Chap. XI. He reproacheth the Js with their ingratitude, by the Parable of a Vine∣yard let out to Husbandmen, who abused and kill'd, first the Servants, and then the Son of the Master of the Vineyard; avoid∣eth the Snare laid for him by the Pharisees and Herodians, about paying Tribute to Csar; convinceth the Error of the Saddu∣cees, who denied the Resurrection; teacheth which is the first and chiefest Commandment, and that he is not only the Son, but also the the Lord of David; exhorteth all to beware of the Ambition and Hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees, and commendeth the Poor Widow that cast  Mites into the Trea∣sury, Chap. XII. He foretels the Destruction of the Temple, the Persecutio for the Gospel, which must be Preached to all Nations; the great miseries and extream calamities that were to happen to the Jews; as also his com∣ing to Judgment; the hour of which being unknown, he exhorteth all to Watch and Pray, Chap. XIII. The chief Priests take Counsel together how to take Jesus; precious Ointment is poured on his Head by a Woman; Judas bargains with the chief Priests about betraying Jesus, who celebrates the Passover with his Disciples; foretells that one of them should Betray him; institutes his Holy Sup∣per; Foretels his Passion, Death and Resur∣rection, as also the Flight of his Disciples, and Peters denial; the beginning of his Suf∣ferings in the Garden by extream Sorrow and Heaviness, accompanied with earnest Prayer, for the removal of his Cup; he is betrayed by Judas with a Kiss, apprehended, led to the High Priests, examined, accused by false Witnesses, and condemned to Death; S. Peter thrice denies him, Chap. XIV. He is brought before Pilate, the Governour, who would have released him, but at the instance of the Jews releaseth Barabbas, and delivers Jesus to be Scourged and Crucified; he is Crowned with Thorns, Spit on and Mocked, and Crucified between two Thieves, the Jews Blasphemously deriding him; he Dieth; the Centurion owneth him to be the Son of GOD, and is honourably Buried by Joseph of Ari∣mathea, Chap XV. On the Morning of the third day, he Riseth from the Dead; and gives full assurance thereof to some devout Women, by the appearance and testimony of an Angel, and afterwards to his Disciples, by appearing in Person among them; and hav∣ing commanded his Disciples to go and Preach the Gospel throughout the whole World, and promised to bestow upon them the gift of Miracles, he Ascendeth into Heaven, and Sitteth at the Right Hand of GOD. The Apostles enter upon their Ministerial Function, Preaching the Gospel every where, and Jesus fulfils the Promises he had made them by confirming their Doctrin with Signs and Miracles. The LIFE of S. LUKE the Evangelist. SAint Luke was without all controversie Born at Antioch, the chief City of Syria, famous for being one of the most flourishing Academies in the World, replenisht with Schools of good Literature, and very eminent Professors of all Arts and Sciences, as also being the place where the Disciples first took the name of Christians; here being Educated from his Childhood, he made a good profi∣ciency in Learning, and for his better im∣provement, he visited the chief Academies of Asia and Greece, and having in each of them Learnt what could be Learnt, he re∣turned to Antioch, and particularly applied himself to the Study of Physick, in which he became a great proficient. Moreover taking a delight in Painting, he became a great Artist therein, and made several Pictures of
the Blessed Virgin, which appears from an inscription found in a Vault, near the Church of S. Mary in Via Lata near Rome, which was this Una ex vii. a B. Luca depictis. Tis most generally believed thar S. Luke was converted by S. Paul, at his first being at Antioch, others say at Thebes; but where-ever it was, certain it is that Paul had a very great kindness for him, and imploied him in matters of much importance, as putting great trust in him. Parting from Paul he is said to have gon Eastward, and Preached in Egypt and several parts of Lybia. Epiphanius writes that he planted the Faith first in Dalmatia, and Gallia, then in Italy and Macedonia. About the place of his Death, several Writers vary, nor do they say whether he was Martyr'd, or died a natural Death: Some say he died in Egypt, others in Greece: The Roman Mar∣tyrology saith in Bythinia; Dorotheus at Ephesus; Paulinus Bishop of Nla, saith he died in Martyrdom, but names not the place; and Nicephorus is more particular, saying, that as he was zealously performing the Office of his Ministry in Greece, he was at last set upon by some of the under sort, who for want of a Cross artificially made, Cru∣cified him upon a Walnut-Tree: But Kirste∣mus from the Arabick Copy, positively affirms him to be Martyr'd at Rome, when he was left behind by S. Paul after his Impri∣sonment The Writings of S. Luke, as universally owned as Canonical, are his Gospel▪ and his History of the Acts of the Apostles. The first, said to be written at Achaia, when he was with Paul, who is thought by some to have bin a great assistance to him in it, inso∣much that it has bin entituled S. Pauls Gos∣pel; and all this might seem probable enough, were it not that S. Luke himself expresly mentions, That whatsoever he writ in this Gospel, he had it from the Testimony of those, who from the beginning had been Eye-witnesses of all our Saviours Works and Transactions; and this as S. Austin says came to pass by the wise Counsel of GOD, that of the 4 Evangelists, 2 having bin Apo∣stles, the remaining 2 should not be so, to the end it might not be believed there was any difference in their Writings, who saw the Actions of our Saviour, and those that described them, from the Faithful Relation of those that had seen them; GOD designing in this manner to shew us, that the certitude of the Evangelical History, comes not only from those that made it, and relate the things which they have seen, which is ordi∣nary in several Histories, whose certainty is only Human and Moral; but that it is ground∣ed on the particular assistance of the Holy Spirit, who dictated all their Words to the Evangelists, as well to S. Mark and S. Luke, who were Disciples to the Apostles, as to S. Matthew and S. John, who were Apostles themselves. The History of the Acts of the Apostles was doubtless writ at Rome, at the time of his being there with Paul, in his first Impri∣sonment, and were both originally written in the Greek Tongue, as may be concluded from what S. Jerom and others observe in the Elegancy of the Style, and purity of the Greek above others of the Apostles, that writ in that Language; and both these Works he dedicated to Theophilus, a Person of con∣siderable Honour and Quality, and one of his principal Converts. He writ his Gospel about the year of Christ 56. In the beginning of his Gospel, he relates the Motive he had in writ∣ing it saying, that several hastily undertook to write the Evangelical History, he thought himself obliged to do it after an exact infor∣mation, from those who had bin the Dispen∣sers and Ministers of it, and especially from S. Paul, to hinder the word of the Gospel from being Sophisticated by the mixture of Error and Falshood. S. Luke always remained in Coelibacy, and arrived to the age of 84 years. The Church says of him, that he continually bore on his Body the marks of the Cross, and therefore thought his Death was not honoured with suffering: Yet one may say, according to the expression of S. Jerom, That his life was a continual Martyrdom.
The Contents of the Gospel according to S. LUKE. THe matter of this Book is like that of the 2 foregoing Gospels, save only that S. Luke relates several Circumstances, which are omitted by S. Matthew and S. Mark. After his preface he sets down who were the Father and Mother of S. John the Baptist, as likewise his Conception, and that of Jesus Christ, declared by the Angel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary, who enquiring of the Angel about this great wonder, is satisfied by him; and giving a visit to her Cousin Elizabeth is confirmed by her Testimony, and in a par∣ticular Song of Praise magnifies the Lord for his wonderfull condescention. After this he relates the Birth and Circumcision of John the Baptist, and the Hymn his Father Zachary sang unto the Lord, Chap. I. Next he declares when, where and of whom Christ was Born; and how his Birth was signified by an Angel to the Shepherds; his Circumci∣sion and presentation in the Temple, where he is embraced by old Simeon, who being over-joy'd breaks forth into a Song of Praise, and Prophecies concerning him, as likewise doth Anna the Prophetess; his growth and advance in wisdom and favour with GOD and Man; and how at the Age of 12 years, he questi∣oned with the Doctors in the Temple, Chap II. When and how John the Baptist, began his Ministry, Baptizing, Preaching, and Exhort∣ing all sorts of Persons, with great freedom of speech, to Repentance, and pointing them to Jesus Christ, how Jesus Christ was Baptized by him, with the recital of his Genealogy, Chap. III. How Christ prepared himself for the discharge of his Office by a miraculous fast of 40 Days, and his victory over the Tempter. He begins to teach in Galilee and at Nazareth, where he had been brought up; he proves, by explaining a passage of the Prophet Isaiah, himself to be the promised Messias; declares that no Prophet is honour'd in his own Countrey, for which his Countrey∣men thrust him out of the City, with design to kill him, but he miraculously escapes their hands. Afterwards he Preacheth at Caper∣naum; and there casts out an unclean Spirit, and delivers S. Peters Mother in Law of a Fever, restoring many other Sick and posses∣sed Persons; and after some retirement in a Desert place, he proceeds to Preach the Kindgom of GOD in the Synagogues of Galilee, Chap. IV. He teacheth the People out of S. Peters Ship, and after a miraculous draught of Fish, he calleth Simon Peter, James and John to the Apostleship, cleanseth a Leper, and healeth one Sick of the Palsie; calls S. Matthew from the receit of Custom, to be an Apostle; defends himself against the accusa∣tion of the Scribes and Pharisees, who charged him for eaing with Publicans and Sinners; Justifies his Disciples for not Fasting, Chap. V. As also for their plucking the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath day; and on the same day restores the Man that had his Hand Withered; he chuseth his 12 Apostles; and declares, wherein true Blessedness consists, and the accursed state, and unhappiness of ungodly Men and Hypocrites; exhorteth to Love our Enemies, and by a similitude sheweth that not the hearers, but doers of the Word of GOD shall be saved, Chap VI. He restores to Health the Servant of a Centurion, who was at the Point of Dying; raiseth from the Dead, the Widows Son at Nain who was carried forth to be Buried; answers the Dis∣ciples of John the Baptist, who were sent to him by their Master, to whom he gives an honourable Testimony, before the Multitudes assembled to hear him; complains of the Stifneckedness of the Jews; and sitting at Table with Simon the Pharisee, he forgives Mary Magdalens Sins, in consideration of her great Love, and hearty Repentance, Chap. VII. He proceeds to Preach the glad tidings of the Kingdom through every City and Vil∣lage, being accompanied by his Apostles, and some devout Women, who ministred to him of their substance; sheweth by the similitude of a Sower, how we ought to hear the Word of GOD; and by that of a Candle, how we ought to Preach it; sheweth who are his Mother and Brethren; Calmeth a great Tempest upon the Sea; casteth a Legion of Devils out of a possessed Person; whereupon leave was given, to enter into the Herd of Swine; healeth a Woman, who had been long afflicted with a Bloody issue, and raiseth the Daughter of Jairus to Life. Chap VIII He sends forth his Apostles to Preach giving them power over Unclean Spirits, and to cure all Diseases; Herod desires to see him, he satisfies the hun∣ger of 5000 Men, with 5 Loaves and 2
Fishes; enquires of his Disciples, what opi∣nion the World had of him; foretels his Sufferings, informs them what are the neces∣sary qualifications of those who would be his Disciples; he affords a glimps of his Glory on the Mount, to 3 of his Disciples; casts out an Evil Spirit from a Youth, which his Dis∣ciples had attempted, but could not; he again foretels his Passion, rebukes his Disciples for their affecting of superiority, and desiring revenge against the Samaritans, and teach∣eth them how they must follow him, Chap. IX. He ordains 70 Disciples, and sends them forth to Preach, instructs them how to behave themselves, menaceth the Cities that had rejected the Gospel; the Disciples return to him with great Joy, for that the Devils were subject unto them, sheweth wherefore they ought chiefly to rejoyce; breaks forth into a Divine Doxology, and pronounceth them happy for seeing and hearing the things which they did; answers a Lawyer, who de∣manded of him, what he must do to obtain eternal Life, and by the Parable of the man fallen amongst Thieves, sheweth who is our Neighbour; he is entertained by 2 Sisters Mary and Martha, of whom he commends the one, and reproves the other, Chap. X. He teacheth his Disciples to Pray, and by the similitude of an importunate friend, and the Love of a Father to his Children, assures them of being heard; he proves from the Parable of a strong Man Armed, that he did not cast out Devils by Belzebub; declares that the Queen of Ethiopia, and the Ninevites, shall rise in Judgment against those, who reject the Gospel; censures the Scribes and Pharisees for their Hyprocrisy and Persecuting of Gods Messengers, and threatens them with heavy Punishments, Chap. XI. He exhorteth his Disciples boldly to Preach the Gospel, not fearing the worst their Persecutors can do, which is to Kill their Bodies; refuseth to con∣cern himself about dividing the inheritance between 2 Brothers, and by the Parable of a Rich Man, who had heaped up Riches, with∣out the least care taken of his Soul; warneth the People to take heed of Covetousness, and of being over sollicitous about the necessaries of Life, and exhorts them before and above all things to seek the Kingdom of Heaven, which once obtained would procure them all things; exhorteth to liberal acts of Cha∣rity, to Prayer, to watchfulness, and to be always in a readiness to open to him, because he will come unexpectedly; foretels the Divisions that shall arise by occasion of the Gospel, and warneth all to make use of the present time of grace, for reconciliation with their Adversary, lest in case of neglect they be left to the severe Justice of GOD, Chap. XII. Upon occasion of some sad events, he urgeth Repentance and amendment of Life; as likewise by the Parable of a Barren Fig-tree, he restoreth a crooked Woman, who had been bowed together for the space of 18 years; describes the wonderful virtue, and encrease of the Kingdom of GOD, by the similitude of a grain of Mustardseed, and of Leaven; exhorts to enter in at the strait gate, threatens Hypocrites with their being shut out of Heaven, and cast into Hell; re∣proves Jerusalem for her Stifnecked impeni∣tence, and foretells her destruction, Chap. XIII. He healeth one sick of the Dropsy on the Sab∣bath, and justifies his so doing; exhorteth to Humility, and to feast the Poor; compares the Kingdom of GOD to a great Supper, to which many of the invited Guests refuse to come; teacheth his Disciples to follow him, bearing their Cross, to consider seriously with themselves what true Christianity▪ will cost them, even the total renouncing and forsak∣ing of all things, Chap. XIV. By the Pa∣rable of the lost Sheep, and Groat, he repre∣sents the joy that is in Heaven for the re∣turn of Penitent Sinners; and by that of the Prodigal Son, sets forth the great kindness, compassion and Love, wherewith GOD em∣braceth those who by true Repentance turn unto him, Chap. XV. By the Parable of the Unjust Steward, he exhorts men to make themselves friends of the Mammon of un∣righteousness, by employing it in Alms-Deeds and acts of Charity; sheweth the impossibi∣lity of serving GOD and Covetousness; the unchangeableness of the Law, and the un∣lawfulness of Divorce. By the Parable of the Rich Voluptuary, and Lazarus the Beg∣gar, he lively represents the different rewards, that await Voluptuous Luxury, and resigned self-denial, after this life is ended, Chap XVI. He sheweth with how great care we ought to avoid the occasion of offences, and how ready to forgive one another; sets forth the Divine Power of Faith, and that after we have done all that is commanded us, we are to own our selves unprofitable Servants; he healeth 10 Lepers, teacheth that the King∣dom of GOD is not to be lookt for abroad,
but within us; and declares the signs of his coming to Judgment, Chap. XVII. By the Parable of the unjust Judge, and the impor∣tunate Widow, he shews the wonderful efficacy of incessant earnest Prayer; and by that of the Pharisee and Publican who went up to the Temple to Pray; the danger of Spiritual Pride, and the good of Humility and self abase∣ment, which above all outward Religious per∣formances, recommends and makes us accep∣table to GOD; upon occasion of little Chil∣dren being brought to him, he teacheth the necessity of becoming like them, if ever we would enter into the Kingdom of GOD; He answers the Rich Man's question, who de∣manded of him, what he must do to inherit Eternal Life; shews how prejudicial Riches are to the obtaining of Salvation, and de∣clares the reward of those that forsake all for his sake; foresheweth his Sufferings, Death and Resurrection, and restoreth a blind Man to Sight, Chap. XVIII. He converteth Zac∣cheus the Publican; by the similitude of the Talents, he teacheth to make good use of the Grace of GOD; rideth in Royal Triumph in∣to Jerusalem, weeps over the City, and drives the traffikers out of the Temple, Chap. XIX. He stoppeth the Mouths of the chief Priests and Scribes, by asking them whence the Baptism of John was; by the Parable of the Vineyard let out to Husband-Men, he re∣presents to them, their horrid wickedness and ingratitude; answers their ensnaring question, whether it were lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar; proves the Resurrection of the Dead against the Sadducees, and shews that Christ was not only to be the Son of David, but also his Lord; he warneth his Disciples to beware of the Scribes, Chap. XX He pre∣fers the poor Widows two Mites, before all the Offerings of the Rich; foretels the total destruction of the Temple, the City of Jeru∣salem; sheweth the foregoing signs of it, and of his coming to Judgment, and presseth to watchfulness and Prayer, Chap. XXI. The chief Priests and Scribes conspire against Christ; Judas treats with them about betray∣ing him into their Hands; he Eats the Passe∣over with his Disciples, and instead thereof institutes and celebrates his Supper; foretel∣leth Judas his Treason; exhorteth his Apostles from ambitious affectation of superiority, by his own Example, who tho' he was Lord of all, yet behaved himself as a Servant; he promiseth them the Glory of being Co-part∣ners with him in his Kingdom; foretells S. Pe∣ter's fall, but with the comfortable assurance that his Faith should not fail; he Prayeth in the Garden on the Mount of Olives, and being in a dreadful Agony, sweats drops of Blood; Judas betrays him with a Kiss; he is seized by a band of armed men, healeth Malchu's Ear; he is brought to the High-Priest's Hall, where S. Peter denies him thrice; is beaten, mocked and abused by the Souldiers; and owning himself, before the Councel of the Jews, to be the Son of GOD, is judged worthy of Death, Chap. XXII. He is brought before Pilate the Governour, who having examined him, declares, he finds no fault in him; Pilate sends him to Herod, who with his Officers doth abuse and deride him, and having caused a Rich Robe to he put upon him, sends him back to Pilate; who endeavours to perswade the Jew to desire his releasement; but they obstinately preferring Barabbas a Mur∣therer to the Saviour of the World, Pilate pas∣seth Sentence upon him, and delivers him to be Crucified; he is led to Execution, bearing his Cross, with the assistance of Simon the Cyrenian; and on his way, tells the Women of Jerusalem that wept over him, the extream calamities that were hasting upon them; he is Crucified between two Robbers, and abused, mocked and derided by the Jews and Souldiers, and by one of the Robbers Crucified with him; but his companion reproved him, and applying himself to Jesus for Mercy, receives the promise of being that day with him in Paradise; after a supernatural Eclipse at Full Moon and several other preceding Prodigies, he gives up the Ghost, and is buried by Joseph of Arimathea, Chap. XXIII His Resurrection is declared by two Angels, to the Women, who on the 3d day in the Morning were come to the Sepulcher to Embalm him, who report the same to the Disciples; he appears to the 2 Disciples going to Emmaus, and is made known to them in the breaking of Bread; he afterwards ap∣pears to the Apostles, reproving their unbe∣lief; and to rid them of their doubtful fears; bids them handle him, shewing them the Wounds in his Hands and Feet; and to con∣firm them further, that they were not mista∣ken, he calls for Meat, and Eats with them; he opens the understanding of the Scriptures unto them; and promiseth the gift of the Holy Ghost, in expectation of which he char∣geth them to tarry at Jerusalem, and having blessed them, he in their presence ascends up into Heaven.
The Contents of the Acts of the Apostles (Written by S. Luke.) LIke as the Evangelists in their Books re∣late the Life, Sufferings, Death, Re∣surrection and Ascension of our Saviour Jesus Christ; so this Book represents to us, how his Apostles, after his assumption into Glory, pro∣pagated his Gospel throughout the World, and assembled the Christian Church composed of Jews and Gentiles; and more particularly we find an account here of what S. Peter and S. Paul, the chief of the Apostles, have contributed towards this great work. S. Luke therefore, the Penman of this Book, after a short Preface declares when and how Jesus Christ ascended into Heaven; and how Mat∣thias was chosen by Lot, to supply the place of the Traitor Judas, who hang'd himself, Chap. I. Next relates how the Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles, in the appear∣ance of Cloven Tongues, like as of Fire, with the sound of a mighty rushing Wind, whereupon they were all fill'd with the Spirit, and began to speak with other Tongues, which being opprobriously reflected upon by some, as supposing them to be Drunk, S Peter cou∣rageously disproves, shewing that what had happened, was nothing else but a fulfilling of Prophecy; and from several passages of the Psalms, convincingly proves that the Messiah was to rise from the Dead, and ascend into Heaven; and how by this discourse of his, about 3000 Persons were converted and Baptized. Moreover S. Luke sets forth the holy qualifications, and happy condition of these first Members of the New born Christian Church, Chap. II. How S. Peter and S John restore a Cripple born, who sate begging at a Gate of the Temple, to the perfect use of his Limbs; whereupon the People running toge∣ther to see this Miracle, S. Peter declares, that this wonderful cure was wrought by the sole Virtue and Power of Jesus Christ, whom they had wickedly put to Death, and exhorts them to repent and believe in him, Chap. III. That hereupon the chief Priests and Sadducees, cause S. Peter and S. John to be seized, and to be brought before the Council, where S. Peter boldly justifies what they had done; the Council, tho' astonish'd at their undaunt∣edness, charge them to preach no more in the name of Jesus Christ, which they absolutely refuse▪ declaring to their Faces, that it was safer for them to obey GOD than Men. The Church betake themselves to Prayer, which is answered with a further effusion of the Holy Ghost; the glorious state of the Primitive Apostolick Church described, by their unbounded Love and Charity, Chap. IV. Ananias and Sapphira his Wife, being for their Covetousness, Hypocrisie and lying to the Holy Ghost, struck down by sudden Death, upon the sentence pronounced by S Peter, great fear comes upon all that saw and heard this terrible Judgment; the Apostles continu∣ing to work many Miracles, are again impri∣soned by order of the High-Priest; but an Angel delivering them thence, and command∣ing them to Preach openly, they accordingly repair to the Temple, and teach the People; which being told the High-Priest, they are brought before the Council, where they bold∣ly and powerfully preach Christ, at which their Enemies are so enrag'd, that they take Counsel to kill them; but being dissuaded by Gamaliel, they are beaten, for which they glorifie GOD; and notwithstanding the strict charge given them to the contrary, they daily Preach Christ both in the Temple and private Houses, Chap V. The Apostles to ease them∣selves, whose whole time was consecrated to the Preaching of the Word, choose 7 Dea∣cons to provide for the Poor; S. Stephen being one of these, a man full of Faith and of the Holy Ghost, works great Wonders and Miracles, confounding those who undertook to dispute with him; whereupon they being enraged, drag him before the Council, and suborn false witnesses against him, who accuse him, of Blasphemy against the Law and the Tem∣ple, Chap. VI. S Stephen answers to the accusation sworn against him, giving a sum∣mary account of the History of the old Testament, from Abraham to Solomon, and shewing that the whole of it, pointed to, and testified of Christ; and concludes with sharp∣ly reproaching them for their Rebellion and Stiffneckedness, and their murdering of Christ the just one, foretold by the Prophets, and expected by all their Forefathers; whereup∣on they Stone him to Death, whilst he com∣mending his Soul to Jesus, prayeth for them, Chap. VII. A great persecution being stirr'd up against the Church of Jerusalem, is the
cause of the scattering of the Saints through∣out the Countries thereabout; amongst whom S. Philip coming to Samaria, preacheth the Gospel there, confirming his Doctrin with many Miracles, by which means many are converted and baptized; the Apostles at Jerusalem, having understood that Samaria had received the word of GOD, sent thither S. Peter and S. John, who being come, by their laying on of hands, bestow upon Belie∣vers the gift of the Holy Ghost; Simon the Sorcerer, who himself was baptized, seeing this, offers a summ of Money to S. Peter, to have the power of conferring the Holy Ghost bestowed upon him; but Peter sharply re∣proving his Hypocrisie, exhorts him to Re∣pentance; the Eunuch of Candaces, Queen of Ethiopia, is converted and baptized by S. Phi∣lip, Chap. VIII. Saul breathing out threat∣nings, and persecution against the Church, is converted by a glorious Vision from Heaven, upon his way to Damascus, which strikes him Blind, and so continues 3 days, after which he is baptized by Ananias, and called to be an Apostle of Christ; He preacheth the Go∣spel at Damascus, where the Jews lay wait for him, to kill him, but he escapes their hands, being let down the Wall in a Basket; the peace and flourishing condition of the Church; St. Peter at Lydda, heals Aeneas of the Palsie, and at Joppa raiseth Tabitha from Death to Life, Chap. IX. S. Peter being Divinely taught and confirmed by a Vision, not to call any thing that GOD hath Sancti∣fied, common or unclean, is sent for by Cor∣nelius a Heathen Centurion, at the command of an Angel, and entring his House is glad∣ly received by him, and by an excellent Ser∣mon, converts him and his to the Faith of Jesus Christ, Chap. X. Which action of S. Peter's being ill interpreted by some, he sa∣tisfies them, by relating the whole matter to them. By means of the dispersed Members of the Church at Jerusalem, the Gospel is spread into Phaenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, to which last place Barnabas is sent to confirm the Be∣lievers, who are there first called Christians; Agabus foretels the Famine which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar; where∣upon the Brethren resolve to send a Supply to the poor Believers in Judea, by the hands of Barnabas and Saul, Chap. XI. Herod Agrippa causeth S. James, the Brother of S. John to be Beheaded; and seeing that it pleased the Jews, proceeds to cast S. Peter in∣to Prison, with intent to bring him forth thence soon after, to Execution; but he is delivered thence by an Angel, at the instant Prayers of the Church; Herod commands the Souldiers, to whom he had delivered S. Peter, to be put to Death; and afterwards making an Oration to the People, with great Pomp and Ostentation, he is struck by an Angel, for taking to himself the Honour due to GOD, and dieth miserably, being eaten of Worms, Chap. XII. S. Paul and S. Barnabas are chosen by the Holy Ghost, to Preach the Go∣spel to the Gentiles, who coming to Cyprus, Preach the Word of GOD in a Synagogue of the Jews at Salamis; S. Paul sharply rebukes Elymas the Sorcerer, and strikes him with Blindness, whereupon Sergius Paulus the Proconsul is converted to the Faith; S. Paul at Antioch of Pisidia, in an excellent Sermon Preaching Christ, many of the Gentiles are converted to the Faith; but the Jews gainsay and Blaspheme, and having stirred up some Honourable Women, and chief Men of the City, against S. Paul and S. Barnabas, they are Banished thence, Chap. XIII. S. Paul and S. Barnabas, having Preached at Iconi∣um, upon some disturbance arising there, came to Lystra, where S. Paul having restored a Cripple from his Mother's Womb, the Inhabi∣tants prepare to offer Sacrifice to him and S▪ Barnabas supposing them to be GODS; yet soon after being stirr'd up by the Jews, they Stone S. Paul, and drag him out of the City, supposing he had been dead; but he arising enters into the City, and the next day goes with S. Barnabas to Derbe, and from thence passing through divers Churches, they confirm the Disciples in the Faith, and returning to Antioch, report what GOD had done by them, Chap. XIV. Some that came from Judea, teaching that the Ceremonial Law ought to be kept, the question is submitted to the de∣termination of the Apostles and Elders at Je∣rusalem; to which purpose S. Paul, and S. Bar∣nabas with some others are sent thither, who having communicated what they were char∣ged with, a Synod of the Apostles and Elders is called, before whom after that S. Peter, S. Paul and S. Barnabas, had declared what they had to say to the point, S. James pro∣pounds his Judgment, which being approved by all, it is thought fit to send their determi∣nation in a circular Letter to Antioch, and the other Churches by the hands of S. Paul, S. Barnabas, S. Jude and Silas: S. Paul
and S. Barnabas fall at Variance and part asunder, Chap. XV. S. Paul because of the Jews circumciseth Timothy; having past through divers Cities confirming the Churches which encreased daily, he comes to Troas, where by a Vision he is called to Macedonia; being arrived at Philippi, he converts Lydia, and casteth out a Spirit of Divination from a Servant, whose Masters inciting the people against S. Paul and Silas, they are whipt and cast into Prison; but at Midnight as they prayed and praised GGD, the Prison doors are opened by a great Earthquake; whereupon the Jaylor is converted and baptized, and they are honourably set at Liberty, Chap XVI. From thence they come to Thessalonica, where they preach and convert some; but the Jews stirring up the Multitude against them, they depart thence and come to Berea, whose In∣habitants having heard S. Paul preach, con∣fer his Doctrin with the Scriptures; S. Paul comes to Athens where falling into dispute with some Philosophers, and being brought by them to Areopagus, he preacheth the true GOD to them, and his Son Jesus Christ; whereby several are converted to the Faith, and amongst the rest Dyonisius the Areopa∣gite and Damaris, Chap. XVII. S. Paul▪ coming to Corinth, finds there Aquila and Priscilla, and Preaching in the Synagogue ofthe Jews, they raise persecution against him, and accuse him before Gallio. He saileth into Syria, and from thence goes to Ephesus, Ce∣sarea, and Antioch, and passing through Ga∣latia and Phrygia, he strengthens and con∣firms the Churches: Apollos Preacheth Christ with great Power and Efficacy, Chap. XVIII. S. Paul being at Ephesus, confers the Holy Ghost, by the laying on of his hands; teach∣eth a whole years there in the School of one Tyrannus, and works many Miracles. The Jewish Exorcists going about to cast out an Evil Spirit, by adjuring him in the name of the LORD Jesus, are sore wounded and bea∣ten by the possessed Party; the new converted Disciples burn their Books of Magick; Deme∣trius out of Covetousness, raiseth a great Up∣roar against S. Paul, which is appeased by the prudence of the Town-Clerk, Chap. XIX. S. Paul accompanied by some of the Disciples, comes to Troas, where Preaching till Mid∣night, a young Man named Eutychus, falls down dead out of a Window, whom he raiseth to Life again; at Miletus he calleth the El∣ders together, telleth them what would be∣fall himself, recommends the care of GOD's Flock with great earnestness unto them, warning them of the false Teachers, that af∣ter his departure, would enter in amongst them, Chap. XX. From thence passing through Cos, Rhodes, and Patara, he comes to Tyrus, and from thence to Ptolemais, and so to Cesarea, where the Prophet Agabus fore∣tells his being bound at Jerusalem, where∣upon the Disciples entreat him not to go up to Jerusalem; but S. Paul professing his readi∣ness, not only to be bound, but to die there for the name of the LORD Jesus, they desist; he comes to Jerusalem, where being perswa∣ded to purifie himself, with four others that had a vow on them, he is apprehended in the Temple by the Jews, who being about to kill him, he is rescued by the chief Captain, and permitted to speak for himself before the People, Chap. XXI. In which Apology he gives an account of his Life and Actions, and particularly of his Conversion, and Call to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, at the men∣tioning of which, the enraged Jews cry out against him, whereupon the Captain would have scourged him, but claiming the Privi∣ledge of a Roman, he escapeth: Afterwards the Captain having summon'd the Chief Priests and Counsel to come to the Castle, he sets Paul before them, Chap. XXII. S. Paul begin∣ning to plead his own cause, Ananias com∣mands him to be struck on the Face, for which he sharply rebukes him, not knowing him to be the High-Priest; and finding that the assembly was compos'd of Sadducees and Pharisees, declares himself to be accused for holding the Resurrection of the Dead; by which means a dissension arising amongst his Accusers, he is by the Captain delivered out of their hands. The Conspiracy of some Jews to kill S. Paul, being discovered to the Cap∣tain, he sends him by Night under a good Convoy to Cesarea, to the Governour Felix, Chap. XXIII. S. Paul being accused by Tertullus the Oratr, (in the Name of the High-Priest and Elders of the Jews,) of Se∣dition and Profanation of the Temple, shews the falshood of their Accusation, by decla∣ring what had happen'd, and his quiet and inoffensive behaviour at Jerusalem; Felix re∣mits the further hearing of him, till the com∣ing of Lysias the Chief Captain: S. Paul Preaching Christ before the Governour Felix and his Wife, makes him tremble; who two years after going out of his Government, to
please the Jews, leaves St. Paul a Prisoner, Chap. XXIV. Festus being come to Jerusa∣lem, is desired by the Jews, to send S. Paul thither to be judged, which he refuseth, and orders them that had any thing against him, to come down to Cesarea, and accuse him there; which being done, S. Paul answers for himself; but Festus to pleasure the Jews, seeming inclin'd to send him to Jerusalem, he appeals to Caesar; King Agrippa, and Ber∣nice desiring to see and hear S. Paul, he is brought before them, Chap. XXV. Where, by way of Apology, he gives an account of his Life, how first he was a Persecutor of the Church, and how by a Miracle he was after∣ward converted to the Faith of Jesus Christ, and called to be an Apostle; and that the reason why the Jews so mortally hated him, was his indefatigable Preaching of that Faith; Festus hearing him discourse at this rate, char∣geth him with Madness; but Agrippa owns himself almost perswaded by him to be a Christian, and declares he might have been released, in case he had not appealed unto Caesar, Chap. XXVI. S. Paul with some other Prisoners, being delivered into the hand of Julius a Centurion, in order to their be∣ing conveighed to Rome, they are embarked on a Vessel of Adramyttium, whence they come to Sidon, and from thence Sailing by Cyprus came to Myra, a City of Lycia, where entring into a Ship of Alexandria, they Sail by Guidus and Crete, till they came to a place called the Fair-Haven, where S. Paul adviseth them to Winter; but the Centurion giving more heed to the Master of the Ship, than to S. Paul, they resolve to prosecute their course, as accordingly they did, passing by Crete; but a terrible Storm arising, they are forced to let the Vessel drive, and to lighten the Ship; S. Paul in the mean time being told by an Angel, that none of all the persons that were in the Vessel should be left, exhorts them to be of good Courage: The Mariners thinking to make their escape in the Boat, are hindred by S. Paul's advice to the Centurion not to suffer it; After hav∣ing refresht themselves with meat, they dis∣cover Land, and running the Ship aground, they are Shipwreckt; whereupon the Souldi∣ers advise to kill the Prisoners, but the Cen∣turion willing to save S. Paul, would not suf∣fer it; and so according to S. Paul's word, all came safe to Land, Chap. XXVII. Be∣ing thus escaped to the Isle of Maltha, they are very kindly received by the Inhabitants; a Viper fastning upon S. Paul's hand, he shakes it off without hurt, which made the Inhabitants think him to be a GOD; He hea∣leth the Father of Publius, of a Fever, and Bloody-Flux, with several other Sick persons, that were brought to him from several parts of the Island; and after 3 Months stay there, they Sail for Italy, and being arrived at Rome, S. Paul is delivered to the Captain of the Guard, and permitted to dwell by himself, with a Souldier that kept him; he calls the chief of the Jews together, and declares to them the cause of his Imprisonment, Preach∣ing unto them the Gospel of Christ; where∣upon when some of them believed, and others not, he openly declares to them that the Sal∣vation of GOD, would pass over from them to the Gentiles; and continues 2 whole years in his own hired House, Preaching the Gospel of the LORD Jesus Christ, with boldness un∣to all that came to him. The LIFE of S. JOHN the Evangelist. ST. John was of the Town of Bethsaida, the Son of Zebedee, and Brother of St. James termed the Major. He was called very young, and in the State of Caelibacy▪ to the Apostle∣ship, and ever kept himself in it; and for this reason saith St. Jerom, he was the beloved Disciple, and one of the 3 partakers in the most intimate passages of our Saviours Life; that he lay with his head in our Saviours Bosom at the last Supper, and was the person to whom our LORD committed the care and maintenance of his Mother the Blessed Virgin; and she on the other side, was advised to con∣sider him as her Son; upon which he took her to his House, after the Death of her Husband Joseph, and gave her all the accommodation his condition afforded; and well she might be committed to his charge, rather than to any of the rest, as being of most ability; for it is positively delivered by Nicephorus, that he sold an Estate in Galilee, left him by his Father, and with the Mony purchast a fair House in Jerusalem, of Annas the High-Priest, and this according to probability was the rea∣son
that procured him that Interest he had in the High Priests Court, so that he was able to introduce Peter into the great Hall, or place of Judicature. After our Saviours Resurrection, he was the first that gave Peter notice of his appear∣ing; he continued at his House at Jerusalem till the Death of the Blessed Virgin, which (as Eusebius saith) was in the year of our LORD 48. And some time after, he took his Journey into Asia, as falling to his Lot, and Founded the Churches of Smirna, Thyatira, Pergamus, Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodi∣cea, &c. But is said to have had his con∣stant residence at Ephesus, of which he was Bishop, althô St. Paul had before planted a Church, and ordained Timothy Bishop there∣of. 'Tis thought, that after St. John had setled affairs in Asia Minor; he went more Eastwards and preached in Parthia▪ to which people as 'tis said his first Epistle was ancient∣ly directed; and we are informed from the Travels of the Jesuits, that the Bassirae, a people in India, have a constant tradition amongst them, that the Christian Faith was there preached by St. John. Many years being thus spent, at length came the Persecution of Domitian, in which we may be sure so eminent a Minister of the Gospel as St. John, could not escape; for he was sent bound to Rome by command of the Proconsul of Asia, where being cast into a Caldron of Salding Oyl all in a flame, he had the same miraculous deliverance, as the 3 Hebrew Children from the Fiery Furnace; but this so great a Miracle, having no effect upon the obdurate heart of this stupid Empe∣rour, he was banisht into the Isle of Patmos, where towards the latter end of Domitian's Reign, (saith Irenaeus) he wrote his Apocalyps, and afterwards by an edict of Coccius Nerva, who succeeded Domitian, he was amongst many others recalled from Banishment, upon which he returned to Asia, and fixt his Seat again at Ephesus; and Timothy the former Bishop being Martyr'd for preaching against the Lewdness and Idolatry of those Heathen-Feasts, then in use amongst them, he took upon him (with the assistance of others) the Government or Bishoprick of that great Dio∣cess, and erected Oratories or Churches; and here at the request of the Asian Bishops, he wrote his Gospel, being about the year of our LORD 96. St. Jerom relates the manner of his Engage∣ment, to write his Gospel; for Cerinthus and Ebion publishing their Heresie, that Jesus Christ was but a Man, &c. almost all the Bishops of Asia, and several others deputed by the Churches, obliged St. John thereunto, and to speak more highly of our Saviour, than the other 3 Evangelists had done, and particularly to maintain his Divinity. S. John not able to withstand the Entreaties of so many Bishops, at length yielded to their re∣quest, provided they would all set apart some time to Fast and Pray for the assistance of Heaven; after which being full of GOD, he establisht the Divinity of our Saviour in the first words of his Gospel. St. Austin makes very edifying remarks on St. John's Gospel; He says, St John was particularly chosen to set forth the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and therefore the other Evangelists conversing with our Saviour, as a man, do relate the actions of his Moral Life, whereas St John raises himself as an Eagle, and sores above the Clouds of human weakness, and disco∣vers in the Bosom of the Father the Word incarnate, GOD blessed for ever, notwithstand∣ing the brightness of his Glory. For he ap∣plies himself more than the rest to describe his excellent Discourses, and especially those that are the most Divine: And whereas the other Evangelists do more particularly de∣scribe the actions of our Saviour, which are an admirable model for ours; St. John on the contrary, intending to supply what was want∣ing in the others, rather sets upon relating the Spiritual Truths, which denote the My∣stery of the Trinity, the equality of the Per∣sons, and the Glory of the Life to come; He doth effectually recommend to us the love of our Brethren, and that representing prin∣cipally Jesus Christ as GOD, and with that humility washing his Disciples Feet, to the end we might learn to grow the more in hu∣mility, by how much we advance in the know∣ledge of the sublimest Mysteries. St. John lived till the beginning of Trajan's Reign, according to the most received ac∣count, being aged about 98 years, though Dorothaeus saith 120, and Chrysostom in ef∣fect the same, affirming that he was 100 years old, when he wrote his Gospel, and lived 20 years after. Theophylact and others will have it, that de died a Martyr, grounding their opinion upon those words of our Saviour, that he should drink of the same Cup, and be bap∣tized with the same Baptism wherewith he
was Baptized. Others maintain a quite con∣trary Opinion, viz. That he never Died, as particularly Hippolytus, Scholar to Clemens Alexandrinus; and more expresly Ephrem Pa∣triarch of Antioch mentions 3 undying Per∣sons, answerable to the 3 several dispensati∣ons of the World, Enoch before the Law, Eli∣as under the Law, and St. John under the Gospel; and so far did this opinion of his not dying prevail, that in St. Austins time it went for currant, that he lay sleeping in the Grave; and Nicephorus relates the story at large, which gave authority to that belief; St. John, saith he, foreseeing his Translation, took the Presbyters and Ministers of the Church of Ephesus, with others of the Faithful, and went with them to a Coemetery, a little way out of the City, whither he was wont to re∣tire to his Devotion; and after he had Pray∣ed a while with them, and instructed them in the more secret Mysteries of Theology, he ordered a Grave to be digged, and then tak∣ing his leave of them, and giving them his Benediction, he went down into it in sight of them, charging them to put on the Grave-stone, and to fasten it, and the next day to come and open it, which accordingly they did, and found nothing but the Grave-Cloths left behind. Besides his Evangelist▪ and Apocalyps, as has been already taken notice of; He wrote 3 Epistles, viz. his Catholick Epistle, that is directed to all persons in general, although St. Austin affirms it anciently inscrib'd to the Parthians: The 2d. was to a Lady of great Honour and Quality, converted to the Faith, stil'd the Elect Lady; And the 3d. was to Caius a Charitable and Hospitable entertai∣ner of all indigent Christians. The Contents of the Gospel according to S. JOHN. THis Gospel is of the same tenor with the foregoing Gospels of St. Matthew, St. Mark, and St. Luke; save only that St. John sets down some Discourses and Prayers of Jesus Christ, and relates some of his Miracles, which are not mentioned by any of the other Evangelists; by which means, a Supplement is made, of what was wanting to make the Sacred History of our Saviour full and com∣pleat. The Ecclesiastical Historians tell us, that St John wrote this Gospel, after those of the other Evangelists, at the entreaty of the Churches of Asia, amongst which the impious Heresies of Ebion and Cerinthus began to spread, who by their Errors endeavoured to overthrow the Doctrin of the Eternal God∣head of JesusChrist; wherefore also he be∣gins this Gospel, with the evident assertion and confirmation of this great and Capital Truth, in a sublime and mysterious Declara∣tion of his EternalGeneration, whereas the other Evangelists begin theirs with his Con∣ception and Temporal Nativity▪ For which reason, viz because of his high and soaring Flight, he has been called by the antients the Flying-Eagle. More particularly he describes, according to the general Method of the other Evange∣lists, the Person and Office of our Saviour. As to his Person, he first represents his Divine Nature, and demonstrates the same by his Works; and afterwards gives an account of his Human Nature also. As to his Office, he first relates the passages which concern his Doctoral or Prophetical Function; how John the Baptist prepar'd the way for him, publick∣ly testifying, that not he, but Jesus the Lamb of GOD, was the promised Messias; by which Testimony of his, Andrew first, and after∣wards Simon Peter his Brother, with Philip and Nathaniel, were induc'd to believe in Je∣sus Christ, Chap. I. How he wrought his first Miracle, by changing Water into Wine, at a MarriageFeast in Cana of Galilee; and how being come to Jerusalem, at the Feast of Passover, he purged the Temple of Buyers and Sellers, and justified his Power and Au∣thority for so doing; many believe in him be∣cause of his Miracles; but he would not trust himself with them; because he knew what was in Man, Chap. II. He instructs Nico∣demus the Pharisee, in the chief points of Religion▪ as concerning the necessity and na∣ture of Spiritual Regeneration, or the New-Birth of Man; his own exaltation on the Cross, prefigured by the lifting up of the Brazen Serpent, concerning the necessity and usefulness of Faith in his Name, and the great Love of GOD in giving him for the Salvati∣on of the World. John the Baptist baptizing in Enon, testifies again to the Jews, that not he but Jesus was the true Messias, in whom all that desire to be saved, must believe, Chap. III. Jesus Christ being come into Galilee
near to Sichar, falls into discourse with the Samaritan Woman, (who was come forth to draw Water) concerning the Water of Life, which he bestows upon those that believe in him, as also concerning the place and right way of Divine Worship, by which means both she and many other Samaritans believe in him; upon occasion of his Disciples desiring him to Eat, he declares that his Meat was, to do the Will of him that sent him; He is well received by the Galileans, because of the Miracles they had seen wrought by him; and healeth the Son of a Nobleman at Capernaum, Chap. IV. He cureth an Impotent Man on the Sabbath-day, (that had been Diseased 38 years) in the City of Jerusalem, at the Pool of Bethesda; whence the Jews take occasion to cavil at him, and seek to kill him; against whom he defends himself, proving not only by the Testimony of GOD his Father, of S. John the Baptist, but also by that of his Works, and the Scriptures, that he was the true Son of GOD, Chap V. He feeds 5000 Men with 5 Loaves, walketh upon the Sea; reproves the Multitudes, because they follow∣ed him for the Loaves, exhorting them to labour for the Meat that endures to Eternal Life; even the Bread that comes down from Heaven, whereof the Manna in the Wilder∣ness was a Figure; teacheth that he himself is that Bread, and that they must eat his Flesh and drink his Blood, as ever they desire to be made capable of Eternal Life; which Divine and Spiritual Doctrin of his being too grosly understood by the Capernaites, he explains himself more fully, declaring that his Words were Spirit and Life; and therefore not to be understood in a gross fleshly manner; upon this Discourse of our Saviour, many of his Dis∣ciples leave him, but the 12 by the Mouth of S. Peter, declare their resolution to continue with him, to whom he declares that one of their Number was a Devil, Chap. VI. Some of his Relations persuading him to go along with them to the Feast of Tabernacles, he con∣sents not▪ but goes up after them; the Mul∣titudes come up to the Feast, discoursing va∣riously of him; he Preacheth to them at the middle and end of that Solemnity, declaring that his Doctrin was not his own, but GOD the Fathers; many believe in him notwith∣standing the Cavils and Contradiction of the Pharisees; he promiseth to give his Holy Spi∣rit, under the name of Living-Waters, to those that believe in him; The Pharisees, are angry with their Officers, who being sent to seize our Saviour, return giving a great cha∣racter of him, and flout at Nicodemus for taking his part, Chap. VII. He delivereth the Woman taken in Adultry, out of the hands of the Scribes and Pharisees, charging her to Sin no more; Preacheth himself to be the Light of the World; that he did not bear wit∣ness of himself, but that the Father who sent him gave witness to him; proves the Jew not to be the true Children of Abraham, but the Children and Instruments of the Devil, whose works they did; declares himself to have been before Abraham; for which saying they take up Stones to stone him, Chap. VIII. He restores a Blind-man born, to his sight, which being signified to the Pharisees, they send for the Man, examine him about the Cure done upon him, and afterward abuse and cast him out of the Synagogue, because he boldly and courageously told them the truth to their Faces; whereupon our Saviour doth more fully manifest himself to him, re∣proaching the Pharisees for their Spiritual Blindness, Chap. IX. He teacheth that all those who do not enter through the Door, into the Sheepfold, are Thieves and Robbers, and not true Shepherds; that he is the true and only Door of the Sheepfold, as also the good Shepherd; sheweth the difference there is between a good Shepherd and an hireling; proves himself to be the good Shepherd by his voluntary layingdown his Life for his Sheep; at the Feast of Dedication, he proves himself to be the true Messia by his Works, for which the Jews take up Stones to stone him; and afterwards endeavouring to seize him, he es∣capes out of their hands, and going beyond Jordan, where John at first baptized, many there believe in him, Chap. X. He raiseth Lazarus of Bethany, who had been Dead 4 days, and was buried, to Life again; where∣upon the chief Priests take councel to put him to Death, fearing that otherwise all the People would believe in him, because of the great Miracles he wrought; Caiaphas the High Priest approves their design, and Pro∣phesieth of his Death; the chief Priests give order for the seizing of him at the Feast, Chap. XI. He is invited to a Supper at Bethany, by Lazarus and his Sisters, where Mary anoints his Feet, wiping them with the hair of her Head; for which she being reproved by Judas▪ Jesus defends and highly commends her; the Jews resolve to put Lazarus to
Death also; Jesus makes his triumphant En∣try into Jerusalem; foretels his Death and Suffering, to his Disciples; prayeth to his Fa∣ther, who answers him with a Voice from Heaven, like that of Thunder; exhorteth the Multitudes to walk in his Light; the Prophecy of the Prophet Isaiah, concerning the hardning of the Jews fulfilled; Many of the chief Rulers believed on him, but did not confess him, for fear of the Pharisees; he ex∣horts his Auditors to believe in him, seeing that he spoke nothing but according to the Commandment he had received from his Fa∣ther, Chap. XII After having celebrated his last Supper with his Disciples, he washeth their Feet▪ exhorting them, from this great Example of his, to Humility and mutual acts of Charity; complains that one of them shall betray him; foretels his approaching Glorifi∣cation, and exhorts them to Charity, which he declares to be the sole Character and Live∣ry of his true Disciples; and forewarneth Pe∣ter of his Denial, Chap. XII. He comforts his Disciples, who were sorrowful with the thought of his suddain departure, by assuring them, that he was going to his Fathers House, to prepare them a place; tells Philip, who desired to see the Father, that he who hath seen him, hath seen the Father; promiseth that whatsoever they shall ask the Father in his Name, shall be granted them; as also that he will send them his Spirit, and be∣queaths his Peace, as a Legacy to them, Chap. XIV. Declares himself to be the true Vine, his Father the Husband-man, and his Dis∣ciples the Branches; exhorting them to bear much Fruit, and to love one another; com∣forts them against the hatred and persecution they should meet with from the World; re∣iterates to them his promise of sending the Holy Ghost, whose Office he describes▪ Chap. XV. He foretels the Evils and Sufferings his Disciples should be expos'd to from the Jews who did not know him nor the Father; comforts them concerning his approaching departure, assuring them, that it would be for their good and profit, because by this means they should be made partakers of the Holy Ghost; and that their Sufferings would not be of any long continuance, but like the pangs of a Woman in Travel, would be chang∣ed into Joy, by the Birth of the true Man-Child; earnestly exhorts them to pray in his Name, assuring them, that the Father will answer all their Prayers, so put up; foretel∣leth their forsaking and deserting of him▪ and teacheth them to look for Peace only in him, not fearing the affliction they meet with in the World, because he hath overcome it, Chap. XVI. After this the Evangelist gives us an instance of his Priestly Office, in an ex∣cellent Prayer he presented to his Father be∣fore his Suffering; in which he prays first for himself that the Father would glorifie him, and afterwards for his Disciples, that he would keep them from the Evil of the World; and lastly, for all those who by their means should come to believe in him, that they may all abide in the Holy Union of the Sacred Trini∣ty, and partake of his Divine Glory, Chap. XVII. The Evangelist describes his Suffer∣ings, as well in the Garden, where Judas be∣trays, and the Souldiers seize him, after that, by a word of his mouth, he had struck them down to the Ground; as in the House of Caiaph the High Priest, where S. Peter denies him thrice, and where he is examined by the High Priest, and in the Judgment-Hall before Pilate the Governour, who having heard first the Jews, and then our Saviour, professeth to find no fault in him, and there∣fore endeavours to deliver him out of their hands, according to the custom the Jews had of having a Criminal releast every Pass∣over; but the People earnestly press him to release Barabbas a Murtherer, and not Jesus, Chap. XVIII. Whereupon Pilate, after that he had been Scourged, and exposed to the in∣sulting Injuries and Mockeries of the Souldi∣ers, seeks again to deliver him; but the chief Priests vehemently crying out to have him Crucified, and telling Pilate that he was not Csar's Friend, if he should let Jesus go, he at last gives Sentence against him, and deli∣vers him to the Souldiers to be Crucified, or∣dering the cause of his Condemnation to be writ, and fixt on the Cross; the Souldiers divide his Garments amongst them, and cast Lots for his Cat or Vesture; Jesus seeing his Mother standing by the Cross; recommends her to S John; and after they had given him Vinegar to drink, he gives up the Ghost, so that finding him dead, his Bones were not broken, as were those of the Criminals Cru∣cified with him; he is Buried by Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus▪ Chap▪ XIX▪ He riseth from the Dead the third day, his Re∣surrection being first signified to Mary Magda∣len by 2 Angels, and immediately after by himself speaking to her: In the Evening of
the same day he manifests himself to his Dis∣ciples; Thomas being absent, who therefore could not believe their report; 8 days after he appears to his Disciples, Thomas being then present, who after he had felt the wound in his Side, believes also, Chap. XX. Jesus manifests himself again to his Disciples, as they were Fishing in the Sea of Tiberias, mak∣ing himself known by the Miraculous draught of Fishes; he Eats with them; earnestly chan∣geth Peter to feed his Lambs and Sheep, and foretells his Death; S. Peter afterwards ask∣ing him, what should become of S. John, re∣ceives a dubious answer; S. John's conclusion of his Evangelical History, Chap. XXI. So that we may perceive that this Gospel is as it were▪ the Soul and Spirit diffused throughout the Body of this History, composed by the other Evangelists. The Contents of the first Epistle general of S. John. IT was never called in question by any Christians, whether this Epistle was writ by S. John the Apostle and Evangelist▪ or no, it being generally and constantly believed to be his. The end and aim of this Epistle, seems to be (according to what he declares himself, Chap. 3. ver. 2, 3.) partly to confirm believers, in the truth of the Doctrin of the Gospel, and partly to exhort them to Godliness, and more particularly to Divine Charity. In the first place, he lays down the indubitable certainty, and unutterable advantages and Prerogatives of the Christian Faith, which advances them to a Supersensual Communion with the Father and the Son; that this Com∣munion is attained by walking in the Light, and that as long as we are found there, the Blood of Jesus Christ purgeth us from all Sin; exhorts us to confess our Sins, to the end we may receive Pardon, and be cleansed from them, Chap. I. He declares that he writes these things that we might not Sin; though at the same time he would have us know, that if we chance to Sin, Christ is our Advocate▪ with the Father; He exhorts all degrees of Christians to keep the great Command of Charity, and earnestly charg∣eth all to beware of loving the World, as being absolutely inconsistent with the Love of the Father; exhorts them to beware of the Antichrists, that were gone forth▪ and to that end to give heed to that anointing, which if faithfully minded, would lead them into all Truth, and preserve them from Error, Chap. II. He represents to them, that being Children of GOD, they ought to live very Holy, avoid all Sin, and above all love one another, not in words only, but in deed, and in truth, Chap. 3. He instructeth them how to try the Spirits, and to distinguish the Spirit of GOD, from the Spirit of An∣tichrist; earnestly presseth to Charity, de∣claring that GOD himself is Love, and that he who loves, dwells in GOD▪ and GOD in him, Chap. IV. He gives several marks and characters of the New Birth, and declares Jesus Christ to be the only Saviour of the World, the true GOD and Eternal Life; and ex∣horteth to beware of Idols, Chap. V. The Contents of the Second Epistle of S. John. THis and the following are no general Epistles, (tho' placed amongst them) as being only writ to private Persons: Some of old have doubted of their Authority, as appears from Eusebius's History Eccles. lib. 3. Chap. XXII. But without sufficient ground, seeing that they agree in matter and stile with the foregoing Epistle, which no body ever doubted of, I. After the Inscription and Sa∣lutation, he exhorts the honourable Matron and her Children▪ (5.) To perseverance in Charity, and the keeping of the Commands of GOD▪ (7) Warneth them against false seducing Spirits, (10) And to entertain no fellowship with them, for fear of partaking of their Sins.
The Contents of the Third Epistle of S. JOHN. THE Apostle after the inscription and Salutation, (3) Commends the Piety of Gaius, to whom he writes this Epistle, (5) And more particularly praiseth him for his Hospitality, in entertaining the Brethren, who for the Gospel sake exposed themselves to Travels in strange Countreys, (6) And exhorts him to continue in the practise of this virtue, (9) Complains of Diotrephes, who ambiti∣ously affecting Superiority, lorded it over the Church, calumniating the Apostle, and nei∣ther receiving the Brethren, nor suffering those that would, (11) Exhorts Gaius not to follow his evil Example, (12) And recom∣mends to him one Demetrius, of whom he gives a good report, (13) Concluding with mutual Salutations. The Contents of the Revelation of John the Divine, or Theologue. THis Book, which is writ in the form of an Epistle, to the Churches of Jesus Christ, is the last of all the Books of the New Testament; and is, as it were, the Seal of all the rest. It was writ by the Apostle S. John, (according to the Testimony of ancient Wri∣ters) about 64 years after the Ascension of our Saviour, towards the end of the Reign of the Emperour Domitian, by whom also, after many Persecutions of the Christians▪ our Apostle was Banished to the Isle of Patmos, where these Revelations were handed to him, for the future instruction and consolation of the Christian Church, according to what he witnesseth himself, Chap. I ver. 9. And tho' some of the Ancients have been of opinion, that S. John wrote his Gospel, at the request of the Churches of Asia, after he was return'd from his Exile; Yet it seems much more probable as well from ver. 2. of Chap▪ I. as from other arguments, that this Book is the last that ever he writ; and both S. John, with regard to the matter therein contained, as well as the whole Christian Church, have thought good, with this Book to conclude and shut up the New Testament, which is also implied by the serious and severe Denunci∣ation against the adding of ought to it, or taking from it, which we find, Chap. XXII. ver. 18, 19. This writing, tho' (being Prophe∣tical and of things to come) it contain many things hard to be understood; yet for all that is full of Divine and saving instructions serving to condemn many Heresies, which began then to spring in the Church, and chiefly to warn and inform the Church of Jesus Christ, as well of the difficulties and Perse∣cutions, which the Devil by his instruments, from that time forward, would stir up against them, and more particularly by Antichrist and his Servants; as of the Punishments and Judgments, which GOD from time to time, would pour forth on his Enemies, and above all at the last day; as likewise of the miraculous deliverances, which from time to time, he would vouchsafe to his Church; and particularly of the Glorious and Trium∣phant issue, she shall at last obtain of all her Labours and Afflictions, by means of her last and Eternal Glorification, in the Heavenly Jerusalem, after the last coming of Jesus Christ to Judgment. This Book of the Revelation may be fitly divided into three parts; The first, of which, is the Preface, contained in the 8 first verses of the first Chapter; The second, contains the recital of many Prophetical Visions, and diverse▪ Pre∣dictions, which were to happen to the Church, from that time forward, to the end of the World, which is continued to the sixth Verse of the last Chapter; The third part from thence to the end, makes up the Conclusion by the closing and sealing of this Book, and together with it the whole New Testament. As to the Predictions which begin at the 9 Verse of the first Chapter, and end with the sixth Verse of the XXII▪ Chapter, they are proposed under several Prophetical declara∣tions and Visions, some of which bear a great resemblance with those we find in the Old Testament, as in Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Zechariah and others: and according as in all times, it hath pleased GOD, to foretel
things to come either in plain terms, or to intimate them by Visions and Dark Re∣presentations, as well thereby to excite our Spirits, to a more exact and profound search∣ing after them, as well as thereby the better to declare the greatness and importance of them; so we find the same Method taken in this Book, and this the rather, because many things therein are foretold concerning the Plagues, that were to come upon the Roman Empire, and some change that were to happen therein, which had they been set down in plain terms, might have put the Emperours upon Persecuting and Harassing of the Church. For which reason also S. Paul 2 Thess Chap. II treating of the same things, empoys a covert way of speaking. Now as for the Visions, we meet with in these Prophecies, they are 7 in number: The first which begins at the 9 Verse, of the first Chapter, and is continued to the end of the third, represents to us Jesus Christ, in his Royal and Sacerdotal Ornaments, walking in the midst of the 7 Golden Candlesticks, that is, the 7 Churches, giving his Orders to write to the 7 Churches of Asia, amongst the which S. John had mostly been conversant, and ex∣presseth the matter and form of these 7 Epistles, addressed to the 7 Churches. The second, Is a Vision of the glory of GOD, sitting upon his Throne, and the Lamb stand∣ing in the midst, surrounded with the 24 Elders, and the 4 living Creatures, full of Eyes before and behind; with the Book Sealed with 7 Seals, which none but the Lamb was worthy to open; and the Apparitions and Prodigies, which happened at the opening of each Seal; which Vision reacheth to the end of the 7 Chapter. The 3 is the Appari∣tion of the 7 Angels with their Trumpets, upon whose Sounding one after another, great Plagues follow: This Vision lasts till the end of the 11th Chapter. The 4th is the Vision of the Woman, clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her Feet, and upon her Head a Crown of 12 Stars, who Travailing to bring forth, is Persecuted by the Dragon, and forc'd to Flee into the Wilderness; and of the 2 Beasts, the one rising out of the Sea, the other coming up out of the Earth, which Perse∣cute the Saints; against which the Lamb on Mount Zion doth oppose himself, accompa∣nied by the 144000 Sealed ones, having his Fathers name written in their Foreheads; all which is contained in the 12th 13th and 14th Chapters. The fifth is the Vision of the Vials and Plagues poured forth on the Throne of the Beast, set down in the 15th and 16th Chapters. The 6th represents the great Whore of Babylon, sitting upon a Scarlet Coloured Beast, full of names of Blasphemies, having 7 Heads and 10 Horns, and the dreadful Judgment of GOD upon her; the Kings, Merchants and Mariners lamenting over her; the Saints Song of Triumph because of her fall; and Jesus Christ at the Head of the Heavenly Armies, engaging and discomfiting the Beast and the false Prophet, with the Kings of the Earth taking their part, com∣prised in the 17th 18th and 19th Chapters. The 7th and last Vision represents the bind∣ing of Satan, and his sealing up in the Bot∣tomless Pit, for 1000 years; the loosing of Satan after the 1000 years are expired, and the end of all things following thereupon▪ by the last Judgment of GOD; after which Death and Hell, are cast into the Lake of Fire, and all that were not found written in the Book of Life; and besides sets forth the New Heaven and the New Earth, with the great City; the New Jerusalem descending out of Heaven from GOD, to be the Eter∣nal glorious Mansion of all the Saints, as is contained in the 20, 21▪ & 22th Chapters. The LIFE of S. PETER. SAint Peter, generally styled the Prince of Apostles, is delivered both by Holy Writ, and the consent of ancient Authors, to have been the Son of Jonah, a Fisherman of Bethsaida in upper Galilee, belonging to the Tribe of Nephthali; commodiously seated on the Banks of the Sea of Tiberias, or Lake of Genesareth, then a small inconsiderable Village inhabited by Fishermen. As for the time of the Birth of this Apostle, tis said to be 3 years before that of the blessed Virgin, which was Anno Mundi 4034. At his Circumcision he received the name of Simon, or Simeon, to which our Saviour added that of Cephas, which signi∣fies a Stone or Rock; and from this last, Peter became his most usual name.
This Apostle, as also his younger Brother Andrew, were from their Childhoods brought up to the Fishing Trade; and these were the 2 first which our Saviour made choice of, to be his Disciples and Followers; tho' accord∣ing to S. Luke, Andrew having the Messia first revealed to him, went immediately with great joy to his Brother, to acquaint him with what had hapned; upon which Peter went with him to Jesus, who presently knew him, and received him. The next that our Saviour received into the number of his Dis∣cples were James and John the Sons of Zebedee, also both Fishermen. And here there occurs to us an observa∣tion, too remarkable to be omitted, viz. the vast difference between the Methods of Divine Providence, and the ways of the World; for whereas the generality of man∣kind looks only upon Pomp, and outward shew; and Pin their Faith upon those of great fame in the World, for Learning and Wisdom; GOD in the Foundation of his Church made use of the meanest, obscurest and illiterate Persons, to confound and put to silence those high Points of Philosophy, so much then noised in the World, and there∣by propagated those Divine Truths, which Human policy was not able to withstand. S. Peter after the Communication with our Lord, for a while returned to his Fish∣ing; but after our Saviours confirming the Doctrin he preached, by such a Miraculous draught of Fish, and had strengthned his staggering Faith, he left all and followed his great Lord and Master, and from that time remained constantly his Follower and Disciple. At this time, Jesus had his chief Residence about Capernaum, whither S. Peter had removed; and here Peters Wives Mo∣ther lying sick of a Fever, was raised to health by our Saviour: Upon Mount Tabor 12 were particularly Pitch'd on to be more immediately attendants on his Person, and to be the constant Witnesses of his Doctrin and Miracles: And these were they that after∣wards were called the Apostles; and not without reason were they so styled, as being the first Persons whom our Saviour appointed as his Messengers, to Preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, and not without the Gift of Mi∣racles, to confirm the World of the Truth of their Doctrin; nor was the number 12 made choice of in vain, as mysteriously an∣swering to the 12 Tribes of Israel; whom he told they should Judge at the general Re∣surrection, sitting on 12 Thrones: Of these 12 Apostles, Peter, James and John, were chosen as a Trumvirate, and admitted into all pri∣vate Councils and Transactions, and Peter is generally put the first. After the Feeding the Multitude with 5 Loaves and 2 Fishes, Peter is only mentioned passing or'e the water, to meet his Master. S. Peter is frequently styl'd by the Fathers the Mouth of the Apo∣stles, and not without reason; for when our Saviour, being forsaken by the Multitude at Capernaum, turned about to his Apostles, and asking them, if they would leave him also? S. Peter in the name of the rest, answered they would not, for that it was he only had the words of Eternal Life; And when in the Journy to Caesarea Philippi, he asked his Disciples what men said of him, and after, what they themselves thought he was? Peter gave this positive answer in the name of the rest, Thou art Christ the Son of the living GOD. Which hearty Declaration how well it was received, appears by this high Eulogy given him in return; Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jonah, Flesh and Blood hath not revealed it to thee, but my Father which is in Heaven; therefore I also say unto thee, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Moreover, I will give unto thee, the Keys of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt bind in Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Peter upon our Saviours Commendations and Words was so Transported with Zeal and Affection for him, that thereby he ran into an Error, which incurr'd his displeasure, no less than before he had received his Applause; for when doubtless out of concernment for his Preservation, he perswaded him to pre∣serve himself, from those Sufferings, he told him he was to undergo, he incurr'd a rebuke that seemed much to lessen the esteem he was lately in, saying to him; Get thee be∣hind me Satan, thou savourest not the things that be of GOD, but of Man. However, it soon appeared that this rebuke was but the chastising Lesson of a gracious Master, who knew the Error he had committed, was but the effect of his imprudent Zeal: For when our Saviour went up to Mount Tabor, (as is supposed to confer with Moses and Elias) Peter was not left out of the Triumvirate of
Apostles; for he with the 2 Sons of Zebedee, which accompanied him, were the only Wit∣nesses and Spectators of his Transfiguration, which was a Type of his future state of Glory▪ And when the Collectors of the Tribute Mony, came to gather their Tribute, Peter is the Person consulted in this Affair; who acquaint∣ing our Saviour therewith, was immediately ordered to go Fish for the Shekel, which was to be paid to the Collecters, which accordingly was done. He is chiefly made mention of in all cases of doubt and controversy, as the most inquisitive to be informed, as in the Question, How oft a Man is obliged to for∣give his Brother for an injury done; and upon the dismission of the Young Man who came partly to ask, what he should do to gain Eternal Life; with this answer, That he should sell his Estate, and give the Mony to the Poor; S. Peter puts in his Quere, What reward they should have, who had forsaken all their worldly concerns to follow Christ? To which he received this satisfactory an∣swer. That ample recompence should be given in this World, and Eternal Life in the other. And now our Saviour foreseeing his appre∣hension and Crucifixion drew on apace, he hastens to celebrate the Passover with his Disciples; whose Feet he wash't, which Peter in modesty would have refused, as not wor∣thy to accept of so great an Honour, for which he met with a Reproof, our Saviour, telling him, That if he wash't him not, he could have no part in him. Whereupon he resigned himself up to his Masters Will, Crying out, Lord, not my Feet only, but also my Hands and Head. After the Last Supper, and the Washing their Feet, he began to dis∣course more plainly to them of his going to Suffer; and when he spoke of leaving them, and going where they could not follow, Peter most particularly shews his resentment, and great zeal to follow him wherever he went, not only to Prison, but even to Death it self; and in the Mount of Olives, whither they went, after the Celebration of the Pass∣over, he persists in his resolute constancy to his Master, saying▪ Though all the rest should forsake and deny him, yet would not he. From the Mount of Olives, our Saviour descended to the Village of Gethsemane, and retiring into the Garden, he desired Peter, James and John, to watch for some time, whilst he suffered that bitter Agony. But see the effects of Human frailty, even in the greatest Saints; for he that but lately had so Zealously exprest himself in his Masters behalf, could not watch an hour with him in his greatest extremity, but fell fast asleep, to∣gether with James and John. However our Lord, considering well the frailties of Human Nature, past over this neglect only with a mild Rebuke, and excuses them saying, The Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak Whilst this and other like Discourses▪ past between our Lord and the 3 Apostles, there was offered a fresh occasion to Peter, to shew his duty and concernment for his Master; for the hour being come, a Band of Souldiers was sent by the High Priest, to Seize our Saviour. Here Peter shewed his rather Manlike than Apostolick virtue, for drawing his Sword in his Defence, he Smote Malchus the High Priests Servant, and cut off his Ear. This attempt might in the Eye of the World▪ have gained him great Reputation, but it met with a check suitable to the rashness of it; especially since he must needs have been better instructed, by his long con∣verse with the Son of GOD, than to be igno∣rant of these Divine Mysteries, and how the Scriptures were to be fulfilled, for the Re∣demption of Mankind: Wherefore he was commanded as an offender, to put up his Sword, with this severe Reprimand, that, They who use the Sword, should perish by it. And now we come to a passage, which will teach us by his Example, how subject the best Men are to failings, and how vain a thing it is, for any to put confidence in his own strength. He that had made so many Asseverations of his Constancy, and never to forsake him, nor denie him, whoever did; not only slunk away with the rest of the Disciples, when he was apprehended by his Enemies; but in the High Priests Hall, when he was tax'd by se∣veral Persons, for being one of his Disciples, which he utterly denied, and with Oaths and Imprecations, renounced all knowledg of him. This was his last, and most dangerous fall from those his former Evidences of Grace and Piety, and of which our Saviour gave him warning, but a little before his Apprehen∣sion, viz. That before the Cock crow'd twice, he should denie him thrice: But thro' Gods mercy, he soon was brought to a sense of this dangerou failing, and by true, and timely Repentance recovered his former In∣tegrity; for as soon as he heard the second
Crowing of the Cock, he went out, and wept bitterly. In fine, his fall seems to have proved Antaeus like, his greater rise, and after all his failings was the principal Assertor of the Christian Faith, and ready to suffer for it on all occasions. He was the first of the Apostles, to whom our Saviour appear'd alone after his Resurrection, according to the Testimony of S. Luke. And at that time, that he ap∣pear'd to several of his Disciples, at the Sea of Tiberias, he was the first mentioned of them: And after he had Eat with them, of the Fish they caught by his directions, he singled out Peter, and had a particular and most affectionate conference with him; the effect of which was the putting it home, whether he had a peculiar love for him, above any of the Disciples? To which he answered, Lord thou knowest I love thee; upon which he bid him feed his Sheep; and for the greater confirmation, all this was repeated 3 several times. Thus oft times in Holy writ things answer Mystically in number; a three∣fold Denial is expiated, by a threefold decla∣ration of Love. After our Saviour's Ascension, the Apostles, with one consent returned to Jerusalem, spend∣ing their time for several days in Prayer, and other exercises of Devotion: At last there met together of Apostles and other Holy Men, to the number of 120; S. Peter as President propounded in the name of the rest, the choosing of another Apostle in the place of Judas the Apostate; and for this Divine office 2 only stood Candidates, viz. Joseph Barnabas sirnamed Justus, and Matthias, both which had been Eye-witnesses of our Saviours Doctrin and Miracles, as also of his Death and Resurrection; And the choise being agreed upon by Lot, (after they had offered up their Prayers to GOD to direct them in their choise), the Lot fell on Matthias. The Feast of Pentecost, so called as being the 50th day from the Possover, they all met to receive the Holy Ghost as was promised them; and accordingly the Holy Ghost des∣cended on them, in cloven Tongues, inspire∣ing them to speak all Languages, for the better enabling them to propagate the Gospel among the Gentiles, as is at large taken notice of in the 213th Discourse, entituled Pentecost, to which I refer the Reader. S. Peter made it clear to them that heard and saw what hapned to them; That the Doctrin, Miracles, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of our Saviour, were but the fulfilling of those Scriptures, that had been so plainly Prophesied of them. By this Divine Sermon, which (next after those of our Saviours) was the first, by which the Gospel was preached, he converted no less than 3000, who were Baptized, and made Members of the Church. And immediately after Miracles began amongst the Apostles, the first visible one being done by Peter, when he and S. John going to the Temple at the 9th hour, seeing a lame man lying to beg for Ams, restored him to his Limbs; as is taken notice of in the 214th Discourse, which Miracle brought a Concourse of People about him; which taking advantage of▪ told them, That what was done, was not by any Skill of his, but by the Power, and in the name of that Christ, whom they had Crucified; Exhorting them withal, seriously to reflect upon what they had done, in Crucifying the Lord of Life; and to expiate so Horrid a Crime, by a timely Repentance and a true Faith in him for the future: By this Exhortation▪ and probably S. John's Preaching in another place, there were brought into the Church no fewer than 5000 Souls. This Preaching of the Apostles, gave great offence to the Priests and Sadducees, who calling to their assistance the Captain of the Temple, Commander of the Tower of Antonia, they seized them, and brought them before the Sanhedrim, or Grand Council of the Jews, as disturbers of the public Peace; and when they were asked by what Authority they thus proceeded; S. Peter boldly an∣swer'd, That they acted in the name of that Jesus of Nazareth, whom they Crucified, and who (tho' rejected by them) was made the Head of the Corner, and for whose Death they ought heartily to Repent, if they ex∣pected Salvation. Being Commanded to withdraw, whilst the Council debated what to do; as soon as they were called in again, the Result was, That they should Preach this Doctrin no more; which they resolutely re∣fused to obey, saying, They were bound to obey GOD more than them: But in regard the Council were not able to contradict the Miracle, they were forced against their will, to yeild to the truth thereof, and knew not what further to say to them; so that for that time they were dismist; and coming to their Company, related to them what hapned; who gave Glory to GOD, for their safe deli∣verance.
As S. Peter was highest in Dignity, so he appeared greatest in Authority, shewing him∣self a Prince, and a Judge amongst his own People; And it was by general consent agreed amongst them, that as they were all one in Mind and Heart; so they should be one in Estate of Livelyhood, Rich and Poor all share∣ing alike, so that those that had Estates, were to sell them, and put the Mony into a common stock, to be equally divided: Among the rest, Ananias with Saphira his Wife, consented to sell his Estate, and bring in the Mony, but keeping back part thereof, were struck dead; the relation of which, is in the 215th Discourse. This severe proceed∣ing, gave terror to all that saw or heard it, and was a sufficient warning for others, to be guilty of the like Deceit, or Hypocrisie: Every day the Apostles were fam'd, and resorted unto more and more, insomuch that the Sick Persons, were brought out into the Streets in Coaches, only for the benefit of Peters Shadow, and hereby greater Numbers were dayly brought into the Church. These things could not but give fresh dis∣tast to the Rulers of the Jews, who were ready to burst with Envy, to see the Church so flourish; for no sooner were they cast in∣to Prison, but an Angel from Heaven makes the Prison Doors fly open, to let them out: In vain it is to lock the Prison Doors, which Heaven resolves to open. Word being brought to the Sanhedrim, that the Prisoners were at Libetry, and Preaching in the Tem∣ple, they were again sent for, and by the High Priest tax'd of their disobedience, in acting contrary to the Councils Order; to which Peter gave answer to the same effect, as before: And Gamaliel, a Person of more Sense, Grace and Learning than the rest; af∣ter the Apostles were withdrawn, prudently advised them, and gave them caution, not to proceed so violently; for saith he, if these things be of GOD, they will stand, if not they will fall of themselves; upon this they ordered the Apostles to be Scourged, and with command not to Preach any more released them. Not long after Peter, being deputed to∣gether with John, by the whole Body of the Apostles at Jerusalem, to go to Samaria▪ and John with Philip; while he stayed there, he emploied his time in conferring the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, upon the new Con∣verts of Philip, by Imposition of Hands, whereby, they were enabled in a great mea∣sure, to perform these Miraculous Cures, the Apostles themselves did. This being obser∣ved by one Simon, sirnamed Magus, who was a great pretender to the Magic Arts, and thereby endeavoured to gain himself a Re∣putation among the common People; and ra∣ther out of Ambition, to advance his Fame by such miraculous Works, than for any desire to imitate the Apostles in their Piety; offered a considerable piece of Mony, to be endowed with this so excellent Gift▪ having (as he thought) rended himself the more capable, by intruding himself an Hypocrite, into the number of Believers, under the Bap∣tization of Philip; But Peter both knowing the corruption of his Heart, and disdaining such an insolent mistake, as to think he would bestow the Gift of the Holy Ghost for Mony, rejected his Proposition with a detestation, somewhat like a Curse; saying, Thy Mony perish with thee; which Words so terrified him, that he (at least in outward appearance) cryed Peccavi, and beg'd the Apostles intercession to GOD for his Pardon. The Church thus setled in Samaria, the 2 Apostles, after some time spent in Preaching in the adjacent Villages, return'd to Jerusa∣lem; from whence after a little time, Peter went to visit the Churches, which those Dis∣ciples had planted, that were dispersed by the late Persecution. At Lidda he cur'd Aeneas, who had laid Bedrid of a Palsey for 8 years. From Lidda, upon the fame of this Mira∣cle, he was sent for to Joppa, where Tabi∣tha, called in Greek Dorcas, a woman much la∣mented for her Piety and Charity, being new∣ly Dead, he by his Prayers raised her to Life again; after which he staied there some time, at the House of Simon the Tanner; where one day, when he had been at Prayer in the upper Room, being Hungry, he called for Meat, which while it was preparing he fell into a Trance; in which he had a Vision of a Sheet, let down from Heaven, containing all sorts of Creatures, Clean and Unclean, attended with a Voyce, saying, Rise Peter, kill and Eat; for which see more at large in the 219th Discourse. Whilst S. Peter discoursed and preached to Cornelius and his Company, the Holy Ghost fell upon several of the Auditory, and inspired them with the Gift of Tongues; at which the Jews, that accompanied him thi∣ther were amazed, and lookt blank; on the other side S. Peter told them, there was no
reason, why these men believing should not be Baptized: At this the very Apostles, and Brethren at Jerusalem took offence, and at his return to Jerusalem, charged him with too much favour to the Gentiles. See the force of old Customs, those that had embrac'd the very Religion built upon Charity, could not yet quit the old Animosity of their Coun∣trey, towards people of all other Nations, but their own; yet at last they were con∣vinced by the reasons he gave them, and rendred GOD thanks for their Conviction. However this Controversie was not so easily determined; for after our Apostles miraculous deliverance by an Angel from the Imprison∣ment of Herodes Antipas, Grandchild of Herod the great, by whom he was designed to be put to Death, as S. James had been but lately before; the Jewish Converts contend∣ing for Circumcision, and the observance of the Mosaical Law, to be joyned with the pro∣fession of the Christian Faith, as equally ne∣cessary for Salvation: The Gentiles on the other side maintaining, that the Judaick Law was abolish't, and that the Faith and pro∣fession of the Gospel was sufficient for Salva∣tion. The best expedient that could be thought on for accommodating of these mat∣ters, and composing of the differences be∣twixt them, was, that a general Council of the Apostles, and chief of the Brethren should be called and meet at Jerusalem; which be∣ing at last resolved on, the Council was cho∣sen and met, where after the things in Con∣troversie, had been for some time debated, S. Peter (to whose Authority all the rest sub∣scribed,) made it appear that the Gentiles had received as great a Portion of the Spirit, as any of the rest, and were as capable of Sal∣vation, by the meer grace of the Gospel, as the Jews that pretended to an additional Me∣rit, by joyning the observation of the Mosaick Law. And in conclusion, it was carried ac∣cording to Peters Sentence, and to that pur∣pose, the Decrees of this Council were sent abroad, for the satisfying Mens minds, and putting an end to the Contentions these Dis∣putes had raised. No sooner was this Coun∣cil broke up, but S. Peter went to Antioch, where after all the Christian Prudence and Charity, he had so lately shewed in the Coun∣cil at Jerusalem, and his excellent ordering of affairs at the House of Cornelius, and his familiar converse with the converted Gentiles at Antioch, at his first coming there, yet fell into an Error which seemed to contradict all that he had done before; for upon the com∣ing of certain Jewish Brethren, out of respect to them, and for fear of their Displeasure, on a sudden left the company of these Gentiles, with whom he had before contracted a Friend∣ship, shunning them as persons Unclean, which was a great amazement and disheart∣ning to them, and an example to the con∣verted Jews, to make the like Separation; even Barnabas himself, being drawn in by the example of others; the consequence of which could be no less than the hindrance of the Gospels Propagation; insomuch that Paul thô but a late Convert, was highly concern'd to see Peters weak carriage in this affair; and thereupon took upon him to withstand him Face to Face, and reprove him severely for it. And thus far reacheth the account of our Apostles Life and Transactions, as taken from the 4 Evangelists, and the Acts of the Apostles: For the remainder of his Life until his Death, we must depend upon the Fathers and ancient Writers of the Primitive Church, whose testimony also might sufficiently pass, were it built upon sure proofs, and not for the most part conjectural. Eusebius affirms, that the time he was at Antioch, he there Founded a Church, and was the first Bishop thereof. What became of him after his deliverance from Herods Imprison∣ment, is not certainly known; some say he preached at Bizantium, and the Countries thereabouts for some time; after which he is said to go to Rome, and to have arrived there in the 2d year of Claudius: That he went to Rome, and stayed there some time, is an opinion too generally received, to be much disputed, and probably he took his first abode among his Countrey-men the Jews, in that part called the Transtyberine Religion, where they are said to have planted themselves ever since the time of Augustus; but we are told, that removing from thence to preach to the Gentiles, he was received into the House of one Pudens, a Roman Senator, new∣ly converted to the Faith; and that in this City he met with Philo, sirnamed Judaes, who came Embassador to Rome, in favour of the Jews at Alexandria, with whom he contra∣cted an intimate familiarity. Much about this time Baronius thinks it was that he wrote his first Epistle to the Churches he had planted in Asia, the less, viz. Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bithynia, &c.
S▪ Mark, as he observes, being with him, at the writing of this Epistle, in his Journey to Egypt, whither he was going to preach the Gospel. The Jews being for some kind of Sedition or Uproar, in the City banisht by an edict of Claudius; and in the latter end of his Reign, S. Peter is generally believed with the rest to have left Rome, after which we hear no more of him as to any particular, till the latter end of Nero's Reign, when he re∣turned to Rome. That he went on in his painful Ministry, in some part of the World or other, is not to be doubted; but whether in Italy, Sicily, or Affrica, or the more Eastern parts, is matter only of bare conjecture; some stick not also to affirm, (but from no sufficient authority,) that he was some time in this our Island of Great Britain. Being returned to Rome, he found the minds of Men otherwise disposed than he ex∣pected, being prepossest with the subtile cheats and devices of Simon the Magician, where∣with he had gained himself so great applause among the Vulgar, that he was esteemed lit∣tle less than a Diety, and was in high esteem with Nero himself, who was a particular fa∣vourer of Magicians, and their Diabolical Acts. Now Peter's main business was, to un∣mask this vile Impostor, and lay open his prevaricating Tricks and Delusions; for effect∣ing of which there hapned a very fit occasion not to be here omitted, since delivered by Hegesippus the younger, an Author of no small account, and contemporary with S. Ambrose. There died at this time a young Gentleman near of kin to the Emperour; for the raising of whom to Life the contest was, between S. Peter and the Magician, who being the Chal∣lenger, the Apostle (strong in Faith) readily accepted the Challenge, and effected that by the power of GOD which the other could not by the power of the Devil. The Sorcerer thus bafled, and in danger of being stoned to Death, had not Peter's Charity and Generosi∣ty rescued him, had again the presumption, or folly to make another bold undertaking, which was, to see him fly up to Heaven; the time being come, he takes flight from the Capitol; but his artificial Wings failing him, he was brought to the Ground with battered Bones and Bruises, which in a few days put an end to all his boasted Forgeries, together with his Life. The unhappy end of this deluded Wretch, instead of bringing the Apostle into greater favour, and his Doctrin into higher esteem, to the further advancement of the Gospel, did but the more exasperate this obdurate Empe∣rour, who regarding the fallacies of an Im∣postor, more than the reality of a Divine Miracle, and not enduring the severe Reproofs of a Religion, so repugnant to his vicious courses, and as a sworn Enemy to all pro∣fessors thereof; he in the first place resolved to revenge the loss of this great Favourite up∣on him, to whom he imputed the occasion of his Death; and in order thereunto, he caused him to be apprehended, together with Paul then at Rome, and both to be thrown into the Mamertine-Prison, where they remained daily expecting the fatal Stroke, being thought fit Victims to the Pomp and Pride of Nero, at his triumphal entring Rome from Achaia: Mean while our Apostle was very much im∣portun'd by the Christians to save himself by flight, which he was much averse unto; but at last being overcome by their incessant Prayers, and Importunities, he yeilded; and the next Night having made his escape over the Prison Wall, and being got as far as the City Gate, he is said to have met our Savi∣our, coming just in, as he was going out; and knowing him, saluted him, (though much surprized) in these words, LORD whither art thou going? But the answer he received was, I am come to Rome to be Crucified a se∣cond time; which he apply'd so home to him∣self, that returning back to the Prison, and rendring himself to the Keeper, he resolved to suffer with chearfulness the Death design'd for him, which was Crucifixion, the shame∣fullest Death they could inflict on the worst Malefactors; only at his earnest Request, he obtained the favour, that as a Person unwor∣thy to suffer in the manner as his LORD had done, he might be Crucified with his Head downwards. After his Execution, his Body being taken down, was Embalmed after the Jewish man∣ner, by Marcellinus, and Buried in the Vati∣can, near the way called Via Triumphalis, as Eusebius, and other Ecclesiastical Writers de∣liver. Over his Grave, (saith Onuphirus,) was built a small Church, upon the destructi∣on of which by Heliogabalus, his Body was removed to a Burying-place not far from Rome, in the way called the Appian way; but by Pope Cornelius, it was carried back to the Vatican, which after a long time of ob∣scurity, was by the Emperour Canstantine the
Great, (amongst several other Churches he erected at Rome,) raised to a most Magnifi∣cent structure in honour of S. Peter; and also wonderfully enrich'd and adorn'd, and every Age since having added to its Splendor, it may be now justly reckon'd one of the Won∣ders of the World. Thus Lived, and thus Died this Grand, and most venerable Apostle, and the principal Rock upon which Christ had assigned his Church to be built. His Death is generally computed to have been in the year of our LORD, 69. and in the 13th. or 14th. of Nero's Reign. The Contents of the first Epistle General of S. PETER. FOrasmuch as the Apostle S. Peter, had chiefly exercised his Apostolical Function amongst those of the Circumcision, Gal. 2.9. He accordingly writes this Epistle to the Jews, dispersed throughout Pontus, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia, who had embraced the Faith of Jesus Christ, as well on the one hand, to confirm and establish them, in the truth they had received, as on the other hand, se∣riously to remind them of, and exhort them to their▪ Duty, as himself declares, Chap. 5.22. So that the present Epistle contains these following Heads. In the first place after the Inscription, in the 2 first Verses, he propounds a short abridgment of the Evangelical Do∣ctrin, in the which he sets down, the most remarkable Benefits which accrue to us by Jesus Christ, to the 13 Verse of the I. Chap. Afterwards taking occasion from the Salvati∣on purchased for us by him, he exhorts Be∣lievers to a suitable Christian Conversation, as well in General, to the 13 Verse of the 2d. Chapter, as in particular, reminding Subjects of their Duties to Magistrates and Governours, Servants to their Masters, and Husbands and Wives, of their mutual Obligations, to the 8 Verse of the 3d Chapter, where he returns again to general Exhortations, pressing upon them the Duties of Charity, Patience, and Temperance, or Sobriety, to the end of the 4th. Chapter. At the beginning of the 5th. Chapter, he exhorts the Elders or Pastors of the Church, to be diligent and faithful in feeding their Flocks; the younger sort to be Obedient, and all to be Sober, watchful and constant in the Faith, resisting their great Adversary the Devil, until the 10th. Verse, where he concludes this Epistle with an ar∣dent Prayer for Believers, and particular Greetings. The Substance therefore of this Epistle may be reduc'd to these 3 heads, which by an exquisite and holy Skilfulness, are en∣terlac'd throughout the whole contexture of it. The First is, a Declaration of the inestimable Benefits, of the Redemption▪ and Salvation purchased for us by Jesus Christ; the 2d is an Exhortation to the Fruits of Faith, and duties of Sanctification, both general and particu∣lar; and the 3d is a warning or admonition to Patience and Constancy in suffering for the Name of Jesus. The Contents of the second Epistle General of S. PETER. THô some in ancient times, have doubted of the Author, and Authority of this Epistle, as appears from Eusebius's Hist. Lib 3. Cap. 22. yet we find, that there is no rea∣son to question either the one, or the other; not only because the Inscription of the Epistle, bears the name of Simon Peter, and that the Author declares Chap. 1st: Verse 18. that he was one of the 3 Disciples of Jesus, who saw his Glory on the Mount; but also, because the Doctrin therein contained, is very consonant with that of the foregoing Epistle, and the rest of the Holy Scriptures. Moreover we find that the Christian Church has always re∣ceived it for Divine and Canonical. The Apostle therefore writes this his 2d Epistle, to the same scattered believing▪ Jews, to whom he wrote the first, as appears from Chap. 3.1. and gives his reasons for thus backing his for∣mer Epistle, Chap. 1.12, 13, &c. It con∣sists of 3 parts, according to the number of its Chapters. In the first, after the Inscrip∣tion and Salutation, he represents to them the Grace and Benefits GOD had bestowed up∣on them, in order to their Salvation; and exhorts them to grow therein more and more; and by the practice of all Christian Virtues, to make their Calling and Election sure; sig∣nifies
his reason, for pressing this Exhortati∣on, and the obligation they were under to re∣ceive it from one, who had been an Eye-wit∣ness of the Divine Glory of Jesus, and an Ear-witness of the Testimony given him by the Father, and whose Doctrin was the same, with that of the Prophets, and Holy men of old, Chap. 1. In the 2d, he exhorts Belie∣vers to constancy and perseverance in the Doctrin of Christ, which they had received from the Apostles, to the end they might not be turned aside, by the deceit and cunning de∣vices of false Teachers, which began then to manifest themselves, and would more fully be discovered afterwards; representing the certain Destruction which by their impiety they would draw down upon themselves and their followers; and describing their wicked manners, Conduct and Conversation; to the end they might be the better known and avoyded, Chap. 2. He warneth them of Scoffers, walking after their own Hearts Lusts, who denyed the return of Jesus Christ to Judg∣ment, and the end or Consummation of this World, in opposition to whom he asserts the 2d coming of Jesus Christ, and describes the terrible end of the World, exhorting them from the expectation thereof, to all Holiness of Life and Conversation. And Lastly, con∣cludes his Epistle by the Testimony of S. Paul, with a short, but serious Capitulation of his chief Exhortations, and a Doxology to our LORD and Saviour Jesus Christ. The LIFE of S. PAUL. SAint Paul, thô not one of the 12, yet for his great Eminence in the Ministry of the Gospel, had the honour to be styled an Apostle; particularly above all the rest that were not of that Number; and hath justly the next place to S Peter allotted to him, both in regard they were so conversant in their Lives, and inseparable in their Deaths. He was born at Tarsus, not only of Jewish Parents, but Originally descended from an ancient Jewish Family, of the Tribe of Benjamin in Judea, where he had his Education, which was a flourishing Academy, whose Scholars (as Strabo testifies) excell'd those of Alexandria, and even Athens it self. In the Schools of this City, he was brought up from his Child∣hood, and became an excellent proficient in all the polite Learning of the Ancients, yet at the same time he was brought up to a Manual Trade, as even the Learnedst of their Rabbins were, for enabling them to get a Livelyhood if occasion required it, it being a Maxim (especially amongst the Jews,) That he who teacheth not his Son a Trade, teacheth him to be a Thief; for Learning of old was not made an instrument to get a Maintenance by, but for the better polishing the Mind; so that the Learned among the Jews, were fre∣quently denominated (as Drusius observes) from some one or other Handycraft Trade, as Rabbi Judah, the Baker; Rabbi Jochanan, the Shoomaker, &c. Having at Tarsus attained to a great per∣fection in the Liberal Arts and Sciences, he was sent to Jerusalem to be instructed in the knowledge of the Laws; and for the better accomplishing him in that Study, was put un∣der the Tuition of Raban Gamaliel the Son of Simon, (the same probably that took up our Saviour in his Arms▪) He was an eminent Doctor of the Law, one of the Families of the Schools at Jerusalem, and a Person of principal Note and Authority in the Jewish Sanhedrim, in which that grave and prudent Speech, before mentioned in the Life of S. Pe∣ter, which he made in behalf of the Apostles, and their Doctrin, took great effect. At the Feet of this great Doctor S. Paul was brought up, as he himself testifies, and by his in∣structions he soon advanced to that degree, that he gain'd himself a Reputation above all his fellow Scholars: Moreover he was a strict professor of the Sect of the Pharisees, which of all others amongst the Jews, was the seve∣rest and most Magisterial, and the professors thereof, generally great applauders of them∣selves for their Sanctity, despising and censure∣ing all others as Reprobates, and unworthy of their Society, and presuming (as Josephus writes,) to govern even Princes themselves. With the fiery Genius of this Sect, our Apostle was too deeply infected, which made him a most zealous Persecutor of the Saints, so that when the blood of the Martyr Stephen was shed, I (saith he with sorrow after his Con∣version) was standing by, consented to his Death, and kept the Rayment of them that slew him. Nay, of all the Apparators, and
Inquisitors employed by the Sanhedrim, to Execute their Warrants upon those upstart Hereticks, as they call'd them, who preach'd against the Law of Moses, and the tradition of the Fathers; he was the Man that strove to be the forwardest. In this Zeal to execute his Office, as he was on his way to Damascus, with some others of his Fellow Officers, breath∣ing out Vengeance and Destruction against the poor Christians; there was on a sudden a most glorious Light shot full upon him, and the rest that were with him, so that they fell to the Ground in great amazement, and at the same time a Voyce from Heaven was directed to him saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? to which, as amazed as he was, answered, LORD, who art thou? the Voice replying, that it was Jesus whom he persecut∣ed, and that it was hard for him to kick against the Pricks. He again desired further Instructions, LORD, said he, what wilt thou have me to do? upon which he was bid to rise, and go to Damascus, and there expect what should be further revealed to him; rise∣ing from the Ground he found his sight gon; in this plight being led to Damascus, he was there 3 days Fasting, and probably then he saw that Celestial Vision mentioned by him, wherein he heard and saw things past utte∣rance, and had those Divine Revelations, which gave him occasion to say, That the Gospel he preached, he was not taught by man, but had it revealed to him by Jesus Christ. The 3 days being expir'd, Ananias, a devout Man, and one of the 70 Disciples, came to him, according to the command he had received from our LORD, who appeared to him, to go, and enquire for one Saul of Tarsus; and having laid his hands on him, told him his Message, upon which his Sight was restored to him, and the gift of the Holy Ghost confer'd on him; presently after he was Baptized, and made a Member of the Church, to the great Joy of the rest of the Disciples, that he should become not only a Professor, but a Preacher of that Faith, which he so lately was a bitter Persecutor of. His stay at this time at Damascus was not long, for being warned away by a Vision from Hea∣ven, he took a Journey into Arabia, where he Preach'd the Gospel for 3 years, and then return'd to Damascus, where the unconvert∣ed Jews eagerly sought his Ruin, endeavour∣ing to seize him, but he escaped thrô the help of the Disciples, and the rest of his Friends, who were zealous for his safety. Thus far we have made an entrance into the Life and Acts of this great Apostle, with which there is scarce any thing equally me∣morable in History; nor could the further pro∣secution thereof have been omitted, but that all the Travels of this Apostle in the pursu∣ance of his Ministry, from the time of his Conversion, to the last of his being at Rome, with the most principal Transactions, and the several Accidents that hapned to him therein, are already related in the exposition of the Map of the Voyages of the Apostles, and more particularly those of S. Paul; to which for avoyding needless Repetitions, the sequel of his Life may not unfitly be referr'd. We shall therefore make some Inquiry into the time and occasion of the several Epistles wrote to the several Churches; as also into the time and manner of his Death, and so proceed to the Lives of the rest of the Apostles. When he went from Athens to Corinth, 'tis said he wrote his first Epistle to the Thessa∣lonians, which he sent by Silas and Timothy, who returned during his stay; and before his departure he wrote his 2d Epistle to them, to excuse his not coming to them as he promised in his first. Not long after at Ephesus, he is said to write his Epistle to the Galatians; and before he left Ephesus, he wrote his first Epistle to the Corinthians. Moreover he sent from thence by Apollos and Silas to Titus, whom he left in that Island to propagate the Faith, and had made him Bishop thereof; in which he gives him advice for the better ex∣ecution of his Episcopal Office. At Macedonia, whither he went from Ephesus, having by Ti∣tus received an account of the Church of Co∣rinth's present state of Affairs, he sent by him at his return, when he was accompanied by S. Luke, his 2d Epistle to the Corinthians; and about the same time, he wrote his first Epistle to Timothy, whom he had left at Ephe∣sus. From Corinth he went for Macedon, whither he sent his Epistle to the Romans, by Phaebe a Deaconess of the Church of Cen∣chrea, not far from Corinth. Going thence to Rome, he sent his Epistle to the Philippians by Epaphroditus, who had been sent from them with Relief, not knowing to what streights he might be reduc'd by his Imprisonment at Rome. In the next place he sends by Tychi∣cus, his Epistle to the Ephesians. Not long after (if not about the same time,) he wrote his Epistle to the Colossians, and sent it by
Epaphras his Fellow-Prisoner, for some time at Rome. As for his 2d Epistle to Timothy, there is some dispute about the time of his writing it; only it seems probable by authen∣tick Authors, that it was writ after the Phi∣lippians and Ephesians. As for the Epistle to the Hebrews, it is not known when, or from whence written, and rather conjectured, than certainly known to have been S. Pauls. Tertullian judgeth it to be written by Barna∣bas; but the most received Opinion is, that it was S. Pauls, but written by him in He∣brew, and so sent to the Jews, and for the better Publishing it to the Gentiles, translat∣ed into Greek, some say by S. Luke, but others probably by S. Clement; for the style of whose Epistle to the Corinthians is observed by Eusebius and S. Jerom to come very near the style of this Epistle, and to contain a purer vein of Greek, than is found in the rest of S. Paul's Epistles. Our Apostle having been now 2 years a Prisoner at Rome, is at length set free, and soon after departs to visit other parts of the World, for the further divulging the Gospel; but into what particular parts, is variously conjectur'd; some think into Greece, and some parts of Asia, where he had not yet been; others will have it, that he went Preaching, as well into the Eastern, as Wes∣tern parts of the World; for in his Epistle to the Corinthians tis said, That Paul being a Preacher both Eastward and Westward, taught righteousness to the whole World, and went to the utmost Bounds of the West. That he went into Spain, may be gathered both from his own Words, as intimating so to do, and also from the Testimony of other Authors, as Theodoret, who writes, That he not only went into Spain to Preach, but brought the Gospel into the Isles of the Sea, and parti∣cularly into our Island of Britain; and more particularly in another place, he reckons up the Gauls and the Britains amongst those People, to whom the Apostles, and especially the Tent-maker, as he calls him, had divulged the Christian Faith. Farther mention of S. Paul we find none till his next and last coming to Rome, which is said to be about the 8th and 9th years of Nero's Reign; and he came in the fittest time to suffer Martyrdom, he could have chosen; for whereas at other times, his priviledge of being a Roman Citizen, gained him those Civilities, which common Morality could not deny him; he had to do with a Person with whom the crime of being a Christian, weighed down all Apologies, that could be alledged; a Person whom Lewdness and De∣bauchery, had made 7 times more a Pagan, than any custom, or Education could have done. What his accusation was, can't be certainly determin'd, whether it were his be∣ing an Associate with S. Peter, in the fall of Simon Magus, or his conversion of Popp Sabina, one of the Emperours Concubis, by which he was curb'd in the Career of his insatiate Appetite: Neither can it be resol∣ved, how long he remain'd in Prison; what the certain time of his suffering was, and whe∣ther (according to the custom) he was first Scourged: Only Baronious speaks of a Pillars in the Church of S. Mary beyond the Bridge in Rome, to which both he, and S. Peter were bound, when they were Scourged. 'Tis affirm'd, that S. Paul and S. Peter, Suffered upon the same day, thô different kinds of Death: Others will have it, that they Suffered on the same day of the year, but at a years distance; and others affirm, that S. Paul Suffered several years after S. Peter: But all agree that Paul as a Roman, had the favour to be Beheaded, and not Cru∣cified: His Execution, was at the Aqua Salvia, 3 miles from Rome; and he is said to have converted the 3 Souldiers, that guard∣ed him thither, who also Suffered for the Faith. Some of the Fathers add, That upon his Beheading there stow'd from his Veins, a Liquor more like Milk than Blood, the sight whereof (saith S. Crysostom) converted the Executioner. He was Buried about 2 miles from Rome, in the way called Vi Ostiensis, where Lucina a noble Roman Matron (not long after) setled a Farm, for the maintenance of the Church. Here he lay but indifferently, (as we may well suppose,) intombed for several Ages; that is, till the Reign of Constantine the great, who in the year of our Lord 318, at the request of Sylvester, then Bishop of Rome, built a very sumptuous Church, sup∣ported with 100 stately Pillars, and Beauti∣fied with most rare and exquisite Workman∣ship; and after all, richly gifted and Endowed, by the Emperour himself: Yet, was all this thought too mean an Honour, for so great an Apostle, by the Emperour Valentinian, who sent an Order to his Prfect Slusti∣nus, to take that Church down, and to erect
in its room, one more large and statelier; which at the instance of Pope Leo was richly adorn'd, and Endowed by the Empress Plac di, and doubtless hath received great addi∣tions ever since, from age to age. Thus was brought up, became converted, and a Preacher of the Gospel, and thus was put to Death and Buried, this great Apostle of the Gentiles, superior in Learning, and natural parts, and not inferiour in Zeal, to any of the rest of the Apostles. We shall proceed according to our method, to the Contents of the several Epistles wrote by S. Paul, and first with that to the Romans. The Contents of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans. AS under the Old Testament, the Holy Ghost moved the Prophets, to set down their Revelations and Predictions in writing, to the end, that for time to come they might serve for instruction to the Church of GOD; so likewise he hath observed the same method under the New, inspiring some of the Apostles, to record the same Doctrin in wri∣ting, which they had Preached; and making choice to this end, of the form of familiar Epistles, as being very suitable to the simpli∣city of Primitive Christians, and very pro∣per for joyning the Doctrin of Salvation, with the several practices and duties neces∣sary throughout the whole course of a Christian Life. And tho' these Epistles were written upon sundry occasions, at divers times, and to several communities, or particular Persons; yet we shall find them all to com∣pose one Body or System of Christian Doctrin: S. John the last of all the Apostles, having collected or compriz'd them together, with the other Books of the New Testament, (as Esdras had before gathered together, those of the Old) and added to them, the Seal of the Apostolical Authority, to make them unques∣tionable and inviolable. S. Paul therefore, who in Preaching had labour'd more than all the rest, was in a more particular manner made choice of, to leave more in writing▪ than any of them, concerning the Mysteries of our Salvation, in no less than XIV distinct Epistles; whereof the first is, that which is inscrib'd to the Romans, tho' not in order of time, (for his Epistles to the Thessalonians, to the Corinthians and Galatians, and the first to Timothy, as well as that to Titus, were writ before it, as the most exact Chronologers have observed) but by way of excellence and dignity, not only for the celebrity of the Church of Rome, whose Faith at that time was spoke of, and renowned throughout the World, Rom. 1.8. but also for the sublimity of the matter, therein declared and contained. This Epistle was not writ by the hand of Terti∣us, but dictated by the Apostle S. Paul; and subscrib'd with his own hand, in the City of Corinth, when he was upon the point of part∣ing thence for Jerusalem, with the collections of the Churches of Macedonia and Achaia, for the Brethren at Jerusalem, and sent by Phaebe a Deaconess of the Church of Cenchrea, near the City of Corinth, Rom. 15.25, 26. &c 16.1, 2, 22. This Epistle was not writ in Latin, as some without sufficient ground have sup∣posed, but in Greek, as all the rest; forasmuch as that Language, was then most universally understood, and almost as familiar at Rome, as Latin it self. The Romans to whom this Epistle is addrest, where those Believers, of whom the new born Church at Rome, was then composed, having been planted there by the Doctrin of the Gospel which had made some Progress in that City, before ever the Apostle arrived there; The Apostle's aim in this Epistle was, to establish and confirm them in the Doctrin of the Holy Gospel, against those Errors, Schisms and Scandals, which even at that time, began to be fomented amongst Christians. Moreover, it also con∣tains a brief, but solid and sound instruction, concerning the chief Articles of the Christian Religion; and of all the saving benefits, and transcendent priviledges, we receive from GOD, in and by Jesus Christ: So that we may well call this Epistle, The ocean of the Christian Doctrin, and the Golden Key of the Holy Scriptures, opening to us the understand∣ing and meaning of them: And more espe∣cially, it leads us to a thorough understand∣ing of the accomplishment of Promises, made to the people af Israel by Moses and the Prophets, concerning the common Salvation of the Jews and Gentiles. We may distin∣guish this Epistle, as likewise most of those that follow, into 3 principal parts: The first whereof is his Preface, ending at the 14 verse of the 1st Chap. The 2d, contains an ample
instruction or declaration concerning the Doctrin of Salvation, and reacheth to the 15th ver. of Chap. 15. And the 3d, is the conclusion of the Epistle, from thence to the end. As to the Doctrinal part of it, which constitutes the Body of this Epistle, the same is composed of many parts. In the first place, it treats concerning the Justification of Man before GOD, not by any of his works, but by the Faith which is in Jesus Christ; from the 16 ver. of the 1st Chap. to the end of the 5th. Secondly, Of Sanctification, or the renewal of mans mind, by the new Birth in Jesus Christ, from the beginning of the 6th Chap. to the beginning of the 7th; where he handleth of the Spiritual Fight, wherein the Regenerate are engaged, by reason of the contrary mo∣tions of the Flesh and Spirit in them; as in the 8th Chap. he sets forth the Victory, they obtain▪ by the Spirit against the Flesh; and the great comfort and assurance of Salvation, which accrues to them from this conquest, even in the midst of their sore Persecutions and Afflictions. In the 3d place, he treats concerning the Eternal Election of GOD, as being the Original and Spring of all these excellent benefits, in the 9th Chap▪ verse 2▪ In the 4th, he speaks of Gods effectual Call▪ according to the determinate purpose of his will of the Jews, as well as of the Gentiles, to the end of the 7th Chap. And upon this occasion, he makes mention also of Rejection or Reprobation. In the following, 12, 13, 14, & 15 Chapters, he sets down the Duties of Love and Gratitude, wherein we stand ob∣liged to the Lord, in acknowledgment of these his unutterable Graces and Benefits; as well with respect to the obedience, which is due to his commandments in general, in the 12 and 13 Chapters, as more particular∣ly, with respect to the right use of things in∣different, and Condescention to those who are weak, and are not yet come to the knowledge of their Liberty in Christ; in the 14th Chap▪ and to the 13 first verses of the 15th. After which follows the conclusion of the whole Epistle, containing a Christian excuse of the liberty he had used in writing to, and exhorting of them, with assurance of his coming to them, and diverse Salutations of particular Persons; shutting up all with a Thanksgiving, and Prayer to GOD for them. The Contents of the first Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle, to the Corinthians. AFter that the Apostle had continued at Corinth, the head City of Achaia, about a year and an half, and had gathered there a numerous Church, Acts 19.9, 10, 11. he departed thence, with intent to Preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ in the other Cities of Asia: And some considerable space of time after this, being then at Ephesus, as may be seen, 1 Cor. 16.8. he was informed by some of the Family of Chlo, 1 Cor. 1.11. that some dangerous contentions, tending to Schism, were Budding amongst them; he received at the same time, also a Letter from the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 7.1. in which they desired his advice, about some Difficul∣ties▪ risen amongst them; to all which he returns his answer in this Epistle, as follows. In the first place, after a short Preface in the 9 first Verses, he censures and reproves them, in the remaining part of the first Chap. and the 3 following, for the Dissension and Divi∣sn crept in amongst them, chiefly occasioned by the Pride, and Worldly Wisdom of some of their Teachers; who by their affectation of human Eloquence and Philosophy, adulte∣rated the simplicity of the Gospel, and despi∣sed it in the Apostle. Next he blames them in the 5th Chap. for tolerating an infa∣mous incestuous Person in their Church; and informs, how they ought to exercise the Ec∣clesiastical Disciplin, and censure against him, and others, guilty of the like Scandalous Enor∣mities: He exhorts them in the 6th Chap. not to bring the differences that happened amongst them, about outward matters, before the unbelieving Magistrate▪ but amicably to terminate the same amongst themselves; and sharply censures them, for the Sin of Forni∣cation, still continuing to be practis'd amongst them. In the 7th Chap. he begins to an∣swer the Points, about which they had de∣sired his advice, and first treats of Marri∣age, and the mutual Duties of Married Per∣sons, as also of Virgins and Widows; and afterwards in the 8th Chap. he discourseth of things offered to Idols, how far it was
lawful to eat of them, and in what cases it was necessary to abstain from their use. The 9th Chap. treats of the maintenance due to the Ministers of the Church; and in the 10th, the Apostle returns again to exhort them, to avoid Idolatry, and to abstain from things Offered to Idols. In the 11th Chap. he reproves some abuses crept in amongst them, with respect to their behaviour, in their Holy Assemblies, and the exercise of Divine Duties; as also in their Celebrating of the Lords Supper, and recals them to the first Institution of it. In the Chapters 12, 13 & 14. he treats of Spiritual Gifts, and the due and becoming use, and exercise of them, and more especially of the Gift of Prophecy and of Tongues. In the 15th Chap. he discourseth at large, concerning the Re∣surrection of the Dead, clearly illustrating, and convincingly proving the same, with a representation of the manner of it; and after having put them in mind, at the beginning of the 6th Chap. of the liberal Contribu∣tion the Greek Churches had made for relief of the poor believers of Judea; he concludes his Epistle, with some Exhortations and Salu∣tations. The Contents of the second Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle, to the Corinthians. IN this Epistle, the Apostle chiefly defends his Doctrin and Apostleship, against the Accusations and Calumnies of some false Apostles; and after a short Introduction, con∣tained in the 7 first verses, of the 1st Chap. he declares to them, to the end of the Chap∣ter, the reason why he was not come to them, according to the Promise he had made them, in the foregoing Epistle; and that this delay of his, did not proceed from lightness or inconstancy, but by reason of the grievous Persecutions he had suffered in Asia; as also, because he was desirous to give them time to Repent of, and mend those faults where∣of he had reproved them; to the end he might appear with greater chearfulness, and comfort amongst them. In the 2d Chap. he gives an account, why he had writ with so much Vehemence and Severity, concern∣ing the Incestuous Person; and exhorts them to admit and receive him again to their Communion, upon consideration of his Re∣pentance and Godly Sorrow. In the 3d Chap. he sets forth the difference there is, between the false Apostles, wholly insisting upon and pressing the Law, which he terms the kill∣ing Letter, and his Evangelical Doctrin, which is the Ministry of the Spirit, whose effect is to quicken and give Life. He de∣clares to them in the 4th Chap. that they themselves, had experienced this difference amongst them, and that his Gospel had not been hid, except to those who perish; and by his own example proves, how effectually the Spirit of Jesus Christ, did exert and shew himself, in and by the word of the Cross, for the forming and framing of men to Pati∣ence and constancy, under the greatest and most difficult Trials and Sufferings. In the 5th Chap. he teacheth how by the same Do∣ctrin and Spirit of Jesus Christ, we become disposed voluntarily to quit this earthly Taber∣nacle, and to aspire to the hopes of a bet∣ter Life; and declares that the foundation of this our expectation, is the Doctrin of our Reconciliation, by the Death of Jesus Christ, whose Ambassadors the Apostles were, sent abroad to Preach this Reconciliation to the World; from which blessed Doctrin in the 6th Chapter, he draws many pregnant and earnest Exhortations to a faithful improvement of the grace of GOD, as likewise to Pati∣ence and Godliness, representing his own person to them, for an example of these ex∣cellent graces; and warneth them to avoid all Communion with Unbelievers and Idola∣ters, upon the consideration of their being the Temple of the Living God, and the glorious promises made to them in Jesus Christ; from which glorious promises, he takes occasion in the 7th Chap. to exhort them to the perfecting of Purity and Holiness, in the fear of GOD; and declares the great satisfaction he had received, by understanding how well they had taken his former Reproofs, and given Evidence of their serious and hearty Repentance, for their past Sins. In the 8th and 9th Chapters, he discourses of Ministring to the relief of the Saints, and Alms-giv∣ing, how the same ought to be raised and
employ'd; and exhorteth them to a bounti∣ful liberality, from the great recompence and Fruit of that Virtue, so acceptable to God, and profitable to themselves. In the 10th Chap. he makes mention of the Spiritual Power, and Authority committed to him, not for destruction, but for Edification; to which he annexeth his boasting, of what he was through grace in Christ, being forced to it by the Calumnies of the false Apostles; shewing that they could boast of nothing, but what he could boast of with much more ground than they, and that in many things he far excell'd them all; to the end of the 11th Chap. In the 12th Chap. he makes men∣tion of some particular Revelations, vouch∣safed to him by Jesus Christ, being wrapt up into the third Heaven; and acknowledgeth that to the end he might not be puffed up, through the abundance of these Revelations, there was given him a Thorn in the Flesh, an Angel of Satan to buffet him: Moreover, he de∣clares how he had conversed, and behaved himself amongst them, as a faithful Apostle of Jesus Christ, without seeking his own in∣terest in any thing. And lastly, in the 13th Chap. he threatens severity, and the exercise of his Apostolical Power, against obstinate Sinners, except they Repent; concluding his Epist. in the 3 last verses, by wishing them all manner of Prosperity, presenting them with his ordinary Apostolical Salutation, and by expressing his ardent Prayers to GOD for them. The Contents of the Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle, to the Galatians. FOr as much as the Churches of Galatia, which S. Paul had planted, by the Preaching of the Gospel, Acts 16.6, &c. & 18.23, &c, had suffered themselves to be drawn aside, from the purity of his Doctrin, by means of certain false Apostles, who taught them to keep the Ceremonial Law, and more particularly, prest upon them the necessity of Circumcision; and that men were not justi∣fied by Faith only, but also by the works of the Law; the Apostles and Brethren that were with him, judged it necessary to re∣prove and better inform them by this Epistle, in order to fortifie them against these Errors, by setting Gospel-Truth in a clear light be∣fore them. To this purpose, after the In∣scription, comprised in the 5 first verses of the 1st Chap. he proves to them, by divers arguments, that they ought not to suffer themselves to be drawn aside from the Do∣ctrin he had Preached, seeing there was no other Gospel to Salvation, but what he had delivered to them, assuring them that he had not received the same of man, but from Heaven, even from Jesus Christ himself, which he demonstrates to them, by the rela∣tion of his former Conversation amongst the Jews, and his miraculous Conversion, and calling to the Apostleship; that accordingly he did not go up to Jerusalem, to make him∣self known to, and confer with the Apostles there, but went immediately into Arabia, to discharge his Apostolical Function, committed to him by Jesus Christ himself; that after∣wards the most famous amongst the Apostles, gave to him the right hand of Fellowship, as a sign of their union and agreement in Doctrin and Function: How he reproved even S. Peter himself, because he was not bold enough, in asserting and maintaining the Christian Liberty, for fear of displeasing some Jews, Chap. 1, and 2, to the 15 verse. And then in opposition to the Doctrin of these Seducers, he proves by many strong reasons, and evi∣dent examples, drawn from Holy Scripture, that man is justified before GOD, only by Faith in Jesus Christ; and not by the works of the Law, whether Moral, summarily con∣tained in the 10 Commandments, or Cere∣monial, consisting of Ceremonies and out∣ward observations, which are all abrogated under the New Testament; with a refutation of the Principal objections, of these false Apostles, from the 15th ver. of the 2d Chap. to the end of the 4th. To which he adds a serious Exhortation to the Galatians, to stand in the liberty, wherewith Christ had made them free; with a caution not to abuse it, to carnal Licentiousness, but by the Spirit, to oppose the Lusts and Works of the Flesh; which he enumerates, and afterwards repre∣sents to them the Fruits of the Spirit; in which he exhorts them to walk and Live, Chap. 5th. And more particularly, he exhorts
them to Acts of Charity, and Beneficence, as well towards Poor Believers, as towards the Ministers of the Word; and then con∣cludes with a serious warning of them, to take heed of false Apostles, representing to them their Avarice and Hypocrisy, and pro∣testing his own sincerity; shutting up all with a hearty Commendation of them, to the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Contents of the Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to the Ephesians. THe Apostle S. Paul, having at first Preached at Ephesus, a famous City, and the Metropolis of the lesser Asia, as he past by that way, on his Journy towards Je∣rusalem, Acts 18.19. did some time after return thither, and stayed there the space of 3 years; Preaching and Propagating the Gos∣pel, as well in that City, as in the adjacent places, as appears from Acts 19.1. and 20.31. Insomuch that he gathered there a great and flourishing Church, from whence (when he was at Maltha, on his way towards Jerusalem,) he sent for the Pastors and Elders of that Church, to warn them to take heed of those false Teachers; which after his decease, would creep in amongst them, and draw Disciples after them, Acts 20.29, &c. Wherefore some∣time after, being Prisoner at Rome, Ephes. 3.1. & 6.20. he judg'd it needfull to fortifie and confirm the Ephesians by this Letter, in the truth they had received; more especially against those, who limiting the Grace of GOD, did not set it forth in its full Luster and Glory. Wherefore after his Apostolical Salu∣tation, contained in the 2 first verses of the 1st Chap. he declares in a most exquisit and sublime discourse, the saving Benefits, Privi∣ledges and Immunities Believers receive here in time, according to the Eternal Coun∣sel, and Purpose of GOD in Jesus Christ, to the 15 ver. of the same Chap. Which de∣claration he continues, and concludes with an earnest Prayer to GOD, that it would please him, to strengthen and confirm them more and more, in the knowledge of this transcendent Grace, and efficacious virtue of Jesus Christ, who being taken up into Glory. sits at the Right Hand of the Father; and is constituted the Head over all things. In the 2d Chap. he represents to them the sad, miserable and lost condition, wherein they were formerly, when Gentiles, being stran∣gers from the Covenant of Promise, without any hope of Salvation, and without GOD in the World; and declares, that they were de∣livered from this deplorable state, by the Death of Jesus Christ; and that it is by the alone Faith in him, who hath broken down the middle wall of Partition, that they have been received into the Covenant of Grace. In the 3d Chap. He sets forth the excellency of this great Mystery of the Gentiles, being called and admitted to the Communion of Jesus Christ, without being oblig'd to keep the Ceremonial Law; declaring that this great Mystery, which had been hid and conceal'd from all former ages, was now so evidently revealed, and manifested by the Preaching of the Prophets and Apostles, that the Angels of Heaven wondered at it; and towards the end of the Chap. he again begs of GOD, that he would be pleased to fortifie them, by the power of his Spirit in the inward man, to the end, they might more and more be made sensible of the efficacious Grace and Love of Jesus Christ, dwelling in their Hearts by Faith. In the 4th, and following Chapters, he lays down several exhortations, to a suit∣able Christian conversation, inviting them above all things, to unity and perseverance in the Doctrin of the Gospel; for the preser∣vation of which from all Errors and Cor∣ruption, Jesus Christ, now ascended up into Heaven, hath ordained and established several orders and offices in his Church, to the 17th verse of the th Chap. Afterwards he exhorts them, to put off the Old man with its deceit∣ful Lusts, and to put on the New man, with all its Graces and Virtues. From thence to the 22d ver. of the 5th Chap. From whence he proceeds, to the more special duties of Man and Wife in the conjugal state, illustra∣ting and inforcing them, from the Mystical Marriage of Christ and his Church, as being the true and original pattern of Matrimony; and this to the end of the 5th Chap. Next he handles the mutual duties of Parents and Children, as also of Msters and Servants,
to the 10th verse of the 6. Chap. Lastly, adviseth them to be provided with the whole armor of GOD, that they may be able to stand, and prevail in the combat against their Spiritual Enemies; and to pray continually, not only for themselves, but also for all Be∣lievers, and more especially for him, that with all boldness he might preach the Gospel, for which he was then in bonds, concerning which Tychicus the Conveyer of this Epistle, would more amply inform them; and then shuts up all in the 2 last verses, with wish∣ing them Peace, Faith and Charity, and commending them to the Grace of GOD. The Contents of the Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle, to the Philippians. THE Apostle S. Paul, having been divine∣ly advertised by a Vision of a man ap∣pearing to him, in the Macedonian habit, to pass over into Macedonia, and Preach the Gospel there; began first to teach in the City of Philippi, where he gathered a famous Church, Acts 16.12. And in compliance with the tender bowels and care he had for all the Churches, but especially for those planted by his own Ministry, he wrote this Letter to them from his Prison in Rome, and sent it by Epaphroditus, to strengthen and confirm them in the Faith of the Gospel, Philip. 2.25. In which Epistle, after his wonted Salutation, he commends the Philippians for their perse∣verance in the Faith, notwithstanding his Bonds and Sufferings, which he relates to them, together with the good fruits his Suf∣ferings produced; and declares, that though with respect to himself, it were much more eligible for him to die and be with Christ: Yet, that for their advantage and benefit, he was willing to continue in the Body, for their furtherance and encrease in Faith, Chap. 1. He exhorteth them to the practice and exer∣cise of all Christian virtues and graces, and above all to Patience, Perseverance, Unity and Humility; setting before them, the Divine Pattern and example of Jesus Christ, who being in the form of GOD, took upon him the appearance of a Servant, and hum∣bled himself even to Death upon the Cross; to which he subjoyns a particular recommen∣dation of Timothy and Epaphroditus, Chap. 2. Afterwards, he forearmeth them against the wiles and seduction of false Apostles, who con∣founded the Law and the Gospel together; teach∣ing that Salvation is to be attained, joyntly by the works of the Law, and by the Faith of Jesus Christ; to which he opposeth his own example, who gloried in nothing, save only in the knowledge of Christ, and adviseth them to imitate him herein. Chap. 3. After some particular admonitions to Love and Unity; and exhortations to a Christian and godly Conversation, he acknowledgeth their libe∣rality towards him, and represents to them, how very acceptable such sacrifices of Love and Charity were to GOD, concluding the Epistle with wonted greetings. The Contents of the Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle, to the Colossians. THE Colossians having embrac'd the Gospel of Christ, by the Ministry of some faithful Teachers, and particularly of Epaphras, there were found some amongst them, as well as the neighbouring Churches, of Laodicea and Hierapolis, Chap. 4.13. who endeavour'd to mingle with the simplicity of the Evangelical Doctrin, the Philosophy of the Greeks, and some ceremonial observa∣tions of the Mosaical Law; whereupon the Apostle S. Paul, then a Prisoner at Rome, be∣ing informed hereof by Epaphras, (as appears from 1.8. and Chap. 4.12) thought fit to write this Epistle, and sent it to them by the hands of Tychicus and Onesimus, that they might be fully informed of all his affairs, and more especially to strengthen them in the truth against all the wiles and errors of Sedu∣cers. Accordingly the Apostle in this Epistle, after the Prefatory part of it, which reacheth to the 12 verse of the 1st Chap. briefly sets down, in a very high and lofty stile,
the chief Heads of the Evangelical Doctrin, and more particularly treats concerning the transcendent excellence of the Person and Office of Jesus Christ, and the great Bene∣fits and Priviledges procured for us, by his Death and Suffering; and demonstrates that all the fulness of the Deity dwels, and is to be lookt for in him alone, to the 23d verse, and from thence to the end of the Chapter. He exhorts them to persevere without waver∣ing in the truth of this Doctrin, for which he suffered with Joy, as being made partaker therein of the sufferings of Jesus Christ, by whom he had been called to the Apostle∣ship, to publish and Preach this great Mystery of Christ in the hope of Glory In the 2d Chapter, he forearms them against the Errors before mentioned, as well of those who by Philosophy endeavoured to corrupt the simplicity of the Gospel; as of those others who made it their business to introduce a Superstitious Worship of Angels, and subject Believers to the observation of the Ceremonial Law, which observances he declares were only shadows of those glorious realities pur∣chased for us by Christ, who was the sub∣stance and Body of them all, to the end of the Chapter. In the 3d Chapter, he begins to exhort them to a Holy and Christian Con∣versation, to the 6th verse of the 4th Chap. And in the first place, he presseth them (in conformity with Christ their Head) to set their affections upon the things of Heaven, to mortifie the corrupt members of the Old Man, and to put on the New Man. (restored to the Glory of the Divine likeness) with all its Virtues and Graces, from the beginning of the 3d Chapter to the 17 verse; and from thence passeth to the particular duties of Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, to the 2d verse of the 4th Chap. At the 2d verse of the 4th Chap. he exhorts them to watchfulness in Prayer, and particularly for him; and to behave themselves with all Crcumspection towards those without. So that this Epistle thus far, seems to be much of the same Argument, as the foregoing Epistle to the Ephesians▪ save only that the same Doctrin, is more briefly and sccinctly delivered here. From the 7th verse to the end, the Apostle con∣cludes his Epistle, declaring that he sent Tychicus and Onesimus to them, that they might be fully informed of his state and condition, to verse 9. Then adds several greet∣ings to verse 17, and shuts up all with a charge, to cause this Epistle to be read also in the Church of Laodicea, to put Archippus in mind of being faithful in his Ministry, and to remember his Bonds. The Contents of the First Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to the Thessalonians. THE Apostle S. Paul having with the danger of his Life, gathered a flour∣ishing Church at Thessalonica, a great and Capital City of Macedonia; was forced toge∣ther with Silas and Timothy, (by the per∣secution of the Jews there inhabiting, who stirr'd up the Rabble against them,) to escape thence to Berea; whither being fol∣lowed by the same Jews, he left Timothy and Silas, and came to Athens, as may be seen at large, Acts 17. And afterwards they both being come to him to Athens, he sent Timo∣thy to Thessalonica, to visit that New-born Church, for which he was greatly concern'd, to the end that he might edifie and confirm them in the Truth; now when Timothy was returned from thence, and had inform'd him, being then at Corinth, of the condition where∣in he had found and left the Believers there; he judg'd it needful to write them this Letter, according to what himself declares at the beginning of the 3d Chap. This Epistle now, besides the Apostles inscription, consists of 2 principal Parts: in the first of which he strengthens them in the Faith they had received, to the end of the 3d Chap. and this he doth in the 4 following Branches; for in the 1st Chap. he witnesseth, with thanks to GOD upon this account, with what extraordi∣nary zeal, they had received the Faith in Jesus Christ, and been converted from Idols to serve the living GOD. In the 2d Chap. he puts them in mind of his courage, since∣rity, diligence and whole conversation amongst them, to the end he might shew himself a good example to them in all things: and this he doth to the 14 verse; and then relates the Persecutions they had patiently
endured, as well as himself, both from the Jews, and their Countrymen, to the 17 verse; and from thence to the end of the 3d Chap. he in very endearing terms expresseth to them, the desire he had to see them again, to the end he might supply, what might yet be wanting to their Faith, and that to this end he had sent Timothy unto them. In the other part, which he begins with the 4th Chap. he exhorts them to a Holy Chri∣stian Conversation, and to the exercise of several virtues, till the 13th verse; then adviseth them to moderate their mourning for the Dead, from the hope they had of a Glorious Resurrection, at the last coming of our Lord and Saviour; to the 14th verse of the 5th Chap. from whence to the end, he presseth several exhortations, particularly to watchfulness and sobriety, to put on the Arms of their Spiritual warfare, to respect and highly esteem their Pastors and Teachers, to Pray without ceasing, &c. and concludes his Epistle with an ardent Prayer to GOD for them, with the wonted Salutations, and an earnest charge to cause this Epistle to be read before all the Brethren. The Contents of the Second Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle, to the Thessalonians. AFter the Apostolical Inscription con∣tained in the two 1st verses, the Apostle commendeth the Patience and Perseverance of the Thessalonians, and comforts them against their sufferings, by the coming of Jesus Christ to Judgment, for the Punishment of Persecutors, and their deliverance, in the 1st Chap. Afterwards he informs them, that the Day of Judgment would not come so soon, as some might expect; because a ge∣neral Apostasie was to precede it, and the Revelation of the Man of Sin or Antichrist, whose Rise, Pride, Deceit and Downfal he Describes, adding a repeated exhortation to Perseverance in the Faith, to the end of the 2d Chap. Lastly, he exhorts them to a Christian Conversation; particularly charg∣ing them to Pray for him, to live in mutual Love and Charity, to withdraw themselves from Brethren that walk disorderly, and live in Idleness, whom he reproves by his own Example; and exhorts and commands them to work with quietness and eat their own Bread, and adviseth the Church, to censure those that shall be found refractory and diso∣bedient. To the 16 verse of the 3d Chap. and in the 3 following verses he concludes the Epistle, by his Prayer to GOD for them, and wonted greetings. So that this 2d Epistle, appears to be much of the same im∣port with the first; because the Apostle having had no opportunity to visit the Thessalonians, thought good to write again to them, and back his former Epistle for their instruction and Consolation. The Contents of the First Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle, to Timothy. SAint Paul Travelling from Ephesus to Macedonia, had left Timothy at Ephesus, to govern that Church for some time, as being one of the principal Churches of Asia; which appears from the 3d verse of the 1st Chap. and whilst he was on his way, or as others judge, after he was arrived at Phi∣lippi, writes this Epistle to him; in the which he carefully and faithfully instructs him, and in his Person, all the Ministers of the Gospel, how they ought to carry them∣selves in their Holy Function. Accordingly in the 1st Chap. after the wonted Apostoli∣cal Salutation, he adviseth him to take great care, that no strange or vain Doctrin be introduc'd into the Church▪ by those who pretending to be Teachers of the Law, do indeed know nothing; and points at the true use of the Law, to verse▪ 11, from whence to the end of the Chapter, he pro∣pounds, in his own Example, an Abridg∣ment of the Gospel, which was committed to him, charging Timothy to keep close and stedfast to it, and courageously to resist all gainsayers, as himself also had opposed Hy∣menus and Alexander, and cast them out of the Church. In the 2d Chap. he ordains that Prayer be made for all men, and more
particularly for Kings, and all in Authority; and prescribes a general Rule, how both Men and Women ought to behave themselves in the Church. In the 3d Chap. he sets down the Order to be observed, in the calling or or∣daining of Pastors and Deacons. In the 4th Chap. he foretells, how some in the last days shall depart from the Faith, forbidding Marriage, and certain sorts of Meat, which GOD had created to be received with thank∣fulness; he exhorts him to Perseverance in the Truth, and the constant practise of God∣liness, which he declares to be profitable on all accounts; to attend to reading, exhorta∣tion and Doctrin; and to stir up the Gift he had received, by the laying on of Hand In the 5th Chap. he informs him, how to carry himself in his censures and exhorta∣tions, to young or old Men or Women; par∣ticularly he instructs him, how those Widows must be qualified, who are admitted to the service of the Poor; and in how great esteem those Presbyters or Elders ought to be, that govern well, strictly charging him before GOD not to lay his Hands suddenly upon any Man. In the last Chap. he exhorts Servants, to be Faithful in their Duties; and again chargeth Timothy to have a care of false Teachers, who amuse themselves with impro∣fitable questions, and verbal contests; com∣mands all to be content with their own Condition, and to beware of Covetousness; and exhorts Timothy, very pressingly to behave himself in all things as becomes the Gospel, and to charge Rich Men to be humble and charitable; and concludes his Epistle, with once more pressing Timothy to be Faithful, to the trust committed to him. The Contents of the Second Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle, to TIMOTHY. THe Apostle S. Paul being a Prisoner at Rome, Chap. 1.8. and perceiving his Death to draw near, Chap. 4.6. writes this Se∣cond Epistle to Timothy who then was at Ephe∣sus; in which (after the usual Greetings) he wisheth him to come to him with the first occasion, signifying how earnestly he desired to see him because of his extraordinary Piety, in the which he had been Educated from his Infancy, by his Mother and Grandmother; and exhorts him seriously to make good use of the Divine gifts and graces bestowed up∣on him, and boldly to propagate the excellent and holy Doctrin of the Gospel, according to his Example: And this the rather, because all those of Asia had left him, besides Onesiphorus, who had been very helpful to him, Chap. 1. That in order to the further propagating of this holy Drctrin, he should commit the things (he had heard of him) to good and faithful Men, that might teach them to others, and particularly, to insist upon that capital and fundamental Point of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: He comforts and strengthens him against Afflictions, as well by his own Example, as by the glorious Reward which attends such Sufferings; exhorts him to avoid all vain Contests and unprofitable Disputes, and to beware of Hereticks, such as Hymenaeus and Philetus, who denied the Resurrection of the Dead; to shun youthful Lusts, and to ex∣ercise himself in all Christian Vertuos, Chap. 2. And to the end he might excite him to a greater degree of Watchfulness; he declares to him, what a dangerous sort of Men would arise in the last days, and oppose the sound and holy Doctrin of the Gospel, pressing him to follow his Example, and immovably to con∣tinue in the Doctrin he had learnt of him, as agreeing in all things with the Holy Scrip∣tures; the profitableness and sufficiency of which, to salvation, he fully asserts, Chap. 3. Lastly, Foreseeing his approaching decease, he most seriously and earnestly exhorts him, to discharge his Duty with all faithfulness and diligence, and to come to him before Winter, because all had forsaken him, at his first appearance before Nero, in order to his Trial, and concludes with the wonted Salutation.
The Contents of the Epistle of S. Paul to TITUS. TITUS, a Greek or Gentile by Birth, Gal. 2.3. being Converted to the Faith, became a faithful Companion of S. Paul in his Travels, as well as in the Ministry of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 2.12. and 8.23. for the Apostle sent him to Corinth, to procure and receive a charitable Collection for the Believers of Judea, 2 Cor. 7.14. and 8.6, 16, 23. and 12.18 and into Dalmatia, thereto Preach the Word, 2 Tim. 4.10. and into the Isle of Crete to provide the Churches with faithful Ministers, Chap. 1.5. to which end also he wrote to him this Epistle, in which (after his wonted Greet∣ings) he seriously informs him of the necessary Qualifications of the Ministers and Conductors of Churches, as to their Life, Doctrin, and Gifts; and afterwards, because in that City there were many wicked Men and Deceivers, who insisted on Jewish Fables, and taught the distinction of Meats, he chargeth him to censure and reprove them, and to stop their mouths, Chap. 1. Afterwards, because some wrested and abused the Doctrin of the Gospel, to encourage Licentiousness, he adviseth him to teach, as well all persons in general, Young and Old, Parents and Children, Husbands and Wives; as in particular, Believing Servants or Slaves, how to behave themselves in their several stations and relations; and above all things, to shew himself a pattern of good Works in all holy and Christian conversation; teaching them, That the Doctrin of the Gos∣pel declares, that the Saving-Grace (procur'd by Jesus Christ) was not revealed, to mini∣ster an occasion to Loosness of life and Li∣centiousness; but on the contrary, powerfully to engage us to the practice of all Vertues, Chap. 2. And forasmuch as some also abused their Christian Liberty, to the encouraging of Rebellion, he presseth him in the 3d Chap∣ter, incessantly to exhort Believers to Obedi∣ence, and subjection to the Superior Powers, and to behave themselves with all respect towards them, notwithstanding their being Heathens; and to this end puts them in mind, that before their Conversion they were such themselves, tho' now restored to a saving Condition, through the Love and Mercy of GOD in Christ, not by works of their own Righteousness, but of his meer Grace; advi∣seth Timothy also to avoid foolish Questions, and unprofitable Contests, and to reject He∣reticks after the first or second Admonition; and having recommended some particular Affairs unto him, he closeth his Epistle with the wonted Greetings. The Contents of the Epistle of S. Paul to PHILEMON. THis Philemon, to whom S. Paul writes here, seems to have been a Minister of the Gospel at Coloss, ver. 1.17, 23. and Coloss. 1.7. and 4.9, 12, 17. whose Servant or Slave Onesimus, was run away from him, and had robb'd him; but coming to S. Paul, who was a Prisoner at Rome, he was Converted by him to the Christian Religion; and being desirous to return to his Master, he prays the Apostle to give him a Letter of Intercession and Re∣commendation to him, that thereby he might be restor'd to his Masters Favor. To this purpose S. Paul writes this Epistle, in which after the Inscription and Salutation in the three first Verses, after a becoming Insinua∣tion, to gain Philemon's good will, by an expression of his Love towards him, and of the Vertues for which Philemom was noted; a particularly for his great Charity to Be∣lievers, and Faith in Jesus Christ, ver. 8. He declares, That he would not lay his Com∣mands upon him in this matter, tho' well he might, but only affectionately desire him so, and then propounds his Request, shewing the justice and reasonableness of it, as being pro∣fitable to Philemon, and in some sort necessary 15 ver. acknowledgeth Onesimus his fault, but withal represents, that it prov'd an occasion of his Conversion, by which means he was now become his Brother, ver. 18. and becomes Surety to Philemon, for the loss he had su∣stained by him, v. 20. and at last concludes his Request with most tender and pathetical Ex∣pressions, v. 22. and wishes him to prepare him a Lodging, v. 23. Salutes him in the name of some of his Companions, v. 25. and shuts up all with his wonted Greeting.
The Contents of the Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle, to the HEBREWS. NOtwithstanding some have doubted con∣cerning the Author of this Epistle, and have attributed it, some to S. Barnabas, others to S. Luke, and others again to S. Clement; yet all the ancient Greek Writers, and a good part of the Latin, do unanimously attribute it to S. Paul, and accordingly most of the Greek Copies of the New Testament retain this In∣scription. S. Peter also writing to those of the Circumcision, witnesseth expresly, (2 Pet. 3.15) that the Apostle S. Paul had also writ to them, according to the wisdom given unto him; which in all appearance cannot be meant of any other Epostle but this. Besides, if we please to confer, what we read Hebr. 13.19, 23. with what S. Paul writes to Timothy, 2 Tim. 4 16, 17. we shall find good reason to believe, that this Epistle was writ at Rome, at that time, when the Apostle (after his first ap∣pearing before Nero) had conceived some hopes of his Enlargement, and that he promis'd him∣self to be in a condition, to take a Journy soon after with Timothy to Jerusalem, to visit them; so that this Epistle seems to have been sent to make way for this his intended Visit. This Epistle is a most excellent part of the New Testament, in the which (according to the Order commonly observ'd by S. Paul, in the most part of his Epistles, and in a lofty and divine Style) he treats at large of the transcendent excellency of the Person and Office of Jesus Christ our Saviour, to the 19th Verse of the 10th Chapter; and from thence to the end of the Epistle, he sets down several Exhortations, tending to strengthen and con∣firm them in the Faith of the Gospel, and in a holy and Christian Conversation. In the two first Chapters he treats of the Person of Jesus Christ; in the 1st he asserts and proves the Truth of his Eternal Divine Nature, and his Preheminence above all Angels; in the 2d, he demonstrates the Truth of his Huma∣nity, or Human Nature, which he took from the Seed of Abraham, for our Redemption and Reconciliation to GOD the Father. In the 3d and 4th Chapters, he speaks of his Prophe∣tical Office, exalting the same far above that of the great Prophet Moses; declaring, that his Doctrin (as being the Eternal Word and Wisdom of the Father) is far more sublime, worthy, and powerful, than that of Moses, or any other Prophet whatsoever; and conse∣quently, that it ought the more carefully to be heeded and obeyed. In the 5th Chapter, he begins to treat of the Call of Jesus Christ to his Sacerdotal Office, and after a Parenthetical Discourse, reaching from the 11th Verse of that Chapter, to the end of the 6th, wherein he blames their dulness and unfitness to un∣derstand these Mysteries, and exhorts them to leave the Rudiments of Christianity, and to press on to the Perfection of a Man-like growth in Christ; he in the 7th Chapter proceeds, to set forth the Sacerdotal and Kingly Office of Jesus Christ, by a continued Com∣parison between Him and Melchisedeck, to the end of the Chapter. In the 8th, 9th, and part of the 10th Chapters, he represents the tran∣scendent Excellence of the Priestly Office of Christ, by comparing his Eternal Priesthood with the Levitical Priesthood of Aaron, and the Temporal Covenant made with the Fa∣thers, with the Eternal Covenant ratified by the Blood of Christ, and therewithal con∣cludes the former part of this Epistle. At the 19th Verse of the 10th Chapter, he proceeds to the latter part, exhorting them in general, to Obedience and constant Perseve∣rance in the abovesaid Doctrin, notwith∣standing their Persecutions and his Bonds. In the 11th Chapter, he gives an excellent description of Faith, and of its miraculous power and efficacy; and in the 12th, Discourses of the excellent properties of Christian Hope and Patience: And in the 13th Chapter, to the 13th Verse, he treats of the Duties of Christian Love and Charity; and then con∣cludes his Epistle with an earnest and ardent Prayer to GOD for them, and a short Admo∣nition, with an account of Timothy's being set at Liberty, and his wonted Salutation.
The LIFE of S. ANDREW. OF all the 12 Apostles, S. Andrew was the first mentioned by Name, to have been a Follower, and Disciple of our Saviour; (the other Disciple who accompanied him be∣ing S. John the Evangelist,) whose Disciple he first was, being the Brother of S. Peter; He also was the first that brought his Brother Tidings of a Messiah come into the World, and was the occasion of bringing him to be his Follower and Disciple. What befell him in our Saviours Life-time, so far as is deli∣vered in the Evangelist, has been already mentioned. After our LORD's Ascension, and the descent of the Holy Ghost on the Apostles, when they chose among themselves by Lot, each of them their part of the World to Preach in, S. Andrew is said to have had Scythia, and the adjacent Regions assigned him for his Province, to which he Travelled thô Galatia and Bythinia▪ Preaching all the way he went. The first place he made any stay at, was Amynsus, from whence he went to Trapezus, and so from one place to ano∣ther, till he came to Nice, where he stayed 2 years: From Nice he went to Nicomedia, thence to Chalcedon, and so thrô Propontis, and by the Euxin Sea to Heraclea. At A∣mynsus, Nice, and other places where he staid any time, by his Preaching and Miracles he Converted very many, Baptized them into the Faith and Ordain'd Priests and Deacons among them. From Heraclea he went to Amesris, where the barbarity of the people made him soon weary and leave it; but far worse was his Treatment at Sinope, the Birth and Burial place of the Famous Mithridates King of Pontus, a place much Inhabited by Jews; out of this City (after divers inhuman Outrages committed upon him,) he was thrust out for Dead; but returned again, and the se∣veral Miracles which he wrought, brought many of them to a sense of their Errors, and afterwards treated him more civilly. At his first coming to this place, he met with his Brother Peter, who bore him company some time. From Sinope he return'd to Amynsus, so to Trapezus, and Samosata, (the Birth place of Lucian) in his Journey to Jerusalem; from whence after some short stay he is said to return to his Scythian Provinces, first to the Country of Abasgi, where at Sebastople a City on the Euxine-Shoar, he Preach'd to the Inhabitants with success; hence he remov'd into the Country of the Zecchi and Bosphrani; but his chief stay was at Chersonesus, a popu∣lous City within the Bosphorus of Thrace; whence he went back to Sinope to confirm the Churches he had thereabouts Planted, and some say Ordain'd one of Paul's Disciples, Named Philologus▪ Bishop thereof. From Si∣nope he went to Byzantium, afterwards built by Constantine, and from his Name called Constantinople, where he Founded a Church, and Ordained S. Pauls beloved Stachys, first Bishop thereof. Being Banish't this place by the then Governour, he fled to Argiopolis, where he stayed 2 years; then Journeying thr Thrace, Macedon, Thessaly, Achaia, and E∣pirus▪ he setled at last at Patrae a City of Achaia, where he seal'd with a resolute Mar∣tyrdom the verity of that Faith, which he had Preach'd both here and in so many pla∣ces; the occasion whereof was (as is recorded in the Book called the Acts of S. Andrew's Passion) said to have been written by the A∣chaian Presbyters and Deacons, who were pre∣sent at his Execution; however mentioned by Philastrius, (an Author who lived Anno Dom. 380,) his bold and free Application to Ae∣geas, Proconsul of Achaia, who came to Pa∣trae at the same time of his being there, with serious admonishment to forsake his Heathen∣ish Superstitions and Idolatry, and to embrace the worship of the true GOD; by which ad∣vice, instead of being perswaded to reason, he became 7 times more hardned in his Pa∣gan Lewdness, and did all he could with per∣swasions as well as Threats, to draw over this Apostle to Sacrifice to his Gods and to re∣nounce the Christian Religion he so zealously Preach'd, for the saving of his Life; which when he saw him bent against, even to the Death, he then resolved his Death, and com∣mitted him to Prison, from which (for that time) the people somewhat mollified by his Doctrin, and innocent Life, by a high hand delivered him. But being brought again before the Proconsul, and resolutely withstand∣ing, as before, all the powerful Arguments he could use to bring him over; he incenst him to that heighth, that without more de∣lay, he proceeded to pronounce Sentence of
Death on him, and with so much the greater Fury, as being so much exasperated for hav∣ing converted his Wife Maximilla, and his Brother Stratulus. After Sentence of Death pronounced, he was committed to the Lictors, and had his naked Body Scourged by 7 of them one after another; which done, com∣mand was given, that he should not be Nail∣ed to the Cross, but ty'd with Cords, to make his Death the more lingring; nor was it a common sort of Cross, but made Salter-wise. In this posture he is said to have hung 2 days, and in that Languishing condition, ex∣horting the people to stand fast to the Faith, which he had Preached unto them. Being Dead, his Body was taken down, and by Maximilla the Proconsuls-Wife, ordered to be Embalm'd, and decently Interr'd; but from this place of Burial, in after Ages, his Body was by Constantine the Great, remov'd to Constantinople, and Buried in that Church, which he had there Built in Honour of the Apostles, remaining so incorruptible, that in Justinians time, in repairing that part of the Church, his Body was found in a Wooden-Ves∣sel among the Rubish, and with great care reposited in his former place. We shall con∣clude with the Character given this Apostle by Hesychius, an ancient and creditable Au∣thor; S. Andrew, saith he, was the first born of the Apostolick Quire, the main and prime Pillar of the Church, a Rock before the Rock, the first Fruits of the beginning, a Caller of others, before he was called himself, a Preach∣er of that Gospel that was not yet believed, or entertained, and a Revealer of that Life to his Brother, which he had not yet perfectly learnt himself. The LIFE of S. JAMES the Great. SAint James, commonly sirnamed the Great, either for his Age, or some par∣ticular Honours conferred on him by our LORD, was Born (some say) at Capernaum, others at Bethsaida, in Galilee. He was the Son of Zebedee, a Fisher-man, but of more than ordinary Note, keeping several Servants under him for that Employment; and Mary sirnamed Salome, formerly Taviphilia, was Daughter of Cleopas's Sister, or rather Cousin German to Mary the Mother of our LORD. Whilst he was exercising himself in his Fathers Trade, in the Sea of Galilee, our Saviour passing along the Shoar, seeing him and his Brother in a Ship busie about their Nets, call∣ed to them to follow him, and to be his Dis∣ciples, promising to make them Fishers of men. This command they readily obeyed, and not long after were called to the Aposto∣lical Office. Moreover these 2 Brothers, and Peter, made up the Triumvirat, before men∣tion'd in S. Peter's Life; and were admitted most particularly of all the rest, to several of our Saviours most grand Transactions. They were at the raiing of Jairus's Daughter, they were at his Transfiguration, and Specta∣tors of his bitter Agony in the Garden. And as Simon, was by our LORD new named Pe∣ter, so these 2 Brethren were named Baner∣ges, or the Sons of Thunder, alluding per∣haps, to the power and vehemency they shewed in the delivery of their Doctrin. How S. James steer'd his Course, after our Saviours Ascension, is variously discoursed. Sophronius saith, he Preach'd to the Converted Jews. The Breviary of Toledo, Isidorus, and an Arabick Copy of Anastasius, and the Span∣ish Writers in general, will have it, That af∣ter the Martyrdom of S. Stephen, having Preached and Planted the Gospel up and down Judaea and Samaria, he Travelled into the Western parts of the World, meaning Spain, and the British Isles, but more espe∣cially Spain. But whether he were a Tra∣veller into these Western parts, or whether his Ministry was confined to Judaea and the parts thereabouts; certain it is that at Jeru∣salem, we have the last account of him; it being the place where he first of the Apostles, received the Crown of Martyrdom, by the means of Herod Agrippa, Son of Aristobulus, and Grandchild of Herod the Great, who caus∣ed this Apostle to be apprehended, Imprisoned, and Beheaded; which said Death the Soul∣dier that Guarded him, or as some say, one of his Accusers (convinc'd by the constancy he shew'd at his Tryal, embracing the Chri∣stian Faith,) suffered along with him. How Divine Vengeance overtook this vain-Glorious Prince, for the Death of this Righteous per∣son, is at large delivered in Holy Writ. As to the miraculous Passage of his interment in Spain, we can only relate what is Recorded by a Monk of the Abby of La Fleury in
France, viz. that when Ctesiphon was by the Apostles at Jerusalem design'd for Spain, with the Ordination of Bishop, he (with others his assistants) carried along with them the Body and Relicts of this Apostle in a Ship without Oars or Pilot; they landed at a Port in Spain, where (after an appearance of an extraordi∣nary Light from Heaven) the Body was on a sudden taken from them, and conveyed to the place of its Interment; but upon their trouble for so great a loss, and their recourse to earnest Prayer, they were directed by an Angel to a place about 12 Miles from the Sea, which being the Jurisdiction of a Noble-Woman, whose Estate lay all thereabouts, by name Luparia; they applied themselves to her, for leave to bury the Bones of the Apostle in her Territory, which met with such enter∣tainment at first, ar might well be expected from such a bigotted Pagan as she was, that is, Contempt, Indignation, and Curses: But their second Address, accompanied with Mi∣racles, and the destroying of a Dragon that cruelly harassed all the Country thereabouts, made so happy an Impression in her Mind, that of an Idolatress, she became a Votaress for the Christian Faith, and converted her Idol Temples into Churches of Religious Wor∣ship, and dedicated them to the honour of this holy Apostle, and gave the Victory to Chri∣stianity over Heathenish Superstition through∣out all her Jurisdiction, and the adjacent parts round about. From the place of his first Interment, Iria Flavia, he is said to have been afterwards conveyed to Compostella, if at least Iria Flavia were the place of his first Interment, and not rather as a learned Author observes, the same with Compostella, so con∣tracted by long time, and the vulgar abuse of words from Jacomo Postolo. However it is, great resort is made yearly to this place, upon the same of those mighty Miracles, said to be done by the Relicts of this Saint, inso∣much that Baronius calls this place, The great store-house of Miracles, lying open to the whole World But this Relation is not inserted as Canonical. The LIFE of S. PHILIP. OF this Apostle there is not much Re∣corded in Holy Writ, but that he was born at Bethsaida, and his being the only Disciple, that stayed altogether with our Sa∣viour, from the first time of his Call: Who his Parents were is not delivered, but is ge∣nerally believed to be also a Fisherman. What part of the World fell to his Lot, in the di∣vision made by the Apostles, we have no very certain, and Authentick account; but it is the probable conjecture of some, that upper Asia was his Province; where having for many years successfully discharged his Aposto∣lical Function, he betook himself to Hiera∣polis, a Rich and Populous City of Phrygia, where seeing the People besotted to the ado∣ration of a great Serpent, or Dragon; he partly by the destruction thereof, (which he is said to have procured by his earnest Pray∣ers to Heaven,) and partly by representing to them, the Stupidity of their Idolatry, and the sadness of their Condition, if they persisted in it; he drew off great numbers of the People, from their blind worship, to the embracing the true Faith. But this the Magistrates took so heinously, that nothing less than his Death would serve their turn; as a Prologue to which, they caused him to be severly Scourged; then he was either Crucified, (or as some say, Hung up by the Neck against a Pillar. It is further added, That at his Execution, the ground upon which the People stood, sunk under them, which when they were troubled at (as an act of Divine vengeance upon their Sins,) it sud∣denly stopt. His dead Body being taken down, and decently buried by his Sister Mari∣amne, a constant companion with him in his Travels, and Bartholomew, a fellow-sufferer, (but not at this time executed;) for being nailed to the Cross, he was taken down upon a sudden panick fear, that for the present sur∣prized them. Policrates Bishop of Ephesus, not speaking of his Martyrdom, only tells us, That Philip, one of the 12 Apostles died at Hierapolis with 2 of his Daughters, who persever'd in their Virginity. Which Testimo∣ny confirms, what is generally attested of him, by the ancient Writers, viz. That he was a Married man: There was never any thing of writing produc'd, that could be certainly ascrib'd to this Apostle; that Gospel which the Gnosticks would have been the Author of, being only a forgery for the patronizing of their horrid principles, and brutish Practices.
The LIFE of S. BARTHOLOMEW. THat this was one of the 12 Apostles, is not to be doubted, though menti∣oned by a different name; for that Nathaniel, whom John the Evangelist joyns with Philip, at their first coming to Christ, is doubtless the same Person, which the other 3 Evange∣lists mentions by the name of Bartholomew; which may be supposed, to be rather a deno∣mination from his Family, than his own pro∣per name; for as Peter is called Bar-Jona, that is, the Son of Jona, so Nathaniel might be called Bartholomew, as it were Bar-tolmai, that is, the Son of Tolmai, which some will have to be the same with Ptolomy, and thence take occasion to derive him from the Nobles of the Ptolomies of Egypt; but this seems to have little agreement with what the Evan∣gelists unanimously speak of Nathaniel; namely, that he was of Cana in Galilee. Whatever his Trade or course of Life was, thô most probably a Fisherman, he received from our Saviour at first sight, this high Character, That he was a true Israelite in∣deed without guile. His Travels for the propagation of the Gospel, are said to have been towards India; for a more particular Testimony whereof Eusebius writes, that Pantaenus (a famous stoical Philosopher) after his Conversion, being zealous to promulge the Gospel, taking a Journy into some parts of India, there found the Gospel of S. Mat∣thew, which Bartholomew had left behind him. However it were, as to his remote Travels, he was at Hierapolis with Philip, where he narrowly escaped Martyrdom; from thence he went to Lycaonia, where he Preached with success; his last and fatal removal, and where he suffered Martyrdom, was Albanopolis, a City in Armenia, or rather Cilicia, if it be the Urbanoplis of Ni∣cepherus; for seeking to reclaim the Inha∣bitants, from their gross Idolatry, he was laid hold on by the Magistracy, not en∣during that any should go about to alter their establish't Religion, and was Crucified, some say, with his head downwards; others, that he was first Fleed, and then Crucified. His Body is said to have been removed to several places, first to Daras a City on the borders of Persia; next to Laparis one of the Aeolian Isles; from thence to Beneventum in Italy, and lastly to Rome. Upon this Apostle there was fathered a Gospel by certain Here∣ticks, out of design for countenancing their own opinions; but it was rejected by Pope Gelasius, as fabulous, and altogether sup∣posititious. The LIFE of S. THOMAS. OF the Birth and Parentage of this Apostle, we have no account; only we find in Scripture, that his Sirname was Didy∣mus; which in Greek signifieth Twin, and so doth the Syria, Thauma, from whence Tho∣mas; so that in effect one Name serves but to interpret the other. He was a Jew, and supposed a Galilean: Simeon the Metaphrast affirms him born of very mean Parents, and brought up a Fisherman; but withal well in∣structed in the knowledge of the Scripture. His slowness of belief in the matters of our Saviour's Resurrection, seems not so much an effect of an obstinate Infidelity, as of the weakness of his Faith, too much overrul'd by human Reason; wherefore instead of being angry with him, took the more pains to con∣vince him by an ocular and manual Demon∣stration. Whether his Province assign'd him was Parthia, is not certain; the like is his being said to Preach to the Medes, Persians, Hircanians, Bactrians, and (as some add) the Aethiopians. As to his Travelling a great way into the Eastern Countries, as far as Sumatra, anciently Trapobane, and the Coun∣try of the Brachmans, the Discoveries made by the Portugals in those Parts seems capable of giving a surer account in some things than can be expected from the Ancients, partly from Monuments and Writing, and partly from the Traditions of the Christians there: They relate that S. Thomas came to Socotoa, thence to Granganor, and so forwards, making some progress in his works; then returning, came to the Kingdom of Cormandel, and at Malibar he began a Church for his Converts, but was
hindred by the Priests, whose profit was too great to part with their Diana, till Sagamo (the Prince of the Country) convinc'd by the Miracles he wrought, not only suffered the Work to go on, but embrac'd the Faith, and by his Example multitudes of the People did the like. But this success of his Ministry hastned his Martyrdom; for the Brackmans well knowing that their Trade would be quite lost by the altering their Country Religion, resolved by his death to put a stop thereon; and to that end, knowing that he used daily to resort to a certain Tomb, or Monument, for exercise of his private Devotion, not far out of the Town; they went thither with a Company of Armed-men, and as he was in∣tent at prayer (after they had pour'd on him a shower of Darts and Stones) one amongst them, to make a quick dispatch, run him through the Body with a Launce. His Body being taken up by his Disciples, was Buried in the Church he had lately built, which after∣wards became a magnificent Structure. From hence some affirm it was removed to Edessa in Mesopotamia; but the the Christians of those parts affirm the contrary. The Dnative given by King Segame for the building the Church is Inscrib'd in Brass Tables, which are said to have been brought to Don Alphonso, Vice-Roy of India, under John the Third, King of Portugal; the Inscription being interpreted to him by a Learned Jew. Another thing of great Remark, which we are told of▪ is a Cross found in the Chappel of S. Thomas at Malibar, on which is an Inscription (inter∣preted by a Learned Bramin) which contains all the Passages of this Apostle from his first coming to Malibar, to his Death, in that place. To conclude, for confirmation of what hath been said of this Apostle, The Portugals (at their Arrival in these Parts) found great num∣bers of Christians, called Thomas-Christians, a sort of People very poor, and having very mean and plain Churches, without any Pictures or Images of Saints, or any other Represen∣tatives, but that of the Cross. They are under a High-Priest or Patriarch, to whom all the Christians of the East are subject, who hath his Seat at Muzal; the Remainder, is of the ancient Seleucia, who with 12 Cardinals, a lesser Patriarchs, and several Bishops, orders all Religious Affairs. They have several re∣markable Rites and Customs observed amongst them, which at large may be seen in Osorius, Paulus Venetus, and some other Learned Wri∣ters of the Affairs of these Parts. The LIFE of S. JAMES the Lesser. TO wave the Controversie of those, who besides S. James the Greater, and S. James the Lesser, will have a third, Sirnamed the Just, who they say was Bishop of Jeru∣salem. We shall follow the more probable Opinion of those who make out, that there were but the two first. This Apostle is most probably the Son of Joseph, espous'd Husband to the Blessed Virgin by his former Wife, whom S. Jerom styles Escha; Hippolytus (Bishop of Prt Salome) adding, That she was the Daughter of Aggi, Brother to Zacharias, Father to John the Baptist; whence he might well be reputed our LORD's Brother, since he himself was reputed the Son of Joseph: And whereas our Apostle is by some called the Son of Alpheus, it may very well be un∣derstood either of Joseph's being called by another Name, Alpheus, as hath been already observed of others in the same nature, or of his being of a particular Sect amongst the Jews, call'd Alpheus. As to the place of his Birth, and profession of Life, no mention is made of either in Scripture; only as to the first, the Jews in their Talmud, call him a Man of the Town of Secania. After the Re∣surrection of our LORD, he appeared to him in particular; as is Recorded by S. Paul; In the next place (saith he) after he had mani∣fested himself to the five hundred Brethren at once, he was seen of James; which is gene∣rally meant of this Apostle. S. Hierom, from the Nazarens Hebrew Gospel, in which are several Passages, not found in the Evangelists, gives us this particular Relation, viz. That S. James (after he had drunk of the Cup at the Institution of the Last Supper) solemnly Swearing, That he would not eat Bread again, till he saw the LORD risen from the Dead; He (as soon as he was Risen) appeared to him, and commanded Bread to be set before him, took it, brake it, and blessing it, gave it to James; saying, Eat thy Bread, my Brother, for the Son of Man is truly Risen from among them that sleep. Not long after our Saviours Acension, he for his near Relation to Christ,
was before all the rest, chosen Bishop of Je∣rusalem by the Apostles; and this has the greater probability, since doubtless for the same reason Simeon, who was next of Kin, was his next Successor in that See. Moreover, in the Synod of Jerusalem, after matters had been long debated in the Controversies be∣tween the Jews and Gentiles, James at last stood up and gave his definitive Sentence to this effect, I judge it so. The more careful he was in the Administration of his Episcopal Office, and the Success he had therein, so much the more enflamed their Malice against him, especially since they could not have their will on Paul, by reason of his Appeal to Caesar, and not being able to effect their design under Festus his Government, they resolv'd to dis∣patch him before the Arrival of Albinus the New Governor; to this end Ananus, the High Priest of the Sect of the Sadducees (the most Cruel of all the Jewish Sects) suddenly calls a Council, before which the Apostle with others being called, are Arraign'd and Con∣demn'd as Infringers of the Law; but because they thought not fit to proceed with open Violence against him, for fear of the People (among whom were many Converts;) the Scribes and Pharisees, as the most subtle in the Art of Dissimulation, are set upon him to entrap him with specious Pretences; telling him, That knowing him to be a Just man, they doubted not, but he would comply with them in drawing off the Seduced People, from the Opinion they had falsly conceived of JESUS, supposed to be the Messiah; and so going up with him to the Pinnacle of the Temple, that he might be seen and heard of all, they thus accosted him; Tell us, O Justus, seeing the People are thus generally led away with the Doctrin of Jesus, who was Crucified, what is this Institution of the Crucified JESUS? To which the Apostle with a loud Voice an∣swered, Why do ye enquire after JESUS the Son of God? he sits in Heaven, on the right Hand of his Father on high, and will come again in the Clouds of Heaven. Hereupon the People below openly proclaim'd, Glory to Jesus; Hosannah to the Son of David. The Learned Politicians seeing themselves thus deceived, cried out, That Justus himself was become an Impostr; and in a rage threw him down, which so bruised him, that he mira∣culously escaped Death; but he soon reco∣vered strength enough to get upon his Knees, and pray for these his malicious Enemies; who nevertheless more enraged to see them∣selves frustrated of their Murtherous design, resolved to prosecute what they had begun, and continued pelting him with stones, as he was on his Knees, till one among them (mer∣ciful in Cruelty, to put an end to his lingring Pain) beat out his Brains with a Fullers Club. This untimely and barbarous Death was in the 86th year of his Age, and 24 years after the Ascension of our Saviour. He was buried in the place of his Martyrdom, near the Tem∣ple, where a Monument was erected, which remained a long time after: But Gregory, Bishop of Tours, saith, He was Buried on Mount Olivet, in a Tomb which he built for himself, and where he had caused Zacharias and old Simeon to be Entomb'd. There is generally received for authentick only one Epistle of his Writing, supposed to have been written a little before his Martyrdom, as ha∣ving some Passages relating to the approach∣ing Downfal of the Jewish Nation. It is directed to the Jewish Converts, disperst up and down the Eastern Countries, to comfort them in their Sufferings, and to confirm them in their Faith against the Gnosticks, and other erronious Opinions. True it is, that some of the ancient Greek Fathers have sup∣posed, that this Epistle was not writ by this Apostle, but by another of that Name, Sir∣named The Just, and who is also called Oblias, being one of the 70 Disciples of our Saviour, and who (by the Apostles) was Consecrated the first Bishop of Jerusalem; but forasmuch as almost all the Greek Copies in the Inscrip∣tion, or Title of this Epistle express the Name of this Apostle, and that it is not at all pro∣bable, that one who was only a Disciple should undertake to write a Circular Letter to all the Churches for their Confirmation and Instru∣ction, whilst the Apostles were yet in being, to whom this Charge particularly appertain'd, we have great reason to conclude, that the Author of this Epistle was indeed an Apostle, because otherwise the Canonical and Apostoli∣cal Authority of this part of the New Testa∣ment; might be call'd in question.
The Contents of the General Epistle of S. JAMES. THe Apostle S. JAMES having writ this Epistle to the scattered Believers of the Circumcision, who had already been instructed in the Principles of the Christian Religion, and professed the same; we find that herein he doth not so exactly treat of the Funda∣mental Articles of Christianity, as the other Apostles do in theirs: But because some of these believing Jews, began to despond and be discouraged, because of the extream violence of Persecution, and that others of them did not live in a sufficient conformity to the Do∣ctrin of Christ, his chief aim in this Epistle seems to have been, partly to comfort and strengthen them against those Miseries and Afflictions they laboured under; and partly to exhort them to joyn a Holy, Religious, and Christian Conversation, to the outward Pro∣fession of Faith in Jesus Christ. To this pur∣pose, (after the Inscription) he exhorts them to Patience under the Cross, which commonly accompanies the Profession of the Gospel, re∣presenting the good and saving Fruits spring∣ing from thence; and teacheth, That Wisdom being the Gift of GOD, is to be sought for of him alone; That when any one is Tempted to sin, it is not GOD that tempts him, but his own Lust; That it is not sufficient to Hear the Word of GOD, but that it must be exprest in our Actions and Practice; and declares wherein true and pure Religion consists, Ch. 1. He proceeds to exhort them, not to accept and regard the Persons of the Rich, to the undervaluing or despising of the Poor; and teacheth, That Saving Faith must always be accompanied with good Works, because Faith without Works is dead, Chap. 2. He censures and reproves those who rashly or arrogantly take upon them, to instruct or correct others; exhorts to bridle the Tongue, shewing what a powerful Instrument it is, either of much good or great mischief, and that true, divine Wisdom consists in Meekness and Peaceable∣ness, being an utter Enemy to Envy, Strife, Partiality, and Hypocrisy, Chap. 3. He ear∣nestly presseth them carefully to avoid Evil Lusts, by representing to them the mischie∣vous effects of them; and exhorteth them to Humility and true Repentance, and to avoid all evil Speaking and Judging of others; re∣proves those who frame Worldly designs and projects, and please themselves in the imagi∣nary success of them, without having an Eye to the uncertainty of humane Life, or the superintendence of the Divine Providence, to which they ought to commit themselves and all their affairs, Chap. 4. He severely threatens the Rich, who abuse their Riches, and oppress the Poor; and exhorts the poor by many arguments, patiently to suffer the Injuries of the Rich; straitly forbids all Swearing; teaches those who are afflicted and diseased, what they ought to do for their comfort, and recovery; sheweth the wonderful power of Prayer, and how great a good it is to reduce a straying Brother to the Truth. The LIFE of S. JUDE. THis Saint Jude, otherwise called Thad∣daeus, or Lebbaeus, is undoubtedly deli∣vered to have been the Brother of that James, called The Just, and the Bishop of Jerusalem, and consequently one of the Sons of Joseph by his former Wife, Judas being certainly the Name of one of the four; and he is commonly called, Judas the Brother of James, to distin∣guish him from the Traytor Iscariot. After our LORD's Ascension, Thaddaeus the Apostle is said to have been sent by S. Thomas to Ab∣garus, Governour of Edessa; and it is the most general Opinion, that it was this Judas Sirnamed Thaddaeus; for it is certain there was another Thaddaeus; one of the 70, who also had been there before. However it be, the general Account of his Travels, is, That he went Preaching first up and down in Ju∣daea, then visited Samaria, Idumaea, and some Parts of Arabia; afterwards, Syria, and Me∣sopotamia; and lastly (as the forementioned Author delivers) came to Edessa, where per∣fecting what the other Thaddaeus had begun, he died quiet in his Bed. On the other hand, Do∣rotheus reports, That he was slain at Berytus, and honourably Buried there. The Writers
of the Latin Church agree in general, That Travelling into Persia, after a good success of his Ministry for many years, at last (for en∣veighing against the superstitious Rites of the Magi) he was by their suggestion and designs put to a cruel Death. There is only one General Epistle, that is directed to all Chri∣stians in general, own'd to be of his writing; and this for a long time was suspected, as quoting an Apocryphal Book, called the Apo∣calyps of Enoch; but at last (upon better con∣sideration) it was received as Canonical. The main scope of it is, to dehort Christians from giving way to the Errors of the Gno∣sticks, and the debauched Principles of Simon Magus. The Contents of the General Epistle of S. JUDE. THe Apostle S. Jude following the Example and Method of S. Peter in his 2d Epi∣stle, wrote this, to exhort Believers to Per∣severance and Constancy in the Faith, and to forearm them against false Teachers, and profane Scoffers, 1. And accordingly after the Inscription and Salutation, 3. He ex∣horts them to contend earnestly for the Faith, and shews them the necessity of it, because many ungodly Men were crept in amongst them, 5. And declares the horrible Punish∣ment, and Divine Vengeance that is prepared for such, confirming it, by the example of the Rebellious Israelites in the Desert, 6. The Apostate Angels, 7. And the Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrha, 8. He describes these Seducers by their despising and Dominion, and speaking evil of Dignities, 11. And by their following the way of Cain, of Balaam, and of Corah, 12. That they are the Spots of Christian Communion, Slaves to their Lusts, inconstant, and wandring Stars to whom Eternal Darkness is reserved, 14. Which he confirms by the Prophecy of Enoch. 16. Enumerates more of their Qualifications, and assures them that those were the false Teachers of whom the Apostles had warned them, 20. He again presseth the same Exhor∣tation to perseverance in the Faith, backing it with the promise of Eternal Life, 22. And to endeavour the recovery of such as are se∣duced, 24. Shutting up all with a Doxology to GOD our Saviour. The LIFE of S. SIMON the Zealot. THat among the 4 Sons which Joseph had by his first Marriage, one was cal∣led Simon, is not deny'd; but that this was the same Simon is not made out from any sub∣stantial Authority. Some will have him, be∣cause he is styled in the Catalogue of the Apostles, Simon the Canaanite, to be of Cana in Galilee; others (upon the same considera∣tion) make him that Bridegroom, whose Nup∣tial Solemnity our LORD honoured with his presence; whereas in truth, he was sirnamed Canaanite rather from his Temper, which probably was hot and sprightly, than from his Country. Canaanite being in Hebrew, what Zelotes is in Greek, which signifies Zeal; or else from a particular Sect among the Jews, called the Zelots. But gross is the mistake of those who will have him the same person with Simon Son of Cleophas, and Suc∣cessor in the See of Jerusalem to James the Just. Being Elected into the Apostleship, he continued with his Brethren till their disper∣sion up and down the World into their seve∣ral Provinces; and then he is said to have taken his Journy to Egypt, Cyrene, and other parts of Africa; thence thrô Mauritania, and all Lybia, and lastly, to have come over into the Western Islands, and in particular into this Isle of Great Britain, where after he had Preached, and wrought many Mira∣cles, and undergon a world of Troubles and Difficulties, he suffered Martyrdom, as is con∣fidently affirmed by Nicephorus and Dorothe∣us; and this is confirmed by the Greek Meno∣logies, which tell us, that he went at last to Britain, where having revealed the light of the Gospel to many, he was Crucified by the Infidels, and Buried there.
The LIFE of S. MATTHIAS. OF the Parentage and Birthplace of this Apostle, we have no account either in Scripture, or elsewhere; he was elected into the Apostolick Office after our LORD's Ascen∣sion, by the rest of the Apostles into the room of Judas Iscariot; and after the dispersion, having spent some time in Judea, (not to in∣sist upon the fabulous relation of his Preach∣ing in Macedonia, and escaping the effects of a Poysonous Cup given him for Experiment, and curing 150 persons that had drank of it before;) he is by Greek Writers said to have Travelled Eastwards. Nicephorus saith into higher Aethiopia; and Sophronius into lower Aethiopia; but if we intend the place where he chiefly fixt, it must be Cappadocia, since his principal residence is delivered to have been at the confluence of the River Apsarus, near the Haven Hyssus. To be sure in his Travels he met with many troubles and diffi∣culties, and fell among a sort of barbarous and untractable people, by whose hands in the end he suffered Martyrdom, Anno Dom. 61. Though first he had the good success to bring over to the Faith great Numbers. Dorothe∣us tells us, he died at Sebastople, and was Buried near the Temple of the Sun. An anti∣ent Martyrology relates him to be apprehend∣ed for a Blasphemer by the Jews, and by them Stoned, and afterwards Beheaded. The Greek Offices observe, that as Judas was hanged on a Tree, so Matthias his Successor suffered upon a Cross. His Body some say, having been kept a long time at Jerusalem, was Translated thence by Helena the Mother of Constantine the Great, to Rome, where some parts of it are shewed at this day, with great Veneration: others will have it, that they were brought to Triers in Germany, and there still preserved his Anniversary, which the Western Churches celebrate on the 24th. of February, but is kept by the Greek Church in August, as appears by the Greek Menl∣gies. There hath been Published, under the Name of this Apostle a Gospel, mentioned by Eusebius, and others of the ancients, but con∣demned by Pope Galasius, as having been rejected by divers before him; likewise cer∣tain Traditions cited by Clemens Alexandri∣nus, by which the Nicolaitans, Marcionites, and Valentinians patronize several of their erroneous Tenets. An Historical CHRONOLOGY, according to the Seven Periods of the World, used in History. CHAP. I. The Division of the Ages of the World. THose that are not willing to take the trouble upon them, which a tho∣rough inquiry into Antiquity re∣quires, nor care to employ their Studies in the profoundest researches of Chronology, but content themselves with a general view of things, may be pleased to take notice, That as the Week is divided into 7 days, so all the time from the Creation of the World to this day, is divided into 7 Periods or Ages. The first Period begins at the Creation, and ends at the Deluge, and contains 1656 Years, 1 Month, and 26 Days. The 2d Period begins at the ceasing of the Deluge, that is to say, from the year 1657, and ends at the Call of Abraham; which was in the year 2083, and contains 426 Years, 4 Months, and 18 Days. The 3d Period, begins at the Call of Abraham, and ends at the deliverance of the Israelites, from their Egyptain bond∣age, which was in the year 2517, and con∣tains 430 years. The 4th Period begins at the Children of Israel's coming out of Egypt, and ends at the Founding of Solomon's Temple,
which was in the year 2992, and contains 479 years and 1 days. The 5th Period begins at the Founding of the Temple, and ends at the Jewish Captivity, which was in the year 3468, Cyrus then giving them leave to Return; and this Age, or Period, contains 476 years. The 6th Period begins at Cyrus his permitting the Jews to Return, and ends at the Birth of our Saviour Jesus Christ, which was in the year 4000, and so contains 532 years. The 7th Period, begins at the Birth of our Saviour, and is to end with the Expiration of the World. CHAP. II. The first Period, or Age of the World. NOw to come to a particular Account of every one of these Ages; in the first place, we have the first Age deciphred to us by this ensuing Table, which comprehends all that the Scrip∣ture mentions of the Original of the World, of the Creation of our first Parents, and of the Birth and Death of the ancient Patriarchs. The Table of the First Age of the World.   Born in the year of the World. Begot Children in the year of his Life. Liv'd after he had begot Children. Lived in all Died in the year of the World. Lived together. 1. Adam 1 130 800 930 930 Adam with Seth with Enos with Cainam with Malaleel with Jared with Enoch with Methusala with Lamech with 2. Seth 130 105 807 912 104 800 3. Enos 235 90 815 905 1140 965 807 4. Cainam 325 70 840 910 123 605 717 815 5. Malall 395 65 830 895 1290 535 647 745 840 6. Jared. 460 162 800 962 142 470 582 680 775 830 7. Enoch. 622 65 300 365 987 308 365 365 365 365 365 8. Methusala 687 187 782 969 1656 243 355 453 748 603 735 300 9. Lamech 874 182 595 777 165 56 68 266 361 416 548 113 777 10. Noah 1056 500 450 950 2006     84 179 234 366   600 59 Anno Mundi, This Table makes all things very clear; by which we see the Age of the Ten first Patriarchs, the time in which they were Born, the time wherein they began to have Children, how many years they lived afterwards, and what Age they were of when they died. The Scripture hath exactly mark∣ed out all these Circumstances; and from thence it is that we have taken whatsoever is here set down; from thence it is that we know the Deluge hapned in the year of the World 1656, being it hapned in the 600th year of Noah who was Born in the 1056th year of the World. But as to the particular Transactions in this Period, or Age of the World, it will be convenient to make a farther Enlargement. We shall not here say any thing touching the Journal of the first Week, and History of the Creation, it being treated of in the begin∣ning of the Old Testament, to wit, the six days Work; we suppose that the common Year of the Jews, which began with the Month of Tisri, with the Equinox of Autumn,
was also that of the Patriarchs, and of the Creation. So that in the sixth day of this first Month, which partly answers to our Septem∣ber, and partly to October, Adam and Eve, were created after the Image of GOD, in the Eve of the first Sabbath, which is our Fri∣day; GOD having blessed and sanctified the following, to be the Day of his Rest. 8 days after (according to the most common Opi∣nion) they sinned against GOD, and were driven out of Paraice, tho' comforted by the Evangelical Promise, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents Head, Gen. Chap. 1, 2, 3. Cain was born in the first Year of the World; Abel in the second, each with their Female to be their Wives; 'tis said Cain's was called Calmanna, and Abel's, Delbora: These irregular and incestuous Marriages, as now accounted, were not so then, as be∣ing in the first spring of Nature; GOD also designing of one Blood to make all Mankind, and derive it from the same Foun∣tain, Acts 17.26. 'Tis not to be doubted, but since the Birth of these two, to that of Seth, Eve had more Children, of each Sex, and in this first fruitfulness of Nature, more than one at a time; Whence arose Cain's fear after his Parricide, Gen. 4.14. Abel and Cain being now grown up, apply themselves, the first to feeding Cattel, the latter to the cultivating the Earth; and worshiping according (without doubt) to the Orders which their Father had recei∣ved from GOD: They offer different Sacri∣fices, according to their different Functions; but GOD having given a particular Appro∣bation to the Sacrifice and Piety of Abel, by Fire, or otherwise, Cain conceived thereat, so great a Grudge, that he resolved to kill him. GOD reprehends him for this unjust malevolency, remembring him of the Supe∣riority he had over his Brother, by Birth∣right, and that Abel acknowledging it, as he did, ought not to be the Object of his Hatred. Yet he persists in this wicked humor, draws his Brother apart (under pretence of Kindness) and privately Murthers him. GOD calls him to account for it, condemns him to be punish'd, and yet provides for the se∣curity of his Life; he retires into the Coun∣try of Nod, there begets a Son named Henoc, and builds a City (to which he gives the same Name) by the assistance, (without ques∣tion) of the rest of his Brethren, of their Families, and his own, Gen. 4.1, 2, &c. This Fratricid hapned about the Year of the World 130, in which Seth was born, whom GOD substituted to our first Parents, in the place of Abel, Gen. 4.25. Josephus pretends, that Seth erected two different Columns, the one of Brick, the other of Stone, on which he wrote Astronomical Observations, to be pre∣served to Posterity. 'Tis certain, that Seth apply'd himself to Piety, and all manner of Vertues, otherwise than the Men of his time; and that Moses having said little of the cursed Race of Cain, Gen. 4.5. sets on a particular deduction of the Descendents of Seth; it being from him that all Men, since the Flood, draw their Original. Of Seth, Aged 105 Years, and who lived moreover 807, was born Enos, in the Year of the World 235, under whom those who made with Seth a Profession of Piety, as the Chil∣dren of GOD, began to separate themselves from the profane Canaanites, to attend his pure service, Gen 4.26. & 5.6.7. Of Enos, Aged 90 Years, was born Kenan, Anno Mundi 325, of Kenan Aged 70, Mahaleel in the Year 395, and of him Aged 65, Jared in the Year 460. Gen. 5.9, &c. About this time the profane Lamec of the Race of Cain, signaliz'd himself in im∣piety; being the first that brought Bigamy in mode, contrary to the order, and institu∣tion of holy Marriage, by which two were to become one flesh, Matth. 19.4, 5, 6. and shew'd himself to his 2 Wives, Hada and Tsilla to be a bloody and violent Spirited man. Of Hada were born Jabal, who invent∣ed the use of Tents for Shepherds, and Jubal, who was the first Inventer of Musical Instru∣ments. Of Tsilla was born Tubalcain, who was the first Smith, and his Sister Nahama, who is thought to have invented the Art of Spinning and Weaving, Gen 4.19, &c. Not that these 4 have been the first Inventers of these Arts, seeing Cain and Abel, for their different Professions, had learnt of Adam some use of Tents, Knives, Cisars, Spades, &c. but they may be properly said to have polish∣ed and bettered what they had received of that kind. Those who think Idolatry began soon in the World, do here search the rise of it, pretending that Tubalcain, whom Pa∣ganism made its Vulcan, as her Venus of Nahama, did forge Images; that Jabal built up Tabernacles for them, that Jubal serv'd them with his Organs, and other Mu∣sick;
and Nahama adorn'd and cloathed them with her Woollen and Linnen. In Anno Mundi 622 of Jared, Aged 162 years, was born the Patriarch Enoch, a Man of exemplary Piety, the 7th after Adam, and en∣lightned with Prophetical knowledge, Jude, v. 14. Tho the Book heretofore published un∣der his Name (stuft with divers Errors) is a fictitious story. Of Enoch, Aged 65 years, was born Anno Mundi 687, Methusalem (who lived the longest of all Men, to wit, 969 years) 235 years after his Birth, his Father Enoch in the 300 years of his Life, (during which time he con∣stantly attended the LORD) was carried up into Heaven, that he might not see death, Gen. 5.24. Hebr. 11.5. After the Death of Adam, Anno Mundi 930, the taking up of Enoch in the year 987, and the decease of Seth. In the year 1042 Corruption slipt in amongst those who made a more particular profession of the Fear and Service of GOD, by the Marriages they contracted with the Canaanites and others; whence came those fierce and impious Giants, Gen. 6.1, 2, 4. which has furnish'd Paganism with those Relations of Gigantomachia. To Methusalem (aged 187 years, in the year 874, which was 113 years before the Translation of Enoch, and of Lamech, aged 182 years) was born Noah, in Anno Mundi 1056, and who was thus named by his Father, as expecting something great and salutary from him, Gen. 5.29. and in effect, tho he were not the Messias, who promises and gives Life and Rest to our Souls, he was however the Type and Figure of him. Under Noah the Herald, or Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. Corruption came to its perfection, and GOD began to denounce to Men the resolution of destroying them; yet allowing them the term of 220 years to Repent, Gen. 6.3. Noah, aged 500 years, and 100 before the Flood, began to have his three Sons, Gen. 5.32. and 6.10. Japhet was the eldest, Gen. 10.24. who was born in the year 1556, or 1557. Shem, the second, born in the year 1558; and Cham, the youngest, Gen. 9.24. one or two years after; for in that the Genealogy of Shem is recited the last, Gen. 10.20. and 11.10. is not because he was the last amongst these 3, as when he is sometimes named the first, doth not prove he was the eldest; but because to his Family, was restrain'd the Promise of the Messias, and that from him was born Abraham, of whom (and his Posterity) Moses undertook the Hi∣story, and not of the other two. About the time of the Birth of Noah's 3 Children, he was commanded by GOD to build the Ark, to preserve in his Family the Seeds of Human kind, with all the several species of Animals, which GOD would cause to come there, whereby to replenish the Earth after the Deluge, Gen. 6.13, &c. During the Life of Noah, his Father Lamech died, aged 874 years, and in the year of the World 1651, which was 5 years before the Flood; and Methusalem his Grandfather, aged 969 years, in Anno 1655, being at the end of the year, or at the beginning of 1656, which was about a Month before the Deluge began. Noah then in the 600 year of his Life, the 100 of Japhet, 98 of Shem, 97 of Cham, and the World 1656, entered into the Ark with his Wife, his 3 Sons and their Wives, being but 8 Persons, 1 Pet. 3.20. in the 2d Month of the year partly answering our October, and partly our November, the 17th day of the Month, in which the Deluge began, which increased for 40 days, Gen. 7.11, 12, 17, &c. It's not to be doubted, but that this Deluge was universal (Moses having affirmed it in express terms) and drown'd all Living Creatures, Gen. 7.19, 20, 21, &c. And because that if any place of the Earth was to have been exempted, GOD perhaps would have sent Noah and his Family thither, together with the rest of the Living Creatures, which he designed to spare, without condemning them to so long and incommodious a Prison in the Ark, during one whole year. The Deluge lasted a year and 10 days; it increas'd, and continued in its highest de∣gree 150 days, Gen. 5.24. at the end of which the Waters began to decrease; so that on the 17th of the 7th Month, answering partly to our March, and partly to our April, the Ark rested on the Mountain of Ararat in Armenia: On the 1st day of the 10th Month of the year, the tops of the highest Moun∣tains began to discover themselves; 40 days after Noah sent out a Raven, and then a Dove 7 days after, to see whether the Earth dried, without being certainly informed; but 7 days after the Dove returned with an Olive-Leaf, whereby the Patriarch knew that the Waters abated; and being sent out the third time (7 days after) he returned no more. Then on the first day of the year 1657, with which
began the year 601 of Noah, the Earth was wholly dried; whereupon the Patriarch took off the Cover from the Ark, and thus pro∣bably let go the Fowls; but he waited for the Divine Appointment to go out himself; which he received, and obeyed the 27th day of the 2d Month; and as soon as ever he set foot on the Earth, he built an Altar, and offered his Sacrifice to the LORD, who pro∣mis'd him, there should be no more such a Flood; and establish'd the Bow, that is, the Rain∣bow in the Heaven for his infallible Seal there∣of, Gen. 8.1, &c. and 9.11, 12. CHAP. III. Of the Second Period, or Age of the World. WE have already observed, that the Second Age of the World begins at the end of the Deluge, and at the Call of Abraham; that is to say, it begins in the year of the World 1657, and ends in the year 2083, thereby containing in all 426 years. This following Table declares the number of Years contained in the succession of the o∣ther ten Patriarchs; who followed those of the first Age, and how many years they lived one after another. The Table of the Second Period, or Age of the World.   Born in the year of the World Begot Children in the year of his Life. Liv'd after he had begot Children Lived in all Died in the year of the World Noah with Shem with Arphaxad with Sale with Heber with Phaleg with Rehu with Sarug with Nachor with Phare with 1. Shem 1558 100 500 600 2158 448 2. Arphaxad 1658 35 303 338 1996 348 500 3. Sale 1693 30 403 433 2126 313 465 303 4. Heber 1723 34 430 464 2187 273 435 273 403 5. Phaleg 1757 30 209 239 1999 249 401 239 369 430 6. Rehu 1787 32 207 239 2026 219 371 209 339 400 209 7. Sarug 1819 30 200 230 2049 187 339 177 307 368 177 207 8. Nachor 1849 29 119 148 1997 157 309 147 277 348 147 177 200 9. Thare 1878 130 75 205 2083 128 280 118 248 309 118 248 171 119 10. Abraham 2008           150   118 179   18 41   75 Abraham came into the Land of Canaan, aged 75 years. Year of the World 208.                             All appears very clear in this Table: We find in the 4 first of these Patriarchs, that the years of the life of Man, were at that time become half in half shorter than before, and that the 6 following Patriarchs were yet shorter Liv'd by half than the 4 pre∣ceding. Moreover the following Table will shew us, how long they lived one with ano∣ther. But before we proceed to the 3d Period, we shall make a further enlargement on this. Anno Mundi 1657, Noah having began a new Epoche by Prayer and Sacrifices; and received new Orders and Promises, applies himself to Agriculture, dresses the Vine; is inebriated with his Fruit; is derided by Cham and Canaan, his youngest Son and Grandson; and in fine, dies Aged 950 years, being 350 years after the Deluge, Gen. 9.20, &c. Seeing the Families of his 3 Sons to multiply exceedingly, he divided to them the Earth, which also they distinctly Peopled by their Posterity: To Japhet he gave Europe; to
Shem, Asia, and to Cham, Africa; which may be gathered from what Moses recites, Gen. 10.1. &c. But to say something parti∣cularly of the Family of Shem, at the Age of an 100 years, being 2 years afters the Flood, Arphaxad was born to him in the year 1658, if we take these 2 years after the Deluge begun, or 1659, if we take them after the Deluge was over. Shem survived 500 years the Birth of his Eldest Son, and died aged 600 years. Arphaxad begets Selah at the age of 35 years, and died in the year 438 of his life: Between Arphaxad and Selah, several reckon Cainaan as Son of the first, and Father of the second, Luke 3.36. But the most able Chro∣nologists acknowledge, That Cainaan without and against the Authority of the Original Hebrew Text, has been first inserted in the Greek Text of the Old Testament, by some Transcriber, and from thence into several Copies of S. Luke's Gospel; for all of them have it not. Selah at 30 years old begets He∣ber (from whose Name several think the He∣brew Tongue is so called, as being conserv'd in his Family after the confusion of Babel) and died aged 433 years. Of Heber, aged 34 years, was born Peleg; after which, he lived more than 430 years, Gen. 11.10, &c. Peleg was thus named, because that in his time the Earth was portioned out, Gen. 10.25. either for that his Birth in the year of the World 1757, being 100 yeas after the Flood, falls into the time of the confusion of Languages; or that his Father Prophetically imposed on him this Name, because this should happen in his time, tho at the end of his days; or whether we are to believe a double division of the Earth, the first by a bare project, which was fairly carried on under the direction of Noah, be∣tween the 3 Brethren; in pursuit of which, to enlarge and extend themselves, they came from Armenia, to encamp in the Land of Shinar: The 2d effective, which has necessarily fol∣lowed the Confusion of Languages. 'Tis cer∣tain that under Peleg, and during his Life, was first undertaken the Enterprize of the Tower of Babel, which GOD overthrew by the Confusion of Languages, Gen. 11.1, 2, 3, &c. 2d, Nimrod the Son of Chus, and Cham's Grandson, who perhaps was the first Author of this haughty design, began by Babel, and other places built in the Country of Shinar; that is, Chaldea; the establishment of his Tyranny, Gen. 10.8, 9, 10. 3d, Departing out of Chaldea, to enlarge it, he past into the Country where Assur (who was apparently the 2d or 3d Son of Shem, tho Helam, and he is mentioned before Arphaxad, Gen. 10.24.) had brought his Colony, and there built Nineveth after the Name of his Son Ninus: And more∣over other Cities, as so many Forts or Cittadels of his Dominion, Gen. 10.11, 12. Of Peleg, aged 30 years was born Rehu; of him (aged 32) Serug, and of him (at the age of 30) Nachor, and of Nachor (at 29 years) Thares, who was the Father of Abraham, Gen. 11.18, &c. Now from the ending of the Flood to the Birth of Phaleg, there is 100 years; and from the Birth of Phaleg to that of Thares 121, that being in the year of the World, 1757, and this in the year 1878. 'Tis said (Gen. 11.27.) that Thares at the age of 79 years begat Abraham, Nachor, and Haran. Now as 'tis certain they were not all born at a time; so 'tis apparent from Scripture, that Haran was the eldest, Nachor the 2d, called by his Grand∣fathers Name, and Abraham the 3d, altho he be called the first, as well on account of the Reputation of his Person, as for that he was the Root of the People of GOD, and the Fa∣ther of the Faithful. Haran died in Chaldea. Gen. 11.28. leaving 1 Son, to wit Lot, and 2 Daughters of which Milcah was married to her Uncle Nachor, Gen. 11.29. and Grandfather to Rebecca, Isaac's Wife, Gen. 24.47. As to Abraham, he was younger by 59 or 60 years, than his eldest Brother; he was Born in the 130th year of Thares, in the year of the World 1808, and 75 years before the Death of his Father: For Abraham was aged 75 years when he went out of Haran, to come into Canaan, Gen. 12.4. and not having left Haran till after the death of Thares, Acts 7.4. who had lived 205 years, Gen. 11.32. he must be born in the 130th year of his Father; and thus the Birth of Abraham terminates it self in 2008. Abraham then lived with Thares his Father 75 years, seeing that Thares died in the year 2083; with Serug 41, seeing he died in the year 2049; with Rehu 18, seeing he died in Anno 2026; with Heber, who died in the year 2187, 179; 121 with Selah, who died in the year 2129; with Arphaxad, who died in the year 2096, 88; with Shem 150, seeing he died in the year 2158; but not with Noah, who died aged 950 years, 2 years before the Birth of Abraham, seeing he departed this Life in the year of the World 2006. We
shall not take much Notice here of what the Jews have asserted, touching Serug, that he was a Painter; and of Thares, that he was a Statuary, and employed himself in making of Idols; and concerning Abraham, that ha∣ving been condemn'd to be burnt alive in the Fire which the Chaldeans worshipped, for re∣proving them of their Idolatry, he was mi∣raculously delivered thence. But, tis certain, Thares went out of Ur of the Chaldeans with Abraham, Sarah, and Lot, Gen. 11.31. by rea∣son of the Idolatry committed there, and the Persecution they underwent; and in obedience to the Call, which GOD had given Abraham, who probably perswaded his Father to obey, and follow it, Gen. 12.1. and 15.7. and Acts 7.2. they came into Mesopotamia to Haran, where Nachor came and found them. This Sojourning in Haran lasted with Abraham for 5 years; for Thares being dead at the end of this term, Abraham (who was already on his March to come into the Land which GOD would shew him) departed by his order to come into Canaan, aged 75 years, Gen. 12. CHAP. IV. Of the Third Age, or Period of the World. IT hath been already declared, that this Third Age of the World began at the Call of Abraham, in the year of the World 2083, and ended at the Children of Israel's going out of Egypt, which was 430 years after. The following Table declares a great part of what hapned most considerable in that time. The Table of the Third Period, or Age of the World.   Years of the World Since the Deluge Since Abraham's departure Before the Israelites coming out of Egypt Before the Birth of Christ Abraham came into Canaan, Thares being dead 2083 427 0 430 1921 Ishmael born in the year of Abraham's Age 86. 2094 438 11 419 1910 Isaac born in the year of Abraham's Age 100. 2108 452 25 405 1896 Isaac wean'd at 5 years old, and Ishmael turned out, 2113 457 30 400 1891 Isaac takes Rebecca to Wife in the 40th year of his Age, 2148 492 65 369 1856 Jacob born in the 60th year of Isaac's Age, 2168 512 85 345 1836 Abraham dies being 175 years old▪ 15 years after Jacob's Birth, 2183 527 100 330 1821 Ishmael dies in the 137th year of his Age, 2231 575 148 282 1773 Jacob flies to Laban at 77 years old, and serves 20 years, 2245 589 162 268 1759 He marries Leah, and afterwards Rachel, at 84 years old, 2252 596 169 261 1752 Levi born of Leah, 2255 599 172 258 1749 Joseph born of Rachel, 2259 603 176 254 1745 Jacob returns to his Father after 20 years Service with Laban, 2265 609 182 248 1739 Joseph sold at 16 years old, and serves Potiphar, 2276 620 193 237 1728 Isaac dies 12 years after the selling of Joseph 2288 632 205 225 1716 Joseph is presented to Pharaoh at 30 years of Age, 2289 633 206 224 1715 Jacob goes into Egypt at 97 years of Age, 2298 642 215 215 1706 Jacob dies at 147 years old, having been in Egypt 17 years, 2315 659 238 198 1688 Joseph dies after he had Ruled in Egypt 80 years, 2369 713 286 144 1635 Levi dies 2392 736 309 121 1612 Aaron born, 2430 774 347 83 1574 Moses born, 2433 777 350 80 1571 He flies to Jethro, and serves 40 years, 2473 817 390 40 1531 The Israelites going out of Egypt, 2513 857 430 0 1491
All that which is taken notice of in this Table is taken from the Scripture it self, and consequently admits of no doubt; only this reflection is to be made upon all the forgo∣ing Tables, that as Adam lived 56 years with Lamech, Lamech 93 years with Sem, Sem 50 with Isaac, and Isaac 33 with Levi, who was the Father or Grandfather of Moses, his Mother named Jacobed, whom for cer∣tain he had seen. It is apparent that Moses wrote nothing which was not in the memo∣ry of Man, since he was not above 4 or 5 Generations from Adam. Isaac likewise lived in their time, that had known those Persons that saw the Deluge, which conse∣quently he could not be ignorant of, no more than what past at the Creation could be unknown at the time of the Deluge, since there were People then living, who had seen those that knew Adam himself. So Adam could not be unknown to Noah, and Sem, nor they to Abraham or Jacob, nor Jacob to Moses, especially at a time when there were no Histories which men could make use of, or have recourse unto. We shall make a further enlargement on this Age or Period of the World, which is as fol∣loweth. In the 70th year of Abraham, and of the World 2078, he began his Travels, which continued for the space of 105 years, which was to the end of his life, Gen. 25.7. And from the vocation of the Patriarch, and the beginning of his Travels, till the depar∣ture of the Israelites out of Egypt, are found the 430 years mentioned, Exod. 12.40. Ga∣latians 3.17. of which the first 215 are for Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the other 215 for the abode and servitude of their Posterity in Egypt: Yet here is found some disagree∣ment between the most exact Chronologists; for some begin the 430 years only at the year 75, and others at the year 85 of the Patriarch; but we are for keeping to what best agrees with the Text of Scripture, begin∣ning from the Birth of Isaac, in the year 160 of his Father, and the 400 spoken of, Gen. 15.13. Acts 7.6. Abram being entred into Canaan, past on as far as Sichem, and the Plain of Morea, and pitched his Tents after the manner of the Nomades in the Fields, which perhaps then not belonged to any one, the Country being not much peopled; and from thence he sets forth towards the East of Bethel. Here in his first Post GOD appeared to him, and pro∣mis'd the Country to his Posterity, where he erected an Altar, and worshipped, Gen. 12.6, 7, 8. But as he advanced towards the South, the Famine makes him descend into Egypt, whence he departs, extreamly obliged by the King, who designed to espouse his Wife (which by a Criminal weakness is said to be his Sister) but he was divinely hindred from it, 12.10, &c. Abram and Lot departing from Charan, travelled for some time together; but by the disagreement of their Servants, they peaceably parted, the Unkle giving his choice to his Nephew; perhaps, as representing his elder Brother, the Nephew retiring towards Sodom, and the Unkle sojourning between Bethel and Hai; where the LORD, appeared to him again, and encourages him by fresh Promises; whence he sets forth to the Plains of Mamre, where he erects an Altar, and makes some stay, Gen. 13.1, 2, &c. Whilst he abides here, several very considerable things happen to him. A War arose between 4 Kings on one side, viz. Amraphel of Cal∣dea, Arjoc of Susiana, Kedorlaomer of Persia, and Tidhal of Nations; and 5 others on the other side, viz. Berah of Sodom, Birsah of Gomorrha, Seinab of Adma, Scemeber of Tseboim, and him of Tsohar. These were all little Kings, and perhaps Satrapes, that is, as it were Governours of Provinces, under the great Monarchy of Assyria. These ast had served 12 years to Kdorlaomer, in paying him some Tribute; but in the 13th year they revolted. He gets to him 3 others▪ and having joyn'd their Forces together, they drive all before them, and obtain great Victories: The Revolters take the Field with all their strength, but are beaten and put to flight, abandoning their Towns to the will of the Conquerors, who there get great booty, and bring Lot along with all his sub∣stance. Abram receiving the News of this, arms 318 of his Servants, and accompanied with Mamre, Escol, and Haner, which were Ammorreens, and his Allies, pursues these Pillagers, defeats them, and recovers his Ne∣phew, with all the Booty, and returns Victo∣rious. Melchisedec, King of Salem, who was also a Priest of the true GOD, who came before him with Bread and Wine, for the refresh∣ment of his Men, and to congratulate him for his happy success, and as in quality of a
Priest, blest him, and received from him the Tenths of the Spoils taken from the Enemy. The King of Sodom offered him all the Booty recovered, asking of him only the Persons brought back; but he generously refused it, contenting himself that his 3 Allies should take their part, Gen. 14.1, &c. This was the success of the first, and most ancient War re∣cited in Scripture, after which GOD renewed to the Patriach his great Promises, and con∣firmed them by Federal Victims, determining to him the time in which his Posterity should be Strangers in the World, and opprest by Servitude, and the People which they were to dispossess, to obtain the Country, Gen. 15.1, 2, &c. Sarah his Wife, impatient at her being barren, gives him Hagar her Servant, to be (as she speaks) edified from her Knees; she finding her self pregnant, triumph'd over her Mistress, who obliges her to fly; but the Angel of the LORD orders her to return, and according as he had told her, she was delivered of Ishmael, who was born to the Patriarch in the 60th year of his departure from Caldea, &c. as mentioned in the fore∣going Fable, Gen. 16.1, &c. being Anno Mundi 2094. 13 years after GOD changed his Name of Abram to Abraham, and that of his Wife Sarai into Sarah, enjoyns him to Circumcise himself, and all that belonged to him, and promises, That of Sarah should be born a Son whom he should call Isaac, Gen. 17.1, 2, &c. In the same year Sarah, aged 90 years, became pregnant, according to the assurances which GOD had lately given them both. Sodom, and the neigh∣bouring Towns (conformably to what the LORD had declared to the Patriarch,) are destroyed by Fire and Brimstone, which GOD caused to rain from Heaven, and their whole Territory changed into the Lake of Asphal∣tites. Lot is warned thence, having testified an utter dislike of the impudent attempts of the Men of Sodom, who would abuse his Guests (who were Angels in the shape of Men) offering them his Daughters to satisfie their Lusts, rather than to suffer the Laws of Hospitality to be violated; but those to whom he had betrothed his Daughters, re∣fused to follow him. His Wife looking be∣hind her out of trouble for the Goods she had left, is changed into a Pillar of Salt. He incestuously pollutes himself with his two Daughters, who make him drunk, and are delivered in their time, the one of Moab, and the other of Benhammi, the Fathers re∣spectively of the Moabites and Ammonites, Gen. Chap. 18, & 19. But Abraham gets far off this horrid and dismal Neighbour∣hood, and retires towards the South into Land of Gerar; Abimelech being King thereof, takes Sarah from him, who he said was his Sister; but he is warned from GOD, not to meddle with her, and made to restore her to her Husband, which he does with many Presents, Gen. 20.1, 2, &c. In fine, According to the Promises of GOD, Isaac was born in the hundredth year of his Fa∣thers age, being 30 years after his depar∣ture from Caldea, Anno Mundi 2108. The Child is Circumcised on the 8th day, grows up, but is derided, and ill treated by Ishmael; which Sarah being not able to bear, his Mo∣ther and he are put out of the House, and without the assistance of an Angel, being in danger of perishing with Thirst, in the Desart of Beershebah; but notwithstanding this dis∣grace, he becomes great, espouses an Egyp∣tian Woman, brought to him by his Mother, and sets up his abode in the Desart of Paran, Gen. 21.1, 2, &c. About this time, Abimelech King of Gerar, attended with Picol, General of his Troops, treats a League which Abra∣ham, for them and their Posterity; and restores to him the Wells of Beershebah, where he plants an Oak, there to perform Divine Rites, Gen. 21.22, 23, &c. To all these Prosperities of the Patriarch, succeeds a great proof, by the command of sacrificing Isaac on the Mount of Moriah, where he signaliz'd his Faith and Obedience; and being hindred to execute it, at the very point of slaying him, he returns home exceed∣ingly comforted; where he hears good News of Nachors Family, his Brother, being multi∣plyed in Mesopotamia, Gen. 22.1, 2, &c. From Beershebah, where he made a conside∣rable stay, he returned towards Hebron, where Sarah died, Aged 127 years, being 37 years after the birth of Isaac, in the 137th year of Abraham, and of the World 2145. And her Husband buys of Hephron a Cave of Macpela for her Burial, Gen. 23.1, 2, &c. This Pur∣chase made by Abraham is well joyn'd, Acts 7.16. with that which Jacob made since near Sichem, Gen. 33.10. Joshua 24.32. Three years after the death of Sarah, Isaac, aged 40 years, espoused Rebecca, Labans Sister, the Daughter of Bethuel, whom his
Fathers Servant went to fetch in Mesopotamia, Gen. Chap. 24. & 25.20. Abraham having married his Son according to his desire, takes himself a 2d Wife, named Keturah, of whom he had several Children, who being sent to∣wards the East, by their Fathers order, grew up in a small time, and were the Fathers of several People, Gen. 25.21, &c. Isaac, 20 years after his Marriage, in the 60th year of his age, and the 160th of that of his Father, becomes by Rebecca, the Fa∣ther of two Twins, Jacob and Esau, who struggling in their Mothers Womb (their quar∣rel being elder than their Birth) obliged him to consult on this Accident the Mouth of the LORD, whether by Abraham himself, or Melchisedec, or by some one of the Pa∣triarchs, who were then alive, (as Sem and Heber) and obtained for Answer, That 2 People were in her Womb, and that the greatest would serve the lesser; as a presage of which, when they were born, Jacob, who was the 2d, took hold of the Heel of the first, who was Esau, Gen. 25.21, &c. Abraham having seen his Sons, two Twins, aged 15 years, he Departed this Life aged 175 years, Anno Mundi 2183, and was honourably buried by Isaac and Ishmael, Gen. 25.6, &c. Isaac being sometime after prest by Famine, had orders not to go into Egypt, but to retire to Gerar; Rebecca was not so old, but that Isaac might well say, she was his Sister, lest he should lose his Life on her account; but Abimelech (this being the common Name of the Kings of Gerar, as it seems of Picol, was that of their Generals) having observed thro the Window, that Isaac behaved him∣self towards Rebecca with greater freedom than is lawful with a Sister, thereby he knew she was his Wife; reprehending him for using this disguisement, strictly prohibited all his People, to offer him or her any abuse; yet at length, being jealous of his Prope∣rity, he made the Wells to be stopt, which Abraham had digg'd, and entreating him to depart out of his Country, he retreats much lower, caused the Wells to be cleansed, which the Philistins had stopt up since Abraham's departure; sees some Contest to arise on this occasion, between his Herdsmen and those of Gerar, and goes up unto Beershebah. There the LORD appeared unto him, and assured him of his Favour; he there erects an Altar for his Service, where Abimelech comes, and treats an Alliance with him, according to the terms of that which his Predecessor had made with Abraham, Gen. 26.1, &c. Whilst these things hapned, Jacob and Esau became men, but of a very different humour; for Esau apply'd himself to Hunting, spending his whole time in the Woods and Forests; whereas Jacob led a sedentary and studious life. Esau returning from Hunting, being very hungry, and finding his Brother seething Broth, he was so desirous of it, that he made over his Birthright to him, that he might satiate himself therewith, Gen. 25.27, &c. This was the first act of his Prophaneness; to which he added a second, viz. the taking at 40 years of Age, (which was the time wherein his Fa∣ther was Married) 2 Heathen Women for his Wives, Judith the Daughter of Beeri, and Basmath the Daughter of Elon, which was a great grief to his Father and Mother, Gen. 26.34, 35. This was in Anno 2208. Yet these 2 Twins divided in some sort the Affections of their Parents; for Isaac, who loved Venison, with which Esau often presented him, had more love for him; but Rebecca, who it seems had in this particular a better understanding, was more inclin'd to Jacob; so that Isaac being become old, and so weak-sighted, that he could no longer distinguish People; ('tis thought he was about 137; Anno 1242; 13 years before died his Brother Ishmael, having left 12 Sons, who possest and peopled all Arabia, Gen. 25.12.) he desired to give his Blessing to Esau before he died, whereupon he declares to him his intention, and sends him to hunt for some Venison for him. Rebecca, who was hearkning at what past, immediately makes ready a Kid, and dresses it according to her Husbands relish like▪ Veni∣son, wraps the Neck and Hands of Jacob with the Skin of the Kid, that in touching him he might take him for Esau, who was an hairy Man; and obliges Jacob in this dress to pre∣sent the Dish to his Father under the name of Esau, and to obtain the Blessing, which accordingly succeeded: For Esau being re∣turned a while after from Hunting, found out the Deceit, weeps for vexation, designs to kill Jacob as soon as his Father was dead. Re∣becca, as well to prevent this Misfortune, as to hinder Jacob from marrying, as Esau had done; she perswades Isaac to let him go into Mesopotamia, to Laban his Unkle, to seek there a Wife, Gen. 27.1, &c. and 28.1, &c. After that Isaac had dispatch'd him for this Voyage, with his repeated Blessing, Esau
seeing that his Heathen Wives displeased his Father and Mother, went towards Ishmael, that is, towards his Family; for he was already dead, to espouse one of his Daughters, nam'd Mahaleth, Gen. 28.6, 7, 8, 9. She is called Basmath, and his 2 other Wives are named Ada the Daughter of Elon, and Ahilobama the Daughter of Hava, Gen. 36.2, 3. it being likely the other had 2 Names, or rather, that being dead without Children, Esau sub∣stituted to them these 2 other Canaanites; having had a particular Affection for her, who was called Basmath, he gave the Name to Ishmael's Daughter, after he had taken her to Wife. The Blessing of Jacob, and his Voyage to Laban, being coincident with the year 147 of his Father Isaac's Life, must be the 77th of his own, and the year of the World 2245. In the Way, GOD appeared to him in a Dream by a mysterious Ladder, to assure him of his Protection in his Travels, both for∣wards, and in his return, Gen. 28.11, &c. Being arrived near Haren, he addresses him∣self to Laban, familiarizes himself with Ra∣chel, is favourably received by his Uncle, in whose service he engages himself for 7 years, on condition of espousing his youngest Daugh∣ter; but the time being come, he has Leah put upon him, and 7 years more Service is exacted of him for Rachel the younger; so that in 7 days time he espouses them both, he himself being at 84 years of age, Anno Mundi 2252. His Father-in-Law gives each of his Daughters a Servant, Zilpa to Leah, and Bilha to Rachel, who by order and con∣sent of their Mistresses, strove who should have most Children, and served the Patriarch as Concubines. And from these 4 Women (in Mesopotamia) he had 11 Sons, and 1 Daugh∣ter, Gen. 29.30, &c. and 31.1, &c. Here is near the order of their Birth; Reuben the eldest of Leah, was born in the 8th year of his Fathers service, Simeon in the 9th, Levi in the 10th, and Judah in the 11th. Rachel seeing this her Sisters Fruitfulness, was vexed with Envy, and by Bilha her Servant obtains Dan in the 12th year, and in the year after Nephthali. Leah imitates her Sister, and by Zilpah her Servant she obtains Gad in the 12th year, and Ashur in the 13th, having also during the pregnancy of her Servant, obtain'd of her Sister Rachel, by her Sons Mandrakes, that their common▪ Husband should lie that night with her, and he begat of her Zabulon, who was born in the 14th year; and a while after in the same year Joseph, of Rachel; but Dinah, his only Daugh∣ter was born of Leah, after the 14 years accomplish'd, and in the 15th year of his abode with Laban; so that Joseph began probably the 7th year of his Life, and Dinah the 6th, when he parted thence. For besides the 14 years Service given to Laban for his Daughters, he suffered himself still to be retained under certain Conditions, which were not observed, Gen. 30.31, &c. And therefore at the end of 20 years, and by GOD's express Command, he leaves him without bidding him adieu, with his Wives, Children, and Cattel. Rachel secretly seizes on her Fathers Tutelar Gods, who being informed of Jacob's Retreat, hastily pursues him, and overtakes him in the Mountain of Gilead; but he is di∣vinely hindered from offending him, and parts good Friends, Gen. 31.1, &c. Jacob being thus got clear of Laban, almost at the entrance of Canaan, Anno Mundi 2265, and in the 97th year of his life, sends to advertize his Brother Esau of his Return, who comes to meet him with 400 Men, of whom he is afraid. He prepares him a great present, and causing it to pass with all his Family before him, remains alone on this side the Brook Jabbok, and wrestles all Night with GOD, who blesses him, and changes his name of Jacob into that of Israel. The next Morning these 2 Brethren meet, and Fraternally embrace, and so part, Gen. Chap. 32. & 33. Esau, who is Edom, retires to the Mount of Seir, to which he was much addicted of a long time, as is seen Gen. 33.16, & 36.1, &c. and where Moses gives a long List of his Descendents; but Jacob marching small Jour∣neys takes his Post at Succoth, on this side Jordan, where he built a House, and set up Tents for his Cattel; and 'tis thought his abode here lasted a year and an half; from thence he passes over Jordan, an encamps near Sichem, where he purchases an Inheri∣tance, and erects an Altar to the honour of GOD, Gen. 33.17, 18, 19, 20. The Jews imagin his abode there was 8 years and an half; but the last year was very grievous to him, by reason that his Daughter Dinah, aged 15 or 16 years, was ravish'd and violated by Sichem, who endea∣vours to make her amends after this Affront, by demanding her in Marriage. But Jacob's
Children deceive the Sichemites, by obliging them to be Circumcised; which these having admitted, Simeon and Levi, Brother-Germans of Dinah, enter into the Town with Swords in their hands (and these poor People in the midst of their Dolours, being unable to defend themselves) kill all the Males of them, and carry away much Booty; at which Jacob is greatly troubled, Gen. 34.1, &c. and 49.5, 6, 7. This Violence so cruelly exercis'd, obliged him to depart from thence, and GOD (who assisted him) orders him to draw towards Bethel, where he had heretofore appeared to him, and there to remain. Before he set on his Journey he reforms his Family, purging it of all Idolatrous Images, which he burns at the Foot of an Oak near Sichem, Gen. 35.1, &c. Anno Mundi 2275. At Bethel died Debo∣rah, Nurse to his Mother Rebeccah, whether he had brought her from Mesopotamia with him, or whether she was sent thither to call him thence, or whether from Isaac, after Rebecca's death, she went in search of him to Sichem, Gen. 35.8. But in parting from Bethel, to come to his Father Isaac, who dwelt near Hebron, his dear Rachel, being big with Child the second time, was delivered in the way of Ephrat, or Bethlehem, of her second Son Benjamin, and died, Gen. 35.16, &c. From thence he advances further towards Migdal-Heder, which was between Bethlehem and Hebron, where his Father resided; and there Reuben committed Incest with Bilha his Mo∣ther-in-Law, Gen. 35.21, 22. and 49.3. As he made but small Journies, by reason of his great Train, so was his stay in every place very short; but at length he arrives in Hebron, where Isaac was, and this was his last Journy in the Land of Canaan. Joseph was born to Jacob in the 14th year of his service, and the 91st of his life; for Joseph was 30 years old when he appeared before Pharaoh, Gen. 41.46. and 7 years of Plenty, and 2 of Famine were already past, since the time that Jacob came into Egypt, aged 130 years, Gen. 47.9. which makes up our reckoning; so that Joseph being 17 years old, when he began to be hated by his Bre∣thren, Gen. 37.2. Jacob in the 11th year of his Return into the Land of Canaan, and which might be the first of his more near approaches to his Father, Gen. 35.27. must be aged about 108 years. And this age of Jacob and Joseph falls in with the year of the World 2276. Then Joseph's Brethren, especially those of the 2d Rank, who were born of Leah, and Rachel's Servants, began to prosecute him with their Hatred, as well for the relation of his Dreams, which presaged the Dominion over them, as the Reports which he made to his Father, of their naughty Behaviour. But GOD having hindered (by Reuben and Judah) the Murthering of him, which these unnatural Wretches projected, he was sold to the Mi∣dianite Merchants, and by them to Potiphar, a great Officer under the Egyptian King, Gen. 37.1, &c. Whilst Jacob bewails the loss of his Joseph, the bloody Coat which was brought him, caused him to believe that he was torn by some wild Beasts. Isaac his Father quietly ends the rest of his days, Anno Mundi 2288, which were con∣cluded with the 180th year of his life, after the Death of Rebecca, already deceased before his Return into Canaan. His 2 Sons were present at his Death, and honourably buried him, Gen. 35.27, 28, 29. This was in the 120th year of Jacob's Life, and the 12th since the sale of Joseph; after which hapned what's recited of Judah and Tamar, Gen. 8. The short of which is thus; Judah was about 10 years old when his Father returned into Canaan; having soon contracted too great familiarity with Hira, he was persuaded to espouse the Daughter of a Canaanite, who was scarce at the years of Puberty; yet he had a Son of her named Er, in the 13th or 14th year of his Life; at which we need not be astonish'd, if we remember the Jews hold by an old Tradition, That a Man is obliged to Marry at 13 years of age. His two other Sons Onan and Selah, were born in the two following years. 13 or 14 years after, Er his eldest Son espouses Tamar; but he immedi∣tely dies, the Father then gives to Onan, whom GOD likewise punished by a speedy death for his filthy Crime. Judah promises to give her to the third, when he should be of Age, and obliges her in the mean time to remain a Widow in her Fathers House; but seeing her self deluded, she disguises her self in the Garb of an Harlot, and becomes a Prostitute to Judah himself, without know∣ing who she was. Having understood she was with Child, he prosecutes her to Con∣demnation for an Adulteress, as being betrothed to his 3d Son; but she discovers to him who it was by; and was Delivered of 2 Twins Phares and Zara. See the Hi∣story of this Gen., 38.1. And supposing the
Marriage of Judah, and the Birth of Er, hapned in the 14th year of his Life, and four years after the Return of Jacob into Canaan, and that 14 years after followed the Marriages of Er and Onan with Tamar, and that she past one year of Widowhood in her Father's House; the Birth of Pharez, and Zara may be terminated to the 19th or 20th year of Jacob's Return into Canaan; and so moreover may have been born of Pharez in the same Country, Hezron and Hamul, Gen. 46.12. Judah must needs have been Married much sooner than his other Brethren, seeing he alone went down into Egypt, having already Children of his Children. 'Tis thought Job was born about this time, tho the Scrip∣ture doth not take notice thereof. Whilst these things past in Canaan, Joseph serv'd in Egypt and remained several years with Poti∣phar, till refusing the impure sollicitations of his Masters Wife, he was by her Calumnies shut up in Prison; to whom the Gaoler, in time, committed the Chief care of the place. Here he interprets the dreams of Pharaoh's Cup-bearer and Baker; he informs the Cup-bearer of his Innocency, and entreats him, when at Liberty, (which was 3 days after) that he would remember him; but he forgets him till two years after he was delivered out of Prison, to interpret Pharaoh's Dream, touch∣ing the years of Plenty and Famine which were to happen; whereupon (for this and the prudent Advice he gave on this occasion, the whole Government of Egypt was com∣mitted to him, and the second place of the Kingdom, that is next unto the King, given him, Gen. Cap. 39, 40, & 41. This was in Joseph's first year, Gen. 41.46. and the 121st of Jacob, in which he was exalted in this high Dignity, and married Asenath the Governour of Onan's Daughter, Gen. 41.45. Anno Mundi 2289. Manasses and Ephraim were born to Joseph before the Famine began, Gen. 41.50. Jacob sends at the first Year of Scarcity his Sons into Egypt, to buy Corn: Joseph knew his Brethren, but is not known of them; retains Simeon as an Hostage, and enjoyns them to bring Benjamin, Gen. 42.1, &c. They return the year following, having Ben∣jamin with them, and at the last he discovers himself to them, and sends Chariots, Gen. 44. Jacob then comes into Egypt in the second Year of the Famine, being in the 130th year of his Life, with all his Family, which (reck∣ning Joseph and his two Sons) are 70 Souls, and were entertained in Egypt, in the Land of Goshen, Gen. 46.27, 28. and Chapter 47.9. Anno Mundi 2298. He lived moreover 17 years in Egypt, Gen. 47.18. and having stipu∣lated to be Interred in Canaan, Gen. 47.30. he blesses and adopts Joseph's 2 Sons, Gen. 48.5. and prophetically declares to all his Children what would happen to them, Gen. 49.1, &c. He died aged 147 years, and his Body was embalmed after the Egyptian manner; car∣ried back in great solemnity into Canaan, and laid with his Fathers, Gen. 50.1, &c. 'Tis thought that Job at 30 years of age, Anno 2315, almost about the same time when Jacob expired in Egypt, espous'd his Wife, whom the Greek Interpreters call Balsorra, originally of Arabia, of whom he had 7 Sons and 3 Daughters, Job 1.2. Levi going down into Egypt with Jacob his Father, had 3 Sons, Gershon, Kehath, and Marari, all very young and unmarried; of Kehath was born Amri, the Father of Aaron and Moses: And tho the Scripture does not design the time of his Birth, we may con∣veniently refer it to the 91st year of Joseph, and the 103d year of Levi, which is Eleven years before the Death of Joseph, who lived 110 years, Exod. 6.16. A term which falls in∣to the 60th year of the descent of the Israelites into Egypt. Joseph having gotten into the King's pos∣session all the Lands of the Egyptians, except those of the Priests, provided for his Father's Family, assured his Brethren of his affection, happily governed Egypt 80 years, dies 54 years after his Father, and orders his Bones to be carried into Canaan, Gen. 50.24, 25, 26. The Vulgars making the History of Genesis of 2300 years, is partly to make the Num∣ber run smooth, and partly to place the Birth of Abraham in the 70th year of his Father Terah, altho he was not born till the year 130, as has been already observed. A while after the Death of Joseph, those of Gath killed the Sons of Ephraim, who was thereat greatly afflicted, 1 Chron. 7.20. The Scri∣pture does not mark the years, nor the death of Jacob's other Sons excepting Levi's, who died aged 137 years, Exod. 6.6. And thus supposing he was four years older than Joseph, he must have lived 24 years more than he. We may presume, that the others more aged nearly followed Joseph; but 'tis certain none of them died before him, as may be seen, Gen 50.24. where he charges them to carry
his Bones with them, when their Posterity they should depart out of Egypt. Supposing that Kehath was aged 70 years when Amri was born, for the Scripture is silent, having lived 133 years, Exod. 6.18. he must have died in the 123d year of the descent of Jacob into Egypt, 54 years after Joseph, and 33 years after Levi his Father; which we distinctly represent, to verify, that all Moses Ancestors were dead, to wit, Jacob, Levi, Ke∣hath, and Amram, who lived 137 years, Exod. 6.20. when he was sent to the delive∣rance of the people, seeing that since the 60th year of Jacob's descent into Egypt, to the 215th year, in which his Posterity went out, there are 155. The death of Joseph, and that of his Bre∣thren, whom we may suppose not to have lived longer than Levi, was followed with the Persecution which their Descendents suffered in Egypt, of which see Exod. 1.6, 8, &c. Amram in the 67th year of his Life, and 127 of the descent of Jacob into Egypt, espouses Jokebed his Kinswoman, either his Aunt, his Father Kehath's Sister, or his Cou∣sin German, the Daughter of Gershon, or of Merari, one of his Unkles, Exod. 2.1. and 6.20. Of this Marriage was born first Mary, whom the Father called by this Name, by reason of the bitter condition in which all the people then lay, being under the violent Tyranny of this Pharaoh, whom common Writers have named Amenophis. Four years after the Birth of Mary, Aaron was born, and Moses 3 years after him. After the Birth of Aaron the King seeing the means heretofore used for the oppression of the people did not succeed, and that the more they were afflicted, the more they mul∣tiplied, Exod. 1.12. took a Resolution secretly to put to death all the Males, intending to oblige the Midwives Siphora and Puah to stifle them in the Birth; which they would not do, excusing themselves to the Tyrant by an ingenious Artifice, Exod. 1.15, &c. But he afterwards used open violence, enjoyning that all the Males should be drowned in the Nile. Moses being Born under this cruel Edict, in Anno 2428, was expos'd on the Nile 3 months after. The Daughter of Pharaoh, whom some name Thermutis, others Merris, causes the Thing in which he was, to be brought her from amongst the Rushes, where the cur∣rent of Water had carried it, and being moved with Compassion, resolved to save its life, which Mary (a little Girl of 7 or 8 years old) observing, offers her self to the Princess to find out a Nurse, and brings her the Mother, who is charged to suckle and take care of it, Exod. 2.1, &c. When he was grown up, Jokebed his Mother brings him to the Princess, who Adopts him for her own, gives him the Name of Moses, because she had taken him out of Waters, Exod. 2.10. and has him carefully brought up in all the Egyptian Learning, Acts 7.22, &c. 'Tis thought he had several great Offices in the Kings Court, where he was considered as the presumptive Heir of the Crown; but he slipped all the Honours and Advantages in the World, when they stood in competition with his service of GOD, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. For at the Age of 40 years he resolved to go and visit his Brethren, kills an Egyptian who had wronged an Israelite, endeavours to reconcile 2 Israelites who were at variance, and finding the murther of the Egyptian was known, and that the King was offended thereat, tesolving to punish him, he fled into the Country of Midian, Exodus 2.11, &c. Acts 7.23, &c. He began to discover himself by the assistance he gave to Rehuel's Daugh∣ters, the Priest, or Governour of Midian, against the violence of Shepherds, who would hinder them from watering their Flocks. This Rehuel was the Father of Jethro, called also Hobad, whose Daughter Moses espoused, the Grand Daughter of Rehuel, named Zip∣porah, Exod. 2.16, &c. and 3.1. & 18.1. Deucalion's Flood is referred to the 67th year of Moses, and the Conflagration of Pha∣eton to the following, which is to say, That the first of these years suffered great Inunda∣tions, and the following was tormented with intolerable Heat: Which Heathenish Narra∣tions, have risen from an Hearsay, of what the Holy Scripture recites of the Deluge of Noah, and burning of Sodom. After Moses had past the first 40 years of his Life at the Court, and the 2d in his Exile at Midian, the 3d was consecrated to the Deliverance and Guidance of the People; for he was aged 80 years when GOD sent him into Egypt, and Aaron 83, Exod. 7.7. Moses in this Age began his Journey towards Egypt, being in the year 2508, he ran a Risque of his Life for neglecting the Circum∣cision of his Son; whereupon Zipporah grew outragious, and is sent back to her Father, Exod. 4.24, &c. Aaron comes and meets Moses,
whereupon they go together to the executing of their Charge, Exod. 4.27, &c. See how they acquit themselves of it, Chap. 5, &c. The first Passover is celebrated the 14th Month of Nisan, and in the same Night the Israelites go forth, and begin their Journey not only with the consent, but even at the instance of the Egyptians, after the Tenth Plague, with which GOD had smote them that Night, Exod. 12.29, &c. This was the 430th year after Abraham departed out of Ur, Ex. 12.40. Galat. 3.17. the 400th year af∣ter the Birth of Isaac, Gen. 15.23. Acts 7.6. the 215th from the descent of Jacob into Egypt, the 145th year after the death of Jo∣seph, the 80th of the Life of Moses, and of the World the 2508th. CHAP V. Of the Fourth Age, or Period of the World. THis Fourth Age, or Period, as hath been already said, begins at the Children of Israel's deliverance out of Egypt, being in the Year of the World 2513, and ends at the Foundation of the Temple of Solomon, which is in the Year of the World 2992, making an Interval of 479 years; which may be divided in such a manner as is to be seen in this Table, which shews who were the Leaders and Rulers of the People of GOD, from Moses to Solomon. The Table of the Fourth Age, or Period of the World. Year of the World     Year before Christ 2553 Moses died after the Deliverance out of Egypt 40 years 1451 2559 From the Death of Moses, to the Rest given by Joshuah 6 years 1445 2599 From thence, to the Peace made by Othoniel 40 years 1405 2679 From thence, to the Peace made by Ehud 80 years 1325 2719 From thence, to the Peace made by Debora 40 years 1285 2759 From thence, to the Peace made by Gideon 9 years 1245 2768 Gideon being dead, the Children of Israel served Baal for some years, probably about 9 years 1236 2771 Afterwards Abimelech governed the People 3 years 1233 2794 THOLA 23 years 1208 2816 JAIR 23 years 1188 2822 JEPTHA 6 years 1182 2829 ABESAN 7 years 1175 2839 AHIALON 10 years 1164 2847 ABDON 8 years 1157 2887 ELI 40 years 1117 2909 SAMUEL 21 years 1095 2949 SAUL 40 years 1055 2989 DAVID 40 years 1015 2992 The Foundation of Solomon's Temple was laid in the beginning of the 4th year of Solomon's Reign 4 years 1012     The Total 480 years.  
There is nothing in this Table, which is not taken from Holy Scripture: But nothing is here said of Sampson, as great and mighty as the Atchievements which he acted in the time of Eli; so that we must take half the years of Eli (that is to say 20) and give them to Samp∣son; as several have done before. But to proceed according to our former Method in the foregoing Ages. This Period is expresly defined 1 Kings 6.1. and in effect the Children of Israel were under the Conduct of Moses 40 years, 17 under that of Joshuah, under Judges 299, under Eli, Samuel, and Saul 80, under David 40; and it was in the 4th year of Solomon, when the Foundations of the Temple were laid. This express Text of the Old Testament can't be opposed by the Passage of the New, in Acts 13.20. which seems to denote about 450 years since the destruction of the 7 Na∣tions to Samuel. For not to alledge here whatever may be said for the reconciling of these 2 passages, all the difficulty will be removed, if we keep to some ancient Greek Copies, followed by the vulgar Version in the Book of the Acts; which contain, That GOD having destroyed 7 Nations in the Land of Canaan, he delivered their Lands by Lot about 450 years after, and afterwards gave them Judges, till the Prophet Samuel. So that this term of 450 years agrees with what is said in the 17th Verse, That GOD had chosen our Fathers (in the Vocation of Abraham, and in the Birth of Isaac) and that after the 450th of this Election, the People who were descended, had obtained under Joshuah the division or portion of the Country; and this term will be easily found, if we joyn the 400 years which slipt till the Birth of Isaac, to the departure of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, and the 40 years which past in the Desart, with the 7 first of Joshuah, after which began the dividing of the Country; and 'tis far better to keep to this, than to attempt the correcting of either Text, and to say, therein is an Error, whether in the first of 480 for 580, or in the second of 450 for 350. 'Tis not necessary to cut the Knot, when one may unty it. Moses then conducted the People 40 years in the Wilderness, which the Scripture asserts in so many places, that the matter is beyond all question. In the first year of the Month Nisan was celebrated the first Passo∣ver. In the same Night the Israelites part from Rameses to the number of 600000 Foot, without their Wives and little Children, and encamp in Succoth, Exod. 12.37. of this number were Joshuah and Caleb, the first younger than Moses by 27 years, and the 2d aged 39 years, when the People went out; Joshuah 14.7. From Succoth they came into Etham, Exod. 13.20. from Etham to Pihahiroth, where the first Murmur arose, Exod. 14.2, 11. and whence they past the Sea dry, Exod. 12.16, &c. Their 4th post was in the Desart of Shur, which seems like∣wise to be named the Wilderness of Etham, Exod. 15.22. Numbers 33.8. Thence they came to Marah, where again they Murmur for the bitterness of the Waters, Exod. 15.23, &c. Then they encamped in Elim, where they find sweet Waters, Exod. 15.27. Num∣bers 33.9. In the parting from Elim they made towards the Red Sea, Numb. 33.10. whence they came to the Desart of Sin, between Elim and Sinai, the 15th day of the second Month after their departure from Egypt, Exod. 16.1. There arose another Murmur for Bread and Flesh, whereupon GOD gives them Quails and Manna, with which they were fed 40 years, Exod. 16.12, 13, 14, 15. from thence they removed towards Dephka; next to lus, and from thence to Rephidam which was their 11th Post, Exod. 17.1. Numb. 33.12, 13, 14. Here they mur∣mured for want of Water, which the Rock of Horeb (struck with Moses Rod) furnish'd them with, and under the Conduct of Jo∣shuah, by the Prayers of Moses they beat and represt the Amalekites, Exod. 17.1, &c. Here also Jethro, Moses Father-in-Law, comes to him, and brings his Wife and 2 Sons Exod. 18.1, &c. Being parted from thence they arrived at the Desart of Sinai, famous for the publication of the Decalogue, 50 days after the Passover, on the 6th day of the Month of Sivan, answering partly to our May, and partly to June, in memory of which the Feast of Pentecost was Anniver∣sary among the Jews. The People being terrified, prayed Moses to interpose between GOD and them, and Moses communing sepa∣rately with GOD, receives at several times sundry Judiciary and Ceremonial Laws, which may be seen Exodus Chapters 20, 21, 22, 23. He is sent to publish them to the People▪ and exact their obedience, who promises it; and having added these Laws, and those of the Decalogue, to what he had already writ∣en
by the divine Command, Exod. 17.14. not only in Genesis, written under the divine Inspiration, or during the time whilst he and Aaron sollicited in Egypt the dismission of the People, or immediately after the passage over the Red Sea; but also in the 18 first Chapters of Exodus. He erects an Altar at the foot of the Mountain, environed with 12 Stones, and there offers Federal Victims, and sprinkles with their Blood the Altar and the People (represented as well by the 12 Columns which joyn the Altar, as by the 70 Ancients, who assisted at it) and the Book of the Covenant, which then contained Genesis, and the 23 first Chapters of Exodus, having first read the 4 last, in which were contained the Clauses stipulated, and promis'd in this Covenant, Exod. 24.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. This Act being finish'd, Moses receives a new Order to ascend the Mountain, Exod. 24.1, 2. but whilst he there communes with GOD for 40 days to∣gether, without eating and drinking, and is divinely instructed of whatever is requisite for the structure of the Tabernacle, and the consecration of Aaron, and his Sons, Exodus Chapters 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. The Peo∣ple being impatient, require of Aaron, to have Gods to carry before them; whereupon the Golden Calf is melted, and they worship it: See the History and Sequel thereof, Exodus Chap. 32, and 33. Moses being vexed at these Peoples Idolatry, and broken by a just Indignation the 2 Tables of the Law, which GOD had given him, to be shut up in the Ark of the Covenant; but after the cen∣sure of the People, and the calcination of the Golden Calf, and the Levites had killed 3000 of these Idolaters, and Moses by his Prayers had obtain'd pardon for the rest, he made 2 other Tables like to the first, and goes up again towards the LORD, there tarrying 40 days more, and returns with his Countenance shining, Exodus Chapter 34. All this past in the first 7 Months of the departure of the Israelites, and the rest of this first year is employed in building the Tabernacle, Exodus Chap. 36, &c. In the beginning of the 2d year the Tabernacle of Assignation is prepared and consecrated, and Aaron and his Sons establish'd in the Priesthood, according to the order prescribed, Exod. 29.35, &c. Nadab and Abihu are punish'd from Heaven for using strange Fire, Levit. 10.1, &c. and the Passover is cele∣brated in its Season, Numb. 9.2. A while after the Blasphemer is stoned, Levit. 24.10, &c. and the People are numbred, Numb. Chap. 1, & 3. After Israel had sojourned near a year in this place, they parted in the 2d year of their Exit, in the 20th of the 2d Month, and drew from Tabhera, or Kibrothtaava, towards the Desart of Paran, where arose also another murmuring for the difficulty of the Way, for which GOD pu∣nish'd them by Fire, which consumed some of the Authors, Numb. 11.1, &c. In the same place also began another murmuring for Flesh, which GOD appeased by a great quan∣tity of Quails, of which they eat for a Month, Numb. 11.4, &c. at the end of which GOD punish'd them with a great Plague, of which several died, whereupon this place was called, The Sepulchre of Covetousness, Numb. 11.33, &c. Here was set up at the divine Ap∣pointment the great Council of Seventy, Numb. 11.16, 17, 24, 25. of which 2 remain∣ing in the Camp, Eldad and Medad, do also Prophecy, Numb. 11.26, 27. Thence they come into Hatseroth, where Mary and Aaron quarrel with Moses, about his Ethiopian Wife; for which Mary is struck with a Leprosie, and shut up for 7 days, Numb. 11.35. and 12.1, &c. After Mary was healed, they came to Rithma, Numb. 36.18. which made a part of the great Desart of Paran, Numb. 13.1. which was called Kadesbarnea, Deut. 1.2, 20, &c. because the Town of this Name confined on it. From hence were sent the Spies into the Land of Canaan, who return∣ing at the end of 40 days, discouraged the People, as if it were inaccessable, and impreg∣nable; but Joshuah and Caleb, who had been there, contradicted the others, and encou∣rage the People, Numb. 13.1, &c. How∣ever the People Mutiny on this occasion, and are for returning into Egypt, which made GOD pronounce, that none of them should enter into Canaan, except Joshuah and Caleb; and that they should abide still in the Desart until the 40 years of their Exit were expired. The cowardly Spies are punished with death, Numb, 14.1, &c. The Israelites (having by a kind of Re∣pentance) attempted to open a passage into the Promis'd▪ Land, notwithstanding Moses Dissuasives, are beaten both by the Amale∣kites and the Canaanites, Numb. 14.39, &c. Thence in the third year of their Exit, they turn towards the Red Sea, and encamp near
Rimmon-perets, and in the other following specified places, Numb. 33.19, &c. Some conjecture, that the Breaker of the Sabbath was stoned in Rimmon-perets, Numb. 15.32. and that the Schism of Korath, Dathan, and Abiram, with all its consequences, hapned in Kehulah, Numb. Chap. 16, & 17. in the 4th year of their Exit; but as to the parti∣cularities of the 35 other years, the Scripture says nothing, only in general, that they of∣ten changed their Posts, Numb. Chap. 33, &c. The last place of their abode was remark∣able; Mary, Sister to Moses dies in the De∣sart of Tsin in Kadesh, in the first Month, Numb. 20.1. The Israelites Murmur again for want of Water, whereupon Moses and Aaron are doubtful, Numb. 20.12, &c. desire a passage thro the Land of Edom, which is refused them, Numb 20.14, &c. Aaron dies 4 Months after his Sister on the Mount of Hor, aged 123 years, and his Son Eleanor succeeds him, Numb. 20.25, & 33.38. The Israelites defeat Harad King of the Canaanites in Horma, Numb. 21.1, &c. Pass from Hor into Tsalmona, and from thence to Punon. They murmur again against GOD who punishes them with scorching Serpents, against the biting of which the Brazen Serpent is set up, Numb. 21.5. Passing from thence they go over the Brook Zerea, and that of Arnon, whence they send an Embassy to Sihon King of Heshbon, to desire passage, which is refused, raising an Army to hinder them, whereupon he is defeated, and his Country conquered, Numb. 21.21. and Deut. 2.24, &c. Hog or Og, King of Bashan, is treated after the same manner, Numb. 21.33. and Deut. 3.1. After these Victories, the Israelites post themselves in the Campaigns of Moab; Balac King of Moab entreats Balaam to Curse the People, the LORD hinders him, Numb. 22, 23, 24. But by his pernicious Council Balac sends Harlots into the Israeliees Camp, who draw them to Corporal and Spiritual Fornication; on account of which Phineas shews his Zeal in piercing with a Javelin Zimri and Cosbi (who was a Midianite Wo∣man) in the very act of their filthiness, Numb. Chap. 25. This Debauchery having been severely and speedily punished, the People were numbred again, that the Coun∣try might be divided amongst the Tribes proportionable to their number, Numb. Chap. 26. Moses advertiz'd of his death, established Joshuah for a Guide after him, Numb. 27.12, &c. He is sent with Phinas against the Midianites, who are defeated, and Balaam killed amongst them, Numb. 31.1, &c. The 2 Tribes of Ruben and Gad, and the half Tribe of Manasses, have for their portion the Country conquered on this side Jordan, Numb. Chap. 32. The last Month of the year was employed by Moses in the repitition of the Law, whence the Book af Deuteronomy has taken its name; and having Sang his Song, and pronounced his Benediction touching each Tribe, Deut. Chap. 32. & 33. he goes up to the top of the Mountain of Neho, where the LORD shewed him all the Country, after which he died aged 120 years, and his Body was disposed of by GOD himself, never any one having known the place where it lay. Anno Mundi 2549. Joshuah takes then in hand the Reins of the Government, sends from Shittim Spies to Jericho, who lodge at Rahabs, Josh. 2.1, &c. After their return the people march, having carried before them the Ark of the Covenant, and pass over Jordan dryshod the 10th day of the first Month, Josh. Chap. 3, & 4. The next Morn∣ing the People are Circumcis'd in Gilgal; the Passover is kept on the 14th; the Manna ceaseth, and the Son of GOD appears to Joshuah, to encourage him, Josh. 5.1, &c. The next Morning of the Passover Jericho is invested; on the 7th day its Walls fall of themselves, and is burnt and destroyed; yet Rahab is spared, whom Salmon the Son of Nahasson, chief in the Tribe of Judah takes to Wife, Josh. 6, &c. Matth. 1.4, 5. Some days after Hai is attack'd, and at first the Israelites are repuls'd with loss, for Achans Crime, who had sinn'd in Jericho; but the fact being discovered, and punish'd, Hai is taken by Stratagem, is fired, and its King hang'd, Josh. Chap. 7, 8. After the taking of this Town the Law is again pub∣lish'd with its Blessings and Cursings on the Mountain of Gerrizim and Hebal, Josh. 8.30, &c. The Gibeonites craftily provide for their safety, Josh. 9.3. Joshuah seeing them at∣tack'd by 5 Canaanitish Kings Leagued against them, marches to their assistance, and defeats their Enemies, Heaven it self fighting for him with Hail-stones, and the Sun stopping in the midst of its course, to
give him time to pursue his Victory, Josh. 10.1, &c. This Victory is crown'd with the ignominious death of the 5 Kings, who had hid themselves in a Cave, and with the taking of Makkeda, Libna, Lakis, Heglon, Hebron, and Debir, where all are put to the Sword, Josh. 10.16, &c. After these ex∣ploits of the first year, the People retired into their Camp at Gilgal, Josh. 10.43. to the beginning of the next, in which they obtain Victories against Jabin King of Hat∣sor, and his Confederates, which are recited, Josh. 11.1, &c. The 5 following years were spent in other Military Expeditions, of which we read Josh. 11.16, &c. and 12.1, &c. In the following was made the distribution and division of the Country, Josh. Chapters 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, & 19. for this division began not till after the 7th year of the Peo∣ples entrance into Canaan, which clearly appears from what Caleb says, Josh. 14.10. He was, says he, 40 years old when sent with the other Spies, to discover the Country of Canaan; and when he spake to Joshuah about making of a division he was 85. The Cities of Refuge are establish'd, Josh. 20.11, &c. and those of the Levites, Josh. 20.1, &c. The Rubenites and Gadites, with half the Tribe of Manasses are sent to their Quarters beyond Jordan, who satisfie the rest touch∣ing the erecting an Altar, before they past over it, Josh. 22.1. In fine, a good while after this, Joshuah being old, calls all Israel to him at Sichem, sets before them their Duty, renews the Covenant between GOD and them, conjures them to serve him in all purity, and dies aged 110 years, Josh. Chap. 23, & 24. According to the calculation of the most exact Chronologists, Jshuah governed the People the space of 17 years; for he could be no less aged than 53 years when the People came out of Egypt, seeing that in the same year he was made their Captain Gene∣ral against the Amalekites. At the same time also died Eleazer, the Son of Aaron, who had succeeded his Father in the High-Priesthood,, which he left to Phineas his Successor, Josh. 24.33. being about the year 2566. The History of the Judges is something harder to calculate, to reckon from the time it assigns to each Judge, and therein compre∣hending that of the oppression, to the death of Samson, 'twill only contain the term of 299 years. Those who will reckon separately the time of the Servitude and Oppression, find more difficulty, because the term will increase full 111 years; whereas in joyning to these 299 years, the 57 years of Moses, and of Jo∣shuah, the 40 of Heli, the 40 of Samuel and of Saul, Acts 13.21. the 40th of David, 1 Kings 2.11. the 4th of Solomon, 1 Kings 6.1. which are all marked in Scripture, we shall have pre∣cisely the 480 years which are specified, 1 Kings 6.1. And it signifies nothing to alledge, that in the time of Jephtha, the Israelites were since 300 years in possession of the Country, Judges 11.26. seeing that often in Scripture the even Number is put for the broken: If one would then reckon the Prescription which Jephtha alledges, since the Israelites came out of Egypt, and were conducted by GOD to the taking and possessing the Coun∣try, there must have been more than 300 years to Jephtha; if it be taken from the possession, which was in the last year of Moses, there will be something less. And forasmuch as 'tis denoted in the Argument of the Book of Judges, that the History be∣gins (according to the calculation of some) in the year 2511, and ends in the year 2810. this principally arises from the Hypothesis of those, who think Abraham was born in the 70th year of Thares, whereas we reckon he was born 60 years after. And as in this Argument we have followed the French, so we believe 'tis by the Printers fault, theres inserted 2511 for 2541, and 2810 for 2840, to which if you add 5 years of the first vocation of Abraham, whence we begin the 430 to the Exit, this calculation will amount to ours. Let us then reckon from the death of Joshuah in the year of the World 2565, to that of Hothniel 40 years, Judges 3.11. under which are comprehended the Anarchy which followed the death of Joshuah, of which see Examples, Judges Chapters 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. the defection of the People, to the Worship of Idols, the vexation of 8 years, which they suffered by the King of Mesopotamia, Judges 2.10, 11. and 3.7, 8. and the re-establishment of all by Hothniel; to the time of his death, which was the 40 years after that of Joshuah, Josh. 3.11. so that the History of the Idolatry of Micah, and the taking of Lais by those of Dan, Judges Chap. 17, & 18. and that of the War of the other Tribes against the Benja∣mites,
for the Injury committed by them of Gibeah against a Levite and his Concubine, Judges Chapter 19.20, 21. belong to these first forty years of Judges. But the rest of the People, whom GOD had procured them by Hothniel, made them some return to their first train, and therefore they fell under a fresh Oppression from Heglon King of Moab, which lasted 18 years, till Ehud was rais'd up for a Deliverer, who having kill'd Heglon, the Country was at rest till the 80th year after the death of Hothniel, Judges 3.30. except∣ing some slight Incursions of the Philistins, which hapned at that time; whom Shamgur, tho ill Arm'd, Heroically represt, Judges 3.31. The death of these two was followed, as it were, by a new corruption of the people, as also with a violent oppression of them by Jabin King of Hatsor, and Sisera the Ge∣neral of the Forces, which lasted the space of twenty years, and till Deborah, who then Judged the people, animated Barac to Arms, and then they together defeated Sisera, who saving himself on Foot, and being retired into the Tent of Jabel, the Wife of Heber Ke∣nian, was there killed by her, which pro∣cured more rest, till the year 40, since the death of Ehud and Shamgar, Judges Chapters 4, & 5.31. After this signal Deliverance, Anno Mundi 2725. the Israelites being return'd to their Vomit, GOD raised the Midianites to cha∣stise them, and after a seven years molestati∣on, Gideon, called Jerubbal, was sent to deli∣ver them. See the History Judges Chapters 6, 7, 8. which lays down till other 40 years, to the decease of Gideon, Judges 8.28. He modestly refused the Scepter, which was of∣fered him, Judges 8.22, 27. His Death was followed by a new corruption of the Israe∣lites, Judges 8.33. of their Ingratitude a∣gainst his House, Judges 3.34. of the Mur∣ther of sixty nine of his legitimate Children by Abimelech, his Natural Son, induced by those of Shichem to Tyranny, Judges 9.1, &c. This Domination of Abimelech was as short as violent, lasting only three years, Judges 9.22. for a mis-intelligence hapning between the Shichemites and him, at the instigation of Gahal, he took, and razed▪ the Town, burnt all the principal persons in a Tower where they had retired, and besieging that of Tebets, a Woman bruised his Head with a great Stone, whereupon he made his Servant put an end to his Life, Judges 9.23, &c whereby it came to pass, what Jotham the youngest of his Brethren, who had escaped his Violence, had foretold in his Apology, Judges 9.7, &c. Anno 2768. Afterwards came Tolah, who Judged Israel 23 years, Judges 10.1, 2. Now as the Wastes which the Midionites made every year before Gideon defeated them, caused without doubt a great Dearth in Israel, which obliged Elimelech, and Na∣homi his Wife, to retire with their Family into the Land of Moab; so 'tis very likely that Nahomi return'd to Bethlehem with Ruth his Daughter-in-Law, under the Govern∣ment of Tolah. Jair succeeded him in the like Office for the space of 22 years, Judges 10.3. These 22 years were not very peace∣able, nor consecrated by the Israelites to the Service of GOD: And therefore in the 18th year of his Government GOD began to chastise them, on one hand by the Philistins, and on the other, chiefly and more violently by the Ammonites, Judges 10.7, 8, 9. where∣upon Jeptha the Gileadite, whom his Brothers had driven away, is recall'd by those of Gi∣lead to be their Captain: He defeats the Am∣monites, executes on his Daughter (by a For∣mal death) the rash Vow he had made, Judg. 11.1, &c. severely chastises the Ephramites, who had Mutinied against him, Judges 12.1, &c. and dies, having governed 6 years, Judges 12.7. The taking of Troy is referred to the time of Jeptha. Anno Mundi 2819. Ibtsan the Bethlemite, who had thirty Sons and as many Daughters, governed 7 seven years, Judges 12.8, 9. Eglon the Zabulonite 10 years, Judges 12.11. and Habdon the Pirathonite 8 years, Judges 12.13, 14. which makes 25 years for the 3. In the same time as the Ammonites (towards the end of the Government of Jair) used their endeavours against the People of GOD whom Jeptha represt; the Philistins also made new Attempts, Judges 10.7. after the first Essay, in which Shamgar had resisted in his time; and they continued the space of 40 years, Judges 13.1. until Sampson, the Israelites Hercules, who Judged Israel 20 years, began to encourage them; for after∣wards the Israelites lay not still without Reta∣liations, frequently opposing the Philistins even under Eli, altho with different Successes, sometimes beating, and other whiles being beaten, till Samuel, Judges 16.31. He is
also called Bedan, 1 Sam. 12.11. See the miraculous History of Sampson, Judges Chap∣ters 13, 14, 15, 16. After his Death, in which expired the Year 299 from that of Joshuah; Eli the High Priest Judged Israel 40 years, 1 Sam. 4.18. The Sacred History does not denote, when died Phineas the Son and Successor of Eleazer in the High Priest∣hood; nor how this Dignity past from Eleazers Family, who was Aarons eldest Son, into that of Ithamar, who was the youngest: For Eli descended of Ithamar, as is seen 1 Sam. 8.3, 4. and 1 Chron. 3.4. So also it return'd in Zadock to its first Branch, 1 Kings 2.27. and 1 Chron. 6.8. Some make Eli to succeed immediately to Phineas about the time when Sampson began to act against the Philistins; but there appears no reason for giving of Phineas such a long life, which must have exceeded the term of 300 years. Some say Phineas was deposed on occasion of Jeptha's Vow; Some say for having approved of the bloody Execution, and others for designing to hinder it. Josephus pretends, that after Phineas, suc∣ceeded in their order Abishah his Son, and Bukki his Grandson, of whom is mention, 1 Chron. 6.50, 51. And perhaps after the im∣mature death of Bukki, we should pass by Eli to the branch of Ithamar, not to find any one in that of Eleazer, who was of competent age, or who had all the requisite Conditions for this employ. Samuel was born under him, and grew up with the time, fit for the Tabernacle, which was then at Shiloh, 1 Sam. Chap. 1, & 2. The Sons of Eli, Hophni and Phineas, behave them∣selves ill, at which he is reprehended by a Prophet, 1 Sam. 2.22, 27, &c. and also by the Ministry of Samuel, 1 Sam. 3.1, &c. To∣wards the end of the Government, and life of Eli, there was a great Fight between the Philistins and Israelites, in which these latter were worsted, Eli's 2 Sons killed, and the Ark taken; at this sorrowful News brought to Philoh, Eli aged 98 years, and deprived of the use of his sight, falls from his Chair and breaks his Neck; and his Daughter-in-Law, the wife of Phineas, dies in Child-Bed, and calls her Son Ichabod, more afflicted for the taking of the Ark, than for the death of her Husband, 1 Sam. 4.10. Anno 2984. The Ark, altho a Prisoner, yet triumphs over the Philistins, 1 Sam. 5.1, &c. who sent it back again into Israel at the end of 7 Months; and arrives at Beth∣shemes, and the People of those parts are pu∣nished with a great Plague, for having look'd into the Penetralia of it; for there died 70070 Men, 1 Sam. 6.1, &c. From Bethshemes it's carried to Kirjathjeharim to Aminidab, where it remained 20 years without being removed, 1 Sam. 7.1, 2. for it seems not to have been till▪ Samuel made it be brought and set down at Gilgal, for a while after the Anointing of Saul, which is thought may be collected from 1 Sam. 12.14, & 13.4. Now altho' 'twas some Consolation to the People to see the Ark returned, yet they found their Affairs in great disorder after the loss of so great a Battle: But Samuel having convocated the People at Mitspa, the Philistins, who took hold of this occasion to invade the Israelites, are put to flight by means of a great Thunder, and pursued as far as Bethcar, 1 Sam. 7.3, &c. From that time the Phi∣listins were kept in some awe, till after the decease of Samuel; for he retook the Towns which they had obtained from the Israelites, and continued in his Magistracy as long as he lived, 1 Sam. 7.13, 14, 15. And tho' Saul was established King by him, yet he still re∣tain'd some remains of his first Authority till his death. S. Paul attributes 40 years to Samuel, and to Saul conjoyntly, Acts 13.21. But we are not certain how many years Saul reigned, nor how many he survived Samuel, whose death is mentioned 1 Sam. 25.1. 'Tis certain that Samuel being old, and his Sons, whom he began to establish Judges over Israel degenerating from his Vertue, the Ancients of the People ask'd a King of him, and he set before them, what they must then expect, 1 Sam. 8.1, &c. Saul the Benjamite is divinely directed to Samuel, who Anoints him as King, and pre∣sents him to all the People convocated at Mitspa, 1 Sam. Chap. 9, & 10. His first Exploit of War was to raise the Siege, which Nahash the Ammonite had laid against Jabesh of Giliad; which succeeding, he thereby won the affection of the People, even of those who had at first despised him, and he is by Samuel solemnly confirmed in his Dignity, 1 Sam. 11.1, &c. Samuel takes occasion in this Assembly to justifie his Conduct, to reprehend the People for their lightness, to exhort them to their duty, and to astonish them by a great Mircale, 1 Sam.
12.1, &c. In the 2d year of King Saul Jonathan his Son repels the Philistin Gar∣rison, which lay near Gilboa; whereupon they reinforce themselves, and come to Michmash. Samuel in this publick Consternation had charged Saul to expect him at Gilgal; but he being impatient, and under pretence of Devotion, offers Sacrifices; for which he is sharply reprehended by Samuel, who makes known to him his Rejection, and that another should be substituted in his place, 1 Sam. 13.1, &c. Now in this Terror the People being half Unarm'd, Saul stands only on the defensive, and contents himself with guarding the Pas∣sages: But Jonathan having only his Shield-Bearer with him, ascends between 2 Rocks to attack the Philistins Corps de Gard, and does great Execution amongst them, and thereby puts the Enemies Army into great confusion and dissention: Upon which Saul (with his Army) pursues them; and those Israelites, whom Fear had made to hide them∣selves, now come out and joyn themselves to him; so that the Defeat was very great. See all the particulars, 1 Sam. Chap. 14. Being heartned by his Victory, he beats this Enemy on all sides, 1 Sam. 14.47. reccives Com∣mandment by Samuel to fall on the Amale∣kites, over whom he gains a signal Victory; but spares King Agag, and great store of Cat∣tel and Booty, contrary to the Divine Com∣mand. But Samuel put Agag to death of his own Authority, and from that time he saw Saul no more, 1 Sam. 15.1, &c. David, when as yet young, not exceeding 20 or 22 years, is secretly Anointed by Samuel King over Israel, 1 Sam. 16.13. But Saul being troubled with an Evil Spirit, David is sent for to play on Musical Instruments before him, during these vexatious Paroxisms, 1 Sam. 16.18, &c. The Philistins having reassembled their Forces, have Goliah in their Army, who braving that of the Israelites, and offering to decide the Quarrel by a single Combat, is undertaken, and kill'd by David; which conciliates a real Kindness from Jona∣than, and the Envy and Hatred of Saul, 1 Sam. 17.1. From hence arose divers Per∣secutions against David, which the Sacred Story gives a particular account of, 1 Sam. Chap. 18, &c. to which we owe several of his Psalms. First, Saul endeavoured to pierce him with his Javelin, 1 Sam. 18.10, 11. Then he makes him a Collonel of a 1000 Men, to make him perish by his Enemies; but he met every where with Success, 1 Sam. 18.13, &c. He afterwards promises him Merab his eldest Daughter, but gives her to Hadriel, 1 Sam. 18.17, &c. but in her stead he gives him Michal, the youngest, and de∣mands of him for her Dowry, 100 of the Philistins Fore-skins. David furnishes him with double the number, and Espouseth her, 1 Sam. 18.20, &c. After this Marriage, Saul designs to Assassinate him; but Jonathan hinders him the first time, 1 Sam. 19.1, &c. and David being well received again by the King, obtains from him a notable Victory against the Philistins, 1 Sam. 19.7, 8. This lasted not long, for being vexed with his Evil Spirit, as David played on the Harp before him, he tries again to kill him with his Javelin. David declines the Stroak, and hastens to his own House: Saul besieges it; but by the prudence of Michal he escapes also this Danger, 1 Sam. 19.11, &c. He comes then towards Samuel, and retires with him to Naioth; where Saul sends first, and then comes himself to take him, but in vain, 1 Sam. 19.18, &c. David being afterwards come secretly to Jonathan, they contrive together how to provide for his safety; he is determin'd for Nob, where Abimelech the High Priest gives him the Consecrated Bread, for want of other, and Goliah's Sword, with which he goes towards Achish King of Gath; where seeing his Life in danger, he counterfeits himself Mad to escape, and is on this account driven from the Court, 1 Sam. Chap. 20, &c. 21. This Achish is also called Abimelech, Psal. 34.1. But as to the High Priest, Abimelech, he was the Son of Ahitub; and this was of Phineas the Son of Eli, 1 Sam. 14.3. and 22.11. so that Ahitub obtained the High Priesthood af∣ter his Fathers and Grandfathers death, and left it afterwards to his Son Abimelech, who was also called Ahijah, 1 Sam. 14.3. Thence he saves himself in the Cave of Adullam, where his near Friends came and found him, together with others, to the number of 400 Fighting Men. He secures his Father and Mother in the Country of Moab, whence he parts by the advice of Gad, an holy Prophet of great esteem in that time, to come into the Land of Juda, in the Forrest of Herets, 1 Sam. 22.1, &c. In the mean time Doeg the Idumean tells Saul, he had seen him at Nob, and how Abimelech received him; where∣fore Saul not only puts him, but all the
Priests of his Family to death, to the number of 85, destroys the whole Town of Nob, and puts all the Inhabitants (without distinction of Sex or Age) to the Sword. Abiathar the Son of Abimelech having only escaped this Slaughter retired towards David, and brought him the News, and succeeded him in his time in the Dignity of High Priest, 1 Sam. 22.9, &c. Tho David was only armed for his own preservation, yet he ceased not on all occa∣sions to use his Arms for the Publick, and therefore he goes and Charges the Philistins at Kehila, and delivers the Town from their hands. Saul thinks to surprize him, and the Inhabitants were ready to deliver him; but being warned of their design from GOD, he departs, and retires to the Desart of Ziph, where Jonathan comes and finds him. The Ziphians advertize Saul thereof, and offer themselves for his Guides to pursue him: But David having notice of his March, shifts from him, until the Philistins being entred into the Country obliged Saul to desist from his Pursuit, 1 Sam. 23.1, &c. David being delivered from so eminent a danger in the Desart of Mahon, retires to the strong places of Engeddi, of which Saul being advertiz'd, goes in search of him, and falls into the hands of David, in a Cave where he was hid, and contented himself with cutting off a piece of his Garment, as a token that he might have killed him, if he would, whereupon Saul acknowledges his Inno∣cency, and desires of him, that when he should come to the Crown, he would not destroy his Family. 1 Sam. 24.1. Not long after this Samuel dies, and David retires with his Friends to the Desart of Paran; he sends to demand Provisions of Nabal, whose People had received all manner of good Offices from him in the Desart, yet he refuses them; but Abigal his Wife dexterously prevents the Misery which her Husbands Churlishness had drawn on him, at which he dies with Vexa∣tion, and David Marries his Widow, whom he adds to Ahinoam his other Wife, which he had espoused after Saul had taken Michal from him, and Married her to Palti, 1 Sam. 25.1, &c. After this the Ziphians go to Saul the 2d time, and advertize him, that David was again returned towards them; whereupon he again pursues him with 3000 Men. David enters by Night into his Camp, goes into his Tent, takes his Javelin which stuck at his Beds-head, and his Pot of Water, and passes on the other side, rouses Abner and Saul, and shews them again, that the Kings Life was in his hands; at which Saul con∣fus'd, acknowledges his Fault, and promises to desist from persecuting him, 1 Sam. 26.1, &c. Yet David durst not confide in his word, but retires into the Country of the Philistins to∣wards Achis King of Gath, who gives him Ziklag for a place of surety and retreat, which he made his place of residence 16 Months, un∣til the death of Saul; whence he made his In∣roads on the inveterate Enemies of Israel, and always return'd laden with Booties, which Achish thought to be taken from those of Judah, 1 Sam 27.1, &c. Achish being confirmed by this Opinion which he had of David, declares to him, that he would make use of him and his Men, 1 Sam. 28.1, &c. And thereupon a new Ex∣pedition is form'd by the Philistins against the Israelites. Saul, destitute of Counsel, ad∣dresses himself to a Witch, to call up the Spirit of Samuel; and the Spectrum which appeared (by means of her Charms) foretels him of the Misfortune he should meet with the next Morning, 1 Sam. 28.7, &c. This was in Anno 2944. The Armies being almost in sight of one another, David and his Men, on the Mistrust which the other Philistins conceived at him, are sent away by Achish, 1 Sam. 29.1, &c. But whilst Ziklag was burnt and plunder'd by the Amalekites, who had carried away the Women and Children Cap∣tives, David in this sorrowful Accident pursues the Amalekites, overtakes them in disorder, and recovers the Persons and the Booty which they had brought away from Ziklag. He equally divides the Booty amongst the People, and returns to Ziklag, and sends Presents to his Friends in Israel, 1 Sam. 21.1, &c. In the mean time the Battel is given between the Philistins and Israelites; these last being beaten, Saul falls on his Sword; his 3 Sons, Jonatham, Abinadab, and Malchi∣shuah, are killed, and their Bodies with their Fathers ignominiously hang'd on the Wall of Bethshan, whence the Inhabitants of Jabesh carry them off in the Night, to the end they might have an honourable Burial, 1 Sam. 31.11. The News of this is brought to David, 2 days after his return to Ziklag, and 3 days after the Battel: He put the Messenger to death, who vaunted of his having fallen upon Saul, altho' at his Re∣quest
to hasten his Death; and utters a Funeral Elegy on this occasion, 2 Sam. 1.1, &c. We have represented all this at large, to shew how much those misreckon themselves, who allow only 2 years to the Reign of Saul, seeing all the things mentioned do require a longer term. He may indeed have absolutely Reigned but 2 years after the death of Sa∣muel, who retain'd the dignity of a Judge all the time of his life; or that he did not Govern properly, but only the two first years, after which he was rejected of GOD, and Samuel saw him no more; but 'tis certain, many years past more since his Anointing by Samuel till his Death, of which here is an unquestionable proof. David was 30 years old when he began to Reign, and Reign'd 40, 2 Sam. 5.4. and the 2d of Saul was spending, or spent, 1 Sam. 13.1. when David was Anointed by Samuel, being the youngest of his Brethren, 1 Sam. 16.13. And when Goliah was killed, David was then but a youth; on which account also Saul durst not hope for good success in this Duel; Goliah himself likewise dispising him for this reason, 1 Sam. 17.33, 42. So that in the time of this Com∣bat he must be above 22 years old; whence it evidently follows, we may reckon 10 years from the Anointing of Saul to his death; so that he Reigned at least 2 years as legiti∣mate King, the 6 following in the unjust prosecution of David till the death of Sa∣muel, and the two last to his death. And as Samuel could have no less than sixty years, when being old the People demanded a King of him, 1 Sam. 8.1, 5. so 'tis easie to conceive he was at the age of 34 years when he began to Judge the people after the Death of Eli, and thus more than 60 years when the people required of him a King, because he was said to be then old: So that he judged above the space of 30 years, and retained still the Dig∣nity 8 years from Saul's Anointing, and that dying aged 72 years, Saul survived him by 2, which makes up 40 years, assigned joyntly to Samuel and Saul, Acts 13.20. Saul dying, David comes to the Crown in the year 2944, being 8 years after the death of Sampson, 40 years after that of Eli, and 436 after the Israelites Exit; for parting from Ziklag he comes into Hebron, where those of Judah Anoint him, and acknowledge him for their King. Abner sets up Ishbosheth, Saul's Son, against him, who having already Reigned 2 years over the other Tribes, made his Troops to advance under the Conduct of Abner against those of David, led on by Joab, near Gabaon, where Abner is worsted, and loses Hazael his Brother, 2 Sam. 21.1, &c. This War continued still above 5 years, until Abner grew offended by Ishbosheth, quit∣ted his Interests and Party, sends Michal to David, he disposes the other Tribes to receive him, and comes to inform David of this at Hebron, where he is well received; but having forsaken the King, Joab and Abishai his Bro∣ther basely kill him; whereat David was greatly offended, 2 Sam. 3.1, &c. A while after Ishbosheth is Assassinated by two of his own Captains, Rechab and Bahana, who bring his Head to David, but instead of thanking them for their Present, caused them to be put to death as Vile Fellows, 2 Sam. 4.1, &c. Then the other Tribes resolve to acknowledge David, and hereupon wait on him at Hebron, where he had already Reigned over Judah 7 years and an half; whence he departs to seize on the Fort of Sion, and to drive the Jehusites from Jerusalem. There Hiram King of Tyre sends to him Ambassadors and Cedar-Wood, with Workmen to build his Court, 2 Sam. 5.1, &c. This was in Anno Mundi 2950. In the 9th year of his Reign he obtains 2 notable Victories over the Philistins, the first in Bahal-Peratsim, and the 2d in a place where there were a great many Mulberry-Trees, 2 Sam. 1.17, &c. And it seems 'twas on this occasion that 3 of Davids Valiant Men went to Bethlehem for Water for him through the midst of the Enemies Forces, 2 Sam. 23.15, 16, 17. After these Victories he again espouseth more Wives, 2 Sam. 5.13▪ and trans∣ports the Ark from Kriathjearim, called Bahale of Judah, designing to settle it in Sion; but being affrighted by the death of Uzzah, he durst not receive it in within his own House, till having known that Obed Edom▪ was blest by it, to whose house he had sent it; he made it be brought thence into Sion with great solemnity, his Wife Michal blaming him for having Danced publickly before it: he is greatly offended with her Re∣proof, 2 Sam. 6.1, &c. He afterwards designs the building of the Temple, which GOD by the Prophet Nathan orders him to remit to his Successor, 2 Sam. 7.1, &c. yet he then prepared, or Divinely received the Model
of it; of which see 1 Chron. 28.11, &c. He beats again the Philistines, and wins them the Fort of Metheg-amma, 2 Sam. 8.1. subjugates the Moabites; and 'twas in this Expedition that Benaja slew two of the most Mighty Men amongst them, and a Lion in a Snowy day, 2 Sam. 23.30. He defeats Hadad∣ezer King of Zobah, subdues the Syrians, 2 Sam. 8.3, &c. and overcomes the Idumaeans, 2 Sam. 8.12, 13, 14. Then he took Mephi∣bosheth the Son of Jonathan home to him, (who was but 5 years old when his Father died, 2 Sam. 4.4.) and committed the care of his Lands to Ziba, 2 Sam. 9.1, &c. which seems not to have hapned till about the 15th of David's Reign, seeing Mephibosheth had then a Son named Micah, 2 Sam. 9.12. It's not certain, whether the War against the Ammonites preceded that which David had against the Syrians; yet it seems the one had great Coherence with the other, of which you may see the occasion in David's Embassy violated by Haman, 2 Sam. 10.1, &c. and the end of it, by taking of Rabba, 2 Sam. 12.28, &c. Whilst Joab carried on the Siege, David commits Adultery with Bathsheba the Wife of Uriah, and procured secretly by Joab her Husbands death at the Siege of Rabba, 2 Sam. 11.1, &c. Nathan is sent to David, to reprehend him for this Double Crime, and the Child born in Adultery died at the end of 7 days, 2 Sam. 12.1, &c. But in the year following, which may be was the 17th of David, was born of her Solomon, 2 Sam. 12.24, &c. And hence it appears that Solo∣mon was the eldest of all those which she had since her Marriage with David, altho Sham∣muah, or Shimha, and Shobab, and Nathan be named before him, 2 Sam. 5.14. and 1 Chron. 3.5. The Famine which the Country suffer'd, and the Expiation made by the Crucifixion of Saul's 7 Sons, at the instance of the Gibeonites, 2 Sam. 21.1, &c. is com∣monly referred to the 20th year of David's Reign. New Wars against the Philistines de∣scribed, 2 Sam. 21.15, &c. Being delivered from all Enemies round about him, he sings to GOD the Canticle which we read 2 Sam. 22.1, &c. and Psalm 18.1, &c. But being puft up by all these Prosperities, he causes the People to be num∣bred, altho Joab dissuaded him from it; and was reduced (by the Ministry of Gad) to one of these 3 points, viz. to suffer from GOD either War, Plague, or Famine, 2 Sam. 24.1, &c. A while after followed the Disorders of his House: Ammon (one of his Sons) violates Tha∣mar; but Absalom her own Brother reveng'd himself 2 years after, by killing him, and flies into Geshur, where he remains 3 years; at the end of which (by the address of Joab, and the Intercession of a Tekoite) he comes again to Jerusalem, where he lives two years without seeing his Father; but at length is reconciled publickly, 2 Sam. 1.13, 14. From that time he began to make Cabals, and to aspire to the Crown, till at length he openly Conspired against his Father, and forceth him to fly from Jerusalem, and to pass over Jordan. This hapned at the end of 40 years, that is, either after the Election of Saul, or since the Birth of Absalom, 2 Sam. 15.1.7, &c. In this flight Zeba obtain'd by Calumny the confiscation of Mephibosheth's Estate: Shimei Curses David; Cushai pretends to joyn him∣self to Absalom, and dissipates the Counsel of Achitophel; who hence perceiving that Absalom's Enterprize would have ill success, makes an end of himself. The Battle was given between David's and Absalom's Forces, the latter of which is beaten, and he flying through a Forest, remains hanged by the Hair of his Head between the Branches of an Oak, where he was slain: David bears his Death with great impatience; but at length shews himself to the people, and is solemnly brought into Jerusalem, 2 Sam. Chap. 16, 17, 18, 19. Sheba the Son of Bicri takes occasion from some Misintelligence which hapned amongst the Tribes, on the account of David's Resti∣tution, to raise a new Faction against him; but Joab besieged him in the City of Abel, and had his head given him, having first Assassinated Amasa, whom David seemed to have preferred before him, 2 Sam. 20.1, &c. After these Civil and Domestick Broils, David obtaining some Rest in the last years of his Reign and Life, applies himself entirely to the establishment of good Order in the Ser∣vice of GOD, as 'tis represented, 1 Chron. Chap. 23, 24, &c. Being now grown in years, he Espous'd Abishag, to give him Warmth. Adonijah treads in Absalom's steps, and draws Joab and Abiathar to his party; but whilst he Feasted with his Conspirators, Nathan and Bathsheba, inform David of it, who on this occasion
makes Solomon to be Anointed King, which dissipated Adonijah's Faction, yet whom So∣lomon at first pardon'd, 1 Kings 1.1, &c. David having given divers Orders to Solo∣mon, dies, after he had Reigned 40 years, 1 Kings 2.1, &c. and Solomon succeeds him, who Reigned as long. He immediately puts to death Adonijah, who had demanded Abi∣shag to Wife, deposes Abiathar from the Priesthood, which he transfers to Zadock of the Branch of Eleazer, and causes Joab to be slain at the Horns of the Altar, giving the charge of this to Benaja, 1 Kings 2.1. he also confines Shimei to Jerusalem, whom going out thence 3 years after (contrary to his Order) was also put to death, 2 Kings 2.36, &c. These things hapned about Anno Mundi 2984. Having espous'd the Daughter of Pharaoh, obtain'd of GOD a singular Wisdom in, go∣verning of which he gave the first instance between 2 Harlots, and reduces the Officers of the Crown into great order, and the People live under his Conduct in abundance and great security, 1 Kings Chap. 3, & 4. CHAP. VI. Of the Fifth Age, or Period of the World. THe farther we go from the Creation of the World, the more perplexity we meet with in Holy Scripture, in adjusting the Ac∣counts of time; but this is in some part recompenced by the Light which on the con∣trary we have cleared in the greatest distance from the Writings of Profane Authors. This Fifth Age of the World, begins at the Foundation of the Temple of Solomon, in the Year 2992; and ends at the Jewish Capti∣vity, in the Reign of King Cyrus, Anno Mundi 3468; which Period contains the space of 476 years. The Temple was 7 years and an half in Building, and was Dedicated in the year 3001, which began the Fourth Millenary of the World. Solomon Reigned 40 years, and died in the year of the World 3029, being 975 years before the Birth of Jesus Christ. But it is incredible to think what a confusion in Chronology, is caused by the division of his Kingdom between the Kings of Judah and Israel, which happen'd after his Death. Even those that have taken most pains in this mat∣ter, have had much ado to reconcile the dif∣ficulties that here occur. [In the Large Volumes of the History of the Bible, there comes in here a Double Table of the Kings of Judah and Israel, which can't be so brought into a Page in this small sized Volume, to which I refer the Curious; as also for the Table of the Kings of Judah, after the Ruin of Sama∣ria.] Anno Mundi 2988. Solomon having treated with Hiram King of Tyre, for Materials for the Temple which he designed, began the Building in the 4th year of his Reign, and the 480th since the Israelites Exit out of Egypt, 1 Kings 6.1. See the History of his Buildings, both Sacred and Civil, 1 Kings Chap. 6 and 7. The Temple finished at the end of 7 years, he makes the Dedication of it in the 11th year of his Reign, 1 Kings 7.37, 38. and 8.1, &c. Having spent seven years in Building the Temple, he consumed 13 more in Building his House; and at the end of these 20 years, which is in the 24th of his Reign, GOD appeared to him again with Promises and Threats, 1 Kings 9.1, 10. Of his other Buildings, Navigations into Ophir, the Visit he received from the Queen of Sheba, see 1 Kings 9.15, &c. and 10.1, &c. Also his strange and numerous Wives, having 700 that were Princesses, besides 300 that were Concubines; how towards the Declension of his Life he turned away his Heart after o∣ther Gods, to connive (at least at their Worship) and tolerate them against his duty. See 1 Kings 11.1, &c. GOD denounces to him, whether immediately in a Dream, or Vision, or by the Prophet Ahijah, who then flourish'd, the tearing away of his Kingdom, and raising up Enemies to him, in the person of Hadad the Idumaean, in Rezon the Syrean, and in Jeroboam the Ephramite, to whom Ahijah foretold, he should be King of ten
Tribes, 1 Kings 11.9, &c. In fine, He dies, having Reigned 40 years, and having lived 62 or 63, leaving his Crown to Rehoboam his Son, aged 41; which shews, that what he said in his Prayer, 1 Kings 3.7. concerned the confession of his incapacity, and not his want of years. Rehoboam, for following the Counsel of the youngest, saw himself abandoned by the 10 Tribes, who rebelled against him, and set up Jeroboam the Son of Nebat for their King, 1 Kings 12.1, &c. From that time was made a distinction between the Kings and Kingdom of Judah, and those of Israel; and some will have this to be the beginning of the 390 mystical Days in Ezek. 4.4. which is to say, of 390 years, during which GOD bore with the Sins of this people. Rehoboam, whom Solomon had of an Am∣monite Woman, 1 Kings 14.22. not being able either to retain by Love or Force the 10 Tribes Obedience to him, and Adoram whom he had sent to them having been Stoned, 1 Kings 12.16, &c. and GOD him∣self having forbidden him by the Prophet Shemaiah, and those of Judah and Benjamin, to take up Arms on this account against those of Israel, 1 Kings 12.22, &c. underwent another vexation 5 years after, by means of Shishack King of Egypt, 1 Kings 14.25. Jeroboam, who began with him in Israel, to settle himself in this new Authority, did set up an Idolatrous and vicious Worship, 1 Kings 12.26, &c▪ Zadoc having exercised the Office of High Priest under Solomon, after the deposing of Abiathar, transmits it to his Son Ahimaha's, who Officiated in the time of Rehoboam, 1 Chron. 6.8, 53. An anonimous Prophet came to Bethel, to reprehend Jero∣boam, and to foretel, that Josias would one day overthrow the Altar, which he came now from setting up; but he himself having not followed GOD's Order, was kill'd by a Lion, 1 Kings 13.1, &c. Jeroboam having by his Wife (disguis'd) consulted Ahijah the Prophet on his Sons sick∣ness, is severely censured with the Prediction of the entire ruin of his House, and the ap∣proaching death of his sick Son, 1 Kings 14.1, &c. Rehoboam dies Anno 3046, having Reigned 17 years, and lived 58, 1 Kings 14.21. leaving Abigam (called also Abiah) his Son Heir of his Crown of Judah, and Quarrels against Jeroboam King of Israel, in the beginning of the 18th year of his Usurpation. But Abijam Reigned only 3 years, as little religious and happy as his Father, 1 Kings 15.1, &c. (In his time flourish'd the Prophet Iddo, the Compiler of this History, 2 Chron. 12.15.) yet GOD gave him some advantagi∣ous Successes against Jeroboam, 2 Chron. 13.1, &c. Anno Mundi 3049. To Abijam succeeds his Son Asa, who comes to the Crown at the 20th year of the expiration of Jeroboam, a Prince of great Piety, and who (without concerning himself at his Grandmother Ma∣haca, the Daughter of Abiscalom of Gibeah) purged the Land of Idols and filthiness, 1 Kings 15.2, 9, &c. In the beginning of Asa's 2d year, Nadab the Son of Jeroboam, having Reigned over Israel 22 years, 1 Kings 14.28. succeeds his Father; but scarce had he began to enter into the 2d year of his Reign, but Bahasca, or Baasha, King of Israel, of the Tribe of Issachar, Conspired against him at the Siege of Gibbethon, and killed him before the 3d year of Asa was ended, and extirminated Jeroboam's whole House, 1 Kings 15.25, &c. This Baasha also undertook a War against Asa, and designed to build Ramah, to serve him as a Fort against Judah: But Asa gives him so great a diversion by Benhadad King of Assyria, that he of all Israel was constrained to lay aside his design, 1 Kings 15.16, &c. Therefore this proceeding of Asa was not ap∣proved of from Heaven; for GOD reprehend∣ed him for it by the Prophet Hanani, 2 Chron. 16.7, &c. Anno Mundi 3090. Asa Reigned 41 years and died, being only ill of his Feet, for having put greater confidence in Physicians than in GOD, 1 Kings 15.10, 23. under Asa and Abijam his Father; the High Priesthood was administred by Azariah the Son of Ahi∣maaz, Radocks Grandson, and perhaps by Johanan his Son, 1 Chron. 6.9. In the mean time Baasha continuing in the Sin of Jero∣boam, was reprehended by Jehu Son of Ha∣nani the Prophet, and threatned with the like punishment, and having Reigned 23 years, died in the beginning of the 24th, 1 Kings 15.33. leaving his Crown to his Son Elah, in the 26th year of Asa, 1 Kings 16.8 whence it appears that Asa's 36th year, in which he was attacked by Baasha, 2 Chron. 16.1. is not to be understood of the Reign of Asa, in the 26th of which Baasha died;
but of the Kingdom of Asa, which had taken its birth in the separation of the Tribes, since which he found these 36 years: For Reho∣boam had Reigned 17, and Ahijam 3, and Asa 15 or 16, when Baasha openly invaded him. Now it hapned the same to Elah, as to Nadab the Son of Jeroboam; for at the entrance of the 2d year of his Reign, in the 27th of Ahab's, Zimri killed him at Tirza, and afterwards put to death all those of his House, and got into his place, 1 Kings 16.1, 2, &c. But Zimri was not King above 7 days; for Omri (General of the Army, with which he besieg'd Gibbethon) having heard of Zimri's Fact, raised the Siege, sat down before Tirza; which Zimri seeing was taken, entred into the Royal Palaco, and burnt himself in it, that he might not fall alive into Omri's hands, 1 Kings 16.15, &c. After the Death of Zimri, altho Omri had already been declared King by all the Army, yet there were formed two parties amongst the People, one for Tibni Son of Ginah, and the other for Omri; but this latter prevailing, assured himself of the Crown by the death of his Competitor. This Contest having lasted about 4 years, he began to Reign absolutely without any Controuler: As the 33th year of Asa ended, and continued 8 years; having transferr'd the Royal Seat from Tirzah to Samaria, which he built; and having bought the Ground of Shemer, who was Lord thereof: So that the 12 years that are attributed to him must be reckoned not from the death of Tibni, but from that of Elah, for the revenge of which he had been Tumultuously declared King, 1 Kings 16.15, &c. He left Ahab his Son Successor to the Crown of Israel in the 38th year of Ahab. He was a wicked Prince, doing great mischief, 1 Kings 16.29, &c. Asa having Reigned 41 years, Jehoshaphat his Son suc∣ceeded him; an Imitator of his Father's Piety and Vertue. He came to the Crown at 35 years of Age, and Reigned 25 years, 1 Kings 22.42. There's some cause to suspect that Azariah, who exercised the High Priest∣hood under Jehoshaphat, 2 Chron. 19.11. is the same as Johanan, 1 Chron. 6.9. and that he continued in this Office (under the Name of Jehojada) in the time of Joash. Jehshaphat strengthens himself against Israel, seeks the Baalites to extirminate them, and from the 3d year of his Reign procures by his Officers, that the People be well instructed in the Law, 1 Chron. 17.1, &c. Anno Mundi 3095. 'Tis thought that in the 10th year of Jehoshaphat, and the 14th of Ahab, began the Famine foretold by the Prophet Eli, which lasted 3 years and a half, during which GOD several ways provided for the Prophet's Nourishment, 1 Kings 17.1. This term expiring, Elijah presents himself to Ahab, evidently verifies that the LORD is the true GOD; causes the 450 Prophets of Baal to be put to death, and obtains Rain for the Land, 1 Kings 18.1, &c. This falls in with the 14th year of Jehoshaphat. After this Execution, Elijah gets away to avoid the Fury of Jezabel the Wife of Ahab, 1 Kings 19.1, &c. Benhadad King of Syria, ima∣gining, that the Famine of the Israelites had much weakned them, therefore hoped to make Asa and his Kingdom Tributaries to him; but he is twice defeated and beaten, losing in the last Battel 100000 Foot, besides 27000 who perished under the Walls of Aphek where they had retired; he is con∣strain'd himself to surrender to Ahab, who spares him, and treats an Alliance with him, which the LORD reproves by a Prophet, 1 Kings 2.1, &c. These Prosperities of Ahab against the Syrians, were immediately fol∣lowed by the Violence executed against Naboth for his Vineyard, 1 Kings 21.1, &c. Jehosha∣phat enjoying particular Blessings, contracted an unfortunate Alliance with Ahab, and so order'd it, that his Son Joram espoused Athaliah Daughter of Ahab, 2 Kings 8.16. and 2 Chron. 18.1. and in the 17th year of his Reign, he associated to the Crown his Son Joram, Ahab's Son-in-Law. Anno Mundi 3106. In the same year Jehoshaphat comes (in pursuance of this Alli∣ance) to Visit Ahab, who made him great Feasts, and engaged him with him in the War against the Syrians, to have Ramoth of Gilead, which they should have surren∣dred by virtue of a Treaty made with Ben∣hadad 3 years past. In this Combat Jeho∣shaphat was in great danger, and Ahab was there killed (according to Michaiah's Predi∣ction) in the 2d year of his Reign. See 2 Kings 8.28. and 9.1. and 2 Chron. 18.2, &c. Jehoshaphat being returned safe from so great a danger, is censured by Hanani the Prophet, for having joyn'd his Arms with Ahab's, and establishes Judges for Civil and Eclesiastical Affairs, 2 Chron. 9.1, &c. But he saw himself
in the mean time attacked by the Moabites and Ammonites, over whom GOD gave him the Victory by their own Arms, they not being obliged to draw their Swords, 2 Chron. 2.1, &c. After Ahab's death, the Moabites Revolt; Ahaziah his Son and Successor having had a great Fall, consults Baalzebub, and would have Elijah brought to him; who at the second Summons comes to him, and foretels him he would be never cured of his Wound, 2 Kings 1.1, &c. He would have had Jeho∣shaphat been Partners with him in the Trade to Tarsis: This Project did not succeed, for Jehoshaphat (who seemed at first inclinable to this Navigation, for which he was reprehended by the Prophet Eliazar, who denounced to him the Shipwreck of his Vessel, 2 Chron. 20.35.) at last refused it, 1 Kings 22.50. Thus died Ahaziah without Children in the 2d year of his Reign, which was the 18th of Jehoshaphat, and the 2d of the first Assump∣tion of this good Princes Son Joram to the Crown, 2 Kings 1.17. At the same time Elijah was taken taken up into Heaven in a fiery Chariot, leaving Elisha the Heir of his Cloak and Office, 2 Kings 2.1, &c. having first written for King Joram, Jehoshaphat's Son, what concerned him. Elisha works ex∣traordinary things, of which see 2 Kings 4.1, &c. Joram, the Brother of Ahaziah, and Ahab's Son, succeeds him the 18th year of Jehoshaphat, and Reigned 12 years. Jeho∣shaphat and the King of Edom joyn together, in the 18th year of Jehoshaphat, and Reigned 12 years. Also Jehoshaphat and the King of Edom joyn together against the Moabites, who were Revolted since Ahab's death. Elisha, who was in this Expedition, obtains Water for the Army, and the Moabites are defeated, and their King reduced to such extremties in his Capital City, that for despair he Sa∣crificed his own Son on the Walls, 2 Kings 3.1, &c. Anno Mundi, 3112. Jehoshaphat in the 22th year of his Reign, which was the 5th of Joram King of Israel, renewed the Title of King to his Son Joram, aged 32 years, with some enlargments of Authority, greater than that he conferred on him 5 years before, in the 17th year of his Reign, 2 Kings 1.17. and thence should be taken the term of 8 years, which the Scripture assigns him, 2 Kings 8.17. and 2 Chron. 21.5. seeing the first of these 8 years falls with the 5th of Joram, 2 Kings 8.16. which was also the 22th of Jehoshaphat, 2 Kings 3.1. And therefore 'tis said, 2 Chron. 21.3. that Jehoshaphat had given the Kingdom to Joram, because he was the eldest, having made other Donations to his youngest. Anno Mundi 3115. Jehoshaphat in the 25th year of his Reign, and in the 4th of this Royal Dignity, conferr'd on his Son Joram, died aged 60 years, 1 Kings 22.24. much about the time the Shunamite Woman was raised to Life by Elis, 2 Kings 4.16. It was also in his time that the 7 years Famine began, predicted by him, 2 Kings 4.38. and 8.1, 2, 3, &c. Joram Reigned alone (after the death of Jehoshaphat) 4 years, or there∣abouts. He followed the Courses of the House of Ahab; put to death all his 6 Bre∣thren, with some of the Chief of Israel, and advanced Idolatry as much as he could: He saw the Revolt of the Idumaeans, and of Libna; he suffered the Philistins and Ara∣bians to pillage his Treasures, and to lead his Wives and Children into Captivity; and having been sick for 2 years, he died aged 40 years (without being lamented by any one) of a filthy and languishing Distemper, according to all which was denounced to him in the Writing of Elijah, 2 Chron. 21.1, &c. The 8 years Reign which the Scripture gives him, were not compleat; for the 1st concurring with the 5th of Joram King of Israel, the 8th year should come in with the 12th, with which is also adjusted the beginning of Ahaziah in Judah, 2 Kings 8.16, 25. And as to what is said, That Ahaziah began to Reign in the 11th year of Joram the Son of Ahab, 2 Kings 9.27. this must be under∣stood of the 11th year expiring, or expired; it being moreover easily conceived, That the 1st year of Joram in Judah, preceeded by some Months the 5th of Joram in Israel; and thus he must have began his 8th and last year a little before the 12th of this Prince; whence 'tis that the Scriprure puts the 1st year of Ahaziah in Judah, beginning at the end of the 11th year, and concurring with the 12th of Joram King of Israel, in the Passages above-cited. During the Reign of the 2 Jorams, Naa∣man was sent into Israel by the King of Assyria, to be cleansed of his Leprosie, 1. King 5.1, &c. The Designs of the Syrians are discovered to the King of Israel by Elisha▪
and those whom the King of Assyria had sent, to seize on him at Dothan, are conducted by him to Samaria, 2 Kings 6.8, &c. A while after Benhadad besieges Samaria, which other∣wise had suffered a long time under a grie∣vous Famine; but a panick Fear made him raise the Siege on a sudden, whereby the City was furnished with supplies, according as Elisha had Prophecied, 2 Kings 6.24. It was after this Siege, so miraculously raised, that hapned the things recited touching Benhadad's Sickness, and the sending of Hazael to Elisha, to consult him, which was followed by his death; after which Hazael becomes King of Syria, 2 Kings 8.7, &c. Licurgus (the famous Legislator amongst the Lacedemonians) flourished about this time. Anno Mundi 3119. Joram King of Judah being dead at the entrance into his 8th year, the 4th after the death of his Father Jeho∣shaphat, and at the beginning of the 12th and last of Joram King of Israel, Ahaziah his Son (sometimes called Ochozias, and Jeho∣ahaz) succeeds him, aged 22 years, 2 Kings 8.24, 25, 26. and to what is said to his having been then 42 years, those who would cut the Knot, think that in the Hebrew Text, by the Ignorance of Transcribers, are here joyned to the 2 Numerical Letters Mem and Beth, which stand for 42, instead of Caph and Beth, which stand for 22; but this Conjecture seems to others the less justifiable, in that this Number is exprest at length in the Original Hebrew, and is not there denoted by Cyphers; and therefore those that are for untying it, think, that in the last place is not mark'd the age of Ahaziah, but the term which past since the Crown of Israel was in the House of Ahab, and the King's Seat at Samaria. Ahaziah following the Train of the House of Ahab, and of which he was by Athaliah his Mother, the Daughter of Ahab and Jezabel, the Grandchild of Omri, joyn'd himself to Joram his Unkle, against Hazael King of Assyria, who seemed to design the re-taking of Ramoth-Gilead, which Ahab had heretofore recovered with the price of his Life: But Joram in some Rencounter was Wounded by the Assyrians, and carried to Jezreel for his Cure, 2 Kings 8.27. whilst he was under the Physicians hands, and that Ahaziah King of Judah came to Visit him, Elisha sends one of his Disciples to Ramoth-Gilead, to Anoint Jehu King; wo parts the next Morning with the other Officers of the Army, Conspirators with him, to come to Jezreel: Joram and Ahaziah come to meet him; the first is immediately killed and thrown into Naboth's Field, the second mortal∣ly wounded, and is thence carried to Jerusa∣lem, and there buried, 2 Kings 9.1, &c. Thus died Joram King of Israel in the 12th year of his Reign, and Ahaziah his Nephew, King of Judah in his first year. Jehu comes to Jezreel, causes Jezabel to be thrown out of the Windows, who is eaten with Dogs, 2 Kings 9.30. and causes the Heads of 70 of Ahab's Sons to be brought him from Samaria, whereunto he bends his course, and finds in the way the chief of Judah and Ahaziah's Kindred, to the number of 42 Men, and puts them all to the Sword. Being arrived at Samaria, he convocates the Servants of Baal in the Temple of the Idol, and there causes them to be destroyed, 2 Kings 10.1, &c. his Reign was long enough, to wit, 28 years, 2 Kings 10.36. but he suffered many vexations from the Syrians, who re-took Ramoth-Gilead, and possest much of the Country, 2 Kings 10.32, 33. Anno Mundi 3120. Athaliah, the Mother of Ahaziah, seeing her Son dead, Tyranni∣cally seizes on the Soveraign Authority; and to confirm herself in her Usurpation, put to death all she could find in Jerusalem of the BloodRoyal: But Jehoash, the Son of Aha∣ziah, was pluckt out of the Paws of the Lioness by the dexterity of Jehoshebah, the Daughter of King Joram, the Consanguin-Sister; but not a German of Ahaziah, Aunt to Joash, and Wife of Jehojada the High Priest, 2 King. 11.1, &c. some think (and there's probability of it) that this Jehojada is the same which is called Jehonan, amongst the Descendents of Zudock, 1 Chron. 6.9, 10. and he seems to be called thus distinctly with these three Names, to wit, Jehonan, Amaziah, and Jehojada. Anno Mundi 3126. During 6 years Joash remains hid in the Temple, whilst that Atha∣liah sways the Scepter; but in the 7th year she is killed, and Joash is declared King of Israel, 2 Kings 11.1, &c. The Reign of Joash was of 40 years; and as long as Jehojada lived, he took particular care of the Service of GOD, 2 Kings 12.1, &c. and 2 Chron. 24.1, As the 22th year of Jeha King of Israel ended with his Life, so Jehoahash his Son
succeeded him in the 22th year of Joash, and Reigned over Israel 17 years, 2 Kings 13.1. After the death of Jehoida, aged 130 years, Jehoash grew loose even to the suffering the re-establishment of Idolatry, and to cause to be Stoned Zacharias the Son of Jehojada (named also Johanan, 1 Chron. 6.9. and Azariah, 2 Chron. 19.11. and Barachias, Matth. 23.35.) between the Temple and the Altar, 2 Chron. 24.15, &c. But for this he did not go long unpunished; for having redeemed himself of Hazael King of Syria, by all the Treasures of his Fathers, 2 Kings. 12.17, &c. a small Troop of Assyrians entred into Judea, defeated his great Army, and carried away much Booty. The Affairs of Jehoash proceeded no better in Israel; but 2 years before his death, he associates to the Crown his Son Joash, of the same Name as the King of Judah, in the 37th year of this Prince; which Joash Reigned in Israel 16 years, 2 Kings 13.1, &c. the 2 first of which preceeded the death of his Father, and the second concurr'd with the last of Joash King of Judah, who was killed by his own Servants, Leagued against him, 2 Kings 12.20. and 2 Chron. 24.25, &c. Anno Mundi 3165. Amaziah of 25 years of age, succeeds in the Kingdom of Judah, in the 2d year of Joash King of Israel, and Reigned commendably 29 years; and as soon as ever his Authority was confirmed, he put to death those who had slain his Father, 2 Kings 14.1, &c. Joash was a great Deliverer in Israel; he Visits Elisha on his Death-Bed, who foretels his happy Successes against the Syrians, and he recovers from Benhadad the Son of Hazael King of Assyria, all the places he was possest of in Israel, 2 Kings 13.15, &c. Amaziah had likewise good success over the Idumeans, against which he went out with a strong Army consisting of 100000 Israelites, which he had taken into pay; but having disbanded them by the Advertisement of an Anonymous Prophet, they made a great disorder in the Frontier Towns of his King∣dom, and carried away much Booty; yet with his own single Troops he killed 10000 Idumeans, and having taken 10000 others Prisoners, his Souldiers precipitated them from the top of a Rock; herein using his Victory ill, that having taken the Idumeans Idols, he fell down before them, 2 Kings 14.7. and more at length, 2 Chron. 25.5, &c. puft up with this Victory, and vext with the Disorders which the Israelites disbanded from his Army made on his Fronntiers, he sent a Cartel of defiance to Joash King of Israel, who not being able to dissuade him from this War, comes out to meet him with his Forces at Bethshemesh, he overthrows his Army, takes him Prisoner, enters Victoriously into Jeru∣salem, causes a great Tract of the Wall to be taken down, and carries thence all the Trea∣sures, 2 Kings 14.8, &c. 2 Chron. 25.17, &c. This hapned towards the end of the Reign and Life of Joash, whom Amaziah survived by 15 years, 2 Kings 14.17. and 2 Chron. 25.25. After Joash succeeds his Son Jeroboam, the 2d of the Name, in the 15th year of Amaziah; and Reigned 41 years, 2 Kings 14.21. About this time flourished the Prophet Jonah, who foretold Jeroboam the Victories which he won over the Assyrians, 2 King. 14.25. and was sent afterwards to Nineveh, Jonah 1.1, &c. Amaziah died 15 years after Jonah, and at∣tempting to save himself out of Jerusalem from a Conspiracy which was formed against him, he was pursued to Lachish, and there killed, 2 Kings 14.19, 20. Anno Mundi 3194. Azariah, named also Osias, or Uzziah, his Son, succeeds him in the Throne of Israel, at the age of 16 years, and Reigned 52. Some pretend he Reigned a while with his Father, or for him, whilst he was a Fugitive at Lachish, which his few years will not admit. Others (on the contrary) pretend, there was an Inter-regnum of several years between him and his Father, (tho' the Scripture be silent of it, making him to suc∣ceed his Father) after a recital of his death, at the age of 16 years, 2 Kings 14.21. and 15.2. and 2 Chron. 26.11. The Opinion of the Inter-regnum is grounded on what we read in 2 Kings 15.1. But we may under∣stand it of the continuation of his Reign, which began immediately after his Father's death, in the 16th year of his Life; for he was in full Vigor, as well in respect of Body, as that of the State; and should we suppose that he was but 1 year old when his Father died, and that he was not declared Compe∣tent till the age of 16, falling in with the 27th of Jeroboam the 2d, this would make no Inter-regnum, because that in a successive Kingdom, as that of Judah, a King that is
a Minor, is however a King, so that still there will be only to reckon from the death of Amaziah to his, no more than 52 years, which the Scripture allots him. The first Institution of the Olympiads, which serv'd as an Epoche to the Greeks, is referr'd to the 5th year of his Reign, which was the 20th of Joroboam. Under this King began Isaiah, Hosea, Joel and Amos to Pro∣phecy; he rebuilt Elah, 2 Kings 14.22. apply'd himself to Piety, thro' the wise Councel of the Prophet Zachary, beat the Philistins and Arabians, obliged the Ammo∣nites to acknowledge him, fortified Jerusalem, took great care of the Tillage of the Earth, and of the Militia, 2 Chro. 26.1, &c. Jeroboam the 2d having Reigned 41 years, 15 of which falls in with the 1st of Osias, must have died in the 26th year; whence is gathered, there was an Inter-reguum in Israel, after the death of Jeroboam, seeing his Son Zachary (who succeeded him, and Reigned but 6 months, and in whom the Race of Jehu was extinct) did not come to the Crown till towards the end of the 38th year of Osias, 12 years after the death of his Father, and that Shallum killed him; and in the 39th year of the same Osias, Menahem having killed Shallum, possest the Throne of Israel, which he held 10 years, 2 Kings 15.18, &c. This Menahem exercised great Cruelties at Tipsah, and loaded the people with a great Tribute, to furnish him with the 1000 Ta∣lents of Silver, which he was to pay to Pull, King of Assyria, 2 Kings 15.16, &c. During these Revolutions in the Kingdom of Israel, Osias having undertaken to offer Incense in the Temple, notwithstanding the Remonstrances and Oppositions of Azariah the High Priest, is struck from Heaven with a Leprosie, and obliged to live apart accord∣ing to the Law; so that he remained a Re∣cluse the rest of his Life, which hapned (ac∣cording to the Opinion of several) 7 years before his death, during which his Son Jotham administred the Affairs of the Kingdom, 2 Kings 15.5. and 2 Chron. 26.16, &c. This zealous Priest seems to have been the Son of Johanan, 1 Chron. 6.10. and thus that of Jehoiada (who was the same, and the Brother of Zachary) who having succeeded his Father Jehoiada in the High Priesthood, was Stoned between the Temple and the Altar, under King Joash, by his Order, and towards the end of his Reign, 2 Chron. 24.20, &c. Menahem being dead at Samaria, his Son Pekahia succeeds him in the 50th year of Osias, and governs but two years, being kill'd by Pekah the Son of Remalia, 2 Kings 15.26, 27. Thus died Osias, having Reigned 52 years in Judah, and seen six Kings succeed in the Kingdom of Israel with great confusion. Now, because 'twas from the beginning of the 52d year of Osias, that Pekah the Son of Remaliah began to Reign, and Reigned 20; the Scripture makes the first year o Jotham, the Son of Osias, (Reigning in Judah) to concur with the 2d of Pekah in Israel, 2 Kings 15.32. Anno Mundi 3245. Jotham was a wise and pious Prince, who succeeded his Father at the Age of 25 years, and Reigned 16 years, 2 Kings 15.32, &c. and 2 Chron. 27.1, &c. and in that there is mention of the 20th year of Jotham, 2 Kings 15.30. 'Tis not to say that Jotham Reigned 20 years alone, but either to declare, that Pekah was slain 20 years after Jotham came to the Crown, or that Jotham before he Reigned alone, which he did for 16 years together, after the death of his Father, had yet exercised the Office of a Regent, and King some years before, during his Father's Confinement. Under him Micah began to Prophesie, and Obadiah was contemporary with him; and the City of Rome was built at the same time. Touching the Buildings and Victories of Jo∣tham, see 2 Chron. 27.3, &c. and of the Disgraces on the contrary which Pekah suf∣fered by the Arms of Tiglah-Pilser King of Assyria, 2 Kings 15.29. Anno Mundi 3262. Ahaz, Son of Jotham, Aged 20 years, succeeded in the Throne of Judah, and Reigned 16 years; but ill, with Injustice and Impiety, 2 Kings 16.2. and 2 Chron. 28.1, &c. Pekah King of Israel, who was now 17 years old when Ahaz came to the Crown, 2 Kings 16.2. joyn'd himself with Rezin King of Assyria to invade Judea, which design did not succeed, 2 Kings 16.5. yet did they great mischief, for Rezin took away Elath from the Kingdom of Judah, and made great spoils, and Pekah kill'd in one day 120000 Men of Judah, and his Soldiers in one course carried away 200000 Prisoners with great Booty; but Obed the Prophet made them be sent back free, and their Booty to be restored, 2 Chron. 28.5▪ &c▪
Ahaz obtained indeed some diversion by Tiglath-Pileser King of Assyria, but all this assistance turn'd to a Snare, and his Ruin; and he brought from Damascus, which Tig∣lath-Pileser had taken from Rezin, the mo∣del of an Altar which he caused to be set up in a place wherein stood that of the Lord, to which Uriah the High Priest (apparently the same which is named Amariah, 1 Chron. 6.11.) lent his hand, 2 Kings 16.10, &c. Ahaz was also disturb'd by the Idumeans, and Philistins, who took away several places from him, 2 Chron. 28.17, 18. In fine, in the 4th year of Ahaz, 20 years after his Father Jotham was come to the Crown, Pekah having Reigned 20 years in Israel, died by the conspiracy of Hosea, who slew him to possess his place; but his Authority was de∣bated for the space of 8 years, till either thrust in by the Assyrians, or Victorious over the contrary party, he began to Reign without opposition in the 12th year of Ahaz, after which he still subsisted 9 years, and then Samaria was taken by Shalmaneser, and all the people transported thence, 2 Kings 15.27, 30. & 17.1. & 18.10. Anno Mundi 3265. Ahaz being delivered from Pekah and Rezin, had some respite, and died in the 16th year of his Reign, when the 3d of Hosea ended, the last King of Israel, leaving his Crown to Ezechias, Aged 25 years, 2 Kings 18.1. so that his Father was not older than the Son but by 11 years; whence it's easie to gather, that Mahasei, killed by Zicri, may have been King Jothams Son, but not of Ahaz, who could not have in the 22th year of his life a Son capable to expose himself to the perils of War, and to be killed by an Enemy. In the time of this good and wise King, the Son of a wicked Father, and Father of a wicked Son, was Azariah High Priest, another than he who opposed King Osias, and the Son of Oriah, who obtained this Dignity under Ahaz, whom some pretend was named Amaria, 1 Chron. 6.11. As soon as Ezechiah was come to the Crown of Judah, in which Government he continued 29 years, 2 Kings 18.2. of which the 2 first were also the 2 last of his Fathers Reign, as appears from the 2 Kings 17.1. &▪ 19.9, 10. he set in good order the Service of GOD, destroyed Idolatry, beats in pieces the Brazen Serpent, to which the people offer∣ed Incense, refused to pay Tribute to the Assyrians, smites the Philistins, and is prospe∣rous in all things, 2 Kings 18.4, &c. and 2 Chron. Chap. 29.30, 51. Anno Mundi 3277. Whilst he busies him∣self in settling Religion, and preserving his Frontiers, in the 4th year of his Reign, with which concurr'd the 7th of Hosea, who having a design to revolt from Shalmaneser King of Assyria, whose Tributary he had been 3 years, he drew on him the Arms of this Monarch, who having held Samaria 3 years besieged, took it at the end of the 9th year of Hosea, and the 6th of Hezechia; then were the Israelites transported into Assyria, and other Colonies of People placed, and mixt in their Country, where they set up an Idolatrous Worship, 2 Kings 17.1, &c. and 18.9, 10. whence came the first rise of this Samaritanism so often mentioned in the Holy Scriptures and Jewish Writings with an Odious Character, yet it since received a new form, when Manasses by the favour of Samballet, one of Darius his great Men, built the Temple of Gerrizim, and drew many Schismatick Jews after him. And thus ended the Kingdom of Israel, having lasted 256 years since its separation from that of Judah. About 8 years after Senacherib King of Assyria, and Salmonesers Successor being an∣gry at Ezekiah's refusing the Tribute, to which his Father Ahaz had submitted him∣self, 1 Kings 18.7. invades Judah; where∣upon Ezechiah treats with him, and redeems himself by a Fine of 300 Talents of Silver, and 30 of Gold; but Senacherib violating this agreement, sends Officers to Jerusalem, charged with Invectives against Ezechias, and Blasphemies against GOD, to oblige him to surrender himself, against which Eze∣chias opposes his Prayers and Faith in the words brought him by the Prophet Isaiah from the Lord, who dismays Senacherib by the expedition of Tirhaka King of Ethiopia against him, and by the Ministry of his Angel kills in one night 185000 Men in his Camp, which obliges him to retire in confusion into his Capital City Niniveh, where two of his Sons, Adrammelech and Shareezer killed him in the Temple of his Idols, and his Son Esarhaddon succeeded him, 2 Kings 19.1, &c. After this deliverance Ezechias falls sick, but is miraculously cured; with a Promise he should live 15 years longer, whereof he obtains an admi∣rable Token, by the retrogradation of the
Sun, on occasion of which Berodac, (or Mero∣dac-Baladn King of Babylon, for he is called by both these Names in the Scripture) who is thought to have been the Son of Nabonassor, and the Grandfather, or great Grandfather of Nebuchdnezar; sends to visit him by a solemn Embassy, as well to congratulate his Recovery, as to be perfectly Informed of this Miracle, 2 Kings 20.1, &c. Isaiah 39.1, &c. and 2 Chron. 31.31. and under Ezechia, Naham began also to Pro∣phesie. Anno Mundi 3360. To Ezechias, at the end of 29 years, succeeded Manasses his Son at 12 years of Age, whose Reign was 55 years, and very unfortunate, he having faln into all sorts of Abominations and Impiety against GOD, and Cruelty against Men, 2 Kings 2.1, &c. and 2 Chron. 33.1, &c. 'Tis thought that amongst others he caused the Prophet Isaiah to be sawn asunder, unto which the Apostle alludes, Heb. 11.37. His Crimes did not escape unpunish'd; for he was taken Prisoner by the Enemy, and carried into Babylon laden with Chains, whereupon repenting and humbling himself before GOD, he was re-established in his first Dignity, 2 Chron 33.11, 12, 13, 14. and died, leaving his Son Amon his Heir at the Age of 22 years, not of his Repentance, but of his Crimes, which he exercised for 2 years to∣gether, at the end of which his own Servants conspired against him, and killed him, 2 Kings 21.19. and 2 Chron. 33.21, &c. An. M. 3370. Josias the Son of Amon succeeds him at the Age of 8 years, and Reigend 31, with Piety and Vertue, having caused the Tem∣ple to be repaired, and the pure Service of GOD to be observed, renewed the Covenant of the Lord with the People, overthrows the High-places and Idols, profanes the Altar of Bethel, according as it was foretold, 1 Kings 13.2. and celebrated the Passover; The High Priest Hilkia much contributed to this holy Refor∣mation, which this good King undertook, as may be seen 2 Kings 22.4, &c. This Hilkia was the Son of Shallum, who after his Father Zadoc, and the death of Ahitub his Grand∣father, who was also called Azariah, in the time of Hezekias, had exercis'd the Priest∣hood in the corrupt and troublesom times of Manasses and Amon, 1 Chron. 6.11. Hilkia repairing the Temple finds the Original of Deuteronomy, the reading of which fills the King with Consternation, who sends Hilkia and others to consult the Prophetess Huldah, from whom they only brought a certain de∣nunciation of Evils, which were ready to fall on the Town and People, with this Conso∣lation for Josias, that GOD would take him away in peace before these things hapned, 2 Kings 22.8, &c. This good King intend∣ing in favour of the Assyrians, to oppose himself near Euphrates against Pharaoh Neco, was vanquished, and wounded to death, 2 Kings, Chap. 22, & 23. Anno Mundi 3401. Under this King Zephaniah the Prophet appear'd; but it seems Habaccuk preceded him. His Son Jehoahaz, a vicious Prince, succeeds him for 3 Months, Aged 23 years; for Pharaoh Neco dethroned him, and carried him Prisoner into Egypt, where he died, putting his Brother Eliakim, whom he named Jehoiakim, in his place, which he held for 11 years together; and certainly by the order of his Birth, the Kingdom was rather due to him than to Jehoahaz, who was younger than him by 2 years; but being older he was not wiser, 2 Kings 23.30, &c. so was his Reign unfor∣tunate, and his end Tragical. It appears from Jeremiah, Chap. 25.1, 2, 3. that the first year of Nebuchadnezars, falls in with the 4th of Jehoiakim, and the 23th of the predictions of the Prophet, beginning from the 13th of Josias. From that time Nebuchadnezar continuing the War which his Father had with Egypt, began to become the Scourge, as well of that Country as of Judea; which was Feudatory since the death of Josias, and the Progresses of Nebuchadnezar were so quick on this side the Euphrates, that in a small time he dis∣possest Pharaoh of whatever he had con∣quered; so that Judea was submitted to him, and Jehoiakim forced to follow the Victorious party, and to pay to Nebuchad∣nezar the same Tributes, and make the same Acknowledgements, which he had hitherto done to the King of Egypt; but about 3 years after, this Prince (thro ill Counsel) revolts against Nebuchadnezar, and by this means in the 3d year, not absolutely of his Reign, but of his Reign as Vassal of Chal∣dea, he draws on him the Arms of Nebuchad∣nezar, and his Ruin; for after the wasting of the Country, by the Incursions of the Chaldeans, he was at length made his Pri∣soner, and laden with Chains, to be carried into Babylon, 2 Kings 24.1, &c. 2 Chron.
36.6. Dan. 1.1. But it seems he died in the way, and was cast into the Common-shoar, as Jeremiah had foretold, Jerem. 22.19. And then Daniel and his Companions were trans∣ported into Babylon, Dan. 1.3. Anno Mundi 3405. To Jehoiakim, in whose Captivity and death began the 70th year, specified Jerem. 25.11. & 29.10. suc∣ceeded Jehoiakim his Son, who is also some∣times call'd Jechonias and Coniah: he was Aged 18 years, when he would have col∣lected the Wrecks of this Crown, and wore it but 3 Months, 2 Kings 24.8. His Father, to confirm it to his Posterity. had associated himself to the Throne, and made him be declared King with him, when he was but 8 years old, 2 Chron. 36.9. but he was 18 when his Father died; and the 18th year of his life, in which he began actually to Reign, and alone, concurr'd with the 8th of the Reign of Nebuchadnezar; who having conceived some ill suspicion of this young Prince, who was indeed viciously given, 2 Kings 24.9. returned to besiege Jerusalem, and Jehoiakim chose rather to surrender and submit himself to the discretion of the most powerful, than to stand out by resistance; so that then was made the first great Tran∣sportation of the Jews into Babylon, the prelude of which began 3 Months before in the carrying away of Daniel, and his Companions, 2 Kings 24.8, &c. Mat. 1.11. And thus is found (near the matter) the Account which we have denoted at the Head of this period of 482 years since the Foun∣dation of the Temple, to the end of the Cap∣tivity. Nebuchadnezar substituted then to Jehoi∣akim, whom he carried away into Chaldea, with the principal Forces of Judea, (the Prophet Ezekiel was of the Company) his Unkle Mattania, Josias his 3d Son, and whom be named Zedekias, who was 21 years old when he came to the Crown, and wore it 11 years, 1 Kings 24.18. But having fal∣sified the Faith he had given to the King of Babylon, he drew his Indignation on him, so that in the 9th year of his Reign and continu'd Captivity, Jerusalem was besieged, reduced to great Extremities, and at length taken after a Siege of 18 Months, the be∣sieged being vexed with Famine and great Mortality in the 11th year of Zedekias, who was the last King of David's Race,  Kings 25.3. Jerem. 39.3. &c. & 52.6. Jeremiah does himself represent how much he suffered during this Siege, Jerem. 37.12. 13, &c. & 36.6. as Ezekiel represented the horrors and sequels of it in Chaldea, Ezek. Chap. 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, &c. Zedekias seeing the City taken by the Enemies, would have esca∣ped by a private Gate with the rest of his Troops, and Chief Men of the Nation; but he was pursued by the Chaldeans, who took him, and led him to Riblah, which is thought to have been since called Antioch, where Nebuchadnezar expected the event of two important Sieges, to wit, that of Tyre and Jerusalem, and there was his Sentence given; his Children had their Throats cut in his sight, and all the Chief Men of Judah, (amongst which were also Skeraiah, Hilkiah's Grandchild, and Hazaria's Son, who had succeeded his Father in the High Priesthood, involv'd unquestionably in this Slaughter, having been of the Counsel of Zedekias; and afterwards he had his eyes put out, and was carried Prisoner into Babylon, where he died; Anno Mundi 3405. Then was the Temple burnt, and City dismantled and laid waste, the Sacred Vessels carried away, and most of the people which remained were transported, 1 Kings 25.4, &c. Jerem. 52.1, &c. All this happened at the expiration of the 18th year, and at the beginning of the 19th of Nebuchadnezar, Jerem. 52.12, 29. In the first Transportation with Jehoiakim, sometimes called Coniah (by Jeremiah) 3023 Jews were carried away into Babylon, and in this last (so greatly had the Miseries of the Siege consumed the rest) there were only found 832 in all, Jerem. 52.28, 29. Those who could remain in Judea, being of the meanest of the people, tarried behind, amongst whom Jeremiah was one, Jerem. 39.14. and 40.5, 6. were put by the Au∣thority of Nebuchadnezar under that of Gedaliah, Jerem. 40, 5, 8.11. But having been soon Assassinated at Mizpah, by Ismael, of the Royal Race, and his Accomplices, Jerem. 41.1, 2, 3. These sorrowful Remains were carried into Egypt, by Johanan and the other Officers with Jeremiah, against his will, and the endeavours he used to disswade them, and miserably perish'd, Jerem. Chap. 42, 43, 44. after they had, as 'tis thought, stoned the Prophet. During all these sad times, and from the 13th of Josias, agreeing with the year of the World 3362. Jeremiah (the Son of Hil∣kiah,
not of the High Priest, who flourish'd under Josias, but of an ordinary Priest, who resided at Anathoth, Jerem. 1.1, 2.) did all he could to disswade both small and great from their Debaucheries, without gaining any thing but Injuries and Threats of Im∣prisonment; Baruch always kept him compa∣ny. 'Tis thought Zephaniah, Huldah and He, prophesied at the same time; He in the Streets, Zephaniah in the Synagogues, and Huldah to the Women. 'Tis certain, these 2 were Contemporaries with Jeremiah, and perhaps Nahum likewise. The first 16 Chapters of Jeremiah, ex∣cepting the 10th, which concerns Zedekias, and the 13th which respects Jehoiakim and Zedekias, belong to the time of Josias, and contain Censures and Threatnings. The 22th Chapter belongs also to Jehoiakim, and Jechonias, and his Preaching, for which he is blamed to the 26th Chapter, wherein he recites the Cruelty exercised by Jehoia∣kim against the Prophet Uriah, whom he brings from Egypt to put to death. To this time, about the 8th year of Jehoiakim, should be referred the Chapters 17, 25, 27, 36, 45, & 46. and to the 7th year of this same King, the 13th, and 35th; and to Jecho∣nias, the 32d and 33d Chapters. What we read in 10, 18, 24, 27, 28, 30, 31, 48, & 49, concerns the first years of Zedekias. To the 4th belong the Chapters 19, 20, 50, 51. and what he says Chap. 13. to the King and Queen, 2 Kings 24.20. & 25.1. To the 9th, the Chapters 34, 37, & 47. To the 10th, the Chapters 21, 32, & 33. and to the 11th, the Chapters 38, & 39. In fine, to the time which followed the taking of the Town, and the destruction of the Temple, the Chapters 40, 41, 42, 43, & 44. At the time when Jeremiah Prophesied in Judea, Ezekiel who was also of the Sa∣cerdotal Order, and had been left Captive in Chaldea, treated of the same things as Jeremiah; and confim'd what he had writ to the Captives, Chap. 28, 29. to forewarn them against the Seducements of Hananiah and Shemaiah, false Prophets, who assur'd them of a speedy Return. The Scripture saying nothing of the death of these 2 Prophets, we shall not mention any thing of what the Ancients tell us. 'Tis observable, that in the 11th year of the Captivity, Ezekiel being divinely advertiz'd, that the Tyrians insulted over the the Miseries of Jerusalem, prophetically de∣nounces to them their sudden ruin, Chap∣ters 26, 27, 28; and in the 29th Chapter he promises, that Egypt and its plunder shall be Nebuchadnezars, and his Armies, for the travel they should suffer in the Siege of Tyre. After these Misfortunes of Judea, and the whole Nation, the City of Tyre taken, and Egypt subdued by Nebuchadnezar, as the Prophets foretold, he began to set up for a Soveraign Monarch, and to reckon the years from that time. It was then in the 2d year of this Monarchy, and in the following that hapned the things related in Daniel, Chapters 2, 3, & 4. it being impossible to determine the time of the Expulsion of this Monarch amongst the Beasts, nor how long it lasted; the 7 times mentioned, Dan. 4.16. being expounded by some of the 7 years, and others by 3 years and a half. Nebuchadnezar having Reigned 45 years, Anno Mundi 3439. left his Son Evilme∣rodac the Successor of his Kingdom, in the 26th year of the death of Zedekias, and 37th of the Captivity of Jehoiakim, or of Jechonias, 2 Kings 25.27. Jerem. 52.31. in which this miserable Prince was taken out of Prison, unladen of his Irons, set at liberty, and treated as a King, by the favour of this monarch, who is thought to have had some knowledge of the true GOD, and in derision whereof the Chaldeans nam'd him Evilmerodac, which is, the Fool Merodac, for this last word was the common Title of their Kings. Since the coming of Evilmerodac to the Crown, the 33 years which remain to end the 70 years of the Captivity, must be divid∣ed between him, Belshazar, and Darius, for the Scripture speaks only of these 3. Jeremiah had foretold, that the Jews and other Nations should serve Nebuchadnezar, his Son, and Sons Son, which is, to the 3d Generation. Nebuchadnezar in dying transmits this great Empire to Evilmerodac his Son; Evilmerodac his Son, to Belshazar his Grandson, who ac∣cording to the style of the Scripture is call'd the Son, Dan. 5.2.18.22. Those who allow only 2 years to Evilme∣rodac, speak without grounds, and seem to contradict the Scripture, 2 Kings 25.29, 30. and this way of speaking that Jehoiakim being by Evilmerodac set at liberty, on the 27th day of the 12th Month, as expired either the year 37 of the Captivity, or the
1st of Evilmerodac, and eat with him, and was fed by him all the time of his life, doth methinks express a longer time than a year or 2; and therefore some of the Ancients attribute to Evilmerodac 18 years Reign, and others 12. Those who make him Assassinated by Neriglissar, his Brother-in-Law, Nebuchadnezar's Son in-Law, and Bel∣shazar's Father, with whom he Reigned 4 years, and Belshazar alone after his decease, about 9 Months, produce no convincing Proofs, but are feign to borrow from Pro∣phane Histories uncertain Conjectures, find∣ing themselves more perplext when they be to agree about the time and qualities of Da∣rius. Let us then, without defining the parti∣cular time of the Reign of these 3, of which the Scripture is silent, allow them together the 33 years in question. It is true indeed, that Daniel passes immediately from Nebu∣chadnezar to Belshazar; but 'twill not be gather'd from thence, that Evilmerodac surviv'd his Father only 2 years; when per∣haps Daniel was absent during his Reign from the Court, attending in some distant Province on the Functions of his Charge; and certainly he must have liv'd a long time out of Babylon, seeing he was so little known there when Belshazar died, Daniel 5.13. And therefore neither does he speak of Bel∣shazar, as a Youth, who came now from losing his pretended Father Neriglissar, un∣der whose Tutelage he had lived; (this great Festival which he celebrated would have been little agreeable to the year of Mourning) but he speaks of him as a perfect Man, who Feasts not only his Gentlemen, but likewise his Wives and Concubines, Dan 5.2. and distinctly recites those Visions he had in the first year of Belshazar, Dan. 7.1. and in the 3d, Dan. 8.1. which he could not say, had Belshazar Reigned only 9 Months. I would give then 20 or 25 years to Evilme∣rodac, and to Belshazar his Son, and the rest to Darius, Subrogat to Belshazar, after he had been killed by the Conspiracy of his own, in the Night of his Sacrilegious Festi∣val, in the which the end of a Mystical Hand, by a Writing which Daniel alone could read and expound, had denounced to him his ruin, Dan. 5.30. so that still the last year of this Darius, who is the same that Writers have call'd Nabonides and Labonules, as they name Belshazar, Labosoarchodes, will fall in with the first of Cyrus, and the last of the Captivity. He was not King of Media, but of Chal∣dea, as may be seen Dan. 5.31. and 9.1. and he is surnamed of Mede, not so much for having liv'd amongst the Medes, but be∣cause he was an originary, and that Ahasu∣erus his Father, Dan. 9.1. is the same, who is termed by the other Greeks Cyaxares (Father of Astyages, and Cyrus his Grand∣father) who being King of Mede joyned his Arms to those of Nebuchadnezar, for the taking of Niniveth, and the suppression of the Assyrians; for as Nebuchadnezar had espous'd Nitocris, the Daughter of Cyaxares, and Sister of Astyages, so it seems he brought into his Court this Darius, his Wives Bro∣ther, and that he there lived in great Credit, seeing he was 62 years of Age, when he was substituted to Belshazar, by the Faction of those who Assassinated him, and of whom perhaps he was the Chief, Dan. 5.31. And this was the first step of what GOD had de∣nounced to him, that his Kingdom should be divided, and given to the Medes and Persians, Dan. 5.28. seeing that this Person being originary of Mede, possest it after him, and settled the Government of it on the Platform of what was practis'd by the Medes and Persians, lately re-united under the Government of Cyrus, (after the death of Astyages his Grandfather) as may be ga∣ther'd from Dan. 6.1, 8, 12, 15. This Darius the Mede in favouring Daniel, and establishing him one of the Triumvirs, who presided over the 120 Satrapes or Go∣vernours, which at his coming to the Crown he had established over all the Kingdom, to share his Authority with those from whose Suffrage he had received it, expos'd him to the envy and hatred of all others, who de∣signed by a wicked and cruel Edict, to make him be thrown into a Den of Lions, where he was miraculously preserved, to the great Joy of the King, and the confusion of his Enemies, Dan. 6.1, &c. As Daniel had un∣der Belshazer, the first and the 3d year of his Reign, the Visions he describes in the 7th and 8th Chapters of his Book; so hapned under Darius of Mede, in the first year of his Reign, what he did and saw in the 9th Chap∣ter. Some few years after, Cyrus, who was mentioned by the name, almost 2 Ages be∣fore his death, to be the Deliverer of the
People of GOD, and the Restorer of his Temple, Isai. 44.5, 8. and 45.1. pursuing his other Conquests, laid Siege before Babylon, during which he Storm'd the Castle of Bor∣sineppe, where Darius the Mede had withdrew, whom he received into Favour, as being his Kinsman, and made him Governour of Cara∣mania, and in fine took the Town by Stra∣tagem, having cut another course for the Euphrates, than that through which it entered into the Town, even when the Inhabitants mock'd at his Attempts, and securely followed their Debaucheries, Isai. 21.5. and Jerem. 51.32, 39, 41. And this is the term or ending of the Empire of Babylon, as may be seen Jerem. 25.12. CHAP. VII. Of the Sixth Period, or Age of the World. As from the Foundation of the Temple (Laid in the Year of the World 2988) we reckon about 482 Years; so from the Taking of Babylon, and the Ending of the Captivity, to the Death of our Saviour JESUS CHRIST, there are (according to some) 490 Years, and (to others) 74 Years more, and again (according to others) 13 Years more. ANno Mundi 3470. DANIEL, who had been till then Darius Favourite, and remained in this quality in the Capital City, insinuated himself so prudently into the Favour of the Conqueror (by the Bles∣sing of GOD) that he continu'd to him the same Employs he had under Darius, Dan. 6.28. And there's great likelihood 'twas at the Prophets perswasion (who without doubt com∣municated to him the Predictions of Isaiah and Jeremiah) that he published in favour of the Jews the Edict of their Liberty, from the 1st year of the taking of Babylon, and the Chaldean Monarchies submission to the Diadem of the Persians, 2 Chron. 36.22. Esdr. 1.1. in the year of the World 3470. Some Learned Men begin here the 70 Weeks of Daniel, and end them at the Death of the Son of GOD, Dan. 9.24. as if GOD would have had the Septenary of the Servitude to be followed by another Septenary, which should bring us in the Death of Jesus Christ, the true Messias, the Liberty of our Souls. The Jews seem in some sort to favour this Sentiment, seeing they make their 2d Temple to subsist but 420 years; and it's apparent, 'twas overthrown by Titus and Vespasian, in the 70th or 72d year after the Birth of our Saviour. But others, to adjust the Holy Chronology with Foreign Accounts (altho they be in several chief Points uncertain, espe∣cially in what concerns the Persian Monarchy) they hold one must descend lower, and begin the account of 70 Weeks in the 7th of Ar∣taxerxes, in which Esdras came into Judea with ample Commission, to set the Republick in order, Esdr. 7.7. or what appears more agreeing with the 20th, in which Nehemiah obtain'd the Office of Governor, and the Authority of rebuilding the Walls and Streets of the Town, Dan. 9.25. Nehem. 2.1. Others have moreover on this Subject, Sentiments less reasonable than the preceeding, the last of which is prefixable to all the rest: We intend not to enter into the discussion of these Chronological Punctilio's, in which one may sooner guess at, than demonstrate things. After the Edict of Cyrus was published, Zorobabel the Son of Salathiel, of the Royal Family, called otherwise Shesbat-shar by the Chaldeans, Esdr. 1.8. and Attirshatta, which is the Governour for the King, in respect of his Dignity, Esdr. 2.63. compared with Esdr. 3.2. and Joshuah the High Priest the Son of Jozadock, and Sherajah's Grandson, who was executed with Zedekias, laden with the Sacred Vessels, which he caused to be restored, with a great number of persons specified, Esdr. Chap. 2. and Nehem. Chap. 7. arriv'd in Judea in the 2d year of Cyrus, a while before the 7 Months, and set to rebuilding the Altar, and offering their Sacrifices, Esdr. 3.1. In the following year they laid the Foundations of the Temple, Esdr. 3.8. But they immedi∣ately met with opposition, by the Credit which their Enemies found at Court, whence it came that Cambyses (Cyrus his Son, who
was employ'd afar off in the Expedition against Queen Tomyris) favour'd them not. And this was the cause of the Fasting and Prayers of Daniel, in the 3d year of Cyrus, Dan. 10.1. But the Prophet died a while after the last Vision which he had, as may be ga∣thered from the words of the Angel, and in ending it, Dan. 12.13. This opposition continu'd under the Reign of Ahasuerus, and more violently under that of Artaxerxes, as is seen Esdr. 4.6, 7, &c. And as these 2 Names seem to have been common to the Kings of Persia and Mede, (compared Dan. 9.1. Esther 1.1. and Neh. 2.1.) yet it seems we should understand by this Ahasuerus, the Son and Successor of Cyrus, whom the generality of Historians have called Cambyses, who was found the Heir of his Scepter 3 or 4 years after the taking of Babylon, and Reigned 7 or 8 years; and by Artaxerxes, who followed him. This Impostor who would pass for Smerdis, Cyrus his 2d Son, whom the eldest had put to death; for his Imposture having been discover'd, and he punish'd, Darius Histaspis came to the Crown, and the Jews seeing him settled, and more∣over considering, that tho Cambyses (preju∣dic'd by his Flatterers) had conniv'd at their Oppression, without confirming the Edict which his Father had publish'd in their favour, yet there was no contrary and prohibited one, other than that of the false Smerdis, who is the first Artaxerxes of the Scripture, and that he not having been lawful King, the Prohibition he had made of Rebuilding was of no validity; they therefore took Courage at the sollicitation of the Prophets Haggai and Zacchary, and set to work in the 2d year of Darius, Esdr. 4.24. & 5.1. Hagg. 1.1. Zac. 1.1. And Darius having chang'd the Offi∣cers of the Crown on this side Euphrates, and substituted to Bishlam, Metredath, Rehum, &c. who in the time of Cambyses, and the Im∣postor Smerdis, had so hotly oppos'd the Building of the Temple, Tattenas, Shether∣boznai, &c. who were more moderate, Esdr. 5.3. They seeing this work advanced, came to Jerusalem, to inform themselves on the Spot; hear from Zorobabel and Joshuah, the Autho∣rity they had from the Edict of Cyrus, and made a faithful Report by their Letters to Darius, entreating him to inform himself of the Truth of the matter, and to send his Commands, touching what he would have them to do in this Point, Esdr. 5.3, 4, 5, &c. On these Letters Darius caus'd Search to be made in the Archives of the Empire, for what might concern this Order of Cyrus; and finding the Writing, he confirmed it by a 2d Edict, more careful to maintain the Will of Cyrus, whose Daughter he had espous'd than had been Cambyses his own Son, Esdr. 6.1, &c. Thus was finished the Temple, and the Dedication of it was celebrated, and they be∣gan to Worship in it in the 6th year of King Darius, Esdr. 6.15, &c. If it be alledged, That according to this reckoning the interruption of this Temple must have lasted no more than 10 or 12 years at most, whereas 'tis said (John 2.20.) it had been 46 years in Building; one may answer, either that the Jews said this at a venture, without any certain information; or that they misreckon'd the time employ'd by Zorobabel in this Work; or that in giving moreover a year or two to the Life of Cyrus since the Work began, 7 to Cambyses, 1 to the Impostor Smerdis, and 36 to Darius, they find precisely these 46 years between the 2d of Cyrus, in which the Jews return'd from Babylon had follow'd this design, and the last of Darius, their second Benefactor, under whom the Work was again undertaken and finished. It seems that Darius, since the Temple was finish'd, took no more care of the Interest of the Jews; whether he was otherwise employ'd in continual Wars; or whether he thought it was sufficient the Temple was built, tho the Walls were not raised. To Darius, after a Reign of 36 years which is commonly given him, his Son Xerxes succeeded, who was born to him by Cyrus his Daughter: It's he who is indicated Dan. 11.2. and of whom is mention Esther 1.1, &c. He repudiated Vashti, espouses Esther in her place, takes Haman into favour, who vex'd at Mordecai for his refusal to bow to him, took a design, not only of destroying him, but at one and the same time all the Jews, which were to be found in the Empire; but the King having read the publick Registers, and the signal Service which Mordecai had rendred him, would have him worthily re∣compenc'd by the very hands of his great Favourite; who as he was just on the point of oppressing the Jews, Esther opposes her self with such success, by the Counsel of Mordecai, that all the mischief which this infolent Favourite had prepared against him,
fell on his own Head, and turn'd to the shameful ruin of himself and his Family. As Mordecai (Esthers Uncle) is without doubt another, than he who came up from Chaldea with Zorobabel and Jeshuah, Esdr. 2.2. and Nehem. 7.7. so what is said Esther 2.6. that he had been transported with the King Jecho∣nias, is not to be understood of his Person, but of that of his Father or Grandfather: But in supposing he was transported in the Reigns of his Father, or Grandfather, and born towards the end of the Captivity; or after 'twas ended; here will be no longer diffi∣culty. Those who collect the History of Esther as far as Artaxerxes, or Darius Ochus, increase this Difficulty; and those who terminate it in Darius Hystaspis, do disingage themselves little better. Those who understand it of Cambyses are contradicted, because 'twas the 7th year of Ahasuerus when he espoused Esther, and Cambyses scarcely past over the 7th of his Reign, having moreover been a constant Enemy to the Jewish Nation to his death; and those who would understand the Ahasuerus of Esther, of Cyaxaris, who was the Father of Darius of Mede, cannot attri∣bute to him the magnificence and extent of the Empire, describ'd Esther, Chap. 1. beside, that he was not King of Media and Per∣sia. Zorobabel and Jeshuah, who had the Con∣duct of the People from Cyrus this year, died, apparently under the Reign of Xerxes, and by their decease left their new springing Re∣publick in very bad order; to speak humanly, there cannot be given more than 60 years in their Administration, and in giving moreover 4 to Cyrus, after the taking of Babylon, 7 to Cambyses, 1 to the Impostor, and 36 to Darius, according to the common Reckoning, they must have liv'd no farther than the begin∣nings of Xerxes, to whom there are alloted 21; at the end of which succeeds his Son Artaxerxes Longemain, that is, Long-hand, who is made to have worn the Crown 40, or 41 years. And in effect it appears from the Relation of Esdras, that Corruption had so greatly gain'd since their decease, that Je∣shuah's Children are reckoned among the Priests, who had taken strange Women, Esdr. 10.18. Esdras, who was of the Priestly Order, well vers'd in the Law, having without doubt heard in Babylon, that by the death of Zoro∣abel and Jeshuah, and apparently from the 2 Prophets, Haggai and Zachary, who had so well seconded them, that all things went ill in Judea, was Divinely inspir'd to return there also, and to bring along with him a considerable Company of Priests, Levites, and Nethinians; which he did under the Authority and Favour of Artaxerxes, in the 7th year of his Reign, with rich presents, authentick Letters Pattents, and a very ad∣vantagious Commission, to establish Magistrate and Judges amongst the People, Esdr. Chap. 7 and 8. Anno Mundi 3538. 13 years after the arrival of Esdras in Judea, which is to say, the 20th year of Artaxerxes, Nehemiah (who is held to have been of the Tribe of Judah, and even of the Royal Race, yet another than he spoken of, Esdr. 2.2. and Nehem. 7.7.) obtains an express Commission of the same King to go into Judea, to re-establish the City of Jerusalem, with a very authentick Commission to govern the Nation; of which see Nehem. Chapters 1, 2, 5, and 14. And it seems that this Edict of Artaxerxes, is the word, That they should return and rebuild Jerusalem, and raise up the desolate places; whence begin the 70 Weeks, Dan. 9.25. seeing that of Cyrus (confirmed by Darius) spake only of building the Temple, not of rebuilding the Town, enclosing it and putting it into a condition of Defence. Nehemiah being arrived at Jerusalem, builds up the Walls, and makes it tenable in 52 days, Nehem. 6.15. See Nehem. 12.27. and the Orders he establish'd amongst the People, as well in Civil as Sacred Matters, Nehem. Chapters 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13. It appears, that in the time of Esdras and Nehemiah, Joakim the Son of Jeshua exercised the High Priesthood, Nehem. 12.26, but it seems he died a while after the arrival of Esdras, seeing Eliashib his Son was already in this Dignity, when the Walls of the Town were rebuilt, Nehem. 3.1, & 20. Nehemiah was 12 years Governour, or Attirshatta, that is, Ethnarck, since the 20th to the 32d of Artaxerxes, Nehem. 5.14. and 8.10. but at the end of this term he return'd to the King, as well to give him an account of what he had done, as because his Commis∣sion was expired, Nehem. 13.6. During his absence new Disorders arose, to which Esdras apparently not being able to withstand, the King was entreated from the
Jews to send them Nehemiah, who at his Return us'd his Authority even on the High Priest, Eliashib; who allying himself with Tobiah the Ammonite, had went so far as to lodge this Stranger in one of the Chambers of the Temple, whence Nehemiah made his Moveables be thrown out, and appointed for its proper use, Nehem. 13.6, 7, & 8. Then also Nehemiah prosecuted the dissolution of the Marriages contracted by the Jews with strange Women, which had been stipulated and began by Esdras, Esdr. 10.3. And Ne∣hemiah proceeded so far on this Point, tat he drove away from Jerusalem one of his Sons, who had espous'd the Daughter of San∣ballat Honorite, Nehem. 13.28. We cannot certainly determine, how long Esdras and Nehemiah liv'd; but these are infallible Maxims, which may give some light to the History. First, That Esdras was Divinely inspir'd, to make the last Review of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and reduce them into a Body; and that he joyn'd with the Book which bears his Name, those of the Chronicles, that of Esther (written by Mordecai▪) and that of Nehemiah. 2dly, That Malachi, the last of the Prophets, has either been the same as Esdras, as several hold, or at least Contemporary with him; it being certain, that since the closing up of the Canon by Esdra, there has been neither Writing nor Writer Canonical under the Old Testament. 3dly, That Esdras had already writ the Chronical Books, before Nehemiah wrote his History, seeing they be therein cited, Nehem. 12.23. 4thly, That they have liv'd both of them to the time of Darius Codomannus, in whose Death (vanquish'd by Alexander the Great) ended the Empire of the Prsians, seeing they have both extended the Succession of the Priests, to the Reign of Darius of Persia, as is expresly read, Nhem. 12.22. 5thly, That the Priest Jadduah, who is the last mention'd by Nehemiah, was Con∣temporary with Alexander the Great, and went before him with great solemnity, as appears from Josephus. 6thly, That Samballat mention'd in Nehemiah, was Manasses his Father in Law, the Brother of Jadduah, in favour of whom he sollicited by Darius, and obtain'd at length of Alexander, to whom he went and surrendred himself, the liberty of building the Temple of Garizim, that he might therein exercise the Priesthood, Nehem. 13.28. These Truths acknowledg'd by most Chro∣nologists, divide them in their Opinions; some pretending, that the Artaxerxes of Esdras and Nehemiah, is he whom Secular Writers have Surnam'd Mnemon; and others judging it more convenient to stop at Longhand; and as the sequel of the Holy History leads us rather to him; so without curtailing the term which profane Historians assign to each of the Kings, which have followed the Great Xerxes, tho with little certainty and consent, 'twill be easie to find ones Reckoning. It's thought the Persian Monarchy lasted about 200 years, and according to the most just Account, the 20th of Artaxerxes Longhand was 86 of it: So that in supposing Nehe∣miah was then 25, and liv'd 135, which has nothing extraordinary, he might have seen Darius Codomannus arrive to the Crown; and there's great probability GOD took them both away, Esdras and Nehemiah, a while after Alexander had past the Bosphorus, that they might not see the entire ruin of an Empire, which had almost continually favour'd their Nation. It's not found any one succeed∣ed Nehemiah in his Office of Governour, and it seems as if after his death, the superiour Authority remain'd in Jadduah the High Priest. Darius, attack'd so violently and success∣fully by Alexander, and in fine wholly van∣quish'd, invested himself with the Monarchy by his death in the 7th year of his Reign. See with what violence the Ram was attack'd by the Goat, Dan. 8.6, 7, &c. Here began the Monarchy of the Greeks, which is the King∣dom of Brass, Dan 2.39. and the third Beast like unto a Leopard, Dan. 7.6. Anno Mundi 3670. Sanballat, the Satrapas of Samaria for Darius, had timely joyn'd himself to Alexander's Party, and obtain'd by his favour what Darius had refused him, to build the Temple of Gerizim, and to esta∣blish Manasses his Son-in-Law, the Brother of Jadduah, High Priest; whence arose the Controversie mentioned John 4.20. and the inveterate Hatred between the Samaritans and the Jews, Joseph. lib. 11. Alexander being angry with the Jews, after the Taking of Tyre, marched to Jeru∣salem, to destroy it; but Jadduah coming to meet him, procur'd not only his Favour, but also his Veneration, putting him in mind of a Dream he had in Macedonia, in which a Man made and cloathed like Jadduah, had
exhorted him to attack the Persians, and promis'd him the Victory over them. This Alexander, who is called by Daniel the King of Javan, Dan. 8.21. and 10.20. outlived Darius by 6 years, and his Kingdom was divided to 4 Strangers: Seleucus had great Asia towards the North for his part; Ptolomy, Egypt towards the South; Antigonus, Asia Minor to the East; and Cassander, Macedonia towards the West, Dan. 7.6. and 8.8. and 23. and 11.4. Wars soon arose between these 4 Kindoms, and namely between the Seleu∣cides and the Ptolomies; whence sprang many difficulties to the Jews, situated between Egypt and Syria, increas'd by their own Dissensions; and the Marriages which these Princes con∣tracted often together, were rather Snares than Alliances. The 2d Ptolomy was the Philadelphian, so nam'd, because he had married his Sister, under whom 'tis said there was made at his instance, because he gathered a great Library, the Greek Translation of the Old Testament, called vulgarly the LXX. 'Tis said also, That this Prince, better affected towards the Jews than his Father had been, restored to liberty 100000 Slaves of that Nation. Then was Eleazer High Priest, the Brother and Successor of Simon the Just, who was the Son of the first Onias, and he of Jadduah, according to Josephus. There were already several Misunderstandings between the first Seleucus the Son of Nicanor, and the first Ptolomy the Son of Lagus, con∣testing for Syria; and according to the vicissitude of War, the Jews were constrain'd to obey sometimes one, and sometimes ano∣ther: But the War growing more fierce be∣tween the 2d Ptolomy and the 2d Seleucus, Seleucus Soter, to whom soon succeeded Anti∣ochus Theos, the 3d of the same Seleucides; Philadelphe by a Treaty of Peace gave his Daughter Laodicea in marriage to Antiochus, and obliged him afterwards to leave her, altho he had already 2 Sons by her, and to take Berenice his other Daughter instead of her, which produc'd dismal Tragedies; for Antiochus seeing his Father dead, put away Berenice, and recall'd Laodicca, who poysons her Husband, and put to death her Sister, and a Child she had in a Cradle: But a while after Ptolomy Evergetes, the 3d of the Name, the Brother of Berenice and Laodi∣cea, attacks Callinus Seleucus, the 4th of the Seleucides, Son of Antiochus Theos, and gains on him great Victories, Dn. 11.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Yet Seleucus Ceranuus, the 5th of the Seleu∣cides, and his Brother Antiochus the Great, both the Sons of Callinicus, took their Re∣venge, and especially Antiochus the Successor, and Heir of his Brother, the 6th King of Syria, comes against Ptolomy Philopater the Son of Evergetes, the 4th of the Name▪ who awaking from his Debauches, takes the Field, defeats Antiochus the Great, and re∣gains most of the places which had been taken from him, Dan. 11.10, 11, 12. See the 3d Book of the Macchabees, which serves as an Explication to these Prophecies, and relates what hapned to this Ptolomy, being withheld at Jerusalem, o enter into the Holy places against the Law of GOD, who became also a Protector in Egypt of the Nation, on which this miserable Prince would have reveng'd himself. During these Stirs, Manasses the Uncle of Eleazer had succeeded him in the Sacerdotal Dignity, and to Manasses Onias, the 2d Son of Simon the Just; and to Onias, Simon the 2d. Antiochus having treated with Philo∣pater, watches an occasion, and seeing him dead, and that his Son Ptolomy Epiphanius, the 5th of the Name, was as yet but a Child, invades Egypt, strengthens himself with Al∣liances against her, takes Caelosyria, and several other places, Dan. 11.13, 14, 15. After which he comes into Judea, drawn thither by the Factions which divided her, and puts all into great Confusion, Dan. 11.16. See Josephus, Book 12. Chap. 3. But being stopt by the consideration of the Romans, who became Protectors of Ptolomy Epiphanes▪ he enters into League with him, and gives his Daughter Cleopatra in Marriage, who (contrary to the Fathers intention) remains faithful to her Husband; but designing against the Romans themselves, he was smartly handled by them,  and in fine knock'd on the Head, as he was plundering a Temple in Syria, Dan. 11.17, 18, 19. Seleucus Philopater his Son, the 7th of the Seleucides, comes to the Crown, forms a design of Pillaging the Temple of Jerusalem, and sends thither Heliodorus for this effect; but his enterprize did not succeed, Dan. 11.20. and see Macchabees Chap. 3. He quickly died, being Poyson'd by Heliodorus and Antiochus, surnam'd Epiphanes, or the Illustrious; who being an Hostage at Rome, secretly went thence, and came into Syria,
and taking on him immediately the Quality of Protector of Demetrius, the Son of his Brother Seleucus Philopater, invades after∣wards the Kingdom. 'Twas this Antiochus, not so properly Ephiphanus, as Epimanes, or the Enraged, whom Daniel describes, and offers as the lively Image and Type of Anti∣christ, Dan. 7.8. and 8.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 23, 24. and 11.21, &c. In the beginning of his Reign Hircanus kill'd himself, according to Josephus, Book 12. Antiq. Chap. 4. and under him began the Soveraign High Priesthood to be Mercenary, and in the disposal of the King. Onias, the 3d Son of Simon the Second was then in this Office; but his Brother Jason obtain'd it by Money, in the 137th year of the Seleu∣cides, and began to introduce Paganism amongst those of his Nation, 1 Macc. 1.11. and 2 Macc. 4, 7, 8, 9, &c. yet he enjoy'd it not long, for Menelaus, whom he had sent towards Antiochus to carry him his Presents, supplanted him, and obtained the Dignity, 2 Macc. 4.23. and hence was seen the sequel of his Crimes. About this time prodigious signs of Armies were seen fighting in the Air over Jerusalem; and Jason on a Report that Antiochus was dead, gathers People and drives away Menelaus, who retires to∣wards the Lacedemonians, where he dies poor, and without a Sepulchre, 2 Macch. 5.2. &c. In the mean time Antiochus was em∣ploy'd in the War against Egypt, (where Reign'd Ptolomy the 6th, as yet a young Child, and surnamed Philometer by Anti∣phrasis, for the hatred which Cleopatra his own Mother, and Sister of Antiochus bore him) which he ended by the Treason of the Ministers of Egypt, who having admitted him into the Country, as his Nephews Pro∣tector, furnished him with the means of be∣coming Master of several important places, by Craft, Bribes, and Intrigues, Dan. 11.22, 23, 24. 1 Macc. 3.30. But Ptolomy being grown up in years and courage, found means to retake them, and make them shake off the Syrian Yoke; who bearing this impatiently, invades Egypt with great vigour, gains the Battle against Ptolomy, who was betray'd by his own People, and renews a fraudulent Peace with him, which was of short durance, Dan. 11.25, 26, 27. For a while after he began new Attempts, upon which the Romans intervening for Ptolomy, he was constrain'd to desist, and came and disgorg'd his Fury on Jerusalem, Dan. 11.28, 29, 30, 31, &c. It was in the 143d Year of Seleucides, that returning from Egypt he enters into Jerusalem, favour'd by those of his Faction; there exercises great Cruelties, profanes the Sanctuary, and pillages the Temple, 1 Macc. 1.21, &c. 2 Macc. 5.11, &c. 2 years after he continues his Cruelties by Apolonius, and by a publick Edict commands all the Jews to embrace Paganism, and to consecrate the Temple of Jerusalem to Jupiter the Olympian, and that of Garizim to Jupiter the Hospita∣ble, 1 Macc. 1 30, &c. 2 Macc. 5.22. &c. and 6.1, &c. Then hapned the cruel Executions on Eleazer, 2 Macc. 6.18. and the seven Brethern, 2 Macc. 7.1. &c. Matthias the High Priest retires to Modin, refuses to obey the Kings Edict, kills the Commissioner and a Jew, who sacrificed to Idols, gathers Forces, and resolves on resi∣stance. 1 Macc. 1.1, &c. In dying in the 146 Year of the Seleucides, he establishes Ju∣das, Maccabeus his Son, Captain General of the People, who refused to adhere to Idolatry, 1 Macc. 2.64, &c. Judas defeats in several Rencounters the Lieutenants of Antiochus, Apollonius, Seron, Georgias, and Lysias; purges the Temple, and celebrates the Dedication of it, mentioned John 10.22. 1 Macc. Chap. 3 & 4. com∣par'd with Dan. 11.32, 33, 34, 35. The Abomination of the Desolation had been in∣troduc'd by the order of Antiochus, the 25th of the 9th Month of the Year 145, 1 Macc. 1.62. and in the same Day and Month in the Year 148, the Temple was purified, 1 Mac. 4.52, 54. While Judas prosecuted his Vi∣ctories, Antiochus dies miserably, in the 149th year of the Seleucides, 1 Macc. 6.1, &c. leaving for Successor his Son Antiochus Eupater. In the Year 150 Judas besieges the Castle of Jerusalem, possest by the Ene∣mies; but Lysias, to whom the King was given in trust, bringing this young King in∣to the Wars, obliges him to raise the Siege, and after some slight Skirmishes, wherein Eleazer signalized himself, killing the great∣est of the Elephants, the taking of Bethsa∣rah by Antiochus, and the Siege even of the Temple, and those who defended it redu∣ced to great necessities; a Peace is made, by which is left to the Jews their Liberty and Religion, which was not faithfully ob∣serv'd, 1 Macc. 6.28, &c.
Antiochus was perswaded by Lysias to this Retreat, to go and oppose Philippus, who relying on the Authority the former Anti∣ochus had given him for the Government of his young Son, arrogated to himself at An∣tioch the Supreme Power, 1 Macc. 6.15, & 63. In the mean time Onias, Son of Onias the 3d, seeing no likelyhood of his coming to the High Priesthood, conferr'd it seems by Eupater on Alcimus, a wicked Man, retires into Egypt, and under the favour of Ptolomy Philometer builds in the Province of Heliopolis, against the Ordinances of the Law, a Temple like unto that of Jerusalem, and for the same use, which was surnamed Onion, of which see Josephus, Book 12. Antiq. Chap. 15. and Book 13. Chap. 6. In the year 151, Demetrius the Son of Seleucus Eupater, being escap'd from Rome, where Antiochus his Uncle had sent him as an Hostage, is receiv'd by those of Antioch, and by the Army, puts to Death Antiochus Eupater, his Cousin German, and Lysias; and at the solicitation of Acimus, who un∣worthily bore the Title of High Priest, sends Bacchides, the General of his Troops, against the well-meaning People, who were used with as much Perfidiousness as Cruelty, 1 Macc. 7.1, &c. Judas opposes himself against these Violences, and reduces Alcimus to great extremities, to whose assistance comes Nicanor from the Kings part, who succeeds neither under the Foxes Skin, nor that of the Lion, and loses his Wiles, his Forces, and his Life, 1 Macc. 7.26, &c. Judas Victorious seeks the Protection and Alliance of the Romans, 1 Macc. 8.1, &c. But in the year 152 Bacchides return'd in Judea, the Battle is given between him and the Troops of Judas, who was killed on the place, and Jonathan his Brother was chosen Captain General in his place, 1 Macc. 9.1, &c. See what was past at the entrance of his Generalship, 1 Macc. 9.1, &c. The year following 153 Alcimus dies, Bacchides retires to the King, call'd back against Jonathan, is beaten and makes Peace with him, who had laid Siege of his own authority against Mach∣mash, 1 Mac. 9.58, &c. Seven years after, in the year 160, A∣lexander, who profest himself (tho falsly,) the Son of Antiochus the Illustrious, rises against Demetrius, who to oblige and retain the Jews to his side, permits Jonathan to raise Men, offers very advantagious Condi∣tions to the whole Nation, sets Jerusalem at liberty, and leaves the Castle at the disposal of the High Priest: But Alexander had pre∣vented him, and made Jonathan High Priest, the habit and quality of which he had taken in the 7th Month of this year, 1 Macc. 10.1, &c. In the same year Demetrius is de∣feated and killed by Alexander, who allies himself with Ptolomy Philometer, and espou∣ses his Daughter; And in the year 165, Demetrius, the Son of the preceeding, endea∣vours to amend his affairs; but Apollonius, General of his Troops is ill handled by Jona∣than, whom Alexander congratulates for his Victories, 1 Macc. 10.67, &c. In the mean time Ptolomy designs to dethrone his Son in Law; takes away Cleopatra from Alexander, and giver her to Demetrius; possesses him∣self of Antioch, and the Kingdom, defeats Alexander, who being fled into Arabia, there lost his Head, which Zabdiel sent to Ptolomy. But this was but a short Joy for him, for he died three days after, and his Souldiers disbanded themselves. Demetrius by this means finds himself settled in his de∣gree, in the year 167, and Jonathan enjoys his Favour, and obtains greater Authority and Priviledges for the whole Nation, 1 Mac. 11.1, &c. Yet this Demetrius, though so effectually assisted by Jonathan, matter'd not the keeping his word with him; and therefore Jonathan turns his back on him, and takes part with the young Antiochus, Alexander's Son, whom Tryphon had brought from Arabia to set up against Demetrius, whose Troops also Jonathan defeated, 1 Macc. 11.53, &c. Then Jonathan renews the League with the Romans and Lacedemonians, and had several prosperous successes against the Troops of Demetrius, so that Tryphon, to whom the young Alexander had only serv'd as a pretence, fearing the Arms of Jona∣than, carried him treacherously to Ptolo∣my, in design of delivering him up to him, wickedly stops him, and in fine, puts him to death, and two of his Sons, whom he had for Hostages of his Brother Simon, with an 100 Talents to release him, 1 Macc. 12.1, &c. and Chap. 13, 15, 16, &c. Whilst that Simon, his Brother's Succes∣sor, procures him an honourable Burial, Tryphon puts to death the young Antio∣chus his Pupil, and possesses himself of the Crown, but Simon reconciles him∣self against him with Demetrius, in the
year 170, and by the Treaty of Peace, the Fortresses of the Jews remain to them; a general Peace is establish'd, and the Coun∣try is again freed from all Tribute, and there begins a a new Epoche for the Nation, 1 Macc. 13.1, &c. In the year 171, Gaza surrenders to Simon, the Castle of Jerusalem, and John his Son is made General of the Forces, 1 Macc. 13.43, &c. In the year 172 Demetrius, intending to oppose Triphon, is made Prisoner by Arsa∣ces King of the Parthians; but Simon enjoys all manner of Prosperity, 1 Macc. 14.1, &c. Cleopatra, Demetrius's Wife, seeing her Husband Prisoner, and to secure her self from the Tyranny of Triphon, offers her self in Marriage with the Crown to Anti∣ochus Sidetes, her Brother in Law, who takes on him the quality of King, seeks by Letter Simon's Friendship, with many fair promises, and draws to him the Forces of the Country. Then Triphon dismay'd (in the year 174) takes his flight; but Antiochus, tho' Simon had sent him 2000 Men for his assistance, did not keep his word; re-demands Joppa, Gazara, and the Fortress of Jerusalem, and on refusal sends endebeus to waste Judea, who was beaten and put to flight by the Sons of Simon, Judas, and John, 1 Macc. 15.1, &c. and 16.1, &c. But in the year 177, Ptolomy, the Son of Abodi, and Simons Son in Law, kill'd his Father in Law, and Mat∣thias and Juda, 2 of his Sons, in the For∣tress of Doch, where he had treacherously invited them to make Merry. His design was also to surprize Jerusalem and Gazara, and to kill John, Simon's other Son; but John having heard of his Fathers and Bro∣thers Murther, and the design against his life, took care of himself, 1 Macc. 16.11, &c. Josephus Book 13. Antiq. Chap. 15. Antiochus Sidetes, offended against Simon and John his Son, who came from succeed∣ing him in the Priesthood and Soveraign Authority, comes into Judea with an Army, besieges Jerusalem, and constrains John to Capitulate under conditions hard enough, but which were not prejudicial to Religion. Under this John, who was surnam'd Hircanus, arose in the Synagogue the two Sects (so fa∣mous) of the Pharisees and Sadducees, John highly favouring these latter. We have pursued the Series of these things the longer, not to place these Books of the Macchabees, nor the History of Josephus, in the rank of Canonical Books; but because they serve to shew the fulfilling of the Pro∣phet Daniels predictions. Pass we more lightly over the rest, destitute as we are of the infal∣lible Light of Gods Word. Each of the Asmoneans who succeeded John Hircanus bore both the Title of King and High Priest, tho' by the Law of GOD, and by the express order these 2 Offices were inconsistent, and were not to be appropriated by any but the Messias, Psal. 110.1, 2, 3, 4. And as their Regality was very tottering, so there were great Irregularities in all their Priesthoods. To John, after he had sustained 30 years this double Dignity, succeeded the first in one and the other Aristobulus his Son, who kept it but a year, having dethron'd his Mother, and privately put to death his Brother Anti∣gonus. His younger Brother Alexander Jammeus succeeds him, and Rules 27 years: He was engaged in several Wars, as well domestick as foreign; the latter against Ptolomy La∣thurus, King of Egypt, and died, having been troubled for 3 years together with a Quartan Ague. He left 2 Sons after him, Hyrcanus and Aristobulus; but Alexandra their Mother governed by the Pharisees, possest her self of the Crown, and obliged the Eldest to content himself with the Priest∣hood, continuing in this Authority the space of 9 years. After her death Aristobulus, who has only 6 years assigned him, takes her place, and deprives Hyrcanus his Eldest Brother of the Priesthood. Antipater the Ascalonite, or Idumean, the Father of Herod, fear'd one and govern'd the other of these. Hyrcanus by his direction implores the assistance of Aretas to good purpose; yet he was con∣strained by Scaurus, Pompeys Lieutenant, to leave off his Suit to him: Pompey himself undertaking the abitrement of this great process, comes to Jerusalem, where Hyrcanus prevailed, takes by force the Temple, defend∣ed by Aristobulus his Party, restores the Priesthood to Hyrcanus, makes Aristobulus and his 2 Sons his Prisoners, and carries them to Rome, 22, or 23 years are assign'd to Hyrcanus, who saw the Temple plundered by Crassus; Alexander his Nephew escaped
from Prison, returns into Judea, but con∣strain'd to render himself to Gabinus, had his Head taken off by Pompey's Order. Aristobulus, with Antigonus his other Son. Fugitive from Rome, recovered the Crown and Priesthood by the favour of the Par∣thians; but Antipater, Hyrcanus's Friend, and who (under his name) had the Admi∣nistration of the Republick, having follow∣ed and served Julius Caesar against those of Pompey's Party, obtained the confirmation of the Priesthood to Hyrcanus. Then was An∣tipater made Citizen of Rome, and Procurator of Judea. Antigonus alledged for himself (before Caesar) that his Father Aristobulus, whom Caesar had favour'd, and his Brother Alex∣ander were dead, the Father by Poyson, and the Brother by the violence of those who follow'd the Party of Pompey; but the favour and credit of Antipater prevailed against his Reasons. At length Hyrcanus lost his Right Arm by the death of Antipater, who left four Sons; Phasael, whom he had made Governour of Jerusalem; Herod, whom he had set over Galilee; Joseph and Pheroras, and a Daughter nam'd Salome. Julius Caesar having been killed in the Senate, Cassius extorts eight hundred Talents from Judea; Antigonus, through the favour of his Father in Law, and other Friends, makes an Attempt on Galilee, where he is beaten by Herod, who by this means conciliates not only the Favour, but also the Alliance of Hircanus, by espousing Mariamne, Alexander's Daughter, Eldest Son of Aristobulus, and of the Daughter of Hyrcanus. Mark Anthony, one of the Triumvirs, being come into Judea, Herod did so insi∣nuate himself into his Favour, that not only he declared him absolved in Judgment from all Accusations, which were laid against him, but also he and his Brothers were made Tetrarchs. But what follows was a new obstacle to his rising Fortune: Antigonus having drawn the Parthians to his Party, they seize on Jerusalem, under pretence of well meaning, make Prisoners Hyrcanus and Phasaelus; Antigonus cuts and tears with his Teeth the Ears of the first, to make him incapable by this mutilation of exercising the Priest∣hood for the future, and Phasaelus beats out his Brains against a Wall. Herod saves himself as well as he could, from Jerusalem, and having left his Brother Joseph for the Defence of the Castle of Massada, goes to Rome in the midst of Winter, where by the favour of Anthony, and the credit of the Triumviracy, he is created King of Judea by the Roman Senate. Adorned with this Quality, he returns into Judea, to do his Office; but Antigonus opposes him during Three Years, till at length Herod takes Jeru∣salem by Force, makes his Antagonist Pri∣soner, and procures him by Anthony's Au∣thority to be Beheaded at Antioch. Fearing Hyrcanus, who was a Prisoner with the Par∣thians, and gently treated in Chaldea, he manages his return to Jerusalem; and hav∣ing deposed Ananel from the Priesthood, who had obtained it after the death of Anti∣gonus, he confers it on Aristobulus his Wives Brother, Aged 17 years; but having most basely caused him to be drowned as he bathed himself with him, he restores Ananel to his place. After several Domestick Intrigues, in which the Ambition, Fraud and Cruelty of Herod every day signalized themselves, and the Suits he had before Anthony with Cleopatra, followed the Battle of Actium, and the death of these two, whereupon he puts to death the old Hyrcanus, who seemed an Eye-sore to him, comes to Augustus victorious, and is well received by him, and obtains the con∣firmation of his Authority, and assurance of his Amity: being returned home, he puts to death his Wife Mariamne, and Alex∣andra his Mother in Law, prejudiced by Calumnies against them; obliges his Sister Salomas to give a Bill of Divorce to Costobar her Husband; rebuilds Samaria, which he calls Sebastia in honour of Augustus, sig∣nalizes himself by several other Buildings; relieves the People in Famine; espouses the Daughter of Simon Boetius of Alexandria, and taking the High Priesthood from Jesus-Phabetis, who had held it six Years after Ananel, confers it on his Father in Law; prejudiced by Calumnies and Suspicions, he put his two Sons to death, Aristobulus and Alexander, which he had of Mariamne; sets a Golden Eagle on the Gate of the Temple, to the great scandal of the whole Nation, and makes not only his own dwelling, but the whole Country a Charnel-House. Thus are we arrived to the Birth of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Seventh Period, or Age of the World. Which contains the History of the New Testament, from the Birth of Jesus Christ, to the Destruction of Jerusalem. ANno Christi, Altho the Spirit of GOD fur∣nishes us with considerable Marks, Luke 2.1, 2. and 3.1, 23. to denote to us almost the exact time of the coming of Jesus Christ into the World; yet it seems to have in this particular bridled our too great Curiosity, in telling us that in the 15th year of the Reign of Tiberius, &c. he was about 30 years of Age. Yet from hence is gathered, he must have been born about 15 years before the death of Augustus. This Prince (according to Suetonius) lived about 76 years; at the Age of 20 he recei∣ved the Succession of Julius Caesar his Un∣cle, killed in the Senate by Brutus and Cassius; to revenge his death, he associates Anthony and Lepidus, and thus formed the Trumviracy, which lasted about 12 years, after which it terminated in the death of An∣thony, he Reigned moreover 44 years. Yet Chronologists begins the years of Augustus in the Empire by the death of his Uncle; and thus we must fix the Birth of the Son of GOD, to the end of the 41st year of Augustus, or at the beginning of the 42d. S. John Baptist, of the Sacerdotal Rank, the Son of Zachary and Elizabeth, ordained for a Fore-runner to our Lord, was born 6 Months before him, it being already 6 Months since his Mother was big of him, when the Angel Gabriel declared to the Holy Virgin the Conception of Jesus Christ, Luke 1.36. She dwelt at Nazareth, a Town of Gallilee, and was betrothed to Joseph when the Hea∣venly Messenger brought her this great News. And a while after, by the secret instinct of the Spirit of GOD, she went to visit her Cousin S. Elizabeth, Luke 1.39, which served to forti∣fie them both in the Faith of this great My∣stery. Whilst the consummation of the Marriage is deferred by the secret Order and Provi∣dence of GOD, which made innocent Obsta∣cles to arise, such as might be the Journy of the Holy Virgin to Elizabeth, it hap∣ned that Joseph perceiving her pregnancy, resolved to disingage himself from her with∣out noise; but he was divinely hindred by an Angel, Matt. 1.18, &c. In the mean time comes the Edict of Augustus, to make the recension and nume∣ration of all the Subjects of the Empire, to know the Forces of it, Luke 2.1. It seems that Cyrenius, as he is named, Luke 1.2. that is Quirinus, was sent into Syria with an extraordinary Commission for this descrip∣tion, whilst that Saturninus was called home, and that Q. Varus had succeeded him. Now to proceed to this description in an orderly manner, every one was obliged to render himself in his Town and Country; and there∣fore, tho' Joseph and Mary had their habita∣tion at Nazareth, they were obliged to go to Bethlehem to be Enrolled in the City of David, because both how mean soever and low their condition was then, drew their original from this great King, as appears from the Genealo∣gies which we have of Jesus Christ, Matt. Chap. 1. and Luke Chap. 3. Being arrived at Bethlehem, they found all places of Entertainment so full, that they were forced to lodge in a Stable, where the hour and pains of Childbirth seizing on the Holy Virgin, she was happily delivered of this Holy Child, God-Man, wrapping him up in poor Cloaths, in the best manner she could in this surprize, strengthened by a particular assistance of the Lord, and laid him in a man∣ger, Luke 2.6, 7. His Nativity was immediately declared by an Angel to Shepherds, who watch their Flocks in the Night; and a Multitude of the Heavenly Choir, made at the same time, the Air resounds with Canticles of Praise on this occasion. These Shepherds come to see at Bethlehem what had hapned, and publish the News thereof to their Neighbours, Luke 2.8, 9, &c. The Scripture has not mark'd the Day or Month of our LORD's Birth; but held to be on the 25th of December: Eight days after his Birth, He is Circumcised according
to the Law, and called JESUS, Luke 2.21. A while after Wise-Men, called Magi in the Gospel, being warned of this Birth by a miraculous Star, come from the East of Judea, and rather from Arabia, than Persia, to inform themselves at Jerusalem, of the place where the King of the Jews was born. Their Demand and Enquiry put them in trouble, and filled the mind of Herod with disquiet, to whose Ambition every thing gave place. Being instructed by the Priests and Scribes of the place mark'd in the Scripture, for the Birth of the Messias, he sends these Strangers into Bethlehem, with a strict charge to bring him exact Information of their Discoveries, pretending also, that he would go and worship him. They setting forth at Night for Jerusalem, see the same Meteorick Star (for it was not an Aethereal) which they had seen in their Country, which led them directly to the Place where Jesus lay, stopping its course on the House; where being entred, they find the Mother and the Child, whom they Religiously worship, and draw forth Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense, which they brought with them to present him; and being warn'd from GOD, not to return towards Herod, they withdrew another way, Matth. 2.1, &c. And this is what the Holy History teaches us; those who affirm, they were but Three, and make Kings of them, have spoken without Book, as well as those who make them to arrive at Bethlehem the sixth of January, and 13 days after our Saviour's Nativity. So the Feast of the Epiphany was celebrated anciently in remembrance, either of the Conception, or of the Birth or Baptism of our Saviour; and not on the occasion of the Arrival of these Magies. It's far more probable, they came not into Judea till about 5 Weeks after the Birth of our LORD; and that a few days after they parted from Bethlehem, the term of the Mother's Purification, and Presentation of her Son in the Temple being laps'd, Joseph and Mary ascended up with the Child to Jerusalem, to satisfy the Ordinances of the Law, Luke 2.22, 23, 24. There Simeon comes to meet and embrace him in the Temple, and Ann the Prophetess meets them at the same instant; and as he (before∣mentioned) joyfully disposes himself for death, having seen the LORD Christ, ac∣cording to the Promise he had; so she spake of it to all them, whom she knew expected Deliverance at Jerusalem, Luke 2.25, &c. Whilst these things past in the Temple, and Herod (who hatch'd a detestable Design against the LORD's Life) expects in vain the Return of the Wise-Men, to execute it with greater Secrecy: Joseph is advertiz'd from Heaven, not to bring back the Child to Bethlehem, but to carry him with his Mother into Egypt, and there to tarry till further Order, Matth. 2.13, 14. It was at Jerusalem that this Command was given Joseph, and thereupon he immediately sets forth; so that S. Luke making him return to Nazareth, after what had hapned in the Temple, Luke 2.39. must be supplied from St Matthew, to understand that he return'd not into Galilee, till he had executed what was prescrib'd by Moses Law, and the Com∣mand which he received to fly into Egypt, as a place of shelter against Herod's Designs: For Herod finding himself deceived by the Wise Men, resolved to use the Lyons Claw, where the Foxes Skin had served to no pur∣pose; and therefore he sends Officers to Bethlehem, who make diligent search in all Houses of this Town, and adjacent places, and kill the Male Children which they could find, from 2 years old and upwards, Matth. 2.16, &c. It was not two years since this Star had appeared to the Wise Men, and they had not been two years in the way; but Herod suppo∣sing the Child might have been born before the Wise Men had observed the Star, and determined to take the surest Measures, he took therefore a larger compass, and con∣demn'd to Death all those who might have been Born since two years, to the time in which the Wise Men were arrived at Jeru∣salem, and had carefully informed himself of them. And thus, if any Children were spared, it were only those who were new Born, seeing few days slipt between his En∣quiry, and his cruel Execution. A while after, and in the same year in which JESUS was Born, Herod falls sick of the filthy and troublesome Disease, called Pedi∣cular, with which he dies. By the Calum∣nies of Antipater, the eldest of his Sons, he had put to Death Alexander and Aristobulus, whom he had of Mariamne; but Antipater, impatient at his Father's living so long, began to Conspire against him, and resolved
on Poysoning him. He formed this Conspi∣racy with his Unkle Pheroras, Herod's Brother, whose Wife was much irritated against her Brother in Law in favour of the Pharisees, a great number of whom Herod had put to death, and Condemn'd the rest to great Fines; for finding himself hated by the People for his Avarice and Cruelty, he had extorted from them a new Oath, which the Pharisees had refused, promising to them∣selves and others, on certain Revelations which they pretended, the Crown should be taken from him, and his Brother Pheroras should wear it. Antipater, the better to carry on his design, procur'd by his Friends to be sent to Rome; but Pheroras surpriz'd by Sickness, repents of this design and dies. Herod suspects his Sister-in-Law to have poysoned her Husband, and in making an exact Inquisition, he finds the Poyson was design'd against him, by the Conspiracy of Antipater. He sends for him from Rome, accuses him of Parricide, and throws him into Prison, in expectation of Augustus his Sentence. Things were in this state when the Little Children were murthered, which Fact being related to Augustus, employed in a second Process of the Father against the Son, made him utter this saying, cited in Macrobius) That 'twere better to be Herod's Hog than his Son. This wretched Tyrant, laden with Crimes, Vexation, and Years, being about 70, takes his Bed, and tho desperately ill, he conti∣nues in his ordinary Cruelty. Two famous Men, Judas and Matthias, Doctors of the Law seeing him in a condition not like to recover, had perswaded their Disciples to beat down the Golden Eagle, which he set over the Gate of the Temple in honour of Augustus; but he caused most part of them to be burnt at Jerico, where he had caused them to be brought: He also shut up in the Hypodrom, the Principal Persons of the Jewish Nation, with Order, that they should be knock'd on the Head, as soon as he was dead, that the Jews might have cause to lament at his death, tho not for it. And having known, that Antipater (on a false Rumour which was spread in the Palace) be∣lieved he was dead, when he called for a Knife to pare an Apple, and had attempted to kill himself with it, and began to treat with the Goaler about his Liberty, he puts him to death, and died himself 5 days after, having Reigned (according to Josephus, who relates all these things at length) 37 Years since he had obtained at Rome the Title of King, and 34 since Antigonus, the last of the Asmoneans was dead. Anno Christi 2. Herod being dead, Joseph had notice from Heaven thereof in Egypt, and receives Order to return home; but having understood, that Archelaus his Son Reigned in his stead, he retired into Galilee, Matth. 2.20, &c. Herod, a while before his death had altered his Will, and by a preceeding, he made Herod-Antipas his Successor of the Crown; but in the last he appointed Archelaus his Successor and King of Judea, with reference to the good liking of Augustus. Archelaus being arrived at Rome, to be confirmed in his Dignity, found there great opposition, as well from the part of Herod-Antipas as from all the Nation, who would have no more Kings. And Augustus having heard the Parties, and the Jewish Ambassadors, to the number of fifty, assisted by 8000 other Jews residing at Rome, who formed weighty Accusations against Herod and Archelaus, and desired, That their Country might be govern'd as a Province, and not as a King∣dom, assign'd Judea, Idumea, and Samaria, to Archelaus, under the Title of Ethnare, that is, less than that of a King; but with Promise to obtain that, if he made himself worthy, though the Jews made no difference between these two Names: But Philip his Brother was made Tetrarch of Ituria and Trachonia and Herod-Antipas was of Gallilee, Luke 3.1. While these things past at Rome, and moreover, an Impostor would pass for Alex∣ander the Son of Herod and Mariamne, whom the Father had put to death; Judea was vext with divers Seditions, and greatly disturbed by the Incursions and Pillagings of this Theudas, or Judas, mentioned Acts 5.36. He was the Son of one Ezekias, Captain of the Banditi, who had heretofore given much Trouble to Herod. Archelaus returned into Judea, takes away the High Priesthood from Joazar, and places Eleazer his Brother in his room. These two were the Sons of Simon Boethius, whom Herod (who had espoused his Daughter) had promoted to this Dignity; but had since deprived him of it, in putting to death his Wife, who had conspired against his Life, and had subsituted to him Matthias
the Son of Theophilus; but a while before his death he had deposed Matthias, accusing him for having connived at the beating down of the Golden Eagle, and put this Joazer in his place; but Eleazer was since dispossest by Joazer, who took his Rank when Archelaus was banisht. The principal Persons of Judea and Samaria, impatient at the rude Treat∣ment which they received from Archelaus, put in an Accusation at Rome against him, in process of which he is dispoiled of his Dignity 10 years after he had obtained it, being banisht to Vienna in Dauphine, all his Estate confiscated, and his Country reduced in form of a Province, and joyned to Syria, where Quirinus is sent Governour, and charged with the sale of Archelaus's Goods, of a second description; and 'tis in respect of this second, that that under which our Saviour was born is called the first, Luke 2.2. In the time of this second description, Judas the Galilean interpreting it Servitude, and pretending that the Title of Lord and Prince belonged only to GOD, he drew great store of People after him, Acts 5.27. In the preceeding Verse there is also mention of one Thudas, a Ring-leader of Sedition, who must have appeared in the time of Augustus, or Tiberius, and must not be confounded with another of the like Name, who arose since, under Claudius the Emperour, and after the death of Herod-Agrippa, of whom speaks Josephus, lib. 20. of the Antiquity of the Jews, Chap. 2. Quirinus having ended his Recension, left Coponius as Procurator of Augustus in Judea, to order affairs there. Then also Joazer is deposed from the Priest∣hood, and Ananus, or Annas (the Father-in-Law of Caiphas) is substituted in his room; and these two exercise alternately the Charge, until our LORD's Death, Luke 3.2. tho not so constantly, but that they left the place sometimes to a Third, as may be verified out of Josephus. Anno Christi 12. Then our Saviour at the age of 12. years was led by Joseph and Mary from Nazareth, where they lived, to Jerusalem, in the time of the Passover, where he stayed unknown to them 3 days; at the end of which they found him in the Temple, sitting or standing in the midst of the Do∣ctors, hearing and asking Questions, to the admiration of all, Luke 2.40, &c. The Sacred Records denoting only this of what∣ever our Saviour did, and whatever hapned to him at his Baptism; only that being re∣turned from Jerusalem to Nazareth, he was subject to Joseph and Mary, applying himself to the labours of a Carpenter, and eating his Bread with the sweat of his Brows, Luke 2.51. (for we have no reason to amuse with Apochryphal Writings) we shall therefore pass lightly over the things that hapned in the World, during the 18 years which slipt, till he was manifested in Israel. Anno Christi 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. We may refer to the 13th year of our Saviour, what was done by the Samaritans in the Temple of Jerusalem, where being secretly entred, and by Night (during the Feast of the Passover) they sprinkled it with dead Bones, to defile it. In the 14th year Augustus sends for Successor to Coponius, in the Office of Procurator of Judea, Marc Ambivius, who remained there but a while; for immediately Annius Rufus was substituted in his place. In the 15th year expiring, or the 16th be∣ginning, Augustus dies at Nola, and Tiberius succeeds him, who from the 2d year of his Empire, in the 17th year of Christ, sends for Successor to Annius Rufus in Judea, Va∣lerius Gratus, who continued in this Office 11 years; during this time he made divers changes in the Priesthood; for first, he de∣prived Annas of it, to confer it on Ishmael the Son of Fabius, whom he displaced a while after, substituting Eleazar to him, the Son of Annas; but at the years end, deposes Eleazer, and puts Simon the Son of Comith in his place; and at the end of a year, Joseph, surnamed Caiphas (Annas Son in-Law) succeeds him; so that we must not wonder if the Gospel speaks often of Chief Priests in the Plural, because the Romans made this Dignity not only Ambulatory, but also Annual, and sometimes shared it be∣tween two Persons, Luke 3.2. About this time Tiberius made the Jews be expelled Rome, because Fulvia, Wife to Saturninus, having embraced Judaism, and 4 vile Fel∣lows, who pretended to be Doctors of the Law, having persuaded her to send for an Offering to the Temple of Jerusalem, Purple and Gold, they had applied (by a horrid Sacriledge) these Oblations to their particu∣lar use. Then also 4000 Jews, who had been freed from Servitude, were sent from Rome into Samaria, to oppose the Thieves there; the Senate esteeming there would be little loss,
if the bad Air killed most part of them. Anno Christi 28, 30. Pontius Pilate at the end of 11 Years succeeds Valerius Gratus; and about two Years after, in the 15th of Tiberius, S. John Baptist begins his Ministry, Luke 3.1. His Habit was plain and mean, like that of Elisha, 2 Kings 1.8. his way of living very austere, and all his Conduct looking towards the Doctrine of Repentance, which he Preached, being charged with the first Administration of Baptism, which he names, Baptim of Repentance for the Re∣mission of Sins, Matt. 3.1, &c. Mark 1.8. Luke 3.1. John 1.6, &c. He began by the Desart of Judea, that is, by that Country of Judea, which for being the less inhabited and culti∣vated than the rest of the Country, was called the Hill Country, and the Desart Coun∣try, Luke 1.39. where he had been brought up in his Father's House, under the Discipline of a Nazarite, to which no less than Samp∣son he had been obliged, before his Birth, Luke 1.15. It was in the Neighbourhood of Jordan, in a place called Bethabara, as who would say, The House of Passage, John 1.28. and which is thought to be the same place by which the Israelites (under the Conduct of Joshuah) entred into the Land of Canaan, Joshuah 3.1, &c. Those who pretend, that S. John Baptist attended his Ministry some years before the Baptism of Jesus Christ, will be hard put to it, to find in Scripture grounds for their Opinion; but being older than our LORD by 6 Months, 'tis to be presumed he had been already 5 or 6 Months employed in the ex∣ercise of his Office, before our LORD was by his Baptism solemnly inaugurated into his. His Preachings were full of Spirit, tho he confirm'd them by no Miracle, John 10.41. his Censures sharp, Matt. 3.7. Luke 3.7. his Instructions weighty and pertinent to every condition, Luke 3.15, &c. and he especially dispos'd mens Minds to believe in him, who was come after him, and whose Fore-run∣ner he was, Matt. 3.11. Luke 3.15, 16, 17. Acts 1.4. In fine, as they came to him from all parts to be Baptized, Jesus then be∣ing 30 years of Age, or thereabouts, Luke 3.23. came also himself from Nazareth to the same end, Matt. 3.13. Mark 1.9. Luke 3.21. Hitherto S. John Baptist had not known him by the Countenance or outward Con∣versation, John 1.33. but GOD made him known to him as he entred into the Water with him, (whereupon he would have ex∣cused himself from Baptizing him, Matt. 3.14.) and farther confirm'd him in the belief of his Deity, John 1.33. For then the Hea∣vens open'd, and the Holy Spirit in form of a Dove descended visibly on him, and this Voice from Heaven was heard, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Matt. 3.16, 17. Mark 1.10, 11. Luke 3.21, 22. Our Saviour being Baptized, according to the common Opinion the 6th of January is car∣ried into the Desart, where he remains 40 Days and 40 Nights, without eating or drinking, and is there tempted of the Devil, Mat. 4.1, &c. Mark. 1.12, 13. Luke 4.1. From thence he returns to Bethabara, where S. John Baptiz'd, mix'd amongst the throng of his other Auditors. Then came to S. John Deputies from Jerusalem, to demand of him who he was, and having deny'd to them he was the Christ, or the person of Elias, or the Prophet promis'd by Moses, he declar'd to them what his Office was, and that he whose way he prepar'd, was in the midst of them. The next morning seeing Jesus, who came towards him, he denoted him in general to his Hearers, as being the true Mssias; and the day following he speaks of him farther to 2 of his Disciples, one of which was Andrew, the Brother of Peter, and the other (as is pre∣sum'd) S. John the Evangelist; these two fol∣lowed our Saviour, who brings them home, where they pass the rest of the day. An∣drew brings his Brother Simon to him, to whom Jesus declares he should be call'd Cephas, which is Peter, John 1.19, &c. The day following the LORD designs for Gallilee, and makes himself also be followed by Phi∣lip, who brings to him Nathaniel, John 1.43, &c. Three days after is celebrated the Marriage of Cana, and the Wine failing, he chang'd Water thereinto, as the first-fruit of his Mi∣racles: and from thence passes into Capernaum with his Mother and Relations, where he was but a few days, John 2.1, &c. Anno 31. From Gallilee, he ascends up to Je∣rusalem on account of the Passover, where he purg'd the Temple, and signalized himself by divers Miracles, John 2.13, &c. Nicodemus comes by Night to him, with whom he had a very important discourse touching Rgeneration, of Faith, and his own
Death, John 3.1, &c. He leaves Jerusalem to preach in all Judea, where he makes Dis∣ciples, and Baptizes by the Ministry of the first. S. John the Baptist, who every day gave ground to him, having left Jordan, Baptized at Enon, where on occasion of a Dis∣pute agitated between the Jews and his Dis∣ciples, touching Purification, he instructs them very particularly of the Person and Office of Jesus Christ, John 3.22, &c. A while after S. John was confined to Prison by Herod Anti∣pus, Tetrarch of Galilee, who yet took on him the Title of King, impatiently bearing the free Reproofs which this faithful Servant of GOD made him on occasion of Herodias, the Wife of his Brother Philip, the Tetrarch of Itruria, who at his solicitation had left her Husband, by a Bill of Divorce, against the Laws and Customs of the Nation, which granted not this priviledge to Women, and had joyn'd herself to this Person, Mark 6.17, &c. Matt. 14.3, 4, 5. Our Saviour having heard of the Imprison∣ment of St. John, and of the Jealousie the Pharisees had at his proceedings at Jerusalem, he leaves Judea to return into Galilee, Matt. 4.12. John 4.1, &c. In this Journey which he made in the Win∣ter, he past thro the Country of Samaria, had at the entrance into the Town of Sichar, or Sichem, a very important Dialogue with a Woman of that Country, and is well re∣ceived by the Inhabitants of the place, where he stays 2 days, John 4.4, &c. From thence he arrives in Galilee, where he is well re∣ceived, Mark 1.14. Luke 4.14, 15. John 4.45. Being at Cana, he there signalizes himself by a 2d Miracle, in curing with a word speaking, the Son of one of Herod's Officers, who is thought to have been Chuza, the Steward of his Houshold, John 4.46, &c. He passes from thence to Capernaum; where having wrought several Miracles, he comes to Nazareth, and is immediately heard in the Synagogue with admiration; but for having spoken too freely he was in danger of his Life, and is on the point of being precipitated from the top of a Mountain, Luke 4.16, &c. and therefore he returns to Capernaum, and there teaches every Sabbath-day, Matt. 13.17. Mark 1.21, 22. Luke 4.31, &c. During his stay at Capernaum, whence he oft went out to preach in the Neighbouring parts; he calls Simon Peter and Andrew his Brother, and afterward James and John, the Sons of Zebedee, to the Apostleship, Matt. 4.18, &c. having taught the People out of Simon's little Ship, where was drawn up afterwards that miraculous number of Fishes, Luke 5.3, &c. In the same Town he deli∣vers one possest in the Synagogue, Cures S. Peter's Mother-in-Law, who lay sick of a Fever, and at Night he had divers sick People brought to him, whom he healed, Matt. 8.14. Mark 1.23, &c. Luke 4.33, &c. The next Morning being followed by his Disciples, he goeth into a Desart place, where great Mul∣titudes followed him; passes from one place to another, Preaching in the Synagogues, and healing the Sick, Matth. 4.23. Mark 1.35, &c. Luke 4.42. Especially he cleanses a Leper, who notwithstanding our LORD's Prohibition, publishes every where this Mi∣racle, Matth. 8.1. Mark 1.40. Luke 5.12. Being returned from this Circuit to Caper∣naum, he teaches near home, Cures one sick of the Palsie, born by four; Calls in (passing by) Levi, or Matthew, to the Apostleship, who makes him a great Feast, being accompanied with other Publicans; at which the Pharisees offended, were also displeased at his Disciples not Fasting, Matth. 9.1, &c. Mark 2.1, &c. Luke 5.17, &c. The Feast of the Passover (Anno 32) drawing near, he goes up to Jerusalem, where he heals on the Sabbath-day the sick Person, which lay at the Pool of Bethesda, and justifies this Action, John 5.1, &c. Passing a while after thro' the Corn-Fields on the Sabbath-day, he excuses his Disciples for their having on that day plucked the Ears of the Corn, to satisfie (in some sort) their hunger, Matth. 12.1, &c. Mark. 2.23. Luke 6.1, &c. On another Sabbath, he heals in the Synagogue one one who had a witherd Hand; at which the Pharisees being offended con∣spire against him, together with the Herodi∣ans; on which account he retires towards the Sea, followed by a great Multitude, Matth. 12.9, &c. Mark 3.1, &c. Luke 6.6, &c. About this time he went apart into a Mountain to pray, after which he chose and establish'd his 12 Disciples, who had not as yet been called by this Name, Matth. 10.1, &c. Mark 3.13. Luke 6.13. Coming down from the Mountain with them, he finds in the Plain a great Multi∣tude of People come from all parts to hear
him, and be healed by him, who were not sent away fruitless, Luke 6.17, &c. Scarce had he entred into an House, but the Multi∣tudes came and found him, and gave him not the leisure to eat Bread; so that his Relations came to disengage him, Mark 3.20, &c. He afterwards made that excellent Sermon on the Mount, which we read Matt. Chap. 5, 6, 7. Luke 6.20, &c. having finish'd it, he Cured the Centurions Servant, Matth. 8.5, &c. Luke 7.1, &c. The next Morning he goes to Naum, where he restores the Widows Son to life, that was carried to be Buried, Luke 7.11, &c. Then S. John sends from Prison two of his Disciples to Christ (more for their Instru∣ction, than his own) with a Message, to know of him, Whether he was that to come, or whether they were to expect another? To which he fully satisfies them, and passes from thence to the praises of S. John, Matt. 11.2, &c. Luke 7.18, &c. He is afterwards invited by Simon the Pharisee, where he defends against his Host, the proceeding of the Repenting Sinner, who had washed his Feet with her Tears, Luke 7.36, &c. After this he passes and Preaches from Town to Town, followed by his 12 Apostles, and some devout Women, who assisted him in what he wanted, Luke 8.1, &c. Curing one who was possest that was Deaf and Blind, he refutes the Calumny of the Scribes and Pharisees, come from Jerusalem; who accused him for Casting out Devils by Beelzebub, the Prince of the De∣vils, Matt. 12.22, &c. Mark. 3.22, &c. And to those who demanded of him a sign from Heaven, he offers no other than that of Jonas, Matt. 12.38, &c. As he ended this Discourse, he was told his Mother, and Brethren were at the Door, who would speak with him, to whom he answers, that he pre∣ferred his Spiritual Kindred before all Carnal Relations, Matt. 12.46, &c. Mark. 3.31, &c. Luke 8.19, &c. Departing thence he sits down by the Sea∣side, and being gotten into a little Vessel, to be less crowded, he teaches the People by many Parables, who stood on the Shore, Matt. 13.1, &c. Mark 4.1, &c. Luke 8.4, &c. Night being come, having severely answer∣ed some, who would have followed him, he designs with his Disciples to pass to the other side of the Lake, Calming by his bare Word a great Tempest, which arose during the Night whilst he slept, Matt. 8.18, &c. Mark 4.35, &c. Luke 8.22, &c. So that he arrives in the Country of the Gadarns, where he casts out Devils from two Persons possest, (tho S. Mark and S. Luke speak but of one, being probably the most signal and furious) and permits the Evil Spirits to en∣ter into a Herd of Swine thereby feeding, and to precipitate them into the Sea, where∣upon the Inhabitants of the Country desire him to depart from them; those who were cured, publish all about Decapolis the benefit they had received, Matt. 8.28. Mark 5.1, &c. Luke 8.26, &c. Hereupon he repasses the Lake, and comes to Capernaum, where he is received on the Shore-side by great numbers of People who expected him, Luke 8.40. and satisfies the Question asked by St John's Disciples, touching his not Fasting, Matt. 9.14, &c. Jairus entreats him to come and visit his only Daughter, who was at the point of Death; and in going, the woman who was troubled with the Bloody Flux for twelve years, was healed by only touching the Hem of his Garment; and Jairus's Daughter being dead in the mean time, is raised to life by him, Matt. 9.18, &c. Mark 5.22. and Luke 8.41, &c. Coming from thence he gives sight to two Blind Persons, and cast ou an Evil Spirit from one that was Dumb, Matt. 9.27, &c. Passing from one Town to another, he is again despised by those of Nazareth, who twit him with his being a Carpenter, Matt. 9.35. and 13.54, &c. Mark 6.1, &c. But being moved with compassion towards the Multitude, because the Harvest was great and the Labourers few, Matt. 9.35. He sends his 12 Apostles 2 by 2, to Preach and Heal the Sick in his Name, Matt. 10.1, &c. Mark 6.7, &c. Luke 9.1, &c. Then was St John Baptist Beheaded in Prison, and his Head given in a Charger to Herodias Daughter, by Herod's Order, who by a rash Oath found himself obliged to this Cruelty; and his Body is buried by his Disciples, who came and inform'd our Lord thereof, Matt. 14.1, &c. Mark 6.17, &c. Not long after, from what was nois'd of Jesus Christ, Herod is in perplexity, he being said to be John, who was risen from the dead, the truth of Heavenly passages being no where less known than at Court, Luke 9.7, 8, 9.
The Apostles return to our Saviour Christ, and relate to him the success of their Preach∣ing, and he, to procure them some rest, leads them aside, in a place near Bethsaida, where great Multitudes follow him, and ha∣ving instructed them, he feeds them to the number of 5000 Men, without reckoning the Women and Children, with 5 Loaves and 2 Fishes, Mat 14.13, &c. Mark 6.30, &c. Luke 9.10, &c. John 6.1, &c. Knowing that the Multitude he had fed, projected to seize on him, and force him to be a King, he retires alone into a Mountain, obliges his Disciples to take Shipping, and to draw towards Capernaum; he comes to them at Midnight, walking on the Sea, St Peter obtains also to walk on the Water, but seized with Fear he sinks, Matt. 14.15, &c. Mark 6.35, &c. Luke 9.12, &c. John 6.1, &c. The next Morning the Multitudes whom he had fed, come to him at Caper∣naum, where to raise up their Minds from sensible Objects, he tells them of a Mysti∣cal Food, which nourishes to Eternal Life, namely the eating of his Body, and drink∣ing his Blood; at which they were most of them scandalized, understanding of an Oral manducation, what he meant of a Spiritual one, John 6.22, &c. This hapning in Galilee a while before the Feast of the Passover, John 6.4. being Anno Christi 33. which was the Third of the Lords Ministry, there came Scribes and Pharisees from Jerusalem, who took offence at the Disciples eating with unwashed hands; but our Saviour herein justifies them, and condemns their Traditions, Matt. 15.1, &c. Mark 7.1, &c. After which he retires to∣wards the Frontiers of Tyre and Sidon, and casts out a Devil out of a Canaanitish Wo∣man's Daughter, Matt. 15.21, &c. Mark 7.24, &c. Then he returns towards the Sea of Galilee, cross the Country of Decapolis, where he cures a Deaf and Dumb Man, Mark 7.31, &c. And sitting near the Sea on a Mountain, he there heals several, Matt. 15.29, &c. Here he also at the same time miraculously fed about 4000 Men, without reckoning the Women and Children, with seven Loaves and some few Fishes, and there re∣mained of the Fragments seven Baskets full. From hence he comes by Water with his Disciples to Dalmanutha, in the Confines of Magdala, where the Scribes and Pharisees ask him again for a Sign, to whom he an∣swers, in reprehending their Hypocrisie, and offers them again the Sign of Jonas, Mat. 15.39. and 16.1. Mark 8.10, &c. He here again warns his Apostles to take heed of the Leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees, and of Herod, Matth. 16.5, &c. Mark 8.14, &c. He comes to Bethsaida, where he cures one that was Blind, who recovers by degrees his sight, Mark 8.22. and passes from thence to the Towns of Caesarea and Phillippi, and by the way asks his Disciples, what Men thought of him, and what their Opinion was also of him; and for the good Confession which S. Peter made in the Name of all the rest, he receives from him in their Name exquisit Promises, foretels them his Death and Resurrection, and calls St Peter Satan, because he would disswade him from his Suf∣ferings, Matt. 16.13, &c. Mark 8.27, &c. Luke 9.18, &c. Eight days after, according to St Luke he is Transfigur'd on the Mount, in the pre∣sence of three of his most intimate Dis∣ciples, Peter, James, and John, talks there with Moses and Elias, and coming down thence explains to them how Elias was alrea∣dy come, Matt. 17.1, &c. Mark 9.1, &c. Luke 9.28, &c. The next morning returning to his Disciples, he finds them environ'd by a great Multitude, and he at his coming cast out a Devil from a Youth that was a Luna∣tick, whom his Disciples could not dispossess, Matt. 7.14, &c. Mark 9.14, &c. Luke 9.37, &c.. Being arrived at Capernaum, he pays the Tribute for himself, and S. Peter, Matt. 17.24. And knowing that his Disciples had contend∣ed in the way touching Superiority, he instruct∣ed them largely on this Subject, Matt. 18.1, &c. Mark 9.35, &c. Luke 9.46, &c. Then the Feast of Tabernacles drawing nigh, he refuses his Company to his unbelieving Relations, in their journey to Jerusalem, on the account of this Solemnity; but he goes up after them, sending before them two of his Disciples; yet the Samaritans would not receive him. In this Journey he sends 70 of his Disciples round about. Being arrived at Jerusalem in the midst of the Feast, he teaches in the Temple; the Officers who are sent to take him, return without him, migh∣tily astonished at his Doctrine, Luke 9.51, &c. and 10.1, &c. John 7.1, &c.
Withdrawing at Night to the Mount of Olives, he returns the next morning early into the Temple, where an Adulteress is brought to him, and having sent her away with a Charge to Sin no more, he shews at large who he is; and the Jews taking up Stones to stone him, he retires for his securi∣ty, John 8.1, &c. In passing by he sees and heals one born Blind on the Sabbath-day, using Clay tem∣pered with spittle for this purpose, which he having published, the Jews are offended at it; which occasions a large sequel of Cen∣sures and Instructions, John 9.1, &. and 10.1, &c. The 70 Disciples return to him with Joy; he instructs a Doctor of the Law, who is our Neighbour; and enters into the House of Martha, who is much busied, whilst her Sister Mary attentively hears the Word, Luke 10.17, &c. Afterwards he teaches his Disci∣ples to pray; cures a Mute that was possest; a Woman cries out from the midst of the Crowd, That the Womb was blest that bore him, and he answers as heretofore, Luke 11.1, &c. A Pharisee invites him to Dinner, where he censures the Pride and Covetousness of that sort of People, Luke 11.37, &c. He again warns his Disciples to take care of the Leaven of Hypocrisy, refuses to divide the Succession between two contending Brethren, and gives on this occasion several excellent instructions, Luke 12.1, &c. On what is reported to him touching the Galileans, who apparently were of the Sect of Judas Gaulonite, whose Blood Pilate's Hand mingled with their Sacrifices, he ex∣horts every one to Repentance; heals in the Synagogue on the Sabbath-day a Woman, distempered 18 years; answers the question, Whether there would be many saved, and shews he little matters the Threatnings of Herod, Luke 13.1, &c. In his way towards Jerusalem, Luke 13.22. he goes into a Pharisees House, to refresh himself, cures one troubled with a Dropsie▪ on the Sabbath-day, and as well at Table, as elsewhere, he sows the Seed of Divine In∣structions, Luke Chapters 13, 14, 15, 16. His Disciples ask of him an encrease of their Faith, and are advised by him always, to esteem themselves unprofitable Servants. He cleanses ten Lepers in passing through Samaria, exhorts to pray always, and offers a Parable of the Pharisee and Publican, Luke 17.1, &c. and 18.1, &c. Being come to Jerusalem, in the Feast of the Dedications, he declares himself to be the Messias, and of one and the same Essence with the Father, whereupon the Jews would have laid hands on him; but he avoids them, John 10.22, &c. This makes him leave Jerusalem to go beyond Jordan, where St John had first Baptized; where several came to him; and the Pharisees Interrogate him touching Divorces, John 10.40, &c. Matt. 19.1, &c. Mark 10.1, &c. Little Children are brought to him, which he would not have hindred; and the young Man, who asks him what he should do to inherit Eternal life, and gloryed in his exact observation of the Law, goes away sad, Matt. 19.13, &c. Mark 10.13, &c. Luke 18.15, &c. Lazarus in the mean time falls Sick and dies; our Lord determines to return into Judea, and there raises the Dead, which be∣ing known at Jerusalem, the Chief Priests and Pharisees, under the Authority of Caiphas, re∣solve to get rid of him; whereupon he re∣treats toward the Desart, in a City nam'd Ephraim, John 11.1, &c. Yet the Feast of the Passover approaching, John 11.55. (it being the 4th of his Mini∣stry, and in Anno Christi 34) he takes his way towards Jerusalem, foretelling his Apostles what would happen to him, Matt. 20.17, &c. Mark 10.32. Luke 18.31. The Sons of Zebedee, in the way, discourse of high things, and desire one might sit at his Right hand, and the other at his Left, at which the other Apostles are offended, and are by their common Master reduced to humility, Mat. 20.20, &c. Mark 10.35. Coming to Jericho, he restores sight to one that was blind, Luk. 18.35. in the Town Zacheus a Publican receives him into his House, Luke 19 1, &c. Going out thence followed by a great Multitude, he gives sight to 2 that were Blind, one of which was Bar∣timaeus, Matt. 20.29, &c. Mark 10.52. And the nearer he draws to Jerusalem, the more he applies himself to undeceive his Disciples touching the near approaches of his Kingdom, Luke 19.11, &c. In fine, 6 days be∣fore the Passover he comes to Bethany, John 12.1. and at the Feast which is made there for him, he is Anointed by Mary with a pre∣cious Oyntment (tho to Judas great trouble)
in order to his Burial, Mat. 26.6. Mark 14.3. John 12.2, &c. Whilst the Chief Priests deliberate to put him and Lazarus to death with him, John 12.11. And Judas at the instigation of the Devil treats him and agrees with them to de∣liver him to them, Matth. 26.14. Mark 14.10. Luke 22.1, &c. he makes his Trium∣phant entrance into Jerusalem, mounted on the Foal of an Ass, with the joyful Acclama∣tions of Hosanna, wherewith the Multitude made the Air resound, Matt. 21.1, &c. Mark 11.1, &c. Luke 19.28, &c. John 12.19, &c. As he drew near to the City he wept over it, Luke 19.41. He goes directly to the Temple, whence he drives out the Buyers and Sellers, and cures there the Lame and Blind, Matth. 21.12, &c. Mark 11.15. Luke 19.45. Some Greeks desire to see him; a Voice comes from Heaven to him, and he speaks of his exaltation on the Cross to draw all Men to him, to the evident conviction of the Incre∣dulity of the Jews, and thereupon returns to Bethany, John 12.20, &c. The next morn∣ing returning to Jerusalem, he was an hungry, and curs'd the Fig-Tree which had no Leaves nor Fruit, Matt. 21.18. Mark 11.12. At Night he went out of the Town; and the next Morning returning, his Disciples obser∣ved that the Fig Tree which he had curs'd the day before, was dry; on occasion of which he describes the efficacy of Faith. Being en∣tred into the Temple, and teaching as before, the Chief Priests and Scribes ask him, By what Authority he did these things; disdaining to answer them, he evades them by a Counter∣question touching the Baptism of John, which they refuse to satisfy, and offers them on this Subject some Parables which concerned the rejection of the Jews, and the vocation of the Gentiles, Matt. 21.19, &c. Mark 11.20, &c. Luke 20.1, &c. Then the Pharisees and Herodians endeavour to catch him in discourse, by the question, Whether Tribute ought to be given to Caesar; the Sadducees Interrogate him touching the Woman who had seven Brethren successively to her Husbands, whose Wife she should be in the Resurrection. A Doctor of the Law asks him which was the chief Command∣ment; and he perplexes them in his turn, by demanding of them whose Son the Messias should be, Matt. 22.15, &c. Mark 12.13, &c. Luke 20.20. After these Questions, he instructs his Disciples, and other Auditors, touching the Scribes and Pharisees; reproa∣ches Jerusalem with its Cruelty and Incre∣dulity, and denounces her Ruin, Matt. 23.1, &c. Mark 12.38, &c. Luke 20.45, &c. Then sitting near the Box, he observes that a poor Widow, who had only cast in 2 Mites, had yet given more than the Richest, Mark 12.41. Luke 21.1. His Disciples shewing him at his going out of the Temple, the magnificence and firm∣ness of its Building, he foretold the entire Ruin of it; and to the two Questions they make him on this matter, when this should happen, and what should be the signs of his last coming, he sufficiently satisfies them in both, and exhorts them to Watchfulness by divers Parables, Matt. Chap. 24, 25. Mark 13.1, &c. Luke 21.5, &c. Thus happens the 4th and last Passover of the Ministry of Jesus Christ, in which our true Passover was sacrificed for us. Thursday at Night (as we reckon and call the days of the Week, and 'twas according to the Jews the beginning of Friday) hav∣ing sent two of his Disciples to prepare him the Passover, he eat it with them, anticipa∣ting by a day that of the Jews, who this year, by an old Custom, remitted theirs to the Saturday following, or to the Sabbath, Matt. 26.17. Mark 14.12. Luke 22.7, &c. John 13.1. and 18.28. In this last Passover he declares, being at Table, that Judas would betray him: he washes his Apostles Feet; institutes the Sacra∣ment of his Last Supper; bid Judas, in giving him the Sop, that he would do what he was to do quickly, as in effect he soon went out. He prepares his Disciples for Suffering, and the approaching Temptation, advertizes St Peter of his approaching Fall; disposes them all to part with him; by the Promise of the Comforter, Matth. 26.20, &c. Mark 14.18, &c. Luke 22.19, &c. John Chap. 13, and 14. And having sang the Hymn, Matt. 26.30. Mark 14.26. he made to his Disciples the weighty Discourse in the 15 and 16th Chapters of St John, and offered to his Father the excellent Prayer, which is recited John 17. He goes out with his XI towards the Mount of Olives, to the place named Gethsemane, there he exhorts them to watch and pray; walks farther: carrying with him Peter, James, and John, and leaving these three a Stones cast off, he prays ardently 3 times, that the Cup might
be removed from him; and finding himself inexpressibly disconsolate, and in unconceiv∣able anguish, he is strengthened by an Angel in his Agonies, and his Sweat was changed into Drops of Blood: He wakes 3 several times his drowzy Disciples, Judas, who for 30 pieces of Silver, had made himself a Guide and Leader of those who were sent to take him, shews him them by a Kiss. Those who were to seize on him, fall down with Fear; his Disciples would have been on the defence, and especially S. Peter, who cuts off Malchus's Ear. Our LORD bids him put up his Sword into his Sheath, heals the Wound with a touch, and reproaching those who came to lay Hands on him, with the violence of their proceeding, he suffers him∣self to be led by them, Matth. 26.31, &c. Mark 14.27, &c. Luke 22.39, &c. John 18.1, &c. Then his Disciples abandon him and fly, and a young Man (who apparently went out, to see what was the matter) having only a Linnen Cloath about him, would have been seized on by these Souldiers, had not he run a∣way Naked out of their hands, Matth. 56.46. Mark 14.50, &c. Thus was he carried Prisoner about Mid∣night, to Annas, Father-in-Law to Caiphas; who causes him to be led to his Son-in-Law, who was Chief Priest for that year. He is here examin'd; several false Witnesses are produced against him, and on his Confession of being the Christ the Son of GOD, he is judged worthy of Death, beaten, buffetted, spit on, and otherwise ill used, Matt. 26.57, &c. Mark 14.53, &c. Luke 22.54, &c. John 18.12, &c. S. Peter following afar off, and by means of another Disciple, who had access to Caiphas, was entred into the House, but accused succes∣sively by 3 distinct persons, to be also one of Jesus Disciples; he vehemently denies it 3 times, after which the Cock having Crow'd for the 3d time, and our Saviour having look'd back in this instant, he went out and wept bitterly, Matt. 26.69, &c. Mark 14.66, &c. Luke 22.54, &c. John 18.15, &c. At length Day appears, and to observe some formality, the whole Senate of the Na∣tion is convocated by Caiphas, where our Sa∣viour persisting in his first Confession, his Condemnation is also confirm'd and reiterated, Matt. 27.1, &c. Mark 15.1, &c. Luke 22.66, &c. Immediately then they led him in a full body to Pilate, the Governour of Judea under Ti∣berius, to obtain his Condemnation and Exe∣cution. Pilate searches all ways to excuse him∣self from it, he declares him Innocent, offers to release him at the Feast; knowing that he was a Galilean he sends him to Herod, who came on the account of the Feast of Jerusa∣lem, who having not drawn from him what he expected, sends him back with Contempt. Pilate's Wife sends word to her Husband, conjuring him to have nothing to do with him; but he (to satisfie the Jews) condemns him to be Scourg'd, and makes him then to be brought before them cloath'd in Purple, and wearing on his Head a Crown of Thorns. But the People cry out, that Barabbas should be released, and Jesus Crucified; which in fine Pilate grants, and having again made him be Scourg'd after the Roman manner, he delivers him to the cruel Death of the Cross, and the Insultings of his Souldiers, who again array him with Purple, and put on him a Crown of Thorns: And they being more weary of Affronting him, than he of enduring their cruel Usages, they give him again his own Cloaths, and load him with his Cross, and thus led him to the place of his Punishment, Matt. 27.11, &c. Mark 15.1, &c. Luke 23.1, &c. John 18.28, &c. and 19.1, &c. Judas seeing him Condemn'd, was touch'd with Remorse, for having betray'd Innocent Blood; restores the Money he had receiv'd, which the Priests lay out in purchasing a Field for the burying of Strangers, and he goes and Hangs himself, Matt. 27.3. Acts 1.18. It was about Noon when he was led out of the Town, bearing his Cross. Simon the Cyre∣nian returning from the Fields, is constrain'd by the Souldiers to assist him. He refuses the mixt Wine which is offer'd him, to make him less sensible of the Dolours; and is Crucified between 2 Thieves at Calvary. His Execu∣tioners divide his Garments, and cast Lots, who should have his Vest, which was all of one piece. He is expos'd to the verbal and real Insults of all, even of the Malefa∣ctors Crucified with him, or at least of one of them; for one reprehended the other, and obtain'd a Promise of the LORD, to be that day with him in Paradice. On the Cross, he recommends his Mother to S. John, prays for his Enemies, who knew not what they did, cries out to GOD in his Dolours, says (after he had tasted Vinegar, which was offered him on his Cross) that all was accomplish'd, recommends his Spirit to GOD, and expires; having cast
forth a great Cry, about 3 Hours in the After∣noon, and near the time when was offered in the Temple the perpetual Sacrifice, and when the Jews slew the Paschal Lamb between the 2 Evenings, to eat it at Night, Matt. 27.28, &c. Mark 15.16, &c. Luke 23.26, &c. Joh. 19.16, &c. Divers Prodigies hapned at his Death, the light of the Sun was supernaturally Eclips'd, (for it was in the time of the Full Moon) at Mid-day, and the Darkness which hapned by his obscurity lasted 3 Hours. The Veil of the Temple was rent from top to bottom, the Earth shook, the Stones clave, the Graves opened, from whence several of the Saints arose, and appear'd to many in the City, Matt. 27.45, and 51, &c. Mark 15.33, 38. Luke 23.44, 45. These Miraculous Events drew from the Mouth of the Centurion this Confession. that He was truly the Son of GOD, Mat 27.54. Mark 15.39. Luke 23.47. The Jews desirous the Condemned Persons might not remain on the Cross the Sabbath-day, which was also that of their Passover, request of Pilate, that their Legs might be broken, to hasten their Death; which being granted, the Souldiers break the Legs of the 2 others, but do not thus to our LORD, be∣cause they found him already dead; but one of the Souldiers pierced his side with a Spear, whence there issued out Blood and Water, John 19.31, &c. Joseph of Arimathea knowing he was dead, requests his Body of Pilate to bury it; which having obtain'd, Nicodemus joyn'd himself to him in this happy work, and wrapping up his precious Body in a Linnen-Cloth, with some Aromatick Drugs, they hastily laid him in a new Sepulchre, cut in a Garden near the Town, Matt. 27.57, &c. Mark 15.42, &c. Luke 23.50, &c. John 19.38, &c. The next Morning thro the diligence of the Jews, and by Pilate's order the Sepulchre is Sealed and Guarded, to hinder his Disciples from carrying away his Body, Math. 27.62, &c. Thus our LORD being laid in the Sepulchre about 4 in the afternoon, past there the whole Sabbath of 24 Hours, and arose thence the day following at Sun-rising. Then Mary Mag∣dalen the Mother of James the lesser, Saloma the Mother of Zebedee, and some other devout Women, who had followed him from Galilee, Matth. 28.1. Mark 16.1. Luke 23.55. Joh. 20.1. go out early in the morning with Aromatick Drugs to embalm him; but being come near the Sepulchre, as the Sun was up, they found the Stone which covered it, was removed; which was done by the Angel of the LORD, to render this Service to our Saviour, rising Victorious with a great Earthquake, which (with the Apparition of the Angels) so af∣frighted the Souldiers that guarded the Tomb, that they became like Dead Men. Mary Mag∣dalen presently suspects, seeing the Sepulchre open, that the LORD's Body was taken away, and returns immediately into the Town, to give notice of it to his Discples. But in the mean time the other holy Women are informed of the Angel that he was risen, and are ordered to carry the News to St. Peter and the rest: Whereupon Peter and John ran to the Sepul∣chre, and found not the Body there; and whilst they return, Mary Magdalen persisting in her thought, sits down crying near the Sepulchre, where first 2 Angels appear to her, who demand the cause of her Tears; the like did our Savi∣our, whom she took at first for the Gardiner, but making himself more distinctly known, she hears him (full of Joy and Consolation) to bid her go and tell the Apostles. And this was the first Appearance of our LORD after his Resurrection, Matt. 28.1, &c. Mark 16.1, &c. Luke 24.1, &c. John 20.1, &c. So that what S. Matthew says of these holy Women in general, Matt. 28.29. must be understood singularly of her. In the same day he shewed himself to 2 of his Disciples, one of which was called Cleophas, and the other (as 'tis thought) was Luke, who went to Emaus, where they knew him in the Breaking of Bread, Mark 16.12, 13. Luke 24.13. And in the Evening our Saviour appeared in the midst of all the Apostles, except Thomas, saying to them Peace be with you. Then he did eat with them, and breathed on them, to communicate to them his Holy Spirit, and to confirm them in the Mini∣stry of Reconciliation, which he had promised before his Sufferings, Mark 16.14. Luke 24.36. John 20.19, &c. 8 Days after our Saviour (as it were) to consecrate particularly to him∣self this 1st Day of the week, and substitute it to the Jewish Sabbath) appeared again to the 11, and convinc'd Thomas of his Incredulity, John 20.24, &c. The Apostles having left Jerusalem, to re∣turn into Galilee, according to our LORD's Order, he shew'd himself again near the Sea of Tiberias to 7 of them, which were Peter, Thomas, James, and John the Sons of Zebedee, Nathaniel, and 2 others; and from the Shoar
he procured them a great Draught of Fishes for which they had fruitlesly toyl'd all Night. Whereupon Peter knew him and cast himself half-naked into the Sea, to come the sooner to him. Coming all to Land they see there Fish a dressing, whereto he bid them to joyn some of their Fish, and makes them dine with him. After Dinner he draws from Peter a threefold profession of his Love, to oppose it to his triple Denial of him, and re-establishes him 3 times in the Office from which he seem'd to have fallen; obscurely foretold him, that he shoud be Crucified in his old Age, and would not have him concern himself with what would become of John, and this was the 3d time he shewed himself to his Disciples, John 21. Since the XI had betaken themselves to the Mountain, which he had appointed them; they saw him, worshipt him, and there received a more particular Explication of their Commis∣sion, for the Preaching of the Gospel, and Ad∣ministration of Baptism, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Matt. 28.16, &c. Mark 16.15, &c. S. Paul also speaks of divers Appearances of the LORD, after his Resurrection, and amongst others, that he had particularly appeared to Peter and James the lesser, and twice to the whole Assembly of the Apostles, and another time to 500 Brethren together, 1. Cor. 15.5, 6, 7. which seems to have been in the Mountain, which the LORD indicated. For 40 Days together, he at several times Communed familiarly with them, with incon∣testable Proofs of the truth of his Resurrection, Acts 1.3, 10, 41, that they might be Witnesses of it to all People over all the World. It appears from Antiquity, that Pilate had in∣form'd the Emperor Tiberius of this, who pro∣posed to the Senate, the putting our Saviours Image amongst the number of the Gods; and tho Divine Providence hindered the Senate from doing it, yet the Emperour expresly for∣bad the Christians to be Persecuted. At the end of these 40 Days having Assembled them at Jerusalem, he ordered them not to remove thence till they had received the Holy Spirit; and finding them still possest with an opinion of his Earthly Reign he turned their thoughts from it, forbidding them to enquire of the Time and Seasons which GOD had kept in his own power, and goeth out with them to∣wards Bethany, to the Mount of Olives, where having blest them, he was lifted up from them into Heaven, being supported by a Cloud, and thus received into his Glory, Luke 24.49, &c. Acts 1.4, &c. And as they beheld him ascend∣ing, 2 Angels appeared to them, assuring them he should one day descend in like manner, as they now saw him ascend, Acts 1.11. 10 Days after our LORD's Ascension, in the Day of Pentecost, the Holy Spirit was sensibly given to the Apostles, by the gift of Languages; and the same day, at the first Preaching of Peter, 3000 Men were converted to the Faith of Christ, and Baptized in his Name, Acts 2.1, &c. And these were the beginings of the Christian Church of Jerusalem, which (by the agreement of its Members, their Charity, Union and Assiduity in exercises of Piety) every day increased, Acts 2.42, &c. Some time after, one Lame from his Birth, about 40 years of Age, was miraculously cured by S. Peter, and S. John; the relation of which is treated of in the 214th Discourse. The Union of the Church is powerfully maintain'd, and all things are had in Common, if not in possession, yet in use amongst her Members, there being no Indigent Person amongst them: Such as had Houses or Lands, sold them, and brought the Price and laid it at the Apostles Feet, to be distributed to every one according to his Necessity, as was done particularly by Barnabas the Levite, but born in Cyprus, whose Zeal and Piety was signal afterwards in the propagation of the Gospel. But Ananias, and Saphira his Wife, having dealt hypocritically in a like occasion, by bringing but half of the Price which they had received for the Inheritance, and yet affirming they had sold it for no more, were both punish'd by sudden Death at S. Peter's word, Acts 4.32, &c. And as the Apostles daily persevered in Solomon's Porch, and signaliz'd themselves by divers Miracles, to such a degree, that the Sick (over which past the Shadow of S. Peter) were healed, and that from all the Country there∣abouts People came flocking to them, the High Priest, chief of the Sadducean Party, and those of his Faction, made the Apostles be appre∣hended, and confined in the publick Prison, whom an Angel delivers thence in the Night, and the Council sending thither in the Morn∣ing for them, they found the Prison Doors fast, and the Watch set, but the Prisoners gone, who were at the Temple doing their Office; where the Captain goes to fetch them, but without violence. Interrogated by the Council, they remain fearless, and 'tis deliberated to put them to death; but Gamaliel, who was a Pha∣risee,
and in Authority, stops this design, telling them, That if the Preaching were of Men, it would come to nothing; but if of GOD, to take heed not to oppose him. Upon this Advice they were Scourg'd and Releast, with a Charge, to speak no more in the Name of JESUS; but they give Thanks to GOD, for having suffer'd thus much for his Glory, and continue doing their Duty, Acts 5.17. Thus past the 34th Year of our LORD, which concurr'd with the 19th of Tiberius. We may refer to the 35th, the Contention which hapned between the Hebrews and Greeks, who were yet equally Jews, differing only by Birth and Language, which had for a long time produc'd the Seed of an old Emulation. For the preventing of this Disorder 7 Deacons were established, who should take care of the Poor and Widows of both sides. These were Stephen, Philip, Procorus, Nicanor, Timon, Par∣menas, and Nicholas, the last of which was a Proselite. And it appears from their Greek Names, that in this Choice there was more regard had to the Greeks, than the Hebrews, Acts 6.1, &c. 'Tis likely this 35th Year was past very peaceably by the Church, which greatly multiplied at Jerusalem, even to that degree, that several Priests became obedient to the Faith. In the mean time S. Stephen grew famous for his Piety, his Miracles, and Zeal, and was every day disputing with the Hellenists or Greeks, for the truth of the Gospel; but in fine, these unhappy People Libertins, Cyrenians, Alexandrians, Cilicians, and Asiaticks, being not able to resist his Wisdom, they suborn'd false Witnesses against him, who accuse him of Blasphemy against Moses, against the Temple, and against GOD. Appearing on this Accu∣sation before the Council, he defends himself by a long and earnest Apology; at the con∣clusion of which, he is drawn by these mad Zealots out of the Town, and cruelly Stoned; Saul keeping the Cloaths of the false Witnesses, who were to cast the first Stones at him, Acts 6.7, &c. and 7.1, &c. In the 20th Year of Tiberius, died Philip the Tetrarch of Iturium, who leaving no Chil∣dren, his place was reduc'd to the Government of Syria, which Vetellius obtained in that time; who having taken away the Prelacy from Caiphas, to give it to John, or Jonathas his Brother-in-Law, he translated it from him, and conferr'd it on Theophilus his Brother. Pontius Pilate being accused before the same Vitellius, for the Murther of some Samaritans, is sent for to Rome, to clear himself; and tho Tiberius died whilst he was in the way, Caligula his Successor banisht him to Vienna in Dauphiny, where being opprest with the con∣sciousness of his Crimes and Calamities, he kill'd himself. The Persecution began by the Death of S. Stephen, in the Year 36; it grew so violent by the Fury of Saul, and others, that it caus'd a great dispersion of the Church of Jerusalem, of which the Chief Members, (excepting the Apostles) search'd their Retreat, some in the other Towns of Judea, others in those of Sa∣maria, which yet turned to the propagation of the Gospel, Acts 8.1, &c. and 11.19. By this means Philip, one of the 7 Deacons and Ste∣phen's Partner, Preaches the Gospel at Samaria, where several are Converted to the Faith, and Baptiz'd, and amongst others Simon the Ma∣gician, which the Apostles having heard, they sent thither Peter and John from Jerusalem, at whose Prayers, and by the Imposition of their Hands, the Holy Spirit is conferred on the Samaritans; Simon the Magician offers Mony to purchase the Means of doing the same; which the Apostle rejects with indignation, declaring to this profane Wretch, That he had no part in this, because his Heart was not right before GOD, Acts 8.14, &c. Whilst the Apostles sowed the Seed of the Gospel in Samaria, in their way to Jerusalem, Philip was sent from GOD into the High way of Jerusalem to Gaza, where he meets with an Ethiopian, and Eunuch, and Officer to Candace Queen of Ethiopia, who returning from Jeru∣salem into his own Country, read the Scripture in his Chariot. Philip joyned himself to him, expounds the Passage he read in Isaiah, and shewed him it related to our Saviour. The sequel of which is se forth in the 217th Dis∣course, on the Eunuch Baptized, Acts 8. In like manner also some of this Dispersion went to Damascus, as Ananias, Acts 9.19.25. and 22.12; others into Phenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, and announced the Gospel every where to those of that Nation; and some Cypriots and Syrenians, spake of it with success also to the Gentiles of Antioch, Acts 11.19. Some went even as far as Rome, as Andronicus and Junias, Paul's Kinsmen, but Converted to Christ be∣fore him, Romans 16.7. Yet did not the Persecution cease at Jeru∣salem; and Saul having furiously made havock of the Church there demands a Commission to go into Damascus, to bring bound all those
whom he should find making Profession of Believing in Christ: But he is miraculously Converted in the Way, as is at large taken notice of in the 218th Discourse, viz. The Conversion of S. Paul, Acts 9. A while after these things past in the East, Tiberius dies in the 23d year of his Empire, and Caius Caligula succeeds him; so that the 23d of him and the 1st of this, concur with the 37th of our LORD. Herod Agrippa, the Son of Aristobulus, and Grandson of the first Herod, termed the Great, is by Caligula made King of Judea. Herod Antipas (who a while before was defeated by Aretas, King of Arabia Petrea, and who kept a Garrison at Damascus, enraged he had repudiated his Daughter, to espouse Herodias his Sister-in-Law, at the sollicitation of his Wife) jealous at the un∣expected Greatness of the other, goeth to Rome, to sue there also for the Title of King; but Agrippa his Nephew, and his Brother-in-Law together, to hinder his success, accuse him to Caligula of divers Crimes, for which he is stript of his Tetrarchy, which is added to what the other possest, and with his Herodias is banisht to Lyons. Paul being Converted to Christ about the year 38, and 2 years before the Death of Ti∣berius (in which time Josephus the Jewish Historian was born) had began to Preach the Gospel at Damascus, with as much Astonish∣ment on one hand, as Efficacy on the other; and after a Voyage into Arabia, for the same purpose, Gal. 1.17. being returned, the Jews who were Enemies of the Gospel, favoured by the Governor, had done him mischief, had not the Faithful let him down by Night from the Wall in a Basket, Acts 9.20, &c. 2 Cor. 11.32, 33. Being thus got out of Damascus, 3 years after his Conversion, he comes to Jerusalom, and by the Mediation of Barnabas, he visits there only S. Peter, and James the Brother of our Lord, commonly termed the Lesser, and tarried only 15 Days, which did not pass without Disputation with the Greeks, and danger of his Life. He re∣ceived in the Temple (as he Prayed) an ex∣press Command to go and Preach the Gospel to the Gentiles; and therefore the Brethren conducted him to Caesarea, and from thence sent him to Tarsus, which was his Country, Acts 9.26, &c. and 22.17, &c. Gal. 17.18, 19. After this Conversion, and by the Revolu∣tions hapning in the Empire, and in Judea, the Persecution stopt there, and the Churches of Judea, Galilee, and Samaria flourished and were calm. And it was perhaps Cali∣gula's first year, when Peter Visiting the Churches, cured at Lydia the Paralitick Aeneas, and raised up Tabbitha at Joppa, where he remained a long time at Simon the Tanners, Acts 9.31. Then also Cornelius the Centurion, a de∣vout Man, and one that feared GOD, tho' a Gentile, was advertized by an Angel to send for Peter at Joppa, to be instructed by him. The Apostle being prepared for this Journy by a Vision, which tended not to make him stand on distinctions of Jew or Gentile, he went without difficulty, attended with some of the Brethren; and was received by Corne∣lius with too great Respect, which he refuses: At the hearing of the Gospel Preached, he and those that are with him receive the Holy Spirit, and are Baptiz'd in the Name of the LORD, Acts 10.1, &c. Peter being return'd to Jerusalem, is obliged to give an account of this Action, which some reprehended; but they were all satisfied at the Report he made them, and praised GOD, Acts 11.1, &c. Whilst these things past in Palistine, and Paul Preaches in Arabia and Damascus, Cali∣gula Deifies himself, and makes himself the Priest to his own Godhead, associating his Horse in his godly Religion; He uses the Alexandrian Jews very roughly, for not ac∣knowledging him a God, and resolves by force to make his Image be set up in the Temple of Jerusalem, to be there served and worshiped; which yet he could not obtain. Barnabas was sent by the Apostles to Antioch, to take cognizance of the condition of the Church there, to the Edification of which he gave great Assistance, Acts 11.22, &c. At the same time the Prophet Agabus, being come down from Jerusalem to Antioch, foretold the future Famine, which hapned since under the Empire of Claudius in the 4th year, and this Prediction obliged the Churches to make Col∣lections for the Brethren of Judea, which were in a fit time sent by Barnabas and Saul, Acts 11.27. Barnabas seeing at Antioch the Harvest great, goes to search for Paul at Tarsus, and brings him, where they Sojourned a year, to the great Edification of the Church in this place: And in this time it was when the Disciples were first called Christians, Acts 11.25, 26. In fine, Caligula was killed, more
worthy of the Name of Monster, than that of Man; and Claudius his Unkle, the Son of Dru∣sus, succeeds him with Fear; but Herod Agrippa encouraging him, obtained by this means his Favor as he had possest that of his Predeces∣sor, so that he confirm'd to him, and even much encreast his Power and Authority. Thus the 4th of Caligula, and the 1st of Claudius concur with the 41st of our Lord. Herod being returned into Judea with this increase of Power and Honour, in the 2d year of Claudius, and 42d of Christ, he did many Acts of Jewish Devotion, and caused a Chain of Gold, which he had received from Cali∣gula (instead of an Iron one, wherewith Tibe∣rius had fastned him) to be hung up in the Sanctuary. But he began to persecute the Church, and put to death James the Major, the Son of Zebedee; and seeing that this pleased the Jews, he imprisoned also Peter, with design to bring him forth to the Slaugh∣ter, after the Feast of the Passover; but when he was to be drawn forth to Punishment, the Angel of the Lord miraculously delivered him from Prison, making the Gates open of themselves before him. The particulars of which is taken notice of in the 220 discourse, viz St Peter's delivery out of Prison. It's held that St Matthew wrote his Gospel about this time, as under the particular In∣spiration of the Holy Spirit, so by the com∣mon Advice of the other Apostles, for the In∣struction of those of the Circumcision, who had believ'd. And tho several have been per∣swaded that he wrote it in Hebrew, but that by himself or some other it was since Tran∣slated into Greek, such as we have it, yet may we with greater likelihood of Truth say, that he himself wrote it in Greek, because the number of the Hellenist Jews converted to the Faith, was at first greater than that of the Hebrews, witness the first 7 Deacons being taken thence. At the same time Herod who had taken away the High Priesthood from Theophilus, to confer it on Simon Canthara, takes it also from him to give it to Jonathas, the Son of Annas, who refuses it through Modesty, and recommends to the King his Bro∣ther Matthias, who had it. Herod after this, and in the year 43 goeth to reside at Caesarea, and designing to make War on the Tyrians and Sidonians, they found means to appease him by the Media∣tion of Blaflus, his Chamberlain, because they drew all their Provision from the Kings Country, and then hapned the Famine foretold by Agabus. On occasion of which Treaty of Peace, giving several Spectacles to the Peo∣ple, he also would needs harangue them from the Tribunal, where he sat Mrgnificently Cloathed, and his Flatterers to applaud him, extolling the Majesty and Eloquence of his Discourse, cried out, 'Twas the Voice of GOD, and not of Man; An Angel therefore struck him, for not giving Glory to GOD, nor re∣prehending these impious Acclamations, and he died gnawed with Worms, Acts 12.19, &c. Josephus also recites the Death of this Prince conformably to what St Luke says of it, but he relates more circumstances, Lib. 19 Antiq. of the Jews, the last Chapter. Barnabas and Saul had timely brought some small time before Herod began to rage against the Apostles, the Collection made in the Church of Antioch for the Poor of Judea, to succour them in the approaching Famine foretold by Agabus, and which seemed now to be at the Door. From Jerusalem they returned to Antioch, bringing with them S. John, surnamed Mark, who is thought to be the Evangelist, bearing this name, and who perhaps was as well as St Luke of the number of the LXX, Acts 11.29, 30, & 12.25. As they attended their Ministry with their Fellow-Labourers in the Church, Simeon, who was call'd Niger, Lucius the Cyrenian, who is thought to have been St Luke the Evange∣list, and Manahem, who had been brought up with Herod the Tetrarch, the Holy Spirit designed them for an Employ of greater ex∣tent, for which they set out accompanied with John, and attended by the Prayers of the rest, about the 4th year of the Empire of Claudius, and the 44th of our Lord, and come to Seleucia, whence embarking they come down to Cyprus, the Country of Barnabas, and begin to Preach the Gospel at Salanus, Acts 13.1, 2, 3. In traversing the Isle they arrive at Paphos, where Sergius Paulus the Pro-Consul had his residence, who desired to hear them; but a False Prophet, a Jew, named Barjesu, and surnamed Elymas, that is, Magician or Enchanter, endeavour'd to hinder him. Paul who now leaves the name of Saul, whether in remembrance of the Conversion of the Pro-Consul, or for the sound sake of his Name, by the change of the first Letter to the Greek and Latin Pronunciation, vigorously opposes this Impostor, and denounces to him a sud∣den Blindness, wherewith he was immediately
struck, which occasioned the Pro-Consul's Conversion, Acts 13.6, &c. Departing from Cyprus they come to Perga of Pamphilia, where John, surnamed Mark, leaves them to return to Jerusalem, Acts 13.13. From Perga they came to Antioch of Pisidia, where being entered into the Synagogue on the Sab∣bath-day, they are desired after the Reading of the Law and the Prophets, to preach to the People; which Paul did by a long and grave discourse. The Gentiles at their go∣ing out, entreat them to Preach the same things the next Sabbath-day; in which al∣most the whole Town assembled to hear the Word of GOD. The Jews endeavour to con∣tradict them; but they declare that on their refusal, by which they made themselves un∣worthy of Eternal Life, they would hence∣forward address themselves to the Gentiles, who receiv'd this News with great Joy, and as many of them as believed were ordained to Eternal Life. Yet the Jews having gain'd some of their bigotted Proselytes, they stirr'd up a Persecution against these two faithful Mi∣nisters of Jesus Christ, who having shak'd the Dust of their Feet against their Persecutors, and left their Disciples much comforted, they past to Iconium, a City of Lycaonia, Acts 13.14, &c. Being enter'd there in the Synagogue, they spake with such efficacy, that several, as well Jews as Greeks, believed in the Lord. They made a considerable stay here, and sig∣naliz'd themselves by several Miracles. On this occasion two Parties are formed in the Town, one for them, and another for the Jews: But on the Point, when those latter, (strengthened by the most powerful) design'd to mischief them, they fled to Lystra and Derbe, and the Quarters thereabouts, where they Preach the Gospel, Acts 14.1, &c. It's thought then was brought over to Christ S. Thecla, an Ironean Virgin, very famous at that time in the Church, tho the Acts which bore her Name are held for Apocryphal. At Lystra, a man Lame from his Birth, having been miraculously cured by them, the people of the place take them for Gods, calling Bar∣nabas, Jupiter, and Paul, Mercury, because he spake most, and would needs sacrifice to them, which they refuse with the greatest aversion, beseeching them to turn from these vain Idols to the living GOD. But certain obstinate Jews, which came from Antioch and Iconia to oppose them, stirr'd up the Populacy against them, who begin now to fling Stones at them; and drew Paul out of the Town as dead, yet being environ'd by the Disciples he comes to himself, rises up and enters again into the Town, Acts 14.8, &c. Those who refer the date of the 2d of the Corinthians to the 4th of Nero, pretend that in this year, and perhaps in this place, hapned the Ravishment of Paul up into the Third Heaven, which was 14 years before, as he declares it, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4. From Lystra they come to Derbe, where having instructed several, they returned back to Lystra, Iconia, and Antioch of Pisidia, esta∣blishing in all the Churches Governours and Pastors. Passing thro Pamphilia, they Preach at Perga, descend to Attalia, and thence Em∣bark for Antioch, where they relate what GOD had done by them in the Calling of the Gentiles, and tarry there a good while, Acts 14.20, &c. Whilst they were here Anno 49. some of the Circumcision, who yet in some sort had received the Gospel, came from Jerusalem; St Paul calls them false Brethren, who thrust themselves into the Church to invade the Li∣berty of it, Gal. 2.4. They had been of the Sect of the Pharisees, and 'tis thought they were of the Party of Ebion and Cerinthus, famous Hereticks, and who may be said to be the Patriarchs of the Photinians, Chiliasts, Pelagians, and Semi-Jews. Some of the An∣cients affirm, That Cerinthus himself was of this party; these would needs oblige the Con∣verted Gentiles to be Circumcised, and to ob∣serve all the Ordinances of the Law; where∣unto Paul and Barnabas vigorously opposed themselves; and because they strengthen∣ed themselves under the pretended Authority of the Apostles, and the Mother Church of Jerusalem, the Brethren of Antioch depute Paul and Barnabas, having also Titus with them, Gal. 2.1. at whose Arrival the Synod was convocated, the Question debated, and decided in favour of the Christian Liberty; those who had begun and maintained this Doctrine at Antioch, disown'd; and the Faith∣ful Gentiles only obliged to abstain from Blood and things Strangled, and those pollu∣ted with Idolatry and Uncleanness. Peter here declares, That GOD had used his Mini∣stry to begin the Vocation of the Gentiles, James, who precides over the Assembly, makes the Conclusion; the Synodal Letters, which contain an honourable Testimony of Paul and Barnabas are put into the hands of Judas nam'd
otherwise Barsabas, and of Silas, who accom∣panied the 2 others in their return to Antioch, where they were well received; and Judas honourably dismist, to return into Judea; Silas staid at Antioch, Acts 15.1, &c. This hapned according to the common Opinion, 17 years after the Conversion of Paul, as they gather from Gal. 1.18. and 2.1, &c. But we had rather, that we may not too much differ from the Calcuation of others, understand 14 years of the 2d Chapter since his Conversion, and not since the first Journy he made to Jerusalem after that of Damascus and Arabia; in which Case we must assign the Synod of Jerusalem to the 50th year of our Lord, which was the 10th of Claudius and the 8th after the Collection of the Church of Antioch, carried by Paul and Barnabas into Judea. And tho' after their first going into Cyprus and other places, to which there can no less time be allow'd than 2 years, they were return'd to Antioch; there's great like∣lyhood Paul did not sojourn there so con∣stantly, but that he now and then visited other places, which were not far distant, to advance the Gospel; to which we may refer what he recites of the propagation of the Gospel by his Ministry as far as Illyrium, Rom. 15.19, 20. and one part of the Per∣secutions, Accidents, and Sufferings, to which he had to that time been exposed, and which he summarily recites, 2 Cor. 11.23, &c. The Decease of the Holy Virgin is referr'd to this Time; but according to this Reckoning she must be older than 15 Years when our Saviour was Conceiv'd, or less than 63 when she Died. There's also great probability, that S. Peter being return'd to Jerusalem, after the Death of Herod, there found John, surnamed Mark, who at Pamphilia had left Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13.13. and that he took him with him to go towards the Jews of the Dispersion, who were in Chaldea, and under the Empire of the Parthians, to whom he directed from Babylon his first Epistle, saluting them also in Mark's Name, 1 Pet. 5.13. and that he was lately returned from this Journy in the time of the Synod. In this Council or Assembly, the other Apo∣stles, amongst which James, Cephas, and John were look'd on as Pillars, acknowledg'd that the Preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles was especially committed to Paul, who had met with hitherto great success; as to Peter, that of the Circumcision; and gave to him, and to Barnabas, the Right hand of Fellow∣ship, reserving to themselves the Ministry of the Circumcision; and agreeing that they should continue to go amongst the Gentiles, Gal. 2.7, 8, 9. Some time after the holding of this Assem∣bly and perhaps in the year 51, Peter him∣self comes to Antioch; and this is the only Journy which we find in Scripture he made; at first he eat and drank familiarly both with Jews and Gentiles; but some Brethren amongst the Jews, coming from the part of James, he began to estrange himself from the Gen∣tiles, and even Barnabas suffered himself to be carried away by this Dissimulation, which Paul not brooking, he freely reprehends Peter for it, and withstands him to the Face, Gal. 2.11, &c. After this Paul and Barna∣bas design to Visit all the Churches which they had planted in their former Voyage; but Barnabas desiring that John, surnam'd Mark, who apparently came from Antioch with Pe∣ter, might be with them; and Paul not ap∣proving it, because he had forsaken them before in Pamphilia; this Dissension pro∣duced so much sharpness as made them part. Barnabas going into Cyprus with John, sur∣nam'd Mark, and Paul being accompanied with Silas, traversed Syria and Cilicia, Acts 15.36, &c. Coming to Derbe and Lystra, they there found a young Disciple, named Timothy, whose Father was a Greek; but whom Lois his Grandmother, and Eunice his Mother, Jewish Women, and yet of the Faithful, Con∣verted in the former Voyage of Paul and Bar∣nabas, had carefully instructed in Piety, and in the Holy Scriptures. Paul resolving to take him with him, first Circumcis'd him, to ac∣commodate himself to the weakness of the Jews, and to gain them more easily, Acts 16.1, &c. 2 Tim. 1.5. and 3.15. In passing thro the Towns, he and his, great∣ly recommended the Ordinance of the Apostles at Jerusalem, touching Christian Liberty, Acts 16.4, 5. Having travers'd Phrygia and Galatia, the Holy Spirit forbids them to Preach the Gospel in Asia; and being come into Mysia, they are also hindred from passing over into Bithy∣nia; and therefore they go down to Troas, where Paul is oblig'd by a Vision in the Night to go into Macedonia, Acts 16.6, &c. There is great probability that S. Luke, who wrote the Book of the Acts, was one of
Paul's companions to Troas, because that from that time, he describes almost the whole Se∣quel of this Voyage in the first Person and in the Plural. Thus then the Apostle, and those of his Company, to come into Macedonia, pass by Samothracia, arriving from thence to Neapolis, situated in the Confines of Thrace and Macedonia; and from thence to Philippi, which was inhabited by a Roman Colony, and there remain'd some days, Acts 16.10, 11, 12. On the Sabbath-day they go out of the Town to a place near the River, where the Jews were wont to meet to Pray; There they found devout Women, to whom they make known the Gospel; amongst whom was Lydia, a Seller of Purple in Thyatira, who believes and is Baptized, with all her Family, and entertains the Apostle with the rest of his Company, Acts 16.13, &c. Com∣ing from Prayers, a Servant Maid, who had a Prohecying Spirit, follow'd them, crying (and continuing so to do for several days) That they were the Servants of the most High GOD, and the Proclaimers of his Salvation, Paul being wearied with her, Commands the Spirit to come out of her; The Masters of this Servant (who drew great Gain from her Divinations) enraged at the ceasing of their Profit, drew Paul and Silas before the Magi∣strate, and accuse them of publishing things prejudicial to the Roman Liberty, and even animate the Populacy against them. The Magistrates having Scourg'd them, confine them to Prison, and charge the Goaler to look strictly after them; who put them into a deep Dungeon: At Midnight (for their mu∣tual Consolation) they sing with a loud Voice the Praises of GOD; and at the same instant by a great Earthquake, the Foundations of the Prison Shook, and all the Doors fly open. The Goaler thinking the Prisoners had escap'd, would have run himself on his own Sword, but Paul hinders him, assuring him they were all there; having gotten a Light he casts himself at their Feet, is instructed in the Gospel; he washes their Wounds, is Bap∣tiz'd, and all his Houshold with him, and en∣tertains them at his Table with great Joy. In the Morning he is ordered by the Magistrates to let them go. But they complain, that being Roman Citizens, they had been Scourged, without any Trial or Form of Law; and therefore the Magistrates come themselves with Excuses to set them at Liberty, and to entreat them to depart the Town, which they did, after they had visited Lydia, and comfort∣ed the Brethren, Acts 16.16, &c. Departing from Philippi, they pass thro Amphipolis and Apollonia, and arrive at Thessalo∣nica, where there was a Synagogue; and Paul being entred there for 3 Sabbath-days together, disputes with the Jews out of the Scripture, with such success, that some of them believed, and a great multitude of well dispos'd Greeks, and some Women of Quality embraced the Gospel, Acts 17. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Thess. 2.2. Paul continuing his abode at Thessalonica, foretels the Brethren of the Revolt of Anti∣christ, 2 Thess. 2.5. and was assisted more than once by those of Philippi, with such Ne∣cessaries as he wanted, Phil. 4.16. But the Unbelieving Jews set the People into an Up∣roar against him, and the rest of his Com∣panions; they break violently into Jason's House, where they Lodged, and not finding them, they haled Jason and some others of the Brethren with him before the Magistrate, charging them with divers Crimes; and to render them the more Criminal, alledg'd they Preached up another King than Caesar; yet the Magistrates release Jason and the rest under Security. After which the Brethren make Paul and Silas depart by Night to Beraea; where being arriv'd they enter into the Syna∣gogue, and find the Jews there of a more gene∣rous Temper than those of Thessalonica, care∣fully comparing what they declared to them, with the Holy Scriptures. But the Jews of Thes∣salonica having heard of this success, they come to Beraea, and stir up the People here also, Acts 17.5, &c. Then the Brethren of Beraea took care of Paul, and made him be conducted to Athens, where whilst he expected Silas and Timotheus, he was grieved to see the City so full of Idolatry: He Disputed in the Syna∣gogues with the Jews and Zealous People, and in the publick place with those he found there. He is reputed by the Stoicks and Epi∣cureans, for a Babbler, and Preacher of strange Gods. Being drawn into the Areopage, he takes occasion from an Altar, which he per∣ceiv'd Inscrib'd, To the Unknown GOD, to instruct them in the Nature of the True GOD, and of his Providence, of the Resurrection and last Judgment. His Discourse was not without fruit; for Denis the Areopagite, and a Woman named Damaris (whom some think to have been his Wife) and some others be∣lieved in the Lord, Acts 17.14, &c. It's
thought that Denis, the Areopagite, having observed in Egypt, where he then was, the prodigious Eclipse of the Sun, at our LORD's Passion, said, Either that the Author of Na∣ture suffer'd, or that 'twas about being de∣stroyed. All Learned Men are now agreed, that the Works which have been so long at∣tributed to him are none of his, having been writ 500 years after him. Silas and Timotheus arrived at Athens, are sent by the Apostle into Macedonia, there to comfort and strengthen the Brethren. He himself being not able to go, as he would have willingly done, Acts 18.5. 1 Thess. 2.17, 18, & 3.1, 2. But leaves Athens, Anno 53, and comes to Corinth, where these two return to him from Macedonia; and where he finds Aquilla the Jew, and Priscilla his Wife, lately came from Italy; the Emperor Cladius having com∣manded all the Jews to depart from Rome, for the Troubles they every day caused on occa∣sion of the Christian Doctrine, which Sueto∣nius has remarked without well under∣standing it; and Paul joyned himself to these two as being of the same Trade, which was to make Tents, and fail'd not on the Sabbath-days, to perswade as well Jews as Greeks, to embrace the Christian Faith, Acts 18.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. S. Paul having protested to the Jews of Corinth, that he would turn himself to the Gentiles, enters into the House of Jusus, who lived near the Synagogue. He Baptizes the Family of Stephanus, who was the First-fruits of Achaia, Crispus the Chief of the Syna∣gogue and his Family, and brings over several Corinthians to the Faith, Acts 18.6, &c. 1 Cor. 1.14, 16. and 16.15. The LORD encourages this Apostles by a Vision, after which he remains at Corinth 18 Months, Acts 18.9, &c. with Silvanus, or Silas and Timotheus, 2 Cor. 1.19. it being thence he wrote in the name of those 3, his 2 Epistles to the Thessalo∣nians; although some think, that the second was writ from Rome. During Paul's stay at Corinth, he is ac∣cused by the Jews before Gallio, Seneca's Bro∣ther, who was Pro-Consul of Achaia. Gallio refuses to hear them, and drives them away from the Bar; and the Greeks (altho Pagans) because Paul perhaps Lodged at one of their Nation, fell a beating of Sosthenes, the chief of the Synagogue, in hatred of the Jews, the Pro-Consul taking no notice of it, Acts 18.12, &c. and it seems that this Sosthenes, who impleaded Paul before Gallio, either is not the same mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.1. or that since he was changed from a Wolf into a Lamb, and Converted to Jesus Christ. This hapned Anno 54. The Apostle after this leaves Corinth, having first caused his Head to be Shaved at Cen∣chrea, (which was the Port of the Town) on occasion of a Vow, and to shew the Jews, he still retained a respect for the Ceremonies of his Nation, and Embarks for Syria, being accompanied by Aquila and Priscilla: Arri∣ved at Ephesus, where he communicates in the Synagogues with the Jews, who desire him to tarry longer with them, which he refuses on the account of the necessity there was of his being at Jerusalem at the Festival; yet promising to return to them, Aquila and Priscilla tarry at Ephesus. Paul Embarks for Cesarea, whence he goes to Jerusalem, and comes down from thence to Antioch. Some time after he parts thence for Phrygia and Galatia, where he is well received, Acts 18.18, &c. and Gal. 4.14. Tho the Galatians (a while after) suffer themselves to be seduced by those who asserted Justification by Works, and the observation of Legal Ceremonies; on notice of which, he better informs them by Writing, Gal. 1.6, 7. rather from Ephesus, when he was about parting thence, than from Rome, as it's commmonly held. Apollos, an Alexandrian Jew, a Man elo∣quent and very able in the Scriptures, whom some have impertinently confounded with Philo, came in the mean time to Ephesus, being in some measure instructed in the way of the LORD; and Aquila and Priscilla in∣structed him better. He afterwards passes into Achaia, where he is recommended by the Bre∣thren, and there employs his Talent to good purpose, Acts 18.24, &c. About the time when Paul parted from Co∣rinth, the Emperor Claudius died, having Reigned 13 Years, 8 Months, and some days, and left the Empire to Nero, who was the first Persecutor of the Christians. Anno 55, 56, 57. When Apollos was at Corinth, Paul arrives at Ephesus, he lays his Hands on 12 Disciples, who as yet knew no other than the Baptism of St John. He con∣tinues for 3 Months together to teach in the Synagogues; but at length he leaves it, by reason of the contradiction and obstinacy of the Jews, and teaches for 2 years in the School
of one Tyrannus, signalizing himself by divers Miracles. He confirms his Doctrine, by what hapned to 7 Jews the Sons of Sceva, of the Sacerdotal Order, who taking on them to be Exorcists, and mixing in their Superstition the Name of Jesus, whom Paul Preached, were very ill handled by the Evil Spirit. Several, who were addicted to curious and unlawful Arts, which were much used at Ephesus, were Converted to Christ, and burnt their Books. Demetrius and his Work-men, seeing their Trade to decay, stir up the Rabble against the Apostle, hale Gaius and Aristarchus (Mace∣donians) into the Theatre, to exact an account of them, for the Contempt of their Goddess, introduced by the Christian Doctrine. Paul would have presented himself to the People, but is with-held by certain Priests of Asia, who having embraced the Faith, retained yet the Names of Chief of Asia, and presided in the Publick Games, when they could do it with a safe Conscience. The Jews make use of this occasion, to Criminate the Apostle, driving to the Theatre, Alexander the Copper-Smith. This popular Commotion is appeased by the Prudence of the Town-Clerk; by which means Paul quietly carried near 3 years at Ephesus, and circumjacent Places, Acts Chap. 19. and 20.31. Stephanus, Fortunatus, and Apollos, come from Corinth to Ephesus, there to visit the Apostles; and by them he wrote to the Corinthians in his Name, and of Sosthenes his first Epistle. Apollos not being willing to return so soon with them, 1 Cor. 1.1. and 16.12, 15, &c. About this time Aquila and Priscilla withdrew to Rome, the Edict of Claudius, which had banisht them thence, expiring with him, Rom. 16.3, 4. Paul remaining still in Asia, projected to pass thro Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, and thence to Rome, and had sent before Timotheus and Erastus, not intending to leave Ephesus till Pentecost, Acts 19.21, 22. Rom. 1.13. 1 Cor. 15. But the Tumults excited by Demetrius, made him depart sooner, Acts 20. Anno 58. From Ephesus he comes to Troas, where he does not fix, being troubled he did not there find Titus, 2 Cor. 2.12, 13. and seers directly towards Macedonia, where he remains 3 Months exhorting the Macedonians to be ready with their Collections for Jeru∣salem, by the Example of Achaia, whose Charity Money was ready a year ago, 2 Cor. 8.1, &c. and 9.2. It seems that then he wrote his 1st Epistle to Timothy, whom in parting he had left at Ephesus, to Govern the Church there, Ephes. 1.3. But Timothy comes imme∣diately after to him in Macedonia, where he had not determined any thing about his abode there. Titus also being come near to him in Macedonia, and brought him good News from Corinth, he writes from Philippi his 2d Epistle in his Name and that of Timothy, and charTitus and another with it, who is thought to have been St Luke the Evangelist, with order to take care the Collections which were re∣commended above a year ago, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. might be ready for him at his arrival, 2 Cor. 7.5, &c. and 8.16, &c. and 9.3, 4, 5. Anno 59. After some stay in Macedonia, he comes into Greece and Corinth, where he re∣mains 3 Months, and whence he writes (by the Hand of Tertius) his Epistles to the Romans, and sends it by Phaebe, a Deaconess of the Church of Cenchrea, on the point of carrying to Jerusalem the Collections made for the Saints, Rom. 15.25, 26. and 16.1, 2, 21, 22, 23. Acts 20.2, 23. Then also Paul wrote his Epistle to Titus from Nicapolis, in which he obliges him to come to him, Titus 3.12. The Apostle had left him in Crete, to settle Pastors in every Town; after that, going from Macedonia into Greece by the Aegean Sea, he had Landed in Crete or Candia, and there laid the Founda∣tions of Christianity. There, to avoid the Ambushes of the Jews, had he taken the way of Syria; he determines to take that of Ma∣cedonia, and sends Sopater, (who is called Sosi∣pater, Rom. 6.21.) the Beraean, Aristarchus, and Secundus (Thessalonians) Gaius, Timotheus, Tychicus, and Trophimus, to stay for him at Troas; and weighing Anchor at Philippi (with the rest of his Company) after the Feast of Easter, he comes to them 5 days after, and there remained 7. On Sunday all the Faithful being Assembled to celebrate the Lord's Sup∣per, and Paul Preaching till Midnight, a young man named Eutychus, sitting in a Window and o're-taken with Sleep, falls dead from the 3d Story; but the Apostle having embraced him raises him up alive. From Troas he Journied to Assos by Land, and the rest of his Company by Water; where having met, they come to Metelin; where parting they found themselves the next morning in sight of Chios, and the day following touching at Samos, they stopt at Trogyllum, and arrived the next day at Miletum, which was not far from Ephesus. Paul hastning to be at Jerusalem at Pentecost, sends for the Bishops and Pastors of the Church of Ephesus to come to Miletum, to
whom he represents the integrity of his Car∣riage, and his preparedness for the Afflictions which attended him, and seriously exhorts them to acquit themselves well of their Duty; and his Discourse being ended, he is conducted by all of them to the Ship, Acts 20.3, &c. not without Disconsolating them, by telling them, They would no more see his Face, as he then thought; tho GOD gave him an opportunity of Visiting them again, after his first Impri∣sonment at Rome. Parting from Miletum, they steer dirictly to Coos, the next day to Rhodes and afterwards to Patara; where they Embark on a Vessel which was bound for Phoenicia. Thus leaving Cyprus on the left, and making towards Syria they arrive at Tyre, where they tarried 7 days, and found there Disciples, who would have dissuaded Paul from going to Jerusalem, fore∣seeing by the Spirit the Persecutions which he was to undergo. At Tyre they Embark'd, for Ptolemais, where they tarried one day with the Brethren, Acts 21.1, &c. From Ptolemais they come to Caesarea, and Lodge at Philip the Evangelist, who had been one of the 7 Deacons, and whose 4 Daughters were enlightned with the Spirit of Prophecy. Agabus foretold Paul of his Bonds, who could not be diverted from going to Jerusalem, Acts 21.8, &c. Having abode several days at Caesarea, they part thence for Jerusalem, carrying with them an ancient Disciple, a Cyprian named Mnason, at whose house Paul was to Lodge. They are kindly received by the Brethren at Jerusalem. The next day after their Arrival they Visit St James, and all the Elders of the Church are Assembled; to whom Paul represents the success of his Ministry a∣mong the Gentiles, and exhibits without doubt the Collections he brought for the poor of Judea. He is here advised to purify himself (according to the Law) with 4 other Chri∣stian Jews, who had made a Vow of a Naza∣rite, to refute the Calumny, as being a Deserter of the Law of Moses, and of bad Example to all the Jews, who also believed in Jesus Christ, to forsake it. But this Project little availed, tho Paul made use of it; for some unbeliev∣ing Jews being come from Asia to the Feast, having seen him in the Temple, where he had satisfied this Purification, cry out against him, as a declared Enemy of the Nation, the Law, and that Place. They also accuse him for pro∣phaning the Temple, by carrying Greeks into it, (for they had seen Trophimus in the Streets with him, and imagined he had introduced him therein) and having raised a great Tu∣mult, they endeavoured to kill him: But Claudius Lysias, the Collonel, who Commanded the Garrison, coming hereupon with his Sol∣diers, took him out of their hands, and causes him to be laid in Irons. And not being able to get any certain knowledge of the Matter, by reason of the Tumult, he orders him to be carried into the Castle called Antonia, where the Garrison lay, where the Crowd was so great, that the Soldiers were forced to carry him on their Shoulders up Sairs, where he desires leave to speak to the people. Lysias asks him, whe∣ther he was not the Egyptian, who some years before having gather'd (under the Title of a Prophet) about 4000 men, had seized on the Mount of Olives; for Felix the Governour had indeed defeated him; but as to his own person, he had escap'd without any bodies knowing what was become of him. See Joseph l. 2. c. 20. But Paul having declared himself a Jew, and born at Tarsus; obtain'd permission to speak, and offers his Apology in Hebrew, which pro∣cures him the greater silence, until he menti∣oned his being sent of GOD to the Gentiles; Then all all his Hearers cry out impetuously a∣gainst him, as unworthy to live, Acts 21.17, &c. and 22.1, &c. Lysias hereupon makes him re∣tire into the Castle, and orders him to be ex∣amined by Scourging; but the Apostle having represented to the Captain, That he was a Roman Citizen; Lysias respecting this privi∣ledg'd Quality, which he himself had bought so dear, made him be speedily unbound, and the day following he convocates the whole Senate of the Jews, to hear the Heads of his Accusation, Acts 22.23, &c. Annanias, who is thought to have been Depos'd, and to exercise the Office of Chief Priest only on this occasion, caused Paul to be struck without any Reason, which hindred not the Apostle from going on with his Defence, and by declaring himself a Pharisee, he set them all at variance with one another; which Lysias observing, took care of Paul, and carried him back into the Castle by the Soldiers, Acts 23.1, &c. The LORD streng∣thens this Apostle the Night following. The next morning more than 40 Zealots conspire to slay him; which Enterprize is discover'd by a young Lad, Paul's Sisters Son; and Lysias to hinder it, sends him the Night following with a good Guard to Cesarea, where resided Felix the Governour of the Province, who confined him in Herod's Palace, Acts 23.12, &c. Anno 60, 61.
Five Days after Ananias came to Caesarea, to implead Paul, thereunto joyning Com∣plaints against Lysias, who had taken him out of their Hand. The Apostle returns a par∣ticular Answer to every thing, and Felix refers to another opportunity the Judgment on this matter. Felix, some days after, makes Paul be brought before him, who strikes him with Ter∣rour by a pathetical discourse of Justice, Tem∣perance, and the future Judgment. He hopes to draw Money; but finding himself disap∣pointed, and constrain'd 2 years after to leave his Place to another, to gratify the Jews, he left the Apostle a Prisoner, Acts Chap. 24. Anno 62. To Felix, whose Government was very Insolent and Tyrannical, succeeds Portias Festus, about the same time as Nero put his Mother Agrippina to death, who (to hasten the promotion of her Unnatural Son) had poyson'd the Emperor Claudius, her Husband. 3 Days after Festus arrived at Caesarea he came to Jerusalem, where the High Priest and Chief of the Council renew'd their Accusation against the Apostle, and entreat Festus to send him to Jerusalem, intending to have him Murther'd by the way; but Festus excuses himself, and declares, he would return to Caesarea in few days, and that then some of them should ap∣pear to be heard in his presence there. Having tarried not above 10 days at Jerusalem, he returns to Caesarea, and the next Morning sits in the Judgment Seat; where having heard the Sum of what both Parties had to say; Festus (to gratify the Jews) demands of Paul, Whe∣ther he would go up to Jerusalem, to be Judged there before him? But the Apostle excuses him∣self, and appeals to Caesar, Acts 25.1, &c. Some days after, young Agrippa and his Si∣ster Bernice came to Caesarea, to salute Festus, and congratulate his coming into those Parts. Festus speaks to them about his Prisoner, and what had hapned concerning him since he came to his Government; and knowing not what he would write to Caesar on Paul's Ap∣peal, is very willing to have the Advice of Agrippa, who having heard the Apostle reason very earnestly out of the Scriptures, tho Festus made a Mock at all, acknowledges to the Pri∣soner, That he had almost perswaded him to be∣come a Christian; and declares to the Gover∣nour, That he might have been released as Inno∣cent, had he not appealed to Caesar, Acts 25.13, &c. and 26.1, &c. In fine, Festus being resolved to send Paul to Rome, with other Prisoners, under the Guard of an Officer named Julius, he was Embarkt on an Adramytten Ship, which went into Asia, accompanied by Timotheus, St Luke, and Ari∣starchus. Touching the next morning at Sidon, Julius permitted the Apostle to go to his Friends to be supplied by them with what he wanted. The Vessel arriving at Myra, a Town of Lycia, they found another there of Alexan∣dria bound for Italy, wherein Julius embarkt himself and his Prisoners. Paul would have advised them to have put in at Fair Havens, and there have Winter'd; because already the Fast of the Month of Tisri was past, that is, the Month of October was come, and the time of Navigation near spent: But the Ad∣vice of the Master of the Ship, to which Julius gave a greater adherence, than to that of the Apostle, prevailed. Not long after an horrible Tempest, and which continued for several days, meets with the Ship; yet the Apostle exhorts as well the Sea-men as Passengers, to take Courage, GOD having told him that Night, by an Angel, That he should stand before Cae∣sar, and that in consideration of him no Body should perish in the Ship. When the Vessel was ready to split, the Sea-men would have saved themselves in the Long Boat; but by the Counsel of Paul they are hindred. The Sol∣diers would have the Prisoners killed, but Julius (on Paul's account) diverted them from that purpose; and the Vessel being wrecked, each man saves himself as he could, some by Swimming, and others on pieces of Planks; and thus all come safe to Land, Acts 27.1, &c. They found it was the Isle of Malta, whose Inhabitants used them very Courteously. And a Viper fastning on Paul's hand, as he gathered up Sticks to throw on the Fire, the Islanders believed he must presently die upon it, judging him to be a Murtherer, whom Divine Ven∣geance pursued to Land; but seeing he had shak'd the Animal into the Fire without any hurt, they change both Thought and Language, and will have him now to be a God. Here Paul cured the Father of Publius, who was sick of a Fever, and pain in the Bowels; and also of those who were sick in the Island. Whence (after 3 Months) Julius Embarks his People in a Ship of Alexandria called Castor and Pollux: The first place they cast Anchor was at Syracuse, where the Passengers refresh'd themselves for 3 days; at the end of which they set forth for Rhegium, and two days after to Puzziolum. And after that Julius had yield∣ed to the Requests of some of the Brethren,
who were there, that Paul should tarry 7 Days with them, they arriv'd at Rome, Acts 28.1, &c. Whilst these things hapned to S. Paul, S. Mark is thought to have died at Alexandria in the 8th year of Nero. Those who will have him to have wrote his Gospel at Rome, want Foundation: There is greater probability he wrote it whilst he accompanied the Apostle in Chaldea, and that since it was sent or left by him at Alexandria, by reason of the great number of Jews which there remained, and amongst which he made a great progress. But according to this reckoning, either we must distinguish Mark the Evangelist, that is, John surnamed Mark, from another Mark the Cousin of Barnabas, Coloss. 4.10. whom S. Paul (in 2 Tim. 4.10.) recommends to his Disciple to bring along with him to Rome, as being very useful to him in the Ministry; or if he be the same, it must be acknowledged, that those who make him die so soon, have not taken exact Measures. Moreover, whilst Festus was waver∣ing about what he should do with the Apostle, Nero having set Rome on Fire, laid the Crime on the poor Christians, whom he caused to be cloathed in the Skins of Wild Beasts, and thus exposed them to ravenous Lions and Bears, making it a sport of putting them to all cruel Tortures. And this was the first of the 10 Per∣secutions, which the Roman Emperors raised against the Christians. It was, as described by Tacitus, very sharp and fierce, but did not last long; for the Storm was in a manner over when Paul arrived at Rome. Then also James the Lesser, under the Authority of Ananias the High Priest and Sadducee, suffered Martyrdom, being thrown down from a Pinnacle and Ston'd. We have a Catholick Epistle of his amongst those of the New Testament; but it's not precisely known in what time he Wrote. Now to return to Paul: The Brethren at Rome understanding he was at Puzzoli, came out to meet him as far as the Market of Ap∣pius; and Julius having delivered up the Pri∣soners at Rome into the hands of the Captain of the Guards, Paul had leave to dwell apart by himself with a Souldier, who was his Keeper. 3 Days after he sends for the Chief Persons of the Nation, to whom he shews his Imprison∣ment, and his Innocency. They tell him, They had received no Information concerning him from Judea, and desire to hear from himself an account of his Sentiments, observing that the Chri∣stian Religion was every where spoken against. He (on the Day appointed) declared to them the Kingdom of GOD, with different success, and a Protestation, That the Salvation which they refused, should be offered to the Gentiles. Thus Paul remained 2 whole years in his own House, receiving all that would Hear him, and Preaching Christ at full liberty, Acts 28.15, &c. Here S. Luke ends his Relation, which he inscribes The Acts of the Apostles, which ap∣parently he wrote at Rome, whilst the Apostle Paul was Prisoner there. He had written his Gospel long before, to oppose the Fabulous Re∣lations of False Teachers, by which they en∣deavoured to overthrow the Doctrine taught by our Saviours true Apostles. It's not known who was the Theophilus, to whom he Addresses both these Relations; but it seems, as to himself, he was to Paul what Mark was to Peter, for the Evangelical History; and he had been also with Coleophas (in the Way of Emaus) an Eye-witness of our Saviour's Resurrection, Luke 24.13, &c. It's of him and his Gospel that Peter speaks, 2 Cor. 3.18, 19. and whom he terms a Physi∣cian, Coloss. 4.14. being far from the Profession of a Painter, attributed to him by the Vulgar, an Employment which in the Birth of Chri∣stianity was equally abominable and unlawful, both to Jews and Christians. Whilst Paul is a Prisoner at Rome, he writes to the Philippians by Epaphroditus, whom they had sent to Visit him and assist him, and who employing himself with the Apostle in the Ministry of the Gospel, was in danger of his Life by a great Sickness, in the very time when the Bonds of Paul, famous in Nero's Palace, had brought over several of his Hous∣hold to the knowledge of Christ, Phil. 1.12, 13, and 2.19, &c. and 4.10, &c. But he had Writ a while before from the same place to the Colossians, and to Philemon, by Onesi∣mus, a Fugitive Servant of his, who at Rome was Converted to the Faith by the Ministry of Paul, who sent him back to his Master with a Letter, and entrusted him also (with Tychi∣cus) with an Epistle to the Colossians, Coloss. 4.7, 8. I say, That the Epistle to Philemon and the Colossians, preceded that of the Phi∣lippians, seeing that Epaphroditus was the Bearer of this, whereas he was then at Rome, and a Prisoner, if he be the same as Epaphras; and several think, when the 2 others were writ∣ten; Coloss. 4.12. Philem. ver. 23. these 3 Epistles, to the Philippians, Colossians, and to Philemon, are written in the name of Paul and Timothy, who was then at Rome, as a small time after the Epistle to the Hebrews
was written to the same place, in which he hoped to see them shortly, Heb. 13.23, 24. Not long after the City of Laodicea, the Church of which was concerned in the Epistle to the Colossians, was overthrown by an Earth∣quake; but is seems that since it arose in some sort from its fall, seeing the Church of Laodicea is mentioned among the 7 Churches of Asia, Rev. 1.11. Now there's great likelyhood that S. Paul, after he had been detain'd Prisoner at Rome 2 years, was releast about the 10th of Nero, which concurred with the 64th of our Lord; on the failure of his Accusers appearance be∣fore the Emperor, and under an Obligation to be in such a place as should be appointed at a time. Some pretend, that during this time, he accomplished the Design which he had of a long time of passing into Spain, Rom. 15.24, 28. At least may be gathered out of his Epistles written from Rome, that he had great hopes of returning again into Macedo∣nia, Asia and Greece, Philip. 1.25. & 2.24. Yea, towards the Hebrews, Heb. 13, 23.24. That he orders Philemon, when he writes to him in the name of Timothy, and his own, by Onesimus and Tychicus; to prepare him a Lodging, Philem. ver. 22. That Timothy, who had accompanied him his whole Voyage and Bonds at Rome, and long dwelt with him, had been sent by him to Macedonia, during his first Imprisonment, and after the Epistles writ∣ten to the Phillippians, to the Clossians, and to Philemon, which bear both his Name and that of Timothy. That Timothy was not then at Rome, when Paul wrote his Epistle to the Hebrews, it being probable that parting from Rome, he was somewhere detained at the be∣ginning of his Voyage to Macedonia and Greece, and that Paul (in receiving the News of his Relaxation, Heb. 13.23, 24.) expected he would have returned to him, tho being at li∣berty he did not do it, but continued his way; And thus the Apostle being at length releas'd, tho the manner be unknown, parted also from Rome, and at least following Timothy; Timo∣thy took a turn into the East, according to his promise and hopes he had conceiv'd; seeing that in the 2d of Timothy writ from Rome, to∣wards the end of his days, and when he pre∣par'd himself for Martyrdom, he orders Timo∣thy to return speedily towards him, and to bring Mark with him; informing him, that Erastus, who probably had given some hope of accompanying him in this second Voyage of Rome, yet remained at Corinth, and was constrain'd to leave Trophimus sick at Miletum, 2 Tim. 4.11, 13, 20. which cannot be un∣derstood of a 2d Voyage of Paul to Rome, see∣ing that having had Timothy with him during the first, he must needs know, that Erastus was not of the Company, and Trophimus was stopt by Sickness at Miletum, and hindred to pass further. So when Paul (from his first Imprisonment) wrote to the Colossians, he says, that Mark was with him, Coloss. 4.10. Phi∣lem. ver. 24. But since he ordered Timothy to bring him to him, 2 Tim. 4.11. when he wrote this 2d Epistle to Timothy, Demas was gone to Thessalonica, Crescens into Galatia, and not amongst the Gauls, as some have thought, Titus into Dalmatia, and he had only Luke with him, 2 Tim. 4.10. But when he wrote to the Colossians and to Philemon, he had with him Luke and Demas, Coloss. 4.14. and Philem. ver 24. In this last Epistle to Timothy, he writes as being ready to suffer Martyrdom, and at the point of death, 2 Tim. 4.6, 7, 8. But in the other Epistle writ from Rome, he speaks, as hoping and assuring himself quickly to see those to whom they were directed: And as he salutes Timothy in the name of Eubulus, Pru∣dens, Linus, and Claudia, of whom he had made no mention in his Epistles to the Phi∣lippians, Colossians, and to Philemon; so he salutes the Colossians, and Philemon in the name of Aristarchus, Mark the Cousin of Barnabas, and of Jesus surnam'd the Just, as of his Fellows in the Ministerial Labors at Rome, of whom he makes no mention to Timothy; but seeing he therein salutes Priscilla and Aquila, and the Family of Onesiphorus, who was an Asiatick, there's great likelyhood, that the first who were at Rome when Paul came there the first time, had also went out thence the 2d time with him, and return'd to dwell in Asia; or in Achaia. This diversity of Persons, joyned to the Circumstances already mentioned suffici∣ently verifies, that the Scene was changed, and that we must imagine a considerable Interval of Time between the Imprisonment of Paul at Rome, and the 2d, under which was writ the 2d Epistle to Timothy. We cannot say where Timothy Sojourn'd, when Paul wrote to him his 2d Epistle, out of his 2d Bonds; and for what Reason he did not return to Rome with him, nor by whom it was sent to him, no more than we know how, whence, or on what occasion, the Apostle re∣turns to his Prison; but it's certain, that from
the same Prison, and a little before he had writ his 2d Epistle to Timothy, which is the last of all his Epistles, he wrote his Epistle to the Ephesians, and sent it them by Tychicus, which manifestly appears from what we read Ephes. 6.21. and 2 Tim 4.12. And certainly had the Epistle to the Ephesians been carried by Tychicus, at the same time he carried with Onesimus the Epistle to the Colossians, the Apo∣stle would as well have joyn'd the Name of Timothy with his, as well in that, as in this, were they sent away from Rome together at the same time. It's certain, that then Accu∣sers presented themselves against Paul, who altho' he was forsaken by all his Acquaintance in his first defence, yet was he so assisted by GOD, that he boldly defended Christianity, and was not at that time Condemn'd. But by an In∣terlocutory Sentence sent to Prison, in which he couragiously expected the time of his Death, 2 Tim. 4.17, 18. Whilst Paul was either newly releas'd from his first Imprisonment, or return'd to his 2d, and therein detained, Peter wrote his 2d Epi∣stle, sensible of his approaching Death, 2 Pet. 1.14. and after almost all of Paul's were divulg'd amongst the Churches, 2 Pet. 3.15, 16. and especially that which was writ to the Hebrews, that there's great Conformity in the Matters which are treated of in them both. A while after was writ the Epistle of Jude whom the Evangelists call Lebbeus and Thad∣des, which is (as it were) an Epitomy of the 2d of Peter, and has great conformity with it. 'Tis the opinion of some, that Peter and Paul suffer'd Martyrdom in the same place, and at the same time; It's certain they both suffer'd Martyrdom, and that Peter was Cruci∣fied, according as our Saviour had foretold him, John 21.18. And it's also certain, that Paul suffer'd Martyrdom at Rome, where he so joyfully expected it; but if Peter underwent it at the same time, and in the same place, (as some are of Opinion) he must have come to Rome a little before the Death of Paul, and after he had writ all his Epistles, seeing that in all of them he makes no mention of Peter, altho he takes notice of several others of less Consideration and Authority than he amongst the Christians. However, because it might happen that since the last Epistle of Paul, writ to Timothy, and consequently since his first Heaing before Nero, which was favoura∣ble enough, and in which he had been deli∣vered from the Lions Mouth, 2 Tim. 4.17, 18. Peter might have come to Rome, we will not therefore contradict those who make them both Dye on the 29th of June, in the 12th Year of Nero, which concurr'd with the 66th of our Lord. Peter (as is said) having been Cruci∣fied with his Head downwards, and Paul Be∣headed. It being our design to contain our selves within the compass of the Holy History, we shall say nothing of what may be mentioned touching the other Apostles of our Lord, and the success of their Preaching in divers places of the World: and therefore to finish our Task, let's observe, That in the same time when Nero began to make Martyrs, whose Ashes and Blood were the Seed of the Church, the Jewish Nation had filled up the measures of their Iniquities, and hastned by its Confu∣sions, its entire and final ruin. The War had begun to grow hot since some years, between the Jews and Romans. Nero had sent Florus, (a wicked man) to succeed Albinus in the Government of Judea; who vexing, and in sundry manners oppressing the Jews, (prone enough of themselves to Sedition, and full of ill Humours), made them take the Bridle in their Teeth, and threw them into Despair. King Agrippa, a great Zealot in Judaism, did what he could to disswade them from taking up Arms; but scarcely was he gone from Jerusalem, but certain seditious persons, who called themselves Zealots, surprized the Castle of Massadas a strong place, and well provided, and therein kill all the Roman Garrison. Eleazer moreover the Son of the High Priest Ananias, Captain of the Temple, a factious and haughty person, perswades the Priests to offer no Sacrifices, but for the Jews, to the exclusion of those which were wont to be offered for the Emperor, and the Romans. The Chief of the Town considering whereto this tended, entreat Florus at Cesarea, and Agrippa, to send Forces speedily to stifle the Sedition in the Cradle. Florus, who desired no better, lets it increase; and the Troops which Agrippa sent, served only to form parties. They held with the chief persons the higher part of the Town, the Seditious possest the lowe Town and the Temple. 7 Days past between them in Skirmishes; but on occasion of a Feast, several Assassins or desperate People got into the Temple, and joyning with others, they burn Herods Palace and that of Agrippa, and the House of Ananias. Manahem the Son of Judas, a Galilean, Chief of these Ruffians, and who had Armed them at Mas∣sada, made himself Master of the Town,
having taken the Fort Antonia, and killed the Roman Garrison; but Eleazer Captain of the Temple, killed him in the very Temple, as he was there at Prayers; and having rout∣ed this Party, he re-takes Massada, and kills in cold Blood, on the Sabbath-day, the Roman Souldiers of several Garrisons, who had sur∣rendered on Terms of Composition. Florus returns the same to the Jews of Caesarea. And thus the Animosity sharpens on both sides, by the effusion of much Blood both in Judea and Syria. Cestius Gallus, Governor of Syria, Arms at this Report, takes and burns Joppa, Lyddia, and other Towns, marches towards Jerusalem, Blocks up the Seditious, who had marched out in the Field against him, and might have then by the favour of the People possest himself of the Town and Temple, had he prest the Siege, which he suddenly raised, and without any Reason, with great loss of his Men, and several Machines of War, which he left behind him in his hasty Retreat, and which served since during the Siege of Jerusalem, to the defence of the Town. At the hearing of this, Nero, who was in Achaia, commits to Ves∣pasian the Care of this War. Titus his Son brings him a great Reinforcement from Alexandria; and thus with an Army of 60000 Men, pierces into Galilee, Besieges, takes and burns Gadara and Jotapata; Tiberias does of it self surrender; Terichee having held out a Siege, is taken by force, and utterly destroyed. And whilst other Towns in Galilee and Palestin yield to the Conqueror, the Jews divide themselves into 2 Factions; the one being for War, and the others being as earnest for Peace. The Countries are filled with Robbers, who laden with Spoil taken from the Peaceable, come to Jerusalem, and fill it with Disorders, Discords, Violences, Murthers, and Blood. These Zealots, (for so did they call themselves) being besieged by the People in the Temple, call in the Idume∣ans to their assistance, who entring with 20000 Men into the City, make there a great Slaughter. Vespasian being moved by these Disorders, prepares himself for the Siege of Jerusalem, and removes all hindrances: Yet on the News of Nero's death, and that of Galba, who had succeeded him, he thinks fitting with Titus his Son to temporize a while, which gives the Jews leisure to take Breath. which they only used to their mutual Ruin. Otho, who had succeeded Galba, having been also killed, and Vitellus being entred into Italy to succeed them, the Troops of Vespasian salute him Emperor, and his Party having prevail'd at Cremona, and at Rome against Vitellus, who was killed, he Embarks at Alexandria, to go to Rome, and charges his Son Titus with the care of the War of Judea. The City of Jerusalem was full of Factions, which raged every day more violently against one another. Titus parts from Caesarea a while before Easter, and comes and sits down before the Town, which he attacks with great Vigor, hindring all persons from going out thence, and any thing to be carryed into it; the Plague and Famine did also there rage; that from the 14th of April, when the Siege began, were Buried or cast into Holes, above 600000 Persons, which had perished either thro Hunger or Sickness. In fine, the City being Attacked on all sides from the 5th of July, all was submitted to the Victorious, and burnt down to the ground; as to the Temple, on the 10th of August, tho Titus did what he could to preserve it; and as to the rest of the Town, the 8th of September, these Wretches being to be brought by no means to any Composition. There were made 97000 Prisoners, and 1100000 Per∣sons died during the Siege. John and Simon, Chief of the Factions, were found hid in the common Jakes; and 2000 others, who chose rather to kill one another, or dye with hun∣ger, than to surrender themselves. Several Prodigies had preceeded this Disaster; A Man for several years together had run about the Street, crying incessantly, Voice of the East, Voice of the West, Voice of the four Winds, Voice against Jerusalem, against the Temple, and against all the People; there being no∣thing that could hinder him, and crying (as he was wont) during the Siege on the Wall, Misery to the City, People, and Temple, he was struck with a Stone out of a Sling, and feeling himself mortally wounded, he added to his Cry these words, in expiring, Woe be also to me. A Comet in the form of a Sword glistered for a year together over the Town; of a Cow led to the Altar sprang a Lamb. A Year before the Siege in the Feast of Easter a great Light shined in the Temple and about the Altar, at 9 at Night, and continued for half an hour. The Eastern Gate of the Temple, which was of Brass, for the opening and shutting of which 20 Men were employ'd and required, was opened in
the Night of it self; Chariots and Armed Squadrons were seen to encounter in the midst of the Air, and dismal Voices were heard by Night in the Temple in the Feast of Pentecost, which said, Let's be gone hence. But the hardned Jews remained deaf and blind to all this, animated themselves to this War from a Prediction, that the Universal Em∣pire should be conferr'd on one which should arise about that time out of their Nation; which Josephus would have meant of Vespa∣sian, but which is rather to be expounded of Jesus Christ; whose Prophecies touching the desolation and everlasting Overthrow of their Temple and City, as they may be seen in Matt. 24.15, 16, &c. and those of Daniel, Cp. 9.27. had then their full Accomplishment: GOD having in the mean time provided by his Pro∣vidence for the safty of the Christian Church of Jerusalem, which was warned to depart thence a while before the beginning of the War, and to retire to Pella, where (during all these Commotions) she enjoy'd peace and safety, as is remark'd by Eusebius, lib. 2. Eccles. Hist. c. 5. The City was taken in the 2d year of Vespasian, which concurr'd with the 70th of our LORD, both the Father and the Son had solemn Tri∣umphs, and the Spoils of the Temple served for Ornaments to the Temple of Peace, built by Vespasian at Rome. It's said, That in Vespasian's 3d year, (An. 72.) Bartholomew suffered Martyr∣dom in Persia; and in the 4th year, Thomas in the Indies; and in the 5th, S. Luke at Patras in Achaia. Vespasian held the Empire about 12 years; Titus his Son 2 Years and 2 Months; and Do∣mitian his other Son (as wicked and vitious as his Brother Titus had been wise, gracious, and excellent in Virtue) 14 years, or there∣abouts. This Domitian was the Author of the second Persecution against the Christians. The Banishment of St John into the Isle of Patmos, in the Aegean Sea, is usually referr'd to the 9th year of his Reign (Anno 91) where he re∣ceiv'd and wrote his Revelation, as is seen Rev. 1.9. But having before usually resided at Ephe∣sus, he there wrote his Gospel, after the 3 other Evangelists to serve as a Shield to the Church, to defend the Divinity of the Son of GOD, against Ebion and Cerinthus, who tho they profest themselves Christians, yet rejected it; of which this Apostle was so constant an Assertor that from thence he was called the Divine, according to the Title which is given him, or which he himself assumes in the Revela∣tions: He had also writ before his Banishment his 3 Epistles, the first of which was Circular or Catholick, for divers Churches at a time; it's said, it was Inscribed directly to the Par∣thians; the 2 others he Addrest to two par∣ticular Persons, the one whom he calls the Elect Lady, and the other named Gaius, whom he Salutes under the name of Eldr or Presbyter, tho one of the first Disciples of Jesus Christ, John 1.37. He had been solemn∣ly called to the Apostleship with his Brother James, when they were mending their Nets in a small Vessel, with their Father Zebedee, Mat. 4.21. and were both surnamed Boanerges, Sons of Thunder, Mark 3.21. Our Saviour had a particular Kindness for him, John 13.23. and therefore he took him with Peter and James, to be Witnesses of the Resurrection of Jairas Daughter, Mark 5.37. of the Transfiguration, Matt. 17.1. and of his Agony, Matt. 26.37. He was at Table, leaning on our LORD's Bosom, in the Last Passover, John 13.23. Peter by his means was intro∣duced into Caiphas his House, when our Saviour was brought thither, John 18.16, 17. took the Holy Virgin home to him on our Saviour's recommendation on the Cross, John 19.26, 27. ran with Peter to the Sepulchre of Jesus Christ, and came there the first, John 20.3, 4. and knew our LORD first, when he appeared to them near the Sea of Tiberias, John 20.7. He, and James the Less, and Cephas, were esteem'd as Pillars, Gal. 2.9. He outliv'd all the rest of the Apostles, and saw executed on Jerusalem and the Jewish Nation, GOD's just Judgments, and our Saviour's Predictions. After 4 or 5 years Exile in Patmos, (Anno 96) the Death of Domi∣tian, by the Edict of Nerva his Successor, who annull'd all the Banishment and other Acts of this wicked Prince, under pretence of Judaism or Impiety against the Gods, restored to him his Liberty; so that he re∣turned to Ephesus, where he peacably died at a great Age, under the Emperor Trajan, and (as 'tis thought) in the 100th Year of our Lord, which concurred with the 2d Year of this Prince; For tho the Report went in his time, That he would not die, on what our Saviour had said of him to Peter, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? John 21.22, 23. yet he said enough here to unde∣ceive those, who during his life, and since his death, imagined he would not die, or that he was not as yet dead.
CHAP. IX. Of the Times that the PROPHETS lived in. THe Times wherein any one of the Prophets lived, may easily be here seen; so that to pass over those whereof mention is made in the Book of the Kings, as Samuel, Gad, Nathan, Iddo, and particu∣larly Elias, and Elisha; the Time of whose Lives are very apparent from the Kings under whom they lived: It will be sufficient to take notice of those whose Writings we have extant, and at the same time, the particular Ages wherein they flourished will be found in this ensuing Table. JONAS began to Prophecy under Joash, Father of Jeroboam the 2d, King of Israel. Anno Mundi 3116. HOSEA, under Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, who were Kings of Judah, and Jeroboam King of Israel. A. M. 3194. JOEL, under the same Kings as Hosea, and not for as long a time. AMOS began to Prophecy in Israel the 23d year of Uzziah, and continued so for 28 years. A. M. 3217. ISAIAH Prophecied in Judah the 25th year of Uzziah, and continued under Ahaz and Hezekiah. The Tradition of the Jews, and some of the Ancient Fathers is, That Manasses (the Son of Hezekiah) put him to death; so that he must needs have Prophecied one whole Age. A. M. 3219. OBADIAH Prophecied in Israel, the same time as Isaiah in Judah. A. M. 3249. MICAH was under Jotham, Ahaz▪ and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah; and it seems to have been about this time, that Jonas was sent to Nineveh. NAHUM began to Prophecy after that the 10 Tribes were carried away Captive in∣to Babylon, as well to comfort those that re∣main'd, as those that were carried away. A. M. 3291. JEREMIAH began to Prophecy in Ju∣dah in the 13th year of Josiah, and Pro∣phecied for 45 years. Being afterwards carried into Egypt, he was there Stoned to death. A. M. 3375. BARUCH was also of the same time, and tho he was of a very great Family, yet he served him as Secretary. ZEPHANIAH, and HABAKKUK▪ were also of the same time. DANIEL began to Prophecy in Babylon, when yet in a manner but a Child, under Nebuchadnezar, and continu'd until the time of Cyrus, that is to say, about the 85th year of his Age; and tho he obtain'd by his Prayers the accomplishment of his Prophe∣cies, for the deliverance of the People; yet it seems probable, he died in this strange Country without ever returning into Judea, Anno Mundi 3398. EZEKIEL (who was of the Race of the Priests, and one of those carried Captive, together with Jechoniah, by King Nebu∣chadnezar) began 5 years after to prophecy at Babilon, and so continued 22 years. A. M. 3409. HAGGAI Prophecied in Judah upon the Return of the People from Captivity, and rebuk'd them for being too slow in Re∣building the Temple, A. M. 3485. ZACHARIAH was of the same time. MALACHY was the last of the Prophets, and seems to have been of the same time, with Nehemiah, that is, towards the end of the Reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus; (A. M. 3550) So that the whole time of the Prophets seems to have been above 400 years. It is observable, That of all the Sages of Greece, so celebrated in Ethnick Antiquity, not one flourish'd till after the time of the Prophets. Pythagoras himself went to Ba∣bylon, and learned many things of the Jews, which he made use of in his Philosphy and Plato also, who inserted many things out of the Books of Moses into his, was near 200 years after all. Now if any one have a mind to prove all that is delivered in this Historical Chronology, Let him consult the Sacred Chronology, out of which it is taken. THE END.
