f1410 18183469 106942
A RELATION OF THE COUNTRY OF JANSENIA; WHEREIN Is treated of the Singularities founded therein, the Customes, Manners, and Religion of it's Inhabitants. With a Map of the Countrey. Composed in French by Lewis Foun∣taine, Esq And newly Transla∣ted into English by P. B. London, Printed for the Author, & are sold by A. Banks, and C. Harper, over against St. Dunstans-Church in Fleetstreet 1668
TO MONSIEUR DE*** SIR, I Have heard you often complain that we see Relations enough of Chi∣na and Canada, but that none had yet appeared which truly declared, what Country Jansenia is. Be content, Sir, here is what you have longed for, ano∣ther would have made a great volume hereof, but
I know how tedious pro∣lixity is to you: I have considered your inclinati∣on, and to tell you all, my own, which does not carry me to that enlargement of speeches which you tearm the profit of the Stationer, and the torment of the Reader. If I had fur∣ther amplified my dis∣course, you would per∣haps have laid it aside, either through contempt or irksomness, as we do great talkers; and many
persons who abridge themselves of their dear∣est satisfaction would have easily bereaved themselves of a Book that had cost more. We may tell many things in seven or eight leafs of pa∣per, and I am mistaken if you find nothing in these that approach Col∣ledge amplifications, or the style of Commenta∣ries. I had believed that the discourse I address unto you should have been
sufficient to satisfie your curiosity, and that of the publick also, but some body advised me to joyn to it the Map which you see here, where in a moment the site of the Country is ex∣pose to the worlds view; the Rivers that water it, and that bind it to the neighbouring kingdomes; the several things that it produceth, and the Sea where all the waters of so famous a Country fall. Some one will perhaps
have a desire to make a more exact and regulate description of it, when he hath seen this, I shall be very glad of it, and I'm sure 'twill have a greater sale in France, than the Almanack that made so much noise, after the De∣claration of Pope Inno∣cent the tenth, and since Jansenisme was beaten down. I would not dare to tell you, that you will do that better than any other, for it would be to excite
you to follow my lights, and I acknowledge that I have none which equal yours. Do then, Sir, what you please; and believe me ever, Your most humble, and obedient Servant, FONTAINE.
A RELATION OF THE COUNTRY OF JANSENIA, In which 'tis discoursed of the Singularities that are there, of the Customes, Manners, and Religion of its Inhabitants. I Will make the descripti∣on of a Country, which to this day, the Geogra∣phers have never spoken of,
and they must believe what I'l tell of it, because I have been there; I dwelt in it al∣most five years, and I will say nothing but upon the faith of my own eyes. Jansenia is a very pleasant and fertile Province, plac'd betwixt Libertinia, that li∣mits it on the Oriental part by it's vast and champion grounds. Desesperia (almost filled with sands and stony ways) that bounds it on the Occidental part, and Calvinia that borders it on the Septen∣trional part. On the Meridio∣nal coast it hath that tempe∣stuous Sea, the depth where∣of could never yet be found,
and which is no less renound for the Monsters it bears than for the Ships that perish therein. The chief Town, where there is a Soveraign Court and an University, is situated exactly in the middle of the Country over which it rules, and it is believed that the principal Founders thereof judged it most expedient to place it there, for the greater conveniency of going into the three neighbouring Pro∣vinces; for thus the ways are equal in length, & to what∣soever part a man will go, the way is so little wearisome, that a Jansenian if he be a
good foot-man, on conditi∣on that he puts forth betimes may go thither with ease in four days. There are always some Posts ordained for those that are in more hast, and some Coaches which never fail to go on their ap∣pointed days. That Land was first inha∣bited by a Colony of Flem∣ings, who named it, and who soon after made it famous, through the novelty of their Laws. Curiosity and Inte∣rest have since that drawn into it many people of di∣vers Nations, who have made it populous as we see at this time.
The Men of this Coun∣try are commonly very lit∣tle, and the tallest do not pass our moderate stature, although the Pictures which they make of them, do re∣present them all of an extra∣ordinary magnitude. They have a small head, but very hard in respect of the spissitude of their brain∣pans, and their minds follow the constitution of their bo∣dies. By the dissection that was made of them at several times, it hath been found, that many of them have a double heart, and 'tis belie∣ved that this is the cause
they are not sincere in their proceedings; they have al∣ways divers ends, and at the same time they can intend contraries. Their most ordinary sick∣ness is a dangerous swelling, whereof they almost all dye, and for which yet they could never yet find any remedy, but by going forth of their Country, whereunto very few can be perswaded, for the climate seems to them very sweet, and when they perceive that any one of their Country will part from them, they use so many artifices, and oblige them in so many fashions, that
they force them to stay there. They Rule themselves by the Moon, and not by the Sun, as do other Nations; and half their time they know not how they live, because their clocks never go well, being so little indu∣strious to direct them, as the inward part of the Machine is never correspondent to the outward, that is to say, to the Hand of the Clock. Their Houses are almost like ours, and every one hath its back-door, for the greater commodity of going whi∣ther they please, without be∣ing peceived by any.
They visit one another rather by night than day, to the end (say they) they may gain that time upon sleep; and all their chief busi∣nesses are treated but by the Candle. To make a distinction between themselves and other people (which they much covet) they affect a particular character, which is observ'd in their manner of living, in their apparel, and in their Language. They march even on a certain pace which they have learn'd, they use Tones which are not usual with us, and at every moment they
turn up their eyes with mea∣sure (which they tearm the Apostrophes of the sight) and that in such a fashion that you would say they are even ready to die. They esteem themselves the most learnd men in the world, and there is no so petty a School-master or Cook among them, wearing along Coat, who hath not that judgment of himself. They believe also that they alone possess the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, and the fruit that proceeds from it being not commu∣nicated to others, they must of necessity be igno∣rant
of the best things. Printing is the Art to which they most apply themselves, and wherein they have best success, and indeed we see nothing more exact nor more pretty then what they do in that kind. But they care not so much for the matter or substance, as for the manner of hand∣ling it. If something slip in it against good faith or the truth, they trouble not themselves much for that, on condition that their Er∣rata's be perfectly corrected, in fair Characters, in fine Paper, and very neatly bound. This makes them
go off readily, especially among women, who are much taken with fine guild∣ed books, without looking any further into the matter. All the Armes which they use come to them from Cal∣vinia, either because they have not the Art to make them themselves, or because they will not take so much pains, but they Polish them excellently, and make them so fair and clear, that the Lawyers, Women also buy them often enough for cu∣riosity sake to set out their Clossets with them. Hereof they give every year some presents to one
an other for New-years-gifts, and I could not one day forbear laughing at a Lady who bargain'd for a pair of Pistols for a present to her friend. They use onely White-powder, wherein they are very dangerous; nevertheless being the custome of the Country no body reproves it, and they laugh at us, who cannot use a Gun without making it known to all the Neighbours, nor kill a Bird without noise. They have many famous Fairs, to which the Calvinists send whole Libraries, which are sold in the twink∣ling
of an eye, for there is a great correspondency be∣tween them and the Jansenists, as well for learning as for Armes, and they also mutually lend their Profes∣sors, when by death some Chair is vacant, and they have no body to supply it. From thence also they have the finest Characters which they use in their Im∣pressions, and they have of all sorts but Roman letters. They traffick in Liberti∣nia, with their Neighbours, and draw from them much money for the Merchandises which they send thither, which are Wines, Su∣gars,
Ambergrcece, which is common enough in their Coasts, Silks, Fine Linnen, and many other things which serve for pleasure and sensuality. Their Traffick is more sad and of less profit in Desesperia, whither they send onely that which is most conformable to the humour of the Country, that is to say, Knives, Cordes, Hemp, to use as they list, Hersecloaths of divers stuffs and several prices, Torches for Burials, Druggs to Embalm the Corps, Marble-tables, Plates of Brass sitted for the reception of
Epitaphs. If they apply themselves to some Science, 'tis always without tying themselves to any form, for they had rather make Rules than receive them, yea they contest the principles which all others agree in. Their Philosophers admit not the common sense, and when I was in the Country, one of their Professors was cashiered for making it one of the Articles of his dis∣pute. Behold now how they pass their Doctors: He that will be received presents himself into the Company of the Expert ('tis so they
tearm it) and after be hath given many proofs of his capacity by a publick dis∣pute, if he hath the major part of the voices, they cause him first to swear up∣on a Book, which they call the Holy Book, never to depart from the Doctrine of the Country. This Book is of no less veneration among them than was heretofore that of the Sybill's in Rome. And although the People know not what it contains, nevertheless upon the be∣liefe they have given it, that it is full of Oracles and Revelations from God, he kisses the Cover of it with
respect when they permit him it, and believes that happy are the gardians of that sacred Volume wherein are contained so many my∣steries. After this they give the new Doctour a Robe of course Bays, having the sleeves lined with Fox-skins in stead of Ermines; which being done, they put upon his Head an old Hat, which serves always at such a Ce∣remony; 'tis that of the Doctour that first founded their Ʋniversity, and which they have conserved ever since his death, because they fancy that no Doctour
can be well instituted or worthy of his dignity, if he hath not worn that Hat. The last Ceremony is the Green Cap, and whosoever is pro∣moted to this dignity, may assure himself of, being at ease all his life time; for the people tax themselves to maintain him fatly, & the devout Women take care of that religious service. Rhetorick is so much used in Jansenia, that every one hath a hand in it; but they cannot suffer Musick, therefore they will never hear of any accord. Not∣withstanding they love the Trumpet, for as much as it
serves at war, to which they have a great inclination, al∣beit they are always over∣come, and never return without some Badges there∣of. When they have lost a Battle, they are so subtle in disguising their trouble, that to see and hear them you would think they had won it; and t' amuse the people, their Commanders never fail to ordain that there be put in their Churches with great Ceremony, some Standards as taken from the Enemy, which notwithstanding they themselves have made to serve to that use of vanity.
'Tis a great pleasure to hear them speak of th' An∣tiquity of their Town. They say 'twas built by a Prince of Hippo, who liv'd above twelve hundred years ago, and they boast that they have Titles that prove it so plainly, that 'tis impossible to scruple it. Their hardi∣est Annalists go farther, and averr that this Lord did on∣ly repair it; that it had been founded four hundred years before, by a famous Prince of Tarsus a great Warriour, who lived in the time of Gamaliel, and who in his Youth had that famous Person for his Tu∣tor
and Instructour. To this effect they shew unto Strangers a great Sword, which they say is the same that he used in his Battels, as that of the Pucelle d' Orleans is shown at Saint Denis near Paris. But I was informed by a Jansenian, a friend of mine, and one more inge∣nuous than the rest, that this Sword was but of thirty years standing; that they had fram'd it after the fashion of Old Armes, and that he that made it died within these few ears.
The whole Town is full of Statues which they have caus'd to be perfumed with smoak to give them the co∣lour which time gives to it's works; but 'tis not ne∣cessary to be very skillful in Antiquity to discover the fraud; and yet as there are in the Country some Histo∣riographers maintained to compose some books wherein those falsities are contain'd, and certain men appointed to distribute them up and down, the sot∣tish people believe what is Printed, and they vaunt themselves of Antiquity which makes the more clear∣er
understandings among them to laugh at themselves when no body is by to hear them. If any stranger de∣sires to be naturalized in the Country, they do not im∣pede him, for as much as they believe that it is the honour of the Nation, and instead of making him pay for his Letters, they even hive him money to receive them, which is the cause that many who are reduc'd to poverty, forsake their Country, where they hope for nothing from fortune; but those who are thus re∣ceiv'd and admitted can∣not be promoted to any em∣ployment
till time doth make appear they have got∣ten the Spirit of the Land, that there is no more fear of them, and are very se∣cret persons; for diffidence is natural to all Jansenians, and that so much, that even in trivial things, they use precaution; for that cause they entertain a great num∣ber of Spies in all parts to relate unto them what is done, and are at a great charge in Letters, that what is said hereof seems incredi∣ble. There is no Kingdom in the World wherein Scien∣ces be better rewarded, nor
after a more honourable manner, and there is seen in the publick place, a Sta∣tue with it's Elogy, to eter∣nize the memory of a per∣son, who in his time was employed in Italy in a ne∣gotiation with little suc∣cess; 'tis said also, that some one had taken occa∣sion from thence to put these two Latine words at the foot of the Figure, Iti∣neri, non tibi; to declare that this honour was order∣ed him, not because he had done well, but to pay his journey. Those kind of rewards are so common in the
Country, that two men have received the same ho∣nour for having both Com∣posed a Book upon the Laws that are observed a∣mong them, the learneder of them having afforded the matter, and the other the fair teams, which occasi∣oned this question, to wit, Whither a man could be a Child of two Fathers; and supposed he can be, Whi∣ther he should be esteemed legitimate and rightly born. The Title of Heroine is given to all well moneyed women, who contribute to the reparation of the Town∣walls, to the melting of
Canons, and to the pay∣ment of the Garrison. To them Authours usu∣ally Dedicate their Books to engage them yet more in the interest of the Land, with their fine Dedicatorie Epistles, and to puff up their heart. The height of honour is to permit them to take place among the Doctours of Divinitie, and many are admitted to it, but they must before hand have read some certain traductions which do in∣spire sufficiencie, and give good testimonie in wri∣ting.
In that Region are found many Animals, which are altogether unknown to us: As Wolves that bear Wool, Foxes of all Haires, and tame ones too that go up and down with their pul∣len, and without offend∣ing them, as 'tis said. Black Parats, which speak very well: Pilled Owles, that sing melodiously, and that make a better harmony than our Nightingals. Their Calves are much bigger than ours, their Asses the like, and out of a Custome received in the Land time out of mind; they take care to cover
their Ears; 'tis the Wo∣mens function to make Biggins and Caps that are for this use. Their Pyes which Chatter very much, remember nothing but such injurions words as are taught them. Their Dogs Bark at none but Strangers, for they know them by their smell, and cover their nastyness as Cats do. But in so neat a man∣ner, that there is not the least thing to be seen, which hath given ground to some of the ignorant sort to believe that they render up by transpiration
the superfluitie of foods. Whereas they please themselves very much in Writing, they keep to that purpose a great number of Geese, which makes it evi∣dent they were much wrong'd, when 'twas said that they us'd none but Eagles Pens. They have no less store of Horn'd Beasts than we, both tame and wilde, and their Forrests bear Staggs of a remarkable greatness: but although they take often enough of them, they have not yet thought of hanging the Heads at their Gates.
They believed when I was there that some In∣chanter had thrown a Charm and mischievous Witcherie over the Nets of their Hunters; for not∣withstanding all their care and vigilancy, they never caught but Bitterns or Cranes Th' aconit is the Flower that grows more natural∣ly in the Land, and all their Gardens are in∣fected with that Poison. In recompence the Bay∣tree grows there very fine∣ly, wherewith they Crown themselves; for as they be∣lieve themselves near Kins∣men
men to the Muses, they willingly take the equi∣page of Parnassus, and besides there are some a∣mong them so perswaded of their Victories, meer∣ly imagining it to be so, that they render to their own selves the ho∣nour of a perpetual tri∣umph. This Country is very subject to be blasted with Thunder, which makes the Inhabitants scarce concern∣ed at it: yet 'tis said they were extreamly troubled when the Thunder with∣out Lightning before, and without making any great
noise, did beat in pieces the Epitaph of their Nati∣on's Prince. Besides the Rivers di∣vided for the good of the grounds, and for the com∣modity of Commerce, there is seen a Lake, which many esteem very like that of Geneva; but others be∣lieve that the figure of it is a little unlike, and it is certain, that the water of it is farre more sub∣tile. This Province produ∣ceth Mines of gold and silver, which make it con∣siderable above any other thing: Quick silver is
more common in it, and many people make it their business to find out the secret of fixing it. But instead of bringing it to passe , it always flyes up into their heads, and at length, by a necessary se∣quel brings great quakings upon them. Of all fruits, there is onely the Winter-pear, cal∣led, Bon-Christian that can∣not grow there, whatever Art you use: but they have another which is al∣most like it, and which they call after the same name; the difference is known onely by the tast,
which hath nothing of the sweetness of the true Chri∣tian's-pear. The Jansenians received the Gospel from one Mar∣galicus, a professed ene∣my to our Kings (they do not agree of the year) but intermingled with so many wicked and abomi∣nable opinions, that one can neither read nor hear them without horrour. They maintain with much obstinacy, that there are some certain people for whom alone our Savi∣our dyed: that others, the number whereof is in∣comparably far greater,
receive no manner of helps which might lead them to an happy Eter∣nity: that Jesus Christ never intended any such thing, when he shed his blood; that if it happen∣eth that he give his grace in Baptisme, or in Penance to any one of these wretches, 'tis like a fa∣vourable Wind which feeds hope for a while, but which will never lead them into the Haven, and which abandoneth them in the middle of the Waves, thereby to be unavoidably suffocated; sometimes also without
having given occasion there∣of by any infidelity. That it is pleasing to God to be thus rigourous; that to him our salvation is assured, or otherways, by granting it, or refu∣sing his graces; that he ad∣mits but of few, because he will largely punish Adam's Children for their Father's sin. That he chargeth them with Laws, which they cannot ob∣serve, but with that aid which is denied them: that notwithstanding 'tis enough to destroy them justly, to be able to say they have not done
what was commanded them, because it suffices that God ordains a thing to bind a man to the ex∣ecution of the precept, were it to flye, though he hath no wings, or that by mishap they have been cut away from him. That God doth good enough to the wicked, when he gives them being , to∣gether with all temporal favours, that make them passe away their lives de∣liciously. That having de∣stinated them to be the victimes of his fury, 'tis a great gratification to them to fatten them up for the
day of Sacrifice , and Crown them with Flow∣ers that all his mercies to these unfortunate People, are onely fine vailes to co∣ver his design of damning them; sweet amusements, which nevertheless bind them to call God their good Lord, their Saviour, their loving Father, al∣though he prepares for them unavoidable punish∣ments; and that all their Prayers, all their Penances be not able to move him upon this Article of Eter∣nity. To be short, that setting aside a small hand∣ful of such as he hath E∣lected
for Salvation right or wrong, the Devils and all humane kind are alike to him. As to the Pope, they say that the Holy Ghost hath not been promised him: that he is not to be heeded in what he says, if he speak alone; that he imagin's to see in Books what never was in them; and also that he cannot Read. That he is an Ʋ∣surper of Soveraign power, which ought not to be suffered: that three heads of their Country-men have more Brains in them, and Learning, than he and all
the Cardinals together, with all the Divines in the world: That such as have receiv'd in times past (as decisions of faith) the declarations of Popes were meer simpletons, brainless and heartless People. 'Tis not yet clearly known what they believe of the Eucharist, but most certainly, this is said to be their opinion of it. To shew it the greater respect, they are wont to hang it up in the Church; their reason for it is that this was done heretofore, and that the time past, as the most venerable, ought to
be the Rule of the pre∣sent time: That Jesus Christ, according to Saint Paul, is separated from sinners, in a higher degree than the Heaven, upon which is placed the Throne of his Majesty, that conse∣quently our Tabernacles have not those great sig∣nifications which do re∣present Mysteries, and which oblige Christians to remember that our Saviour is above them through san∣ctity and place. Some were minded to tell them, that we ought to go along with the times we live in; that this hang∣ing
up of the Host may occasion many accidents, and that 'tis a sad thing to see the Sacrament down upon the ground when the cord is gnawn by some beast, or chanceth to break through age. That the Tabernacles which at this day are in use in other Countries , and within hand's reach, do perfectly well express that admira∣ble descending of the humbled Word into a strange nature, and de∣clare that he is come near us by his holy Incarnati∣on. This advice was judged of no weight, and
they did determine for ever that the blessed Sa∣crament should be hanged up, when there was no o∣ther reason but onely that all other Nations, from whom they ought to re∣ceive no rule, do not use that way, and that they must oppose them in it. They have so much re∣spect for the Eucharist, that one of their greatest desires would be to be deprived of it all their life time out of humility, and even at the hour of death. In some places they hire Priests to say Masse
but seldome, to introduce a Custome of it: a thing singular enough among these People, to pay peo∣ple for doing nothing. I have seen in that Country a form of prayers, amongst others this which they are to say at the Ele∣vation of the Blessed Sa∣crament: Lord, I adore you upon your Crosse, and at the general judgement, which is to be at the world's end: As if a man should say to the King, Sir, I sa∣lute your Majesty in the Army where you were two years ago, and in the Pa∣lace in your Seat of Justice,
where you will be within six weeks. Which made me think theirs is not the same as ours, touching that Article, or that the Au∣thours of those fine Pray∣ers, who have so many times examined them, and made them so often be Printed, do explicate them∣selves very badly. Their Priests take great delight to hear their Pe∣nitents repeat their sins se∣veral times. After they have put them to the trouble of telling all, they most often deny them Ab∣solution, without any cause that deserveth it, and com∣fort
them up with pro∣mises: this repeating esta∣blishes sometimes a great familiarity upon matters very grievous among per∣sons, that should not have any: or causeth an ex∣ceeding shame, which keep∣eth many from Confession, resolving rather to perish than gain their grace by these redoubled confusions, and which are not necessa∣ry at all. Indeed 'tis said that the Doctours of that Country, do not hold Absolution a very effective thing, that they teach that it is but a simple declaration of the
grace one hath obtained by an inward sorrow: that a man may very well be without it, and that the released Prisoner ought lit∣tle to care to be told that the Gaoler hath set open the Door, or that nothing be said of it to him. Upon this supposal they do not hasten themselves to give Absolution; that they refuse it often enough to dying persons, and re∣mit them to the next week. This rigorous proceed∣ing hath cast many into despair, and constrained many others to go out of
the Country to discharge themselves of their sins, amongst more humane and more reasonable people, where the Yoke of Chri∣stian Religion is no hea∣vier than Jesus Christ made it. The Jansenians speak much of publick Penance, but as Women do of Ar∣mies where they never go, for there is no one seen to do it, and all this tattle aimes and ends but in one thing, to abstain from the Eucharist, or not to go to hear Masse, wherein they find most wonderful facilities. This is their
Publick Penance, their principal austerity, their ad∣mirable sanctification. As the abstaining from the Eucharist seems to them the most meritorious of all their Fasts, they reckon the Weeks and Months they have forborn it to make to themselves a great subject of consolation thereo; sometimes also they let Easter passe with∣out receiving, and say to their Country-men, God be thanked, 'tis now almost two years since I received the Sacrament, which puts me in hopes of greater strength, and that he who
recompenseth the humble will grant me graces which he affords not those intempe∣rants of communion, who would think themselves starved if they were not continually at the Holy Ta∣ble: So have they often this word in their mouth, O Lord, withdraw your self from me, for I am a sin∣ner, rather than this, Come to me, and I'le comfort you. Notwithstanding not long since, in some places they affect frequent Com∣munion, and combate their own maximes, to stop the mouths of such as might say: Truly these people
are not wise, who believe that Grace is more aboun∣dantly given when one forbears coming to the source of it; that the heavenly Bread does profit those most who eat it not, than those who use it ve∣ry often: In fine, that sick people find themselves bet∣ter, if they bar themselves of a remedy ordain'd for their recovery. But their Books, which they cannot suppresse now, have declared so much as a man may say without judging rashly, that in those places where they re∣ceive the Blessed Sacrament
most, that practise what they have condemned, they subvert what they have endeavoured to build, with all the artifices and cavils of their dangerous eloquence. But perhaps, that since they have set forth those Books, humane nature hath been altered in them, and falls no more into such faults as are common to the just, which said how∣soever shall be an impedi∣ment of Communion, when that with the difficulties which they did find in it, they perswaded the people to forbear it altogether.
Their Calender is very different from ours; they have blotted out of it twelve or fifteen Popes, whereof the most part have pronounced against the errours which they pro∣fesse, and 'tis doubted whither it be through ven∣geance, or to make place for other Saints whose names agree with those of their men, and who please them most. They admit of no Moncks, but like well of Nuns, without letting a man know wherefore, for the Institution is one and the same, and it seems
that the consequences be alike to such as inquire not after reasons in the dif∣ference of Sexes. There's great striving who shall be Directour of these Nuns, and those who are chosen for that pur∣pose find therein so many allurements, so much gen∣tlenesse, so much fruit to be done, that they have much ado to depart from their grates. They for∣bid them expresly all Books which they have not com∣posed, as being not worth redding or pernicious; sometimes they go further, and make them vow never
to see any of them, least the answers made to their own may change the minds of these Beata's whom they keep under Tyranny; and to mitigate this tedious ser∣vitude by curiosity, which is natural to the Sex, they teach their Philosophy in their Vulgar tongue, or teach them Latine. In some places the Di∣rectours leave off their long Coats every morning, and transform themselves into Handicrafts-men, to get leave to go into the inward Gardens (which they could not do other∣ways in good conscience)
and after they have work∣ed the hour with the Spade or Mattock, by a second Metamorphose they change their condition, they wash their hands and face to take off the dust and sweat, they put on again the long Coat which they had left off, they become graver, they speak of spiritual things, and then they are called Priests, as I have been informed by a Nun of the Country, whom I had permission to speak with, but after many Ce∣remonies: yet although this is pass'd over without scandal, yea with modesty,
as she assured me, never∣theless a thing so extra∣ordinary doth for all that much amaze me. They are so zealous in their way, for the propa∣gation of their Faith, that they do not onely depute men to establish it where it hath not yet been re∣ceived, but female Missio∣naries, who explicate their Divinity very bravely, which occasion'd the say∣ing, That in Jansenia there are Professors of all Sexes, and that Doctrine was fallen into the Distaffe. Nay, they have Agents of Religion disguised, who
go into other Countries to gain people. These same are long before they discover themselves, after they have gotten the re∣pute of being peaceable and quiet men, that mind nothing but the pure glo∣ry of God, and only when they foresee that that may serve for the advancement of the Sect. That they may be e∣steemed more Religious, they have some Demy-Anachorets, who are nei∣ther Monoks nor Seculars; these live very retiredly, and a man can hear no∣thing of their solitude, but
that some of them make Baskets, others pattins or Card-matches, which are afterwards sold at the Market, and which the more devout amongst them esteem as relicks. The Dutch-men that have gone into the Coun∣try have there cryed down the Jesuits, wherefore they have made a Statute never to admit them, and 'tis believed they'l be more constant in this resolutior, than hath been the Repub∣lick of Venice. These people live in a wonderful Ʋnion, what one does the rest allow of it
without any farther exa∣mination; they praise one another very friendly, and this mutual and perpetual Panegyrick is an intimati∣on of a great deal of cha∣rity. To give renown to their Preachers, they draw to their Sermons certain folks, instructed in all such ge∣stures as may testifie a rapture in them, that 'tis impossible to Preach bet∣ter; yea, they take care that many Coaches may be seen at the Gates of the Churches where the Ser∣mon is, and that the Coach∣men make a great railing.
If they give Almes, 'tis ever very exemplarily, for they take order that all the World may know it. For a Shirt that one shall have bestowed upon a Beggar, it shall be present∣ly noised abroad, that he hath laid out in Charita∣ble deeds above eight hun∣dred ells of linnen. For a Messe of Broth he shall have sent to a Sick Body, they'l speak of no lesse than of a Tun of Gelly,; what they say they desire should be kept private, is always thundered abroad, and a Shilling that falls from their hand, makes a grea∣ter
noise than all the Bells in our Ladies Church at Paris. In this they seem to imitate very much our Lotteries, where for a three∣penny Looking-glasse a man shall have drawn, for a Pair of Gloves the Trum∣pet declares it to all stand∣ers by. This 'tis that gives cre∣dit to their Almes be they never so small: They make a Common Purse of all that each particular person hath a devotion to give: as their number is very great, ye must not wonder that so many drops of water do fill up the Bason. This
heap being made, the care of it is committed to certain quaint, well agreeing, neat, well spoken persons, and that have a devout, sweet and winning countenance. Being in possession of this money, which is not use∣lesse to them, they spread it in several places, and look into the neceffities of the people, that they might have an opportunity of employing those collected sums, not as Deputies, but as Religious and zealous persons, that value not the riches of this world, that give them by hand-fulls, and that believe that their
patrimony doth belong to such as stand most in need of it. Yet very often those persons thus sent about give not any thing of their own, and the peo∣ple believe that they are the spring, when they are but the Pipes. Upon this opinion 'tis said that the Spirit of Jansenia is a Spirit of Cha∣rity, and that there are Divine Men in it who di∣stribute what ever they have amongst the poor: who had rather suffer their own selves than see their Neighbour suffer; al∣though, to say the truth,
they well know that these praises are not due to them. Yet they do willing∣ly accept them and with a smiling countenance they tell the company that they are very sorry they are not able to do any more. This makes them admi∣red, followed, and makes every thing allowed of that comes from their mouth, for the People can∣not believe that such cha∣ritable people can or will lye. It is reported that sa∣vage people for a Bottle of Strong-water, which they love very well, are easily perswaded to be Christi∣ans;
but that the Water of Baptisme alone doth not move them to any devo∣tion. The same is seen in such as yield to the Jan∣senians; for the doctrine proposed unto them is re∣ceived but for the libera∣lities sake which attend it: To make this Drugg be swallowed down, the Doctours have taken care that interest should be an assured vehicule of it. This same zeal which they affect to shew to∣wards they poor, makes them disapprove of what they are told, that in other Countries the
Churches are enriched with Marble and precious Pi∣ctures. They think that justice is done to the poor, to deprive God of these great Ornaments which do him no good, to convert them to their own use: and that Solomon will have been well scourged in the other world for having built so magnificent a Temple, which was guilded to the very walls : That at that very time he began to fall from his Wisdome, and that there's no doubt to be made, but that all the good people of Jerusa∣lem
were much scandaliz'd at it. The have Colledges to instruct their youth, and some Silly rich one gottin by flatteries and praises, he takes upon him the payment of the Professours wages, or the Schollars Pension, if they are poor, but upon condition they shall with speed teach them that Jesus Christ did not suffer for Still-born Children, and that all Infidels acti∣ons, nay to save a Man's Father from Ship-wrack, or to hinder homicide, are so many mortal sins that deserve everlasting damna∣tion,
and that God ought to punish as violators, Par∣ricides and Sacriledges; for they esteem it a point of Salvation, to know and believe all this as well as the Mysterie of the Tri∣nity, and the Incarnation of the World; which is known by the great care they take to inculcate this Do∣ctrine into the minds of Serving-men, Chamber∣maids, Artisans, and by the stir they keep when the contrary is avouched. Upon which account they give a Book to the young Schollars, the leaves whereof are divided in two
Columnes: The one con∣tains the Rules of Gram∣mar, the other the Do∣ctrine of still-born Chil∣dren, and the Sins of Infi∣dels. If they do not learn both Lessons together, their hinder-part answers for their Head. Lo! here one of their questions. Come hi∣ther, Child, if you were an Infidel, and that your Father were fallen into a Well, would you take him out of it? If he says no, Ah you ingrateful wicked, says the Master , he hath nothing of good nature. If he says yes, he replies to him. Child, you would do
very ill: God would take it ill from you, you would damne your self; what, to save a Father would you commit a mortal sin? it would be much more enor∣mous than in letting him perish: For sins of omission are more pardonable than the others. When you shall be further advanced in learning, you will hear of a certain person called the pi∣ous Aeneas, because he car∣ried his Father upon his Back to save him from fire. He was a wicked man, and he could not carry away the good old man without mor∣tal sin.
They'l tell you farther, that Biton and Cleobis were good felldws, be∣cause their sick. Mother having a mind to go to the Temple upon a Festi∣val-day, and having no Coacih-horses, they fasten∣ed themselves to the Coach, and drew her thi∣ther. This good office, which gained them an im∣mortal fame, was a great sin; and if ever any one tells you the contrary, stand in it stifly. You may in time come to read the Bible, (for you may become Priests:) when you read in it that
the Mid-wives of Aegypt would not suffocate the Hebrew Children as they had order, beware you value not that impious mer∣cy, for you would value a very wicked action. In a word, the justice which a Pagan Judge doth to the people, of it self deserves burning, because that without grace all that he doth is vitiated and becomes a crime out of a corrupted end. As to Still-bom children here is what they say. Chil∣dren, ye must observe that there are exceptions, of re∣demption as there are of
Grammar, and that those must needs perish, whom Christ would not have to be comprehended in the number of the redeemed. Among these excluded wretches are comprised still-born Children; Alas (say they) God would not have suffered for you (young people) if your Mothers had hurt themselves before their Lying-in, if hey had flung themselves out of a Window, or into he River, if a Tile had fallen on their Head! but because you were not smo∣hered in their Wombs , it may very well be that Je∣sus
Christ may have shed his blood for your salvati∣on; for to assure you of it, I neither can, nor ought not. May be he hath not suffered for this fine Child, nor for that neither; may be he hath , and 'tis the o∣pinion of our Doctours that ther's no certainty in that point. As the Masters are one∣ly waged to teach them those things and others as t falls out, they are migh∣ty careful that their Schol∣lars be not ignorant there∣in, should they die for fear, or go out of their wits, as 't often comes to pass.
The Women that are ordained to teach little Girls to read, are not in appearance lesse zealous in inspiring their belief into those young ones. Do not think Girls, say they, that God's grace is always with us; alas! no. There are some miserable times, when there is a necessity of perishing: What should we do if God withdraw himself from us? This happens very often though; are not we very unhappy? Chasti∣ty is injoyned us, and some∣times we are destitute of necessary power to continue it: Be mindful of this
(Girls) it concerns your Salvation not to be ignorant of it, and you may upon oc∣casion stand in need of it. There are Husbands that would not be so cruel to their Wives had they stu∣died Divinity; for they would know that grace is often times denied us, and that in this case they must rather pitty out infirmities, than be angry at faults we fall into by the absence of such helps as God doth re∣fuse us, either to chastise us for our infidelities, or to teach us by a necessary fall that we can do nothing with∣out him.
Thus they frame little Girls to that patience which runs them into the greatest shames of the Sex, when the sollicitations are pressing, and the occasions present: for although they intend not to give Lessons of impudicity to their lit∣tle Scholars, yet the Do∣ctrine tends to it, and when age hath ripened the body, nature can quicken the me∣mory with it. The Gallants too in Jan∣senia never fail to quote their Doctours to such as they will corrupt, and to tell them that there are moments wherein resi∣stance
is not in our pow∣er. This impression, toger∣ther with concupiscence, which is stirred up by these pernicious discourses, makes a miserable creature easily believe that the mo∣ment wherein she is spok∣en to is that very insant which is not in the dispo∣sion of the will, and that 'tis time to yield, since that God doth no longer side with assanlted vir∣tue. Among them single-life is annexed to Priest∣hood as in the Romane Church, but 'tis unknown
whither they would admit this Cuftome into the Country, if it were not al∣ready introduced into it. And indeed I have seen some officious Lay-men , who did purpose to re∣monstrate how very in∣commodious it was; that it may cause much incon∣tinency in such as have de∣dicated themselves to the Altar: that by means of this rigorous Law, the De∣votion to the Sacrament of Marriage would be dead∣ned; and they said all this with their eyes turned up to heaven, lifting up their Shoulders with many sighs.
They suffer Lay-people to receive under one kind, but many among them affirme that the contrary would be much coveted. 'Tis believed that this light was brought to them from England with other Merchandizes, whereof they made no brags, be∣cause they were liable to Confiscation, and that they would have been repre∣hended for having recei∣ved them contrary to the Magistrates order. 'Tis a common opinion that the people of Janse∣nia would easily acknow∣ledge the authority of the
Holy Sea, if the Doctours of the Law did not hin∣der it. But above all things they have an eye to that, and go from house to house to confirme such as waver in their Faith, exhorting them with great importunity to perseve∣rance in the Religion of the Country, and even suffer Martyrdome, in case any Foraign Power should force them to be of ano∣ther opinion. This care did not for all this hinder a publick Mutiny some years since, upon the violent suspition that many had, that their
easiness was abused, and that the reason why there was no intelligence with the Pope, is because Rome and Errour do not agree. Upon those complaints, the consequences whereof might be very dangerous; the Doctours assembled concluded that time was to be obeyed, content the people, and send Deputies to the Bishop of Rome, as it were to submit them∣selves to his orders, and to desire of him the clearing of some doubts which troubled their consciences. That if he approved their Doctrrine, all the better,
because they demanded nothing more, but that the Church should yield and own that she had fail∣ed till then; that if to the contrary he determined any thing that they did not usually teach, they would search after expli∣cations that would satisfie the people, without any ways hurting the belief of the Country; and because they gave a near guefs to what Rome ought to say upon that matter, that they would have answers ready to satisfie the obje∣ctions of their enemies. That they would more∣over
make many Transla∣tions of certain Treatises of the Fathers which seem∣ed not to swarve much from their Opinion, and that when there should be but one period that might favour them, they ought to Translate the whole Book, to shew it to the people and women. Moreover 'twas decreed, that if any of them, to avoid the Thunder of the Vatican, did slacken in his obedience, and did come to Sign any Article that might prejudice them, they would declare him separa∣ted from their Body, un∣worthy
worthy of ever having been of it, and of being capable to be of it; that as one Excommunicated he should no longer share in the graces of their friend∣ship, entertainment, elo∣gies, nor in the merits of their purse. Before they separated themselves, they bethought themselves of some means to gain some Bishops, which might very much contri∣bute to the reputation of their Doctrine, even when the Pope had condemned him for an Heretick, be∣cause it would be an easie matter to perswade the
weaker sort of people, that the faith of tire Pre∣late is always that of the Church. Some did represent, that in Italy there were many poor Bishops, that it should be proposed to some of them by civil Letters, that if they would have the goodness to come into Jansenia, where their fame was already much spread, they should there receive all the honour due to their merits; that although it was not decent to pro∣pose reasons of utility to disinterested Prelates, ne∣verthelesse they were desi∣red
to bear with that word: That Jansenia did well know how to reward their pains, that it would maintain their Tables, their Coaches, their whole train, and farther that none should know so much. 'Twas to be added, that if they apprehend the trouble of giving orders, they might often dispense therewith, because they would have but very few Priests, and that one Mass a Week in each Church would suffice, that they would allow them great Vicars that should be peo∣ple of repute, if they
would not make choice of some themselves; but that above all, they should not bring any Moncks with them, because that Gene∣ration speaks of nothing but Priviledges, and that their Country allows not of them. Others were of Opini∣on, that they should write into Spain, where they believed they might find men ready to do any thing out of consideration of greatnesse, for it is the pas∣sion of Spaniards, and a man thinks himself happy enough if he hath the Wall, though he were to
suck nothing but Wind, and cat nothing but Red∣dishes. They were to re∣present in these Letters the disposition they were in to give them the same rank among them as the Pope hath in Rome; that nothing should be done without their order; that the whole Nation was of the same mind, and resolv∣ed to spare nothing to make the Bishop and his People bear the image of the Triumphant Church. Some did turn their thoughts towards France, but others of a more clear∣er wit give notice that in
that Kingdome the Bi∣shops did in such manner concurr with the Pope, that not was it credible that they would ever be will∣ing to forsake him. That if any one of them did stand up for Jansenia, he would be looked upon by the other Prelates as a de∣sertour of the Faith; and what ever shew he might make of honesty, no one would have a good opi∣nion of him: In a word, that it would be a super∣fluous thing, and they would expose themselves to a manifest refusal, by drawing to their party
men that have resolved the contrary, and who for to gain the world would not expose themselves to so great an infamy. This diversity of Opi∣nions was the cause at that time they did deter∣mine nothing as to that Article, and thus they broke off having admo∣nished their Deputies, that the Air of Rome was no ways wholesome for them, that they should not for∣get their Caps, to the end they might be always co∣vered, even before the Pope, and that when they should be returned back
into Jansenia their native Country, it would be time enough to uncover themselves. Not long after there was a rumour spread up and down, that the Plague had spoiled all Jansenia, and that there was not a soul left in it; for albeit that this Province be sub∣ject to great winds, which made a doubt that it was not EAolia, yet the Plague makes there often great ravages, which much amaz∣eth the Physitians, and there was ground to be∣lieve that the distemp had been great.
Then it was that one might easily perceive that the Jansenians were abo∣minable to the whole world. For upon the news that their generation was extinguished, many people did strive who should make the greatest Bone-fires, and knocked out the Heads of Wine∣vessels in the streets, be∣lieving that they could not be too profuse in expres∣sing their joy; but this sa∣tisfaction did last no longer than till the beginning of the following Winter. For even then those Janseni∣ans whom the Plague had
dispersed, and who had retired themselves into their Caverns, began to come out of their Holes, with countenances that had not yet lost all the marks of fear. They came to Town again by little and little, sometimes single, sometimes two by two, after having an hundred times drawn back their feet upon suspicion, whi∣ther they should be safe in their first Lodgings. In fine, all fear was laid a∣side, experience having shewn that the ill air was dissipated, and because the mortality had not been
great, whatever fears or noise it had raised, in less then six months the Town was near as ful as ever. The other people that had rejoyced for their death, did express so much trouble for the return of the Jansenians, that they were even going into mourning. Since that there hath been nothing but in∣sultings on all sides; the one taxing their enemies with cowardise, for ha∣ving been so passionate a∣gainst such as they believ∣ed were dead: They on the contrary upholding that they had not done
enough, and that the world could not shew joy enough in being rid of such a wretched Sect. END
IANSENIA
AN EXPLICATION OF THE MAP. JAnsenisme is in an equal disposition to Liberty, Despair, and Calvi∣nisme. The opinion that Grace doth necessitate the will to good, when 'tis granted us, happen what will, and do what one can, makes the Libertine. The Doctrine that teach∣eth
that Jesus Christ did not dye for all, and that he will refuse his Grace to many, that cannot be saved but by it, maketh the Desperate. The Sect that debars the Liberty of Man of the source thereof, that maintains that God's Com∣mandements are impossible, that moveth one to the contempt of the Supream Bishop, of his Decrees, of his Censures, makes the Calvinist and Presbyterian. Those that seem not to reach so far, loose them∣selves in Jansenisme it self, as you may perceive by these Monsters, and by
those Shipwracks in the Sea that bears it's name. These Rivers, these Coaches, these Post-horses, these Boats laden with Books and other Marchan∣dise, do make appear whi∣ther Jansenisme doth tend, and the reaches thereof: Her communications with the Errants, whom she will not own, and in fine, how dangerous it is to professe a Doctrine, the principles whereof does in∣vite and draw people to Charenton, to Debauchery, or to the Halter. These Cypress-trees which grow amongst the Rocks,
these doleful trees where ye see Men hanged up, make it appear that the Country bordering upon Jansenia on the Western part is a Land of Despair. That which ye see over against it, hath not any thing but what's pleasing, so is it more inhabited than the other, because that Liberty allures more people, than the diffidence of God's goodness doth ruin. Those Statues of Bacchus and of Venus do evidence the exercises of such as went from Janse∣nisme into this Land of Pleasure, and the Gods that
are adored there. Calvi∣nia that takes the upper hand of the Map, and whi∣ther ye see so many peo∣ple go, notifies what ye know of these wretches, who after having for a time tossed themselves to and fro under an ambigu∣ous name, did at length declare themselves true Di∣sciples of Calvin. These others that dig the ground in Jansenia, would not be so earnest at their work if they were not in hopes to reap some benefit thereby. The Sepulcher strucken with a Thunder-bolt is that of the Flemish Professor's,
whose Epitaph was con∣demned and caused to be razed out by the Pope. The Book says enough of the Lake. This same Forrest where you see a place of Habitation, is the Reti∣ring-house of the Demy-Moncks, who are what they are not, and are not what they are. 'Tis left to you to guess the Creatures for your service: These half Muzled Asses, these Flocks of Geese, these huge Calves that a man would take for Oxen, these Sheep-wolves, these pleasant Owles, these great horned Stags, these Foxes that befriend Hens
so much, for all these well deferve your pains in look∣ing into the meaning of them. There are yet other creatures spoken of in the Relation of the Country, weigh all the words of it, there are none but may be made use of, if ye read it as ye should do from one end to the other, ye will (with delight) discover what the Jansenists do teach, what they hatch, what they have done, and what they can do.
Just as I was making an end of this Relation, these two Letters which treat of the fame thing, were put into my Hand by a friend that had taken a Copy of them. I thought it would oblige you, Reader, to let you have a sight of them. SIR, I Am told that Janse∣nisme lyes desperate∣y sick: if it dies, as it
is very likely, it will not have lived long. We ought to believe that God is absolutely willing it should be de∣stroyed; since that all manner of remedies prove ineffectual, and that although it be in the height of youth, yet it cannot escape. 'Tis affirmed, that it hath made a Will, and that it Bequeaths its Books to a Minister, whose name I could not learn: He
that will be chosen to make the Funeral Ser∣mon, will have matter inough if he will forget nothing, and follow his instructions. I saw a Paper by chance, wherein he is highly praised, for having been so generous as to fly out against two Popes, and for having withstood four Anathemes with∣out stirring. I do not think there is any pray∣ing for it now 'tis dead,
nor that it will receive the usual Ceremonies to the deceased, because it's near Relations will believe it to be glorious in heaven, at the very moment of it's expira∣tion, and that they are not people that wilt ap∣ply to him the Indulgen∣cies of Rome, or sprinkle it with holy Water; for as you well know 'tis not their devotion. If they follow the custom of their good friends,
they may well say thus, Sleep Corps until the Lord doth awake thee. My Letter mentioneth that many of the sick per∣sons Domesticks will not need to trouble themselves to look a Master after its death, because many worthy persons of several quali∣ties, and some Church∣men have engaged to take them, giving them another kind of Livery. We shall know for cer∣tain
by that, those that were the deceased's true friends, and there will be no farther need of guessing at inclinations, that will be better known by their Signs than any Scrivener. If there be an Inventary made of all moveables, with the forms receiv∣ed in France, those that take delight to disguise themselves at Shrovetide will be fitted at a cheap rate; for 'tis said there
are above fifty, as well Perriwigs as Beards, and as many several ha∣bits as it usually wore, sutable to the part it would act, when it had no mind to be known: But there is no likely∣hood that the heirs will produce all this: They may keep them for their own use, and prudence will undoubtedlyoblige them to divide among themselves in a friend∣ly manner all things of
this nature. I fancy they'l be careful in burn∣ing several Letters and other Papers, which might reveal Mysteries if seen; for to this day all things are written in Cyphers, and since what was discovered in the Flemish Doctors Letters, which were more ob∣scure than any Aenig∣ma, 'tis not credible that a secret communicated to a friend in unknown tearms or barbarous fi∣gures,
can be long with∣out being known, if it falls into anunderstand∣ing mans hands. When I know more, I will ac∣quaint you with it, in the mean time I will re∣main as ever SIR,  Your most humble, &c.
Answer. SIR, I cannot conceive where you have disposed of your charity, truly 'tis not well done, to jeer sick persons thus. You make that the subject of your recreation which to many others is a great afflicti∣on. Will you believe that I have seen some so overcome with pain that
they even almost lost their sences. If death fol∣lows the disease, it will be far worse, and I am much affraid they may chance to exclaim against per∣sons in power whichwould deserve an examplary pu∣nishment; for I question not but the Magistrates would take notice of it, and there would be an end of them if they were called to the Bar. But, I pray, think me not a worse Catholick for being
of this judgment, for al∣though those people be not of our Religion, yet their tears move me, because I am a man, and because compassion is a due from us, not onely to the just that are afflicted, but also to wretched criminals, I am SIR,  Your, &c.
