F665 12537451 62877
THE EXAMINATION AND CONFESSION OF Captaine Lilbourne and Captaine Viviers, Who were taken at Brainford by his Maiesties Forces, and had their triall at Oxford, on Saturday the tenth of this instant December, before the Lord Heath, other Lords of his Maiesties privy Coun∣cell being present, who were iudged as Ring leaders of the Round-heads, to lose their lives on wednesday, being the 14. day of this Moneth. Being sent in a letter from Mr. Daniel Felton, a Scholer of Trinity Colledge, to one Mr. Tho. Harris in Lincolne Inness Fields. Also many perswasions and strong inducements where∣by his Maiesty doth make knowne and declare upon good grounds how much it concernes the good of this Kingdome, to incline to an accommodation of peace, much desired (as his Maiesty conceives) of all his loyall Subiects. London printed for T. Wright. 1642.
TRVE Intelligence from OXFORD. WHEREIN IS FVLLY DISCOVERED the manner of the Indictment of Captaine Lilborne, and Captaine Vivers, who were to suffer as guilty of high Treason, Decemb. 14. 1642. SIR, I Had long time a desire to salute you with my Letters, and my Love, and having been debarred the intercourse of Carriers, I hope we shall now enioy one another more often by our Letters, his Maiesty having this day made Proclamation; That Carriers shall passe againe from place to place, and to be secured from all danger. There came intelligence this morning to Oxford, That there is a good inclination in many of the Citizens of London for peace, and that many thousands of them have Petitioned to the Parliament for the fame, and that they were much opposed the last Mon∣day in their Guild-hall, and many of them imprisoned. It hath wrought a great impression here in Oxford, and it is made all our discourse. I must beseech you that you would so much obliege me, as to send me word with what possible speed you can the true intelligence of it; and in answer of so great a courtesie, I will bee carefull to dispatch unto you all newes worthy your observance
and relation here in Oxford: And in the first ranke must acquaint you, that the sentence of Death is passed against the two Captaines that were taken prisoners by his Maiesties Army in Brainford: They were tryed for their lives before the Lord Chiefe Iustice Sir Robert Heath, and were indicted as guilty of High Treason, for that being subiecty both unto his Maiestie, they took up rebellious Armes against him. They pleaded for their lives very boldly, especially Captaine Lilborne, who being but a man of low fortunes, hath arose to the degree of a Captaine, by the boldnesse of his spirit. He spoke much for himselfe, and alledged he much wondred at the proceedings of the Charge against him, the Law passing upon him as he had beene a Felon, and not a soul∣dier that he honoured his Maiesty as much as any there present, and that the preservation of his sacred person was as tender to him, that hee was so far from taking up Armes against his King, that the only end he made in all this service, was by the losse of his bloud to procure safe∣ty to his Maiesty, and peace unto the Kingdome, by en∣devouring what in him lay to pluck him from the hands of those who infused bad counsaile into his sacred eares. Notwithstanding all this, the Iurie passed upon him, and found him guilty of high treason, the sentence of death was pronounced against him by the L. Heath: this is the day of his execution, in my next letter I will at full ac∣quaint you with the manner of it: in the meane time I must beseech you to certifie us with the proceedings of your Citizens Petition for peace, which will bee very welcome newes unto us all, especially unto him who is, Sir, Your most humble servant, WILLIAM FELTON.
Strong Inducemen whereby his MAIE∣STIE doth make knowne how much it concernes the good of this Kingdome to encline to peace, &c. GOD looking from Heaven, and beholding the miserable estate of this Nation, which he in Iu∣stice for the delinquencie of sinne had punished with civill war, doth begin to pitty us again, and to shew that mercy is the direct attribute of his essence, he will soften the hearts of men to receive an accommodation of peace, that the sword may no longer cut downe the youth and most generous spirits of this Land. There hath beene bloud enough, and too much already spent in a private quarrell, which by Plebeian wits was never hi∣therto well understood; and Kenton field will be remem∣bred by posterity with much griefe, since so many there∣in did lose their fathers, husbands, brothers, nay the bloud of all sorts of kindred was mingled together, and could not be distinguished. And what was the cause of this un∣naturall battaile? why the common people were led on by ungrounded opinions, and pay, to cut the throats of their brethren, the Protestant was exposed to fight in maintaining the unlearned humorous conceits of the Brownists and other Sectaries, being villianous people, and such as have bin the great disturbers of the common∣wealth; they endeavoured the fall of the true Religion, and to bring in new Doctrines, which with much impu∣dence they brayed out in Convinticles, and had follow∣ers enough, equall to themselves for weake heads, and shallow understandings.
The Citie and Countrey carried up their fancies with all the strength they could make, and applauding new inventions, grateful to nature, they began to dispise the Church, and Clergy, nay the Common prayer, as things ancient, and not fit for service. Hereupon souldiers, rea∣dy to maintaine any cause, flocked together, and being ready (for pay) to iustifie any quarrell, a great battaile was fought at Kenton, with much losse on both sides, and pitty it was that so many of the Nobility and Gentry should bee lost in such a battaile, where so much cruelty was acted in so short a time. But though men prove more fierce then Tygers, and ready to sheath their swords in one anothers bodies, yet the hand of God can stay their hands when they are lifted up in greatest fury; and when his good pleasure is, he can both perswade and command a peace, and the warre cannot passe beyond the bounds which his his divine providence hath appoin∣ted, but as for other hopes to see peace, he will make us beholding to his divine bounty. For now after these fu∣rious passages of a civill war, he doth make some hearts to fall off from the prosecuting this destroying work of ruine, by maintaining war within this land, which must needs eat up the fruits thereof, and bring it to a despised and wretched poverty, other nations with pleasure look∣ing upon our calamities. And since it is a principle, that all things must move from some beginning to an end, the Citie hath begun to bring about this great desired work of peace, and to set a mark upon such as doe oppose the common vote of the people, and doe cry up warre, trans∣ported by their violent faction; they have therefore de∣vised a way to distinguish such as bee desirous of peace, from the other who are either cold to embrace it, or re∣frain to oppose it.
But indeed who can oppose the inscrutable works of God, plotted by many secret wayes, to manifest his Glorie; therefore if he will this worke of peace shall with a swift motion goe forward in despight of all op∣position, let all the heads round about this Citie, con∣spire to slack and stay those intended propositions to the Parliament for peace, let the waves of tumult make the Shippe of the Church and Common-wealth worke to the Haven of safety, yet at last it shall conquer the tempest of ignorance, of scandall and envie, raysed by those mouthes of ignorance, that blow such violent crosse winds to cast it away. Behold the King with his Scepter is ready to oppose these waves, to compose this storme, and shall any date to be movers and disturbers of this calme of happy peace? No, stand now for God, the King, the Parliament, and peace: You have now many good & great causes, united in one, then let your hearts stand firme in contrarietie to those Vipers, that would eare a passage out of their mothers Wombs; those empty clouds of ignorance, that hover about till they are driven away by the cleare Sun shine of the Gospell. Your City is wise, and full of grave Senators, that can with cleare iudgements looke into the Ambition and Bloudy thoughts of all Sects; therefore, now if your hearts bee inclinable to peace, perswade your selves (as indeed it is) that nothing can be more acceptable to God, your King and Coun∣trey, then a well grounded peace. Would you have this land, the ancient seat of plenty and prosperity, embrace peace? or if you desire to see the King in his peaceable Throne againe, and enioy all happinesse under his gra∣cious
reigne, embrace peace: Or doe you wish for the peace and quietnesse of your consciences, of the Church and State, embrace and most willingly yeeld to peace. But what need we doubt it, for if your wisedome faile not, you will with all cheerefulnesse seeke this peace so much opposed, if calamities may come within the view of of your understanding, there's sorrow, griefe, bloud, losse, violence, murther, and all the mise∣ries of warre dayly extant and acted, and can there bee happinesse in this? is there musick in the groanes of dy∣ing men? is it ioy to see teares standing in the eyes of this father, this husband, this mother and that brother, for the death of their comfort in their severall relations. Then you may roundly conclude, that war is to bee pre∣ferred to peace, murther and slaughter before life and safety, and the Kingdomes ruine before the generall good of the Kingdome. But if the contrarie bee true, (as all wise men doe acknowledge) then downe with those ambitious, irreligious people, that cry down peace, and let all other people pray and endeavour for peace be∣tween the King and all his true hearted subiects. FINIS.
