H497 13113330 97717
THE Old English Officer. BEING A necessary Looking-glass For a Christian ARMY. OR A fit Companion for Young SOULDIERS. Wherein you may behold a Perfect, Easy, and speedy path to obtain the Exercise and Disci∣pline of Foot, and make Soldiers fit for present Service; either in Field or Garrison, the Old English Military way. With plain Directions and good Instructions out of Sacred and Moral Histories of Worthy Commanders, how they should behave them∣selves in time of Peace and War; Delightful to hear, and profitable to practise these Times. Written by Charles Hammond Captain of Foot, by Commission under K. Charles the First, of ever Blessed Memory, and one of the Sons of the Clergy. It was the saying of Jesus the Son of Sirach, Eccl. 26.28. ver. there was two things grieved his heart, To see a Man of War suffer Poverty, and men of understanding not set by.
The Epistle. To the Young Heroick spirited Reader, whose Resolutions are generally Affected to Military profession, and well deserving that Honourable Name of a Soldier. Wisdome, Valour and Victory, attend ever their Service for God, for Religion, for his Church & for their King and Country, Amen. GENTLEMEN, FInding there is little likelyhood of my being imploy'd abroad in these times, I thought not to be idle at home; but would advance and incourage as much as lay in me, that Honourable Calling of a Soldier, which I have been a well-wisher to this Forty years, in the Service of our Gracious Soveraign that now is, and all along in his Royal Fathers of ever blessed Memory: and now in these times of Acti∣on, to take off the ill thoughts of many men, and convince them as much as lies in my power of
their opinions, which many will busy themselves and discourse on. Frst those that look upon Soldiers with a scorn∣ful eye, as men not worthy of Respect and Ho∣nour. 2. Them that think Old Soldiers not fit for Imployments or Commands. 3. Such as cast an aspersion on those that served his  Majesty, in the Wars. 4. All that think the old Discipline of England cannot be taught as short and serviceable as the new way. 5. They which will hold that opinion that wars is not lawful. And Lastly, to convince that rebellious principal of too many that will argue and hold it lawful that Subjects may take up Arms against their lawful Soveraign in points of Religion: Gentlemen I must confess I am no Scholar, though I sprung from the Loyns of the Clergy, my Father and Grandfather being both of that Function, but they dying in my minority, I was brought up and Educated otherwise with that Learning they left me, which was enough to in∣struct me in the points of Loyalty, and to defend my Religion in the English Tongue: and as I ever took delight from my Youth, to learn and study the practick part of the Discipline of Foot, to inable me as much as could to be a Soldier, an∣swerable to that Command I obtain'd; so I made it
my study in spare time, to Read and Learn out of Sacred and Moral Histories and Authors, and worthy Commanders, how Soldiers might live and behave themselves to their credit, and for the Honour of God, their King and Countrey. For want of Memory and practise I have for∣got much of both; yet this small Treatise, if pra∣ctis'd, I hope may serve you as an A. B. C. to be∣gin withall, till your experine and abler School-Masters in Discipline can teach you more: which I hope will not be despis'd by any that are well-wishers to an old Soldier. Now I desire you if you find any Errors of the Press to pass it by, if in me, judge it my forgetfulness for want of imployment and Exercise, which I wish all young Officers that are now honoured with the first (imployment or Command may not forget the last) Exercise, when Time and Opportunity serves; which will redown'd to their Honour, the incouragement of their Soldiers, the daunting of their Enemies when they come upon Service, and the glory of our King and Nation, which I shall heartily pray for, and wish to hear, and as willingly serve to the utmost of my Power and Ability. Charles Hammond. From my House in Cloth Fair next door to the Sign of the Harts Horns.
The Contents of the Chapters. CHAP. I. Of the Honourable Calling and Imployment of a Right Souldier. CHAP. II. Of Prest men and Volunteers. CHAP. III. Of the just causes of making war. CHAP. IV. For the choice of Soldiers and Officers. CHAP. V. Of Discipline, Government, and the Evils to be avoided in a Camp, and Punished. CHAP. VI. Directions and Instructions for the Discipline of Foot Soldiers.
Judge not the Author Till you have Read his Book Spare time, have Patience too Observe and look O're every Leaf, and then I hope you'l find Truth guide his Pen A Loya Heart hi Mind.
Of the Honourable Calling and Imployment of a Right Soldier. A Right Soldier in his Vocation, well qualified and behaving himself worthi∣ly indeed, liveth in a Course of life wor∣thy Honour; and his imployment in Warlike affairs is very honourable. First God himself is pleased to carry the name of a Soldier, God is a man of Way (saith Moses) Exod, 15.3. and the Son of God professed him∣self to be, a Captain of the Lords Host. Joshua 3.14.15. 2. The most Renowned in Holy Writ, and in Human Stories, have attain'd to great Fame and glory by their valient acts and Feats of Arms, as we may see in Joshua, in Gidian, Ebud, Buruc, Sampson, David and his Warriours. What spee∣ches are there of the Nine Worthies? whereof Joshua, David and Judas Machabeus are three, it is all for their Valour and victory in Battel; by Warr the Fame and Memory of Julius Casar, Great Alexander, Pirrhus, Themistocles, Sci∣pio, Hannibal, Scanderberg, and Charles the 5th. remain immortal, and innumerable others both in Prophane and Divine story. 3. Whence came all those greatly affected Ti∣tles
now in the world, rose they not from Valour, Prowess, Military employments and Exercise of Arms? whence came Esquire, but by being Ar∣miger, an Armour Bearer, whence came a Knight of old, not by scraping of Wealth and buying the Title, but by being Miles a Soldier, a Noble man; an Earl, a Duke, nay the highest name of Dignity, an Emperour, but from Honour in the field bestowed upon him that knew how to Rule and Command an Host of men. 4. Solomon the wisest of Kings that ever was, held such as were men of Warr to be more honou∣rable than to be imployed in servile work, such as he employed strangers in, 2 Chron. 8.9. And the people of Canaan the Hittites, Amorites, Periz∣zites, Hivites and Jebusites base people, were not worthy to be men of War, the function was too honourable for them, as it is for too many that are admitted sometimes, more fit for Stocks, Bridewell, Goals, Gallies, or the very Gallows, than to be Inrolled among the honourable and men truly worthy the name of Soldiers, if the worth of a true Soldier were well weighed. 5. By the profession of Arms many have at∣tained from a mean condition to great honur, Da∣vid from a shepherd to be a King of Israel, Jepttha of base birth, yet by valour became a Judge in Is∣rael, Isicrates the Athenian who was Lieutenant to Artaxerxes was he not a Coblers son, Eume∣nes one of Alexanders Captains, was a Carters
son, Servius Tullius who triumphed 3 times, was the son of a poor servant, Dioclesian though a bloody persecutor of the Christians, yet a valiant man, obtained the Empire by his Prowess & valour and yet but a Scriveners son. Nicholas Pichinni∣no the great Captain and Commander of the Ar∣mies of the Potentates in Italy was but a Butchers son: The famousest Nations of the World the Romans who subdued Kingdoms, never held any profession worthy so great honour, nor ever re∣warded any so much as they did Valiant men, ge∣nerous spirits, adventuring their lives and obtai∣ning thereby praises to themselves and glory to their Nation, as their Histories do shew. 6. That Calling must needs be honourable which requireth so many honourable parts and praise-worthy Endowments, requisite to make a man deserving to be admitted into Military pro∣fession, As to be a man of understanding, of a stout and undaunted courage, not fooll-hardy, but prudent and patient of an able body yet no Lub∣ber or Luskish and sluggish disposition, but nim∣ble and lively to execute designments, and crown∣ing all this with true Religion, and zeal towards God, with a Loyal and faithful heart to his King and Countrey. For the honour of this profession how great Volumns are written of men of War, their valiant deeds and Memorable acts have cau∣sed them to be Registred to all Posterity, by the Pen of the Learned, which cannot be read but with
great delight and great profit even to make valiant and couragious spirits emulous of their Fame and Glory: what profession procured more honour to People a Nation then men of War hath done, Greece for her Achilles, and others: what pray∣ses everlasting did Epirus that little countrey ob∣tain by her Peerless Pirrhus, and that terrour to the Turk Scanderberg, Macedonia by her great Alexander; Troy, by her valiant Hector, Rome by Caesar, Pompey, Scipio, and the rest; Lacede∣man by Simon and Leonidas; Carthage by her Hannibal, and so other places by their valiant Worthies: in a word who is more worthy ho∣nour in the hearts of all vertuous men than a man of Courage, so he be well qualified, that by some base condition he wrong not himself, which true generosity of spirit will utterly disdain to do. CHAP. II. Of Prest Men, and Voluntiers. OF such as go to war, there are two sorts, such as be commanded, and such as offer them∣selves; the former we call Pressed, who without inforcement would not go, Moses was as King in Israel, and he waited not for Voluntiers, but commanded to chuse out of every Tribe 1000 to make an Host of twelve thousand to go against Mi∣dian, so did Saul and David, 1 Sam. 21. 2 Sam.
20. without which Command Princes could not have waged Battels as they then did. The other sort are termed Voluntiers, which are Natives or Forreigners, these men may offer themselves to the wars, and enter into the Pro∣fession of a Soldier; its not to be doubted Ehuds Soldiers were all Voluntiers at the found of a Trumpet, Judg. 3.27. So were the three sons of Jesse, and such were David's worthies, 1 Sam. 17. Again Deborah the Prophetess praiseth the Voluntiers which came to help Barak, besides she complaineth of such as following their own private business, neglected the wars, and withal cursed Meroz for not coming to help the Lord Judg. 5.12.15.23. Moreover, that which may be lawful by Pre∣ssing and compulsion may as well be lawful for Voluntiers if there be not very just cause or im∣pediment to hinder this: A lawful calling may be as well undergone freely as by compulsion, else how should Princes and States do that have not power to Press, if Voluntiers might not in good conscience offer themselves; but here Voluntiers must know and be resolved of some things. 1. Of the Calling of a Soldier, where it is law∣ful and that a man may therein live, and as well receive wages as men do for discharge of other duties in any other lawful vocation: be content (saith John Baptist) with your wages, speaking to Soldiers, therefore they may serve for wages.
2. Of the justice and lawfulness of the war in∣to which he thrusts himself, seeing he goeth not by Command of supream Authority: if the war be just, a man may serve with a good conscience of his own accord, but if it be apparently unjust, let men beware that they imbrew not their hands in blood going Volantiers if Princes command: that case is altered for private persons may not sit and judge of Princes actions; I have Read that St. Austine saith, That a good man may serve under a sacrelegious Prince, for the unjust Command shall bind the Prince, when the duty of Obedience shall make the Soldier free. 3. They must have the leave of such as have So∣veraign Authority over them, for a Subject to one, cannot dispose of his own person to the ser∣vice of another Prince without leave; but he may put himself voluntarily into the Service of his own Soveraign whose Subject he is. 4. Voluntiers are to weigh with themselves what special impediments they have to with-hold from going, in respect of some perticular calling, requiring their own person for discharge of the duties thereof, or some charge of a Family, Wife, and Children depending upon their personal be∣ing necessarily amongst them, or whether their being at home may do more good to the Countrey then the service in War. 5. Ther end must be good for defence of Re∣ligion, their King and Countrey, for Relieving
the unjustly Oppressed for maintenance of Right and such like, and withal to learn Experience for the good of their Countrey, but not to run in un∣advisedly, as some do out of a Malecontentedness, nor of an idle humor, nor of a foolish vain glory, or a bloody dsposition, of a base mind for Prey and Plundering, but as a man of valour, for more praise worthy and better ends. 6. Lastly that Voluntiers put themselves under the Command of Authority to do Service, and to be subject to Rule and Discipline, observing Or∣der, keeping their places where they are comman∣ded, from which they may not depart without leave of such Commanders as they have commit∣ted themselves unto: for though they enter vo∣luntarily, yet being under Authority, they may not think themselves then free at all times to part at their pleasure, for if they should, upon necessa∣ry service, such wandring Stars and such strag∣lers would utterly fail the Expectation of their Commanders. Thus with these considerations, men may be Voluntiers and put themselves into Military Ser∣vice and Authority may admit of them, as both the Scriptures and Histories shew, but yet the General and others with him must be cautious what Voluntiers they entertain; beware of such as fly from the Enemy, let them be tryed before they be trusted, for we may read in stories that such sometimes hath been sent of the Enemy to do mischief.
Two Spaniards feighned themselves Fugitives to the Venetians, with a purpose to kill Alvian their General, so did certain Turks with an in∣tention to kill Scanderberg, the Munidians which seem'd to forsake Hannibal and to fall to the Ro∣mans in the battel of Canna, were a great help to Hannibal to get the victory, in turning against the Romans upon a suddain, this wisdome was among the Philistians going to battel against Saul, they would not admit of David and his company, many other Examples hath been abroad, and here at home in our late unhappy wars, but I hope our Commanders will be more careful abroad (if there be occasion) in entertaining Voluntiers in other Countryes. CHAP. III. Of the just Causes of making war. VVArrs upon just causes undertaken is un∣doubtedly lawful, though contrary to the opinion of some, but there is nothing more for incouragement in any action than to have Con∣science satisfied in the lawfulness thereof. 1. God is pleased to be called a man of War, now he never admitted of a title of a thing unlaw∣ful, Exod. 15. 2. He has given command to his people to ight, he made Laws for directions to them, when
they went to war God sent his spirit upon them to incourage them, as in Gidion and Sampson, as you may read in the Book of Judges, and in 1 Sam. 15.2 24. Num. 31.3. God raised up some Prophets to comfort and set forward his people to war, thus he moved De∣borah to call Barak into the wars, Judg. 4. and Jahazil to encourage Judah to go against their Enemies, 2 Chron. 20.14, 15. God taught Da∣vid to play the part of a valiant Captain and Sol∣dier, he made his hands to war and his fingers to fight, and made his arm strong, for which Da∣vid tendred thanks to him, Psal. 18.39. Thus you may see what warrant war hath in the Old Testament, but in the New you will say tis otherwise, for he but once or twice at most is called the Lord of Hosts, James 5.4. more often the God of Peace, and we do profess the gospel the word of Peace; it is true, that all men should seek peace, and ensue after it as a blessing of God, yet just and necessary war is not to be condemned, St. Ambrose saith, it is part of Justice by war to defend our Countrey and confederates and such as need aid from spoylers and oppressors: neither doth the New Testament Matt. 24. disalow of war, so it be just; our Prince of peace tells us of war Rev. 19.17. and is pleased to be set out as the Captain of an Host riding on horseback, and subduing his Enemies; hereby shewing that his Church shall have wars and he will take their part: A Centu∣rian,
and Cornelius a Captain, and a Soldier that feared God waited on him Acts 10.1. the Lord in calling the Gentiles to the Gospel, made choice to begin with this calling; with a good conscience we may take up Arms when there is no safety but in Arms; we must know that God taketh not away the Law of Nature to defend our selves by forcible means against violent Enemies, God hath now appointed Kings to use the Sword, not only to punish Offenders under them, but also to defend their Subjects from violence and wrong at home and abroad, and what hindreth Princes and States to recover what is justly their own, if other∣wise not to be gotten but by force of Arms. As we see the undertaking of war to be lawful and honourable, so it must be understood whether it be just; for the cause as it is, either Good or E∣vil, so may the issue be thereafter expected; true it is that unjust wars may have good success, for the iniquity of the people against whom they are undertaken; a just war is in defence of our King, our Countrey, our Religion and Liberty, God alloweth to go to war against an Enemy coming upon us, Exod. 17. Jud. 6. Upon this ground was the wars of Joshua against the Amalekites, 1 Sam. 15. of Gidion against the Midianites, of Saul a∣gainst the Philistines, of Ahab against Benhadad, the Romans against Hannibal, and of our antient Brittains here against the Romans, Saxons and Danes: Kings may justly war against native Re∣bels,
it is a just war to help friends Allies & Asso∣ciates unjustly opprest and wrong'd, upon this ground Abraham armed himself against the four kings to recover Lot, whom they had carryed a∣way, Gen. 14.14. David rescued Keilah from the Philistines, 1 Sam. 23.1. Saul, Jabosh Giliah from the Amonites, Judas and Simon his brother help∣ed the other distressed Jews, 1 Mac. 5.10. It is a reproach to a Nation to forsake Friends, Confe∣derates, and such as should be holpen in their di∣stress, God willeth, alloweth us and commandeth us in such a case: it is a just war to bring under such as Rebel, or to get peaceable possession of a Crown, justly claimed as David did the King∣dome of Israel against Jeboshah, and the house of Saul: Now lest men imbroyl themselves in need∣less use of the Sword, to their own ruine, in the next place it is to be considered by what Authority this war is to be undertaken, for a necessary and just war doth not warrant every one upon their own heads to make war, though they be able to gather a people together; but the first mover thereof must be the Supream Authority of that Nation, the wars that God allowed, and so just which he alwaies commanded, were made ever under and by the Authority that he set over hs people, Exod. 17.8. Tthe war against Amaleck, Num. 31. was commanded by Moses, so was that against Midian; in like manner, Israel warr'd under the Command of Joshua, and after under
the Judges, and then under Kings, as Saul, David and the rest, therefore it is not for Christian Sub∣jects to be of that Rebellious principle, as to wage war or to take up Arms against their lawful So∣veraign, under pretence of Religion, much more to destroy their Subjects, and murder one of the best of Kings, whose blood I am afraid cryes for Judgement still on the heads of them and theirs that had a hand in it, and not truly repented for. CHAP. IV. For the choise of Soldiers and Officers, NOw in sending forth an Army, great care must be had what sorts of persons are to be sent forth. Let them be Natives and Subjects living under that Soveraign Authority that sends them out, though they be of several Countries; then their years such as the Lord held fit for war were in Is∣rael, 20 years old and upward, Num. 26.2. and such did Amaziah take for younger or hardly grown up to strength, and above 46 (except old and expert Soldiers for skill) are not to be admit∣ted, because strength decays 2 Chron. 25.5, as I have heard Learned Experienced Souldiers say, touching their bodies, in Israel were chosen strong men, able to go to war, men of valour and cou∣rage, stout and strong, of a vigorous and coura∣gious
mind, not fearful, 1 Sam. 14.51. for such were put out of the Host by God's appointment, and this did also that valiant Judas Maccabeus, 1 Macc. 3.56. what good will they do but fail in performance, make others to be faint hearted, and so give the Victory to the Enemy: likewise for their skill in Arms, raw and ignorant men are not to be put suddenly upon service, for not a multitude, but Art and Exercise geteth the victo∣ry, for the ignorant Soldier may not only endan∣ger himself but his followers too, therefore the Soldiers in Israel were very expert men, Judg. 20.16. Besides all this, it is fit Soldiers should be Re∣ligious, ye very requesite, because they expose themselves so to the danger of death, which none but such as are Religious can be prepared, for he that is not truly Religious can never be truly va∣lorous, for they then may expect God's ayd, they may fight with their hands and pray with their hearts, by which means that renowned Ma∣chabeus, 2 Mac. 15.26.27. conquered Mica∣canor, and slew of his Enemies 35 thousand: Re∣ligion will make men Valiant, never any in Holy Writ Recorded for Religious, but were indeed Valiant, for God requireth all should fear him, there was Abraham, David, Asa, Jehoidah the High Priest, Josias the Religious King, all valiant men, and how can they otherwise choose but be valiant when they know that God is reconciled to
them, death if it come will be to them advantage, these only have Faith in God,See Dr. Sutton Dean of Exeter, his book of War, moving the Ar∣my to be religious. and so will be cou∣ragious, the Religious, of conscience will be obedi∣ent, as Israel professed to be to Joshua, and are like the Centurians servant going and coming at com∣mand, Matt. 8.9. and not mutanous, they are of a quiet behaviour and temperate, not bablers, drunkards, nor quarrelsome, they will esteem of and love a worthy Captain according to his worth, who must be to them as a father, and they to him as sons; for in Israels language they were called the sons of the band, their Prayers are of more force to prevail with God to take their parts and to vanquish an Enemy than all other means be∣sides: Israel fought but Moses did procure the Victory by Prayer; now I know some of your young roaring, Atheistical, Prophane swearing dam-me boys will laugh at this, and foff and de∣ride this choice of Religious men, as having no pattern of warlike Chieftains to follow; let them look to the mighty man of war, the Lord of Hosts, the King of Kings, and consider what manner of Soldiers he did choose to fight his battels, the Commanders were Religious, as Joshua, the Judges, Ehud, Gidion, Jepthah, David and o∣thers, his Armies mustered by the Lord, were called His sanctified ones, Isa. 23.3. set a part by
him to Military imployment, they were all mighty ones, and strong, skilful to march and did not break rank, they cared not for wounds though the sword pierced them, Joel 2.2, 5, 7, 8. verses. I can bring you Examples here in our own Kingdome, in our late war, in the Army that was raised for the King in that small County, when Sir Ralph Hopton came down, who was counted a Puritan, he was religious and a brave Souldier likewise, pray enquire of the worst of our Enemies how it was governed, when they were first raised, and how God prospered them, being but 5 Regiments of Foot and very few Horse; The cheif Comman∣ders the Lord Mohun Sr. Bevil Greenfield, Sr. Nicholas Slaning, Coll. Godolphin, Coll. Trevanion, and others which ventured their Estates, and most of them lost their lives in the Service, their Offi∣cers and Soldiers under them were as well instru∣cted to fear God as as to honour and serve the King; Oaths was held so abominable amongst most of the Officers, that the Soldiers durst not swear an Oath before them. Likewise went to Pray∣ers before we went to fight, if possible we had time, the Soldiers durst not Command for a cup of beer, much less then to Robb, Plunder and Spoyl their Quarters where they march'd or lay, and for their undaunted valour and Resolutions upon Service, it was very well tryed several times before they ever had Relief or could March out of their own Countrey to joyn with other Forces
as that Remarkable Fight at Stratten; in Corn∣wal, where our Army was but 5000 foot at most, and about 17 Troops of Horse, the Enemy 12000 Foot and 1500 Horse, and a brave Artillery, 12 Brass Guns, and we but 3 Iron guns, we fought them and totally routed them, the Earl of Stam∣ford Commanding them, and Chidly his Lieute∣nant General, whom we took Prisoner, and all their Artillery; the Fight beginning about three in the Morning, and continued till three in the Af∣ternoon, they having another great body of Horse at Bodnam, which likewise the next day we rou∣ted and dispersed, and having at last neither Pow∣der nor Shot left, but Resolution and clubs of Musquets to fight them, we went to Prayers that Morning before we fought them, and that strengthned our Forces, and Armed our Soldiers with undaunted Resolution, in a word, no cou∣rage like a Christian courage. But it will be objected, that Jeptha had in his Camp vain men, there gathered to David men in distress, in debt, discontented, ye and wicked men sons of Belial, who fought with courage, recove∣red their losses and slew the Amalekites. It is very true, but these were some only a∣mongst the rest, the Commanders themselves and others among them were well given, again, they had such persons as pleas'd to come to them in their distresses, bu they did not hire such as Abime∣lk , vain men and light men, Jud. 9, 4. A
Company fit for such a Captain. Authority that may Press, may find fitter men for their Service in a good cause if they look to prosper, than Rogues, Loyterers, Swearers, debauch'd per∣sons, Goal-birds, Scuif and scumm of a people, held unworthy to live amongst honest men, very Ou casts of Parishes, not to be admitted indeed unto the honour of being a Soldier; but some will perhaps say that out of these Routs of Out∣casts, some have proved very serviceable, also so may unclean Livers, prophane Swearers, and Cup Captains have shewed great courage in wars, and its known that Heathen men, Julius Caesar, Alexander, Hector, Achilles, Themisto∣cles, Epaminondas, Pyrrhus, and infinite others have been vaant Soldiers, for these latter though Heathens, yet moral vertiles have been commen∣ded in them, and according to their Pagan Pro∣eion they were Religious; asking counsel of their gods, without which they would not go to war, and they hearkned to their Priests, Devines Southsayers, Astrologers, Chaldeans, and such as was Revealers (as they thought) of the will of their gods: but for the Rout of Out-casts it may  some, very ew have been serviceable, but wha have all the rest been, an heathen could say, tha of a Company Riotous and disorderly, there is  use, for the other that are held so valorous: tru it is, that humane fortitude may be in an Abia¦leck that murtherer of his brethren, in an Abner
Joab, as it was in these fornamed Renowned Heathen, yea in other most lewd and vicious, and most prophane in religion, there may be out of Pride and ambition, out of a furious heat of heart out of a resolved fool-hardy desperateness, out of hope of spoyle; out of some such grounds per∣haps shewed a kind of valour: but this is not Christian fortitude such as was in David and o∣thers accompanied with other laudible vertues, what desperate companions were the three Sedi∣trous Captains in Jerusalem and their followers, they prodigally shed the blood of one another, and like Lyons fought with the Romans, but at length to their utter confusion: what becomes of such seeming valourous men let experience speak? happy were it that Christian Armies were gathe∣red, of Religious, or at least of civel and moral honest men, that the commendations of them might be like Scipio Africanus his Army, the meanest of whose Soldiers seemed to be grave Senators, but it is the Deportment, Discipline, and Conduct of Officers that must make experi∣enced an well governed Soldiers, when David had numbred the people, as likewise Amaziah, they placed Commanders over them, of which somewere over thousands, some over hundreds, some over fities, 2. Sam. 18. and some but over tens, they were called the Officers of the Host, the chief had command over many thousands, all of them were choice persons,
valiant men skilful in the use of Arms, ry'd Soldi∣ers in the field worthy their places, they wer wise and valiant and such as  God before them and in the service of war offered themselves to the Lord, and though all were worthy praise some exceeded others, and were more Renowned as were the special Worthies of David, and tha without Pride in themselves, not contemning others and without envy of the less famous, for any thing the Scripture speaks of; the Leaders Captains and Officers were none of them young striplings, raw and unskilful soldiers, but a known en, if a David, a young man, a youth be advan'd to be Captain over a thosand by Saul it was extraordinary indeed, because he was known and had often shewed himself to be vaant, a man of War, prudent in speech, and wise in his actions and behaviour, for he had lain a Lion and a Bear, and overcame Goliah, before this his ad∣vancement, such a youth as he may well be ad∣mitted to Command, but Adrian the Emperour expresly forbad beardless youths to aspire to such a charge; Alexander in his Expedition against Darius chose such for his Commanders as was Experienced in his Fathers service, and of rip judgement, such as have not attaind to the grace of a manly countenance in such man-like services cannot procure authority sufficient to command brave spirits; and such as procured their places without desert was removed. Caesar being in A∣frica
dismissed some Collonels & Captains with dis∣grace because they had got such places by favour  no by just deservings; deserts should only ad∣vance every officer such as are Valiant, Loyal, Di∣igent, men of Skill and aiming at publick good, not profit, or other ourses not befitting a ight Sol∣dier, much less a sound Christian; worth in men advanceth the work intended; wars by God's blessing will prosper, soldiers will be more obedi∣ent, and the whole Army better governed. Now I would not have no young Gentlemen and Noble persons mistake me, that I should any wayes yonder value such as hath taken Command and raised men or the speedy advancing an Army;  know that some hath taken delight to experi∣ence themselves in Discipline from their youth d bent themselves to learn to Command though they were never commanded: but I speak of such as despise, and scornfully look upon old Officers, a not worthy to bear the Titles they have honou∣rbly got, much less to have Commands answera∣ble to what they are able to undertake, and with knowledge and  perform if try'd, which I beleive if His Majesty knew their constant Loyal∣ty, their former ability, and their now indigen∣cy, they should be some wayes provided for, as well as others, though they are old, else it is a bad encouragement for the young: that virtuous and valiant King, Pyrrhus who was the greatest Commander that was in his time, when word
was brought him, that one that was an old Soldi∣er who had faithfully served him was dead, the King was very sorry, some told the King he was old, and ripe for death, Yes (saith the King) I am not sorry for his death, but that death hath cut him off from the good that he deserved, and I inten∣ded him: it is written of the Lacedemonians, that they did not only provide for men which served them in the wars with good salleries, but also the very horses when they were grown old, they bought a piece of ground to keep them in. I found an old Treatise that was translated out of a Spanish copy, was Printed at Saragoza 100 but remain'd in Oxford, dedicated to our late So∣veraign, of ever blessed Memory, King Charles the first, the Life and Death of Jacobo Alman∣sor an Arabian, Mahometan King, for Example, it is written of his Vertues and Victories, when he saw his Officers were grown old, having spent their best time in his service licened then to take rest, and honoured them with places in Cities, Castles and Fortresses, giving them good Saleries, receiving still their Pay what they had in the wars, which was the cause he never wanted men of Service, and he won eighty and six battels by Sea and Land, Conquered Spain, and took five Kings, subdued Asia, Africa and Europe, it is said of him in his Epitaph, That he observed Justice with benignity and mercy, and kid the nakedness, hunger and thirst of his Subjects with
his large and liberal hands. He began his Raign in Anno Dom. 654 and dyed in 723. CHAP. V. Of Discipline, Government, and the Evils to be aoided, in a Cap and punished. AN Army gathered, General, and Officers chosen, and by good counel the war establi∣shed, yet all is nothing without Military Disci∣pline; which is the main foundation and strength of an Army, the Lord therefore when he brought forth his Host of the Israelites under the General Moses, he appointed a strict Discipline, which is the strongest guard to preserve an Army from destruction. Alexander Severus, so called, for his strickt observing of Discipline, he held Discipline the preservation of the Common-wealth, as the letting of it slip should be the loss both to his Name and Empire. Scipio Africanus so observed Dis∣cipline, as his Soldiers seemed Senators, as Plu∣tarch witnesseth: the cruel Turks observe Dis∣cipline to our admiration, by which they have mightily prevailed against us Christians, who may be ashamed of our over much loosness there∣in. The well ordering of the Host of Israel by the Lord, stood in these things. First, in making excellent Laws for googo-Nment,
for his Laws were so righteous as no¦ation could come near them, nor had the lik; as Mos old them, Good Laws are the founda∣tion of Order and Discipline, the guide of mens actions and preservation of an Army, without which there would be nothing but disorder and so confusion. Secondly, in the Execution of those Laws, from which none might turn either to the right hand or to the left, the life of all Laws is to see them observed and strictly obeyed, for else Laws be made in vain. Thirdly, in not allowing any priveledge to any person to transgress the Laws; Moses the General was a strickt observer thereof, and so was his Deputy Lieutenant Joshua, and if Moses himself transgressed, he tasted of the Kings the Lord of Hosts displeasure, Num. 20.12, 14. Moses was so just and strict a justicer, that in just proceedings he would have none spared, not the heads of the people, nor any to spare his bro∣ther, nor his companion, nor his Son, Saul would have put Jonathan to death for not keeping the charge put upon the whole Hot; Num. 25.4. Exod. 32.27.29. And the Romans without respect of persons, punished offenders: the Con∣sul Titus Manlius caused his own son (for break∣ing the Law of Discipline, though otherwise his act in slaving an upbraiding Enemy was honoura∣ble, and to the Romans beneficial) to be Beea∣ded,
none in a Camp may think themselves free from observing Order, no not the General, for he that commandeth others, must order well him∣self, or his command will grow in to contempt; this made Papirus to purpose the death of the Ge∣neral of his Horse, because he fought without command, though he returned Victorer; Alex∣ander the great, would desie of his Soldiers the observation of no stricter Laws than himself would undergo: Adrian the Emperor was singular praise worthy for this, so was Scipio, Severus and others. Fourthly, in promising rewards to the obedi∣ent, grace and favour to such as keep themselves within bounds and good government; the promi∣ses are set down at large in many places by Mo∣ses, and was faithfully performed as to Caleb, Jo∣shua, Phineas, and others; this will procure love to the Laws, make them more remarkable, and take up the minds of the well disposed with a watchful care to obey them; for as impartial Ex∣ecution of Laws terrifies some, so the reward per∣formed putteth life and courage into the hearts of other some to do worthily. Now the evils to be avoided and punished are several; there is nothing displeasing to God but sin, and sin it is that pre∣vents God's blessings, Deut. 23.9. and causeth all success, as Moses exhorted Israel, and as Au∣relianus the Emperor said to his General in a Mi∣litary Epistle of his, if thou be a tribune, yea if hou wilt live, keep back the Soldiers hands from ing evil.
1. Evil to be taken heed of is Atheisme, deri∣ding of God and Religion, cursing and blasphe∣ming his name, this God punisheth with death, Lev. 24.16. for where God and Religion is con∣temned, what can prosper? Q. Fabius a Heathen imputed the calamity that befel the Romans in the overthrow of Flanimus, to be the neglect of Religion; and the only means said he to recover God's avour, was to reverence it, and to have a care to please God; should then a Christian de∣ride God and Religion: what came of Rabsakah and other Blasphemers? God did slay in his Host 85000. Julian the Emperour after he apostated and became Christ's Enemy, he soon came to de∣struction▪ and Julian his Uncle, who in contempt of Christ and the Sacrament, pissed against the Table; before he dyed he fell into such a Disease as made his entrails rot, and he to void filth at his mouth: and the abuse of his name by swearing and cursing and damned Oaths, the Lord telleth us that a curse remaineth upon them, and he threatneth to cut them off: yet some hold them∣selves no Soldiers, till they can gracelesly, as a grace to them, thunder out bloody Oaths, ay and of late days, what terrible oaths have been inven∣ted, that it would make one that hath any fear of God in him, tremble to hear them: let me be bold to tell you, that if you were not Atheists and be∣leived there was no God, you would never so of∣ten call upon him to damn you for every idle false
thing that you do: but how can the Soldiers be controuled for it when they learn it of their Offi∣cers; let your Valour, Discipline, and conduct be never so good, you may find those Oaths be the cause of conquering of you, and if God be not the more merciful to you, your damnation may fall upon you as suddenly as you have often wisht it. 2. Prophanation of the Sabboth, the Lord's day, God punished this in the Camp of Israel, Judas Maccabeus took special care to keep the Sabboth with his Host, when Nicanor King Deme∣triu's General would in contempt of God fight with Judas on the Sabboth day, there was slain of his men 35000 and he kill'd, his head struck off, his tongue cut out for blasphemy, and his head sent to Jerusalem to be hang'd upon the Tower, 2 Macc. 8.27. One of the Kings of Denmark, contrary to the perswasions of the Divines, would joyn battel with an Enemy upon the day of Pentecost, but he lost the Field and his life withal, vain sports are to be abandoned on the Lord's day in a Christian Host. 3. Rebellion treasonable practises, Mutanies, Rebellion against lawful Authority God punisheth extraordinarily, making the Earth to open and swallow up some, and fire to devour others; see it in Absolom though he had most of Israel to take his part, let the end of them, Bichry and Zimery
make men take heed of Rebellion Treasonable practises and conspiracies and secret working with the Enemy are to be carefully lookt into, and to be prevented; and the parties found out, severely punished; for good Gedeliah being warned, and not making timely enquiery, was by trayterous Ishmael cruelly murthered; so one Quintilius Va∣rus for being too slack to find out the treachery of one Narminius of which he had intelligence, was slain with all his company: of such was Ne∣hemiah in danger, but his wisdome prevented, and Judas Maccabeus had a Rodorus among them a discloser of secrets to the Enemy, but he was found out: Cyrus the younger Executed one Ountes which went about to betray him to the Enemy. Mutany, God punisheth murmuring, and such as cause Sedition; and stir up others to grow Rebellious; Scipio upon a Mutany of his Soldiers in Spain, put to death the chief movers, and so pacified the rest; so did Tiberius, when his did Mutany in Pannania; but it is hard measure to poor starving Soldiers, for coming and deman∣ding their pay in extream need to be held Muta∣nous; for only this Captains should hang some to make others willing to dye rather for hunge then any more to complain, which is unchristia cruelty, and merciless inhumanity. 4. The ill use of much Gameing, a thing that was not in use in God's Host, and good it we
that it were less in use in our Camp, for God is dis∣honoured by Swearing, monys wasted and many evils happen thereupon; I have heard that the Spaniard in time of Service doth banish unlawful games; in the Seige of Poytiers, the Admiral cau∣sed a certain Ensign to be hanged, for playing at cards while his company did watch in some peril; many Exercises should be appointed them, and such as can Read to get Histories of War, and o∣ther good books to read and discourse thereof: Thus the mind and body will be well imployed, it may be some Soldiers would be so well Exerci∣sed, if there were Commanders like Caesar, who read much, and did write his own wars; or like Pirrhus the famous Martialist in his time, who wrote many books; and as Hanibal in whose Tents were found many books which he studied; brave generous spirits should be delighted in either to read or hear read the Acts of valiant Warriers, and scorn base Play and childih games. 5. Is Cowardliness, and flying out of the Host to the Enemy: Cowardliness when a Soldier dare not for fear perform his charge: Cowards God sent out of his Camp, when he sent his to war, and so did Maccabeus; Appius Claudius did behead those Soldiers, that throwing down their Arms fled from their Enemies: Licurgus made a Law amongst the Spartans, That no man should return home that turned his back upon his Enemy: Caesar put certain Ensigns from their places, because
they lost their ground in an Encounter with Pom∣pey at Dirrbachium: The Coward doth not on∣ly help the Enemy, but dishartens his friends; The Lacedemonian women would deliver Shields to their Sons, exhorting them to war, either to bring them again, or to dye valiently; there was among them Damatria who hearing that her son had not fought like a Lacedemonian, when he came slew him; so much did women there detest a cowardly spirit: flying away out of the Host to the Enemy, is worthy severe punishment, such base and treacherous spirits amongst all the Sol∣diers in Israel I never read of, the Romans puni∣shed such with death, Caius Matienus coming but home from the Army in Spain without leave, was beaten under a Gibbe, and sold for one piece of money, to signify the base esteem of such a Fugi∣tive. 6. And last is Murder, Theft. Filching, Ra∣pine, Robery, and Sacriledge, the killing of one another; God gave a very strict charge against it, Joab the General being guilty must dye for it even at the Alar; 1 Kings, 2.30.31. Captains may not like rash-braind and bloody men, disor∣derly kill Soldiers: he that shall do so among the Spaniards, I have read, dieth for it; Qarrels and Challenges thereupon with acceptances have been the loss of many lives unworthily, hereby Princes lose their Subjects, the Army weakned, and the Enemy thereby advantaged; Soldiers
lives should be pretious one to another, their blood should be spilt in the Public cause against the Enemy, not in private quarels, no if a man put the lye upon another: Jehu a right valiant Captain marhing uriously, did not quarrel with the Captains in his Company, when they said it was false which he spoke, so putting the lye upon him, Jeremiah said it was false, which was a lye to a Captain of the Ward; Gedeliah put the lye upon Johanan a Captain, a high and proud spi∣rited man, and valiant too, yet none of these of∣ferd to any the stab, nor did beast-like, more than man-like, rush upon one another and kill-one the other: these quarrelsome fellows are not ever the best men, drunkenness, whoeing, swearing and no doubt forswearing, are no marks of disgrace o them, but the tearm Lye, I must confess is a rvoking word, and cowards will use it to pro∣voke a patient yet a good spirited man, and found so when they try him, or before the face of an E∣nemy; away wih these delusions of Sathan, you that are truly valiant and right Christian Souldi∣ers, suffer not your selves to be transported with this conceited disgrace to seek Revenge, and so be guilty of blood, a crying sin before God. Now for Theft also, God punisheth Acans theft, yet these are too common with Soldiers, for many base fellows fitter for the Jayl, ye the Gallows than the wars, are no sooner enterd into Service, but are bold to lay hands upon other mens goods,
which they carry away with many a bitter curse, the curse is upon the thief and the swearer, who also bringeth a curse upon others, as Achan did, that one thief caused the overthrow of the Army, what evil then will a multitude of thieves do in an Host, Aurelianus the Emperor would not suffer his Soldiers to take a Pullet or chicken from coun∣trey people his friends: Tiberius made one of his guard to be put to death for taking a Peacock out of a mans yard, Tamberlain caused a Soldier to be slain for taking a poor womans milk and some cheese and not paying for it; Pescenius Niger would have put to death divers Soldiers met to∣gether easting themselves with that they had stol∣len, but through intreaty their lives was saved, yet they were punished, and their punishment was to lye in Tents during the war without fire, to live only with bread and water, and to make restitution to the Husbandmen; and the reason gi∣ven to this severity, because such acts did tend to Rebellion. Aurelius writes an Epistle to Soldi∣ers, to keep their hands from other mens goods, but theft is not only to be restrained in Soldiers, but also in Captains and Officers, which they may many waes commit, by robbing poor Soldi∣ers of their pay; Caesar was severe against this villany, so as two of his Captains of horse Ros∣cillus and Aegus having defrauded Souldiers of their Pay, fled to the Enemy as soon as they heard that Caesar had notice of it, its an indelible
base character of infamy, saith one, to defraud a poor Soldier of his due. Likewise in taking from a Soldier his weapon or horse: Theophilus the Emperour of the East, banished a Commander out of ins Dominion, for taking a Soldiers horse per force from him, for want whereof he was af∣terwards stain in battel, and withal bestowed the Commanders possession upon the Soldiers wid∣dow, albeit that Captain had bestowed the horse upon the Emperour himself, unwitting to him till the widdow claim'd him as the Emperor rode on him, Of Captains abusing poor soldiers, read Sr. Tobis Smiths Epistle to the Nobility of England, as Captains and Officers may not wrong soldiers, so soldiers may not rob one another: Modestina judg'd him worthy of death that stole his fellows , besides great care must be had that soldiers do no spoyl, nor rob such by whom they are per∣mitted to pass by peaceably, nor such as be Vi∣ctuallers of the Camp, such must be suffered to go and come very securely; the Army of the Prince of Aurange besieging Florence; had like to have been famished through the disorder only of three or four soldiers which rob'd the Merchants and Victualles which came and went from the Camp, but those were hang'd and then plenty was brought in, the punishing of this sin in Tamber∣lains Camp; made his mighty Army of many hun∣dred thousands for to be plentifully served. These are those sinful evils which principally
in an Army are to be suppressed and punished, for by suppressing disorders, God is honoured, the Army strengthned, the Enemy dishartned, neigh∣bours and friends secure and incouraged to abide constant; but where sin doth reign, and disorders suffered, there all things fall out clean contrary, misery and want will follow to their ruine and overthrow, God will be against them and friends will abandon them as unworthy of aid. CHAP. VI. Directions and Instructions for the Discipline of Foot Soldiers. Six chief things a Soldier ought to be instructed in when he first enters himself to be under Command. FIrst to make choice of a civil comrade, and an able Soldier if he can, that he may instruct him to handle his Arms. 2. to keep his Arms clean and fixt. 3. To keep his Arms by him in a reddiness, if sudden occasion should happen to be called to them. 4. To behave himself civilly in his Quarters, and to be in them in due time; and not to be out after the Taptow is beat. 5. To keep himself clean in his linnen and clothes.
6. And Lastly, to give respect to his superiour and inferiour Officers and not to dispute their commands, and to be civil to the Corporal of your Squadron that he may teach you at leisure times to handle your Arms compleatly. Now there is six necessary motions and po∣stures belongs to the Exercise of a foot Company, 1. Orders, 2. Faceings, 3. Doublings, 4. Countermarchings, 5. Wheelings 6. Firings. There is six Orders. 1. The Closest Order, which is not a Foot be∣tween Files, it is only necessary for a Stand of Pikes to keep off the Horse from entring a Port or Auenew, Piles at this closest and the Ranks at Order, or closest Order, which is 3 Foot or a Foot and half, in this posture they may keep off a par∣ty of Horse. 2. Is Close Order, which is a foot and half, this is necessary when Pikes and shot are inter∣lin'd to charge horse, when they have fired to fall off to the Right and Left from their Center, the Pikes Ported while they fall off, a close Order is fit for Firings and Wheelings. 3. Is Order, that is three foot, which is a fit distance between File and File, either Marching or in the Field. 4. Open Order, which is six foot, that is com∣monly between Rank and Rank, either marching
or in the Field, but in a March between Open Or∣der and Distance, which may be about nine foot, is very convenient for Pikes when they march in a Body by themselves, if the Officer thinks fit. 5. Is Distance, which is twelve Foot; which is a very fit space in time of Service, to run up Field pieces, opening from the center to the Right and Left, either in the Flanks of Musqueteers or in the Body of Pikes, and when they have fired to run them back in the Reer, and the Files to close again as they were. 6. Is Double Distance, which is twenty four foot, this may be used when any great person is coming to view the Company, to make a guard for Ranks to open backwards, to double Distance or what distance the Officer sees fit, according to the fulness of his Company; then for half Ranks, double your Right and Left hand Files from your center, every man upon the Right from the center, fall behind his right hand man, and so doubles the Right I and File, so every man upon the Left from the center doth the like, so you make but two files, but when you make your guard, you face to the Right and Left inwards and make two Ranks, no other word for Reducing but, Files Rank off as you were. Now take notice these Orders or Distances are to be observed as your Officers gives the Word of Command, either for Ranks or Files, for Ranks o open backwards, or advance forward, or Files
to open from the Right or from the Left, or from the Right and Left, as your Officer pleases to Ex∣ercise, only observe your word of Command when your Officer gives it, and not mistake Ranks for Files: Now your File-leaders, your Bringers up, and your Right and Left hand Files, must be sure to know their Distances, for the File-leaders and the Right hand File guides the whole body, so doth the Bringers up and Left-hand File, when they, face about, the Rear is made the Front, for a Souldier hath but two men to observe in Marching (Opening, Closing, and Countermarch∣ing) that is, his Right hand man and his File-leader, File-leaders are to take their distance from the Right hand man, or from the Left if Comman∣ded; now to keep an even Rank let every man be sure to keep his right heell even with his Right-hand mans left heell and Files every man to keep right behind his Leader, upon Service he will find it a good security, one man standing amiss spoyls either Rank or File, (which is the credit of a Company) either Marching or in the Field, so much for the first fow Orders. 2. Now your second is Facings which I have brought into six, which are necessary and ser∣viceable. 1. FAcing either Right or Left as occasion serves.
2. Facing to the Reer. 3. Facing to Front and Reer. 4. Facing to the Right and Left from your cen∣ter. 5. Facing to the Right and Left inward to your center. 6. Facing to either Angles, or to all your An∣gles. Now let Soldiers observe in all their Facings, to turn upon the right heell, and then they shall keep their Ranks and Files even. Five of these Facings are necessary for fings, but facing to the right and left inward to your center. The word of Command is March and inter∣charge ground, then, your Body of Pikes are Hanks, and your Musqueteers are in the body, which may charge the Horse if the Horse should Flank them, and if you have a good stand of Pikes, you may interline Musqueteers and Pikes; The word of Command is, Pikes face to your Right and Left inwards, Musqueteers face to your Right and Left outwards from your center, then March when your Pikes and Musque∣teers are joyn'd, face to your Leader, then you you have a Rank of Musqueteers and a Rank of Pikes; then Ranks to the Right or left hand dou∣ble, take notice this must be it your stand of Pikes be equal with your Musqueteers, if not let the odd Files of Musqueteers that are over above be in the Flanks.
3. Is Doublings. 1. DOubling Ranks either to the Right or Left. 2. Doubling Files either Right or Left. 3. Half Files double your Front. 4. Bringers up double your Front. 5. Half Ranks of the Left, face to the Right, March and double your right half Ranks, face to your Leader, then face to the Left, Reduce them. So likewise half Ranks of the Right, face to the Left, March and double your Left half Ranks, face to your Leader, face to the Right and reduce them. Directions. RAnks Doubling, every even Rank 1 doubles the 2 the 4 and the 6 movers, if you be ne∣ver so deep, if you face about them that moed before stands, and they that stood double if you double to the Right, then move with your right foot first, to the right hand of your Leader, at 3 steps or motions, as you were: fall off with your left foot first, and at three motions it brings you in your right ground again: Likewise if you double to the Left, you step with the left foot first and fall back with your right. Now for Files you that are File-Leaders, tell from your right hand File whether you are even or odd, if even
you must double to the Right, if commanded move we with your right foot and at three motions, fall behind your right hand man, as you were, advance up with your left foot first in your place again. Now if you be an odd File from the right hand, you must double to the lef, with your left foot fall beind your left hand man, and with your right foot adance in your place again when com∣manded: take notice that the File-leaders and tight hand File guides Ranks and Files, for the Ranks move not till their right hand man moves, nor the Files till the File-Leader moves, when you double rank or file move altogether, not be∣fore your right hand men and File-Leaders. Now for your half Files, doubling your Front the half Files is the 4. Ranks if you be six deep, if you dou∣ble to the Right you March up of the right hand of your Leaders keeping your distance, then fa∣cing about to the left, you March and fall into your places: so if to the left, you March on the left hand of your Leaders, you face about to the right and fall into your places. Now Bringers up to the Right or Left hand, double your Front, you move with that foot first as the word of Command is; the Bringers up Marches, passeth the 5th Rank, then they March, falls into the second Rank next the Front, and the half files in the third Rank reducing; face about on the contrary hand, march and fall into your pla∣ces.
Now the six doubling is: Half Files face to your right and left from your center, the center is the midst of your files, if you be even files; if not you cannot Exercise handsomly: if you be twelve files, you face six to the right and six to the left; the word of Command is (as I take it) March clear your Body and double your Front to the right and left intire; this posture drawing up at the brink of a hill, you may seem three Bodies, being three stands of Pikes; now you may be re∣duced two wayes; face about clear your Body, face to the right and left inwards, March, joyn, and face to your Leader. 2. Reducement. Half Files face to your right and left inwards, March and double your Front half files, then face to your Leader, then face about, March and take your places. 4. Is Countermarches. There is but three Countermarches, Gaining, Maintaining and Losing ground: in your Coun-Marches your Files to be at your Open Order, your Musquets Poys'd and your Pikes advanc'd. 1. Gaining ground; to your right hand ad∣vance three steps, face about to your right, March easily, observing your right hand men which
was your left hand men before, let your Serjeant be in the Rear, and shew them their ground where they shall stand, face to your Leader, then the Front is the Rear and the Rear the Front, then countermarch them to the left, then they have gain'd six steps of ground in the Front. 2. Maintaining ground; they step one step and fall off, either to the Right or Left. 3. Losing ground; every man falls off the ground he stands on and follows his Leader, so you lose your whole ground. Countermarches, Maintaining and Losing are very necessary for quick firing, they all make rea∣dy, then they fire and countermarch off very quick; countermarch losing upon a Retreat is good Service; they Fire, and every man falls of upon the ground he stands on, upon a counter∣march you may make your half files your Rear and your Front half File the Front; thus, Hal Files to your Right hand about, then to the righ and left hand countermarch, your Front Half Files countermarch to the Right, and your Rea to the Left, then to your Leader; Reduce Fro and Rear half Files to your Right and Left coun∣termarch, then your Front half Files to yo Left, and your Rear to the Right, they have  same ground and the same places facing to  Leader: then Half Ranks countermarching, fa to your Right and Left from your center, th countermarch to the Right and Left outward
then your Pikes are Flanks and your flanks the Body; to your Leader; Reduc't; Face to your Right and left from your center, then counter∣march to your Right and Left inwards; to your Leader. 5. Is Wheelings. 1. Wheeling to the Right. 2. Wheeling to the Lef. 3. Wheele to the Right hand about, 4. To the Left hand about. 5. Wheel to the Right and Left inwards to your center. 6. Wheell is face about. Then Wheell to the right and left inwards to the center. Directions. YOu must close your Files to your close Order; and Ranks to their Order; slope your Mus∣quets and advance your Pikes; if you wheel to the Right, your Right hand man stands still, only s a hinge moves as the Body comes about upon is right heell, and the Left hand man moves the Body, and must observe a distance in the ground hat he may neither close nor open his Files in heelings: now the Fe-leaders must observe eir Left hand men in wheeling to the Right, and e Right in wheeling to the Left; and if File∣eaders observe their distance in their Files, the
Left hand men must move fastest; it will ask Offi∣cers great care to teach them to wheell handsome∣ly, which is a very necessary and commendable motion if well done, either to the Right or Left, or Right hand about, or Left hand about; the Right hand men and Left hand men in the Front beng the chief guides in their wheelings; it is ne∣cessary in gaining the wind of an Enemy, or in altring your Pikes and Musqueteers either to the Front or Rear, or to your Flanks. As for Example, Wheell to your Right and left inwards to your center, then your Musque∣teers are in the Front and your Pikes in the Rear; when you have wheel'd facing to your Leader Reducing, wheell to your Right and Left out∣wards from your center, so to the Rear; face a∣bout and wheell to the Right and Left inwards to the center then your Pikes are in the Front, and your Musqueteers are in the Rear; Reduce them as before. Then Half Files face about, wheell Front and Rear half Files to the Right and left in∣wards to your center, then your Musqueteers are in Front and Reer, and your Pikes in the midst of the Body; much more may be done with Whee∣ling, but I shall leave it to those whose often Ex∣ercising hath learn'd what I have forgot for want of imployment.
6. Is Firings. 1. Front. 2. Reer. 3. Right Flank. 4. Left Flank. 5. Front and Reer. 6. Both Flanks. According as the Enemy chargeth them Firing to the Front. FIrst two Ranks make ready, First Rank ad∣vanceth six paces when he Presents; the second Rank Marches up ready to Present against the first hath fired; when they have fired they fall off to the Right and Left in the Reer, loading again as fast as they can: this Firing is proper, Marching towards the Enemy; but when they approach nearer the Enemy, then All make ready, the two first Ranks advanceth 3 paces, Presents, Fires, falls off the first Rank stooping, the next standing. The third firing is three Ranks advanceth, first kneeling, 2 stooping, the 3 standing. The first and second fires, the third presents, if commanded fires. This posture of firing is most commonly fired by Divisions; the Divisions that fires stands still and make ready again while others advanceth and Fires. There is another firing advancing upon the E∣nemy, and very necessary, interlin'd with Pikes, charging they all make ready the first Rank, Fires, Stands, makes ready again, the second Rank advanceth before them, the third be fore them so advanceth still as long as your
Officers sees advantage, the Pikes still advancing with them; I need not give any Directions for the Reer or Flanks firing, the Reer firing is for a Retreat, and the Flanks is either for advancing or Retreating. Now I shall only give you my opinion concer∣ning the Postures of Pike and Musquet, which is the shortest and speediest way to make young Sol∣diers fit for present Service. For the Pikes, I have reduc't into six. 1. Is Order your Pike. 2. Advance. 3. Shoulder. 4. Port. 5. Comport. 6. Cheek & Trail, which is very little difference only removing the hand. For your Order it is a fit posture for a Centry in the day time to be set at any Carriages belonging to the Magazeen or Artilery; and when you stand to your Arms in the Field: for your advance it is a fit Posture to Troop home your Colours; to fetch your Colours; when you wheell or coun∣termarch, or when you are interlin'd with Mus∣queteers, to be ready to Port or Charge. Shoulder is for a March. Port is only when you enter a gate, or Por that you may be ready to Charge if you were op∣posed by Horse. Comport is necessary when you March up Hill.
Cheek is a fit Centry posture in the night. Trayl is only fit for your Marching throw a a cops or wood in the night, every man to take hold of his Leaders butt end of his Pike and joyn it with his Spear end, March easily, your Files Marcheth out compleatly as they enter in, Now you may charge from all these postures, but never us'd upon Service, nor necessary only 3 which is, from your shoulder, Advance and port, there is two Postures more, Charging to the Horse, and your Funeral posture. The First, from your Order to your inside Or∣der; that is, your Butt end of your Pike, in the inside your right foot, your left hand holding your Pike; with your right hand draw your Sword over your left arm, bending with your right knee, keeping firm your Pike with your oot, charging to the brest of the Horse, you may face and charge any way, turning on your right heell; when you have done charging, Order your Pikes; lock your Pike with your right legg and eath your Sword. 2. Your Funeral Posture, you only ground our Pikes to the left hand of your Leaders, and ce to the Left hand about, so Trail; take notice  your Funeral posture the Rear and youngest Officer Leads, the less you are Exercis'd with it he better it is for your Company.
Six chief and necessary Postures of the Musquet. 1. ORder, which is answerable to Pikes, Order the Butt end close to your right foot with your Lock outwards, your right hand up to your Muzzl end, but not over your Muzzel, and your left hand akembow by your side, (having no Rest) which is a graceful posture. 2. Poyse, which is answerable to your advance of Pike; your right hand close under the Pan, and your thumb up the side of your Pan. 3. Shoulder, which is answerable to Pikes be∣ing ready for a March. 4. Joyn your left hand holding your Musquet by the stock, the Barrel upwards, under your Lok at a Ballance, yet your Muzzel mounted, your right hand imployed either to your center posture or guarding your Pan, when you stand made ready or Marching under a Gate or Port. Present, a compleat posture if you stand well, with a full body, your Musquet breech close to your right shoulder holding your elbow up, your left foot standing a little further than the right, your heels bending something inwards, and your toes a little outward, leaning your shoulder a little forwards close to your Musquet, your face upright,
not bending to the Lock of your Musquet as if you were aiming at a mark. 6. Firing. brest high or something low∣er. Now when you are commanded to load your Musquets either from your Order or shoulder. 1. Joyn or ballance your Musquet. 2. Open your Pan and clear it with your Thumb, or a little scut or Furr, which your nea Soldiers will have hang at their Bandeleers, which will clear better than your thumb. 3. Prime your Pan, handle your Primer with your two forefingers and your thumb, so Prime over the breech of your Pan 4. Shut your Pan, east about, in your casting about, shake off your loose corns of Powder that is on the ier of your Pan, for in trying your match it may do a mischief; in casting about, step forwards with your right leg, holding your Mus∣quet in your lft hand, with your barrel down∣wards. 5. Charge and load wih bullet: open your Bandeleers with your teeth, charge with Powder, draw forth your scourer, shorten it to an inch, take the bullet out of your mouth; ram down your bullet, recover your scourer, shortning him upon your brest to a handful or more, and hold so with your fingers that you endanger not your hand over the Muzzle, if he should fire by chance being hot in Service, some sparks may lye in
the breech of him, when you have Loaded. 6. Recover and Poys, casting back your right foot, then you are ready eher to Order or shoul∣der, as your Officer thinks fit. When you are commanded to make ready. First is, Joyn or ballance again. 2. Draw forth your Match, blow your Coal. 3. Cock and fit your Match. 4. Guard your Pan with your two fingers over your Pan. 5. Present, when you present blow your Coal again. 6. Fire. There is Six good Instructions for Soldiers to Ob∣serve for Firing well. 1. To keep good Priming Powder 2. To keep a good Coal in your Match 3. To try and make fit your Match, that you Coal may rather bruise at the breech of your Pa than Cock too short. 4. Carry your Arms fair, when you stand made ready, for fear your Peice going off yo may offend your Leader. 5. When you Present blow your Match, an Present breast high, rather lower, bend your pre∣senting a little towards the left; if you be on th right Division, if the left, bend a little toward the Right, for firing foreright, your shot ma
go thorow the Files, which thus levelling a little a cross your shot must do execution in the body, and specially if you be near your Enemy. 6. When you Fire, draw your Tricker but once, if he fires not, fall off and mount your Piece going off, if he should fire he might do no harm to your Leader. I shall not presume to give instructions to any Officers what their duties is, only these six pro∣perties they ought to be endowed with. 1. Courage. 2. Policy. 3. Patience. 4. Humility. 5. Mercy. 6. Charity. Courage and Policy are good Companions in the Field before the face of an Enemy, Patience and Humility will gain the love of Soldiers and all others. Patience will Teach and Discipline a Company sooner than any hasty or passionate words or blows can do. When you give the word of Command, give them time, and shew them how it should be done, if they be young Soldiers, if old Soldiers and neg∣lectful, then ought some severity to be used.
Mercifulness, in not too severely punishing, if they be not common offenders. Charitableness, In taking care of them in their sickness, or lying wounded when their Pay cannot maintain them: or if they are taken Prisoners to get them Exchanged or send them Relief if you can. These things will make your Soldiers stick to you in time of Service, and venture their lives if they see you ingaged, to fetch you off. Gentlemen, or Fellow Soldiers, I have sent this Old English Officer amongst you, how he will be intertaind I know not, I hope some will respect him for his Loyalty, though by some others slighted for his Indigency; he looks for no entertainment of Self-conceited Time-servers and self-ended men, for they disdain Loyalty if clothed with Poverty. God and a Souldier they alike adore, Just at the brink of danger, not before, The danger past they are both alike required, God is forgot, and the Soldier slighted.
Learning and Arts by most these days we see Are Honour'd and Respected, when they Age be. VVhy should Old Soldiers then be slighted when they have gain'd Experience in the Field, and Honour have ob∣tain'd. Incouragement will make us young, being try'd it might appear, For in midst of dangers, we are too Old to fear. Lisenced Octo. 22. R. L'Estrange. FINIS.
