H82C 99827610 32032
A True and Perfect RELATION OF THAT Most Horrid & Hellish Conspiracy OF THE GUNPOWDER TREASON. Discovered the 5th. of November, Anno Dom. 1605. Collected out of the Best and most Authentique Writers, and now Re-published. For fuller information, and to remember the People of England of Gods VVonderfull Mercies and Deliverances Vouchsafed them, for his great Name, and for his Churches sake, in the Defence and Maintenance of the Protestant Religion, Established in these Nations. With the Names of those Traytors that suffered for that bloody Plot. By I. H. Gent. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, thou alone dost marvellous things? The snare is broken, and we are escaped. LONDON, Printed for Fr. Coles at the Sign of the Lamb in the Old-Baily. 1662.
A True and Perfect Relation OF THE GUNPOWDER TREASON. THere is no Nation under Heaven, who have received and enjoyed so many blessing, both of right and left hand, as the people of England; we have had sure preventing mercies in times past, and we have been honoured and saved by restoring mercies, as our late experience can sufficiently manifest. God hath had more respect to this Age of the Church, making good all his promises of love and kindnesse to it, then to all the several ages before. He hath not dealt so with the people round about us, nor in the Times before us: Wonderfull is his Name, and greatly to be praised. But to Comply with the Time, and Solemne occasion of our thanksgiving; setting aside and waving the repetition of all other manifold Deliverances, our purpose is briefly here to bring to our Remembrance, and set before our eyes those strange and miracu∣lous merciful dispensations of the Divine Majesty to us and our Fore-Fathers, in the revealing, discovering, and preventing that most monstrous & before unheard of mischief, the Plot of the Gun∣powder-Treason. In order whereunto it will be requisite to consider the State of the Kingdome, deducing it from the end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, of ever Blessed Memory: who by the Divine providence escaped not a few dangerous conspiracies against her Life, and consequently against the safety of the Church and Kingdom; All these wicked Machavilians Designes were principally laid, fomen∣ted
and abetted, and intented to be executed by Roman Catho∣liques, incited thereunto by the Jesuits and other Emissaries of the Pope and See of Rome. For which reason divers Statutes were made by Parliament (for the better security of her Person and Government) against Priests and Seminaries and such as should be reconciled, that was, perverted to the Romish Religion; and for breach of those statutes, enjoyning those Priests departure and absence out of the Kingdome, and for other Offences several of them were Executed, to the great Exulceration and Exasperation of the rest of that Perswasion and Religion, who could by no means endure that Queen or her Government. She dying, the Papists of England were in great hopes that her Successour King James of Scotland, whose Mother in their Opi∣nion dyed a Martyr for their Religion, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; would not only remit and surcease those rigours they had before suffered, but would also grant them free Exercise and Toleration of their Religion, and grew very confident and jolly in this vain expectation: which when they perceived to be fru∣strated and disappointed, at that Kings very first coming in and assumption to this Crown, by his declaring his constant resolution for the maintenance of the Religion here Established; a conspi∣racy was entred into by one Watson and Clarke, Priests, the Lord Cobham and George Brooke his Brother, Thomas Lord Gray of Wilton, Sir Walter Rawleih, Sir Griffin Markham, Sir Edward Parham, Bartholomew Brookesby and Anthony Coply: their design being to surprize the King and Prince Henry, and securing of them, either at the Tower or Dover, there by violence to ob∣tain their own pardons, a Tolleration of Religion, and a remo∣val of some Councellours, &c. And to conceal this Treason the better, Watson devised Oaths of secresie, teaching that the Act was lawful being done before the Coronation, (for the King had deferr'd that Solemnity till St. Jamse's day, a while after) because the King was no King before he was anointed and the Crown So∣lemnly set on His Head. This Plot came by the Wise Providence of God to be discove∣red, and the conspirators tryed for it at Winchester; the Term be∣ing adjourned thither, because of the Plague then in London, where they were all Condemned but onely three of them, viz. George Brooke Esq Watson and Clerke Priests; three other, viz. the
Lords, Cobham and Gray, and Sir Griffin Markham were brought upon the Scaffold, and by the Kings Grace and Mercy severally Reprieved, Sir Walter Raleigh, that famous Historian, many years after was charged with the same Judgement, and Beheaded in Westminster Palace Yard. This end had these Troublers of the State, whose Grand Mini∣ster, such as the Politick Civil Lord Burleigh, were too wary and jealous to be surprized by such Devices; and the Nation now seemed to be in a most sweet and lasting peace, through the wise temperament of the King and his more indulgent hand, the then Papists for many years had felt; when loe a most Desperate and Infernal Conjuration was laid, by some Grandees and mad Zea∣lots of that Religion; a Plot so impiously wicked, that the former was a meer shadow to this intended blaze and conflagration: the very recital whereof makes the Pen to Tremble with the thought of those shakings, revulsions, and trepidations this dire Blow would have Caused. This Horrid Treason was first thought on in the last year of Queen Elizabeth; Thomas Winter being sent into Spain by other his Complices, to desire that King in the name of the English Ca∣tholiques, to send an Army into England, with whom they and the Male-contented Gentry and Souldiery at the Earle of Essexe's death would be ready to joine: which being assented to, conclu∣ded and agreed on by the said King, Winter returned into Eng∣land, and gave a welcome account to his party and Negotiation; but Queen Elizabeth dying, though they would have perswaded the Spaniard to bold his former Resolution, yet he now would not further hearken to any such motion. In the mean while the Jesuits had been tampering to diswade the acceptance of King James into England, urging it, that death was rather to be endured then to admit a Heretique; from which principle & other the like stuffe out of Parsons his book, Philopater Sect. 1. Catesby the first in the Conspiracy, took his ground, it be∣ing the then Jusuits position: That if any Christian Prince shall ma∣nifestly turn from the Catholique Religion, &c. he presently falleth from all Princely Power and Dignity, and that ipso facto, before any sentence pronounced against him by the supreame Judge and Pastour; and that his Subjects are Absolved from all Bonds and Oaths of Allegiance, &c. By such like fiery Divinity of their own making the Gunpowder-Treason took strength.
The Parliament then called by the King, was Prorogued from the 7th. of July, to the 7th. of February: a little before which Prorogation, Catesby then at Lambeth, sent for Thomas Winter a∣foresaid, and broke with him concerning this Powder-plot: who answered, that indeed struck at the root, but if it should mis∣carry, the Catholique Cause would be greatly Scandalized: Catesby replyed, the nature of the Disease required so sharp a Re∣medy, and then demanded his consent; which he freely gave, but proposed difficulties as want of an House, the difficulty of the Myne noise in working, and such like, which Catesby satisfied by telling him, let us begin the attempt, and where it saileth let us passe no further. Then they agreed that the Constable of Spain, then in the Low Countries should be dealt withal for assistance, but not the plot to be discovered, &c. Sir William Stanley and other Fugitives should be underfelt; chiefly one Guido Fawkes employed about the first overture to the King of Spain, and then in that Kingdome, should be drawn to the association. Sir VVil∣liam Stanley declined all general propositions that was, yet hoping to make his peace in England, but brought Fawkes to VVinters acquaintance, who dealt together with one Owen about the busi∣nesse. Fawkes was a Gentleman of Darbishire, resolute in any undertaking for his Religion: and so VVinter and he returned into England to Catesby, to whom came Thomas Percy, kinsman to the late Earle of Northumberland; where after a short conference, they agreed upon an Oath of secrecy; Swearing by the Blessed Trinity and the Sacrament never to disclose, &c. Whereupon Catesby, who had drawn in one John VVright, discovered the plot to Percy and Winter, and Jack VVright to Fawkes; and so they resolved to proceed. To this purpose Percy was ordered to take the House where to lodge instruments of Violence and Death, which he hired of one Ferris, who Tenanted it of Mr. Whineyard, belonging to the Wardrobe; and Fawkes by the name of John Johnson, as Mr. Per∣cy's man was put in to possesse it, and received the keyes of the House. It was also thought convenient to have another House to lodge the powder and provision for the Mine, from thence to be conveyed to Mr. Percy's; so one was taken in Lambeth, and one Keyes appointed the keeper thereof. Now they fell to work upon the Mine having store of baked meats with them the lesse to need sending abroad.
The chief Conspirators were now in Consultation what they should doe when the deed was done, and agreed to seize upon the Duke that was our late King Charles, of blessed Memory, and the Lady Elizabeth, (the King and Prince Henry being devoted to the Flames) and having warned others of the Popish Nobility to forbear sitting in Parliament to get what number of Horses they could; which strength, having the Heir apparent with them, would be odds sufficient, in that general confusion and Conster∣nation, which would attend the Effects of their Treason. About Candlemas they brought over in a Boat the Powder which they had provided at Lambeth, and laid it in Mr. Piercy his House, because they would have all their danger in one Place. Then falling to their Work in the Mine, they came against the Parlia∣ment House stone wall, which was very hard to beat through, at which time they called in Christopher Wright to their Company. As they were thus labouring, they heard a rusling noyse, which was the removal of some Coals, that made them think they were dis∣covered; but Fawks being sent thither to know the business, un∣derstood the Coals were a selling, and that the Cellar was to be Let, which for its conveniency, Piercy presently hired, and put into it 20 Barrels of Powder, newly provided, and covered them with Billets and Fagots, provided for the purpose. Their Work being in such a readinesse, Fawks was sent over into Flanders to give the Oath of Secrecy to Sir William Stanley and get him over and Owen; Sir William was in Spain, Owen see∣med well pleased but said Sir William would not engage. Where∣upon Fawks returned about August, the Parliament having been prorogued from the 7th of February before-going, to the 5th of November. About this time Mr. Piercy and Mr. Catesby met at the Bath, where they agreed that few being yet in the Company, Ca∣tesby should have Authority to call in whom he pleased; who drew in Sir Everard Digby, Mr. Tresham of Northampton shire, who contributed Money to the carrying on of the Design. In the interim, Fawks and Winter bought some new Powder, as suspecting the first to be damp, and conveyed it into the Cellar, and then for ten dayes before the sitting of the Parliament, went down into the Country, where by Enfield Chase, at a place cal∣led Whitewebs, they communed with Catesby, who asked them if ther Pince would come to the Parliament, who replying negatively
he said then we must have our Horses beyond the Water, and pro∣vision of more Company to surprize the Prince, and leave the Duke alone. All things thus laid and fitted, according to their former result of warning the Popish Lords from the danger, being some ten days before the sitting down of the Parliament, a Letter was put about seven of the Clock on a Saturday Evening, into the hands of a Footman of the Lord Mounteagles in the Street by an unknown man of a reasonable tall stature, with a Charge to deliver it to his Lords own hands, which he did; my Lord no sooner received it, but perceiving it writ in an unlegible Hand, he commanded one of his servants to read it, when perplext with the strangeness of the matter (think it might prove some foolish devised story or other) he hasted away with it to Whitehall to the Secretary, the Earl of Salisbury, who perusing it likewise, commended my Lords care and discretion, telling him, that whatever the Letter seemed, yet had he received Advertisements from beyond Sea concerning some practices of the Papists to make new stirs, to the enabling them to deliver to the King a Petition for Toleration of their Re∣ligion like sturdy Beggars that would force, if they could not beg¦an Almes. The Earl added, that he would presently communicate it to some others of the privy Council, Mounteagle onely desiring that what ever the issue or meaning of it might be, it might not be imputed to him as proceeding from his too light and sudden ap∣prehension which his Majesties safety had onely prompted him to. The Lord Chamberlain was therefore made acquainted first with it in the presence of the Lord Mounteagle, who likewise concur'd there was some perillous attempt intended against the Kings Per∣son, which the Lord Chamberlain by his Office was principally concerned to take care of as well in all publique places of Assem∣bly, as in his Majesties own private Palaces. Whereupon the said Letter was by consent communicated to three more Lords of the privy Council, the Earls of Worcester and Northampton, and the Lord Admiral, who all concluded it was a matter not to be slighted, and that the King should be informed thereof, that in the mean time no other noyse should be made a∣bout it, that the Design might ripen and be the fitter for Discovery. According to this determination, the Earl of Salisbury in the Gallery at Whitehall, on Friday being Allhallows day, delivered
the King the Letter, without any speech or judgement made of it; the Contents whereof were as followeth. My Lord, Out of the love I bear to some of your Friende, I have a care of your preservation; Therefore I would advise yoa as you ten∣der your safety to devise some Excuse to shift off your Attendance at this Parliament; for God and Man have decreed to punish the wic∣kedness of this time. And think not slightly of this Advertisement, but retire your self into your County, where you may expect the Event in safety; for though there be no appearance of any stir, yet I say, they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet they shall not see who hurt them. This Counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do you good, and can do you no harm, for the danger is past as soon as you have burned this Letter; And I hope God will give you grace to make good use of it, to whose Holy Protection I com∣mend you. The King (who was alwaies very fortunate in solving of Ridles) ne sooner read the Letter, but after a little pause, and the read∣ing it over again, he delivered his judgement of it as of a matter not to be slighted; for that the stile of it was not like a Pasquil: when the Earl of Salisbury perceiving the King to apprehend it deeplier then he expected, hinted to the King that by one clause thereof (that the danger was past as soon as the Letter was burned) it seemed to be written by a fool or mad man; for what would the notice of the danger advantage or availe any man, when the burning of the Letter was sufficient to avoid it? But the King joyning and referring that clause to another (that they should receive a terrible blow that Parliament) did happily guess that the danger intended there was by some sudden blowing up of powder; for no other Rebellion or Insurrection whatsoever, could be attempted unseen in time of Parliament, but by that in∣visible, nor no mischief take effect but that speedy way of destructi∣on; & to that sense he rightly turned and construed (the danger is past as soon) to that of as quickly; and therefore advised that be∣fore his going to Parliament the under-rooms of the Parliament House might be well and narrowly searched. It must be confe∣ssed that God put this interpretation into the Kings Heart; for though now upon the event appearing, no other construction can be made of the letter, yet before, the wisest did not apprehend that meaning: so that next to God the Nation is beholding to the
King their Head, for this his temporal saving knowledge. The Earl of Salisbury wond'ring at this strange, yet rationall Commentary of the King, which he knew to be farre contrary to his ordinary and natural disposition that was alwaies averse from or editing due advertisements of practises against his person; and rightly conceiving this extraordinary caution of having the rooms searched, proceeded from the Vigilant care he had of the State, more then of himself: thought fit to dissemble his concur∣rent apprehension of the danger, putting it off with some jest or merry discourse, and so took his leave of his Majesty, but repai∣red instantly to the same Lords of the privy Counsel: whom he acquainted with the Kings judgement, and construction of the Letter, and what had else passed in private; who agreed that the said Earle should put his Majesty again in mind of the businesse, the next day being Saturday, when it was ordered, the Lord Cham∣berlain being present; that the said Lord Chamberlain should ac∣cording to his Custome and Office, as usually, view both Parlia∣ment Houses above and below; and see and consider what like∣lihood or possibility of danger might be layed there. But because they would not have any rumour fly abroad, and also for the ful∣ler discovery of the plot, if there were really such a thing; it was resolved that he should not go thither while Munday in the After∣noon, the day before the setting down of the Parliament: at which time he went thither, accompanied with the Lord Mount∣eagle, who impatiently expected the event; Being there, and ha∣ving reviewed all the lower rooms, he found in the Vault, under the upper House great store of provision, of Billets, Faggots, and Coles; and enquiring of Whinyard keeper of the Wardrobe, to what use he had put those lower Rooms and Cellers? he replyed, that Mr. Thomas Percy had hired the House and part of the Vault under the same; and that the said Wood and Coal was also his provision; whereupon the Lord Chamberlain casting his eye a∣side, espied Fawks the pretended servant of Percy in a corner, but took no further notice of the man. At the naming of Percy, the Lord Mounteagle began to suspect the matter, and that the Letter might probably be sent from him, and intimated afterward so much to my Lord Chamberlain: who among the other things he related to have seen and considered, omitted not the suspition of Mounteagles, as also the jealousie he
had of such a great quantity of Coals, Faggots and Billets, for a persons use that had not been, nor yet was resident in the house he pretended to take for his dwelling: whereupon the King insist∣ed that the House was to be narrowly searched to the bottome, it being to be suspected that those Faggots were laid there onely for covering of the powder, of which opinion were all the Councel∣lours present; but the manner of the search was not so well agreed on, for as the Kings and Kingdomes safety required all Caution for preventing the danger, so the reputation of the State, and the imputation it would lay upon the Earle of Northumberland, whose Kinsman and most Confident Familiar this Percy was, if it should prove but a Fable after a curious and strict search, made them loath to be too eager therein; the rather because it was known how much the King detested to be thought jealous or suspicious of any of his good Subjects. But the Kings resolute persistency for a through search prevayled, for as he said it could prejudice no man at all that was innocent: and either they must examine the bottome of the matter, that no possibility of danger might re∣main, or else not to meddle any further in it but plainly to go next day to the Parliament, and leave the successe to Fortune, which he believed they would hardly take upon their consciences. It was therefore finally resolved to search all places, and upon the pretence of Whinyards missing some of the Kings goods to view those rooms narrowly for them. And to this purpose Sir Thomas Knevet, a Gentleman of his Majesties privy Chamber, and a Ju∣stice of the peace in Westminster, was employed: who according to the trust reposed in him, went about the midnight next after, accompanied with such a small number as was fit for that errand; and at his coming neer the House, seeing Fawkes, Percy's preten∣ded man, standing without doors at that dead time of night, with his Cloaths and Boots on, he apprehended him, and then proceeded to the search. In which after he had caused some of the Billets, Faggots, and Coals to be overturned; he first found one of the Barrels of powder, and afterwards 35 more, being 36 in all. And searching the fellow he had taken, he found  matches and all other instruments fit for blowing up of powder  his pockets and about him, which made him instantly to  his own Guiltiness, but in such a wicked manner that he said  he been within the House when Sir Thomas took him, as
just before (to the ending of his work) he would not have failed to have blown up Himself, House and altogether, but it pleased God by this his opportune seizure to prevent every part of that Dive∣lish Invention. After Sir Thomas had caused this Caitiff to be surely bound and well guarded, he returned to Whitehall, and gave notice to the Lord Chamberlain and Earl of Salisbury of his success, who pre∣sently rouzed the rest of the Council that lay in the Court, to as∣semble together, who as they soon as they could get ready, came and forthwith entred the Kings Bed-chamber together, where the Lord Chamberlain could not refrain his sudden gladness, but at first entry told the King in a confused hast that all was discove∣red and the Traytor bound and in Custody. The King arose, and sending for the rest of the Council then in Town, the Prisoner was commanded to be brought in (having stood without some while to the gazing and wonderment of the people without any alteration of countenance or dejection of spirit) when notwithstanding the Horrour of his Guilt, and his sudden surprizal and the terrour which the presence of so grave a Council must needs strike him with, yet he continued obstinate against all manner of revealing his Complices, nor could the Council get any thing of him all that day as to any discovery, he laying at the blame upon himself, saying he was moved thereunto onely for Religion and Conscience sake, denying the King to be his lawful Soveraign or the Anointed of God, in regard he was an Heretick: and the same regardless gesture and countenance he used before the Council, the same he kept all that day of his at∣tendance, answering with scorn to such as he knew had no power to examine him and smiling in their faces, nor would he be drawn to confess any other name then John Johnson. But after two or three dayes consideration in the Tower, of the certainty of his Death and the fright of the Rack which was shewed him only, he begun to fail in his resolution; confessing part and then the whole truth: of which this is the perfect abstract. The principal Conspirators and that laboured in the Mine by this Confession, were Robert Catesby, Robert Winter, Esq. Thomas Piercy, Thomas Winter, John and Christopher Wright, Fawks, and Bates, Catesby's Man. The accessories to it, though not personally la∣bouring in the Mine, were Everard Digby, Knight, Ambrose Roke∣wood
and Francis Tresham, Esquires, John Graunt, Gentleman, Robert Keyes. Upon the spreading of the News, on Tuesday the 5. of Novemb. the Town was all over in an Extasie and a kind of joyful uproar; the Londoners flocking down towards Westminster, to blesse their eyes with those standing structures designed for the Kingdoms and their own Tomb, while Winter and the two Wrights (Catesby be∣ing gone the night before, and Piercy at four of the clock in the morning the same day of the Discovery) hastned out of the Town, all of them flying for VVarwick-shire, where about two of the clock in the morning the same day, Graunt, with other his as∣sociates, had broke up a Stable of one Mr. Benock, a Trainer of great Horses for the Nobility and Gentry thereabouts, and carried away eight Horses fit for service, and with them met with that Company which fled out of London at Dunchurch, at Sir Everard Digby his Lodging, who had appointed a Hunting Match on pur∣pose to draw his party the more unsuspectedly together. This Hellish Company being thus met, and finding their Treason dis∣covered, resolved to run a desperate Course, and from close trea∣chery, run into open rebellion, thinking if more joyned with them to save themselves in the throng; but this Snow-ball wasted instead of increasing, and therewith the hopes of animating a party by their Example; for they had much adoe to keep their Servants from flying from them; and their whole number made but eighty, who having wandred a while through VVarwick-shire to VVorcester-shire, and from thence to the edge and Confines of Stafford-shire. This Rebel Bravado had not the Honour to be beaten with a Kings Lievtenant or extraordinary Commissioner, but by the ordinary Sheriff of VVorcester they were all beaten and taken. For though their speedy flight prevented the Kings Pro∣clamation, whereby their Horrid Fact was set forth, yet the County without any such incentive were ready to suppress them of theie own accord, knowing that armed concourse could portend no o∣ther, then a Rebellion. Upon which guess, the Country refused to give them willingly so much as a Cup of Drink or any manner of comfort and support, but with execrations deserted them, and a poor Smith struck at VVinter, and had seized him, but that he was rescued by his party: And so at last after Sir Richard Verney High Sheriff of VVarwick-shire them had carefully and closely
chased them to the Confines of his County, some of the meaner sort being also apprehended by him, Sir Richard VValsh did like∣wise hotly pursue them through his Shire; And having gotten some tice of their taking Harbour in Mr. Littletons House, he sent Trumpeters and Messengers to them in the Kings Name, to render themselves to him His Majesties Minister, and knowing no more of their Crime then what was publiquely visible, did promise up∣on their dutiful and obedient Rendition to him, to intercede at the Kings hands for the sparing of their Lives, who received only from them this scornful Answer, (They being better witnesses to themselves of their own demerits) that he had need of better Assi∣stance then of those few Numbers that were with him, before he could be able to Command or Controul them. But here the wondrous work of Gods justice now magnified it self, for while this message passed between the Sheriffe and them, the Sheriffe and his peoples zeal being justly kindled and augmen∣ted by their arrogant answer; and therefore preparing to give a furious assault, and the other party making themselves ready within the house to performe their promise by a defence as reso∣lute; it pleased God that in the mending of the Fire in their Chamber, one small spark should flye out and light upon less then two pound weight of powder, which was drying a little from the Chimney; which being thereby blown up, so spoyled the faces of some of the prinacipal Rebels, and the hands and sides of others of them (blowing up with it also another great bag of pow∣der, which notwithstanding took not fire) that they were not only disabled and discouraged thereby from any further resistance, in respect Catesby, Rookewood, Grant, and divers others of greatest account among them, were thereby made unable of defence; but also wonderfully strucken with amazement in their guilty Con∣sciences; calling to memory how God had justly punished them with that same instrument, which they would have used before for the accomplishing so great a sin, according to that sentence, in that in which we sin, in the same shall we be punished. In so much as they presently (see the wonderful power of Gods Justice upon guilty Consciences) did all fall down upon their knees, praying God to pardon them for their bloody enterprize. And after that giving over any further debate, opened the Gate and suffered the Sheriffs people to rush in among them, of whom they desperately
sought their own destruction. The three principal of them, Ca∣tesby, Percy and Winter joyned backs together: whereof Catesby and Percy, (though the Proclamation directed the taking of him alone if possible, because the whole Cabol and mistery of the designe was lodged in him, by reason of his great Relations and acquaintance) were slain; VVinter was taken and saved alive. And thus those resolute and furious cruel Papists, who dreamed of no lesse then the destruction of Kings and Kingdoms, and pro∣mised to themselves no lower Estate, then the Government of great and Ancient Monarchies; were miserably Defeated and quite overthrown in an instant, falling iato the pit which they had prepared for others. And so fulfilling that sentence, which his Majesty did in a manner prophesie of them in his Oration to the Parliament; some of them being presently slain, others deadly wounded, stripped of their Cloaths, and left lying miserably na∣ked, and so dying rather of Cold then of their Wounds; and the rest that either were whole, or but lightly hurt, taken and led pri∣soners to the Jayle (by the Sheriffe, the ordinary Minister of Ju∣stice, to the ordinary prison of the worst (yet compared with these) harmlesse Malefactors, where they remained till their sending up to London, being met with a huge confluence of all sorts of peo∣ple, desirous to see them as the rarest and unusuallest sort of Mon∣sters, and as the publique spectacle of shame and Gods fieree wrath, and just indignation. They lived bloodily in superstiti∣on, they practised divellishly in all manner of impiety, and they dyed desperately in disgrace and ignominy: And their memory shall be cursed throughout all Generations. What Cause have we then, and how many wayes are we pro∣voked to trust in God, and to love and worship him, that so mira∣culously hath defended us; especially since it is to be feared, that he in his just displeasure for our unthankfulnesse, did give us up and our late Blessed Soveraigne to the unreasonable violence of most ungodly and blood thirsty men; and oh that all the undu∣tiful company who promoted that sad Rebellion, would consi∣der of this and our late good providence, and repent from their Hearts of the great evil they have done, lest vengeance overtake them also. Let us therefore lift up our hearts to God, for he hath put a new Song of Joy and Thanksgiving into our Mouths, and mercifully taught us, to lift up our Eyes to him from when cometh
our Salvation. Psal. 121. Our help cometh from the Lord which hath made Heaven and Earth. He will not suffer our Feet to slip, for he that keepeth us will not slumber, for behold he that keepeth Is∣rael will neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord is our Keeper, the Lord is our Defence at our right Hand. Which God of his Infinite Mercy still stretch out to our Protection, and continue us in Peace and Quietnesse, from the treacherous practises of the Jesuited Pa∣pist, and the bold and Rebellious Outrages of Sects and Schisme. And let all the people say Amen. IN January following a Commission was issued out to severall Judges of both Benches for the Tryal of those Traytors: who sate on the 27th. of that moneth, and gave sentence of Death up∣on them: and on the Thursday following, Sir Everard Digby of Gothurst, in the County of Bucks; Robert VVinter of Hodington, in the County of VVarwick; Graunt of Yarthbrook the same Coun∣ty, and Bates, were Executed at the West end of Pauls; on the next day, being Friday, Thomas VVinter, Keys, Ambrose, Bookewoood of Staningfield in that County Esquire, and Fawkes were Exe∣cuted in the Palace-yard at VVestminster. Sir Everard for his good parts was pitied, the rest were sorrow∣ful for themselves. It is observable that in Catesby, the Name and Family of that Councellour and Privado of Richard the Third, who was also the betrayer of his Patron, the Lord Hastings expi∣red; one sin punishing another in the like Guilt. Francis Tre∣sham of Northamptonshire Esquire, another of the Conspirators, remained about Court and fled not, put proffered his ready ser∣vice for the suppression of his Fellowes, yet suspected of partaking with them, he was committed to the Tower, where before their Arraignment as aforesaid, he dyed of the Strangury; Garnet the Jesuite, who concealed this Treason, was executed likewise in March following, who confessed his Fault. So ended the Unfortunate Traytors, giving us cause to say, Soli Deo gloria. FINIS.
