I1004 16170912 104975
To our Right Trusty, and well beloved Counsellor, JOHN Lord BERKELEY, our Lieutenant General, and General Governour of our Kingdom of Ireland, and to our chief Governour or Governours of that our Kingdom for the time being, and to the Lords, and others of our Privy Council of that our Kingdom. NOw we the Lord Lieutenant and Council, in Pursuance of His Majesties said Letters, and by virtue of the said clause in the Act explaining the Act of Settlement, do by this our Act of Council, give and grant general Licence and leave to all and every His Majesties Roman Catholick Subjects, and all other His Majesties Subjects what∣soever, as well to hire and purchase from, as also to demise, alien, and grant unto each other their Heirs and Assigns, any House or Houses, Lands or Tenements, within any of the Cities or Towns Corporate of this Kingdom, and the Liberties thereof, as freely, and in as full, ample, and beneficial a manner, to all intents and purposes, as if the aforesaid clause of Restraint in the said Art had not been, and that none of His Majesties Subjects, shall from henceforth be molested, or incur any penalty, or forfeiture for any Breach, or non-observance of the said clause of Restraint, the person or persons so purchasing in the said Ci∣ties, Towns and places, taking onely the usual Oath of Allegiance, as formerly, the said Act, or any other Act, Statute, Law, or Ordinance to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding. And we do hereby further signifie, That His Majesties Will and Pleasure is, and His Majesty in and by His said Letters, doth order and declare, That His Majesties said Irish Roman Catholick Subjects, for∣merly Inhabitants, Natives, or Freemen, and such as have, or shall have Right to be Freemen, in any of the said Cities, Towns and places, and all other His Majesties Subjects shall be forthwith restored unto, and enjoy their accustomed Priviledges, Freedoms, Immunities and advantages, and be allowed, and peaceably admitted to Inhabit, and Trade by Transportation, Importation, Whole-sale, Retail, or other∣wise, in the said respective Cities, Towns and places, without distur∣bance or molestation, as freely, as they, or their Ancestors, or any other did, or hath been used at any time heretofore, in the time of His Majesties Dear Father of Blessed Memory, and as any other His Majesties Subjects do at present, without making any distinction between His Majesties Subjects of this Kingdom, or giving any interruption up∣on pretence of difference of Iudgment, or opinion in matters of Re∣ligion; But that all act and deal together, as becometh dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the said former Act, or any other Act, Order, or pra∣ctice to the contrary notwithstanding; whereof His Majesties Chancel∣lor of Ireland, His Iustices of both Benches, the Barons of the Ex∣chequer, and His Majesties Council at Law in this Kingdom, and all Magistrates, Governors, Mayors, Sheriffs, and other Officers of the said respective Cities, Towns and Corporations, and all others whom it doth or may concern, are to take notice, & conform themselves thereunto. And it is ordered, That His Majesties Letters aforesaid, and this our Act of Council be forthwith published in all Cities, and Towns Corporate in this Kingdom, to the end all persons concerned, may take notice of the same. Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the Eighth day of March 1671. JA: ARMACHANUS. Mich. Dublin Canc. Clanbrazill. Heugh Glenaully. Jo. Bysse. Theo. Jones. GOD SAVE THE KING. DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Tooke, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY; And are to be sold by Joseph Wilde, Book-seller in Castle-street, 1671.
