L1362 31355392 110439
A LETTER formerly sent to Dr. Tillot∣son, and for want of an Answer made pub∣lick and now Reprinted; with the said Do∣ctor's Letter to the Lord Russel a little before his Execution. To the Reader. THE Author of the following Letter sent the Original to Mrs. Tillotson for her Husband, and a Copy of it to my Lady Derby, for the Princess of Orange, several Months ago; and when he writ it, he hoped the Members of Parliament would have been, against the Sessions, awakened by their Disappointments and Taxes, to consider aright, what is the present State of this miserable Nation, and how much worse is our future prospect; and had he found them in that Tem∣per, and acting steddily for their Countrey, he had thoughts to have presented with his own hands, his Reasons, why he thinks they have wronged King James, over-rated their Disease, and mistaken their Cure; and he would also have given in Proposals, how the King may be restored, without hazard, either to our Religion or Property; and this the Author would have done, because he thinks, that if either Rea∣son or Religion would prevail, such an Offer must have had some weight; but whilst the Whigs as much Sacrifice their Understandings to support this Change, as the Tories did their Consciences to make it, a Man would be reckoned mad that attempted in such a manner to reclaim such a Sett of Men, as have no more publick Spirit, than what lies in wran∣gling for their particular Parties; or common sense, than what is poper to get into Pensions, and Places, that, at the witty Sir Charles Sidley once said in the House, They may charge in Armor. How wild a Project too, would it be to offer Reason to Men that so little know their own Minds, that are so inconstant, as that what they pass unanimously one Sessions, they throw out the next, as they have done the Judges Bill? The Author would venture himself against great odds, if it was but an even Wager, that England might reap Good by so bold an Undertaking; for he sees Slavery
coming on so fast, that he thinks Life will be a burden to an honest and free Spirit; yet nothing that Cato (were he here) could do, or suffer, would repair our broken Constitution, unless God teaches our Senators more Wisdom, or is pleased to teach the People that a House of Commons may as scandalously abuse the Trust they repose in them, as some of his Ministers did King James; which that he may, is the hearty Prayer of the Author, both for the sake of the English Liberties, and Protestant Religion; for the sake of the very Being of the one, and the Honour of the other. The LETTER. SIR, I Shall Preface what I am about to say, with an assurance, That I have formerly had the greatest Veneration for You, as well for your Piety as good Sense and Learning; That my Noti∣ons of Government are so large, that the first thing that I ever doubtfully examin'd, that had Your Name affix'd to it, was the Letter to my Lord Russel: but your Actions since do less quadrate with that Opinion I had of your Sincerity, and seriously make me address my self to You, to know how you reconcile your present Actings to the Principles either of natural or revealed Religion; especially, how you reconcile them to the Positions and Intentions of that Letter; and consequently, whether you have a Belief of God, and a World to come. Sir, I think it a very extravagant Maxim in Government, to af∣firm all Insurrections which are only levell'd at Reformation, and designed to correct Mal-administration, and the Authors of them, and thereby (when the Common Methods are at a loss) to let the King know, what are the Measures of his Government, the Voice and Interest of his People, that so Justice and Mercy may prevail a∣gainst illegal Courses and his flattering Minions, and that the Rights of his Crown ad the Privileges of his People may be adiusted and preserved. I say, I think it an extravagant Position, to affirm▪ That what may be so conducive to publick Peace, and the maintenance of a Constitution, and the general Ends of all Government, is Ille∣gal: Yet I have often thought, that the Oath that expects a Man should swear it unlawful, upon any pretence whatsoever, to rise in Arms against the King, or any Commissioned by him, intended to establish this wild Civil Article; and I thought your Lordship writ upon so solemn an occasion, designing to justifie the Purport and Doctrin of
that Oath; which was carrying Loyalty to a higher pitch than I ever thought necessary to make a good Man, or a good Christian. But, Sir, to lay your Letter aside at present, give me leave to examin this Revolution with the most impartial desire of being in∣formed; for I solemnly invoke God Almighty to attest, That my Non-compliance with K. William and Q. Mary's Title and Admini∣stration, is founded upon Scruples of Conscience, to which I yet want satisfactory Answers. I am a Protestant of that size, that I hope God would enable me to undergo all the Persecution that the Malice of Men and Devils can invent, rather than one moment prostitute my Conscience so far as to give any reasonable Umbrage for Protestants to suspect, or Papists to hope, I could be made a Convert to the Church of Rome. I love my Country better than my Wife and Children; and certainly therefore so much, that I would for no Interest in the World disquiet the present Settlement, if I thought it was fit for an honest Man to comply with it. I have no Personal Obligations to King James; and I thank God I have an obstinate Honesty, that will scarce allow me to be ac∣ceptable to any King. Whatever I have done, or shall do, for the Exil'd Prince, is upon meer Motives of Conscience. I have no rea∣son to believe my self uncapable of being forgiven, or perhaps em∣ployed, under the present Government; my Rlations and Frieds are many of them violent, and almost all at least for it. But let us begin with the Revolution: I acknowledge King James's Ministers gave great Provocations; I could have joined with any but a Fo∣reigner to have rescu'd our Liberties; and yet I must as freely de∣clare, I saw nothing done that would have been too hard for a Par∣liamentary redress, or at least for the intrinsick Power of this Island, the natural Weight of those who are sensible of their Religion and Property: but I cannot tell how any Provocations tha were given the People of England, can justifie the Invasion of a Nephew and a Son-in-law. I cannot tell by what distinctions in Morality the Dutch could salve their denial, by their Ambassador, that those Forces were designed for England; I cannot imagin what dispensation gave them and the Subjects of England liberty to tell so many things that were notoriously untrue, that they knew then to be untrue, and that have been much more apparently proved so by the sequel of things. Sure the Morality of the Decalogue is not abolished: Let us see how many of the Commandments are broken; Has not Mammon been made a God, and a Crown an Idol, to which the P. of Orange and his Adherents have sacrific'd the Lives of many thousands of Men, as well as the Reputation of our Religion, besides a vast Treasure▪ tho' it is not fit to be named after the other two Immolations? Have
they not taken God's Name in, when they consecrated to the Pre∣servation of Religion the Injuries and Violations of it, of which they have been guilty? I do not know whether you are a strict Sabbatarian; I believe not, and will acknowlege I am none: but I think the Nation grosly perverts the ends of Humiliations and Fast∣ings, and appointed Days for God's Worship, whilst they pray to God to prosper any immoral Enterprize. For God's sake, and the sake of your Soul, and the sake of your Queen's Soul, study the fifth Commandment, tho' the performance of it has the promise of length of dys in this Life, the breach of it (if any Religion be true) will plunge her into Miseries of a longer duration; She has partaken with Thieves and Liars against her own Father; She is a Receiver of what has been by them from him wrongfully taken away, unless it can be proved that the Crown of England is Elective, the Kings of it punishable and deposable. If this is right, you know, Sir, all our Law-books are in the wrong, for they say, The King can do none; That he is not accountable to the People, collectively or representatively; and that the Monarchy of England is Hereditary. This is all in the Original Contract of our Statute-Books and Law Cases. Sir, You know these things, you cannot plead ignorance, nor can you believe Abdication: You know the treatment the King had from the P. of Orange and his own Subjects, and cannot believe he volun∣tarily resigned. Are not then our Judges, our Juries, our Fleets, and our Armies, guilty of Murther, in opposing King James's Return? Don't your Queen list so many Assassins, whilst she Commissions them for that pupse? Is it not as unlawful to steal a Crown as a Trifle? And till they have recanted all the false Accusations which were countenanced by the Prince of Orange and his Princess, and were instrumental towards the getting of these Crowns, do they not violate the Ninth Commandment, as well as covet their Neighbours (their Fathers) Goods? The Civil and Natural Obligations the Prince and Princess of Orange have to King James aggravate their Crime; and, if it were not almost levity to say so here, I would add as another aggravation, their having co∣veted too many of King James's Servants. The King of England does every thing by his Officers; they are impeachable, they are punishable: The King (who we always said was not so) is dethron'd, whilst those are imploy'd in this Govern∣ment, who were the Disgraces and Instruments of the last. But I don't intend a Libel, and therefore will not enter into an Account of such Matters; I will neither give the present Ministers their Cha∣racters, nor shew how little, as meer Men and Subjects, we are the better for the Change. But I fear, whoever reflects without heat or byass upon what I have said, will find we have lost at least Nine of
the Ten Commandments, which is exceeding Popery in our Index Expurgatorius with a witness. But, to come to your more particular Case, I beseech you to pub∣lish some Discourse (if you can clear things) to demonstrate either your Repentance of what you writ to my Lord Russel, or the Reasons that make that, and what you now do, consistent; and that you, with the usu∣al solidity with which you treat upon other Subjects, justifie the Proce∣dings, and explain the Title of K. William. I know no body has a stronger and clearer Head, and if you have Truth on your side, you can write unanswerable. God's Glory, the Reputation of the Pro∣testant Religion is at stake; your own good Name calls for it; and more especially because you have accepted a most Reverend and Devout Man's Archbishoprick; a Man that has given Testimony how unalterably he is a Protestant! a Sufferer formerly for the Laws and Church of England; a Sufferer for those very Principles upon which that Letter to my Lord Russel was writ; for those very Principles which you disputed for (when he was about to Communicate) when he had so short a time to live, nay, you remembred him of even upon the Scaffold, with the dreadful Commination of Eter∣nal Wo. Really, Sir, if there be any Truth, if there be any Virtue, if there be any Religion, What shall we say to these Things? What will you say to them? You must be at the pains to clear this Mat∣ter, that we may not believe the Boundaries of Right and Wrong, the Measures of Violence and Justice quite taken away, that we may not be tempted to Speculative, and from thence to Practical Atheism. This Change has made many sober Men Sceptical, and gon farthr towards eradicating all the Notions of a Deity, than all the La∣bours of Hobbs and Epicurus; and your part in it has, I must confess, more stagger'd me than any one Thing else: I have been ready to suspect that Religion it self was a Cheat, and that it was a defect in my Understanding, that I could not see through it; for, I think, if I can know my right Hand from my left, our preset Govern∣ment stands upon Foundations that contradict all those Discourses which you, as well as others, have lent to Passive Obedience. The excessive Value I have for you, for your Knowledge, your Judg∣ment, yur largeness of Spirit, your Moderation, and many other great Qualities that ave signalizd your Name, once made you one of the greatest Ornaments of the Christian Church, one of the greatest Exemplars of sound Morality, and all that Philosophers call Virtue, make what seems to me an Apostacy from what you Preached and Writ, pretended to believe, and would have others to belive, shake me so violently in the first Credenda of Religion, that I beseech you,
if you think it necessary upon no other account, that you will pub∣lish such a Discourse, at least, for the Satisfaction of mine, and the Consciences of many others, who I can assure you of my own knowledge, lie under the same Scruples with my self, have the same Scruples in relation to the Government, and the same Temp∣tations to question Religion it self upon your account: It is the in∣terest of the Government to satisfie such Men; and if you think that we ought particularly and privately to apply our selves to you, our Number is so great that it would be too constant a trou∣ble for any one Man to undergo; nor can we safely debate a point of this Nature; nor can you expect Men should trust themselves under the Protection of your Honour, whilst they think you have in the Face of the World, so grosly Prevaricated both from that and what ought to be a Principle of a higher Nature, the dictates of your own Conscience. We would as soon deliver our Reasons at the Door of a House of Commons, and I am not sure that the same Spirit of Integrity, which has hindred me from succumbing under what we think an Usurpation, will not the next time there is an Assembly there carry me that length, (if I don't in the mean time publickly hear from you.) I beg of God Almighty (in whose Being I bless his Name I yet believe) to lay a happy constraint upon me, to do what may be most for his Glory, and the Good of these Nations; and I earn∣estly supplicate him, that he will enable me to suffer what-ever may be necessary for those great Ends, and that he will incline you either to publish yur Reasons or Repentance. To his blessed Guidance and Protection I heartily recommend you. ADVERTISEMENT. ⁂ Since Dr. Burnet's Pastoral Letter is burned by the Common Hang∣man, according to the Order of the House of Commons; it's therefore now far more necessary that you or he should explain King William's Title, and what you have now to say against the following Letter to my Lord Russel. Dr. Tillotson's Letter to the Lord Russel. My Lord, I Was heartily glad to see your Lordship this Morning in that calm and devout Temper at Receiving the blessed Sacrament; but Peace of Mind, unless it be well grounded, will avail little: And because transient Discourse many times hath little effect for want of time to weigh and consider it; therefore in tender Compassion
of your Lordship's Case, and from all the good Will that one Man can bear to another, I do humbly offer to your Lordships delibe∣rate Thoughts these following Considerations concerning the Points of Resistance, if our Religion and Rights should be invaded, as your Lordship puts the Case; concerning which I understood by Dr. Burnet, that your Lordship had once received Satisfaction, and am sorry to find a Change. First, That the Christian Religion doth plainly forbid the Re∣sistance of Authority. Secondly, That though our Religion be established by Law, (which your Lordship urges as a difference between our Case, and that of the Primitive Christians,) yet in the same Law, which establi∣shes our Religion, it is declared, That it is not lawful upon any Pre∣tence whatsoever to take up Arms, &c. Besides that, there is a particular Law declaring the Power of the Militia to be solely in the King. And that ties the Hands of the Subjects, though the Law of Nature and the General Rules of Scripture had left us at liberty; which, I believe, they do not, because the Government and Peace of hu∣mane Society could not well subsist upon these Terms. Thirdly, Your Lordships Opinion is contrary to the declared Doctrine of all Protestant Churches; and though some particular Persons have taught otherwise, yet they have been contradicted herein, and condemned for it by the generality of Protestants: And I beg your Lordship to consider how it will agree with an avow'd asserting of the Protestant Religion, to go contrary to the general Doctrine of Protestants. My end in this is to convince your Lordship, that you are in a very great and dangerous Mistake; and being so convinced, that which before was a Sin of Ignorance, will appear of a much more heinous Nature, as in Truth it is, and call for a very particular and deep Repentance; which if your Lordship sincerely exercise upon the sight of your Error, by a pe∣nitent Acknowledgment of it to God and Men, you will not only obtain Forgiveness of God, but prevent a mighty Scandal to the Reformed Religion. I am very loth to give your Lordship any disquiet in the Distress you are in, which I commiserate from my Heart; but am mch more concerned, that you do not leave the World in a delusion and false Peace, to the hindrance of your eternal Happiness. I heartily pray for you, and beseech your Lordship to believe that I am with the greatest Sincerity and Com∣passion in the World, My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful and Afflicted Servant, JOHN TILLOTSON,
Dr. Tillotson's Last Prayer at the Execution of the Unfortunate Lord RUSSEL. O Almighty and Merciful God, with whom alone live the Spi∣rits of Just Men made perfect, after they are delivered from these Earthly Prisons; we humbly commend the Soul of this our dear Brother into thy hands, as into the hands of a Faithful Crea∣tor, and most Merciful Saviour; humbly beseeching thee, that it may be precious in thy sight: Wash it, O Lord, from all its Guilt in the Blood of the immaculate Lamb that was slain to take away the Sins of the World; that whatsoever Defilements it may have contracted in the midst of this wicked World, by the Lusts of the Flesh, or the Wiles of Satan, being purged and done away by a sincere and unfeigned Repentance, through thy infinite Mercy and Goodness in our Lord Jesus Christ, it may be presented pure and holy, and without spot, before thee. O Lord, we humbly beseech thee to support thy Servant, and stand by him in this last and great Contest; Deliver him from the Pains of Eternal Death, and save him, O Lord, for thy Mercies sake; and grant that all we who survive, by this and other Instances of thy Providence, may learn our Duty to God and the King; and that by this, and other like Spe∣ctacles of our Mortality, we may see how frail and uncertain our Condition is in this World, that it is all but Vanity; and teach us so to number our days, that we may seriously apply our hearts to that holy and heavenly Wisdom while we live, which may bring us to Life Everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord: In whose holy Name and Words we conclude our Prayers. Our Father, &c. It being credibly and confidently reported, That you, Sir, imme∣diately after the Execution, went to visit that Excellent Lady my Lady Russel, and assur'd her, amongst other expressions to com∣fort her, That you wish'd your Soul might go to the same place whither my Lord's was gone: I beseech you to make Mankind understand that expression, or vindicate your self from the Imputation where∣with this Story charges you. FINIS.
