L1865 12412551 61563
Lex Talionis. Neque est lex justior ulla Quam necis Artificis arte perire sua. Poor ROBIN turn'd ROBIN the DEVIL: Being his Exact CHARACTER. Written by one that had his Friend, formerly twice most egregiously abused by him, to his great Disparagement, and greater Prejudice: Now Published upon his Second Attempt to appear again in Print, after he had been once supprest by Authority, for his intollerable Abuses, especially, to one of eminent Quality. And may be very satisfactory to all those that have been formerly abused: and for diversion of others that detest his wicked Practices. The words of a Tale-bearer are as wounds that go down into the innermost parts of the Belly, Prov. 18. 8. HE is a Medler of those thigs that doth not concern him, an Harkner after other mens faults, a Forgetter of his own; One that endeavours to make a Laughing-stock of the ill Accidents or Misfortunes of others by Pro∣claiming, Printing and Publishing them to the world; he is a Discoverer of his ill Nature, one that de∣lights in nothing more than in Mischief, an Eves droper, an Incourager of Tale-bearers, and a pro∣digious teller of Lies; and, rather than his story shall want something to make his Reader laugh, to a Mole-hill of Truth, he will add a Mountain of lies: He's the Scab of a Commonwealth, that many mens fingers itch to pull off and throw in the dirt; he is an Abuser of men in Authority, especially Consta∣bles and their watchmen, upon all occasions rendring them ridiculous upon the least apprehension of a mistake; a Scoffer at the Authority he lives under; a Need-not in a Commonwealth, an unnecessary & troublesom member of the place he lives in, a mere Make bate, an Accuser of the Brethren, an Advan∣cer of Untruths of the Town, a Padler in the Excre∣ments of mens Imperfections, a Wounder of Mens Credits, a Robber of persons Reputations; an Agent for the Devil, the Foreman of his Shop, one that thinks the Devils work is never well done unless he hath the finishing of it; one that would seem to out-doe him in his own way, who was a Lyar from the Beginning; a mere Rake-shame, one that's never more studious than when he endeavours to set peo∣ple together by the ears, and is never better pleas'd than when he hath wickedly disgrac'd a man most: one that hath more ears than Nature gave him, he is the Cujus Contrarium to all manner of good, one that Nolens Volens will have an Oar in another mans Boat; one that will be down right sick if there be no ill News stirring in the Town, and tho' he be never so bad, yet the first sad Disaster, makes him perk up his ears and mend apace, and if the tydings of some sad misfortune chance to beat upon the Drum of his Ear, he is presently restor'd to his former health, and then with the Devils Ho, Ho, Ho, laughs so loud and so heartily, that then you may easily guess he is pleased to the very guts. He is the Devils terrestrial Register, an Ingrosser of mens Msdeeds, the Herald of Misfortune, Ill Fame, and Shames Chief, the Sower of Sedition, an Hinderer of Peace-making, a false Commentator upon mens Actions, an uncharitable Constructor of things and Accidents, a Perverter of things good in themselves, into those that are bad; a Tongue-pad, a Town-fop a Common Buffoon, a Jack-pudding in print, a Fel∣low made up of Canting and Bumbast, a Coyner of new words to do the Devils old Work; a Nick-na∣mer of Places, a Miscaller of Men, a Mis-interpre∣ter of their Actions, an Imposer of Falsities on mens Belief. One that is any thing but what he should be; so far from a Christian that he's not a good Moral man; He is the Antipodes to Love, for that covers a multitude of faults, but he discovers more than all, and makes Proclamation of it when he has done▪ a bold and sawcy Rascal, a scribling and impertinent Fellow: a shame to his Company where-ever he is, being an Upholder of such like himself who march both City and Suburbs to harken after and bring him the Intelligence of ill News, to supply his great Necessity: an Abuser of his Betters, worse natur'd than himself none can be; he is the Opposite to good manners and good Behaviour; an Exalter of Saw∣ciness, a fit Usher, for disorder; the Off-spring of a Rebellion-promoter, an evil speaker of dignifi'd Persons, as well as the Communalty; Death's Cosin-German, spares none; a Destroyer of White Paper, an Increaser of Bum-fodder, and the Licensers In∣come; one that deserves publick Punishment as well as Suppression; or privately to be Bastinadoed into better Manners, if Ketch the Hangman do not catch him, and hang him out of the way, to the ease and quiet of the Commonwealth; a Fate, I am apt to believe hath befallen many an honester man than himself, for many of them rob men but of their Silver, but he robs them of that which is more pre∣tious than Gold. Pro. 22. 1. A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches: But he acts contrary to the Dictates of Nature it self: Ʋnum Os, Natura duas formavit & aures, Ʋt plus audiret quam loqueretur homo. Since of Ills thou act'st the Devil and all, Wee'l thee henceforth Robin the Devil call.
Another CHARACTER of Poor Robin. Written by another Hand, upon the same Occasion, some time before the other; and now, both sent forth together, to inform the World what kind of Person he is; and also that there might not be a double Trouble with so inconsiderable a Fellow. POOR ROBIN the Devils Secre∣tary, is a little, silly, idle, imperti∣nent lying, poor hungry Fellow; a miserable Ballad-maker and Character-Monger; a constant haunter of Tap-hou∣ses and Scandalous Places, hatcht out of the Spawn of Meriton Lateroon, a meer Wanderer, having no known or certain ha∣bitation; One of Satans Secret Council, a Member of the Hellish Cabal, a Promoter of Wicked Designs, who living by ungod∣ly Gains, is the very Author and Fomen∣ter of Strife, bringing fresh Coals to put out the fire, Rabshaka and Judas in folo, lim∣ned to the Life. He is a News-monger, an Incendary, One that writes and invents Lies, to supply his own pinching Necessi∣ties: His life is Prophanness, his Belief Atheism, his Religion Villany, and his Soul a Tabernacle or Habitation of Infer∣nal Legions: A grand Contriver and As∣sistant in Managing of Hells Decrees, One without whom the Devil would be ill able to carry on his Designs; and who alwaies takes him into Council when he has any great matter in agitation: he is a meer rant∣ing Rodomontade, a Vagabond, a Chang∣ling, a Detractor from other mens worth; a Minter of Calumnies and Slanders, a For∣ger of Abuses, a fellow made up of no∣thing but Deceit and Falshood, Lucifer's Intimate, Secretary and Spoke's-man to Beelzebub's Council: one having neither Faith or Truth, ungrateful to his Benefa∣factors, and a Traytor to his Confederates and Friends, having neither Credit or Re∣putation, not caring for, or fearing either God or Man; An absolute Bundle of Abu∣ses and Villanies, a Shameless Rascal, a a very Pitiful and sharking fellow, a light-finger'd Animal, a Petty-fogger, a merce∣nary Scribler, and Desperate Hector of the Quil, being beholding to Charity for the Stuffing his Paunch, and filling of his em∣pty Belly, whose otherwise starved, for∣lorn, wretched and miserable Carcass must have inevitably perished. The reward of his Villanies is generally a little Bread and Drink, to stuff his thin, lean Jaws withal. This his sad course of Living prompts him to act the greatest Villanies: He, for half a Crown, made a Ballad of his own Fa∣ther, as his Mother says (for she was whore enough.) And takes all unlawful Course for bread to still and quiet the croaking of his ungodly guts, not valuing who he abu∣ses provided he can get but a meals meat by it. See the Anabaptist's Champion, their Zeal and their Religion! The Devil, or the worst of his servants they'l entertain into pay, provided that with Tooth and Nail they'l stick to them, in helping them out at a dead lift. London, Printed in the Year, 1680.
