L2669 99828590 33020
The Latine GRAMMAR. OR, A Guide teaching a compen∣dious way to attaine exact Skill in the LATINE TONGUE, FOR A proper Congruity and elegant variety of Phrases in Prose and Verse. Published for the Common good in conti∣nuation of a former Guide, teaching to read English rightly, and Write accordingly. By Richard Lloyd. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Roycroft, for the Author, Anno Dom. 1653.
The Latine Grammar. OR A Guide, teaching a compendious way to attaine exact skill in the Latine Tongue, &c. Of Grammar. GRammar is a Series o rules directing to write and speak congruously, whence the true meaning of words may be certinly known. And it hath two parts, E∣tymologie and Syntaxe. Of Etymologie. Etymologie doth teach the affectious of words, specially such as concerne the variations of parts of Speech.
Of parts of Speech. The principall parts of speech are three. 1 Nouns that betoken things. 2 Verbs that betoken a doing or suffering of the things. 3 Adverbs that signifie some circumstance be∣longing to the things, or to the doing or suffe∣ring of them All regular Nowns and Verbs are variable by proper affections, But Adverbs are invari∣able savig b common accidents. Of common Accidents. The common affections equally belonging to all parts of Speech are two, the forme and fi∣gure. Of the Forme. The forme doth consist in the signification of wors for which they were ordained. Of the Figure. The figure doth consist in the origination of words, distinguishing them as Primitives and Derivatives. Of a two fold forme or signification of words. The signification of Words is either genuine and literall, according to their originall institu∣tion, or Tropologicall and translatitious with Ano∣logie to the literall for words change sense each with other proportionably to the bonds of union,
or marks of opposition known between them, where∣fore in a consentaneous sense any part will deno∣minate the whole, or the whole any part having essentiall union each with other by a Trope called Synecdoche, likewise the cause will denominate its owne effect, or a subject, its own adjunct, and con∣trariwise, having naturall union amongst them∣selves, by a Trope called Metonymia, others ha∣ving a Relative union (as they resemble) so ac∣cordingly they may denominate one another by a Trope called Metaphora. Lastly; in a dientaneous sense when the gesture and pronunciation of the speaker, compared with a knowne condition of the thing or party spoken of, doe evidence a con∣trariety between the words and meaning, it is by a Trope called Ironia. Of the Tropologicall forme or borrowed sense of words. A Trope doth modifie the sense of words in pro∣portion to their native use instituted either, 1▪ For supply where proper words are wanting, or 2 To civilize proper words which seem offensive, or 3 When the words are decent to beget variety the main object of delight. And it should be regula∣ted with ingenuity, perspicuity, and moderation, for Jewels are not to cloath the body, but to adorne some eminent parts thereof; besides that the best things growing common become contemptible, in fine when the literall sense of words, with good Authors, doth breed absurdity, the Trope must rectifie it. And there is no such Author without Tropes, nor any student that can attaine their
meaning, without previous skill therein as prin∣ciples. Of Synecdoche. By Synecdoche either the Genus that is common and universall, doth give name unto the Species, being some particular comprehended under it, as Atrides, for Agamemnon, whereas Atreus had a∣nother Sonne, Cythaaea, for Venus: Nequam for Diabolus. And thereto belongeth any other Nown, used by the figure Antonomasia, Orator for Ci∣cero, Poeta for Homerus, Urbs for Roma, quadrupes for Equus, mortalis for Homo, ventus for Auster, ne crede colori, for pulchritudini, bello virtus dignoscitur, for spectatur fortitudo, uteris authoritate intemperantius, for iracundius, semper ebrius, for saepe. And contra∣riwise the species doth give name unto the genus, as Anglus perit, for Angli, the singular for the plurall, Cato, Curii, for sapiens, frugales, Boreas for ventus, pon∣tus for Mare, nectar for Vinum, Charta, Papyri au∣dex, for membrana, fides Punica, for fallax, aut affli∣cta, omnium gemitu triumphas, for gaudes, vivit baccha∣nalia, for Intemperanter, parum abest, for nihil aut non. The finite for infinite, or else the totall, or inte∣grall doth give name unto the parte or members, as Catone sepulto, for Catonis corpore, bibit Araim, for aquam, prosternit silvam, for Arbores, Graeci, for Ar∣givi, tertium portu peegit annum, for Hyemem, men∣dicant ostiatim, for ad Ostia divitum, vellet dimicare viritim, for singulatim. And contrariwise, the part doth denominate the whole, animaque litavit, for homine, arbiter est oculus, for oculatus, aes for num∣mus, ferrum aut mucro, for gladius, pius, prora, puppis, for Navis, imen, Janua, pares, tectum, for-Domus, mae∣nia,
for Ʋrbs, te septima portat omnibus errantem ter ris et fluctibus aestas, for annus, quiescit, for dormit momentaria caecitate percussus, for subita, pedetentim venit, for tarde. Thus whether the whole doth name the part, or a part the whole, either-way they advance each other; the whole naming a majori, doth ascribe its entire worth and honour to the part thence named, the part naming ab insigniori, doth nobilitate the whole by its eminency, without which none should denominate. Wherefore we call a Foole stultum ca∣put, not calcaneum, because the heele is uncapable of discretion. And a devout person pium pectus, not cerebrum, the seate of affection, complying mostly with devotion. Last, this trope hath precedence before the rest, as grounded on the neerest bond of union, to witt, the inward causes of matter and forme, and is seconded by Metonymia, grounded on the outward causes. Of Metonymia. By Metonymia, the externall cause being the 1. efficient, 2. instrument, or 3. end, is put for the effect. 1. Aeneadae for Aeneae posteritas, Lucanus legi∣tur for poema. Aethiopes multum monstrant in corpore solem, for nigredinem; praeceps ira insolens victoria, and most epithets; jugulat for occidit, segnius inslat for tardius. 2. Lingua for sermo, manus for scriptura, ar∣ma for bellum. 3. Justitia for patibulum, aris impo∣nit honorem, for victimam. And contrariwise the Ef∣fect is put for the Cause. 1. Garminibus metus om∣nis abest, for poetis, Libycae clades, for Scipiadae, expal∣luit for timui, sudavit for laboravit. 2. Direxit vul∣nera for tela. 3. serta legunt for flores. Onom∣topoeia
doth belong to a Metonymie of the effect, as bomhus apum for id soni. The subject also doth give name unto the adiuncts taken largly, whether inherent therein, or adhering thereto, which way are used, 1. The seat for quality non tibi plus cordis sed minus oris inest, for prudentiae, verecundiae. 2. The continent for the thing contained, focus for ignis, poculum ebibit for vinum, specially places for in∣habitants or things done therein. Africa belligerat, for Africani, carcer for captivi, sunt pleni ruris for rusti∣citatis, forum for lites, id rostra docent, for conciona∣tores, tibi militat aether, for fulgura cum tonitribus. 3. The chiefe Authors and Owners for things per∣taining to them. Junoni templum struxit Sidonia Di∣do for structurae author erat praecipua. Acheloia cornua fregit Hector, for Dux cum exercitu, so Advocatus for cliens, proximus ardet V calegon, for domus. 4. Things for time proper thereto, tertia messis erat for annus. 5. The thing signified for the signe. Orphea consti∣tuit medio sylvas{que} sequaces, for imagines caelatas pal∣lida luna pluit for pluviam prae monstrat, populi cor im∣pingua for impinguatum renuncia. Hereto belong sa∣cramentall phrases, but Sacraments are of a higher nature, morally exhibiting, like Seales and earnests, a present right with assurance of a future full enioy∣ment. 6. The Antecedent for the Consequent, tegit pedes for alvum exonerat; fuit Ilion ingens gloria Dardannium for desiit esse, tunc messis in herba for ver, so messis in umbra for hyems, muner a non sperno for ac∣cipio, preces exaudiuntur for Conceduntur. Some call these instances Litotes, some call them Metalepsis, and both such and other Examples denominating all the Company by the chiefe Actor, have neer af∣finitie with Synecdoche of the part, as contrary-wise
Curii for frugales have affinity with a Meto∣nymie of the subiect for the adiunct quality. Like∣wise the adiunct doth give name unto the subiect. 1. Vertues, Vices, and other properties, are set for things endued therewith, patientia vincit for patiens, scelus for scelestus, iussit potestas for magistratus, artem terra quaevis alit for artificem, A Cyathis for Promus. 2. Vna coronant for pocula, comburuntr lites for fora, Mene putas vestris includere udis for icis, frigus opa∣cum quod umbraculis adiacet. 3. Luget Parnassus for Musae, hic passim insanitur for ab omnibus vicinis. 4. Capiunt oculis & pectore noctem, for somnum, fun∣dit ab antris Aeolus armatas hyemes for procellas, solsti∣tio defende pecus for astu. Autumno gravidae vites for vuis, nulla infaelicior aetas for nullius aetatis homines. 5. Ʋrina sana for sanitatem indicans, sceptrum, fasces, pupura for princeps, claves for Ecclesiasticall, gladius for civill government, pubes, lanugo for iuvenlus, toga for pax subscripsit for assensit. 6. Multa desiderantur for desunt. Lavinaque venit littora for ita postmodum vocata, scenam calefecimus for implevimus, speluncis abdidit atris for profundis, which last Metonymies are as more remote so far more elegant: but the for∣mer between causes and effects are more familiar, because more naturall. Of Metaphora. By Metophora words change their sense accord∣ing to the likenesse of the thing spoken of, to the things which properly they do betoken, and that ample ground doth make this trope more capacious then any other; as Corvus for nocens, Columba for in∣noxius, legis habena for potestas. Fulmen fortunae for impetus, ferreus est precibus for inexorabilis, lae ta seges for uber, aurea Phaebe for ruhicunda, vites gemmant
for germinant, laterem lavat for nugatur, ramos com∣pesce fluentes for excrescentes, fluxae vires for minutae, Hebraei ab Hebero flun, for oriuntur, mens fluctuat for dubitat, Lente venit for cunctanter, id lente fert for patienter, lente agit for remisse, lente rem probat for diu, which is derived from lentus, properly signify∣ing viscous or clammy. This trope as it is more copious then any other, so it is more useful to unmaske the nature of things, to excite accordingly either love or hatred there∣unto, and to accomplish both with grace, or without offence; therefore it is familiar in Adages or Pa∣rables of the wise, but it will require these cautions following. 1. That it doth not admit more disproportion then proportion, as Caeli fornices, being neither large enough, nor circular. 2. That it be not too far fetcht, Syrtis patrimo∣nii. 3. That it be not too obscene, as stercus curiae. 4. That it doth not imply a contradiction, fer∣reus in studiis puerest. 5. That it be not devious from it selfe, exundat & ardet amore. 6. That it be not too familiar a condition, re∣quisite to all tropes, because they must be rarities. Lastly, those Metaphors be most emphaticall, which add life or reason to inanimate or senselesse things, as Pontem indignatus Araxes, and having a double analogy they be reciprocall, as auriga navis, or gubernator urrus, but terminating in a simple rela∣tion they cannot be converted, as vulpes may be set for callidus, but not contrariwise callidus for vulpes, except it be by another trope, called Synecdoche ge∣neris.
Of Ironia. By Ironia words are carryed from their owne to a cleane contrary sense, which is understood by the expression and contradiction of such words, to the things which literally they betoken. Scilicet hac vi∣tam servatam dote rependis, for ingratitudine Me duce Dardanius spartam expugnavit adulter, for minime gen∣tium. Id facinus in laude ponas egregia, for ignominia; Credo quam innumerabiles hostium copias in Italia fu∣disset, for nullas: so Qui Bavium non odit, amet tua car∣mina, as admodum inculta. Sic, idem iungat vules & mulgeat hircos, for ineptias agat; which two last are called Astismus: En agros metire iacens, & Satia te San∣guine Cyre, both called Sarcasmus. These examples, Midas pauper, for Cui sua desunt bona: or Codrus di∣ves, for qui nil cupit, are not Ironies, but Metony∣mies of the consequent; dare classibus austros, for clas∣ses austris is Hypallage; de tuis nildicam periuriis, or ut praeteream tua latrocinia, are Apophasis and Para∣lipsis, Lucus qui non lucet, Parcae quae non parcunt, Euxinus for Axenus are Antiphrasis; all which re∣semble this trope, but are especially different from it. Lastly, it is used most in merriments, and some∣times in grave, but sharpe reproofes of faults, no lesse odious then notorious. Affections belonging to the former tropes. Metalepsis is a graduall progresse of sundry tropes in the same word, Stratoque super discumbitur ostro. Hinc movet Euphrates, illinc Germania bellum: Post aliquot mea regna vidns mirabar aristas. Allegoria is the continuation of the same trope in sundry words, nostros habemus Curios, Mamercos,
Marios, rete accipitri non tenditur neque milvo ne charta nos prodat pertimesco, sine Cerere et Baccho friget Venus, Contrahe sam vento tua turgida vela secundo. Filiolas Cadmi profert Nilotis Arundo, Quas serit e Cnidio distillans sepia nodo. Which last is called Aenigma. Catachresis is an usurpation of words enforced from the received to an improper sense, faciesque simillima lauro, Ʋltores sperate Deos, tibi laeta minatur, Vir gregis, aut acres tendunt arcus, minuto sunt ani∣me, Capitis nives. Hyperbole doth amplifie or abate the sense of words used unequally to their true meaning, not to de∣ceive, but to levell the uneven opinion of the hearers, by such means rectified, and the first sort is called Auxesis, the last Meiosis: Gigantes for proceri, Nani for pusilli, Mons for verruca, Parricidium for homicidium and contrariwise nusquam tuta fides, for apud paucos, the indefinite for the finite, all Hyperbolicall Synecdoches, which some Authors think to be Catachresis Venere formosior, pice nigri∣or, sublimi feriam sydera vertice. Every affection doth in some sort belong to all the Tropes, but the Irony is least affected with them. Metalepsis is most familiar to Synecdoche and the Metonymie, even as the Allegory to the Metaphor, Catachresis with good Authors, doth only affect the speech intended for the rusticks. And otherwise doth resemble the speech of Rusticks for the most part in Comoedies.
Tho common affections of Nouns and Verbs. There be three affectious common to Nouns and Verbs, to wit Number, Gender, and Per∣son, whereof the Number doth equally belong both to Nouns and Verbs, the other two un∣equally, for the Gender is more peculiar unto Nouns, and the Person unto Verbs. Of the Number. There be two Numbers, 1 The Singular belonging to one as Pater obijt. 2 The plurall pertaining to more then one, as liberi lugent. Exceptions. Two Substantives singular with a Con∣iunctive Adverb called a Copulative, or one Noune Collective, or a Pronoune Distribu∣tive singular, referring to a society is equiva∣lent to the plurall, speaking implicitly of many: And Verbs or Adiectives referring thereunto, will agree with the more worthy Person or Gender, the former in both being accounted worthiest, saving that the Neuter standeth for the worthier Gender after copulates that be∣token things inanimat, as Virga & Baculus nos consolata sunt, gens armati perimus, vestrum ali∣quis adeste, utraque suo delectatae studio, aliud de dignantur. Likewise Verbs singular called Im∣personalls, are equivalent to the plurall, by ver∣tue of the oblique construed with them, as nos
docere oportet, vobis discere non luberab omnibus aut luditur aut cessatur. Lastly, Nouns proper or common, being only plurall, referring in Apposition to other Sub∣stantives singular, are equivalent thereunto, and speak but of one, as Vrbs Athenae, Baccha∣nalia, festum infame, Circenses, curule certamen, Aeneides, Virgilij poema. Tu mihi deliciae, Ars inopis divitiae. Where may be noted that any Substantive of a continued signification, speaking of the same thing, must be put in the same case, Phoebe nutrix nos amat alumnos. Of the Gender. The Gender doth distinguish Nouns betoken∣ing Male or Female, physically by their sexes, but otherwise doth Gramatically differ sexies, Nouns having commonly like Declension, and constantly a like construction unto those which have proper sexes. The distinct Genders are only three, 1 Masculine, as Spado, sermo, 2 the Feminine, as Vulpes, Nubes. 3 The Neuter, as scortum slagitium.
Annotations. A Noune cannot be of any more then one of the said three Genders in the same Sentence or Construction. But otherwise many Nounes by their termination and signification, may be some of the two first, and others of all three Genders; and of this last sort are all Adiectives, which if they have three divers endings, as bonus bona bonum, the first as bonus is Masculine, the second as bona, is Foeminine, the third as bonum, is Neuter; or having two seve∣rall endings, as dulcis dulce, the first as dulcis is Masculine or Foeminine, the second as dulce is Neuter; or having but one ending, as faelix, dulci∣bus, bonis, then such are of all three Genders, cal∣led the Common of three. Substantives physically betokening both Sexes, hee and shee, under the same ending, as such by sig∣nification are both of the Masculine and Foeminine Gender, called the Nounes of the Common of two, but notwithstanding in the same Sentence, or in a continued Construction they keep constant∣ly to one Gender, as Parens de quo dubitatur Afri∣canus est. Other Substantives having no reference to di∣stinct Sexes, are called Nounes of the doubtfull Gender, being either Masculine or Foeminine, upon the authority of approved Authors who use the same promiscuously only in a continued Construction, but not in the same Sentence, as nullus est dies qua lite∣ras non scribo. Appellatives of Beasts, Birds, & Fishes, as vulpes, hirundo, passer, aquila, Cetus, specially those least conversant with man, though having distinct Sexes, yet keep constantly to one Gender, most a∣greeable to their termination, and are called Epi∣coenes.
Exceptions. Some such Nouns betokening domestike crea∣tures, and having a Termination that is not con∣stant to one Gender, be of the common of two, as Bos, Sus, Canis, and such like: And others of like sort, not having reference to any sex, are doubt∣full as Grus, Bubo, with such others. Of distinct Genders knowne by generall RƲLES. The proper Gender of any Nouns may cer∣tainely be known by their signification or ter∣mination, and sometimes by combination of both together. Of Genders knowne by signification. Nouns Physically betokening a certaine sex, if Male, are Masculines, as Galba, if Female are Feminines, as socrus, but filius is Mascu∣line, and filia feminine, both by signification and by termination. All proper names, and many common Nouns referring to more knowne Appellatives will i∣mitate the same, as in signification, so likewise in Gender, some few excepted, that follow the Termination constant to a certaine Gender. Of Masculines following the more knowne Appellative. The more knowne Appellatives being Mas∣culines, do for the most part communicate the same Gender to all proper names, or lesse known
Appellatives subordinate therunto as Deus, Pan Angelus, Gabriel, Diabolus, Sathanas, fluvius O∣rontes, but Averna, Gadir, be Neuters by the Terminations, constant to that Gender, Mons, Ossa, but Aetna, is feminine, referring unto Ru∣pes, Ventus, Lybs, but Ornithiae, is feminine, La∣pis, Adamas, but Marmor is Neuter, and Chry∣stallus feminine, referring unto Gemma, Piscis, Labrax, but Auxumae is feminine. Of Feminines following their Appellatives. The more known Appellatives being femi∣nines, do in like sort transmit their Gender to their respective lesse known Appelatives, or to proper names belonging thereunto, as Dea, Ju∣no, furia Alecto, mufa Clio, regio Persis, insula Cyprus, Urbs Pergamus, but Gabij, Hippo, Acra∣gas, are Masculines Bactra, Lugdunum, Hispal, Proeneste, Argos, Tibur, Zeugma, be neuters: Herba Baccharis, but Helleborus is Masculine, Arbor Pinus, but Pinaster is Masculine, navis Ar∣go comaedia Eunuchus, fabula Thyeste, but in these last Examples Synthesis doth sway the Gender. Of Neuters knowne by signification. Any part of Speech taken materially for the elementary parts of the word, are of the Neu∣ter Gender, as Amicitia, for Amicitiae vocabulum, Etymologice sumptum, dictum est ab amo. Or ta∣ken figuratively, as the Verb or Adverb in∣stead of a Substantive by Enallage, as scire tuum ihilest, for scientia tua, Cras aliud veniet, for Crastinus alter; And such are all Aptote Sub∣stantives,
as Tempe, fas, Halec, virus, sinapi, eor∣nu, nihil, hir, frir, pondo, Chaos, Hippomanes, pascha, with other exotick, or peregrine words, refer∣ring to no Physicall sex, either male or fe∣male. Of Genders knowne by termination. Nouns Regular, that do not referre either to a Physicall sex, or to a more known Appella∣tive, are best discerned in their proper Gender, by their Declensions, where accordingly their proper Gender shall be specified. Of Persons. There be three Persons in both Numbers, both of Nouns and Verbs distinguished each from other: The first Person, as the speaker singularly, ego doceo: plurally, nos Docemus, he second Person is spoken to, singularly, tu disces, plurally, vos discetis. The third Per∣son is spoken of singularly, ille advertat, plural∣ly, illi advertant. And all Nouns whatsoever be of the third person, whether Substantives (not apposed to ego, nos, tu, or vos) or Adiectives that have not the same for their Substantives. Moreover, ego, nos, tu, and vos, are common∣ly understood with Verbs, being never expressed but by way of restriction or amplification notifi∣ed by Coniunctions exceptive or Demonstra∣tive, as in the Syntax will be instanced.
Of Enallage. By Enallage any part of Speech or their affections may be changed one for another; populum late regem, for regnantem; Criminibus terrere novis, for terrebat, Which with other variations, by Tropes and Syno∣nymes, are very usefull for copiousnesse and ele∣gancy of expression, and are most necessary to gaine or advance good skill in Poetry, as the meet∣est helps to prepare Phrases for metricall formes. Moreover Enallage hath obtained sundry names in sundry respects, being called Antimeria, when it changeth parts of Speech, or Antiptosis, when it changeth Cases, or Heterosis changing Genders or Declensions, or Alloiosis changing other affecti∣ons. Of literall and genuine formes of NOƲNES. The Genuine forms commonly called the kinde of Nouns are two, the Substantives and the Adictives, distinguished each from other three wayes. 1 The Substantive hath a, or the before it, because understood of it selfe, and it answereth to the Question who or what, for clearing the sense of all other parts of speech ioyned there∣with in structure. But Adiectives have no such signe, because of themselves, they have no per∣fect sense, but in reference to their Substan∣tives. And therefore Adiectives agree with their Substantives, in Case, Gender, Numb∣, and Person.
2 The Substantive hath but one Gender, or two at the most, but Adiectives have all three Genders. 3 The Substantive regularly, hath but one ending in the same Case, but all Adiectives have two endings, in some Cases, and some Ad∣iectives in some Cases have three divers en∣dings. Plus, and quid with its compounds, as quic∣quid, aliquid, and the like, are alwayes put Substantively. And such are sometimes other Adiectives of the neuter Gender, having quid∣dam, or negotium, or verbum, — in the Hebrew, or Chrema in the Greek Idiome, understood therewith, as triste senex miles, turpe senilis A∣mor, horrida narrant. Likewise other Adiec∣tives of the Masculine or Feminine Gender, have known Substantives to be supplyed there∣with, as omnis amicus, supply homo, Pinguis Ferina, supply caro, una triremis, supply, navis, meus natalis, supply, dies. Of the variation of parts of Speech. Substantives may be changed unto Adjectives, or contrariwise, and either of them to Verbs, or Adverbs, as Ingenium Herois, heroicum ingenium, or ingeniosus Heros, pro dotum copia, or co piose dotatus, aevo quolibet locoque, or semper et ubique, clarescet, or audiet clarissimus, or clarissime.
The formes or kindes of Substantives. There be two kinds of Substantives. 1 Proper names belonging definitly to one, as Homerus. Or 2 Nouns Appellative and com∣mon, belonging indefinitely unto any of the same rank or condition, as Poeta belonging equally to any of the Poets. The variation of Nouns proper or common. Proper names by Tropes put on the nature of Appellatives signifying in a borrowed sense, not the persons, but their conditions, as Hydra for Clades, Metaphorically, Nero, for Tyrannus, Synecdochical∣ly, but such are used more commonly in the plurall as Aristoeles for Philosophi, Alexandriae, for Ʋbes imperatoriae by Synecdoche of the species, Caii, Decii, Fabricii, for ipsoum Liberi, by a Metonymie of the cause, the Authors giving names unto their fami∣lies. Appellatives are contrariwise used for proper names Antonomastically as Clades Lernensis, for Hydra Lernaea, Tyrannus, for Nero, Philosophus, for Aristoteles, Atrides, for Agamemnon. Proper names, or Appellatives may be changed one to another by Synonyms. Paraphrastically. Aegyptus for tellus que faecundissima Nilo, Pluviae inscia regna, Arvum genitale Canopi, Deorum prodigio∣sa parens.
Adulator: Qui vendit fucum fumumque, Morbus amicitiae, Mancipium ventris. Proverbially. Qui captat ficum, Cauda blanditur, Sermonem sesamo condit, Rosas loquitur, Qui Vulpe bnignior audit, Et pellax patulas oleum distillat in aures. Emblematically. Chamaeleon quemlibet olorem imitans, Corvus ca∣daverum oculos effodiens, Cervus et fistula, Apis in ore mel, sub cauda spiculum gerens, Lupus asinum titil∣lans. Aenigmatically. Placentinorum potius quam Veronensium soboles. Tropologically. Assentator by Synecdoche of the part; Parasitus, by a Metonymie of the adjunct, Palpo, Metaphorically fautor et fo or Ironically. The formes or kindes of Adjectives. Adiectives are of three sorts or kinds. 1 Nounes betokening for the most partisome quality. 2. Pronouns, Notifying alwayes the quantity. 3 Participles, signifying an Active or Pasive power, capable of intension, and thereby di∣stinct from any act or passion▪ which hath all∣wayes some adsignificance of time, proper to the Verbs, and inconsistent with intension.
The severall kindes or Formes of Pro∣nounes. Pronounes considered at large, are of two kinds, either Demonstratives when joyned with their Substantives, they shew a thing not spo∣ken of before: or Relatives, when referring to their Substantives, construed in a former Sentence, and then called Antecedents, they reherse a thing spoken of before. Annotations. The Pronounes considered strictly in their di∣stinct formes of quantity are either, 1. Finite and singular, as Ego tu sui ille ipsei hic is and iste, or 2. Indefinite, being either. 1. particular, as non-nullus quidam aliquis, or 2. universall, as omnis nul∣lus. All which are called Redditives when they an∣swer to qui or quis, the Interrogatives. And quis or such other desisting to be Interrogatives become Redditives, admitting diverse formes suitable to their structure. These Possessives meus tuus suus noster vester Ho∣mericus Ciceronianus, and such like answering to the Interrogative Cuius may be sorted with finite Pro∣nounes. Other Possessives referring not to peculiar per∣sons, but unto Countries, as Atheniensis Romanus Cres Libs Arpinas nostras vestras with such other, answer∣ing to the Interrogative Cuias, may suit with the Indefinite; In which ranck may be placed likewise all the rest that follow. The Cardinall Pronounes, as unus duo tres qua∣tuor, and the rest answering unto Quot.
The distributives, as bini, trini or binarij, ternarii, and the rest answering to Quoteni. The multiplicatives, as duplex triplex, &c. an∣swering unto Quotuplex. The Ordinals, as primus secundus tertius, &c. answering unto Quotus. The Proportinals, as duplus triplus, &c. an∣swering unto Quotuplus. The Temporals as biduanus bimestris biennis, answering to Quotennis. The Frequentatives and Diminutives, as mul∣tus nimius paululus, answering unto Quantus. The Comparatives and Superlatives, as doctior and doctissimus, answering unto Qualis. Ego tu sui, being alwaies Substantives, have a pro∣perty to be constant to their dictinct persons, but any other will admit of any person agreeable to their Substantives; as sui Caesarem defendamus, or defendite servi Sui and suus, are called reciprocals, because they have immediate recourse to a pre∣cedent Substantive, either in the same Sentence, as trahit sua quemqu voluptas, or quis{que} sua voluptate trahitur, or in a former sentence reducible to the same, as vule nulier u ipsa & omnia laudentur sua: or vult sese ac sua laudari. Hic, iste, and ille when they referre to three, hic doth point at the last and neer∣est; iste at the second neerest, ille at the first and furthest. And commonly hic and ille are limited in like manner, when they referre to two. But ille and iste compared together, Ille rferreth to the best, and Iste to the basest. Of the variation of Pronounes. Pronounes have much affinity with Adverbes, and are commonly interchanged therewith, whe∣ther Interrogatives, as ubi, for quo die aut loco; or
Redditives, as hactenus, for usque ad hunc diem au locum; or Collectives, as perimus una, for omnes; or Distributives, as deferimus singulatim for singuli; or Numerals, as Nummi dividuntur hipartito, for in duas partes, and by way of equivalence, Castra si∣mul expugnantur ter quina, for quindecim. Distri∣butives passing for Cardinals, with Substantives that have no singular. Adverbes likewise supplie Diminutives and Frequentatives, either by ap∣position, as parum argutus, non satis facundus: or by composition, as subargutus, non perfacundus, for ar∣gutulus, haud facundiosus. More instances of remissi∣on, or intention, follow in the compounds of prepo∣sitionall Adverbes. And it may be noted, that all Pronounes, as implying, a quantity may be used partitively, yet such as have not that sense proper∣ly, but adventitiously, will not admit the structure of the partitives regularly; for it may be said, facun∣diosus oratorum, but satis facundus, or perfacundus oratorum, will be a barbarisme. A Relative may be put to substantives of con∣tinued signification; as fucos arcent ignavum pecus, or qui sunt pecus ignavum, or qui sunt ignavi. And it must necessarily be supplyed with Vocatives af∣ter Obliques of the second person, or their Posses∣sives: as Do tibi Maeri meum vinum, bibo Maeri tu∣umque, for qui es Maeri. Relatives will change the Participle of the pre∣sent Tense, to the Indicative; as sat luit desipiens, or qui desipit, and Participials in bilis, or Futures in aus, to the Subjunctive, as ptrem reperies exorabi∣lem, or exorandum, or qui exoretur. And sometimes they are changed to Conjunctive Adverbes cau∣sall; as Te felicom arbitror, qui, or quoniam probus audis Sometimes they cease by repitition of the
Antecedent, with si dum cum quia qumvis: as sat prosecisti, cu (or cum tibi) Cicero placeat; Scelus ad∣mittis quod (or quamvis seelus) abhorres. And if both Sentences be Negatives, by changing the last to nisi, as nulls homo miser, quem non (or ni∣si hominem) Deus odit. Interrogatives may be changed to their Reddi∣tives, with Num or such like Adverbes; (as quot, or an, utrum, nunquid lot) cahortes duxisti, Quam pau∣cas (or nonne paucas) reducis. These resolutions young Scollers should bee trained to make readily, as their certaine Guide to finde out the structure of Interrogatives, at farre distance from the words, whetherto they do re∣ferre. Likewise Relatives for the same end may be chan∣ged to Demonstratives, as Stolidum reo, quem tam dilucida nedum intelligere constat; or si consta eum nedum intelligere tam dilucida. The figure of Nounes. By the figure Nounes are either primitive, as the originals not exceeding ordinarily one or two syllables, as sors tristis, or Derivatives, as descending thence, which if they come but of one originall, are called simples, and if from two or more, they are called Compounds. Of simple Nounes derivative. Nounes simply derivative, are either Verbals, as suadela suasorius, or adverbialls, as inter∣nus extraneus, or Denominatives coming either from proper names, being patronymicals: as Hectorides Phoronis, being Gentiles, as Macedo Libyssa: or from Appellatives, being Possessives,
Frequentatives, Diminutives, Comparatives, or Superlatives, as herbarius, herbosus, herbula herbaceus, herbidior and herbidissimus. The severall endings of Nounes verball. Substantives end in a, antia arium arius Scriba ia∣ctantia auctarium emissarius, ber. bra. brum. bula, bu∣lum, tuber scatebra ventilabrum fabula, stabulum, orum culum, fulcrum, vinculum, and by syncope vnclum do. uredo ela, entia, es, eus, suadela, sapientia, teges abigeus, go, imago, for imitago, ta, il, ile, io, is ius, furia, pugil, cubile, legio, messis, genius, lum, ja∣culum; men, mentum, mes, monia, solamen, alimen∣tum, fomes, alimonia, na. num, nus, urina regnum colo∣nus. or, dolor, trina, tru. trum, trus, tum, doctrina tonitru, aratrum, tonitrus, viretum, ver, ul, ulis, ul∣tus, ur, us, cadaver, consul, curulis, tumultus, fulgur, mergus, ex. ux. vindex, dux. Supine Verbals end in sio. sor. soium, sum, sura, sus: as censio, censor, censorium, pnsum, censura, census: tio. tor. torium, trix. trum, tum, tura, tus. lectio, lector, tentorium, mo∣trix, lectrum, tectum, lectura, lectus. xamen. xio. xor. xorium. xum, xura, xus. flexamen, flexio, ixor, frix∣orium, frixum, flexura, nexus. Adjectives end in arius, actuarius, bilis, bris, bun∣dus, flebilis, lugubris, palabundus, cer, cris, crus, cu∣lus, cundus, cus. volucer, volucris, ludicrus, ridiculus, iracundus caducus. dis, dus, viridis, pallidus, er. es. piger, deses, ilis, itius, jus, vtilis, for vtibilis, fictitius, anxius, lus, nus, orius, rus, vlcus ivus, us, uus, ax. ox. pendulus, plenus, oratorius, avarus, biulcus, sativus, probus, cae duus, tenax, praecox.
The severall endings of Nounes adverbiall. Adverbiall Adiectives end in aneus, arius extra∣neus, contrarius, cus, anticus. er. ernus, erus, exter, externus, or exterus, gnus, benignus, in quus, propin∣quus, ius nimius, dinus, tinus, perendinus, diutinus, and such like of time, and mediastinus of place, ex∣cept such Nounes are compounded with tenus. Sundry endings of Denominatives from proper Names. Patronymicks Masculine, end in ades, ides, ion; and Plurall in adae, or idae, Anchisiades, Iliades, Maenetiades Atlaentiades, Aeacides, Pelides, Japeti∣on, Oedipodion, Aeneadae, Romulidae, Aegidae. Foe∣minines end in as, ine, is, one. Thestias, Ilias, Peli∣as, Phaetontias, Nerine, Adrastine, Acrifione, Nere∣is, Inachis, Latois; whereto may be added Mascu∣lines in ta, as Donatista, Jacobita, and such other, denominating Sectaries from their first Authors. Gentile Sustantives have for endings an, ar, as, ax. Acarnan Car Arcas, Nostras, Thrax. ens. er. es, essa, Laurens, Ser, Cres, Cressa. ibs. idae. ins. ir. is. is∣sa. ix. Libs, Numidae, Tyrins, Trevir, Samnis, Aethi∣opissa, Cilix. o. on. ops. os. ox. Brito, Lacon, Aethi∣ops, Tros, Capadox. ta. tes. tis. Israelita. Spartiates, Spartiatis. ur. urs. us. Ligur, Tiburs, Anglus, ys, yssa, yx. Libys, Libyssa, Japyx. Gentile Adiectives Possessive have terminati∣ons, anus, arius, aticus, Romanus, Dardanarius, Apol∣loniaticus. ensis, enus, eius, eus. Atheniensis, Aby∣denus, Aetneius, Maroneus. iacus. icus, ius inus. Aegyptiacs, Aegypticus, Aegyptius, Agrigenti∣nus.
Adjectives ending in alis, anus, aris, filialis, mon∣tanus, familiaris, ber. bris. cer. cris. cus. saluber, mu∣liebri, alacer, alacris, magicus, ensis ernus. eus. ca∣strensis, paternus, meus, aureus, inus, itimus. ius, ivus. vicinus, legitimus, regius, festivus, ster, stis, stris. stus. uus. noster, caelestis, campestris, honestus, tuus, annuus. All which respectively may be possessive. Frequentatives end usually in tus. idus. lentus. licus. lus. orus. osus. fortunatus, herbidus, violentus, famelicus, nubilus, Ʋxorius, piscosus. Diminutives being both Substantives and Adjectives, notefy∣ing alwayes an abatement, and that often with in∣dignity, and sometimes with flattery, and seldomest with modesty, do end in ella. ellum. ellus. opella, flagellum, cultellus, or illa. illum. illus. mammilla, sigil∣lum, pugillus, tantillus, ola. olium. olum. olus- filiola, epistolium, ingeniolum, filiolus, ula. uleus. ululus ulum. ulus. adolescentula, equuleus, homululus, frustulum, adolescentulus, ridiculus, senecio, homuncio flosculus, di∣caculus, grandiusculus, ramunculus, sio. ster. pusio, Grammaticaster. Materialls end in aceus. alis. arius. aticus. hordea∣ceus, aqualis, aquarius, aquaticus, etus. eus. cus. inus. ius. itius. querctus, querceus, quercicus, quercinus quercius, lateritius, gnus abieguus, if it be not com∣pounded with genus, aus. quernulanus, or quer∣queculanus, neus. nus. querueus, quernus. Comparatives end constantly in or, and Super∣latives in mus, as prior, primus,.
Of forming Comparatives and Superlatives. Adiectives whose signification may increase or be diminished, being put absolutely without excesse, as durus hard are called Positives, or somewhat exceding the positive in a proportion, between two having the English ending in er or the signe more set before it, as harder or more hard be called Comparatives, or surpassing all others of like kind, having the English ending in est, or the signe most before it as hardest, or most hard, be called Superlatives. Comparatives and Superlatives are both formed from their Positives ending in i whereto the Comparatives adde the termination or. and the Superlatives add ssimus, so duri maketh durior and durissimus, likewise tristi maketh tristior and tristissimus. Exceptions. Positives that end in er and ur apocopated have rimus put thereto, in forming the Super∣lative, as niger nigerrimus, celer celerrimus, ma∣tur maturrimus, And some few that end in lis, change that to llimus, as humilis humillimus, so facilis and similis with their Compounds and with some Authors, gracilis, agilis, docilis, but with others these three last keep the Generall Rule, and all Adiectives besides, which end in lis, as nobilis nobilior nobilissimus.
Of irregular Comparatives and Superla∣tives. Some Adiectives are used onely to one of the three former degrees in signification, as for exam∣ple. To the Superlative onely maximus, minimus, optimus, pessimus,. To the Comparative onely ma∣ior, minor, melior, peior. To the Positive onely, as all Nounes either incapable of intension and re∣mission, being extreames; as aeternus, momntaneus, praecipuus, gregarius; or equall in their condi∣tion; whether first of nature, being Nounes ma∣teriall, as faginus; or fignifying the species of time or place, as bimulus, diurnus, meridionalis; or being derivatives from proper names, as Paschalis, Eous: or of relation, as all Pronounes being pronominally taken for tuissimus, as patruissimus, and Neronior is used for tibi simillimus, deposing the proper sense, or of adsignificance, being Par∣ticiples of the first Future, never admitting a com∣parison, because they never faile to signifie an ex∣presse time. But Participles of the second Future, are used onely to the Superlative, and that with late Writers, not with Classick Authors. And Par∣ticiples of the Present & the Preterrenses, when they desist to signifie time, do become Nounes, and admit Comparisons; as amans, amantior, a∣mantissimus, doctus, doctior, doctissimus. Other Adiectives are by use unmoveable, which end in ar. or ur. bundus crus. cus. eps. es. eus. ius. lus. mus. ster. stus. uus. seldome admitting a Compa∣rative, or Superlative degree, saving by a supple∣ment of magis, and maxime, or such like, answer∣ing to more and most, the signes thereof in english,
as the Positive dispar, hath for Comparative ma∣gis dispar, for the Superlative maxime dispar, and so in the rest. Some Adiectives want the Positive onely, as plus plurimum, deterior deterrimus, magnificentior mag∣nificentissimus and such like Compounds of dico, loquor, volo. Some want Comparatives onely, as consultus, di∣versus, falsus, fidus, inclytus, invictus, invisus, invi∣tus, meritus, novus, nuperus, pius, sacer, strenuus. Some Adiectives, want onely the Superlatives, as adolescens, ingens, iuvenis, salutaris, satur, senex, taciturnus, and proximus, imitating a Positive doth make proximior onely. The variation of Comparatives and Su∣perlatives. Comparatives or Superlatives leaving the na∣ture of Partitives, are used absolutely for Positives; as celerior celerrimus, or celerius celerrime, huc advo∣lasti, for celer, or celeriter. Likewise Comparatives may take the place of Superlatives, as multo praestantior omnibus ille, for praestantissimus omnium. And contrariwise Superla∣tives may take the place of Comparatives, fidissimus ille duorum, for fidelior. Superlatives may be changed and diversly ren∣dred, either by Adverbes of intension put unto the Positive, as apprime doctus, perdite nefarius, nequic∣quam infaustus, undi{que} probus; or by Adverbes of re∣mission with a Negative, as haud parum, or medio∣criter letus, or with Adverbes of likenesse, referring to singularity, as alous vt nix, or tropologically, when proper Names or some Appellatives stand
for Adiectives; as Theseus, for fidissimus, decus & tutela Pelasgum, for inclyssimus, and such others. Some Positives have the force of Superlatives affirmatively, as princeps omnium: or negatively, nulli secundus; or any Positive construed with a Genirive plurall of its owne Substantive, as im∣piger fluminum, nigra lanarum. Superlatives may be expressed by Hebraismes, as putum putum argen∣tum, flos florum, sapiens consiliariorum, vir sanguinum, populus electionis, dulcis prae nectare, excelsus supra Gentes. Superlatives may be implyed in Paraphra∣ses, as vir, si quisquam alius, bonae frugi, impertum ob∣tinens, nulli cedens, parem nusquam inventurus, palma dignus, nullum non superans, and such others. Of Compounds. Compounds come either from entire words, whe∣ther two rects and both Substantives, as jusjuran∣dum; or two rects, the one a Substantive, and the other an Adiective, as respublica, or both rect Ad∣iectives, as alteruter; or a rect and oblique both Substantives, as paterfamilias, or oblique and rect, both Adiectives, as levidensis; or oblique Substan∣tive, and rect Adiective, as jurisperitus, or two rects Adiectives, with an Advebe, as unusquis{que} where all rects are onely variable, and the rest unmove∣able. Or Compounds come from words impaired, commonly the former, as grandaevus, sometimes both, as aprugnus: Sometimes words compounded be of divers tongues, as epitogium, parisyllabicum ambactus: Sometimes the simples are obolet sa∣ving in composition, either both, as completus, or the former as difficilis vesanus, or the latter, as de∣sensio, and such are all encliticals, as egomet, tute, idem quidam, quispiam, quicun{que} hicce, suapte. Some for eu∣phony
take increase of letters, as reditus, and some change the first Vowell of the latter simple, as ini∣micus, pertinax. Moreover Compounds with Clas∣sick Authors, are much more in use then the simple words, both as more significant, tending to briefe descriptions, and as affoording more variety in the resolutions, whereof the first is found in composition of Nounes and Verbes, instanced in the variation of Substantives, and the other in Composition of Nounes or Verbes, with prepositionall Adverbes, which will be instanced in that place. The peculiar affections of Nounes. Affections proper unto Nounes, are three, Case, Declension, and Gender. Of Cases. Cases are divers endings of Nounes in either of both numbers, being regularly foure, the No∣minative, Gentrive, Dative, and Accusative. Of the Nominative. The Nominative called also the Rect, in op∣position to al other Cases, called Obliques, goeth before a Verb Personall, which doth agree there∣with in person and number, or else cometh after a verb substantive in apposition to the Nomni∣tive going before it, as necessitas est artium ma∣gistra. Annotations. Some Greek Nounes are found irregular, be∣ing redundnant in the Nominative singular of some
Declensions by casting away s. as Thomas, Thoma, Crhyses, Chryse, in the first, Orpheus, Orpheu, in the second, Oedipus, Oedipu, Aias, Aia, Pallas, Palla, A∣lexis, Alexi, Paris Pari, Simoeis Simoei in the third. All which are proper names, and some Latine Nouns Appellatives, cast away us. as from meus, be∣ing with old Authors mius cometh mi, from genius, geni, from filius fili, and from all proper names, as Caius Cai, Georgius Georgi, Aemilius Aemili, and such like. And all other both proper and common Nouns of the second Declension ending in us (Deus only excepted) will change us to e. imitating therein Nouns of the third Declension in the Greek, as optime Feste nequaquam, insnio Lastly all Nounes in such redundant Terminati∣ons being rectes, because they are never derived from the Genitives, are only of the second person, singular spoken to, and therefore called Vocatives to distinguish them from the regular Terminations, which are used indifferently for any of the three persons. Of the Genative. The Genitie so called, because thence are ormed all other Obliques and Derivatives, may be known in English by the signe of before t, or by the encliticall s. added thereunto, and n latine by being the latter of two Substan∣ives, that have divers significations, as Di∣cipuli Magister, the Master of the Schollar, or he Scholars Master. But the Genitive con∣trued with adiectivall Nouns or Verbs have the omer Substantives understood, being easily to e supplyed, as the more known Appellatives,
referring to their subordinate species of place, time, praise, price, cryme, punishment, order, mea∣sure, or some peculiar respect, as vivit Romae, sup∣ply Urbe, abest bidui, supply spacio vel itinere, e∣jusmodi est probitatis, supply Virtute, venalis te∣runcii, supply precio, reus furti, supply, crimine damnatus exilii, supply poena, poetarum doctissi∣mus, supply ordine, or numero, liber sex digito∣rum crassus, supply mensura, inops fide, promisso∣rum dives, rerum suarum satagit, alienarum imme∣mor, supply ratione. Moreover Genitives be∣ing the latter of two Substantives, are often changed to the Datives, as filius Heri, or Hero. Of the Dative. The Dative is construed with any part of Speech, being either put acquisitively with refe∣rence to the end or obiect, having in English the signs to, or for, as obviat, or venit obviam, or obvius mihi, or else Ablatively with reference to some cause, part, or specifical circumstance, having the signs from, through, in, with, by, & after the Compa∣rative degree, the signe then, being the English of prepositionall Adverbs expresly put there∣to, o otherwise understood therewith, as ab Italia discessit, quia prae ebrietate bacchabatur, postmodum Athenis exceptus, herbis sanatus est a Medico, sociis omnibus sobrior. Annotations. The Ablative in regard of a redundant termina∣tion found only in the singular not of all, but of some Declensions, hath passed for a distinct latine case (which the Greek, a mother tongue unto the
Latine hath never owned) And therefore it were more equall to account the same a redundant Da∣tive by the same law, whereby the Vocative is con∣cluded to be a redundant Nominative. For to make either of them a distinct case, would require the same to have a distinct ending in both numbers and all Declensions, according to an equall Rule required alike in every Case, wherein both these redundants faile. Moreover (as the Nominative is frequently used to the second Person (for a Voca∣tive) so the regular Dative is often used promiscu∣ously for the redundant Ablative, as proximus Re∣gi, or a rege, id mihi, or mecum commune, alinus ambi∣tioni, or ambitione, oratori, or ab oratore diversus est Po∣eta, tibi or a te fama petatur, Virgilius Homero compara∣tur, or cum Homero, formido tibi, or de te, robori, or ro∣bore fidens, tibi, or tecum certabo, vitia haec insunt amo∣ri, or in amore, vosmet eripite slammae or slamma, with many more. Of the Accusative. The Accusative called in Greek the Causa∣tive, as pointing ordinarily at some cause, fol∣loweth a Verb transitive, bring the Active or Deponent, or a Verb neuter being o the same signification with it, or else goeth before an in∣finitive mood, as veritatem tueri, haud eam labe∣ctare Judicis est, villicus provectam aetatem vivens, suam senectutem oiari dedignatur. Otherwise the Accusative construed with Verbs neuter of different signification from it is Ellipticall, having understood therewith ei∣ther an infinitive of some Verb Transitive, or more commonl some prepositionall , as Id possumus, supply agere, quod probos ece, for
apud probos, but most usually the Prepositions serving thereunto are expyesied therewith, as per mare veniunt in Britannian. Of Declensions. All variable Nounes are ranged according to their mutuall Analogy among themselves, to five distinct forms, and thence are called Nouns of the first, or second, or third, or fourth, or fifth Declension; for the Declension is a distinct form or way of varying Nounes, according to their severall Cases or Terminations. Annotations. Nounes of the two first Declensions are parisyl∣labicall, having like number of Syllables in all Cases, save in the Genitive plurall of both, and in the Dative plurall of moveable Substantives, in the first onely, as dearum, deabus, deorum. Nounes of the three last Declensions are impa∣risyllabicall, taking the increase of a Syllable in sundry oblique Cases, which increase some Nounes of the third Declension have in all the obliques thence. Nounes both Substantive and Adiectives of the Neuter Gender, in the Nominative and Accu∣sative, both singular and plurall, of any Declensi∣on do end alike, and in the plurall do end onely in a, few Pronounes excepted, as hoc, quod, ambo, and duo, being all irregular, whereof in the Hete∣roclites, Nounes of the third Declension, whether Mas∣culines or Foeminines, or both, end alike in the No∣minative and Accusative plurall. And Nounes of the fourth end alike, not onely in those two Cases,
but also in the Nominative and Genitive singular; and Nounes of the fifth end alike in the Nomina¦tive singular, and in the Nominative and Accusa∣tive plurall. And Nounes both of the first and fifth end alike in the Genitive and Dative Singular. Lastly, it is of most concernment farre above any other, that Schollers be well versed, and very per∣fect in the Declensions of Nounes and Conjuga∣tions of Verbes; the onely parts of Speech variable by proper affections: And for that purpose the distinct Termination proper to every Case of each Declension, should be made familiar to them, that by casting of the same from any Oblique, the word then having for its last bound the Characteristicall letter, which is alwaies that next preceding the termination of the Nominatve; Learners may with ease change the termination of such Obliques to the proper ending of the Rect, or Nominative in the same Declension, as for instance; filiabus, by termination is a Dative plurall of the first De∣clension, take thence abus, and the word doth end in i, being the Characteristicall, then put thereto a, the termination of the Rect in that Declension, and it will be filia, which any Novice may decline accordingly, but without such certaine prescript to finde out the Rect, hee will faile therein. So pueros by termination is an Accusative plurall of the second Declension, take thence os, and the word will bee puer, whereto us the proper ending of the Rect in that Declension should bee added, were it not a∣pocopated, so from fab'ros, take away os, it will bee fab'r, and being no proper ending, it may be under∣stood that such words are syncopated in all the Ob∣liques, whence e, the middle Syllable is cut off, and must bee restored to the Rect, making it faber. In
the third Declension, affording greatest difficulty in such Nounes, as do increase in the Genitive singular; a recourse should be made to the sundry endings of Rects therein, and good notice taken of the sundry endings of the Genitive singular, be∣longing often to the same ending of the Rect, and by a reduction of the terminations of other Ob∣liques, to the termination of that Genitive, the Rects proper ending will soon be found by Analogy with particular instances in that Declension, as for example; in partibus, change tibus, a termina∣tion of the Dative plurall to tis, an ending of the Genitive singular, and by rule partis must come from pars; so in remigum, laticum, change gum, and cum, to gis, and cis, both by rule come from ex. the proper ending of the Rect, changing e, to i, and in limites, change tes, to tis, and limitis will come from the Rect limes, changing likewise e, to i, and casting away s: in vulnera, change era, to eris, and by rule vulneris will come from the Rect vulnus. And in words of the fourth and fifth De∣clension the former Rules will serve. Of the first Declension. Latine Nounes of the first Declension do end only in a, being by termination Foeminine, and are declined as in the Example folowing. Singulariter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. Und-a. ae. ae vel a. am. Pluraliter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. ae. arum. is. as.
Annotations. Greek Nouns Substantive of this Declension end in as, and es, which in Latine will both end in a. and others end also in e. And hebrew Nouns end in am, or as, which latine-like will end in amus, as from A∣braham, or Abrahs, Abrahamus. And all be declined as in examples following. Singulariter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. Satrap-as vel a. ae ae vel a. am vel an. Athlet-es vel a. ae. ae vel a. am vel en. Epitom-e es. e. en. Ad-am vel as. ae. ae. vel a. am. The plurall as in Latine Nounes. Substantives of this Declension answering to the first or second in the Greek may be of any Gender, except the neuter, for Greek Nouns ending in e are feminines, as Epitrope; or ending in as, or es, or made thence to end in a be Masculines, as tiaras & tiara, planetes and planeta, or Nouns that end in a, & do betoken humane conditions belonging to both sexes, are of the Common of two by signification, as advena, verna; or referring to noe certaine sex may be of the Doubtfull gender by authority, as Talpa: or being Appellatives of bruit creatures, may be epicoenes, as vipera, Simia. Of the Genitive Singular. With old Authors, Nounes ending in a vowell before a, or ending in ra, or na, have the Genitive singular in as Greek-wise, as dux vias, for viae, im∣petus auras, filius Latonas: And old Poets have changed ae to ai. as Aulai, Pictai, Geryonai, for au∣lae, pictae, Geryonae.
Of the Dative singular. The Dative singular is constanly redundant in this Declension and in none other besides this. Of the Genitive plurall. The Genitives plurall of Nouns Patronymick, and Gentile, and Nouns compounded of colo, and gigno are often Syncopated, as Aeneadum, spartia∣tum, Caeliolum, Terrigenum, the two first of these ending Greekwise in the common tongue, being Parisyllabicall in all cases, as Aeneadae, Aeneadon, which by the Boeotick or Aeolick dialect may end in a on as Aeneidaon And Latine Nounes do imitate the same Dialect, having r. inserted between a and um, as in Aenidarum. Of the Dative plurall. Some moveable Substantives ending in us of the second, and in a of this Declension, have therein a redundant Dative plurall, as nata maketh natis, common to it with natus, and natabus proper to it selfe, for distinction of the Genders, as the Nounes redundant in the rect distinguish persons. Of Nounes redundant being of this and other Declensions. Some proper names are redundant, being of this and the second Declension, as Hierosolyma Hiero∣solimae, and Hierosolyma Hierosolymorum. And some Appellatives are of this Declension in the plurall, and of the second in the singular, as epulum epuli, and epulae epularum. Others of this, and the third; as Pascha Pasche, and Paschatis, Orontes Orontae
and Orotis, Chalcas Chalcae and Chalcanvis. Of the second Declonsion. Latine Nouns of the second Declension, end constantly either in um. being all neuters, or us. or in (er and ur) having us apocopated, being Masculines by termination, except few such being feminines, and all be declined, as in the example following. Singulariter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. Ov-um i. o. um. Alv-us vel e. i. o. um. Puer i. o. um. Li-ber bri. bro. brum. Plurialiter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. a. orum. is. a. i. orum. is. os. i. orum. is. os. bri. brorum. bris. bros. In this Declension vir with all Substantives ending in er and Adiectives ending in er and ur, have us apocopated, and both Substantives, and Adiectives ending in er, not having a vow∣ell, or halfe vowel going before er. be for the most part syncopated in all the obliques, as vir for virus, viri, viro, miser for miserus, miseri, misero, satur, for saturus. saturi, saturo, but faber, for faberus, fabri, fabro, and sacer, for sacerus, sacri sacro. Some are excepted, as adulter, presbi∣ter,
socer, alter, asper, celtiber, gibber, lacer, liber (the Adiective) prosper, dexter, making dexteri or dex∣tri, and all Compounds of gero, and fero, which are never syncopated, as armiger, armigeri, stelli∣fer, stelliferi. Moreover all Adiectives in the second termination being feminines, are of the first Declension, but in the first and third being Masculines and neuters are of this Declension, and are thus declined. Singulariter. Procer- Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. us vel e i. o. um. a, ae. ae vel a. am. um. i. o. um. Pluraliter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. i. orum. is. os. ae. arum. is. as. a. orum. is. a. Some Pronouns in the Genitive singular do end in ius, and some in jus. and both in the Dative end in i. as unus una unum, unius, uni, being o∣therwise regular, as also totus, solus, and alter, uter, ullus, with their Compounds, but ille ipse iste, with is ejus ei, qui cujus cui, and hic hujus huic are more irregular, whereof in the Heteroclits.
Annotations. Greek Nouns of this Declension in the Nomi∣native singular end in os. on. s. and eus. and are thus declined. Singulariter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accusa. Byss-us vel e. i. o. um. Barbit-on. i. o. on. Ath-s. . . n vel Thes-eus vel eu.ei.v.eos.eo v.ei.eum v.ea. The pluralls as in Latine. Substantives of this Declension answering to the third and fourth of the simple, and to the third of the contracts in the Greek, may be of any Gen∣der except the Common of two; For besides Mascu∣lines most usuall in this Declension of Nouns both Greek & Latine, ending in os, or in us, many Greek Nouns changing os to us, and few latine Nouns in us, are feminines, as for instance. Antidotus costus methodus byssus{que} papirus Nardus & hyssopus dialectus eremus & arctus Graeca, latina colus vannus domus alvus humus{que}. Likewise pampinus is doubtfull, and elephantus, epicaene. And Symbolon, with all such other Greeke Nounes are Neuters. Of the Genitive Singular. The Genitive Singular ending in ij, is often apocopated, as tua cura peculi, for peculii.
Of the Nominative Plurall. The Nominative Plurall with some old Authors, doth end in ei. as captivei, for captivi. Of the Genitive Plurall. The Genitive Plurall is often syncopated, but mostly with Poets, as Chara deum soboles, for deo∣rum, but it happeneth very seldome in the Neuter Gender, as duellum, for duellorum. Nounes redundant being of this and other Declensions. All Adiectives of three divers endings are re∣dundant, being of this and the first Declension; as bonus bona bonum, some Nounes are of this and the third Declension, as sequester, sequestri, and sequestris, glomus, glomi, and glomeris, vesper, vesperi, and vesperis, polypus, polypi, and polypodis. Perseus, Persei, and Perseos. Other Nounes are redundant in the Genitive plurall onely, as Bacchanalia, Baccha∣naliorum, and Bacchananum: ancilia, anciliorum, & ancilium; And so sponsalia, vecligalia. Others are redundant in the Dative plurall onely: as poemata, poematis, and poematibus, or poemasi. Other redun∣dants in the Singular bee of this, and in the Plurall of the third Declension: as iugerum, iugeri, and iu∣gera, iugerum, iugeribus; being both formerly Nounes moveable, but now obsolet, saving that iu∣geris, and iugere, of the Genitive and Dative abla∣tivall singular bee still in use. Of the third Declension. Nouns of the third Declension do end in three Vowels, a e o. and in seven Consonants, c
l n r s t x. Amongst which the Terminations a e c t. and both us, and or, increasing short in substantives, & us increasing long in Monosylla∣bles; & al Adjectives of the Comparative degree, be alwaies Neutrals. And al. el. en. ar. ur. be most∣ly Neuter endings, but admit Exceptions, Aus. or ys. or us. increasing long, or os. making otis. are alwaies foeminine by Termination: And for the most part such are Substantives that end in as. or is. or x. or s. with another Con∣sonant, and Polisyllables Derivative in o. and Parisyllabicals in es. but some of such endings admit Exceptions, Or, and os. making oris. be alwaies Masculines and ordinarily dissyllables primitive in o and Impatisyllabicals in on. and es. and er. being syncopated, the several Excep∣tions to this last, and to the former Genders follow next after the formes, by which such Nounes must be declined, as in these Ex∣amples. Nav-is. Lau-s. Pect-us. Faelix Trist-is
Singulariter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. Turr-is. is. i. vel e. em. vel im. Lau-s. dis. di vel de. dem. Pect-us. oris. ori vel ore. us. Fael-ix. icis. ici vel ice icem & ix. Trist-is & e. is. i. vel e. em & e. Pluraliter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. es. ium. ibus. es. des. dum. dibus. des. ora. orum. oribus. ora. ices & icia. icium. icibus. ices & icia. es & ia. ium. ibus. es & ia. Annotations. Nounes of this Declension answering to the fifth of the Simples, and to the first, second, and fifth of the Contracts in the Greeke, have all seven Gen∣ders, and some few exotick, either Greeke Appella∣tives, or Hebrew proper Names, have two more Terminations, the one in y. the other in id. as mo∣ly molyos, Neuter by Termination, David, Davidis, Masculine by signification, declined regularly like the rest. A. and e. in this Declension are terminations of Nounes Neuter onely; as problema problematis, cu∣bile cubilis maenia maenium. O. in Nounes Primitive of two Syllabls, is a termination Masculine: as ordo ordinus, sermo sermonis; and in these Nounes
of many Syllables, pugio pugionis, scipio titio, senio ternio. But caro, carnis not increasing is Foemi∣nine, and so is grando grandinis, with all Deriva∣tives of many Syllables ending in do, and go; as dulcedo dulcedinis, prurigo pruriginis, except harpa∣go harpaginis, a Greeke Noune▪ Masculine. Like∣wise derivative Verbals, and Denominatives, end∣ing in io, bee Foeminines; as lectio lectionis: so legio, concio, with communio, ditio, talio, rebellio, per∣duellio; lastly, Hiericho Hiericbuntis, by signification is Foeminine: But bubo bubonis, is of the doubt∣full Gender, and hirundo hirundinis, an Epicoene. c. and t. are endings of Neuters onely, as caput ca∣pitis, lac lactis; halec is an Aprote; for halecis doth come from halex a Foeminine. Al, and el, are Neutrall endings; as mel mellis, animal animalis: but sal, in a different sense is Neu∣trall, or Masculine, in the Singular, but masculine onely in the Plurall, used for facetiae. Il. ol. and ul. are Masculine endings, as mugil mugilis, which with old Authors was Parisyllabicall, sol solis, exul exulis: which last is accounted com∣mon, but good Authors say exulem & vagam redux∣it, or vagam ab exilio, not vagam exulem. An. in. on. are Masculine terminations, as Paean Paeanis, Evan Evantis, Delphis or Delphin, Delphinis. Xenophon Xenophontis, by signification and termina∣tion Masculines: and agon agonis, canon canonis, by termination onely: But Sindon Sindonis, is Foemi∣nine, and halcyon halcyonis, aedon aedonis Epi∣coenes. En. is a Neutrall ending, as lumen luminis, but pecten pectinis, ren renis, and splen, lichen, lien, are Masculines.
Ar. and ur. bee Neutrall terminations, as calcar calcaris, being formerly Parisyllabicall, hepar, for hepas, by antithesis, hepatis: far farris, for diffe∣rence from faris, fatur, murmur murmuris, ecur ieco∣ris, and iecinoris, by Epenthesis, or from an obsolet iecinus, but salar salaris, and furfur furfuris, bee Masculines, turtur and vultur Epicoens. Er. is a Masculine termination, as imber imbris, alacer alacris, pater patris, campester campestris, with many more both Substantives and Adiectives, syncopated in all Obliques, after b. c. t. aether ae∣theris, crater crateris, puber, and pubes by Antithe∣sis, puberis, except it er syncopated, for itiner itineris, ver veris, cadaver cadaveris. And cicer, laser, spinther, piper, papaver, Neuters, with sicer, laver, which as Herbes be Foeminines by signification: But linter lintris, clyster clysteris bee of the doubtfull Gender, and passer passeris an Epicoene. Or. increasing long is a Masculine ending, as, honor, and honos by Antithesis, honoris, but arbor arbo∣ris, is Foeminine, and cor cordis Neuter, with ador, or ados adoris, aequor, marmor, and all others increasing short. Yr. is a termination of Greeke Nounes, being the common of two by signification; as martyr marty∣ris. As. a termination of Nounes increasing, is Foe∣minine; as pietas pietatis, lampas lampadis, except vas vadis, and as assis, which with all ponderals derived thence, as bes bessis, semis, or semissis, se∣missis, decunx decuncis, dodrans dodrantis are Mas∣culines, so are likewise Gigas gigantis, and mas maris, by signification; but vas vasis is Neuter. Aus. is a termination Foeminine: as laus lau¦dis.
Es. is a termination Foeminine of parisyllabi∣call Nounes, as nubes nubis, and a Masculine end∣ing of imparisyllabicals, as pes pedis, termes terme∣tis, fomes fomitis, lebes lebetis; but Chremes making Chremis, and Chremetis, is by signification Masculine, so are abies abietis, Ceres Ceeris Foeminines, aes aeris is Neuter, vepres vepris, palumbes palumbis, and ales alitis are of the doubtfull Gender, and vulpes Epicoene. Nounes plurall onely that end in es, do analogically keep such Gender as they should bee of, were they regular, and had the singular, as am∣bages Faeminine, and natales Masculine, because ambages, and natalis their singulars would bee such. Is. of Nounes increasing, or not increasing, is mostly a termination Foeminine as navis navis, lis litis, cuspis cuspidis, genesis geneseos or genesios, charis charitos, so Themis making Themis or Theidis, or Themissis, and Salamis or Salamin Slaminis, are by signification feminines, likewise Simoeis Simoentis, s by signification masculine. Some imparisyllabi∣alls encreasing in dis nis and ris are masculines, as pis lapidis, Aeneis Aeneidis or Aeneidos, sanguis san∣uinis, glis gliris, vomis for vomer vomeris. And few arisyllabicalls. Mascula sunt piscis, fascis, sic mensis et orbis. t corbis sentis vectis sic vermis et axis. Et fustis postis torris velut anguis et unguis. Quaelibet in quis lis demum claudentia nisve. All Adjectives ending in is are of the Common two, as tussis, likewise Scrobis scrobis or scrobs scro∣s, is of the doubtfull gender.
Os making otis will be feminine, as Cos cotis, dos dotis, and making oris, masculine, as flos floris, but os oris, and os ossis, with epos epeos, and such Greek words be neuters. Heros herois, is by signification Masculine, and so are custos custodis, sacerdos sacrdo∣tis, of the Common of two; us increasing short, is a termination neutrall, as corpus corporis, vulnus vul∣neris, or increasing long in Monosyllables, and Nounes of the Comparative degree, as ius, iuri, me∣lius melioris, but mus muris, lepus leporis, ligus or ligur liguris, be Masculines by signification, pecus pecudis, is feminine, if pecudis be not a parisylla∣bicall. Any other Nounes increasing long are fe∣minines, as incus, subscus, palus paludis, tellus telluris, virtus virtutis, so opus opuntis is feminine by signification, and likewise grus gruis of the doubtful Gender. Ys is a termination feminine of Greek Nounes, as Chelys Chelyos, Chlamys Chlamydis or Chlamydos. But Gortys or Gortyn Gorlynos, is by signification and termination faeminine. S. with another consonant next it in the end of Nounes is a feminine termination, as trabs or trabes trabis, glans glandis, pars partis, hyems hyemis, stips o stipis, stipis, fron frondis or frontis, puls pultis, and Tiryn Tirynthis feminine by signification. But fons fontis, ons, pons, dens and Hydrops Hydropis, Chalybs Cha∣lybis, Gryps Gryphis are masculines. And princeps principis, auceps aucupis of the common of two by signification, adeps adipis, forceps forcipis, of the doubtfull Gender, concors concrods, caelebs caelibis, anceps ancipitis of the common of three. X. Being the termination of Nouns is feminine  pax, pacis, nex necis, carex caricis, nix nivis, filix filicis, nos noctis, lux lucis, obsolet frux frugis, styx stygis, coccys
onix onych is. But these grex gregis, remex reigis, and thorax thoracis, caudex or codex codicis, podex, cu∣lex, pulex, muex, ramex, rumex, apex, latex frutex, pol∣lex, vertex, calix, volvox, tradux, bombyx are mascu∣lines, and so is Hylax Hylactis by signification; but senex senis for senecis is of the common of two: And limx limacis, imbrex imbricis, varix vaicis of the doubtfull gender, so udax audacis, trlex triplicis, felix faelicis, velox velocis, trux trucis of the Common of three. Of the Dative singular. The Dative singular of some Nounes in this De∣clension is regular, ending only in i, and those not only Greek, as poesis poesi, but also latine, being either proper names as Chaybdis, Opis, Fabaris, Syrtis, or Ap∣pellatives, as buris, amussis, strigilis mare, or the two last endings apocopated, as mugil, vigil, animal, cal∣car, par, september, memo, and most Adjectives ex∣cept these that follow which have a redundant Da∣tive in e. to wit, all Participles not made Nouns participial as ncens, not innocens, or such as are de∣fective in the neuter as Senex, Juvenis, or that in∣crease short, as deses, uber, vetus, or that increase long, being made proper names, as Clemens, Fae∣lix. Many Substantives have the redundant Dative in e. to wit Nounes syncopated, as caro venter, and collis turris, with such like doubling l. and r. so apis nubes dogma grando sermo lac sal splen far mas virtus caput lex, but victrix and such nounes verbal taken adjectively, may be used indifferently.
Of the Accusative singular. Substantives in the Accusative singular end only in im, whose Datives end only in i. and other pari∣syllabicals end either in em or im; whose Datives may take or leave the redundancie, as navis, pup∣pis: but all the rest being no neuters, both Substan∣tives and Adjectives end only in em, except Greek Nounes which have for their terminations in, as ge∣nesin, some yn, or a, Erinnyn or Erinnyda, and some em or a. as aetherem, or aethera, and latine Nouns Greekwise as cassidem or cassida. Of the Nominative and Genitive plurall. All Adjectives or Substantives neuter increasing short, and monosyllable Substantives that end in us encreasing long, make the Nominative plurall in a. and the Genitive plurall in um as caeliba caelibum, so vigila participa votera memora impota dogmata cru∣ra. Other monosyllables make the Nominative like∣wise in a. but the Genitive in ium, as corda cordium, ossa ossium. And all other netuers not increasing, increasing long, whether of Substantives or Adje¦ctives, make ia, and ium, as retia retium, so vectigalia laquedria omnia folicia, excepting nounes of the com∣parative degree, as meliora meliorum. Substantives of other Genders in the Genitive plurall end in um, either increasing short or synco∣pated as sanguinum, fratrum, salubum, volucrum, campestrum, or not increasing, that have a vowell next before um pum or tum, as canum opum va∣tum, or increasing long with a vowell next before cum dum gum num rum tum, as radicum, paludum,
legum, leonum, rumorum, civitatum, and the rest end for the most part in ium, as Ʋrbium fascium vadium salium carnium marium mersium litium. Genitives plurall of some nounes that end in ium, are syncopated as sapintum caelestum boum. Some admit Epenthesis as alituum caelituum, some end Greek-wise, as haeresen. Of Datives plurall. The Dative plurall of some greek nouns end in asi, as dryasi for dryadibus. And likewise bos will make bubus, and bobus for bovibus. Of Accusatives plurall. The Accusatives plurall end sometimes in eis, of Substantives and Adiectives feminine, that end in the genitive plurall in ium, as parteis omneis, being an Archaisme, and sometimes the Adiective is con∣tracted, as omnis for omnis. And in greek nounes that Case doth end sometimes in as greek-wise as rhetoras for rhetores. Nounes redundant being of this and other Declensions. Some Nouns redundant are of this and the fifth Declension, as requies requietis and requei, so fames famis and famei; some are in the singular of this, in the Plurall of the second, as vas vasis, and vasa vasorum, from vasum now obsolet.
Of the fourth Declension. Nounes of the fourth Declension end in us, be∣ing for most part Masculine verballs, few other Nounes in us are feminines, and all pluralls in ua euters, being derived from Aptotes singu∣lar in u; the Nounes variable are declined as in these examples. Singulariter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. Curr-us us ui vel u um Corn-u u u u Pluraliter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. us uum ibu s us ua uum ubus ua Annotations. Substantives of this Declension answering neer∣est to the fourth of the contracts in the Greek, may be of any Gender, having the Common of two an Epicoene. Some Greek proper names of this De∣clension have a third termination of rects in o. as Clio, Clotho, Gorgo, Jo, Mantho, Sappho, all feminines by signification, and are declined as in this ex∣ample.
Singulariter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. Ecch-o us oi o. Pluraliter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus.       us Some few Appelatives are likewise feminines, as porticus acus tribus manus colus domus ficus, and the plurall idus, likewise penus specus be of the doubt∣full gender. Of the Genitive singular. The Genitive singular of this Declension with old Authors did end sometimes in i. as fructi for fructus copia, so tumulti, ornati. And sometimes in uis as delium anuis, for anus. And the Genitive plurall is often syncopated, as Currum. Of the Dative singular and plurall. Some Poets have used the Dative singular only in u. as parce metu. Moreover the Dative plurall of arcus artus lacus partus speus tribus veru do end on∣ly in ubus, but cornu genu portus do end both in i∣bus and ubus, and most other Nounes in ibus only. Of Nounes redundant, being of this and other Declensions. Nouns redundant are of this and the second De∣clension, as Domus domi, for any dwelling place, and Domus domus for an edifice, ficus fici for the Tree, and ficus ficus for the fruit, colus coli for the Instru∣ment
and colus colus for the work: others are of this and the third, as penus penoris and penus. Of the fifth Declension. Nouns of the fifth Declension end only in es, being feminines, and are thus declined. Singulariter. Nomi. Gen. Dat. Accus. Aci-es ei. ei vel e em. Pluraliter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. es erum ebus es. Annotations. The fifth (having no affinity with Greek De∣clensions, as the redundant Dative hath none with Greek cases) is a latine Declension of Nounes de∣scending mostly from other Declensions, either the fist, as from mollitia mollities, from desidia desidies, from Barbaria Barbaries, or the second, as from allu∣vium alluvies, or the third, as from plebs plebes, or the fourth, as from acus acies. And Nounes of this Declension be feminines, as most usually derived from such, except dies of the doubtfull Gender in the singular, and masculine in the plurall, and meridies only masculine: further∣more dies with effigies facies res species and acies are entire in the plurall. But the rest have only the Nominative and Accusative plurall, or entirely want that number, as betokening vertues or vices,
whereof in Nounes Anomalous, remaining only to be handled. Of the Genitive and Dative Singular. Dies with good Authors is found in the Genitive, as paena dies for diei, so is die apocopated, mercatus die septimi. And Dii syncopated, laetiliamque di, but this last may come from dius obsolet, whence are diu and most Derivatives that are in use, like∣wise the Dative singular in other Nounes is oft con∣tracted, as res commissa fide, for fidei. The termination of Nouns being the Common of two. Sus canis exul homo vates bos author & infans Dux{que} pugil{que} parens princeps cum vindic Martyr. Bifronsverna senex, quaevis Gentilia, ut Arcas. The termination of Nounes▪ the Doubtfull Gender. Grossus adeps limax varix specus anguis et imbrex. Barbitos atque dies tradux scrobs cum grue linter. Masculines seldome Feminines. Bubo cinis cortex ales cum cardine margo At{que}rudens et onyx python cum calce, pede imo. Feminines seldome Masculines. Halcyon et forceps natrix lynx talpa cupido.
Of Nounes Anomalous. Nounes Anomalous are raged to foure sorts, that is to say, to redundants, defectives, hetero∣geneous and heteroclitous, whereto may be ad∣ded Heteroeidous, such as have divers formes, proper to the Pronouns, and Heteoschematous belonging unto Compounds▪ all notified alleady in their distinct places. Of Nounes Heteroclit. Nounes Heteroclit swarving mostly from the regular, and very needfull to be known, as ve∣ry usuall, are these that follow, ego tu sui is iste ille ipse hic qui ambo and duo, the three first being totally irregular, and the eight last only in parte, are declined as in the following instances. Singulariter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. Ego. mei. mihi vel me me Tu. tui. tibi vel te te. Pluraliter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. nos nostrum vel nostri nobis nos vos vestrum vel vestri. vobis vos. Singulariter & Pluraliter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus caret sui sibi vel se se.
Singulariter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. is   eo eum ca ejus ei vel ea eam id   eo id. Pluraliter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. ii vel ei eorum iis eos eae earum vel eas ea eorum eis ea Singulariter. Ist Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. e   o um a ius i vel a am ud   o ud Pluraliter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. i orum   os ae arum is as a orum   a And in like manner be declined ille and ipse, saving that ipse maketh the neuter ipsum.
Singulariter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. hic   hoc hunc haec huius huic vel hac. hanc hoc   hoc hoc Pluraliter. Nom. Gen. Dat. Accu. hi horum   hos hae harum his has haec horum   haec Singulariter. Qui   quo quem Quae cuius cui v qua quam Quod   quo quod Pluraliter. Qui quorum quibus Quos Quae quarum queis quas Quae quorum vel quis quae. Pluraliter. Du— Nom. Gen. Dat. Accus. o orum obus os ae arum abus as o orum obus o And in like manner Amb— o ae o &c.
Num and en compounded, or ne si and alius ap∣posed to, or compounded with quis, will change quae both singular and neuter plurall to qua:num; en, si, and ne are scarce compounded with any other Case besides the Nominative and the Ac∣cusative; but alius is compounded with quis in all Cases, and quae or quod may be apposed there∣unto. Se may be doubled in the Accusative and quis in that and other cases, as in the Nominative quisquis quicquid, in the Dative Ablativall quoquo quaqua quoquo, and in the Accusative quicquid. Isle and hic are compounded together in the Nominative, istic istaec istoc and istuc, in the Da∣tive Ablativall istoc istac istoc, in the Accusative istunc istanc istoc or istuc. And ecce with eum and cam eos and eas, eccum eccam eccos eccas. And en with illum illam as ellum ellam. Lastly, quis in the Nominative, and qui in the Dative ablativall being seperate, are of the Common of two. Of Nounes heterogeneous. Some Nouns with the number change their Gen∣der, as in the following instances. Masculines in the Singular, Neuters in the Plu∣rall: as avernus averna, Pangaeus Pangaea, where the Neutrall Adiectives may bee put Substantively, or refer to known Appellatives, the first to flumina, the last to arva, or iuga. Masculines in the Singular, Masculines and Neu∣ters in the Plurall; as iocus, locus, ioci, or ioca, loci, or loca, both being with old Authors Neuter in the Singular, but now grown obsolet.
Feminines in the Singular, and Neuters in the Plurall; as carbasus carbasa, the Neuter Singu∣lar being now obsolet, and the Masculine Plurall: Neuters in the Singular, Masculines in the Plurall, as caelum eaeli, and caeli caelorum, neither Singular of this, nor Plurall of that being in use. Neuters in the Singular Masculine, and Neuter in the Plurall: as fraenum fraeni, and fraena, rastrum, rastri and rastra, the Masculines Singular being ob∣solet. Neuters in the Singular, Feminines in the Plu∣rall: as delicium deliciae. Neuter in the singular, common of three in the Plurall; as plus, pluris, plures and plura. In all which Examples it would bee an easier way to account such Nounes defective in the number, which they want, whereby all the Heterogeneous vanish, as needlesse incumbrances to young Students. And upon the same account may be iustly banished the combination of Nounes defective: as of Jupiter with Jovis, supellex with supellectilis, and such others, which ought not to passe so, else by the same Law all Compounds of such defective Simples should retaine like Obliques: but Marspiter will not make Mars Jovis; neither doth Dijovis come from diespiter, but diespitris. Of Nounes defective in Declension. All Aptotes spoken of in the Genders are de∣fective.
Of Nounes defective in the singular Num∣ber. All the Cardinall Nounes of number, (unus ex∣cepted) are defective in the Singular: as duo tres quatuo, ducenti, millia; Distributives, as singuli ge∣mini, bini, trini, or trni: but such are used of Poets in the singular, terno consurgunt ordine remi, yet in a different sense. Nounes implying a Dignity do commonly want the Singular, whether proper Names of Townes, Gabij, Thbae, Pergama: of Feasts, Floralio: of Games Apollinares, Pythia: of Bookes, Biblia; or Appel∣latives, superi, lares, Penates, Caelites, proceres, primo∣res, magnates, sori, fasces, natales, maiores aedes nuptiae munia: or betokening terrour, as manes parcae lemu∣res, inseriae: or plenty, divitiae opes blanditiae, sales, and facetiae, in the same sense, or at least variety idus, calendae, sortes, dirae, lactes, bellaria. Of Nounes defective in the Plurall. All proper Names (unlesse they are Plurall on∣ly, as in the former rule) or taken Appellatively, ot for the persons, but for their conditions in∣stanced in the variation of Substantives, are onely singular: as Jda Tagus Lelaps. Some of these ad∣mit of both numbers, but in a double sense: as Per∣gamus, a Towne in Asia, and Pergama, the Trojan-turrets, or in a double notion, as Argos an aptote, and Argi variable. Appellatives also want the Plurall, being abstracts, as gloria lux, and in particular such as betoken Ver∣tues or Vices, whether morall, as fama pudor indo∣les culpa labes: or naturall, as salus contagio poda∣gra fames sitis vita mors lethum: specially such as
end like desidia, sapientia ignavia materia pietas forti∣tudo, Or Names of peculiar Ages, as pubes senium: Or Names of any Office of Persons, or property of place or time, tribunatus tablinum iustitium: or Names of Plants or Fruites, bacchar triticum siligo: or of Liquids and things measurable, pix lac oleum butyrum saccarum: or of Metals, aurum argentum fer∣um, aes for aera the aptote Plurall and such others, betoken things materiat, not the bare matter. Or Nounes collective or Distributive, having in the singular a force of Plurals, as vulgus, plebs, proles alter nemo. Lastly Names of things individuall, as mundus phaenix, sol ignis, for soles, and ignes signifie daies, or heates; so vesper oriens ver, hyems meridies unus: wee read unis vivunt legibus for ijsdem, but oftner proceres uni, for soli. Of Defectives in Cases. Monoptotes being onely rects, Jupiter, supellex, for supellectilis is a regular Adiective, exspes, macte singular, and macti plurall, being onely Ge∣nitives, as nauci dicis cuiusmodi, which may bee an Aptote Adiective, impraesentiarum which may be an Adverb, being only Datives Acquisitive, ostentui, dispicatui, divisui inductui, or Ablativals ambage impete injussu, natu, & diu noctu astis imprimis ingratis, which may bee Adverbes, being onely Accusatives, eccos ellas inficias, inferias. Diptotes being Nominatives and Accusatives, dica dicam, and all Aptotes, excepting such as end in u. likewise suppetiae suppetias with parisyllabi∣call Plurals of the third Declension; as grates, and many Plurals of the fifth, and hyemes for colds r stormes: and rura fora ora man, taken indefi∣nitely,
not particularly. Being Rects and Abla∣tives, fors forte; being Gentives and Ablativalls, spontis sponte, verberis verbere, iugeris iugere, repe∣tundarum repetundis: Being Accusatives and Ab∣latives, as dictum dictu, and all Supinalls. Triptotes wanting Rects, Jovis, sui (the Primi∣tive) and dapis, frugis, ditionis, precis, vicis, opis, sor∣dis, primoris: or wanting the Genitive, as nemo quisquis istic faeces vices; or wanting the Dative, as plus tantundem. Of Defectives in Gender and Person. Pauper dives iuvenis, and such other want Neu∣ters, caetera caeterum doth want a Masculine, satius is neuter only, Ego nos tu vos have each but one Person. Of Nounes redundant in Gender. All Nounes Epicoene by synthesis, or, of the doubtfull, or, of the common of two, or of the common of three; as elephantus bubo parens faelix, bee redundant in Gender, because they do by sig∣nification belong to many, though by construction they referre certainely unto one Gender, whereof already. Of Redundants both in Genders and Declen∣sions. Some Adiectives do abound, as in Declension, so in Gender, being of two or three divers endings; as inermis, or inermus: so bijugis, enervis, magnani∣mis, effraenis; and with some Authors, insomnis pro∣clivis, illimis, enormis, imberbis, insormis, hilaris, end also in us. And with some Authors procerus, and benignus, end also in is.
And moveable Substantives will abound as in Gender so in Declension, sponsa sponsus, admonitum, admonitio admonitus, cassida cassis, baptismus baptis∣ma, alluvium, alluvio alluvies, abacus abax, gryphus gryps, pavus pavo, hebdomada hebdomas, mulctra mulctrale, involocum involucre, occipitium occiput, praesepium praesepe, tonurum tonurus, delphinus del∣phis, or delphin, with many more. Other Substantives abound in Gender but not in their Declension; as baculus baculum, tapes tape∣te, and such other. And other Nounes are redun∣dant, either in case alone, or in Declensions one∣ly notified in their proper places. Lastly, besides these Anomalies of Nounes in the direct motions by cases, and in the indirect moti∣ons by Genders, there is another transverse mo∣tion of Adiectives made by comparisons which is anomalous and irregular, spoken of already in the various Figures of Nounes. Of Verbes and their formes or kindes. Verbs like Nouns are of two kinds, being ei∣ther Substantive betokening to be, or Adjective signifying to do, or suffer. The kindes of Verbes Substantive. Verbs Substantive may be distinguished as they signifie either. 1. Truth of being, as sum fio existo evado maneo nascor orior efficior tueor constituor vivo, or 2 the hope of being as ro∣gor poscor exoror designor: or 3, the opinion of being, as audio, for vocor credor dicor habeor ex∣istimor videor: or 4 the experience of being, as arguor cognoscor inscribor.
The kindes of Verbes Adjective. Verbs Adjectivall have foure kinds, being ei∣ther Neuter, Active, Passive, or Deponent; the two first ending in o, and the two last in or. Of Verbes Neuter. The Verb Neuter betokneing either to do, or suffer is intransitive or absolute, having a signi∣fication in it selfe compleat, either Actively in Verbs of gesture, as discumbo surgo sto venio disce∣do mingo, nubo with their Meditatives, micturio nupturio; or Passively in Verbs inceptives and their Primitives, as caleseo and caleo, and in ma∣ny others, as aegroto vapulo veneo liceo fio with its Compounds. Of Verbes Active. A Verb Active having of it selfe an imperfect signification, is alwaies transitive to a sufferer, either person or thing; as pater amat filium & ejus indolem, and some are transitive only to the thing of the same signification with themselves, s gaudium gaudet, alienum arat sundum, bibit vinum, canit hymnum. Of Verbes Passive. The Verb Passive hath also an imperfect sense without recourse unto the Doer: for correla∣tives reflect upon, and withall interpret each an∣other: as amatur a patre filius, eadem contilena canitur. Of Verbes Deponent. A Verb Deponent laying aside the transverse
motion from or, to o, doth in the passive termi∣nation retain the three former significations, in that respect called also a Verb common: as ra∣rius osculor, used absolutely for a Verb of ge∣sture, osculor te, used transitively, referring to a sufferer, osculor a te, used passively reflecting up∣on the doer. Few Verbs will equally share in all three sen∣ses, but any Deponent will admit, as in the Participle of the second Future, a passive sense and structure, so in all other Moods and Ten∣ses an active signification and construction: as pauca tibi sunt loquenda, or pauca loquere. The variation of the formes or kindes of Verbes. A Verbe Substantive and an Adjective construed together, will both bee changed into an Adjectiveall Verbe; and contrariwise, as arte oratio excoli∣tur & splendescit, or exculta est & splendida. A Verbe Neuter of gesture may be made a Passive in the third person singular onely, and contrariwise, as audita virorum clade flebant saemi∣nae, or flebaur a saeminis; but such Ablatives of the Doers are seldome expressed, and the precedent Ablative of the thing or cause, called the absolute, will bee resolved to a Nominative: as virorum clades quum a faeminis audiretur, flebatur. The Verbe Active may bee turned to a Passive, by making the Accusative of the sufferer a Nomina∣tive, and the Nominative of the Doer an Ablative of the person or of the thing, with ab the preposi∣tionall Adverbe serving thereunto, or to a Dative of the person put acquisitively, specially with Po∣ets,
as virtutem nos colimus, tu samam petas, or Ab nobis colitur virtus, tibi fama petatur, so Tu canas hym∣num, nos fundum arabimus, or hymnus a te canatur Ab nobis arabitur sundus. Verbes Deponent are invariable to any other kinde, both as defective in Figure, and as partici∣pating in the sense or forme of the other three. Of the Figure of Verbes. By the figure Verbes are either primitive, be∣ing originals, as do curro caveo; and such like Active or Neuter verbs in o. or else they are de∣rivative, as descending from a primitive: whe∣ther simply from one, as cursito, or compoundedly from two or more, as reddo. Of Verbes simple. Verbs simple a of three sorts, denominative, verball or adverbiall. Of Verbes denominative, and their varia∣tions. Verbes denominative are either Apparatives; as aquor frumentor lgnor, pabulo, resolued by sup∣pedito aquam, &c. Or Imiatives, as adolescenturio cucurio, ligurio, prurio, scaturio, Syllaturio, patrisso, aegresco, calvesco, canesco, puerasco, vilesco, silvescit, vesperascit, graecor, irascor, ruslicor, vulpinor; re∣solved by adolesentem refro, &c. Of the Verbal derivatives. Verball derivatives are of five sorts. 1. Fre∣quentatives, 2. Diminutives, 3. Desideratives, 3. Inchoatives; and 5. all Verbes in or, deri∣ved either from known Verbes in o, being Active, as doceor, from doceo, or Neuter, as curritur, from curro; or from supposed Verbes in o. and such are
all Deponents, as fateor, from supposed fateo. Of Frequentatives and their variations. Frequentatives or iteratives be all of the first Coniugation, and for the most part derived of the Supine by changing um to o. as tracto tonso nexo, commentor sector syncopated, grassor amplexor. And in the first Coniugation by changing atum unto ito, if the Supine be a Polysyllable, as of clamatum clamito, else if it be a disyllable, it keep∣eth a. as nato. Some frequentatives joyne both the precedent formes together, as of dictum dicto, and from dictatum dictito, so from pulso pulsito, and pulto syncopated. And some verbs of the third Congu∣gation in the second person singular cast away s. taking to in the place of it, as agito stuito fugito, quaerito, the last syllable save one being short in all simple frequentatives, being polysillables, and all be derived from Verbs Active or Deponent, be∣ing of the first or third Coniugation, and may be resolved by the Adverb saepe or the verb soleo, as saepe quaero, or quaerere soleo, &c. Of Diminitives and their variations. Diminutives being of the first Coniugation, have the Terminations following albico canillo sor∣billo pullulo pitisso dormito, they are derived from Verbs of all foure Coniugations, and may be re∣solved by aliquantulum put unto the Primitive, or by sub and such other compounded with it, as ali∣quantulum albeo or subalbico. Of Desideratives and their variations. Desideratives or meditatives take both formati∣on and signification, from the first future ending in rus as cenaturio pransurio esurio iturio; and they
are derived usually from Verbs Neuter of any Coniugation, and will continue Neuters, and may be resolved, canare cupio. And suitable thereto in sense are, viso accerso arcesso incesso lacesso facesso ca∣pesso, &c. for vidre accire appeto. Of Inchoatives and their variations. Inchoatives or Augmentatives are of the third Coniugation, and derived from Verbs neuter of all foure Coniugations, by adding co to the se∣cond person singular, as labasco hisco for hiasco cla∣resco putesco from obsolet puteo miseresco, tremisco re∣miniscor fruiscor and fruniscor odormiscor resolved by incipio labae, or pergo clarere. Of Adverbiall Derivatives. Verbs derived from Adverbs be all of the first Coniugation, as intro satio supero, and are redu∣cible only to their Primitives, or otherwise vari∣able by some synonymes. Of Verbs compounded. Verbs of more then one originall are compoun∣ded of Verbs with Nounes, as belligero multiplico, of Verbs with Verbs, as calefacio calefio, and actito may come of actum ito, of Verbs with Adverbs, either absolute, as benefacio satisfacio, or prepo∣sitionalls either inseparable, as confeo diduco dis∣cedo removeo scerno, or seperable either one, as defetiscor, or two as indefessus, or of obsolet Verbs with such whether Latine, as renideo conniveo a∣dipiscor aspicio deleo elicio expedio extinguo offndo, or Greek as excello expleo induo experior.
Of alterations in words by composition. A syllable is sometimes inserted in the compound, as in concipilo reciproco recupero, Sometimes a let∣ter only as in comburo redimo, both for Euphonie. Sometimes the simples are impaired, either both as aucupor cogo malo, or the Verb is only entire, as, possum credo trano ampuo aufero assero, or only maimed, as prebeo dego pergo. And in some Com∣pounds both are intire, as manumitto satisdo. Some Verbs in composition change a. to u. as consulo in∣sulto exculpo inculco. Some change o. to u. as oc∣culo, some cast away a. as excludo percutio diluo, some change a. to e. as gradior making egredior, so patior fatiscor damno lacto sacro follo arceo tracto par∣tio scando patro candeo carpo spargo pario, so compesco dispesc those two from pasco, some Verbs change the first vowel into i. through all Moods and Tenses as caedo making paecido praecii, so laedo egeo quaero tene, cado cano salio except in consulo, so patior rapio sapio statuo tango taceo and placeo, except in complaceo and perplaceo, so habeo except in posthabeo, so maneo compounded with e. in pre and pro, so pango saving in composition with circum de ob and re. Other Verbs change the first vowell into i. in all Tenses, except the preter tense, and such other as be derived thence, as fateor making confiteor, but confessus, so capio frango iaeio premo and emo, except coemo, so rego except pergo surga, so ago, except perago satago dego cogo, so facio compounded with prepositionall Adverbs, so lego compounded with e de con inter di and nec, which three last make intellexi dilexi neglexi, but all other like the simple. Lastly by composiion, some change the figure on∣ly, as, verto revertor, some only the Coniugation,
as do das, making addo addis, some both, as sperno making aspernor, some change the coniugation and forme, as candeo making accendo, some the forme and figure, as sacro making execror, some all three together, as frango making suffragor. Of the proper affections of Verbs. The proper affections of Verbs are foure, Moods, Tenses, Persons and Coniugati∣ons. Of Moods. Moods are distinct wayes of using verbs in the same sense and structure being seven. The Indicative, Imperative, Subiunctive, Par∣ticiple, Infiitive, Gerund and Supine. Of the Indicative. Verbs of the Indicative, whence all other Moods are formed, either aske a Question or give a reason of doing or suffering, as Quo va∣dis? Oxoniam peto. Of the Imparative. Verbs Imperative either 1 Command by authority, or 2 Advise as a duty, or 3 Grant to importunity, or 4 Crave as curtesse. 1. Paeni Sicilia excedunto. 2. Fraus omnis abesto. 3 Re∣tuas tibi habe. 4. Dil caeptis aspirate. Of the Subjunctive. A verb Subiunctive doth commonly inter∣pret another principall verb, being allwayes the Indicative or Imperative, and therefore hath a precedent Coniunctive adverb causall or con∣ditionall
put thereto, or implyed therewith, being familiarly resolved to the Infinitive, as, Jubeo valeas, or ut valeas, or te valere, so cave facias, or ne facias, or cave facere. Otherwise the Subiunctive by Enallage standeth for the Imperative, called either per∣missive and potential resolvible to the Infini∣tive with possum volo debeo, or with the Im∣personalls, licet libet oportet, as vitiis aeque omnibus abhorreas, or te vitiis aeque omnibus ab∣horrere oportet. Or else an Optative being then ioyned with an Adverb of wishing and resolvible to the Infinitive with quaeso, precor, opto, as utinam dictis Alane maneres, or te dictis manere opto. Of the Participle. The Participle an amphibious kind partaketh with Nouns in Declension, by Case and Gen∣der, and with Verbs in Coniugation, by tense, signification, and construction; and with both in number and person. Wherefore the two futures, retaining constantly both tense and structure, are constant Moods of verbs, as Mulier Graios visura Penates: or Cui Graiorum Penates visendi The present and preterperfect tense then only are Moods, when they keep expresse mention of time, and the same structure, as vinum a∣mans, or qui amat, segnitiem exosus, or qui odit polenta pransus, or qui pransit. Else words of either tenses become Nounes, desisting to be Moods of verbs by deposing the tense & struc∣ture, as Vini amans, or amator, which alwayes happeneth when such words admit a different Figure from the verbs whence they ate derived,
either by composition, as, impatiens operis, indoctus lyrae, or a Comparative intension, as, quanto re∣verentior ille deorum, tanto sit reliquis ornati∣or, unus habetur prae reliquis longe cultissimus. Of the Infinitive. Verbs of the Infinitive Mood are constru∣ed regularly with adiectivall nouns or verbs, as miles audax est, or audet occidere et occidi. But irregularly and figuratively by Enallage, they sometimes stand for a Nominative Aptote, as, humanum est irasci, sometimes for a Genitive of the Gerund, as, mtere tempus erat, for metendi, sometime for the Indicative, as, Tum pius Aene∣as as humeris abscindere vestem for abscindebat, or Elliptically another verb may be understood therewith, as abscendere caepit. Of Gerunds. Gerunds being the second future put Sub∣stantively are used in the singular number only, to expresse the administration of affairs. And being Genitives are accordingly construed with a former Substantive either expressed, as, vi∣vendi ratio, or understood with adiectivall nouns or verbs, as, Id fecit assentandi, potius quam quod gratum haberet, supply causa, which construction is sometimes found of Gerundivalls, as, Insti∣tuitur imperium reipublicae augendae, supply gra∣tia. And the Genitives of Gerund, are some∣times used for the Gerundivalls by Enallage, as licentia diripiendi pomorum, for diripiendorum pomorum, sometimes also by Enallage the In∣finitive doth come in place thereof, as, Non da∣tur ad Musas currere lata via for currendi.
In the Dative acquisitive Gerunds are con∣strued either with verbs, as, operam navat exo∣rando nec flendo modum facit, or flendi, where the latter of two Substantives is changed to a Dative; or with Adiectives, as, tundendo inhabi∣le ferrum, scribendo papyrus inutilis, and the Ad∣iectives are sometimes understood, as, Non sunt aes alienum solvendo, supply pares, idonei, and such like. In the Dative Ablativall Gerunds are con∣strued with prepositionall Adverbs, expressed or understood, as, in judicando criminosa celeritas, cantando rumpitur anguis. In the Accusative Gerunds are construed with Prepositions constantly expressed, as, locus ad agendum amplissimus. The Nominative is commonly a gerundival, keeping the construction of the passive voice, as, vobis bibendum aut abeundum, where the Ac∣quisitive is commonly understood, But by a Grecsiue seldome used in the latine, it will ad∣mit Cases of the verb, as, armorum si nobis ca∣rendum, pugnent alii, amicos tibi demerendum, resolved by oportet, aut opus est amicos te demere∣ri, or ut demerearis. Of Supines. The Supine so called, as regardlesse of af∣fections, belonging thereunto, is construed with verbs of motion, notifying the tearme or end thereof, as, tui misertum venio, Graiis servitum matribus ibant, scitatum oracula missi, coctum, non vapulatum conducti sunt, ire with the first, and iri with the last being understood, nolo Uxorem filio datum, aut has litteras sibi renunciatum iri, de
injuriis questum itur, Legantur socios rogatum, re∣solved, rogaturi, rogare, or ut rogarent socios. The Dative Ablativall of the Supine may be construed with verbs of motion like other Substantives, but is no Mood of a verb, for it admitteth no casuall word thereof, as, redit venatione, or venatu ferarum, not feras. And moreover will be construed with Adiectives, which construction the Supine will not admit as facile mirum arduum fas opus, turpe factu, or fieri, not factum or facere or factum ire. Lastly but few Deponents will forme this Ablatiall as, dignum imitatu. Differences of the seven Moods. The Indicative and Subjunctive are definite in time, person, and number, and likewise the Im∣perative in all three, but notwithstanding it is defective in time present or past, nor lyable to command or counsell, and also in the first person, for all men do allow themselves full liberty. The Participle is indefinite only in person. The Infinitive in Person and Number. Gerunds and Supines, are indefinite in all three making no expresse mention of time, person or number, though Gerunds do participate with second fu∣tures, and both Gerunds and Supines are sin∣gular. Lastly, either of both admit a signification promiscuously Active or Passive, being resolvible to either voice, but the Supine more commonly to the Active, and Gerunds to the Passive, whence they are derived.
Of the variation of Moods. The future of the Indicative is used for a most binding Imperative, as non occides for ne occidito, but specially the Participle of the second future, as, vincendum tibi aut moriendum, for aut omnino vince aut porsus morere, or in Hebraisme moriendo morieris. Participles of the present, or the Gerunds no∣tifying the efficient cause, are resolved to the In∣dicative with dum cum quia si postquam, as defetiscor ambulans, ambulando, inter ambulandum, or dum am∣bulo, but the Participles of the present or preter∣tense put in the Dative ablativall, called the abso∣lute, are resolved to the Subjunctive, as Imperante Augusto, or cum imperaret, boste superato, or sisuperetur And so are Gerunds notefying a finall cause, con∣ductus ad accusandum, vel ob absolvendum, or ut ac∣cuses aut absolvas. And all Gerunds are familiarly changed to Gerundivalls, differing only each from other, in that Gerunds notifie rather the office then the time, & Gerundivalls notifie the time rather then the office, as, nos Gramaticam docendi, vos illius ediscendae cura tenet. The Infinitive will be changed to the subjun∣ctive with ut after verbs of command advise in∣treaty or suffrance, profit, &c. as iubeo moneo rogo sino decet licet oportet refert expedit, &c. as volo te abire, or ut abeas: And to the Indicative with quod after verbs of common or particular sense, or of passions arising thence, as, intelligo dubi∣to reor audio video spero metuo gaudeo mereo iuvat dolet arridet allubescit displice, &c. as constat te va∣lere, or quod vales, which variation is necessary to be known for finding the structure of the Accu∣sative between two verbs, whether it followeth the
Verb Personall or cometh before the Infinitive. Other variations are instanced formerly in the se∣verall Moods. Of Tenses. Tenses directing when things do or suffer are five. The 1. present notifying the time now with the signes doe or am. 2. The Preterimperfect tence, the time searse past with signes did or was. 3. The Preterperfect tence the time lately past with signes have or have been. 4. The Preterpluperfect tence the time long since past with signes had or had been. 5. The future a time to come with signes shall and will, or shall and will be, or with the signe hereafter, and it is called the promising tense. Of forming Tenses. What Cases are in Nounes, the same are Ten∣ses in Verbs all descending from the second per∣son singular of the present in the Indicative, as the obliques from the Genitive singular, partly by changing in the Preterperfect tenses, and Su∣pines of some Verbs in the three last Coniugati∣ons, the Characteristicall letter, which is the next before as es and is, and partly by adding to the Characteristicall in other Tenses, as in the ex∣amples following. The Preterimperfect tense of the Indicative and Subiunctive changeth as es and is, in the three first Coniugations of Verbs in o; & aris eris of Verbs
in or to bam ebam arem erem, and abar ebar, arer erer, and is or iris of the fourth Coniugation to iebam iebar, and irem irer, as of amas amabam ama∣bar, amarem amarer, of doces docebam docebar, do∣cerem docerer, of legls legebam lgebar, legerem lege∣rer, of auds audiebam audiebar audirem audirer. The future of the Indicative changeth as and es to abo and ebo, and aris eris, to abor and ebor, but is of the third to am ar, and of the fourth to iam iar, as of amas amabo amabor, of doces docebo do∣cebor, of lgis legam legar, of audis audiam audiar. Aed in the Imperative the future changeth as to a, or ato, and aris to are or ator: es to e, or et, and eris to ere or etor is of the third to e or ito, and eris to ere or itor; and is of the fourth to i or ito, and irs to ire or itor, as of amas ama amato, and a∣mae amator, of doces doce doceto and docere, doce∣tor, of legislege legito, and legere legitor, of audis audi audito, and audire auditor. The present of the Subiunctive changeth as of Verbs in o, and aris, of Verbs in or to em and er, as of amas amem amer, es, to eam and ea as of doces doceam docear; is of the third to am and ar, as of legis legam legar, but is of the fourth to iam and iar as of audis audiam audiar. And in the Infinitive changeth as to are, and aris to ari, as amare amari, and es to ere and eris to eri, as docere doceri, and is of the third to ere and eris to i as legere legi and is of the fourth to re, and iris to iri, as audire audiri. And in the Participle changeth as to ans, es to ens, and is of the third to ens but is of the fourth to iens, as of ama amans, of doces docens, of legis legens, of audis audiens. And from the Participle of the present is formed the Participle of the second fu∣ture by changing s to dus, as of amans amandus, of
docens docendus, of legens legendus, of audiens au∣diendus. The Preterperfect tense in the Indicative of Verbs in o for the most part changeth as to avi, and that to atum, as of amas amavi amatum, es to ui and that to itum, as of mones monui monitum, is of the fourth to ivi and that to itum, as of audis audivi auditum, but is of the third to i. and that to tum or sum or xum, as of emis emi emptum, of vi∣sis visi visum, of figis fixi fixum. Where may be noted that the Supine in the first Conjugation doth end only in tum, in the se∣cond and fourth may end in tum or sum, and in the third may end in tum or sum or xum. And from the Supine are formed the Participles of the Pre∣ter tence, and of the first Future, that by chang∣ing m. to s. as from emptum is made emptus, this by changing m to rus, as from emptum empturus. And all Participles may be knowne by their Ter∣minations both in Latine and in English, the pre∣sent in Latine ending alwayes in ans or ens, as amans monens, and in English ending in ing, as loving, warning, the second future in Latine ending alwaies in dus, and englished like the In∣finitive of the Passive voice, amandus like amari to be loved, the preter tense in Latine ending in tus sus or xus, and in English in t. or u. or d. emptus, visus, fixus, bought, seen, fixed; the first fu∣ture in Latine ending in rus, and Englished like the Infinitive of the Active voice, as empturus like emere to buy: furthermore the present is declined like Adjectives of one Termination, and the other three like Adjectives of three divers endings, as amans amantis, but amandus amanda amandum, so amatus and amaturus.
Lastly from the Preterperfect tense of the In∣dicative is formed the Preterpluperfect of the same Mood, and the Preterperfect and Future, of the Subjunctive by changing i to eram erim ero, and the Preterpluperfect of the Subiunctive and Infinitive by adding thereto ssem and sse, as of legi cometh legeram legerim legero and legissem le∣gisse. Of Tenses proper to every Mood. Verbs that end in o. have in the Indicative and Subiunctive all five tenses, and verbs in or have in the Indicative the present, the imperfect and the future, but in the Subiunctive the present and imperfect only. The Imperative of Verbs in o and or hath the future only. Verbs Active have two Participles, the present and first future, and Passives have the other too, the Preter tense and second future. Deponents, and many Neuters have all foure Participles, but the Pretertense of neither will admit of a Passive signification or construction, which are in both ac∣customed to the second Future, as, stadium equis currendum, haud viris ingrediendum: Pariciples of the present first future and Preter tense in both voices will retaine the construction usual to other Moods, but the Preter tense of Neuters in o. are ordinarily made Nounes participiall, and of the Neuters passives do keep alwayes the Passive sense and structure, as, Pugnatum est ab Hostibus: Gerunds and Supines have no expresse mention of Tenses, and in other moods the Tenses lacking are supplyed by circumlocution.
Verbs in or by the Participle of the Preter∣tense, with sum or fui, supply the Preter tense; and with eram or fueram, the Preterpluperfect tense; and in the Subiunctive, with sim or fuerim supply the Preter tense, with essem or fuissem, the Preter∣pluperfect with ero and fuero the Future. And in the Infinitive with esse or fuisse supply the Preter∣tense with the Supine, and iri, or second future, and esse supply the Future tense▪ Verbs in o, and Deponents in or, in the Infini∣tive Mood, by the Supine, with ire and first Future with esse, or rather with fore supply the Future, and when the first Future of the Participle is de∣fective, fore will stead the same, as, Quos terres, hos oportet fore ut timeas, for te timiturum. The in∣stances of these former rules will follow in the Examples of the severall Coniugations. The proper affections of some Tenses. Verbs in o. of the first and fourth Coniugation in the second person singular, and the second and third plurall of the Preter tense, in the Indica∣tive, and in all persons of both numbers in all o∣ther tenses derived thence may be Syncopated, as, amasti amastis amarunt amaram amarim amaro a∣massem amasse, so audisti audistis audierunt audieram, &c. nterii, and perii are Syncopated in all persons saving the first plurall and in Imitation thereof, some Verbs of the thir'd Coniugation, as, petii, &c. And other Verbs are Syncopated mostly of i Poets in the second person singular, as extinxti dixti for dixisti. Edim duim ausim axim faxim for ederim dederim auserim egerim fecerim, likewise surpucram for surripueram, submossem for submovis∣sem, produxe for produxisse, divisse for divisisse. And
the future of the Subiunctive is changed with old Authors, amavero to amasso, prohibuero to prohibesso, petivero to petesso, with such like in the three first Coniugations▪ and in the Infinitive for levatu∣rumesse levassere, &c. Verbs in or whether Passive or Deponent in the Infinitive of the present tense will Paragogically take er thereto, as, monstrarier optat, caepit dilabier orbis. Participles of the second future in the third and fourth Coniugation admit Antithesis, as faciundus experiundus for faciendus experiendus. Others of the first future are oft irregular, as, sonaturus for soniturus, nasciturus for naturus, pariturus for par∣turus. And others of the preter tense like the Su∣pine are Syncopated, as, pinsitus and pistus, potatus and potus. The variation of Tenses. The Preterpluperfect tense of the Indicative is used often for the future, as, perieras nisi fugisses, for periturus eras. And the preter tense for the future of the Subiunctive, called with some an exact tense, as, molam si le redemerim for redemero. Lastly the Present and Imperfect tense thereof passe for a future called the simple, nil refert si post cladem sapias or saperes, for sapies. Of the Number and Persons of VERBS. The Numbers equally belonging to Nounes and Verbs being two, the singular and plurall, are spoken of already as also the three Persons, which being more genuine to Verbs, as Gender to Nouns,
must like the Genders be understood Physically, and strictly where the nature of things afford it, that is when rationall creatures are spoken of, and otherwise may be taken at large Grammatically, being three in both Numbers, whereof before. In the language taught of God, the third Per∣son being the radicall hath precedence, and the first as doth become Civility, speaking of it selfe, is last in place. The future used in that tongue for the Impera∣tive beginneth with the first Person, implying that who make Laws, should first take them; but as Jews and Gentiles are used ordinarily in oppo∣sition, so is their forme of speaking, all Nations constantly beginning with the first Person in both Numbers of all Moods and Tenses, leaving the next place flatterers like to the second person spo∣ken to, quite neglecting the third Person spoken of, as abiect. Of the CONJƲGATIONS. As Tenses answer unto Cases, so do Con∣iugations of Verbs to Declensions of Nouns, being foure distinct wayes wereby a regu∣lar Verbs end uniformly in the same Voice, Mood, Tense, Number and Person. The Coniugation of every Verb is known by the termination of the second Person singu∣lar in the present tense of the Indicative mood, where all Verbs ending in as, or having a. in aris long, are of the first Coniugacion. And such as end in es, or have e. in eris long, are of the second. And such as end in is short, or have
o. in eris short b of the third: And such as end in is long, or have the first i. in iris long be of the fourth. Annotations. It may be noted that all Verbs of the second Coniugation do end in eo and eor, but beo calceo enucleo meo laqueo creo screo nauseo bee of the first Coniugation; and eo queo veneo, be of the fourth. Likewise all Verbs of the fourth Coniugation except those three last mentioned do end in io, which ending few of the first Coniugation have, as faucio repudio hio concilio satio, but many of the third end in cio dio gio pio rio tio, as facio fodio fu∣gio capio pario percutio. Some Verbs admit of two Coniugations, being either commonly of the first and seldom of the third, as, lavo lavas lavavi lavatum, and lavis lavi lavitum, or by Syncope lautum and by Anti∣thesis lotum, sonosonas and sonis sonui sonitum, so tono tonas and tonis tonui tonitum; Or commonly of the second, seldom of the third, as strideo strides, and strido stridis stridi, fulgeo fulges, and fulgo ful∣gis fulfi, but tergeo terges, and tergo tergis tersi, are both common, ferveo ferves, and fervo fervis fer∣vi, sorbeo sorbes sorbui sorbitum, and sorbo sorbis sorpsi sorptum, tueor tueris tuitus, and tuor tueris tutus, oleo oles olui oletum to grow, and olo olis olui oli∣tum to smell. Or comonly of the second, seldom of the fourth, as, cieo cies cievi citum, and cio cis civi citum, the last being most usuall in composi∣tion, as the first being simple. Or commonly of the third and seldom of the fourth, as, fodio fodis fodi fodere, and fodire fossum, orior oreris, and ori∣ris ortus, and such other.
Many Verbs being the same in Theme do dif∣fer as in signification, so either in Coniugation only, as, aggero appello compello colligo consterno de∣ligo effero fundo mando obsero volo. Or likewise in quantity, as dico lego with their compounds, being all both first and last of the first and third Con∣iugation. Sum with his Compounds are wholly irregular among Verbs, as, Ego tu sui among the Pronouns. But fui conjugated with sum hath ll tenses regu∣lar which are derived thence. And both sum and fui do require in order to be first declined by themselves, as helps expedient to forme in the In∣finitive the future tense of all other Verbs ending both in o. and or. And in the Indicative the preter tense of Verbs only that end in or, and of all other tenses that are derived thence, which be∣ing otherwise Defective are to be supplyed by sum and fui, joyned with the Participles of such Verbs, whereof before. Examples of Verbs to be declined. Sum es fui esse ens futurus to be. So, Absum abes abfui abesse absens abfuturus. The Indicative Mood and present tense Singular. Sum I am, es thou art, est he is. Pluraliter. Sumus we are, estis ye are, sunt they are▪
The Preterimperfect tense Singular. Eram I was, eras thou wast, erat he was. Pluraliter. Eramus we were, eratis, yee were, erant they were. The Preterperfect Tense singular. Fui I have been, fuisti thou hast been, fuit he hath been, Pluraliter. Fuimus we have been fuistis yee have been, fu∣erunt vel fuere they have been. The Preterpluperfect Tense singular. Fueram I had been, fueras thou hadst been, fuerat he had been; Pluraliter Fueramus we had been, fueratis yee had been, fuerant they had been. The Future Tense singular. Ero I shall or will be, eris thou shalt or wilt be, erit he shall or will be, Pluraliter Erimus we shall or will be, eritis yee shall or will be, erunt they shall or will be. The Imperative and Future singular. Es, or esto, be thou hereafter, esto be he, or let him be hereafter. Pluraliter, Este, o estote, be yee hereafter, sunto be they, or let them be hereafter.
The Subjunctive and Present Tense singu∣lar. Sim, I may would or should be, sis, thou mayst wouldst or shouldst be sit, he may would or should be, Pluraliter. Simus, we may would or should bee, sitis, yee may would or should be, sint, they may would or should be. The Preterimperfect Tense singular. Essem, or forem, I might would or should be, esses, or fores, thou mightst wouldst or shouldst be, esset, or foret, he might would or should be, Pluraiter Essemus, or foremus, we might would or should be, essetis, or foretis, yee might would or should be, essent, or forent, they might would or should be. The Preterperfect Tense singular. Fuerim, I might would or should have been, fueris, thou mightst wouldst or shouldst have been, fuerit, he might would or should have been. Pluraliter Fuerimus, we might would or should have been, fueritis, yee might would or should have been, fu∣erint, they might would or should haue been. The Preterpluperfect Tense singular, Fuissem, I might would or should had been, fuisses, thou mightst wouldst or shouldst had been, fuisset, he might would or should had been,
Pluraliter Fuissemus we might would or should had been, fu∣issetis yee might would or should had been, fuissent they might would or should had been, The Future Tense singular. Fuero I may would or should be hereafter, fu∣eris thou mayst wouldst or shouldst be hereafter, fuerit he may would or should be hereafter, Pluraliter Fuerimus we might would or should be hereafter, fuerits yee might would or should be hereafter, fuerint they might would or should be hereafter. The Participle Mood. The present tense ens being, or essens obsolet, whence doth come essentia, the being. The Future Tense, futurus about to be. The Infinitive Mood. The present, esse to be. The preter tense, fuisse to have been. The future fore, or futurum esse to be here∣after. Annotations. As Sum hath been declined, so may be formed Possum, compounded of potis and sum, and poteram, of potis eram, potui of potis fui, potueram of potis fu∣eram, potero of potis ero, possim of potis sim, possem, of potis essem, potuerim of potis fuerim, potuissem of potis fuissem, potuero of potis fuero, posse of potis esse, po∣tuisse of potis fuisse. So Prosum proderam profui pro∣fueram prodero, with the rest compounded thence.
Examples whereby may be declined Verbes active and passive. Am- o as avi. atum aturus ans or aris     atus andus Mon- eo es ui. itum iturus ens eor eris     itus endus Leg- o is i tum turus ens or eris     tus endus Aud- io is ivi itum iturus iens ior iris     itus iendus Examples of Verbes Neuter and Depo∣nent. Pugn— o as avi atum atutus ans andus Rix— or aris atum atus aturus ans andus Examples of Verbs both in o. and or. declined throughout all Moods and Tenses. The Indicative Mood and Present Tense.   Singulariter. Pluraliter Laud— o as at amus atis an or aris vel are atur amur amini antur
Cens- eo es et emus etis ent eor eris vel ere etur emur emini entur Fig- o is it imus itis unt or eris vel ere itur imur imini untur Pol— io is it imus itis iunt ior iris vel ire itur imur imini iuntur The Preterimperfect Tense singular. Laud- abam abas abat abar abaris vel abare abatur Plur. abamus abatis abant abamur abamini abantur Cens— ebam ebas ebat ebar ebaris vel ebare ebatur Plur. ebamus ebatis ebant ebamur ebamini ebantur Fig— ebam ebas ebar ebar ebaris vel ebare ebatur Plur. ebamus ebatis ebant ebamur ebamini ebantur Pol- iebam iebas iebat iebar iebaris vel iebare iebatur
Plur- iebamus iebatis iebant. iebamur iebamini iebantur. The Preterperfect tense singular. Laud- avi avisti avit atus sum vel fui atus ea v. fuisti atus est v. fuit. Plur- avimus avistis averunt vel avere ati sumus v. fuimus, ati estis v. fuistis ati sunt fuerunt vel fuere. Cens- ui uisti uit us sum v. fui us es v. fuisti us est v. fuit. Plur- uimus uistis uerunt vel uere i. sumus v. fuimus, i. estis v. fuistis i. sunt fuerunt vel fuere. Fi- xi xisti xit xus sum v. fui. xus es v. fuisti. xus est v. fuit. Plur- ximus xistis xerunt vel xere xi sumus vel fuimus. xi. estis v. fuistis xi sunt fuerunt vel fuere. Pol- ivi ivisti ivit itus sum v. fui itus es v. fuisti itus est v. fuit.
Plur- ivimus ivistis iverunt vel ivere iti sumus v. fuimus iti estis v. fuistis iti sunt fuerunt vel fuere. The Preterpluperfect tense singular. Laud- averam averas averat atus eram v. fueram, atus eras v. fueras atus erat vel fuerat. Plur- averamus averatis averant ati eramus v. fueramus ati eratis v. fueratis ati erant vel fuerant. Cens- ueram ueras uerat us eram v. fueram us eras v. fueras us erat vel fuerat. Plur- ueramus ueratis uerant i. eramus v. fueramus. i. eratis v. fueratis i. erant vel fuerant. Fi- xeram xeras xerat xus eram v. fueram, xus eras vel fueras xus erat vel fuerat. Plur- xeramus xeratis xerant xi eramus v. fueramus. xi eratis v. fueratis xi erant v. fuerant.
Pol- iveram iveras iverat itus eram v. fueram, itus eras v. fueras, itus erat vel fuerat. Plur- iveramus iveratis iverant iti eramus v. fueramus, iti eratis v. fueratis iti erant vel fuerant. The Future Tense singular. Laud- abo abis abit abor aberis vel abere abitur Plur. abimus abitis abunt abimur abimini abuntur Cens- ebo ebis ebit ebor eberis vel ebere ebitur Plur. ebimus ebitis ebunt ebimur ebimini ebuntur Fig- am es et ar eris vel ere etur Plur. emus etis ent emur emini entur
Pol. iam ies iet iar ieris vel iere ietur Plur- iemus ietis ient iemur iemini ientur. The Imperative Mood and Future Tense.   Sing: Plur. Laud- a vel ato ato ate vel atote. anto are v. ator ator amini v. aminor, antor. Cens- e vel eto. eto ete vel etote. ento ere v. etor. etor emini v. eminor. entor Fig- e vel ito. ito ite vel itote. unto ere v.itor. itor imini v. iminor untor. Sep- i. vel ito ito ite vel itote iunto ire vel itor. itor imini v. iminor iuntor The Subjunctive Mood and present Tense.   Sing. Plur. Laud- em es et emus etis ent. er eris v. ere etor emur emini entur.
Cens- eam eas eat eamus eatis eant ear earis v. eare eatur eamur eamini eantur. Fig- am as at amus atis ant ar aris v. are atur amur amini antur. Pol. iam ias iat iamus iatis iant iar iaris v. iare iatur iamur iamini iantur. The Preterimperfect Tense.   Sing. Plur. Laud- arem ares aret aremus aretis arent arer areris v. arere aretur aremur aremini arentur. Cens— erem eres eret eremus eretis erent erer eretis v. erere eretur eremur eremini erentur. Fig- erem eres eret eremus eretis erent erer eretis v. erere eretur eremur eremini erentur. Pol. irem ires iret iremus iretis irent irer ireris v. irere iretur iremur iremini irentur.
The Preterperfect tense singular. Laud- averim averis averit atus sim v. fuerim atus sis v. fueris atus sit v. fuerit. Plur- averimus averitis averint ati simus v. fuerimus, ati sitis v. fueritis ati sint vel fuerint. Cens- uerim ueris uerit us sim v. fuerim us sis v. fueris us sit v. fuerit. Plur- uerimus ueritis uerint i simus v. fuerimus i sitis v. fueritis i sint vel fuerint. Fig- xerim xeris xerit xus sim v. fuerim xus sis v. fueris xus sit v. fuerit   xerimus xeritis xerint xi simus v. fuerimus xi sitis v. fueritis xi sint v. fuerint. Pol. iverim iveris iverit itus sim v. fuerim itus sis v. fueris itus sit v. fuerit.
Plur. iverimus iveritis iverint iti simus v. fuerimus iti siitis v. fueritis iti sint v. fuerint. The Preterpluperfect Tense Singular. Laud- avissem avisses avisset atus essem v. fuissem atus esses v. fuis atus esset v. fuisset. Plur. avissemus avissetis avissent ati essemus v. fuissemus ati essetis v. fuissetis ati essent v. fuissent. Cens- uissem uisses uisset us essem v. fuissem us esses v. fuisses us esset vel fuisset. Plur. uissemus uissetis uissent i essemus v. fuissemus i essetis v fuissetis i essent vel fuissent. Fi- xissem xisses xisset xus essem v. fuissem xus esses v. fuisses xus esset v. fuisset.
Plur- xissemus xissetis xissent xi essemus v. fuissemus. xi essetis v. fuissetis xi essent v. fuissent. Pol. ivissem ivisses ivisset itus essem v. fuissem itus esses v. fuisses itus esset vel fuisset. Plur- ivissemus ivissetis ivissent iti essemus v. fuissemus iti essetis v. fuissetis iti essent v. fuissent. The Future Tense Singular. Laud- avero averis averit atus ero v. fuero atus eris v. fueris atus erit vel fuerit. Plur- averimus averitis averint ati erimus v. fuerimus ati eritis v. fueritis ati erunt v. fuerint. Cens- uero ueris uerit us ero v. fuero us eris v. fueris us erit vel fuerit.
Plur- uerimus ueritis uerint i erimus v. fuerimus i eritis v. fueritis i erunt v. fuerint Fig- xero xeris xerit xus ero v. fuero xus eris v. fueris xus erit v. fuerit. Plur- xerimus xeritis xerint xi erimus v. fuerimus xi eritis v. fueritis xi erunt v. fuerint. Pol. ivero iveris iverit itus ero v. fuero itus eris v. fueris itus erit v. fuerit Plur- iverimus iveritis iverint iti erimus v. fuerimus iti eritis v. fueritis iti erunt v. fuerint. The Participle Mood. The Present Tense Laud-ans, Cens-ens, Fig-ens Pol. iens. The first Future Laud-aturus, Cens-urus, Fi-xurus. Pol. iturus.
The Preter Tense Laud-atus, Cens-us, Fi-xus▪ Pol. itus. The second Future Laud-andus, Cens-endus Fig-endus, sep-iendus. The Infinitive Mood. The Present Tense Laud- are Cens- ere Fig- ere Pol. ire ari eri i iri. The Preter Tense Laud- avisse Cens- uisse Fi- xisse Pol. ivisse atum esse vel fuisse. um esse v. fuisse xum esse v. fuisse. itum esse v. fuisse. The Future Tense Laud- atum ire v. aturum esse: Cens- um ire v. urum esse Fi- xum ire v. xurum esse.
Pol. itum ire v. iturum esse
atum iri v. andum esse. um iri v. endum esse xum iri v. endum esse.
itum iri v. iendum esse▪ The Gerundivall Mood. Laud-andum. Cens-endum. Fig-endum. Pol. iendum. The Supine Mood. Laud-atam. Cens-um. Fi. xum. Pol. itum ANNOTATIONS. Students should be made exact in all the proper affections of Verbs, as before hath been required in the like affections of Nounes, for as more variable, so they are more difficult, and call for greater di∣ligence, but Verbs chiefly, which will more exer∣cise Learners to finde out the Theme then Nounes, because the Characteristicall is oftner changed therein; besides that many instances there∣of must have recourse to sundry distinct heads be∣fore they are resolved to their Themes, as for ex∣ample, from Juncturus, cast away the Termination proper to the first future, and instead thereof, put to m, and it will be iunctum, the Supine whence it is formed: Then it may be remembred that ctum in the Supine cometh from xi in the Preter Tense, as iunctum from iunxi, againe xi will come from gis in the present, so iungis maketh iunxi, that iunctum this iuncturus; from hauserimus cut of erimus and put i in place thereof it will be hausi whence it is de∣rived, as this from hauris. In censeremini▪ change the
second Person Plurall to the first singular censerer, this to censeris, and by a graduall regresse it leadeth unto cseor, according to the precedent Rules of forming Tenses in the severall Moods. So Legitote cometh from lege, this from legis, audietis cometh from audiam, this from audis, so docendus from do∣cens, this from doces, and so in the rest. Exceptions to the Generall Rules for the forming of Preter Tenses and Supines. Verbs of the first Coniugation ending in bas, cas, mas, nas, pas tas, change as to ui, das maketh dedi, stas steti, juvas iuvi, And all in the Supine end in tum. Verbs of the second Coniugation making bes, psi, ges, xi, ies ievi, les levi, ves vi. In the Supine end all in tum. But making des, di, or si, lces▪ and lges, lsi, and rges rsi, nes nsi, res si. And the Depouent teris making ssi in the Supine end all in sum. Verbs of the third Coniugation making bis, bi bui, or psi, cis ci, cui, or xi scis, vi, or scui: few Verbs making dis, di. Likewise other Verbs making gis, gi, or xi, his, xi, lis lui, mis mui, or psi, nis, ni, vi, or ui, pis, psi, pi, pui, or pivi, quis, qui, or xi. ris, rui, vi and ssi sis, ui, ivi, or ssi, apo∣opated. And some making tis, ti, vis, vi, or xi, ui, xis xui, in the Supine end in tum. Other both Deponents making beris, psi, and Verbs in o making rcis rsi dis di, or si rgis rsi, llis, llui, li or si, mis, ssi, rris rri, tis ssui, rtis, rsi. in the Supine end in sum.
Other Verbs making gis, his, ctis, or uis, xi, and xis, xi, or xui end in xum. Verbs of the fourth Coniugation making cis cui, or xi, lis lui, nis ni, pis psi, tis rui or ri: in the Supine end in tum. Other both Deponents making diri di, or Verbs in o making bis, psi, cis, si, ris, si, tis, si end in sum. Examples of the former Exceptions, in Verbs of the first Conjugation. Cubas doth make cubui cubitum, but thence come cubatio and cubatorium, all Compounds thence with interposing m. will be of the third Coniugation, as, decumbis decubui decubitum, and accubo, incub, occubo, recubo, may take m or leave it. Necas necavi or necui necatum, or nectum, but the last is scarce used, saving in Composition, secas se∣cui sectum, hath secaturus, applicas, explicas, implicas make ui or avi, itum or atum, but plicas maketh only avi & atum, micas micui doth want the Supine, but emicas emicui hath emicaturus, and dimicas hath dimicui, or dimicavi dimicatum, fricas fricui frictum, but defricas defricui, or defricavi defrictum, or de∣fricatum, Das dedi datum, so circundas, pessundas, satisdas, venundas: but all other Compounds thence are of the third Conjugation, as, condo condis con∣didi conditum, and abscondis abscondidi, or abscondi, ab∣sconditum, or absconsum, domas domui domitum, but from edomas cometh edomatio. Sonas sonui sonitum, whence cometh sonabilis, and sonaturus. Crepas crepui crepitum, & increpas increpui increpitum,
whence cometh increpatio, discrepas discrepui; and discrepavi discrepitum, and discrepatum. Vetas vetui vetitum, whence cometh vetaturus, stas steti statum, but astas astiti astitum, and so all Compounds thence, saving that Supinall Deriva∣tives love best the regular way, as, praestaturus prae∣statio praestabilis, Juvas Juvi, whence doth come iu∣vamen; so adiuvas adiuvi adiutum; Liguas, nexas, wih many more want the Preter Tense, and there∣with the Supine derived thence. Examples of exceptions in the second Conjugation. Sorbes sorbui sorbitum, and thence sorbitio, but ab∣sorbes absorbui and absorpsi absorptum. Misces miscui mistum, syncopated▪ and by Anti∣thesis, mixtum, mulces, mulsi mulsum, luces luxi with∣out Supine. Suades suasi suasum, but sedes sedi sessum, spondes spospondi sponsum, strides stridi without Supine, audes ausi, obsolet ausum, gaudes gavisum, by Epenthe∣sis, whence gavisus sum, The Preterperfect Tense supplyed by circumlocution, and ausus sum, with audeo. Indulges indulsi indulsum, & indultum, from ob∣solet indulxi, fulges fulsi, turges tursi, both want Supines, terges tersi tersum, mulges mulsi mulctum, from obsolet mulxi, so auges auxi auctum. Fles stevi fletum, nes nevi netum, cies cievi citum, vies vievi vietum, oles olui olitum, but exoles, and some other make olevi oletum, reris ratum, tueris tui∣tum, soles solitum, from solui, obsolet for which so∣litus sum is in use.
Manes mansi mansium, but emines eminui, and the rest so formed want Supines. Torques torsi torsum, and tortum from torquitum, obsolet syncopated, from both, torsio and tortilis, Haeres haesi haesum and hesitum, by Epenthesis, torres torrui tostum for torritum, by Syncope and Antithe∣sis, so misereris misertum, Syncopated, and censes censui censum, for censitum, fateris hath fassum, as if it were from fates fassi. Moves movi motum, but cave cavi cautum, and faves favi fautum, by Epenthesis. Cales, cares, coales, doles, lates, lices, noces, pares, places, taces, vales, with their Compounds change es to ui and that to itum, but all other Neuters make∣ing ui in the Preter Tense want the Supine. Aves mederis maeres vides nives want the Pre∣ter Tense and Supine, but the Compounds of ni∣ves have nixi and nictum. Examples of the Exceptions in the third Conjugation. Bibis bibi bibitum, lambis lambi wanting a Supine, decumbis decubui decubitum, scribis scripsi scriptum, la∣beris lapsum, as if it were from labis lapsi. Icis ici ictum, parcis peperci parcitum, and parsi par∣sum, dicis, dixi dictum, from obsolet lacio elicio doth make elicui elicitum, but all other Compounds thence make lexi and lectum, noscis novi notum, but noscitu∣rus and agnovi agnitum, eognovi cognitum, pascis pavi pastum, but compescui compescitum, and dispescis dis∣pescui doth want the Supine, adipisceris adeptum, as if it were from adipis adepi, and that from the obso∣let simple apo, whence cometh aptus, comminisceris
commentum, as if it were from cominis comini, exper∣geris expergitum, and experrectum, as if it were from expergis expergi or experrexi, itasceris iratum, as if it were from iras iravi, nancisceris nactum, as if it were from nancis nanci, oblivisceris oblitus, from oblivis ob∣livi, pacisceris pactum, as if it were from pacis paci, profleisceris profectum, from proficis profeci, defetisceris defessum, as if it were from defeteo defetis defessi, ulcisce∣ris ultum, for ulcitum, as if it were from ulcis ulcivi, clauds clausi clausum, edis edi esum, but comedis com∣edi comesum, or comestum, graderis gressum, as if it were from gradis gressi, so cedis cessi cessum, findis fidi fissum, cadis cecidi casum, whose Compounds want Supines, occasum and recasum, with incasurus, being excepted, pedis pepedi peditum, tendis tetendi tensum, & tentum tundis tutudi tusum, and tunsi tunsum, pandis pandi passum, for pansum, by Antithesis. Fugis fugi fugitum, regis rexi rectum, frigis frixi frixum, and frictum, frangis fregi fractum, pungis pu∣pugi and punxi punctum, vehis vexi vectum, but con∣vehis convexi convectum and convexum. Alis alui altum, for alitum so colis colui cultum, ex∣cellis excellui excelsum, vellis velli and vulsi vul∣sum. Gemis gemui gemitum, premis pressi pressum, comis compsi comptum, the labiall m affecting the cognate (p) for its companion, so emis emi, and of old empsi emptum, sinis sivi hath no Supine, situs is used for positus by Aphaeresis, spernis sprevi spretum, by Meta∣thesis, for spervi spertum, so decernis with such other Compounds, crevi cretum, for cerni, the simple doth want the Preter Tense and Supine likewise, temnis wanteth both, but contemnis contempsi con∣temptum,
gignis genui genitum from obsolet genis, ponis posui positum, canis cecini cantum, but succinis with some others make cinui centum, strepis strepui strepitum, rumpis rupi ruptum, carpis carpsi carptum, sapis sapai or sapivi sapitum, coquis coxi coctum, linquis wanting Preter Tense, and Supine hath Compounds that make liqui lictum, loqueris locutum, sequeris secutum, as if it were from loquis loqui, sequis sequi, Teris trivi tritum, by Metathesis, moreris making mortuus, for moritus, whence is moriturus, likewise oreris ortum, whence is oriturus, quaeris quaesivi quaesitum, quereris questum, Syncopated, seris sevi satum, but conseris con∣sevi consitum, with such other changing in the supine a to i, conseris conserui doth make consertum, the first coming from the Greek Verb speiro, the last from eiro, geris gesse gestum, verris verri versum. Arcessis arcessivi being of the fourth Conjugation now obsolet, and by Syncope arcessii, by Apocope, arcessi, pinsis pinsui pinsitum pinsum and pistum Synco∣pated, depsis depsui, whence cometh depsititius, and visis visi, without Supine. Flectis flexi flexum, plectis plexi to punish, plexui, to fold, have plectum, and piexum, pectis pexi and pex∣ui pexum, and pectum, or pectitum, by Epenthe∣sis, metis messui messum, mittis misi missum, vertis ver∣ti versum, stertis stertui Supinelesse, niteris nisum or nixum, uteris usum, pateris passum, from obsolet pa∣tis passi, vivis vixi victum, solvis solvi solutum. Sta∣tuis statui statutum, ruis rui ruitum, but diruis dirui dirutum, with such other, casting away i from the Supine resumed in the first Future, as, diruiturus, frueris whence fruitus, and by Epenthesis fruintus, by Crasis fretus; likewise fructus, as if it were from fruis fruxi, struis struxi structum, fluis fluxi flux∣um;
whence also come, fluctus and fluitus, luis lui, and of old luvi, whence is diluvium, so pluis plui & pluvi whence is pluvia, both wanting Supines, but having Derivatives thence, as, luituus. Texis texui textum, nexis nexui nexum, &c. Cal∣ueris whence is calumnia with cluis, furis, reminisce∣ris, vesceris, vergis, metis, tollis, ambigis, liqueris, with many other want Preter Tense and Supine. Examples of the Exceptions in the fourth Conjugation. Cambis campsi campsum. Sancis sanxi sanctum, and sanivi sancitum, farcis farci fartum, and sarcivi farcitum; and farctum, and fartum Syncopated, raucis rauci rausum, amicis ami∣u and amixi amictum. c Ordiris orsum, as if it were from ordis ordi and or∣ditum, as from ordis ordivi. Salis salii and salui saltum, but exilis exilii, or exilui exultum, with such other Compounds change∣ing a of the simple Supine unto u, Venis veni ven∣tum. Sepis sepsi septum, and sepivi sepitum, whence is se∣pimentum, sepelis sepelivi sepelitum, and sepultum, by Syncope and Antithesis. Hauris hausi haustum or hausum, whence is hausu∣rus, aperis and operis, make perui and pertum, and all other Compounds peri and pertum, from paris peperi partum, changing a to e, Sentis sensi sen∣sum, metirismensus, but demetiris demensus and de∣metitus. Feris with some other want Preter Tenses and Supines, Compertum est, the Impersonall Passive
hath only a Preter tense, and such as are deri∣ved thence. ANNOTATIONS. Some Verbs in o, as do, sto, and others of the se∣cond and third Conjugacion will Greek-wise double te first Consonant in the Preter tense for the most part with e, and in some Verbs with i, o, and u, as ded, steti, didici, poposci, cucurri, pupu∣gi, which six commonly have the same syllable doubled in their Compounds, as addidi, constiti, changing e, to i, perdidici, de po posci, praecucurri, re∣pupugi, but all other Compounds from simples doubling the first syllable, reject any such increase, as pendes hath pependi pensum, but dependes dependi depensum; Likewise the former Verbs both simple and compounds cast of the increase in Supines, so cucurri cursum, and praecurri praecucursum. Diverse Verbs concurre in the same Preter∣tense, and others in the same Supine, as, fulges, and fulcis make fulsi, luces and luges luxi, paves and pascis pavi Likewise manes and mandis make man∣sum, tenes and tendis tentum, vincis and vivis vi∣ctum, verris and vertis versum. Many Verbs compounded have a Preter tense, or Supine, or derivatives thence, whose simples are therein defective, And contrariwise: as from liquas defective in the Pretertense and Supine come liquamen liquatio liquabilis and deliquatus: So from nuis nuinutum numen being regular, there be compounds defective, as, abnuis, and moreover ir∣regular supines have many derivatives from the regular wanting, as, adiuvamen adiuvaturns, from adiuvi adiutum, whereof more instances are in the severall Coniugations: Some Compounds with
changing the first vowell of their simples differ hence in the Preter tense, and others in the Su∣pine. So emines hath eminui from manes mansi: thus cantum, captum, carptum, factum, fartum, iactum, partum, raptum, sparsum, change a, to e, as concentum deceptum, with many other changes notified in the Conjugations. Of Verbs Anomalous. There be three sorts of the Verbs irregular, the Heteroclitous the Redundants, and the Defe∣ctives. Of Hetereclites. Verbs swarving from the regular Coniugations (besides Sum) are these following, volo and his compounds, making vis vult volumus vultis, for volis volit volimus volitis, and noli for nole nolito, velim for volam, vellem for vo∣lerem, vellefer volere, so fers fert fertis, for feris ferit feritis, fer ferto ferte fertote, for fere ferito ferite feritote, ferrem ferre for fererem ferere, from fero; be∣ing both of the third Coniugation. Likewise fierem fieri for firem fire from fio of the fouth coniugation. Where may be noted that facio being defective in the figure to be made a passive hath the neuter fio, instead thereof, not only in the simple, but also in all compounds which keep facio intire, as, calefa∣cio calefio, but other compounds changing a, to i, will be made passives, as, afficio afficior Likewise the neuter, E▪ as it hath all three persons will not be made passive, but Compounds thence being Verbs Active will forme a Passive voice, as, adeor, ambior, which last doth forme all tenses regularly, but Eo in the Preter imperfect tense maketh Ibam for iebam, and ibo for iam in the future. And so do
other compounds thence. Likewise iens out of use doth make euntis, so abiens with other com∣pounds thence in use make abeuntis. Queo and nequeo make also quibam and quibo, whence are (though seldome) found queundus quitus and nequi∣tus. Edo hath es est and estis redundant with edis edit and editis, so ede edito edite editote, or es esto este estote, so ederem or essem, edere or esse. Lastly dic duc fer and fac are apocopated with all com∣pounds thence excepting such from facio which change a, to i, as afficio making affice. Of Redundants. Redundant futures being Imperatives or Infini∣tives of Verbs in o, and or, (except fito and scito, with all compounds thence as calefito, rescito, ad∣mitting no redundance) And the second person singular of Verbs in or, redundant in the Indica∣tives present, preterimperfect and future tense, and in the Subjunctives present and preterimper∣fect tense together with Verbs redundant in Con∣jugation are notified in their proper places. O∣ther Verbs redound in forme or sundry senses ac∣cording to their sundry structure, being either A∣ctive or Neuter, as audio vocem, or bene audio fasti∣dio te, or tui, Rus habitat, or secum, offendit gemmam, or caespite, count societatem, or una, glacies aquam durat, or durare nequit, incipit diem, or a die, vos man mus, or vobiscum, huc ruit, or rut, aeris acervos, sufficit ira animos, or dies non sufficit, virtus aetatem superat, or e dum superat, terram vertimus, or res bene vertit. Nos, quoties variant animi, variabimus artem, me mi∣eum occidis. Occidit spes nostra, Rem ad Senatum re∣ert, or de his rebus refert, sapit culinam, or ad Ge∣nium,
omnino depereat, qui opes deperit. Nugas non mo∣ror sub dio moraturus. Other Verbs are Active or Neuter and Depo∣nent, as comito and comitor, so comperio, fabrio, impertio mereo munero populo punio: Likewise assen∣tio, vergo, lachrymo modero vago. Of Verbs defective in Moods. The Verbs called Impersonalls have no Impe∣rative mood, but instead thereof are used to the Subiunctive. And both they and other Verbs spo∣ken of before want Supine, Gerund, and Parti∣ciple Moods; for such of that kinde as they do retaine become Nounes, admitting no cases of their Verbs, as, vis paenitendi for paenitentiae, id nego lici∣turum, for legitimum sore. Of Verbs defective in Tenses. In the first Conjugation Verbs Denominatives and diminutives, besides others spokn of already do want the Pretertense, and Derivatives thence together with all their compounds, as, cortico, cornicor sorbillo pitisso. And dcortico, &c. In the second Conjugation most Verbs neuters want the Pretertense, & other Derivatives thence, as aveo, clueo, denseo, flaveo, glabreo, liveo, with o∣thers before mentioned. In the third Coniugation all Verbs inchoative or augmentative ending in sco, as augesco, with o∣thers before notified want also the Preter tense, and its Derivatives. In the fourth Conjugation few Verbs do want the Preter tense excepting meditative, whereof two only have it, to wit, parturio parturivi, and esurio esurivi esuritum.
All Verbes in or of any Coniugation, and Verbs neuter passive want the Preter tense, saving in the Participle Mood whence the rest are supplyed by circumlocution as hath been aforesaid. Verbs in o and or want the Future in the Infini∣tive as it is before instanced, suesco and soleo want all futures, as repugnant to their signification. Of Defectives in Person. Dor and for be never used saving in composition as, addor affor and the first person both singular and plural, is defective in all Verbs of the Impe∣rative. Likewise Verbs called Impersonalls, are never used in the first or second Person of either number or in the third plurall, except onely few Verbs neuter with a Nominative of the thing, as, libet, licet, liquet, decet, pudet, taedet, piget, paenitet mi∣seret oportet, all of the second Coniugation, but in other Coniugations, or in any of the passive voice, such Verbs are never used in the plurall, as benefit, malefit, satisfit statur sedetu, curritur, itur, and others in the Preter tense only, and Deriva∣tives thence, as, puditum, pigitum, libitum, licitum, pertaesum benefactum est vel fuit. Other Verbs are most improperly called Imper∣sonalls being found familiarly to be Verbs Perso∣nall, though more frequently used to the third person, as delectat, attinet, accidit, &c. dapibus te delectas, or tu delectaris. And such are Verbs of exempt power, as, faste dies vesperascis murmure saevo verberibusque tonas: which are indeed more commonly read in the third Person singular, the rect being usually understood, as, lucescit supply dies fulminat, supply Jupiter, pluit, supply Caelum.
Of Defectives in severall affections. All Verbs are defective being used adverbially, whether as Adverbs of intreating, as▪ te quaeso, or quaesumus, so vos amabo, sodes for si audes, or as Ad∣verbs of exhorting, age agedum, or of shunning, as lites apagite, or of granting, as dextram cedo, for cedito and cette for cedite. Likewise sis sultis, for sivis si vultis, with their compounds, apagesis cap∣sis cavesis, vide sis, or of explaining, ilicet, scilicet, videlicet, for ire, scire, videre, licet. Other Verbs are also defective in sundry affecti∣ons, whether they be of reioycing, as, ovat ovans o∣vatus, or of greeting: ave aveto avete avetote, a∣vere. Salvebis salve salveto salvete salvetote salvere. valebis vale valeto valete valetote valere, or of af∣firming, aio ais ait aiunt, aiebam aiebas aiebat aieba∣tis aiebant, aias aiat aeiatis aiant aiens, inquam inquis inquit inquitis inquint, inquiebam inquiebas inquiebat inquiebatis inquiebant, inquisti inquistis, inquies inquiet inque inquito, inqutas inquiat inquiatis inquiant inquiens. These Verbs of the preter tense have the rest derived thence, fui tuli senui odi caepi memini, &c. moreover odi hath osurus, and exosus perosus, Cae∣pio and caepiam are seldome used but caeptum and cepturus, from caepi are very common. Memini hath memento and mementote with the Supine, mentum, whence is mentio: defit for deest hath defiet defiat de∣fieri, Iufit for incipit, is single, going alone, ausim from absolet ausi of andes, duim from dui for dedi, axim and faxim from axi faxi, for egi feci, factus fa∣ciendum from absolet facior, latum latus laturus from lao a Greek Verb.
Lastly it should be remembred what was before advertised in the Nounes, that no simples be joy∣ned in Conjugation that are not formed a like in composition, as, Sum may be coniugated with fui forem fore, because absum hath abfui abforem abfore fio hath factus and faciendus, because tepefie hath tepefactus and tepe faciendus, fero hath tuli and la∣tus, because defero hath detuli, and delatus, which formes other Verbs will not imitate. Of ADVERBES. The Adverbs (being invariable, saving by a different figure) is so called because it refer∣reth to some other word, whether Noune, Verb, or other Adverb for a clearer declaration of their meaning in sundry circumstances, as, Vos au∣tem sociosque omnes Dii quam diutissime conser∣vent incolumes. The formes of Adverbs. There be three kinds of Adverbs. 1. Some absolutely significant of themselves vulgarly called Adverbs 2. Some respectively significant, as uniting words or sentences called Coniunctions. 3. Some meerely subservient to oblique cases of the Substantives, notifying either rest, wherein resideth some Act or passion, or mo∣tion whereto, or whence the same do tend.
The kindes of absolute Adverbs. 1. Adverbs are 1 Some Interrogatives asking a question that concerne either 1. the being, as, Num nunquid an utrum, and the en∣cliticall Ne. or 2. The cause, as quare quaprop∣ter quamobrem, quid ita, quidni, quin for cur non. or 3. The place, quo, quorsum unde utro qua. or 4. The time, quando quandiu quousque quo∣ad (and ubi an Interogative of place and time) or 5. The number quoties: or 6. The quality, as qui quomodo, or 7. The quantity, as quam quantum quantopere. All which except the first desisting to be Interrogatives become Indefi∣nites: and many of them will be Relatives answering to some precedent Adverb, as Tunc sapis quando siles; ubi sunt amici, ibidem opes. 2. Some requiring an attentivenesse, as en ecce, and sometimes heus. 3. Some inviting, or therewith exhorting, as ehodum eia euge agedum. 4. Some affirming, or therewith interpre∣ting, as nae etiam ita quidem certe profecto sane plane maxime quippe nempe nimirum scilicet videlicet. 5. Some used in swearing, as Pol Edepol Ecastor Mehercule Mediusfidius, for me Dios fi∣lius, &c. 6. Some bee of doubting, as forte forsit for∣sitan forsan fortassis fortasse si nisi. 7. Some are for uniting, as pariter simul aeque una. 8. Some for severing either with choise, as potius immo satius magis, or without choise, a∣seorsim
secus aliter singulatim viritm bifariam vnice duntaxat solum tantum modo solummodo. 9. Some are of wishing, as Utinam si o si. 10. Some of forbidding, as ne neutiquam nequaquam. 11. Some used in denying, haud nihil, or nil for non, nec neque nequidem, or parum minime; or those used in forbidding. 12. Some are of quality, Splendide fortiter falso, raptim incassum frustra perperam, and Greek-wise, lugubre torvum acerba recens. 13. Some of quantity either with remission, sensim belle vix aegre paululum modicum, or with intension, satis valde adeo sane quod, nimis ferme fere pene prope propemodum prorsus omnino pe∣nitus multum magnopee; and such in Com∣parison may respect either only quantity, as minus minime magis maxime, or quality and quantity together meliuscule doctius doctissi∣me. 14. Some are of likenesse or proportion, qua∣si eu sic sicut sicuti tanquam iuxta prope ut uti velut veluti quemadmodum tanquam all relatives and aeque perinde, answered by arque or acsi, so quam to which last ante or prius oft referre, & ei∣ther of both may be Elliptical in some structure, as altero die quam mortuus est febricitavit, for antequam. 15. Some of place, signifying either, 1 In or at a place, hic illic istic ubique vbivis ubi∣cunque alibi uspiam humi domi, &c. whereto may be added according to their severall senses, Juxta prope answering to procul, so infra supra intra extra pone, o: post, and ante, or coram, foris, and intus, or 2. To a place, huc illuc istue, eo
quo aliquo quocunque int to foras peregre, or 3. Cowards a place, quorsum sursum deorsum in∣trorsum retrorsum or 4. From a place, hine illinc inde unde aliunde caelitus funditus radicitus infer∣ne superno desuper cominus eminus, or 5. By a place, as hac illac istac ea qua qualibet quacun∣que recta, where with may be supplyed via. 16. Some of time either finite, nunc tunc tum mox jamjam illico hodie cras heri pridie postridie perendie nudiusterti s for nunc est dius tertius, donec quousque quoadusque quoad ejus quandiu quamprimum antequam: or indefinite, iampridem dudum olim quando aliqùando mane sero luci vesperi semper indies iugiter nunquam tandem cito nupor. 17. Some equally belong both to time and place, usque procul post quo hactenus ubi unde. 18. Some betoken time and quantity: sepi∣uscule. 19. Some place and quantity longiuscule. 20. Some are of number either finite, semel bis ter decies centies millies so millies bis or bis et millies, or indefinitely of number and time, toties quoties crebro saepe raro iterum rursus. 21. Some of order with time or place, primo secundo, &c. 22. Some of passion called Interiections, because inserted as thort Parentheses importing commonly by unperfect sentences some suddain motions of the minde tending either to a wonder Infandum immane phy papae hui, or 2. ioy evax io. or 3. Laughter ha ha he. or 4. Scorne hem vah proh; or 5. feare, as atat; or 6. Sor∣row, hei heu eheu hoi ah. or 7. Threat vae malum. or 3. Silence aust.
Of Adverbiall Constructions. The imperfect sense accompanying Interje∣ctions may be made up to a perfect sentence in the first sorte of them, by fide maius est. In the second by plaudite, in the third by quis ab∣stineat cachinno. in the fourth by sordet enim, or facessat, in the fifth by caveatur: in the sixth by res est lugubris. In the seaventh, by, imprecor. In the last by obmutescite, where may be noted that some Interiections, as infandum immane, malum, are Substantives, wherewith est should be supplyed hei and vae stand for Substantives Aptore with a Dative Acquisitive, as hei or vae mihi, for meus dolor est. And others leave the sentence annexed to be finished with knowne supplements, as, hem tibi Davum, supply affero; ehodum ad me, supply accedito eheu conditio∣nem magistratus administrandi, supply defleo, proh Deum atque hominum fidem, supply obte∣stor, where Verbs of the same signification are easie to be found. Adverbs of place, time and quantity being made Nounes Aptote, are construed, the two first with Genitives of their own signification, the last with any that may be their Substan∣tives, being pronominall Adjectives, as nusquam loci, tunc temporis, for nullo loco eo tempore, parum lucri, multnm laboris, for par∣vum lucrum multus labor. Other Adverbs admit the cases of their Pri∣mitives, as dixit optime omnium, supply nu∣mero, because we say optimus omnium, quo fa∣miliarior eo reliquis fidentius accedit, propius fer∣tur
nunc a terris, nunc ad caelos, castra propius urbem moventur, proxime, or pro ximius Pompei∣um sedebat, Tibi similiter vivit, utisiter nulli, ne∣dum naturae convenienter. The kindes of Conjunctive Adverbs. Coniunctive Adverbs are some meer Copu∣latives either 1. Joyning both words and their meaning, as, et que encliticall, quoque ac atque nec neque cum or tum with tum non mo∣do sed eriam. Or 2. coupling words but severing their signification, as ve encliticall, vel aut seu five. 2. Some meere Adversatives, sed at ast au∣tem tamen vero verum atquiquin alioquin caete∣roquin nisi praeterquam. 3. Some Adversatives, but withall conces∣sive, etsi tametsi etiamsi quanquam quanvis licet esto. 4. Some Discretibes, saltem vel ad minus certe ut minimum. 5. Some Causalls, nam namque enim ete∣nim, ut quid quum quoniam quandoquidem ne non inquantum quatenus siquidem. 6. Some conditionalls, si sin modo nisi dum dummodo. 7. Some Illatives, Ergo ideo igitur quare itaque proinde idcirco quapropter quamobrem. 8. Some Comparatives, as all Adverbs of likenesse. 9. Some Electives, immo potius magis non adeo ut, secus or aliter quam non aeque ac, &c. 10. Some Continuatives, praeterea nec non i∣tidem porro caeterum insuper ad haec.
11. Some Ordinative, primo deinde demum denique, &c. 12. Some Completive, nam quidem equi∣dem profecto certe aurem. ANNOTATIONS. The Conjunctive Adverbs have no share in regence of Cases, Moods or Tenses, whose constru∣ction wholly dependeth every where upon some other regents, as in the following instance. No∣ster patriae gue tolius, extraneis tamen haud aeque patronus, Romae ac Venetiis nauci, aut pro nihilo ha∣betur, non secus acsi de fraude vel furti reus esset: where may be noted, that Moods and Tenses must be suitable to the matter spoken of without refe∣rence to such coniunctive cementaries: And subsequent Moods must be regulated by the pre∣cedent in every period, as hath been instanced in the variation of the Subiunctive, Optative, Po∣tentiall, and Infinitive; else they need no gui∣dance. The kindes of Prepositionall Adverbs. Prepositionall Adverbs commonly attend a∣circumstance of time or place or persons sette instead of places, or else do accompany Nouns that signifie either a part, or an entire cause, whether of the person or of the thing, or other∣wse a qualification of the thing. And it is proper for the prepositional Cumlike a Copula∣tive
to ioyne causes, but for absque sine praeter, to sever causes. The same Prepositions will differ in signification as the cases differ where∣on they attend. And moreover they will differ in their sense by apposition to, or composition with words of different senses, as in the ex∣amples following. Prepositions serving to the Genitive. Ergo tenus Virtutis ergo for gratia, Cumarum tenus, for usque ad earum terminos. Prepositions serving to the Acquisitive. Obviam praesto propius. It obviam hostium conatibus, for contra conatus, nec ullum est mantellum obviam fucis, for pro fucis, praesto sum tibi, for juxta te sum, propius accedit urbi, for ad urbem. Prepositions serving to the Dative Ablativall. A ab abs absque sine cum ex e de prae pro coram palam procul. A Scipione superatus est referring to the agent. A rationibus a studiis, a pugione, a secrets, supply, praefectus officio: Ab Romuli gente. supply, ortus a Cumanis rediit, for a Cumis, a millibus passuum te prae∣stolatur, for millium iutervallo a verberibus impunitas for quantum ad verbera, a frigore myrtos defende, for contra frigus, Catonis a morte, for post mortem, Abs te stetit Senatus, for pro te, pastor ab Amphriso, for Amphrysius. Absque metu, for hoc amoto, sine Cerere
et Baccho friget Venus, or iis deficientihus, cum fratr Quirino Rhemus iura dabant, for Rhemus et frater, Summa cum humanitate nos excepit, for humanissime cum boste pugnatur, for contra hostem, benefaciendo secum crtant, for inter se. Ex auro integrum vas, for omnino aureum, usually referring to the matter, ex illo tempore celeberrimus, for post id tempus, vox e caelo, for a cielo audita, ex usu, or commodo, or dig∣nitate nostra, for ad usum, &c. Illud est e republica, for pro Republica, ex Platonis sententia, for se∣eundum cius sententiam. De Senatu audivi, for a Senatu, de moribus oratio, for circa mores, or quae in iis versatur. Prae amore misera, for per amorem, prae ocu∣lis, for ante oculos: Caeleri prae te uno viles, for praeter te unum, or tecum collati, And the case of a Demon∣strative may be Ellipticall, as res omnes relictas habeo prae quod tu velis. Pro amicitia feci, for ami∣citiae causa, pro maenibus stat, for ante maenia, pro concio∣ne venit, for concionaturus, pro viribus egit, for impensis∣sime pro Praetore, for Praetoris vice, pro Turribus ad∣stant, for Turrium tutela, habetur, pro vidua, for tan∣quam vidua, sanequam pro ec ac debui moleste tuli, for non prout debui, pro facultate, for secundum vi∣res. Coram nobis, for nostri presentia, coram Senatu, for in eo. And Coram differeth from ante, as properly importing neenes; whereas ante admitteth dis∣tance. It differeth likewise from palam, that being determined by its case to certaine persons, this be∣ing used indefinitely to any persons; As palam po∣pulo, for quolibet adevrtente. Procul urbe, for ab urbe.
Prepositions serving to the Accusative Apud penes ad adversus ante pone post circum citra, intra, trans, ultra, extra, intra, infra, supra, praeter ob contra, erga, iuxta, pro∣pe secus secundum prater. Apud forum agitur, for in foro; apud me aliquandiu sore cupio, for solus, apud Mantuam, for prope illam, a∣pud nos frugum copia, for nobiscum, nos penes sunt di∣vitiae, for sub nostro dominio. Thus apuc, and penes differ, the first noting presence, the last posses∣sion. Ad tribunal se Iudex confert, for intra tribunial li∣tigator se recipit ad tribunal, for usque ad, or ante. Ad balneas moritur, for a pud eas, ad exercitum ma∣net, for in co. Ad haec tempora rivsurus, for circum haec, tendens ad sydera palmas, for sydera versus, haec nihil ad nostras artes, for prae nostris, or cum nostris comparata, non nisi ad tres annos peragatur, for post tres annos Panditur ad nullas ianua, nigra preces, for ob, or propter nullas. Ad Judicis pedes procidit, for ante pedes. Ad mea mala hoc accessiit, for praeter a∣lia. Ad eius arbitrium, for iuxta suum. Ad speciem magnificus, for secundum spectm. Ad multam noctem, for sero noctis. Ad Cyathos, supply delegatus, mu∣lieres ad unum perosae, for simul, or una. Comaedi∣a ad verbum translata, for exacte. Ad summam, for deniqne. Adversum hostes, for contra illos, adversus amicos tendit, for erga ipsos, domum versus, and such like, have aa constantly implyed with them, which some∣times is expressed. Ad Tiberim versus; but in more commonly, versus in utramque partem, quoquo ver∣sus, are both absolute Adverbs, like sursum versus,
save that the first stand for Aptotes. Ante Comitia vel Senaculum aut Senatores, refer∣ring to time, place, and persons, and with Ad∣verbs of time, it is often Elliptically understood, pridie Calendas, for ante Calendas. Pone castra, referring only to place, for post ea, se post Cratera tegebat, for pone cratera, post tres annos, for totidem peractis, post Regem secundus, for a Rege, post nummos virtus, for un mis virtuti praepositis Circum theatra referring to place only, circier me∣ridiem, for propeillum, referring to time, quindeci circiter dies, referring to time and number, circa nos aut urbem, aut id tempus, referring to persons, place, and time. Cis Alpes aut Padum itra montes aut flumina, the first being used to proper names, the last to Ap∣pellatives, both answering to their opposits trans and ultra, the three last referring with place to time and agents. Citra calendas, for ex hac parte calendarum, or ante calendas, ultra calendas, for post eas, or ex altera parte, itra ius, for laeso jure, ultra famam, for famam superans, citra vel intra, ultra vel extra modum, for vix or nimis moderate, the fist used for remission, the last for intention, extra io um for sine ioco nul∣lus extra te adfuit, for praeter te. Inter nos lis haec est, for haec nostra lis, inter ludos, for dum ludi celebrantur, fabulantur inter caenandum, for nnantes, diligunt alii alios inter se, for invicem, or muuo, infra dignitatem, for nulla dignitatis ha∣bita ratione infra sex dies, for ante sex dies, infra te∣ctum, for in aedibus. Supra morem, aut iustum, for amplius more, supra ca∣ut nobis imminet periculum, for prope, commonly importing Aearness so differing it from supe, which
may imply a distance. Propter vos aut vestram amicitiam, for vestri gratia, propter humum volitat, for prope humum, propter scelus vapulat, for sceleris merit, obstultitiam paenas luit, for propter, ob Romam legiones duxit, for ad Romam, ob oculos versatur, for ante oculos. Urbs contra Thebas sita, for e Thebarum regione contra praedones expeditio, for adversum eos, pietas erga parentes, for iis ita demerentibus. Juxta aequor, for prope illud, juxta famulas ope∣ram navat, for una cum usdem, adsum iuxta te, for tibi auxiliaturus, iuxta, for apud Capuam, iuxta Var∣ronem doctissimus, for secundum, or post Ʋarronem. Prope id opidum, for iuxta illud. Secus aquarum decursus, for prope illos, Secundum naturam, for n∣turaliter, secundum voluntatem, for iuxta illam, se∣cundum aurem vulneratus, for prope aurem, Me secundum patrem haereditas, for post patrem. Praeto secundum me decrevit, for pro me, proxime ac se∣cundum Deos homo praestantissimus, for Diis tantummo∣do minor, imago secundum qietem mihi obversabatur, fo in somno, secundum officia deliberatur, for de officiis or fuper ea. Per diem operor, for toto die, per Eboracum profi∣cistor, for Urbem transeo, via secta per ambas, for inter ambas, per Deos, for iis testibus et vindiibus, pe patriam obsecro, for eius gratia, per me certior fies, for mea opera, per aetatem licet, for tate non obstante per gratiam bonam abiit, for cum gratia, per me ta∣das, for mea venia per ludicrum, for iocose, quae dam sunt pre se amabilia, for ex sua natura, or pro sua vir∣tute, per speciem, for nequaquam re, per otium feci, for tiosus, per ebrietatem lites oriuntur, for ab ebrietate, per id tempus, for circa illud, per fas & fidem deceptus, for violata fide, per te stat ut hae fiant nuptia, for ti
potestate: Praeter for ultra haec, vobis alia obijcieban∣tur multa, praeter nostros mores atque leges, for contra, praeter oculos Domini sua diripebantur bona, for ante oculos, praeter, for supra modum, omnes tuti prae∣ter ducem, for nisi dux, or hoc uno excepto. Prepositions serving both the Accusative and the Dative Ablativall. In sub subter super clam tenus. In vos benevolentia, for erga vos, in rebelles pugna for contra rebelles, appulit in portum, for ad portum, iusticium in duos menses indicitur, for quandiu duo praetereant. In os laudat, for coram, or in conspectu. In vos fiet exemplum, for vestro scelere coercito. In ucem bibit, for usque ad diem, vertuntur in cine es, for fiunt cineres in dies crescunt, for usque, or iugite fert pisciculos in caenam, for pro cana, recipitur in fo∣rum, for intra forum vivit in diem, for non amplius die. In tempore venit, for opportunus, mediis in mili∣bus ardet, for inter mille. In numero aut honore ha∣bitus, for honoratus. In manu stat victoria, for ad libitum. Sub tecta referto sarmenta, for infra tecta. Sub lucem redeunt, for circiter lucem, sub id tempus, for por illud, sub horam pugnoe, for ante horam, sub um∣bram properat, for ad umbram, sub iugum missi, for captivi. Sub adversa quercu, for pone quercum sub terris posuere domus, for in terris sub montibus Idae, for iuxta montes, sub illo tempore, for eodem, sub corona, for coronati, sub dio, for fine tecto, sub manu, for in promptu, sub die movet, for tarde, sub vinea iacont, for tuto, sub umbra, for simulate.
Subter, for infra praecordia subter, for sub testutline, super Caram utas, for ultra llos. Super somnam for Cubili praefectus, nocte super media, for circa mediam, multa super Priamo rogitans, for de Priamo, hunc su∣per ipse sua molitur laude laborem, for pro sua laude, fronde super viridi, for in viridi, clam, or clancu∣lum patrem ea fecit, for patrem ea celavit, clam uxore for hac inscia, Tanaimque tenus descendit ab Euro, for usque ad Tanaim, capulo tenus, for prope capulum pube tenus, for donec ubesceret. rocul prope clam palam versus and usque, have other Prepositions construed with them before their cases, which are therefore supposed to be understood being not expressed, and they are in that respect accouned absolute Adverbs. Quaenam praepositions quibusque inserviunt casibus. Propiero adversus citra cis circiter extra. Post apud ante secus iuxta supra versus ad intra. Erga er ulra penes contra prope pone secundum. Infra inter circum praeter trans aduce quarto. Abs tenus absque palam prae ex de pro cum sine coram Ablato: des clam super in sub subter utrique. Quo petit ad, sic usque, procul longe a, prope utramque. Usque penes versus tenus, aut Pronomine iuncto Septeno cum, cuique suos praeponito casus. Obviam habet socium praesto propiusve dativum. Aurium et adde tenus, patrim plerunque dualem. Denique pro causa patrim vult quemlibet ergo. Annotations. The Prepositionall like the Conjunctive Ad∣verbs have nothing of regence, but are only ser∣vile, yet con as such are very usefull, because without coniunctions, no sentences can have ei¦ther
a Consummation in themselves, or a Conti∣nuation from each to other. And Prepositions af∣ford much of compendious and various elegance as by apposition instanced already, so by composi∣tion, as in the following instances. A ab abs (which with the rest next following, are separable Prepositions) doe in composition sig∣nifie either privation, as amens absimilis abstemius, or separation, avulsus, abactus, abstractus, or in∣tension, abnegatio, absolutio. Where a is used in Latine words only before m. and v. ut in exotick words before x and z. Ab is used before any vow∣ell, and before b. d. f. h i. l. v. se;ldome before m and p. alwayes before r. and s. And for Euphoni ab is changed into au in auferens and aufugiens. Abs is used before c. q. t. And both these and all other separable Prepositions have like places in Apposition as they have in Composition Ad com∣pounded doth signifie an increase, accumulatio ap∣proach accessus assimilatio. And it is intire in Composition with any vowel, or with b. d. h. i. m. v. except ahbrevians. But d is cut off thence before words that begin with c. f. g. l. n. p. r. s. t. lea∣ving them doubled in recompense of the losse. These are excepted, adsuturus, adlubescit, agnitus, adsunt. Likewise d. before q. is changed into c. acuiesco. Ante compounded noteth a precedence in time, place, or some other condition, antolucanus, ante∣ambulatio, antefere, and being alwayes intire, it goeth before a. c. e. f. g. l. p. s. Circum referring only unto place being com∣pounded, is intire before a. e. h. m. o. p. And com∣monly doth change m to n before c. d. f. g. i. l. q. m. s. t. v. But m. is cut of before i. as in Ciuitus. Con∣
a compounded doth signifie opposition, as, contra∣dico contraliceor, contradico, or over against contra∣positus, contrastans, contraveniens. And it is every where intire, and only before such letters as are in the former instances. De compounded noteth detraction, deoorticor, descent, defluxus, deficience, dedisco locall motion deambulo, or is privative, delumbis, or active with intension deamo, with re∣mission; defervesco or negative, demens dedecus, or Demonstrative delatio. And is found entire be∣fore all the letters wherewith Latine words begin, but seldomest before q. and u. as dequestus de∣usts. . or ex compounded fignifie privation, elinguis, or intension elusus exoratus. And it is used for ex∣tra, exclusus, moreover E. is used before b. d. g. i. l. m. n. r. v. But Ex before all vowels and c. p. q. t. which before f. casteth away x. recompensed by doubling f. as effraenis. And s. after x. is cut off without recompence, as exanguis, in exspes, it is preserved for a difference from expes. In compounded signifieth, non, inutilis, intra, in∣gressio, contra insultatio, valde, incanus, supra, imminens, fie, iniussu, publice, indictum, local motion, importatio. And it is intire before vowells, and c. d. f g. h. i. n. g. s. t. v. Before b. m. p. the letter n. is changed in∣to m. imberbis immortalis impar. Before l. and r. it is cut off, and the letter following is doubled, as, illaesus, irrisio. Inter compounded signifyeth middle∣nes, interpositio, privation interitus, intension inter∣dictum. And it doth remaine intire in composition before all letters wherewith Latine words begin, except intelligo, and such others changing r. un∣to l.
Intro in composition doth keep constantly to the same sense, and is intire before c. d. e g. i. m r. s. v. Ob compounded doth stand for parum, as oblon∣gus, for contra as obiectum, for circa, as obsessio, for coram, as obveniens. And it is found before all let∣ters for the most part intire, except in opprobrium, and ocquiniscens, where b. is changed to p. in the first, and c. in the last, and such others: but in o∣missus and opertus it is cast away. Post compounded referring only to succession of time place or some other circumstance doth remaine intire, going before words that begin with a. e. f. g. h. i. l. m. p q. sc. v. Per compounded signifieth valde, permodestus, periniquus, or non perfidus, or trans perspicuus, or nimium pertinax. And it doth remaine entire be∣fore any letter, wherewith Latine words begin, saving in pellectus and pellucidus. Prae in composition doth signifie ante, praefatio, super praefectus, maxime praeclarus praepotens, immatu∣re praecox. In some Compounds it doth not alter the sense of the simple words, as in praecinctus praeut, and it is intire before all letters that begin Latine words. Praeter compounded is constant to the same sig∣nification, and doth remaine intire before a. d. e. f. g. i. l. m. n. p. q. r. v which only it will precede, and no other; praeterbitans hath b. for Euphony. Pro in composition is used for ante, providus, or procul, prophanus, prohibitio propuduum, or super, pro∣minens, or ultra, progressus, or palam, promulgo, or val∣de, procurvus, or longe, protentus. And it is alwayes intire, and goeth before all letters except b. e. o. q.
Sub in composition doth signifie parum, subiratus, or infra, subiectus, or repente, subitus, or vicissim suf∣fectus, or clam, surreptus, or super sublimis, or post sub∣sequor. And it goeth before all letters, except q. and is commonly intire: only before c. f. g. m. p. r. the same are doubled in steed of b. cut off, as in succedens suffugium, suggestio, summissus, suppositio, sur∣reptus, but suscipiens, suspirans, sustollens, may be compounded with sus for sursum. Subter in composition is used for clam, subter∣ducens, for infra subterfluens, subtorlabens, and is never impaired or compounded with any other letters. Super compounded hath the signification of aplius, superadditus, of diutius, superstes, of sursum superveniens. And it is never impaired, being compounded with all letters except b. and q. Supra in composition referreth only to a place, and goeth only before d. p. s. being ever intire. Trans compounded doth likewise refer to place only, and is alwayes entire going before a. c. e. f. g. i. l. m. p. q. t. v. But it casteth away s. before ano∣ther s. as in transumptus. Likewise both s. and n. before d. i. u. as in trado, traijcio, trano. Prepositions inseparable so called, because they are never used a parte in apposition are six: Am or oftner a for amphi, Con, for cum, di for dis, Re for retro, se for seorsim or sine, ve for vi or vae, alwayes & only used to composition, except in few Archa∣ismes, as am terminum, for ad: Am compounded, referreth only to place, or somewhat equivalent thereunto, and goeth before p. as amputans. But an goeth before c. h. f. q. ancisus, anbelo, anfractus, anquiro, and amb before a. e. i. u. ambages, ambesus, ambigens, ambustus, or amb afore d. as amb i∣dexter ambidentes.
Con compounded doth stand for simul, commensa∣lis, for contra, contendo, for valde, conctio concre∣pitus. And it is intire before c. d. f. g. i. n. q. s. t. v. before b. p. and l. m. r. the letter n. is changed, as in these instances, combibo, compareo, colligo, commuto corrigo. And before h. or any vowel, n. is cut off without recompence, Comedo alone hath m. instead of n. for Euphony. Di or dis compounded stand for non, difficili, for seorsim, discissus, for contra, dissensio, for valde dis∣pereo, for ordinate, dispositio. Moreover Di is used in composition before words that begin with d. g. l. m. n. r. But dis before b. c. i. p. q. s. t. and before f. the same is doubled in recompense of s. cut-off as in diffid. Re in composition is used for retroe recessus, for ursum, recognosco, for reciproce, redamo, for adversum reluctor, for valde, redundo, for procul, remotus, for non reclusus. And sometimes it addeth nothing to the signification of the simple, recaleo. And it is put befor b c. d. f. i. l, m. n p. q. s. t. v. but before h. and a. e. i. o. u. it will take d. for Euphony redhibeo redactus, redemptus, rediens, redolens, reduncus, and reunctor, reunio, reedifico with∣out d. In reddo for rem, do, d. is doubled for a re∣compence of m. cut off, so Re is never impaired. Se compounded doth note a separation, seiun∣ctus privation, securus, socors, deviation seductus. And it cometh in composition before c. d. g. i. l. m. p. v. being alwayes intire. Ve in composition doth signifie intension, vehe∣mens, diminution vegrandis vecors, privation vesa∣nus, veiovis. And it goeth before c. d. g. h. i. p. s. being every where entire, vetus for vae atas is con∣tracted.
Annotations. Some Prepositions will not be compounded at all as, absgue adversum apud circiter citra coram erga, intra, iuxta penes, pone, secundum, sine, ultra, being allwayes separable. Others have Compounds but very few, as, quo∣cica circum circa, cisalpinus, cispadanus, perclam mecum, quibuscum, extraordinarius, extrinsecus, in∣franares propalam, propemodum, propterea, praeter, propter, supradictus, hactenus, quadantenus qu∣tenus quoquo versum retrorsum, usque, quoque. Many are found seperable from their cases, be∣coming absolute Adverbs, some commonly, as ante citra circum circiter clam, coram, contra, infra intra, iuxta, palam, pone post procul, prope, secus, subter super supra ultra, some very seldome, as prae propter and tenus thus: (having much affinity with Pronouns) Adverbialls will admit of diverse formes in diverse structures. Of the figure of Adverbs. Adverbs by the figure are some Primitives being many Monosyllables, as nunc, mox, iam, cras, sed, vel praclam, ad per, &c. And others Derivatives, which may be Pronominall Monosyllables, for they descend from any part of speech, and from Nouns or Pronouns in any case, hic quod recens penitus, facile, potius, plurimum, acerba, horrida, in the Nominative or Accusative, humi, domi, nauci, in the Genitive, tempori, luci, vesperi, in the Ac∣quisitive, hac forte repente subito recta, noctu, hodie, in the Ablativall. All which have the same both ter∣mination and signification with their Primi∣tives.
Others differing in Termination from their Primitives being of the first or of the second De∣clension will end in atim itus iter itim im, or e. as summatim, medullitus, ostiatim, humamtus, huma∣niter, viritim, enixim, caesim, raptim, male. Being of the third, they end in atim enter tim ter no, as generatim, vehementer, partim, segniter, omnino. Derivatives by comparison follow the rules of other Adjectives, being the same with Adjectives neutrall, as minus, minimum, or Superlatives may endin e. or . novissime, postremo, both Comparatives and Superlatives may be derived from Prepo∣sitions prae prius, primo, so extra exterius, extreme, infra, inferius, infime, &c. Of Compound Adverbs. Adverbs are compounded some like Pronouns with syllabical additions, as tandem, ubinam, uspi∣am, paulisper, hice, hiccine. Some with precedent Substantives, dextrorsum, pedetentim. Some with subsequent Substantives, tantopore illico perendie, saepenumero. Some with subsequent Adiectives, denuo praete∣rea. Some with subsequent Verbs, Ʋbivis quoli∣bet. Some with two Verbs, scilicet videlicet, Some with two Adverbs, tantammodo velut protinus dein. Some with three originalls, deinde, aliquan∣tisper, quamobrem, nudiustertius.
THE TRUE REASON OF A RIGHT SYNTAX. THe Syntax is a congruous and orderly dispo∣sall of all the parts of Speech, requiring with congruity of words a meet placeing of the same in Prose or Poems. And it is two fold, Analogicall in the simple and common custom of Construction, or Anomalous, when swarving thence, it hath for Authority the constant practise of approved classick writers▪ And this last doth fi∣gurat either the Construction of simple sentences, or the elocution of the whole speech. Of Analogicall Construction. The Analogicall Construction is two fold, by Concordance, or by Consequence. Of Concordance. By Concordance a Substantive or any part of Speech put Substantively having a regent power will require any Noune or Verb depending there∣on to agree therewith in its proper affections. Tum capitale nefas operosa diluit arte vir nequam.
Of Consequence. It was a common error generally received, that every oblique did belong to a certaine regence of some particular part of Speech, which mistake hath multiplyed Rules, and thereby stunned al young Students without cause; for the structure of oblique Substantives (which are no Appositions▪) do not depend upon the regence of any part of Speech, but upon a consequence, or in pursuance of a certrine sense and meaning of the precedent leading word, what part of Speech soever it be, as in that respect indifferent to the structure of a∣ny oblique. Wherefore either Verb, or Noune, or Adverb, standing for a guide, as it, shareth in the same signification, so it will be joyned to the same oblique, in construction, as Hostibus occurrite, or obvii, or obviam ite. Sometimes severall oblique Substantives refer∣ring to the same leader for limitations of severall circumstances make with it one predicat answer∣ing to a rect Substantive precedent, as to the Sub∣ject. Sponte domi trepidante manu sibi detrahit ostrum. Of Anomalous Construction. The Anomalous construction is made by six fi∣gures altering the ordinary Syntax of words, to wit, by Enallage, Hypallage, Ellipsis, Pleonasmus, Zeugma, and Syllepsis, whereof the two last belong only unto Concordance, the fourth only to a Consequence, and the three first may concerne either of both.
Enallage is a figure that changeth parts of Speech and their affections each with another, whereof before in the Etymologie. Hypallage doth trans∣ferre Substantives or Adjectives, being the same, or different Cases, and sometimes different Gen∣ders having some mutuall dependance amongst themselves each to the others place, as Pectus quoque robor a fiunt, where Robora the last of both rects doth stand for regent, and pectus put in Ap∣position thereto is taken collectively for all parts of the breast. So Amantium irae amoris est redinte∣gratio, where id may be Elliptically understood with irae a Genitive Singular, else, as a rect of a Noune plurall only it may be apposed to the regent Singular. Likewise praeclarae virtutis homo, for precla∣us virtute. Auri sacra fames, for sacri. Solstitium peco∣ri defende, for Solstitio defende pecus, date-classibus au∣stros, for classes austris. In nova fert animus mulats dicere formas, for corpora in novas formas mutata. llipsis doth figurate the construction, when some word that is very obvious, but wanting, must be supplyed, having common instances in most Rules. Eleonasmus is a redundance of words, where some may be spared, were it not of purpose to make the sentence more remarkable, as abstinet a Vino, pridie eius diei, or calendarum, ubi gentium quo terra∣rum abiit, nusquam loci invenitur tua solius culpa est hisce oculis egomet vidi meis auribus audivi, sic ore lo∣cutus, vitam voxit improbam, morte obii repentina, re∣bus gaudens secundis laetatu, berbae sub sibi succo vi∣ctitant. Zeugma doth figurate the concordance, when a Verb or Adiective agreeing with the nearest re∣gent Substantive, is to be supplyed in a congruous
number, person, case, and gender, with all other regents having respect thereto, whether set before or after without any Copulatives or with them, as Ego de patre, Tu de liberis, omnes de Bello percontati sunt. Socus & Classe relicta. After Adverbs of exception or comparison, the Verb or Aiective will best agree with the remotest regent. Cui nemo nisi mulieroulae indignatus esset. Ego sicut faenum lotus laresco. If a Verb or Adiective be placed with a regent Noune of multitude, having parts that follow wherewith it may be supplyed, or if the same be placed with any part being understood with the rest then it is called Prolepsis, as Populus vivit, ali in penuria, in deliciis alii. Impliciti laqueis nudus uterque iacet, where the Distributive uterque must be re∣solved to the parts, Mars nudus, Venus nuda, being an implicite Prolepsis. Syllepsis doth affect the concordance, when many regents copulated whereof some or all be singular do govern a Verb or Adiective plurall agreeing with the worthier regent in Person or Gender, the first of both being worthiest, and the second next in dignity, as Tu & Uxor estis valetudinarii. Ego, filia tum servitiis omnibus moribundae sebricitamus. So the Preposition cum with the Ablativall case doth often take the place of a rect and copulative, Juradabant Rhemus cum fratre Quirino, for et Fra∣ter: But in prose the Verbs or Adiectives would best agree with rects, being seldome altered by the oblique, except it be with Poets, and that harshly if the oblique be a Pronoune, as Divellimur inde Iphitus & Pelias mecum: In things without life the neuter commonly passeth for the worthiest Gender Divitiae Decus honor omnia in oculis sita sunt. And
sometimes in living things, Judaei suem leporem aut cygnum gustare nolunt, quae tamen alunt lueri gratia: sometimes when the Copulated regents concurre in the same Gender, the Adjective doth agree with them. Grammatica olim & Musica iunctae sunt. Sometimes the copulated being adiuncts of men, whatsover their own Gender be, will admit of ad∣jectives Masculine. Inventus praecipueque mancipiae morigeri sunto, which is a Metonymie. Many Adiectives Singular copulated may agree with a Substantive plurall: Magna minorque ferae, Colores albus, ater & viridis in Iride spectantur, which are an implicite Prolepsis. Lastly, if divers regents are included in a Col∣lective or Distributive, which may be resolved to hic & ille, alter & alter, being equivalent with a Copulate, and the Verb or Adiective doth agree with them only in signification, not in their pro∣per affections of Number and Gender, then it is called of late Writers Synthesis, Tota Gens in seipsos armati, uterque deluduntur, Terrae Titania proles fulmi∣ne deiecti, for Titanes, hoc pecus omne meum multae quoque montibus errant, where Oves or Caprae, a specificall kind must be supplyed from the generall word pecus. Servitia repudiavit qui catervatim con∣currebant, by a Metonomy of the adiunct. Latium & Capua multati sunt agro, for Latini & Capuenses, by a Metonomia of the Continent. Vos o Calliope placidas praebete Canenti, for Musae quarum ipsa dux erat, by a Synecdoche of the species, Capita coniurationis crucibus affixi, by a Metaphor. Other examples passe under the name of Synthesis where some known Appellatives are understood Elliptical∣ly, as plus quam duo millia caesi, where hominuns
should be supplyed, Rex tibi praecipimus, for Ego cum Poceribus, nobis praesente, for Praeside cum Asses∣sorbus. Other instances having no equivalence with a Copulate, cannot be a structure by Syn∣thesis, but by plaine Ellipsis, as in Eunucho sua, where must be supplyed Comaedia, Praeneste sub ipsa, suply Urbe, Centauro, in mgna, supply Navi. The Concordance of continued Substantives. A regent Substantive will require any other Substantives in a continued signification common∣ly called Apposition, be they few or many to a∣gree with it selfe alwayes in person, and regular∣ly in Case and Number, as Authorem perdis scelerum origo & fome, otium, fatis authoribus istaec tot mala contingunt: where the latter continued Sub∣stantives declare the nature of the former; some∣times by adding property, as in the former instan∣ces, sometimes by clearing an ambiguity, as Leo sydus caeleste, sometimes by restraining generality, as Ludi Consualia. The apposed figuratively may be a Genitive with a regent of any other case by Antiptosis, as Urbs Antiochiae, for Antiochia, transit flumen Rheni, for Rhenum; And it must be a Genitive, with a re∣gent possessive standing for the same Case of the Primitive by Enallage, as Tuum oculat testis indici∣um elevari nequit, for Tui indicium. Likewise the apposed may be of a different number, which being plurall only, will agree with a regent singular, as, Egot uae deliciae. And con∣trariwise Parisii Metropolis, or being a regular Noune plurall may agree with a regent collective singular, as, Senatu patriae praedonibus And con∣trariwise, sunt pecus igaavum fuci. Or with many regents singular copulated, Philippus & Maria Re∣ges
Angliae. And contrarywise, Servitia famulu cum famula vili acquisivit. Lastly, the apposed being moveable Substantives must accord in Gender with the regent, Ensis vi∣ctor, hafla vel ferrum victrix, the Neuter agreeing best with feminines of nouns unmovable to the neu∣ter. A Nominative after an Indicative or the Accu∣sative standing instead thereof after an Infinitive of Verbs Substantive, having the nature of defini∣tions, are apposed to their defined regents in a con∣tinued signification; for no word can be governed of any more then one regent in the same respect, as, Honor est virtutis calcar, nuptiae dignoscuntur hon∣stior conditio quam iucundtor, Musae habentur, literatis∣sima Cohors. Ego salutor matris deliciae. Ars vocatur inopum divitiae lad bus arguitur vini Bacchator Ho∣merus. Vos mallem amicos esse quam haberi. Circen∣ses curule certamen vocari constat, where the verbs Substantive do constantly accord with regents, but Participles signifying to be esteemed, or called, or a Relative, ioyned with other Moods reduced thence, may indifferently accord either with the regent or with the apposed Substantive. Passim cla∣rescit Lutetia vocata, or vocai Parisii quae vocatur, or qui vocantur Parisiii, quam, or quos vocant Parisios. And if both be Appellatives that betoken things inanimate, then such Participles do commonly accord with the apposed, Paupertas visum est onus, omnis error non est habenda stultitia. And they con∣stantly agree with the apposed, when both referre to Men. Opibus congerendis student Gens universa∣dicti Veneli, or, quos vocant venetos, Proles Aeneia condidit Albam, qui fertur Julus, or by variation, Cui nomen Julus, or Juli, or Julium. Likewise such being apposed, require a concordance of any Ad∣iective
following, Fulmina belli Scipiadae caesi. Last∣ly, an Apellative apposed to a proper name will requie the regence. Apiolae Latino um opidm cap∣tum est, Bihlia sacer coex e assiaue revolvendus. Moreover Datives construed with, dabis, dato, datur, libet lcet, expedit aequum necesse opu est, and such other as they take the place of Accusatives before the Infinitives of Verbs Substantive or passive of esteem or calling, so they admit the Appositions following the said Infinitives to be either Datives or Accusatives answerable to the Accusatives to be supplyed from thence. Do tibi dum bonus es, justo sanctoque videri, a quum est piis censeri innoxiis, non datur vobis haberi civibus, or cives, mihi neo libet nec licet esse negligenti, or negli∣gentem, where vos from vobis, and me from mihi, should be supplyed with Cives and negligentem. The Concordance of Adjectives. Adiectives whether Nouns, Pronouns or Par∣ticiples agree with their Substantives, being of the same sentence with them, in Person, Case, Gen∣der, and Number: vos omnes habiti, estis infidi, but a Pronoune Relative being of another sentence, may be of another Case, then the Antecedent Substantive, which is to be supplyed therewith. aetaies quam nulla potest involvere Nubes for quam diem, and any Participle wherein a Relative is in∣cluded must have the antecedent substantive suppli∣ed Coguntur Superi, renuit mora nulla vocatos, Supply, Superos, and sometimes to avoid ambiguity, the Substantive is repeated with a Relative to cleare the sense. Laus est virtutis merces quam mercedem ventosi tan mmodo apetunt, and the Substantive is oft repeated without necessity, diem scito esse nul∣lam quo die pro s non agam. Sometimes the regent
Substantive is transferred from the principall sen∣tence and made the same Case with the Relative, changed to a Demonstrative by Antiptosis. Quam struo domum vestra erit And a Relative plurall con∣strued with a partitive Singular, may be changed from the Genitive, and made the same Case with it. Nubium flatus varii quibus alo sinduntur alio perrum unlur, or qui alius cas findit alius perrum∣pit, being Prolepsis. Sometimes the Relative is put in the Antecedents Case Greekwise, Aliquid corum scribe quoum for quae consuevisti. Sometimes the precedent Verb is to be supplyed therewith. L∣gm edicito quam tibi videtur, supply edicadam esse. Sometimes qui is used for qualis, and being plu∣rall, referring to an Antecedent Singular, the antecedent must be understood specifically, not in∣dividually. Eunuchum deperit quibus Reginae tantum utuntur. Qualis & quantus: being Relatives agree alwayes with the latter Substantive. Tales viros esse putas, qualis famina. Tanta tibi sides, quan∣ta opes. And such Relatives may be changed unto Adiectives with Comparative Adverbs, tam and quam, as tam optimum oleum quam acerbissia erit olea, for tale obeum qualis olea, Sol tantus, quanta onrus rota, or Sol tam magnus quam ota. Adiectives used Adverbially are englished after Verbs Active or Neuter, betokening quality, time, or posture. And answering to a precedent regent Substantive Oxoniam petit ibens & frequens, for libenter & frequenter. Oportet nos matuinos agere, for mane, saltat subrius, bit cubitum incnatus, incedit rectus, domit supinus. Distributives being plurall only are properly ioyned with regents that want the Singular: Sin∣guli proceres, binae literae, trna castrae. Pronounes par∣titive
have much affinity with Substantives, for as regents they require a concordance of finit Verbs in person and number, and of Adiectives in Case, Gender, Person and Number. Nullus superum sper∣netur inultus, supply with Superum numero, or consortio, where the principall regent being the Genitive plurall doth allwayes leave an im∣presse of its owne person and Gender in the partitive. The partitive being a Superlative placed be∣tween two Substantives of a continued significati∣on may agree with either of them, but more pro∣perly with the regent. Inedia frangitur Leo anima∣llum fortissimus, or fortissimum, or Animal fortissi∣mum, being then indefinite. The Genitive of the principall regent after Su∣perlatives may be changed to the Accusative with ante. Rosa ante alios stores suavissimus, or to the Accusative with inter, or to the Ablative with e. de. ex. after any partitive, Natu maximus vestrum inter vos e. or de vobis, Manuum, or e manibus, or inter ma∣nus dextra est fortior, Zonarum, de Zonis, or inter Zonas media. Hoc operum mihi crede turum, or ex operibus, or inter opera. Ego fratrum, or e fratribus superstes, nigra Lanarum coloribus inepta, Craesus divi∣tum, uus, solus, or such like being Ellipticall. Other instances are Graecismes. Degeneres canum, im∣probi hominum, Sociorum opportuni, acer equorum, used for Superlatives. The Partitive Superlatives may refer to diverse or contrary kindes. Sic ego sum rerum non ultima Sexte tuarum, rerum omnium mors est extremum, bona existimatio est omnium prima, hominum est malorum optimus bonorum pessimus. And sometimes the re∣gent is repeated with the Partitive, as the Antece∣dent
with the Relative, Oculorum dexter oculus cae∣cut. Lastly, the principall regent may be a Ge∣nitive singular being a Collective. Pompeii sangui∣nis unus, uventutis pessimus. The same Pronouns desisting to be Partitives agree with their Substantives, in all four affections like other Adiectives, Ʋnus hostis, alter amious est, utrunque spenis. Substantives Greek-wise are used for Adiectives being no Appositions. Dat marem strepitum, for masculum, habet heroas sensus, amat iuvenes ocos, Ro∣mula tellus. Qum populum late regem cognevi∣mus. Any Adiective Neutrall in either of both num∣bers, may be put Substantively, quiddam, negotium verbum, or Chrema being understood, varium & mutabile semper faemina, and such may be Substan∣tives to any other Adiectives, as mala sunt ferenda, but more commonly the Pronouns. Omne rarum charum paua his similia, and such may be under∣stood with Participles that forme the Preter tense of the Infinitive, nocet esse locutum, supply id. Lastly Pronouns of quantity being Neuters Sin∣gular, are usually construed with a Genitive of any Substantive, wherewith otherwise they should ac∣cord in all proper affections thereof like other Ad∣iectives. Minus tristitiae, extremum luctus, dimidium, or dplum pecuniae, plus doloris id noctis, &c. for minor tristitia, &c. And such a Genitive is some∣times Plurall, not only of Nounes that want the Singular, as istud divitiarum, but also of the regu∣lar, after Partitives, as tantum nummorum. Other examples imitating the same structure be Grae∣cismes, Opaca locorum, amara curarum, cuncta terra∣rum, abdita rerum, ardua montium. Lubrica vallium.
And such are these Genitives singular standing for Collectives. Telluris operta, belli acuta, famae in∣ania, fortunae ineerta. But omnia sunt hominum tenu pendentia filo, for humana omnia, is Enallago. Any word taken Technically will be an Aptote, and may be either put in Apposition with another Substantive, as Lactea nomen habet, or stand for a Substantive to an Adiective. Istud Anticomarita. So may Verbs stand for Aptote Substantives in the Indicative, non habemus salem quod in te est, In the Subjunctive aequum est ut suum cuique reddas, In the Infinitive: Suadere molestum est. Likewise Adverbs are used for Aptote Substantives. Nuper praeteritum mox futurum, nunc tantummodo nostrum est. But Ad∣verbs of quantitie standing for Partitives with a Genitive plurall, leave the concordance of Ad∣iectives in Gender and Number to the Genitive being the principall regent, as due thereto from themselves if they were variable, partim signorum erepta sunt, bombardarum displosae, plusquam quinqua∣ginta militum occisi, for quedam signa nonnullae bom∣bardae quinquaginta milites, by Enallage. Lastly, two Aptotes singular, as a Copulative require an Ad∣iective plurall, frigere & calere sunt contraria. Some Adiectives are set alone, the common Substantive being understood. Vescimur bubula, supply carne, Laborat tertiana, supply febri, perfunditu calida, supply, aqua, aeris centeni, supply, Nummi scribitur in duo decim, supply Tabulis, venit ex Tus∣cuano, supply, agro, docet togatam, supply comaedi∣. Pronominall and Participiall Adiectives do usually accord with a Genitive of the Primitive understood in the possessive, by Eunallage of the forme and Figure. And likewise the Relatives have often the same concordance with the former:
Accomodatissimum stomacho est lac caprium quae fronde vescuntur, mea nil refert qui sum innoxius, sua ipsius laude quantus erat, or sua ipsorum laude quanti, tua est unius, or solius culpa, nostra duorum, or pauco∣rum sententia quot quot adsumus, damnatur, vestra cu∣iusque plurium, or omnium spes quota suit, tota ce∣cidit, tunc tua defuncti molliter ossa cubent, nostros vi∣disti flentis ocells, by Enallage of Figure and Num∣ber. And if a Participle doth precede, the pos∣sessive should not follow but the Primitive, as ma∣ternae lugentis lachrymae, or lugentis matris lachrymae id suaserunt. The Concordance of Verbs Personall with Rects. A Verb Personall doth agree with a regent No∣minative, in Number and Person, as, Nemo semper sapit. And whereas some Tense in the Passive and Deponent voices, be formed by the Participle, The same must likewise accord with the Rect, in Case, Gender, Number and Person, as other Ad∣iectives. Litterae alihi honorandae nobi (cum illiberali∣ter aspernatae sunt. In such grecismes, as, Haec errata condonabitur. Nounes that seem to be the Rects are plaine Accusatives thus to be made en∣tire, Quantum ad haec errat a condonahitur. Any part of speech by Enallage may be made an Aptote, and as the Substantive to an Adjective, so likewise the Nominative to a Verb Personall, being com∣monly singular, as afore said. But Adverbs col∣lective or partitive construed with Genitives plu∣rall will govern Verbs plurall, as, Abunde fabula∣rum historiis admixtae sunt, for fabulae quam pluri∣rimae
Testium partim sunt oculati, partim auriti, for quidam testes. And the Verbs are alwayes plural when the principall regents betoken living things. Else if they signifie things inanimate, ioyned with Adverbs or Pronouns partitive, they will ad∣mit a Verb singular, as plurimum, or satis leporum & facetiarum omni sermone fusum est. Of two Rects singular copulated, or one Collective singular comeing before a Verb or Adiective plurall in Syllepsis and Synthesis. And of Verbs or Adiectives agreeing with the neerest Rects or Substantives, whether of divers, or of the same kindes, as parts of the whole in Zeugma and Prolepsis. The Rect being the first or second person singula or plurall is never expressed, but to notifie some distinct property, either in a common Act or passion resolvible to Pronouns of diversity, or to Coniunctions exceptive, both with Negatives. Quod ego in laude pono tu vertis vitio, for alter nul∣lus, nos seria quaerimus vos ludo indulgetis, for prae∣tere a nulli, or nemo nisi vos, or praeter vosipsos. Or in a singular Act or passion resolvible to a Pro∣noune demonstrative or individuall, or to a Su∣perlative Adverb absolute or Prepositionall, Nos colimur Domini Servi sordescitis ipsi, for nos soli, or vnici, so os paecipue, or prae alis. Otherwise the first and second person in both numbers are al∣wayes understood. Quid facis ignoro, nitimur in ve∣titum, discite iustitiam moniti. Likewise a Rect of the third person being a Relative, except qui, is understood after Adverbs coniunctive or disiunctive, or a Negative in place thereof. Niedula lucet, ac splendescit, friget vero, non calet. Sometimes the coniunctive Adverb is not expressed, but may be supplyed by a resolution of
the sentence. Voce faucibus elapsa, reverti nquit, or si vox faucibus elaberetur, nequit Reverti. Quas tibi do literas, raro displicent, is a figurative structure by Antiptosis. The Relative Qui must necessarily be supplyed with any Vocative after obliques of the second person, or any possessives derived thence to make the Syntax intire and perfect. Vestra Judices sen∣tentia stabit, for qui estis Judices; and by varia∣tion, vestra Judicum sententia stabit, or vestra Ju∣diciaria sententia. Te pater obsecro, for qui es pater, or by variation, te patrem oro, resolvible in the same manner to qui es pater, but not by necessity, as in the former, that being Ellipticall, this a per∣fect structure. Rects that betoken men are com∣monly understood, specially with est, fertur, ferunt, dicunt, aiunt, praedicaut, clamitant, tradunt, prohibent, and such others. The Rects are likewise understood with Verbs of exempt power instanced in their Etymologie, Saxa pluunt, signifying the Stones drop or sweat, is a Regular sentence, but saxa pluit, the Cloud doth shower Haile, is Ellipticall, where Nubes should be supplyed. The Verb Substantive is commonly understood, as, quot homines, tot sententiae, rari quip∣pe boni, mium, immane, quantus quantus, &c. Sometime a Verb Adiective is understood. Ego continuo mecum, supply cogitabam, recte tu quidem & vere supply loqueris, which is familiar in Dia∣logues. Such Verbs are likewise understood in Proverbs Sus Minervam, supply docet, Cantharus pillulam, sup∣ply sapit. By the Figure Apostopesis, Verbs are omitted, having sometimes a known sense of indignation.
Quos ego, supply puniam, or of derision, Tune illam cantando, supply antecellis. Sometimes a concealed sense either of obscenesse. Tu autem sed Hircum oles or of some other odiousnesse, Novimus & qui te, sup∣ply viderunt. And of other imperfect sentences accompanying Interiectionall Adverbs, it hath been spoken already in their Etymology. Lastly Genitives of some proper passion or affe∣ction ioyned with Accusatives of the person, be∣ing construed with the Verbs Impersonall, paeitet, taedet, miseret, pudet, piget, seem to take the place of Nominatives by Atiplosis, as, avaros impendii taedet, for impendium, else some Pronoune Demonstra∣tive is to be supplyed, with such as id, or tantum im∣pendit taedet. And the same will fitly answer to the Question what, a Charactaristicall note of Rects to Verbs and Substantive to Adjectives. And moreover such Genitives may be changed to Infinitives, the usuall Recs of all Impersonalls, as tanti laboris nos nil paenituit, or Nos nil paeni∣tuit tantum tolerasse laboem. In like manner is used Platonis mihi in mentem venit, supply, dictum, Civi∣tatis refert, supply bonum. Of Construction by consequence in Generall. The Genitive is construed alwayes with a for∣mer Substantive, and if it be not expressed, it must be supplyed by Elipsis: The Acquisitive may be construed with any part of speech, having a sense suitable thereunto. But the guid or leading word is Ellipticall being a Substantive with two Da∣tives after a Verb Substantive, or an Adiective
with a Gerundivall Dative, whereof in their proper places. Ablativals with many Accusatives are u∣sually construed with Prepositions, which if they be not expressed, are alwaies to bee supplyed with any Ablativals and with all Accusatives, being no suf∣ferers. All the Obliques being Ellipticall are likewi called Synecdochicall Cases, because they ∣ctually note that part wherein some proper  or affection doth reside, whereof particular  is given in the particular Syntax of every Ca Prepositions in the Compounds do often refer to their proper Cases, Oppido abuns transiit Rhenum, which are sometimes repeated with their Cases; Ad consilium accersunlur Jurisperiti cum legibus colla∣turi. And sometimes they are transferred from Compounds to their Cases, by the figure Tmesis, sub amplexus ibit amica tuos, for subibit. Moreover ex and prae in Compounds, have the force of ex∣tra and praeter, egreditur urbem, excedit modum, prae∣vertitur Hebrum. Derivatives are construed with the same Obli∣ques, as their Primitives, when they continue the same sense, not swerving thence. Epulum saluti sa∣tis commodule apparatur, or sat commoda, or quae sat commodet, optimus, or Optime ommum dixit, reliquis melior aut melius audit, propior, aut propius, aut proxime nobis aut a nobis, aut nos, aut ad nos sedet; whereof before in Adverbes, so Justitia est legibus obtemperatio, nil tibi hanc rem curatio est, domum re∣ditionis spe sublata, Catonis de hoc vitio sententia de∣cretum aut opinio stabit, Tuum hominis probi pectus perspexi.
Some Nounes in the same signification have sundry constructions, as pater mihi, or mei, or meus, doctissimus ominum, or ante, or inter omnes, or ex omnibus poeta dignus avis, or avorum, vacuus irae, or it a, or ab ira, sumus pares aut aequales nobis, or inter nos, stercus agro vel ad agrum utile, Murus trigin∣ta pedibus, pedes, or pedum longus. Some Nounes admit of various structures, but in various sen∣ses. Aer est omnium commune, where the Guide is put Substantively; or omnibus communis, where it is put Adjectively with relation; or communis in∣ter omnes, or nobis cum omnibus aliis: by vertue of Con most familiary used in composition to this last structure. In like sort Regum secundus, the Guide being Partitive, secundus Regi, or a Rege, being an Adiective of Diversity; So farti admissio idem est ac ipfum furtum, the Guide being construed with a Copulative: or idem furto, as an Adjective of likenesse, or idem cum furto, in a Comparative sense: So vir consilii alienus, for expers, ambitioni a∣lienus, for inhabilis, maiestate alienus, for vacuus, vir gravis paci, for molestus, gravis authoritate, for pol∣lens, similis tui; referring to internall qualities, si∣milis tibi, referring to externall parts. Some Verbes also in the same sense admit of divers structures, as dono impertio aspergo insterno induo exuo prohibeo in∣terdico, and such others are construed with Acu∣satives of the Person, and Ablativals of the thing▪ or Accusatives of the thing, and Acquisitives of the Person: dono te munere, or tibi munus, &c. O∣thers are construed with an Acquisitive or an Ac∣cusative, praestolo antecedo anteeo antesto attendo il∣ludo insulto tibi, or te, &c. So libido nobis, or nos incessit, morti, or mortem occubuit, tecto, or tectum sub∣iit,
eloquentiae, or ad eloquentiam hoc conducit. Others are construed with Acquisitives, or Ablativals, con∣sentio tibi, or tecum, dissentio tibi, or a te, acquiesco sententiae, or sententia. Others with other Cases, lo∣quor tibi, or ad te, admoneris errati, or erratum, or de errato, comparamur aliis, or cum aliis, or ad ali∣os, or inter alios, interest vestrum Judicum, or ve∣stra Judices, supersedeas exemplorum multitudini, or multitudine, or multitudinem. Others are construed with Acquisitives of the Person, or Accusatives of the Thing, medicor tibi morbido, or tuam morbum, condono peccanti, or peccatum, or condono te pecca∣tum. Tempero, moderor, with such other, having Rectes of the Adiunct are construed with the Ac∣quisitive, but having Rectes of the Subiect are con∣strued with the Accusative. Officium moderatur no∣stro consilio, but nos moderamur consilium officio non ex libidine, Pudor temperat nostrae orattoni, or nos tem∣peramus orationem pudore. Most Verbes with change of significations will vary in their Constructions: Accedo tibi, for assen∣tior te accedo, for adeo, abhorruit sceus, for odit perpetratum, abhorruit a scelere, for devitavit perpe∣trandum, ausculto tibi, for obedio ausculto te, for audio aemulor te. for imitor aemulor vobiscum, for certoae,-mulor malorum faelicitat, for invideo, Caveo tibi, for provideo, caveo te, for fugio, coveo ate, for metuo, Ca∣veo pignore, for securum facio, consulo tibi, for pros∣picio, consulo te, for consilium pet, consulo in Commu∣ne, for statuo, de commodis consulo, for moneo; and senatores consulunt put absolutely, contingit mihi, for accidit, contingo te, for ango, doleo tuam vicem, or de tuis rebus adversis, or ob res adversas, but do∣let mihi caput▪ the Verbe referring transitively, to
others miseries, but Intransitively to our owne. Do litteras tibi ut nuncio, do ad te ut amicum, socius deficit mihi, for deest, deficit me, for desti∣tuit, deficit a me, for desciscit, deficit ab adiu∣tore, for dissidet, deficit in hostem, for mutatur, alimento deficit herba, for caret, faeneror pe∣cuniam tibi Sc. usuram daturo, or abs te Sc. usuram recepturo, irae indulget, for non obstar, iram in∣dulget, for fovet, formido metuo timeo vobis, or de vobis ut amicis, formido vos ut hostes, or a vobis ut hostibus, impono tibi praestigiis ut vete∣rator, impono te humeris ut Baiulus, prospicio sa∣luti Sc. tuendae, prospicio periculum Sc. futurum, in me recipio, for promitto, me domum recipio, for confero, me stupentem recipio, for ad me redeo, refero tibi ut noscas, refero ad te ut decernas, re∣fero tuos mores, for imitor, nostra refert, for ad nos spectat, officio renunciat, for discedit, Praeto∣rem renuncio, for promulgo, vacat studijs, for operam dat, adineptias vacat, for otiatur, culpa vacat, for caret. And many others whereof be∣ore in the redundant formes of Verbs. The Construction of Genitives Regular or Ellipticall. The Genitive is alwayes construed with ano∣ther Substantive, which if it be expressed hath a Genitive in some sorte a cause thereof. But if it be understood, being usuall after Adiectivall Nouns or Verbs of passion, then the Genitive doth de∣note the cause of such affection, Ratione, or Causa, being to be supplyed therewith, as the former
Substantive. And some Genitives of Nounes that betoken a specificall place or time, have a more Generall known Appellative understood there∣with, whereof particular instances were given be∣fore in the properties of that Case. A Genitive of the person or thing construed with a Rect or oblique, may be changed to a Da∣tive, but more properly a Genitive of the person, as Patri domus, ecquid tibi causa doloris, exitio nautis est mare, mihi fascinat Agnos. Sunt oculis tene∣brae per tantum lumen abortae. Suo sibiiure abluntur amnes. In this last example, sihi is Pleonasticall, which is familiar to it, and also to mihi and tibi. Two Datives of the thing with Sum, or one of the Thing, and another of the Person, with do, duco, habeo, relinquo, tribuo, verto, venio, and such like are usually construed, both in Verse and Prose, otherwise the Dative of the person, with Substantives of other Cases, are more familiar in Poetry, and the same is ordinarily a Pronoune as in te following instances. Rex pius est Reipublicae ornamento: where may be noted that Sum, the Co∣pula like the Coniunctions doth never stand for guide, that office in such structure belonging to Author Instrumentum via, or causae understood El∣liptically, and thus supplyed. Rex pius est Author▪ aut causa ornamento, aut ornamenti Reipublicae Ar∣tes sunt Senectuti subsidio, aut Senectutis instrumen∣ta subsidii, aut subsidiaria instrumenta. But in stru∣cture with other Verbs, the Dative of the thing, doth referre unto the Verb, and the Dative of the person doth referre to the former Dative, as the latter of two Substantives, having the place of known Genitives. Virtutem bonis vitio vertunt im∣probi,
for bonorum vitio ne ipsis probro vitium duca∣tur, for ipsorum probro, altisque ludibrio habeantur, for aliorum ludibrio. Any Genitive being the latter of two Substan∣tives, or a Dative in place thereof, having no Epithet construed with it may be changed to an Adjective Possessive derived thence, signifying▪ Persons, Places, Times, Matter, Art, Sect, or some property, as Tuo hoc futurum est commodo, for tibi commodo, herba est hortensis, or horti, vestis Hye∣malis, or Hyemis, vas vitreum, or vitri, lex Gram∣matica, factio Romanensis opus mire artificiosum, for mirabilis artificii, for Genitives will admitte of such Epithites only as may be changed into Adverb with a Possessive. In property of speech, the Pronouns possessive meus tuus suus noster and vester, should be used with Nounes of affection, as, amor, odium, cura, neglectus, &c. when such affections are Transitive passing from the person. Otherwise the Genitives of the Primitives, mei tui sui nostri and vestri are more proper, when such affections are Passive, resting in the person, as, Tuo favet desiderio, for qui desideras, but tui favet desiderio, for qui desideraris: which Lawes are seldome observed in the Pronouns, and much lesse in other Possessives, or Primitives, whereas it would much clear the sense to be strict∣ly observed in both kindes. The Gerundivall Genitive hath sometimes construed with it a Genitive plural of such nouns as otherwise would be a Substantive thereunto be∣ing made a second future, as, licentia diripiendi Pomorum, for diripiendorum pomorum. A Dative of the person, is alwayes construed
with a Gerundivall Rect, as properly belonging to the second Future, whence the Gerunds are derived. Vigilandum est custodi, not Custodis. And it is commonly understood▪ being Pronominall, as, discendum est aut vapulandum, supply, vo∣bis. A Genitive of a Substantive joyned with an Epithet of eminency, for praise or dispraise, may be changed to an Ellipticall Ablative. Judex maximae integritatis, or maxima integritate, supply, affectus, imbutus, indutus, insignis, praeditus, &c. And both Cases may be changed by Hyppallage, Judex maximus integritatis, supply laude, or Dote, or maximus integritate, for pro integritate, so mu∣lier multae impudentiae, or multa impudenttae, supply, infamia deliquio, &c. Sometimes an Epithet is supplied by a Prono∣minall Rect of the Verb Substantive, referring to a remarkable antecedent, that hath full force thereof. Pater qua est indulgentia facile exoratur pr∣duellis in gratiam restitui nequit, eiuscemodi est mali∣tiae, which may thus be made intire structures, qua est indulgentia, supply, insignis, or pro qua est indul∣gentia, so eiusmodi est malitiae, supply, reatu, or pro eiuscemodi malitiae reatu, or culpa. The Genitives of proper names betokening per∣sons, are sometimes construed with former Sub∣stantives understood Elliptically being knowne Appellatives referring thereunto, as itur ad Vestae, supply, templum, Deiphobe Glauci, supply, Uxor filia sorer, serva, with such others. The Genitive is sometimes construed with a Primitive Elliptically understood in the Possessive Tua Magistri dogmata, for tui Magistri, whereof in
the concordance of continued Substantives. The Genitive of time is found Ellipticall, some∣time, but very seldome, abest bidui, supply, spa∣tio, militiae natus, Belli ccisus, supply, tempore. Pro∣per names of Townes or Citties, and sometimes of Ilands, being of the first or second Declensi∣on, and singular number, are Genitives Ellipti∣call, when ought is signified to be done, or hap∣pen either in them or at them. Strabo natus Cre∣tae, supply, insula, Gnosi, supply Urbe non Gortynae, supply, Oppido. And such are, humi, and do∣mi, being Appellatives, if the first be not an Ad∣verb, for it never admitteth any Epithet in such structure, as, Copora fundit humi, not humi gelidae. But Domi will admitt meae, tuae, suae, nostrae, ve∣steae, al enae, and none other, as, Non altenae ves∣cuntu, quam meae & patris Domi, not Domi paternae, supply, mensa, or sub tecto. Genitives of the Person construed after the Verb Substantive, and referring to a property whether externall of fortune, or internall of manners, are put ELLIPTICALLY, Some Substantive of a continued significati∣on being to be supplyed with them, so in the first kind, the Rect precedent should be repeated, as Ovis nigra est Melthoei, supply, Ovis. And in the se∣cond kind proprium may be supplyed. Or in stead thereof when it is spoken of ought that is good, of∣ficium, or if spoken of any thing that is evill, then, mos or consuetudo may be supplied. Pastoris est oves tondere, furis deglubere, supply, proprium, hominis est errare, supply Mos, Christiani est resipiscere, supply, officium, where may be noted, that mei, tui sui nostri vestri, The Genitives of Pronouns primi∣tive,
will not admit such structure, but must be changed to the possessives, meum, tuum, suum, nostrum, as, docere meum est, discere vestrum, supply, officium, And any of the former may be made a Possessive, as, Ovis Melibeta, tondere pastorale, errare humanum, supply, quiddam, or such like. Likewise refert interest, or in the same sense est will not ad∣mit any Genitive of Pronouns Primitive, but in∣stead thereof, an Ablative of the possessives is fa∣miliarly construed with them, causa or vice being to be supplyed. Tua judicis refert, supply, vice. And other Genitives either of the Person or thing will ioyne thereto in structure; Ut recte agant omnium est, ut boni regnent interest Reipublicae, where offici∣um, with the former, and bonum with the latter kind of Genitives should be supplied. Genitives of the measure construed with Nouns of quantity are Elliptical. Trabs sex pedum longa durum lata vnius crassa, supply, pro mensura, if the structure is not otherwise regular. Verbs of e∣steem value or concernment, as sum or fio stan∣ding for aestimor addico condico, sto, consto do distraho emo, redimo, mercor, veneo, vendo venundo, liceo licito, taxo, habeo, duco, pendo, puto, facio, consulo, and refert interest, or in the same sense with both, est, are construed with these Genitives of Substan∣tives, flocci, nauci, pili, teruncii, and assis nihili, or of Adiectives put Substantively, huius tanti, quan∣ti, with their Compounds, aequi, boni, pluris, mino∣ris, plurimi, maximi, and magni, parvi, with all which precio is understood Elliptically. Pluris est oculatus testis quam auritus, so tanti passim fit pecu∣nia, supply, pretio, which may be an Hypallage, for tant o pretii, or with supply of res, or quidda, for
a continued Substantive, it may be made, tanti pretii fit pecunia, supply res. Genitives of the crime or punishment are Ellipticall, being construed, either with Nouns that signifie Guilt or Inno∣cence, as, reus noxius conscius affiis immunis pu∣us insons, or Verbs of accusing, condemning, or acquitting, as accuso alligo arcsso arguo astringo cito convinco defero deprehendo increpo insimulo interrogo postulo damno condemno iudico teneor absolvo libero purgo with which crimine or paena are Ellipticall, as reus furti, conscius homicidii, purus sceleris, insons caedis, supply, crimine, so reus capitis, immunis verbe∣rum, supply, paena, accusaris periurii, supply, cri∣mine, damnaris dupli, absolveris peculatus, supply pae∣na, where may be noted that castigo condono corripio culpo excuso mulcto plecto punio reprehendo vitupero, are construed with Accusatives of the crime or punishment, as culpo discipuli oscitantiam, not Discipulum oscitantiae. Nouns or verbs betokening affections of the mind, as Remembrance, Care, Knowledge, Cer∣tainty, Boldnesse desire hop, or what is contra∣ry thereunto, are construed with Genitives El∣lipticall having ratione causa or gratia, understood with them, as praesagus mali, immemor sui, improvi∣dus Belli, indoctus ilae, dubius vri, fidens animi appetens vini cupidus aurisecurus armorum intrepi∣dus procellae laetus bonorum certus vincendi, or victo∣riae, so discruior mentis erubesco fortunae fastidio vestri vestrarumque ineptiarum fallor mentis gaudeo voti miror iustitiae indoluit successorum paternae ve∣retur irae miserescit infaelicis reum satagit suarum ob∣livistitur meritorum meminit iniuriarum, demum re∣cordaturus vindictae.
Likewise such Adiectivall Nounes or Verbs, as signifie Plenty, Power, Worthynesse, or the con∣trary, are construed with Genitives Ellipticall, as inanis vacuus, or expers irae, dives auri plenus a∣movis lactis abundans tutelae indiget operae paucus c∣pax artium compos voti inops mntis, impos rationis potitur voluptatum urbis, or homo indgnus avorum, Cura tuae virtulis digna, Immunis Blli fuit & liberri∣ma Legum Roma, these last examples be graecismes & mostly used by Poets. Moreover Nounes either of affections with Genitives being their fears, or of plenty, worth and power with Genitives, signi∣fying the parts affected, may both be reduced to a Genitive or Ablative of the property belonging to praise or dispraise by Hypallage, as vir anxius mentis, or anxiae mentis, or anxia mente, so multus ci∣bi or multi cibi, nullus fidei, or nullius fidei beaus oe∣rebri, or beati cerebri, infelix fortunae, or infaelivis for∣tunae, amplus nasi or ampli nasi, integer vitae, or in∣tegrae with such others. Lastly, Nouns of likenesse, property or com∣munity are construed also with Ellipticall Geni∣tives: instar habet meriti. Iambus Choraei par est, Domi∣ni similis vitium non Snectutis, proprium, sed etiam Juventus commune. All which like consors: soci∣us affinis Compes, with many more, may passe for Substantives, and as such admit of Datives in∣stead of Genitives, so tui studiosus mi necessartus suorum liberalis alienorum profusus vitiorum fugax, laborum patiens, alearum doctus, scelerum conscius, are construed with Genitives as the former, but such will not be changed to the Datives. And it may be noted that Nouns or Verbs, of Desire, hope, care, knowledge, may in place of Genitives
be construed with the Infinitive or other Moods reducible thence, as cupidus divitiarum itescere ditescendi, or u ditescat. And those of worthabi∣lity or boldnesse may in place thereof be constru∣ed with Accusatives, and the Preposition ad: Or with the Infinitive. Virgo tuae formae, or ad tuam for∣mam digna, nubere, or quae nubat tibi digna, so impar tui congressus, or ad tuum congressum, or tecum cougredi, or ad congrediendum, audax facinoris, or ad facinus, or ut faciat. Construction of the Acquisitive regular or Ellipticall. Nouns or Verbs signifying honour, favour, profit, pleasure, ease, yeeldance, obedience, trust, promise, performance, command, discovery, neer∣nesse, likenesse, or what is contrary thereunto, are construed regularly with Acquisitives of the thing or persons notifying the scope of such relation, Id prudentiae consentaneum, tibi maxime decet: wherenote that the Accusative after decet or opport do either precede an Infinitive expressed or understood, or otherwise is Ellipticall, as hath been instanced in that case. Nemini amicus, faves voluptatibus saluti noxiis, res adversae bonis prosunt iis non obsunt. In Which sense, iuvare laedere, and of∣fendere, are construed with Accusatives, so Supe∣rioribus supplicamus, authoritati alienae inter∣cedentes, tali nunquam supplices. In which sense, precor obtestor oro imploro obsecro quae∣so, are constiued with Accusatives. Ars alteri facilis & iucunda est, alteri displicet, quatenus ipsi difficilis, tibi fidus tuae probitati non diffido
nobis moriger iusso parebis, decretum nobis nun∣ciavit, nulli mandavit, ut vectigalia Caesari solverentur, pertinacia est constantiae vicina si∣milis propinqua finitima, vel saltem non con∣traria, hoc alienissimum est, or dissidet tuae arti & personae. Regular acquisiives are also construed with all compounds of Sum, except Possum: Or with other Verbs compounded with satis bene or male, or with any Verb compounded with prae, ad con sub super ante post ob in and inter, when such Praepositions do not referre to their proper cases, as if they were not compounded. Est and suppetit, for adest, and videor, for appareo, be con∣strued also with such Acquisitives velle suum cui∣que est, mihi rerum suppetit usus, tibi videris optimus. Acquisitives of the person, are commonly con∣strued with Verbs Active of taking away nummos abstulit eripuit exemit subtraxit furatus est mihi. Or of the thing with Verbs Neuter of forbearance, parcit vacat abstinet supersedet cessat cedit, or disce∣dit certamini. Participialls in bilis, and Participles in dus, are construed with Acquisitives only: nullo penetra∣bilis astro lucus erat. Visa mihi soror est visendaque denuo nulli. Other Moods of Verbs passive are construed with Acquisitives of the person, but ve∣ry seldome: Ego non intelligor lli. These Adjectives, par aptus utilis idoneus faci∣lis with their Compounds, and natus promptus paratus expeditns alacer ferox ardens vehemens, may by variation chang the Acquisitive to an Accusa∣tive with ad, or to an Infinitive, or any other Mod reducible thence, vir idoneus Bello, or ad Bellum,
Belligerare ut Belligeret, or ad Belligerandum. Ellipticall Acquisitives were noted in their proper places. Constructions of Abla∣tivalls regular and Ellipticall. Ablativalls are regularly construed with some Prepositions serving thereunto. And such are all Appellatives and proper Names of Countries, and commonly of Ilands signifying the place whence motions rise, or wherein or whereat they rest as, veniens ex ure discessit ab Italia, uxorem in Lemno ducturus. But proper Nouns of Townes and Cities be∣ing of the third Declension, or being pluralls only of the first or second Declension in the same signification as the former are Ellipticall Abla∣tivalls, and so are ruri or domo signifying from a place, not at or in it, domi hodie mansurus domo eras discedam est mihi far modicum, rure or ruri: such Ablativals ending anciently in i. as tempori and vesperi, rgnavit Amyclis Lacedaemone natus. Ablativalls of time are regular, whether it be articulate time answering to the Question when, de luce vigillat, sub nocte dormit, or be a continu∣at time, answering to the Question how long, pa∣cem pollicetur pro triginta diebus ab annis triginia na∣tus, but more commonly both are Ellipticall without Prepositions, and the articulate is more familiarly the Ablativall, but the continuate an Accusative. Ablativalls of the person construed with Verbs Passive in any Moods besides the Participle, are commonly regular, qui vult ab improbis laudari a
probis culpabitnr, and they are constantly such with the Neuter Passives, Vapulo, vento exulo sio, and the Compounds of it, benefit a Deo, or any imperso∣nall passive, Regnatur a multis, and mostly with, Verbs of asking receiving, or takeing away, as vemam oremus ab ipso, ab oraulo audivi ab hosti∣bus misere acceptus, e vita, or de medio tollitur, and with Nounes or Verbs of neernesse or distance: Nobiscum aequales, or collati, ab aliis discrepant, or snnt divesi, which three last may be changed to Acquisitives; id vitio assine dissidet pietati exuit mihi vestem. Ablatialls are sometimes, but seldome used re∣gularly, with Verbs or Nouns of plenty, or emp∣tinesse, Liber a metu vacat a negoiis: but they are commonly Ellipticall, as opibus abundat. And such Ablatives by variation may be made Rects, and the Rects Acquisitives, as opes illi abundant. Moreover such Ablativalls may be changed into Genitives, whereof before in that construction. But these Verbs emungo, fraudo, levo, orbo privo spolio viduo, are constant to Ellipticall Ablatives, without variation, and such are pluit, sanguine, carne, lacte, and captus, or cassus oculis. Ablativalls of Price are very seldome used re∣gularly as litterae pro nihilo habentur, but are usual∣ly found Ellipticall with Nounes or Verbs, as au∣ro venalis, carus obolo vilis asse obsonatus drachma. Likewise magno parvo vili paululo minimo nimio di∣midio duplo, with such are put Substantively, danda magno accepta parvo ducuntur. Ablativalls betokening particular crimes, or utroque alio altero nullo ambobus plurimis, referring to crimes, are used regularly with Nouns or Verbs,
as Uxorem accusavit de pudicitia & veneficio de am∣bobus, or de altero damnata est de rapina & homi∣cidio reus ageris; but other Ablatives of crimes or punishment, are commonly Ellipticall, and may be made Genitives, whereof before in that con∣struction. Ablatives with the Preposition de are construed with mereor, and ago ambigo celo certo cogito dico loquor glorior iudico qnaero statuo tracto, and such o∣ther. Or with Substantives having the same sense, as liber lis sermo sententia, &c. or with Nouns or Verbs of affection, and such may be changed to a Genitive instanced in that construction. Ablatives with e.de. or ex, are construed regu∣larly with Nouns of the Comparative or Superla∣tive degree being put partitively instanced al∣ready in their concordance. But when Ablatives betoken the measure of excesse, or the part ex∣ceeded with such Nouns or Verbs, they are Ellipticall caeteris multo doctior, ab iis virtute su∣peratur. And such are Ablatives of the measure after Nouns that betoken quantity, Liber tribus digitis crassus. And such is the Ablative in this example, It clamor caelo where tenus may be supplyed. And contrariwise a Pronominall Ablative is sometime to be supplyed with tenus. Est aliquod prodire tenus for eatenus, or hactenus. And otherwise Caelo may Greek wise be put for caelitus. Ablativalls of the integrall part or matter, be alwayes regular, homo constat ex animo & corpore, vas integrum ex auro, and sometimes of the effi∣cient with Verbs Neuter, prae timore siluit, but al∣wayes with the Passives: a patre diligimur. And
sometimes of the manner, cum luctu loquitur. And ordinarily the Gerundivall Ablatives, ex defen∣dendo quam ab accusando uberior gloria comparatur. Other Ablatives of the cause or instrument, or part affected, or of the manner, or such like ad∣junct, or circumstance are Ellipticall, being con∣strued with Nouns or Verbs. Natura parens im∣perio tyrannus quisque deterior est licentia mi∣les ense validus Consilium specie laerum offi∣cio durum eventu luctuosum aeger corpore sanus mente natione Britannus aetare provectus in∣genio tardus moribus severus nomine Grama∣ticus rebarbarus, vinces veritate digito com∣pesce labellum onusti crapula relevandi sunt abstinentia, mente, ac artibus contremescunt, tuo solius ductu nobis haec mala creantur; where may be noted that Ablatives of the cause or part may be resolved to the Rects, and of the manner to Adiectives or Adverbs, and of either kind, o∣therwise, as in the following instances; verilo∣quus qui, or quoniam verum loqueris vinces, or veri∣tas vincet digitus labellum compescat abstinentes cra∣pulam relevabunt, rem peregit mira celeritate, or ce∣lerrimus or celerrime, mens & artus sibi contremiscunt te solo duce, or quum tu duceres, or a te duce mala haec creantur; where the Ablative called absolute may admit a Preposition: Auro loquente pollebis, for siloquatur aurum, or pro auro lo∣quente. Concurrunt aegri audito medicum ve∣nisse, for ab adventus rumore, or quando ad∣ventus fama crebrescret, so ulceribus resecandis or dum secarentur, or de futura ulcerum lectio∣ne contristantur. Te convalituro, or post quam convalesces, or de tua valitudine gratulabimur
senecta aetate, or quamquam senesceret, or in se∣nectute literas didicit. Thus all such called ab∣latives absolute are Elliptical, but may admit of Prepositions with them: Ablatives of the same, or of a cognate signification construed with Verbs neuter, or with neutrall Deponents are al∣wayes Ellipticall. Vita vivit longissima recta ibat via sua fidunt sapientia morte moritur car∣ne vescitur officio fungitur viribus nititur, urbe, or urbis potitur seipso fruetur bonis laetatur sese dignatur honore, or se putat dignum cultu, or coli, pec unia tibi utendum est, or tibi usus, or opus est id solum emas non quo est opus sed quod necesse, where opus and necesse differ in sense and structure, but with acquisitives they ioyn in both, id minus mihi necesse, aut opus est. Ablatiues are Ellipticall construed with Verbs of forbidding, as arceo veto interdico prohibeo, or with Verbs of affecting, as prosequor afficio, praeditus imbutus, aqua interdico, amore prosequor; virtute praeditus literis imbutus. And such are Ablatives, construed with natus, prognatus, satus, cretus, crea∣tus, ortus editus, as nate Dea. And such are the Ablatives, mea, tua, sua, nostsa, vestra, construed with refert interest, and est whereof before in the structure of the Genitives. Constructions of Accusatives regular and Ellipticall. Nouns that imply some suffering, and bound a transient action are only regular Accusatives con∣strued with Verbs Active or Deponent, or with Verbs neuter, having a cognate signification with
such Accusatives, as voluptatem cepi, or voluptas me cepit, pacem ambiens litem sortior. These examples, dule canit horrendum sonat multa garrit bacchanalia vivit, are neuters put adverbially Greekwise, and seldome used save in Poetry. But the rest that follow are Nouns and Verbs of the same sense. viam vivit, iter currit sanguinem sitit nefas peccat aves ea vscuntur quae rapiunt pedibus mea bona uteris patria commoda potitur offi∣cium functus estfa ut amorem fruar allium olet paternam vocem sonat. All which ioyned with some Epithets, are more familiarly read in the Ablative, whereof before in that construction. But Hircum olet, hominem sonat, are Metonymies of the subject for the adiunct, and therefore cannot be made Abiatives till they are reduced to a cog∣nat sense, as Hici faeto olet, humana voce sonat And such are, pert su Ignaviam, for Ignvi sor∣dibus, so auri scrupulus argenti denos valet, for Denorum prcio. Some Verbs Active with an Accusative of the person admit another of the thing in a cognate signification to their owne, and such are, Induo doceo moneo hortor suadeo consulo celo taceo percontor postulo rogo flagito posco peto oro obsecro, as indo, or exuo te vestes, doceo te literas, id ipsum nos monuisti quod cogitaba∣mus, fames nos talia suafit multa vos hortabar amicos hanc rem consulam, id parentes celo vos sensum taceo hoc illos percontor pacem te pos∣cimus, te veniam oramus, vitae rationem vos postulo sententiam vos rogo alimenta vos pos∣co, whereof induo will change the Accusative of the person, to an Acquisitive, or of the thing,
to an Ablative, docoo, moneo, consulo, percontor, celo change the Accusative of the thing to an Ab∣lative with de, postulo, and the rest change the Ac∣cusative of the person, to an Ablative with ab. And all of them retaine the Accusative of the thing being made passive, which doth make it pro∣bable, such cases are Ellipticall, having ad circum iuxta secundum, or such like understood with them, because they do not determine a transient action, requisite to regular Accusatives, as aforesaid. Moreover the Accusatives of the thing being mostly Pronominalls, when they have not the same signification with the leading Verb must not be used otherwise then as they are warranted by good Authors in their practise or use thereof. These examples, Reges vos turba creavit, Te virum presta Tyrannidem latrocinium vocamus, ar Accusatives of continued, not of divers significa∣tions. Accusatives construed with Verbs or Adjectives of profit, likenesse, neernesse, inclination, or the contrary are construed regularly with ad the Pre∣position, and may be changed to the Infinitive, or to the Acquisitive instanced in that constructi∣on. Accusatives of Nouns Appellative, or proper names of Countries, and commonly of Islands, notifying the place, whereto a motion tendeth, are regularly construed with ad the Preposition. Profectus ad Galliam mox ad ur bem exinde ad forum se contulit. Denique ad Samum concessit. But pro∣per names of Townes and Cities in that significa∣tion are constantly Ellipticall. Athenas & Mega∣ra migravit. And sometimes proper names of
Ilands. Cyprum profectus est. And seldome of Countries, as, Italiam petijt, so proxime Hispani∣am, and such like have ad understood with them Elliptically. The Accusatives of Rus and Domus in both numbers are Ellipticall in the same sense, Nuper∣rime domos & rua sua redierunt. And such are names of Nations used for the Countrey, and of speciall actions used for the place, wherein they are done, both being Metonymies, the first of In∣habitants contained for the continent, in the last of adjunct acts for the place where they are acted. Mauros veniunt, for Mauritaniam, it inficias ex∣equias suppetias, or Cubitum venatum, and such like Supines. But Accusatives may be regular, if the motion reach not to the Town, but neare it, or the proper names of Townes have Epithets with them. Ad Capuam venit, for ante juxta, or prope, Hoc iter ad doctas proficisci cogor Athenas. Nounes that answer the question how far de∣termining the space or intervall of place indefi∣nitly like those that referre to particular places by the question whether are Ellipticall Accusatives after Verbs of motion, vix pedem aut unguem latum hinc discessit: And sometimes they are regular, per stadium Olympiae ingreditur Milo, surgit tres ar∣bor in ulnas. And sometimes they are Ablatives after Verbs that have no expresse mention of mo∣ving; abest hinc quingentis millibus passuum. And such are measures of length, breadth, or thick∣nesse, umbratres ulnas longa, which may be made Ablativalls, or Genitives Ellipticall instanced in those constructions. Nouns that betoken a continuall time, are
commonly regular Accusatives; per id tempus, intra sex annos. And sometimes are Ellipticall, puer id aetatis, majorem vitae partem infaelix. And sometimes they are made Ablatives, docuit nos quatuor annis. And very seldome Genitives in∣stanced in that structure. Nounes that betoken the part affected with a property or passion construed with Adjectives or Verbs, either Neuter or Passive will be Ellipti∣call Accusatives, being Graecismes. Os vocem∣que Deo similis sed caetera dispar, dolet caput, redimi∣tus tempora lauro. But latinewise, such Nounes will properly be made Ellipticall Ablatives in∣stanced in that structure. Of the due placing of Words in sentences. An orderly disposition of words in sentences doth require a foure fold circumspection. 1. That some sentences or parts of speech ac∣customed to certain places be not removed thence without good warrant. 2. That warrantable elegancies may be prefer∣red before vulgar postures. 3. That an Euphony be preserved in both. 4. That the perspicuity of sense be not impaired by any. 1. Of sentences and words designed to certaine places. 1, In prose the continued sentences, or Abla∣tives called the absolute, do commonly begin the periods. 2. Pronouns Relative, or conjunctive Adverbs,
do usually begin such sentences as are continued. 3. Adverbs of exciting, forbidding, shewing, or wishing, and any Interrogatives pronominall or adverbiall, being no Encliticalls should ordi∣narily begin the principall sentences. 4. Moreover in every sentence customarily Ad∣jectives are placed before their Substantives, the Antecedents before reciprocalls, all kinds of Ad∣verbs before the words whereto they should re∣ferre, excepting some notified in their proper pla∣ces; And finite Verbs are placed last, But in verse, all the former Rules will admit variations, being then authorised, when they are used with approved Poets, whose practise is the best guide therein. 2. Of Elegance in some postures swarving from the Vulgar. Verbs finite whether those called Impersonall, or the Neuters referring to sundry causes, will best beseem the first place, dedecet viros muliebriter rixari, vigilat Dominus & servi: deflorescit formae dignitas, aut morbo, aut vetustate. Some Adverbs are placed elegantly after the words which they do limit, mitigati admodum sunt eorum animi, post∣quam diu nimium disputassent, impense cnpiunt, sed consulunt parum, non succedit quod faciunt sedulo, futura prospicit longissime, so commonly the finall Polisyllables will smooth the sounds of sentences and make the Adjectives at last gratefull, nihil isthoc visum est molestius, quod ipse facit, non putat injustum, and specially when such have before
them some Parenthesis, parentum dilectio est (me judice) maxima, such are dissyllabicall Adjectives, specially Pronouns after Substantives of many syllables, inter oratores bonos raro convenit, facul∣tas nulla tibi dabitur, and the Genitive is hand∣somely seated between the Adjective and its Sub∣stantive, or a Preposition, and the case whereto it serveth, sagacissimus naturae inagator Aristoteles, omnes omnium charitates patria complectitur, ad illi∣us temporis incommoda hoc accessit. Proper naes being Polysyllables placed first grace the sen∣tence, else are disgraced, except an Epithet of praise or dispraise doth lead them. Neoptolemus cognominatur Achillis fillus, or Nobillissima Achillis proles Neoptolemus cognominatur, qui tyrocinium in Bello adolescentulus posuit, where the principall, not the continued sentence doth lead the rest. And if continued sentences be but short, the sub∣ject of the principall whereto they refer should lead them, Spiritus, qui densatur hymali frigore, in nebulam quasi concretus crnitur. Last Prose pla∣ced versewise, or verse placed prosewise will lose their elegance. 3. Of Euphony requisite in placing words. The good sound of words joyned in composi∣tion, are the best patterns of Euphony in words joyned by Apposition, with this caution, that letters sounding well being doubled between words compounded, have ill sounds between words appsed, wherefore the former may not u∣sually nd in the same letter, or in another of a cognate sound, with that which doth begin the
next word after. Nor in any wise may the same syllable end the former, and begin the next word after, for that hath neere Alliance unto stam∣mering. 2. The same word repeated, without a figure cannot sound well, and therefore it should be supplyed by a Relative or a Synonymy. 3. Homoteleutons, being figures should be used accordingly as rarities. 4. Sandy or loose words that will not conca∣tenat like untunable feet, ending every where with the words in verses, will make sentences have flat and jarring sounds. In fine, the advise of judicious eare in this Office wil be of singular steed. 4. Of cleering the sense of words in every posture. As the former Rules conduce thereto, so like∣wise it will much availe for perspicuity of sense in words. 1 To preserve in sentences a naturall order by placing the whole before the parts, and causes before effects, and the worthiest before lesse worthy; Omnis familia, parentes, liberi, servitia, in∣defessis laboribus victumquae ritan. 2. To shun the multiplying of Relatives, answring either to single or to sundry Antecedents, and in stead thereof, either to repeat such Antecedents, or to use Distributives, specially when the Antecedents are of the same Gender and number, as, Socordes ab ignavis discrepnt, deficiunt enim socordes prospi∣ciendo, ignavi fortiter agendo, h fortitudine, illi consilio carent. 3. To use Laconisme will conduce thereto, for
prolixe sentenees will tire the Auditors under∣standing and with all beget obscurity. 4. Lastly, to distinguish words by accents ac∣cording to the Rules thereof specified in their proper place, and to give all sentences proper points regulated before in the Rules of Art for writing. The FIGƲRES of ELOCUTION FIgures swarving from the common course, but having Authority from the most learned in the Latine tongue, do belong 1. Some to Elementary parts of words, being Letters and Syllables. 2. Some to intire words consisting either in their sense being Tropologicall, or in their Ety∣mology changing the parts of speech, and their affections. 3. Some to sentences having Anomalous Syn∣tax, all which are handled in their proper places. 4. Some to the whole speech beeing dressed up with artifice of Oratory called Elocution. Wherefore as Trops advance and quicken the sense of words, so the figures of Elocution heighten sentences for a subtile and secret ope∣ration upon mens Judgements and affections, ei∣ther 1. To perswade them to assent, or 2. To introduce a prejudice of their dissent, or 3. To
amuse them, and so to suspend their resolutions. The Schems or figures of Elocution, being ve∣ry numerous, may be reduced to five kinds, pro∣per to so many offices complying with the prin∣cipal seats of Oratory to wit. 1. Some being used exegetically to cleere the sense meet for the Narrative part. 2. Some used Apodictically fitting the seat of Arguments in Confirmations. 3. Some used Catasceastically mustring a number of Conjectures, where the weight of a sollid reason faileth peculiar to Amplifications. 4. Some used Analeptically, repeating words or sounds with Glosses to make things spoken of more heeded as more concerned suitable with a∣ny place where the matter is weighty, and the hearers dull. 5. Some Pathetically agreeing with any place requiring indignatoin or compassion, wrought by a previous passion in the oratour. And in each kinde the most usefull are selected, and the rest declined. Of Figures serving to Narrations. In the narrative part the office of a figure is ei∣ther, 1. To distribute the matter handled to its severall branches; so making way to remove what is unconcerned. And there to will conduce Me∣rismus, &c. or 2. To determine the question po∣sitively, whereto serve Brachyepia, &c.
Of distinguishing. Merismus doth orderly dispose the whole con∣troversie to sundry parts, of purpose, to insist up∣on the point concerned. Delatori lubentissime ig∣noscatur, aut ob mandatum coacto, aut ob gestatem querulo, aut ob pietatem spontaneo, sd malicioso, qui data, opera male agit, nemo bonus indulgeat. Palindro∣mia hath some affinity therewith, making diverse words of severall Relations answer orderly each unto the other. Pastor arator, eques, pavi, colui▪ superavi, Cras, rus, hostes, fronde ligone manu. 2. Pradiastole doth distinguish things that seemingly are like by cleere unlikelinesse. Virtutem fortuna premit, non obruit illam. Iniquum est pro astuto sapientem, pro audaci fortem pro illiberali frgalem haberi, iniquissimum vero sub∣dolos nuncupari prudentes, confidentes magnanimos, sordidissimos quosque bonae frugi viros, virtutes enim vitijs admixtae a potiori jure denominantur, vitia, ve∣ro ab virtutibus alienissima earum titulis non sunt dignanda. 3. Amphidiorthosis, used also to distinguish, doth preface to a future offence and therewith salve it. —horrida narro, Inculpanda tamen, quia pro re sermo paratur▪ Homunciones autboritate exutos hominem vincere est facinus, Civem incarcerare scelus, necare nefas, in crucem toilere ecquid est insolentius? Prob malum, quid dicm? Principem olli, jugulari, subsannari, Parricidio plus est, Theomachia est. 4. Aphorismus or Metanoia doth likewise recall a word and rectifie it.
Heu Cives, si forte licet vos dicere Cives. Haec est ultio sceleris, nisi forsan aequo durius loquor, nam sceleris est prohibitio, non ultio. 5. Anaclasis, Antimetabole Chiasmus Diallelon Enagonion used to the same office determine things with a difference from the vulgar sense. Qui sapiunt regnant, pax est opulentia regni. Cum senibus puer est, cum puerisque Senex. Aliorum sapientiae fortuna, aliorum fortunae sapien∣tia non suppeditat. Edendum ut vivas, non viven∣dum ut edas. 6. Antithesis, Enantiosis, Synrcists, notifie dif∣ferent events of different causes. Ille novo veterum vagus est errore locorum. Amicos parit obsequium, hostes veriloquium, do∣norum antehac profusos, postmodum egenos fore o∣portet. Alter dandobenignus, alter accipiendo astutus. Quam opportuna erat expugnantibus civitas, tam in∣expugnabiles erant civium animi. Ego plector, quod tu peccasti, nos meruimus, quae praemia vos repor∣atis. Of Defining. 1. Brachyepia, Characterismus, Enargia, Hypo∣typosis, will exactly describe as it were peece-meale persons, facts, time or place. Crine ruber, niger re, brevs pede lumine luscus, Venit hyems, teritur Sicyonia bacca traetis, Glande sues redeunt laeti, dant arbuta silvae. Amicitiae, consuetudnes, vicinitates, clientelae, ludi, festique dies, quid haberent voluptatis, carendo magis intellexi, quam perfruendo 2. Hypomone, or Paradoxon will decline the
vulgar opinion, and introduce some unexpected decision of the thing in hand. —Verus amicus Nec prece, nec pretio, sedenim virtute paratur. Scientiam habet, non ut sciatur quo quidnam le∣vius▪ aut inanius; non ut ipsam, vendat, quo nihil est vilius, sed quo in suam inspiciat vitam. 3. Antistasis, or Analepsis, will serve to the same office. Una salus victis, nullam sperare salutem. Perijssem, nisi perijssem. 2. Of Figures proper to confirmation. In Argumentative Topicks, Figures have re∣course to essentiall causes, specificall properties and necessary consequences, ranged for proof of what is propounded, whereto comply Aitiologia, &c. or for disproving of the contrary suitable with Antistrophe, &c. Of Prooving. 1. Aitiologia in some respect called also Apo∣phasis, doth confirme what was propounded by some concludent reasons. An mihi cantando victus non redderet illum, Quem mea carminibus meruisset fistula, caprum? Grassatori jure licet eripere vitam, qui eriperet a∣lienam. Apophonisma doth imply a reason for an∣swer to a supposed doubt, fac velis perficis. Lit∣terarum sunt radices amarae sed fructus dulces. 2. Synathroismus is a Series of causes concur∣ring to the same effect. Multa simul ab ultione lae∣sum
revocant, officium, consuetudo, tempus, existi∣matio periculum, religio, which with severall conjunctions set between them is called Polysyn∣theton, or without any such as in the former in∣stance is called Asyntheton or Dialysis, being much more elegant as noting each cause apart suffici∣ent. 3. Synonymia differeth from the former, noti∣fying not divers causes, but different circumstan∣ces of the same cause. Otium, quies, tranquillitas, pax demum adest inopinata, pugnavit, vicit, trium∣phavit. 4. Synoiciosis or Sysceuasis will elgantly ex∣presse how contrary causes may produce the same effects. Par meritum gratesve pares poenasve reposcit. 7. Illiberalis & profusus sunt aeque inopes, aeque infames, alter qui suisrebus uti nollet, alter qui suas res dissiparet, ideoque pari poena sunt afficiendi. Of disproving. 1. Antistrophe doth retort a reason used to dis∣prove what it should have proved. An quisquam perimit vivum, conditque peremptum! Festinusve fugit lethalem vindicis iram. Bella est haec accusatio, qua me litigij postulas, ea∣demque opera mihi litem intendis. 2. Prolepsis, Antiphora, or Procatasceue, do pre∣vent objections, stealing to a good esteem by a seeming ingenuity, labouring withall to avoid or abate a prejudice. — Scio me Danais e Gentibus unum. Testem produci vult adversarius, fateor nullum
affore, praeter suam ipsius conscientiam, commotus enim lachrymis, quod petebat dedi, solus, soli, sin haec ne∣gabit, vobis satisfactum esse de utriusque veritate o∣portet. And the reasons given are called Prosapo∣dosis. 3. Epitrope, doth neglect what is objected, as impertinent were it granted. J, sequere Italiam, ventis pete regna per undas. Esto Rex, Tyrannus, Sacrilegus, prae multis unum malumus. Profundat, perdat, pereat, nostra non interest. 4. Exuthenismus doth adde unto the former some scorne or sharp reproofe then called Epi∣plexis, or Epitimesis, or Schesis. Egregium facinus, miscebat graeca latinis. Indignum est Italos Trojam succendere flammis, Quid face Trojanos atra vim ferre Latinis? Dux vester bolliger at calamo, militat dolo, expug∣nat nummo. Egote armatis ejeci, non dejeci, una litera tantum latet facinus▪ 5. Alloiosis distinguishing between persons or their facts by different circumstances doth accor∣dingly excuse or aggravate crimes. Quod licuit ueris, licet aetatique senili? Aliud est vivere in aequa Civitate ubi lex vlet, aliud sub unius imperium devenire, ubi singularis po∣testas regnat, ilic lege fretos libertatis meminisse, hic unius potestati traditos quotidianam commentari subjectionem, opus est. Homicidium aliud est a furioso, aliud ab ebrioso per∣petratum illud condonatur, ut involuntarium, hoc ca∣pitale judicatur, ut voluntarium, eodem censu (cum ebrietate istius causa) numerandum, ebrius adhaec duplici tenetur crimine, scilicet ebrietatis & homici∣dij.
6. Anancaion hath the same office with the for∣mer, in preventing prejudices caused by necessity, nihil valuit pro fratre deprecatio, cum judicaret Tyrannus cujus crudelitas omnem naturae necessitudi∣nem extinguebat, verum enimvero quamvis auxi∣lium a fratris periculo violentia submovisset, quod potui, feci, nempe calamitatis particeps eram. 3. Of Figures meet for Amplifications. To the seat of amplification do belong figures that comply with conjecturall proofs by circumstan∣ces of time, place, persons, but specially of facts considered in the circumspection of their possibility, lawfullnesse, honour, profit, pleasure. 2. In their e∣stimate from authority of the wise, and practise of the best. 3. In their comparison with, or contrariety to other facts, of which sort are Auxesis, &c. 1 Auxesis doth extenuat, or else aggravate facts be they good or evill by their severall adjuncts. Templa Deum, feslique dies, sacra Concio furtum Nil prohibent, nedum remoatur Anathema dirum. Dum restituuntur ad integrum damnati, solvuntur vincti, redùcuntur exules, promoventur perduelles, rescinduntur leges, Ecquis Rempublicam ruere non in∣telligat? And the severall progresse of vertue or vice, doth give this figure the name of Exallage. 2. Dinosis doth specially expose the heynous∣nes and horror of vices. Haec una jus est stultitiae, ut nullus hominem, ejusmodi furoris, ut nullus fae∣minam, ejusmodi crudelitais, ut nullus ma∣trem appellet, quoe fuit uxor Gneri, Noverca fili filiae pellex 3. Icon or Homoiosis doth illustrate things by some similitude whih if eall and of fact, is call∣ed
Paradigma, if imaginary and feigned, is called Parabole. Qualis populea moerens Philomela sub umbra. Amissos queritur aetus. Orpheus in sylvis, inter Delphinas Arion. Quod natura tranquillum est, ventorum procellis, mare conturbatur, Talis est exercitus, ubi seditio concitatur; Qualis in mundo Phoenix redivivus, Ta∣lis imperio Aristides restitutus. 4. Epiphonema is a quick short inference from what was said before, intended for applause to all the rest. Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum. Scilicet aliam nollent libertatem, quam per mortem, such will handsomly close an Epigrame. 4. Of Figures repeating words or sounds. 1. Words are repeated sometimes together, if in the same sentence, called Epizeuxis, if in di∣vers called Anadiplosis; and this last continued called Climax. 2. Sometimes asunder, either in the beginning of diverse sentences, called Epanaphora, or in the end thereof called Epistrophe, or in both places called Symploce. 3. Sometimes in the beginning, and end of diverse simple Theses called Epanalepsis, or only in the end of Mixttheses called Epanodus. 2. Sounds are repeated by Paronomasia, Polyp∣toton, Homoioteleuton, Oxymeron.
Of Words repeated. 1. Epizeuxis, Diplosis, or Protrope doth repeat the same word together in the same sentence, with some additionall explanation put unto the latter; wherewith inquam may be supplyed. Ah Coridon Coridon quae te dementia ceit? Vos hortor socij, nunc nunc insurgite remis. Adeste, adeste sceleris ultrices. Likewise Dia∣cape, or Diastole inserting a word betwen, is ac∣counted a species of the former. Duc (age) duc ad nos. Excitate (si potestis) excitate ipsum ab inferis. 2. Anadiplosis, or Palinlogia doth repeat con∣tinuatly, the same word, but as of diverse sen∣tences closing the first, and beginning the next, and having otherwise the same modifications as the former, it is mostly used in Verse, or being more continued, is called Gradatio. Deiphobum vidi lacerum crudeliter ora, Ora manusque ambas. Hic tamen vivit, vivitlimmo in senatum venit. Imperator vivat, vivat & vincat, vincat salvusque redeat. 3. Climax doth sometimes differ from the former, that repeating alwaies together the same indi∣viduall word; but this repeating often, the same onely in the Originall, or inserting some other words between the same Numericals. Quod libet, idque licet, sibi, quod licet, id satis au∣dent, Quodque audent, saciunt, faciunt, quodcunque mo∣lestum.
Nos praestat inpia, diligentes, diligentia opulentos, opulentia protervos, protervia deinde inopes, in gyrum circumquaque versos. Epanaphora, or Epibole, doth repeat words asunder in the be∣ginning of divers Sentences. Hic gelidi fontes, hic mollia prata Licori, Hic nemus, hic toto tecum consumerer aevo. Ego quaestoribus intrminabar, ne stipendio sump∣tum facerent, Ego armentarijs patefaciendis obsta∣bam, Ego arma sferi prohibebam. And some use Synonymies instead of the same words repeated. Dolui clandestinum hostem intra muos impune va∣gari, aegre uli vestri omnium facilitatem unius fal∣lacia tentari, me commovit in accipienda injuria pluri∣morum laetitiam ostentari. Some range therewith Diaeresis, distributing as to the same, so to sundry Subjects severall properties Nocte leves stipulae inclius, nocte arida prata Tondentur, noctis lentus non deficit humor. Spumat aper, fluit unda fremi leo, sibilat anguis. Spirant venti, florent prata, frondesunt nemora, mi∣tescunt fructus. 5. Epistrophe doth contrariwise repeat the same word at the end of diverse sentences. —Gravis est Cantantibus umbra. Juniperi gravis umbra, nocent & frugibus um∣brae. Primo ad Belligerandum nos impulit Philippus, Denique calamitati nostrae succensuit Philippus. 6. Symploce doth comprehend both the former, repeating the same words, in the beginning and end of diverse sentences. Quam bene Caune tuo poteram nurus esse parenti. Quam bene Caune meo poteras Gener esse parenti.
Quis legem tulit? Rullus! Quis populum in tri∣bus distribuit? Rullus. Quis decem viros creavit? Rullus. Some call the same Coinotes. 7. Epanalepsis doth repeat sometimes one, but oftner many words that begin simple Theses at the end thereof, placeing between some forcing reasons that move thereto. Victus amore tui, cognato sanguine victus. hosphoreredde diem, quid gaudia nostra moraris, Caesare venturo, Phosphore redde diem. Huc pater O Lenaee, tuis hic omnia plena. Muneribus tibi pampineo gravidus Autumno flo∣ret ager, spumat plenis vindemia labris. Huc pater o Lenaee veni. Libentissime profiterer, vos esse homicidas, si fa∣ret integrum, libentissime profiterer. 8. Epanodus doth repeat at the close of periods (having mixt Theses) sometimes one, and some∣times two words of the last sentence returning to a particular account of such as are repeated. —Divellimur inde Iphitus & Pelias mecum, quorum Iphitus aevo Jam gravior. Crudelis mater magis, an puer improbus ille? Improbus ille puer, crude is tu quoque mater. Demophoon ventis & verba, & vela dedisti. Vela queror reditu, verba carere fide. Gratiam, qui refert, habet, et qui habet, in eo quo habet, refert.
Of sounds repeated. 9. Paronomasia in Nouns, and Paromoion in Verbs, will descant upon resemblance of words that sometimes have like sense, sometimes quite unlike, this called Antiphrasis that Ploce. Ille Chrysostomus potuit Chysostomus esse. Verba parant oneris tantum nil instar honoris. Liber ab erroribus parum liber veritatumque illi∣beralis, ut oremus, non ut aremus, instruit Philo∣sophia. Tantum amari affert amari, rudibus ferri color videtur rubidus. 10. Oxymeron doth notifie concurrent juncture of two contraries predominant in the subject: And it differeth from the former consisting of words having diverse both formes and figures but words here have alwayes the same sense op∣positly, and either one is derived from the other or both descend from one same Primitive. — Discors concordia faelibus apta est His ut quaeque pia est, hortatibus impia prima est. Neve foret scelerata, scelus fait— Cum ratione insaniunt. 11. Polyptoton doth figurat the speech when the same words in divers sentenses vary their affecti∣ons either proper or common. Hic pater, hujus opem poscas, huic justa refertor. Gratia, fac redames hunc toto pectore dignum. Cedere jussit aquam, jussaque cessit aqua. Pulchra est virtus, pulchrum est virtutem colere, pulchri sunt virtutis cultores, pulcherrime consu;latur virtuti colendae.
12. Homoitelenton accompanied with Ilocole closing short sentences with like sound are very plausible if they be not too common. Non est dives, qui absque modo utendi, aut fine cupiendi, nummos auget, nullos possidet, mulium e∣nim appetere egentis est indicium, sicut nihil pacere egestatis est initium. Aliud est benefacere, aliud injuriam non inferre▪ inde benevolentiam cuncilies, hinc odium vites. 5. Of Figures expressing or exciting passion`s. Passions figurate the speech either. 1. With some question of much concernment called Ero∣tema, or 2. With diverting the speech another way called Apostrophe. or 3. With personating somewhat in a meere imagery called Prosopopia. or 4. With consulting the present Auditors l∣led Anacoinosis. or 5. With the speakers e∣ration with him selfe called Aporia. o  with some wonder at an unexpected strangenesse called Ecphonesis. or 7. with seeming feare of prejudice called Aposiopesis. or 8. With indignation where no feare stoppeth, called Aganactesis. or 9. With execratious when rage hath freedome called Aria. or 10. With imploration of pitty when all other means do faile called Decsis. 1. Erotema doth prejudge the matter or ra∣ther out dare a contrary judgement. —Anulla putatis Dona carere dolis Danaum; sic notus Ulisses? Quis erat armorum sensus, quae tua mens oculi ma∣us? quis ardor ille, quid cupiebas. quid optabas.
2. Apostrophe doth by way of confidence in the cause appeale from the Judges present to the practise of most grave eminent persons, so in∣gaging the present judicature to assent for feare of dishonour in dissenting from such gravity; Te nunc allquor (Affricane) cujus nomen Civitati est splendori, nostra si audivisses crimina quanti penderes? Some call this Figure Cleticon, or Cataphora. And Metabasis, Metathesis, or Metastasis have some affinity therewith, being all used to digres∣sion. Prosopopia doth differ from the former, that speaking to persons absent, this speaking unto a∣ny thing, personated, as if they were rationall, and present, or otherwise making such things to speak. — Quae non mortalia pectora cogis Auri sacra fames— Hose mihi fructus, hunc fertilitatis honorem. Officijque refers, quod adunci vulnus aratri, Rastrorumque fero, totoque exerceor anno. Pijssima vitae dux Philosophia, nobis Clientibus tuis hac angustia consule tristissima. And it is called of some Mimesis, or Ethopoia. 4. Anacoinosis doth seem to take advise, but in∣tendeth to convince the Auditors that the cause is good, if it were their owne. Sit tua res eadem, quidnam rationis inires? Quem virum aut heroa putatis eximia Clius celebrare posse praeconia, quae nec poetarum carminibus, nec annalium monimentis, aut prudentum judicijs, pro meritis expendantur. Hccine mihimetillicita, vobis licere velletis? li∣bere loquimini.
5. Aporia is used when we reason with our selves consideratly about some doubtfull matter. Quid faciam! nolo sudare, rogare pudebit. En quid agam, rursusne procos irrisa priores Experiar — Both this last and former be species of Dialogis∣mus. 6. Ecphonesis doth break out at the strange∣nesse of some unwonted accident either good or evill. O pietas! O prisca fides, miranda virorum! Heus! etiam mensas consumimus, inquit Ioles. Ecquis non amentes Camillos, Curios, Fabios, pronun∣ciaret. 7. Aposiopesis and Paralipsis do sufficiently hint, what they professe to passe in silence, for avoiding danger, envy, or other brand of immodesty. Insidias taceo, velut ac tua surta, rapinas. Quid memorem portus, Lucrinoque addita claustra? Impari periculo ad judicium venimus, sed mihi quidem; nolo tamen quicquam ominosius proloqui. Protome hath neer affinity therewith. Ne nimis urgeam, ad me revertor. 8. Aganactesis lets loose the reines to passion where no feare doth bridle it. Cantando tu illum, aut unqua ni tibi fistula Cera. Juncta suit — Vos feram populi faeces: indesinenter feram? aut ferendo insolenliores efficiam. Quae malm dementia! 9. Ara, Catara, Diabole Adde Curses to raging furie. —pro talibus ausis Dij quibus est pietas grates persolvere dignas Curent.—
Sed non ante datum cingetis maenibus urbem, Quam vos dira fames, nostraeque injuria caedis, Ambesas subigat malis absumere mensas. Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo. 1. Deesis doth adjure some mercy by that which is accounted with men most sacred. Per superos, atque hoc Caelum, te posco favorem. Obsecramus pro patria, deorum sacris parentum monimentis, vestrorum libertate, vestro ipsorum ho∣nore, nos miseros quam primum metu liberate. The method of this Grammar, and how to make thereby good progresse in the Latine Tongue. 1. IT may be understood that common concern¦ments (equally belonging to this Grammar with the former made for English) are not heer repeated, but left to be remembred or learned thence. 2. Wherefore to begin with what is peculiar hereunto, it may be noted that the method of this Grammar is Syntheticall composing Ana∣lyticall Rules of Etymologie with results of Stru∣ctures framed thence. This composure is made for the reasons fol∣lowing. First, because the Syntax with the pro∣per signes of each affection, belonging to the parts of speech, are the specificall differences whereby such affections must be defined. 2. Next the placing of the Syntax in the same Rules with those severall affections are infallible
guides, whereby green wits, may with ease finde out the structure, which otherwise would perplex them. 3. Likewise the composure of both together, doth conferre unto compendiousnes, the only way to advance young Schollers being encourag∣ed to proceed when they have easie taskes. 4. Moreover it is necessary to abridge Gram∣mars, because they are to be oft repeated as the only means to gaine proficiency for childrens progresse is a product in very few of ingenuity and industry, but in most youths of a customary practise growing into an habit. 4. This Grammar so much as is printed in English letters with examples thereto belonging should be read twice or thrice within Book, and afterwards so oft without Book by young begin∣ners: who from thence forward should be made acquainted with the method and meaning of all the Rules, wherein the Masters constant dili∣gence will be necessary. And furthermore they should be made to read deliberatly the Annotati∣ons annexed to the Rules, as good helps to under∣stand them better, for both are needfull prepara∣tions to the reading of Latine Authors: 5. Leaness thus enabled to take lessons should be taught to expound and examine the same themselves, by few plaine rules as certain guids, for instance. 1. They should look out first the principall verbe. 2. Next they should search out the Rect or No∣minative, whereon that Verb and the rest depen. 3. Last, they should orderly dispose all cir∣cumstances, placeing the object after neuters,
the sufferer after Transitives, the agent after passives, and ranging with all the premisses such other respective limitations as belong thereto; ll which are discernable in the Latine, by the concordance or other structure, and in English by good sense in every sentence, the necessary se∣quell of true expositions, as in example. —Heu Divos temnere discant Ʋt moniti per vos mox omnes caede luetur. To scorn the Gods ah shall be purg'd with blood, That all men warn'd by you may learn for good. 6. Thus youth for ease may begin with Janua Linguarum, learning thence by heart a Latine and English sentence to be rendered without Book, first intire, and asunder as before; next word for word together, a Heu ah, temnere to scorne, Deos the Gods, luetur shall be purged, caede with blood, &c. So keeping close to the signes of all affecti∣ons, as good helps at the first assay to know them and their structure. Then without losse of time, they themselves, should give account of every word, both in their severall affections, and in their Syntax by Grammar Rules in the proper words thereof, as followeth. 7. Mox (by the part of Speech) an absolute Adverb (by forme) of time (by Figure) primitive by construction) as a circumstance referring unto Discant. Discant, a Verb adjectivall neuter of com∣pleat sense betokening to do primitive by proper affections) of the third conjugation and subjun∣ctive mood interpreting another principall Verb and present tense, speaking of the time now, but
with (may) a Potentiall signe shareth with a con∣tinued future, called the simple and the third per∣son spoken of and plurall number speaking of many it agreeth in Person and Number with the Rect omnes. Vos a Pronounce Demonstrative primitive of a finite quantity (by proper affections; irregular in Declension, the plurall number and Accusative Case having per a Prepositionall Adverb primi∣tive expressely serving thereunto, besides that it referreth as the agent or tearme whence to moni∣ti. Moniti, a Verb Passive of imperfect sense, ha∣ving reference to the Agents, derived from the Active moneo the Participle Mood and Preter tense, speaking of Time past, the second De∣clension. Rect plurall Masculine Gender by ter∣mination, agreeing with viri an Ellipticall Sub∣stantive answering to the Question who. Omnes, A Pronoune Demonstrative Colle∣ctive, of indefinite quantity, Primitive of the third Declension, a Rect plurall of the Common of two by termination, but Masculine by constru∣ction, agreeing likewise with the same viri un∣derstood. Ʋt a Conjunctive Adverb causall, Primitive, referring also unto discant. Caede a Noune Substantive Primitive of the third Declension, an Ablative singular feminine gender by the termination es, not increasing, con∣strued with luetur, as the cause, and of the same signification, therefore the Preposition is Ellip∣ticall. Luetur a verb adjectivall passive, derived from
the Active luo, and that from lavo syncopated, or it hath affinity therewith, the third Conjuga∣tion Indicative mood future tense speaking of the time to come with signe shall the third per∣son singular, agreeing with the Rect temnere. Divos a Noune Substantive derived of Deus the second Declension Accusative plurall and masculine gender by the termination us, it fol∣loweth the verbe transitive temnere. Temnere a verb Active transient to a sufferer for compleating the sense thereof, primitive the infinitive mood present tense by Enallage stan∣ding for Rect Substantive Aptote singular that goeth before luetur, and answereth to the questi∣on what. Heu an Interjectionall adverb of sorrow primi∣tive, and a circumstance belonging to luetur. 8. It may be noted, that words which end in exposition must begin at examination, in a re∣trograde course, for usually the word following doth referre to former guide, saving that it is a property of Interrogatives Relatives conjun∣ctive and prepositionall adverbs to precede in∣exposition all subsequent guides. Likewise it must be remembred that beginners should be used con∣stantly to vary every Noune according to a pro∣per example in their own Declension, and every Verb according to their proper terminations, with Analagy to the same Conjugation. And for finding the Rect of Nouns and theme of verbs, youths may take directions, page 39. & 105. or advise with Dictionaries. 9. In this progresse to facillitate all the rest Learners should be made to repeat by parts all
the Grammar at least once every week, giving as aforesaid a just account of the method and meaning of all Rules therein, and moreover should be made to get by hart the first Dictiona∣ry in the Janua reading over the next often and deliberatly, so as they may be ready to give English for any Latine word therein; and con∣trarywise Latine for every English, which will furnish them with good abillity to expound all o∣ther Latine Authors, and besides to discourse in Latine, wheeof more followeth. 10. When such performances grow habituall, the proficients need not decline all variable words, or to account for common structures, but in both, to expedite the hardest, and to notifie in every Syntax the true reason of it, wherein they should be then well versed, and lastly to distin∣guish what is regular, and what is figurative, ei∣ther in Orthographie by a Metaplasmus, or in the sense of words by Tropologie, or in the parts of speech and their affections by Enallage; or in the structure by other Anomalies specified in the true reason of a right Syntax. Nor is it requisite that Learners be tyed to the signes of parts of speech, and their affections, when such and their Syntax are known without it; provided that such without impaire of the Au∣thourss meanin improve their owne Translations, whether made lesse or larger, as A rationibus dele∣gaus pro sua sibi pritia inter calculandum ibi ad∣esto▪ Let a well skilled Auditor help the at ac∣counts. Sus ad lyram. The bruit that is undisci∣plinable, will never attaine to make good Mu∣sick, and for their honour Schollers should be
elaborate to advance their mothers tongue; for e∣very language hath its idiomes and some elegan∣cies proper to it selfe. 12. The next taske in a due procedure, should be to strive for a luxuriance in the tongue, which the Schollers learne, and that is only gained by due variations of the sentences, a peculiar pro∣duct aymed at in this Grammar: First as of con∣cernment to finde out the proper structure when it is ambiguous. Next as of unavoidable necessity to prepare Phrases for Poeticall measures. Likewise as of ornament unto Prose by accesse of copiousnesse. Last, as of speciall use in the practick of all stru∣cture, when Masters to confirme their Schollers judgement, and to perpetuat the same in lasting memory, do appoint them to vary the choisest Phrases in their Lessons, so teaching them to use what is good, not (as it is properly tearmed) to make Latine, a base Coyne of their own stamp, no better then Barbarisme Solaecismes, or at best a Neoterisme, or Idiotisme of their own tongue. 13. When youths are habituated in variations, and for that purpose have stored their note books and memories with variety and choise of phra∣ses, they may be incouraged to constant exer∣cise of the same in familiar discourses among themselves, and no sooner should they be allow∣ed customarily to speak in Latine, then they are enabled to speak Latinly. At which advance Youths need no more to manage a common cal∣ling, for then they are fit for any office, saving of a perfect Orator, which is not to be aymed at by a vulgar wit, but by an heroick Genius to be
discerned by these ensuing arguments. 14. Can Schollers intend their learning all the Schoole time, that will suffice only for the precedent progresse. Can they abate their recreations, if need re∣quire some meales, that cometh towards it, but not home, being for the most part desultory. Do their studies aim at Honourable Eminen∣cies? Are they predominant to all other affections, whether of profit or pleasure? Will they admit of no vacations, but still in∣sinuate themselves, at all urgent intermissi∣ons? Are they insuperable in all obstructions? Do such Students resolve to attain their de∣signes or perish with them? If thus affected, they are in possibility to prove competent Orators, ei∣ther for God, as Churchmen, or for Princes as Embassadors, or for the people as their Advo∣cates, or for Schooles or Universities, as the Pro∣fessors. But who leap furthest, use first to stoop; And so must these begin with the lower step, and proceed by degrees and ordinary means. 15. Such then may first be exercised in short and easie simple Themes, for displaying the splen∣dor of any Vertue, or discovering the filth of any Vice, for which use Schollers should before hand by the direction of their Master, be well stored with common places gathered, and Alphabetical∣ly ranged for more readinesse: And as a supple∣ment when their stock proves canty, they may be tutoured to make use of Lycosthenes and other Au∣thors; borrowing thence some choyce Apoph∣thegmes
or similitudes the most proper Topicks usefull for beginners. 16. Learners may be taught therewith to make by turns some Epigrams, provided they be first taught the Lawes of Poetry, and with reading Poets bee well exercised to scan their Verses, and give account of feet and quantity, after which preparation they may be trained, first to make Adonicum and Almanium or Glyconium and Phe∣retratium, or Partheniacum, and Archilochium, which are the shortest Verses, and each couple a just proportion of Maeonium the chiefest of all the rest▪ And if children cannot thrive or speed at such assayes; To tune green witts they may be used to place words in Verses being before displa∣ced, as Quis aurum oblatum nisi inops mentis res∣puit. And when their phansies are possessed with a true Poeticall Idea, they may be exercised in simple Thems taken from Buclers Thesaurus, where they have for matter a competent variety of Poeticall Phrases prepared for Verses, and if they will not suffice they may be further guided to use sentences taken from Palingenius, Flores Poetarum or such other, (not ingrossing intire Verses, untill they are accstomed to a poeticall stile, for then they may be instructed with ease to change Comaedies into Verses, as choise mat∣ter for a satire, and well prepared for the forme, and with a new forme Apophthegms will afford convenient matter for other Epigrams. 17. After good proficiency in the former exer¦cises, Schollers may proceed to more elaborat tasks upon mixt Thems, whether indefinite, as an potior vit est caelestis; or else finite called Hy∣pothesis,
as an Philosopho potior est caelibatus; But in discretion the Master should propound no o∣ther Quaestion to his Schollers, then from their former reading, they may finde competent pre∣vious matter for their invention. Or what is therein wanting he should supply, either by sug∣gesting to them proper arguments, or by direct∣ing them to learned Authors that minister such upon the same subject. Else their Declamations must prove jejune to say no more. 18. Lastly, to declaime with credit, will require good forme aswell as matter and in both a figura∣tive Elocution. The last is epitomized in the next foregoing subject. And the first is summari∣ly handled by Apthonius, and in Farnabies, Judex Rhetor tus. But all three are ministred amply and magnificently by Causinus in his Book de E∣loquentia where the precepts need to meet with juncture of Diligence, Witt, and Memory, or cannot be converted into practise, and who are not content therewith, having abilities fit to be Suadelas, Miions may learne of the Master O∣rator, Cicero de oratore perfecto. But alas the melody of an Orpheus that was wont to allure both Birds and Beasts to sing in concordance, and dance compliance is now grown uselesse, because outvoyced by Drums and Guns, that stunned her Clients, & when they pause the whisling fluits do play, and pretend to Oracles, but prove Sirens. FINIS.
