L2717 12402555 61297
Die Lunae, 1. Feb. 1696. IT is Ordered by the Lords Spi∣ritual and Temporal in Parlia∣ment Assembled, that the Thanks of this House be given to the Lord Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, for his Sermon Preach'd on the 30th of January last before this House, in the Abbey-Church at Westminster; and he is hereby desired to Print and Publish the same. Matth. Johnson, Cler. Parl.
A SERMON Preach'd before the House of LORDS, AT THE Abbey-Church of St. Peter's-Westminster; ON Saturday the 30th of January, 1696/7. Being the Anniversary of the Death of King CHARLES I. of Glorious Memory. By the Right Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM, Lord Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield; Lord Almoner to His Majesty. LONDON, Printed for John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate-street, near the West End of St. Pauls, 1697.
The Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield's SERMON Preach'd before the House of LORDS.
A SERMON Preached before The House of LORDS, January the XXXth, 1696/7. ZECH. VII. 5. Speak unto all the People of the Land, and unto the Priests, saying, When ye Fasted and Mourned in the fifth and seventh Month, even those seventy years, did you at all Fast unto me, even to me? FOR the better understanding of these Words, it will be necessary to Consider the Occasion of them, which may be gathered from the three first Verses of this Chapter. God's People the Jews, within a few years before, had been Captives together at Babylon, and upon the taking of the City by Cyrus King of Persia, part of them, even as many as pleased, were returned with his Leave and Fa∣vour to Jerusalem; and there, upon the encouragement that he gave them, had begun to Rebuild their Tem∣ple, that was destroyed by King Nebucadnezzar. But besides those that were returned to Jerusalem, there
were others of them that remained yet at Babylon; I suppose chiefly such as had Estates there; tho' some of them might stay there upon other Occasions. Now af∣ter some twenty years, the Building of the Temple, which had been so long discontinued, being now carried on amain, and near finished, some Questions arose among those Jews at Babylon, whether they should still continue all those Fasts which had been hitherto observed by their whole Nation. The Question was more particularly concerning those Fasts of the Months Ab and Tisri, the fifth Month and seventh Month of their year; that of the fifth Month being for the Destruction of the Temple, that of the seventh Month, for the slaughter of Gedalia, and those others of the Remnant that staid with him in Ju∣dea after the Captivity. They observed two other Fasts, namely of the fourth Month, and of the tenth Month, whereof one was for the beginning of the Siege of Jerusalem, and the other was for the Burning of that City. These last they thought they had Reason to continue, because the City of Jerusalem was not yet built. But for those two Fasts of the fifth and seventh Month, they thought now that the Occasion was ceas'd, and therefore the Fasts should cease also. But they were not so sure of this, but that they thought best to send to Jerusalem for a Re∣solution of their doubt. There was the High-Priest, that was their ordinary Guide; and besides, at this time, there were Prophets, Haggai, and Zechary, that had Divinc Inspiration. These they sought to espe∣cially, and by one of them, the Prophet Zechary, they had this Answer from God. Speak to all the People of the Land, &c. This is but an Introduction to that Lesson from God, which follows in the ninth Verse, Execute
Iudgment, &c. From which words, consider'd together with these in my Text, the meaning of it appears to be plainly, as if he had said, Consider what kind of Fast it hath been, that you have now observed for so many years, for these seventy years that have past since the destruction of the Temple, and since the slaughter of Gedalia. Tho' you have all this while kept these Fasts, and did well in it, was it well to keep them so as you have done? Your Fasting hath been no more to me, than your eating and drinking hath been; when you did eat, and when you did drink, was is not to your selves? Verse 6. even so was your Fasting likewise, it was to your selves, and uot to me; for all the while you have liv'd at your own rate, without any change for the better. In plain words, God takes nothing for a Religious Fast, but that which is joyned with a real Reformation; that which leads to a Reformation of Life, and that which ends in such a Reformation; such a Fast God accepts, and no other. Of any other Fast he says, who required this at your hands? Esa. I. 12. And so in this Text, did you Fast to me, even to me? In the words thus explained, there are several things to be observed. As particularly, 1. That it hath been the way of God's People to Appoint and Observe Days of Fasting for any Pub∣lick Calamity. 2. That where the Calamity was such, as drew great and heavy Consequences after it, they continued their Fasting year after year, for many years. 3. That those Fasts are acceptable to God, and no other than those, which produce a real Reformation. First, It is clear from this Text, and from many others, that in the Ancient Church of God, they ap∣pointed
days of Fasting and Mourning, to humble their Souls before God, upon any publick Calamity. It appears to have been the will of God that they should make such Appointments on such Occasions, Joel II. 12. God calleth them to this, as a means for averting of his Judgments. Turn ye unto me with all your hearts, and with Fasting, and Weeping, and Mourn∣ing, &c. When without a call from God, Men have made such appointments for themselves, it appears that God hath accepted their good will in so doing. So graci∣ous was he, even to the Ninevites, Jonah III. 10. and therefore we cannot doubt he would accept the like Fasts of his own People. From this Instance of the Ninevite's Fast, it farther appears that this was no Jewish Rite; for they of Nineve had none but the Natural Religion, and whatsoever that teaches, is a Law to us Christians, as well as to Jews or Hea∣thens. Secondly, It is clear from this Text, that for such a Publick Calamity, as draws a train of woful Con∣sequences after it; as the first stroak requires a Publick Humiliation; so it may be very fit to repeat that Humiliation every year, as long as any of those Consequences endure. The burning of the Temple, and the destruction of that poor Remnant of God's Peo∣ple, were such publick Calamities, as deserv'd to be remembred, in a Fast, when the year came about; and they did so remember those things, in the Months in which they happened; the fifth Month, and the se∣venth Month, mentioned in my Text. But was that all? No, as oft as those Months returned (which could not be, without minding them of those things which
happened in those Months;) so oft they repeated those Fasts. And thus they did every Year, for Seventy Years together, in Memory of those great Calamities. Thus in former Times, before the Babylonian Cap∣tivity, when God's People had lost the best King that ever they had, King Josias, the only Man that stood between them and the heavy judgments of God; for his Death, they had a Fast, which they continued till the Captivity; and afterwards, for no less than a Hundred and Fifty Years: We know not how much longer; but we know it was above an Hundred and Fifty Years after, that Ezra writ the Second Book of Chronieles where Chap XXXV. 25. that Writer saith, they continue it to this Day; that is, till the Time of his Writing that History. But what is an Hundred and Fifty Years, to the continuance of these Fasts in my Text? The Fast of the Fifth Month and the Seventh, and also those of the Fourth and of the Tenth Month, all which you read of together, here Chap. VIII. 19. All these Fasts continued in the Jewish Church, till the Last Destruction of Jerusalem; which was near Six Hundred Years after. So long, God accepted what they did in observing them; as we may reasonably judge: Because, as we are sure they observed those Fasts in Christ's Time; for they do so still to this Day; so we see Christ did not reprove them for these Fasts; as he did for all the Jewish Corruptions and Superstitions; nor did they ever Tax him for breaking those Fasts, and therefore we have no reason to doubt but that he kept those Fasts with them. But after his Death, they kept them still, till the Destruction of Jerusalem,
as we gather from Josephus; and all this Time, the Apostles of Christ still kept these Fasts with them. After the Destruction of Jerusalem, they were no more the People of God: And therefore it matters not much what they did, as to any Au∣thority we can draw from it; but as to matter of History, we know that for these Sixteen Hundred Years since they are continued still in that Nation. And no doubt they will continue, still, in the Ob∣servation of these Fasts; till their gathering again after their Conversion to Christ. Then it will be fulfilled, which we read in the Eighth Chap. of this Prophecy. Where speaking of the Conversion of the Jews in the time of the Messias, the Prophet tells them Ver. 19. beforementioned; Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the se∣venth, and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of Judah, joy and gladness, and chearful feasts. He shews plainly, that this shall be after the Conver∣sion of the Jews, by what follows in the Two Last Verses of that Chapter. What I have said may give some satisfaction to them that have a Curiosity to know how long these Fasts here mentioned were to continue. But I confess that was beside my present intention. I intended only this, to shew that, in all Ages, it hath been the Practice of God's Church, to keep Yearly Days of fasting upon such sad occasions; and to continue those Fasts from Age to Age if occasion required. Which being considered, there needs no other Answer be given to them that ask a reason of our keeping this Yearly Solemnity. I do not
speak now, of them that are so wicked to justify the King's Murther; but of them that have the same sense of it that we have: and yet, because they do not love Fasting; or whatever the reason may be; they would not have the Memory of it, kept up in this manner. They say, What need is there of this for a thing that was done so long ago? It is now Forty Eight Years since that Blessed King was put to Death. And since that time, have we not seen the Restauration of the Royal Family? Was not our Fast, Then, turned literally into Festival? And do we not keep that Festival ever since? They think much to be obliged to this Festival so long after; but much more to Keep a Fast for that which, as to them, seems to be quite worn out of Memory. Now for Men that Talk at this rate, if they are Men of no Conscience, such are not to be sa∣tisfied. But for them that pretend to tender Conscien∣ces, they, if they are truly such, may and will be satisfied out of Scripture. In my Text they see the People of God, in Scripture-times, when they had kept Four such Fasts every Year, for Seventy Years together; that is a great deal more than Forty Eight; yet they were not weary of keep∣ing them. They had no Objection against Two of them; but for other Two of those Fasts, they had an Objection against them, much like one of those that I have now mentioned; Their Fast for the Destruction of the Temple, and that for the Unpeopling of the Land. Now, both these occa∣sions were ceas'd. The Temple was now Rebuild∣ing, and the People was returned from Captivity. Now, they had reason to think both these Fasts might be turned into Festivals; at least those Two
Fasts, they might think, were to be no longer continued. And that was the reason of their sending to know the Will of God by his Prophets. But what was the Will of God concerning this matter? Was it, that they should keep these Fasts no longer? No. But that they should keep them better; better, then they had done all this while. Had they kept them fifty Years, as they ought to have done; (there was just fifty Years from the Destruction of the Temple, till Cyrus his Reign,) then, in the Second Year of Cyrus there had been an end of their fasting. For there was an end of the Seventy Years, from the 4th of Jehoiakim, the time that God had prefixed for the Babylonian Captivity. In the First Year of Cyrus they returned from the Captivity; and in the Second the foundation of the Temple was laid. But then, they were so little reformed by all their fasting; that, for their Sins, the Building was stopt the next Year, as you may see in the 4th of Ezra, and the 10th Chapter of Daniel. The stop was near Twenty Years; in all which time they fasted on, and were never the better. They were content, as Haggai complains of them, that God's House should lie waste, while their own Houses were in Building, Hag. 1. 2, 4, 9. They had not a Zeal for Religion; No, nor had they any Justice, nor Charity for one another. They were every one scraping for himself what he could get. This was it that Haggai and Ze∣charith the Prophets then living both Preached and Writ to reprove. And while it was thus with God's People, though they kept their Fasts all this while, God asks them, For whose pleasure, and
to whose service they did it; have you fasted and mourned these seventy years to me, even unto me? By his Question, Was it to me that you fast∣ed? His meaning is, it was not to me. Your Fast was not such as I require and approve. That which God requires and accepts and ap∣proves, is described in the 9th and 10th Verses of this Chapter, in these words; Execute true judgment; Show mercy and compassion every man to his brother; oppress not the widow, the fatherless, the stranger and the poor; Let none of you imagine evil against his brother in his heart. These and such like Duties he requires, which, being all summed up together, amount to a National Reformation. A Publick National Reformation, is that which makes a Fast acceptable to God. This is the Third thing I have observed in my Text. As to God's People here spoken of, it is grant∣ed that they Fasted and Mourned; there was no want of that. They rather over did it that way. Where was the fault then? God tells them, it hath not been to me, even to me. If they would have God accept of their Fasts, they must do what God intended them for; even all that he describes in Ver. 9th and 10th of this Chapter, and all other things of that kind, which I sum up in the Word Reformation. To Discourse of this matter as it deserves, would require more time than you will willingly spare me; I shall therefore shew you as briefly as I can, these Three things, which are all that are necessary at this time. 1. What kind of Fasting and Mourning it was, that they used in the Jewish Church.
2. What the reason was that God would not accept it, would not take it as performed to himself. 3. What it was that he would have accepted of them, and will yet accept of us Christians. 1. For their Fasting and Mourning, it was such as consisted all in Bodily Acts: Such as one might perform to the full, and yet his Soul might be never the better for them. But they were Acts of great severity too, which shewed that they were much in earnest that performed them. Their fasting was, not only an abstaining from such and such Meats and Drinks, as the manner is with some Christians, that never eat and drink more deliclously than on such days. But theirs was a to∣tal Abstinence, especially on some of their Fasts, from all kind of sustenance whatever. They held themselves to it with all rigour imaginable. They imposed it not only on themselves, but on every li∣ving Creature about them. Not only Men and Wo∣men, but even the sucking Children; not only Hu∣mane Creatutes, but the very Beasts, the Herds, and the Flocks; all were kept from Meat and Drink, as if God would have been moved by their Mortifi∣cation. Perhaps the Ninevites might think so, when they made their Beasts keep their Fasts with them Jonah VII. 7. But the Jews made their sucking Children Fast, even by God's Prescription Joel 11. 6. Not that God himself could be moved; but their Parents might, by hearing the Cries of those innocent Creatures, to Cry also themselves, the more earnestly, in bewail∣ing their Sins before God. 2. Then for their Mourning, besides their Vocal Cries, they observed also all those Rites, which in
those Eastern Countries they used in their bitterest Afflictions. I will name you those Rites which are mentioned in Scripture, that you may see how severely they punished themselves with them: Such as rending of their Cloaths, putting Sackcloth on their flesh, girding it close to their Body; shaving themselves into Bald∣ness, sprinkling Ashes upon their Heads, and so hanging them down, and sitting desolate; beating their Breasts, and smiting on the Thigh; weeping Rivers of Tears, if they were so well stored; or in∣stead of it, pouring out Water before the Lord. And when they had tired themselves with these things, to make their Rest as unpleasant as their Labour, their way was, to spread Sackcloth on the ground, which they strowed with Dust and Ashes, and there they laid themselves down for all Night; sometimes for several Nights together; sleeping, only when they could wake no longer. A whole Day and Night, or whole Days and Nights together, thus spent in Fasting and Mourn∣ing, in all these dolorous Circumstances; one would think might have pass'd, for sufficient proof of sincere Mortification. And so it might in the Judgment of Men, that see only the outsides of Persons and things. But God that sees the Heart, saw through all this, into a world of Cheat and Hypocrisy. He saw that many that Fasted and Mourned in this manner, did really intend it only for Men and not for God. For many of them, God was not in all their thoughts; but Men they thought would see them, and believe them, and be so much the easier Prey to them.
As for those that did think of God, and had a sense of Religion, but did not live under the power of it; they could not but look upon God as being angry with them for their Sins; and therefore, being in fear of his displeasure, they took this to be the easiest way to pacify him. It is certainly much easier for a Wicked Man, for a day or two, now and then, to undergo the severest Penance, then to bring himself to live constantly in a course of Obedience to God. And therefore they that kept their fasts, as you have heard, they did as it were commute; and chose to give God, that Penance on their Fast-Days, rather than the Obedience of their whole Lives. They that were not so wise to think of this, yet did the same thing, without thinking; per∣haps first, for company with the others, to do like their Brethren; and afterwards out of custom, to do still as they used to do. This seems to have been the general way of that People, for which God severely expostulates with them, in several places of Scripture; but especially in Isa. LVIII. from v. 3. to v. 9. I leave them that are disposed, to look the Place. It comes to this in short, that their Fasting and Mourning, was all such as I have described. A meer Carnal Discipline, that had no inward Goodness in it self, nor made them ever the better, as they used it. And therefore it signified nothing to God's design, of bringing Men to be like him in Righteousness and Holiness of Life. Whether any Fasting can conduce to this pur∣pose, and what it is; that is the last thing to be Considered.
That there is a Fasting to God, tho' not such as they used, this was granted to the Jews in many Texts, And we that are taught to Worship God in Spirit and in Truth, and therefore have no reason to think our selves obliged to those Rigours that were neces∣sary for that Carnal and Ignorant People; yet we must not think to excuse our selves so, from the Duty of Fasting, for the strengthning of our Supplications to God upon great and extraordinary Occasions. Our Saviour, when he reproved the Hypocrisie of those that placed Religion in those outward shews that the Pharisees used in their Fastings; yet at the same time he gave Rules, how that Duty should be performed otherwise, Matth. VI. 16, 17, 18. And howsoever he exempted his Disciples from those Jewish Fasts, while he was with them, yet he declared, that when he was taken from them, they also should Fast, Matth. IX. 15. And so we find in the example of his Blessed Apo∣stle St. Paul, He reckons Fastings among the things which he endured, not only as a Christian, but as a Minister of God 2 Cor. VI. 5. And again, Chap. XI. 27. He seems to value him∣self by it, that he was in Fastings oft, as a thing wherein he out-did other Men, even his fellow Apo∣stles themselves. But what? did he place Religion in this? No, at all, he used it only as an Instrument of Re∣ligion. He knew very well, for he Teaches us, That Bodily Exercise profits little. 1 Tim. IV. 8. But
it is a useful help to that which profits most of all; even to Godliness which is Profitable to all things as there it followeth. And for Mourning, which is joyned with it in my Text, this also is necessary upon the account of Sin; otherwise we should have no occasion for it at all. The Angels that have no Sin, they have no occasion of Mourning; nor should we, if we could serve God on Earth (as we pray that we may,) as the Angels do in Heaven. In short, it is a Godly sorrow that works Re∣pentance, 2 Cor. VII. 9, 10. All other Sorrow, but for Sin, is good for nothing, but to break ones Heart, as it will, if one takes too much of it. Worldly sorrow worketh Death, faith the Apostle. But as he goes on, Godly sorrow works repentance, not to be repented of. Godly Sorrow is our Mourning to God in my Text. To God, Mourning for ours and other Mens sins against him: Lamenting, Abhorring, and Detesting them. This works a Resolution against them, which is the real beginning of Repentance. And this being followed, is a blessed amendment of Life. In order to that, Fasting also is profitable, not so much for the Weakning of the Body, as for the Strengthning of the Soul. Those things which the Soul hath chiefly to strug∣gle with, are the Appetites and Lusts, and Affections, and Imaginations; All which are seated in the Body, and the Soul hath need of help for the subduing of these.
As to the Appetites, Fasting plainly doth the work. You will find it by this days experience, if you Fast as you ought to do. You deny your Appetite what it would have. And denying it once, you will be the better able to deny it again. And the oftner you do this, the more you will be Master of your Appetites. The Affections and Lusts are to be subdued in like Manner. It was the way that St. Paul gained the Government over himself. He was in Fastings oft as I shewed you but now. And that way, he kept under his Body and brought it in subjection, as himself faith, 1 Cor. IX. 27. By this Exercise of denying our selves, we also learn to reject all evil Fancies and Imaginations. They are most troublesome things, if you hearken to them. There is no quiet, but by constant and sted∣fast rejecting them. For that indeed all these sensual Faculties are alike. It is only by feeding and humouring them, that we make them too strong for us. There is no way to Master them, but by denying them what they would be at. Get the Victory over them and keep it; which is not to be done but by constant exer∣cise; by such exercise, which is all a kind of Fasting, and this Fasting is a Principal part of it; I say, by this means, get the Victory over them and keep it. By this you set the Rational Soul in its Dominion. And that being enlightned by the Word of God; and
being assisted by his Grace, which Prayer, joyned with faithful endeavours, will certainly obtain; This will do the Work of God. The Soul will be Transform∣ed into his Image: It will be like him in Righteous∣ness and true Holiness. O blessed affliction, whatever it be, that hath set us a Fasting and Mourning to so good a Purpose! O joyful Trial that hath had this effect, to purge out all our Dross, and to restore us to the Image of God! O happy Rod that hath Chastised us into our Duty, and made us so wise that we shall need it no more! When we need it no more, we shall feel it no more. That is certain, in Gods way of dealing with Nations. For as the Jewish Church said in her Lamentations, God doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Chil∣dren of Men. All his Judgments upon Nations, when they are not to utter Destruction, they are designed to prevent it, if possible. And therein he is so Gracious, That, if one Judg∣ment will not do, he will send more, till they have their Effect, either to save them, or to fit them for Destruction; and then to make them In∣excusable. This is certainly true of any Nation, which God hath taken into his particular Care; As he did Israel of Old, and as he hath done us at this Day.
He hath shewed his Care of us, by so many In∣stances, both of Mercy, and Judgment, and even in Judgment still remembring Mercy; that I do not doubt to exemplifie all that I have said, in the va∣rious Turns of Gods Providence over us of this Na∣tion; beginning from that dreadful Stroke of God's hand, which hath occasioned our Meeting here to∣gether on this Day. It was a dreadful Stroke indeed, the Cutting off of that excellent King, of whom the World was not worthy. I think no Encomium too good for him; but that is not so much my business at this Time. I am now to Consider, whence this terrible Stroke came; and upon what Account it was given us, and how we have Profited by it since, after so many and many Fasts as we have kept on this oc∣casion. Whence it came? Is there any evil in the Land, and the Lord hath not done it? saith the Prophet? This evil was surely from the Lord. It was Gods Judgment upon this sinful Nation. A dreadful Judgment it was, such as the Jewish Church bewailed in her Lamentations, Lament. IV. 20. Speaking I suppose of King Zedekiah, a King not to be named with Our's the same day. He was one that did Evil in the sight of the Lord; and yet he was their King, and see how they lamented the Loss of him. When he
was fallen into his Enemies Hands, they la∣mented him in these words: The Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, was taken in their Pits, of whom we said, under his shadow we shall be safe. But when I speak of the Judgments of God, which must be for the Sins of a Nation; we are first to con∣sider what those Sins were, as well as we can do it at this distance of Time. They are now so far out of remembrance, that I would not call them to mind; but that I think I am obliged to it at this time, by the Duty of my Place. For in vain do we Fast and Mourn for this Judgment, without saying what the Occasion of it hath been. I mean only what National Sins we are to Confess before God; and what we are to amend, if they yet continue amongst us. I cannot pretend to give a very particular Account of our National Sins at that time. Nor dare I take upon me to Charge the meritorious Cause of that Judgment upon this or that sort of Men. Some indeed have been too lavish that way, in declaiming against the Sins of the Court, and of the Governing part of this Na∣tion; but they have done it with a wicked Design to blast the Memory of him that had the least share of them. I Beseech God it may not be laid to their Charge. But for the Sins of the Nation in General, I think it cannot be denied, they all sprung from a Surfeit
of the Blessings of God. Our Religion, our Liber∣ties, and our Properties, were all in such a flourish∣ing State, as made us the Envy of all other Nations round about us. And yet here at home, through the Practises of some Ambitious Men, every thing was then represented to the People quite contrary. They were even frighted out of their Wits, with false Cries of Tyranny and Popery. In a blind Belief whereof, Multitudes of the People run into Sects; and those inflamed them into a horrible Rebelli∣on; which the rest of the Nation, the Generality of them, did but too tamely comply with. And they that, according to their Duty, opposed this, yet too many even of them, so far provoked God with their Sins; that he thought fit to pu∣nish the whole Nation, by depriving it of all those Blessings at once, in suffering that Excellent King to be Murthered, as upon this day. I Charge it upon none at this time, but the Sins of the Nation; for it must be a National Sin, that bringeth down a National Judgment. And this Judgment was taken aright, by many devout People of the Church of England at that time: Who immediately humbled themselves under the afflicting hand of God; and kept a true Fast on this day, for many Years before there was any Law to Authorize it. All which time, the Authors of this Cursed Fact, having then the Government in their hands; gave
the whole Kingdom full occasion to see, what a woful Change they had made. But this must needs be said, to do right to those Usur∣pers; that they severely Corrected all Vices but those that were chiefly their own. Especially Drinking, Swearing, and Cursing, were punished more severely in those Times, than at any time before in our Memory. Adultery, was one while made a Capital Crime▪ and though I think none suffered the Punishment, yet I must needs say, it was not then so much in Fashion as it hath been since. Our Vices were then the more capable of being brought within Bounds, because their Nurse, Luxury, was so much disabled, by the Havock and Spoil that the Wars had made upon most of the Great Estates in the King∣dom. At last, when the Usurpers came to divide a∣mong themselves, that united all the rest of the Nation. All Enmities seemed to be forgotten at that time. The People being thus prepared for such a Mercy, God heard the Prayers of his poor affli∣cted Ones, and especially of them that had Fasted and Mourned in secret on this Day; and accord∣ing to their Prayers, God wonderfully brought about the Restauration of the Royal Family; upon which, This Fast was Enacted by Law; and now and ever since it hath been observed by the whole Nation.
It hath been so, now these Six and Thirty Years. But even, from the Beginning of that Time, might not God well say, Was it to me, even to me? That most Pious Learned Man, who was not the best In∣terpreter of Prophecies, yet was in this a true Pro∣phet himself. Dr. Hammond, at his Death, which was just before the King's Restauration, prosess'd, He was more afraid of the Ill Effects of that, than he was of any thing that had happened. He feared, that the Prosperous State of the Church, coming in so upon the sudden, before Men were prepared to receive it, would do the Church more hurt than all its Persecutions had done hitherto. Sure enough, that sudden Change so turned ma∣ny Mens Heads, that they were, as the Psalmist faith, like Men that Dream. If they had been Awake, they would have acted wiser than they did And for the generality of the Nation, it was won∣derful to see what an Alteration this made in them. The very Pomp of the King's coming in revived the Luxury of the Nation; which had been much Chastised and brought down in the Troublesome Times. The Universal Joy of it, set all People to the Drinking of Healths, which before was grown quite out of Fashion. The Corruption of Morals, in other kinds, more than I can Name, spread from the Court downwards into all Parts of the Nation. And those Immoralities tainted even Religion it self. Wheresoever they took, they disposed Men, ei∣ther to Atheism, or to Popery.
It was Popery indeed, that made its Advantage of all the other Horrible Things, and even of Athe∣ism it self; as it appeared, when Popery was come into the Government. Then, within a short Time, a profest Atheist, was look'd upon as next to be∣ing a good Catholick. He that was but profligate∣ly Vicious, was thought to be in a fair way to it. And no Man was accounted throughly fit for publick Trust, that would not do Things against his Con∣science. This was so notorious, That it did even turn a great many Mens Stomachs against Popery. They loathed the gross Immoralities which they saw were so fulsomly courted by it. Drinking and Swearing were in a manner yielded up to the Roman Catho∣licks. There was scarce any capital Crime that would not be pardoned to a Convert. The very Atheists, that had any sence of Honour, were ashamed to be thought of that Religion. For our Religion, They that had no Zeal for it before, were even fond of it when they saw it going away. The Dissenters themselves, (all but those that would have given up the 5th of Novem∣ber for the 30th of January, of them I have no∣thing to say;) but most of the rest of them were so ready to join with us in the common Danger; that tho' they did not wholly unite with us, yet they differed from us Amicably.
These were fair Dispositions for that Mercy which God had then for us in store. And he shewed it soon after, when we were come to the utmost Necessity. When he look'd, and saw there was none to help, then his own Arm brought Salvation to us. It was the hand of God, that raised us up a Deli∣verer, to save us from the very brink of Destruction. God brought us two Plants united together, out of that Royal Oak, that was cut down upon this Day; and he covered a third of them under the hollow of his Hand, which otherwise had been certainly snatched away from us. Now, upon such a Deliverance as this was, we might have believed that God had accepted our Fasts. Now we might have hoped he would have turned them into Festivals; That he would have delivered us from all our Enemies at once. And doubtless so he would, if we had Fasted to a National Reformation. There was nothing want∣ing but that. There wanted nothing on God's Part. He shewed his Inclinations towards us, by those wonderful Pre∣servations he hath given us. And that, not once or twice, but Year after Year. Such has been his con∣tinual Goodness towards us. But, such is our un∣thankfulness to him; that we have grown not bet∣ter, but worse, upon all the great Things that he hath done for us.
Who would have thought, but that upon that Miraculous Revolution, and the Wonderful Preser∣vations he has given us since, we should have been, if not altogether such as he would have us, yet at least much better than ever we had been before? Who would not have expected that we should have mended upon it exceedingly? But alas! How far are we from that? Are we not now worse than ever? Our Provocations higher than ever? Is not our Luxury more extravagant? Are not our Adul∣teries more Impudent? Our Drinking more Profli∣gate? Our Swearing and Cursing more Bold? In all respects. Do we not behave our selves as if we had been Delivered for these Things? How can we ex∣pect, but that God should now turn his Hand upon us? That he should strike us down lower, that he should wound us deeper, than ever? Alas! Did he not do it, in taking away our Blessed QUEEN from us? The Light of our Eyes, the Breath of our Nostrils, the very Joy of our Hearts! I can say no more; I am Astonished, as oft as I think of it. This! was a Blow at the Root. This may convince us, we have not yet Fasted to God We have not, nor never shall, till there be a National Reformation. Nothing else will please God, nothing else can save us, but this. Be Exhorted therefore in the Name of God, to set Heartily to this great and necessary Work, every one in his Place and Station. You that have none but your selves, have the less to do; but
you that have others under you, have the more to answer for; especially you whom God has advan∣ced into the highest Rank; you that fit in the great Council of the Nation; you, above all others, ought to consider, that not only your Honour and Interest, but the whole Nation lies at Stake, to be saved or lost by your Hands. We have too much Reason to fear, from what you have heard. Yet, blessed be God, we are not without Hope, if we are not wanting to our selves. God hath yet preserved to us a Gracious KING, now after that heavy Stroak of his Hand, in taking our blessed QUEEN from us. God hath given Him a Heart to supply to us what we have lost; so that in Him we have them both in great Measure. We have also yet remaining to us, another undoubt∣ed Plant of the Royal Stock; from whom we have one Princely Shoot, and may yet hope for more, if our sins do not hinder us of that great Blessing. We have (through the Goodness of God) a fair Prospect, toward a happy End of that hor∣rible War that lies upon us. God hath taken off Pharaoh's Chariot Wheels, he drives but slowly to what he did. He has been, for some Years, wholly upon the Defensive▪ And now, God be thanked, he thinks it his Interest to have Peace. We have nothing else to fear, but only our Sins and our Divisions. And our Divisions are the Fruit
of our Sins. Amend these, and trust in God, he will do every thing else for you. No one of us can do all; but let every one do his Part, in Reforming himself and his Family, and those that are under him. If all others will do the same with you, the Work is done, for which we have Fasted all this while. The Church and Nation are Safe, and we are Happy. But if others will not join with you in this Necessary Work, it is sad to think what is like to follow. However, you shall not lose your Labour, come what will, you shall find your Ac∣count by it. You shall, even in this Life, in such Measures as God sees best for you: And whatsoever you want here, it shall be made up to you, more abundantly, in Life Everlasting. FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and sold by John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate∣street. A Debate on the Justice and Piety of the Present Constitution: Under King William. In Two Parts. The First relating to the State: The Second to the Church. Between Eucheres a Conformist, and Dyscheres a Recusant. By Samuel Hill, Rector of Kilmington, Author of Solomon and Abiathar. The Guide of a Christian, directing him to such Things, as are, by him, to be Believed, Practised, and Hoped for. There are added at the end, Prayers to be used upon Several Occasions. Price 6 d. A Sermon Preach'd before the House of Lords, at the Abbey-Church of St. Peter's, Westminster, on Wednesday, the 11th of December, 1695. Being the Day appointed for a Solemn Fast and Humiliation. By the Right Reverend Father in God, James, Lord Bishop of Lincoln. A Sermon Preach'd before the House of Lords, at the Abbey-Church of St. Peter's Westminster, on Thursday, the 30th of January, 1695. being the Martyrdom of K. Charles I. By the Right Reverend Father in God, Humphrey Lord Bishop of Bangor. A Practical Discourse concerning the Redeeming of Time. By Edward Pelling, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Rector of Petworth in Sussex.
A Discourse concerning the Authority, Stile, and Perfection of the Books of the Old and New Testa∣ment; with a continued Illustration of several diffi∣cult Texts of Scripture throughout the whole Work. By John Edwards, Fellow of St. Jsohn's College in Cambridge. Octavo. Miscellany Essays. By Monsieur St. Evremont; with a Character by a Person of Honour here in Eng∣land. Continued by Mr. Dryden. In Two Volumes. Octavo. Eight Sermons Preached on Several Occasions. By Nathanael Whaley, Rector of Broughton in Northamp∣tonshire. The true Royal English School for his Majesty's Three Kingdoms; being a Catalogue of all the Words in the Bible. Together with a Praxis in Prose and Verses, and Variety of Pictures, all beginning with one Syllable, and proceeding by degrees to Eight, di∣vided and not divided; whereby all Persons, both Young and Old, of the meanest Abilities, may with little Help be able to read the whole Bible over di∣stincty, easily, and more speedily than in any other Method: With Directions to find out any Word. To∣gether with an Exposition on the Creed. By Tobias Ellis, late Minister of the Gospel. Octavo. Letters on several Subjects: By the late Pious Dr. Henry Moore: With several other Letters. To which is added, by the Publisher, Two Letters: One to the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's; and the other to the Reverend Mr. Bently: With other Discourses. Published by the Reverend Mr. Ellis▪ Octavo. An Answer to the Brief History of the Vnitarians, call'd also Socinians. By Will. Basset, late Rector of St. Swithin,s London. Octavo.
