L3348 R2922 13672212 101157
The Loyal Letany: FRom a new model'd Jesuit in a Scotch Bonnet, With a Mass under's sleeve and a Covenant on it From Irish Sedition blone out of French Sonnet, Libera nos Dom. From Conspiring at Joes and Caballing at Mews From Sr. Gutts holy Tub of Uncircumsized Jews From Gibbet and Halter which will be their dues. Lib. &c. From a Parliament man rak't cut of the Embers From Knights that haunt Counters and Lunatick Members, From Presbiters Januaries and Papist Novembers, Lib. &c. From hugging a Witch and consulting the Devil From Welch Repermanes which are something uncivil From the touch of a Scot to cure the Kings Evil. Lib. &c. From the mutinous Clamours of such as raise fears From those that wou'd set us together by the Ears Who still for the Shipwrack of Monarchy steers Lib. &c. From Rebellion wrapt up in an humble Petition From the crafty intregues of a Suttle Politition From a Geneva Divine and a Staffords Phisitian, Lib. &c. From serving great Charles as his Father before And disinheriting of York without why or wherefore And from such as Absolon has been or more. Lib. &c. From denying the King that which is his right From Cashiering of Members for faults very light From the troublesome Searches of a Monyless Knight. Lib. &c. From Libelling the Government and Actions of Kings From vindicating Sectaries in illegal things From encouraging Faction which Rebellion brings. Lib. &c. From murmering for sending the Parliament home From chosing Fanaticks to sit in their room That the actions of forty may not be our doom Lib. &c.
From late Irish Massacres by Papists done, From Seditious Cur Throats which thing is all one. From murthering the father and banishing the Son. Lib. &c. From putting three Towns to the Sword in Coole blood, From robbing and spoiling the Land for its good, From Cloaking their Crimes with a Warrant from God. Lib. &c. From shrouding all Villanies under the cause, From making us happy by giving Sword Laws, From trampling o'th Mitre and Crown with Applause. Lib. &c. From Hunting the King and abjuring his Race, From cleansers of Bung holes Usurping his place, From preachers in Tubbs that are void of all Grace. Lib. &c. From Vulcanes Treasons late sorg'd by the Fan, From starving of Mice to be Parliament man, From his Copper face that outface all things can. Lib. &c. From unbridling the Faction the King to dismount, From giving for each thing to Subjects account, From letting P's Dominere as they were wont. Lib. &c. From voating Lords useless and dangerously Ill, From hanging of B— up for dropping the Bill, From letting Fanaticks have too much their will. Lib. &c. From purging the House to obstruct our free choice From resolving the King to Oppose with one voice, From such that at mischief do daily rejoyce, Lib. &c. From all the Seditious that love not the King, From such as a Civill War once more would bring, Deliver us good Lord let each true Subject sing. Lib. &c. FINIS.
