L831 11849698 49913
CAM-HY Emperor of China & the Eastern Tartary Aged 41 years, Drawn when he was but 32. London Printed for Benj: Tooke and Sam Buckley in Fleetstreet.
MEMOIRS AND OBSERVATIONS Topographical, Physical, Mathematical, Mechanical, Natural, Civil, and Ecclesiastical. Made in a late JOURNEY Through the EMPIRE of CHINA, And Published in several Letters. Particularly upon the Chinese Pottery and Varnishing; the Silk and other Manufactures; the Pearl Fishing; the History of Plants and Animals. Description of their Cities and Publick Works; Number of People, their Language, Manners and Commerce; their Habits, Oeconomy, and Government. The Philosophy of Confucius. The State of Christianity, with many other Curious and Useful Remarks. By LOVIS LE COMPTE Jesuit, Confessor to the Dutchess of Burgundy, one of the Royal Mathe∣maticians, and lately Missionary into the Eastern Countries. Translated from the Paris Edition, and illustrated with Figures. London: Printed for Benj. Tooke at the Middle Temple Gate, and Sam. Buckley at the Dolphin over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1697.
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE English Translation, Directed in A LETTER to Sir G. M. Baronet, and W. M. Esquire, Members of Parliament. AMONG the various Productions of the Press none seem (in your Clear Judgments) more delightful and in∣structive, then the Relations of Voy∣ages and Travels; I mean those written by Men of Capacity and Sincerity, which lye in a small Compass; for most Books are either Romances, Novels, or Hypotheses; Panegy∣ricks, Satyrs, or Burlesques (the one too com∣monly taken for Truths, as the others for He∣roicks) which come forth either to ease an Hy∣pocondriack
Spleen; or else to flatter Ambitious Powers, to raise Private Fortunes, or favour Particular Factions: Those venemous Sorts of Vermine that infest Humane Societies, and spread such Poysons, as fe Atidotes can reach, un∣less fetch'd from abroad, which sometimes raise the Pule, and give the Blood a more generous Tincture; the World (like a Machine) being best understood, and manag'd, by taking it to pieces, viewing and comparing the several Parts together; from whence just: Impressions may be taken with the greatest and most perfect I∣dea's; so the Greek Master painted his Vlysses. The Knowledge of Forreign Countries seems to be the Noblest School for the enlarging and cultivating the Mind of Youth, who being ge∣nerally confin'd by Education and Customs at Home (which few ever live to Surmount and Conquer) to a narrow Sphere of Thought, are for the most part puff'd up, and choak'd for want of a free Air and a large Prospect; hence it is that so many become unfit for Publick Bu∣siness and Action, or even common Conversa∣tion, falling into Disorders upon little Contra∣dictions, and Starting at every Thing that lyes out of their way. Imperitum est Animal Homo, si circumscribatur Natalis Soli sui Fine, says Se∣neca. Such a One the Great Homer drew his Telemachus. The Globe is compar'd to a true Glass, in which may be seen the different Faces of Na∣ture with the several Arts and Mysteries of Go∣vernments.
Every Climate affords new Scenes, wherein a Man may learn that the Harmony of the Universe consists in a wonderful Variety, which (as the Emperor of Siam once repartee'd upon the Jesuits) seems to have been set out by the most glorious Creator and Governour of all Things for his own immortal Praise. Therefore tis in vain for the Collegium de propagandâ Fide, and the Roman Catholick Courts, to labour on Earth, or expect from Heaven a general Unifor∣mity in the Religion and Manners of Mankind, no more then in other Customs, Diets, Habits, and Commodities; However, their Missionaries ought not to be discourag'd in their Underta∣kings, for the Improvements of Geography, Na∣tural and Civil History, Commerce, &c. bring Honour and Profit sufficient to reward their Pains, in case their Adventures upon Religion turn to no Account. The same Immense Pow∣er always has, and ever will be worship'd in different Forms, under various Figures, and Idea's. It seems to be a General Error amongst us, that many wise Nations adore meer Stocks and Stones, without any respect to the Supream Divinity. Of all the Kingdoms of the Earth China is the most celebrated for Politeness and Civility, for Grandeur and Magnificence, for Arts and Inven∣tions; which the Romish Priests are so sensible of, that they pass there under the Characters of Physicians, Painters, Merchants, Astrologers, Me∣chanicians, &c. and are receiv'd as such in the Courts of Asia, which are too sine to suffer o∣penly
the propagation of a strange Religion; as some of the most pious Missionaries (over-heat∣ed with the Naked Truth) often find to their own Destruction; especially when the Brach∣mans, the Talapoins, and the Bonzes begin to grow Zealous of their Masquerades, and to see thro' their Disguises. But, you may perhaps demand (because you do not use to take Things upon meer Recom∣mendations without further Enquiry, and Exa∣mination) why the Booksellers should venture to print in English these Memoirs of China, see∣ing we have already so many Relations of that Country? To which they give this Answer, viz. That most of our Accounts of China are either fabulous, or Copies, and not comparable to this Original of theirs: Besides, that vast Em∣pire is so Fertile and Wonderful in all respects, that it will always furnish fresh Materials for Discoveries, let the Travellers be never so saga∣cious and industrious; few of whom will be found to deserve such a Character, unless Those lately sent at the French King's Expence, with a Stock of excellent Instruments, and with a sufficient Fund for making useful Observations; amongst these our Author was one of the Chief, and therefore the Reader may expect more from him, then what is already Extant in the print∣ed Works of his Predecessors.
Marco Paulo, Nicolo di Conti, Galeotto Pe∣reraSee Ramusio Vi∣aggi & Navigationi, Printed at Venice in 3 Vol. fol., Gaspar de Cruz, Ferdi∣nand Mendez Pinto, Gonzalez de Mendoza, Anthony de An∣drada, Manuell de Faria Sou∣sa, Pedro Cubero Sebastian, and some others of the Moresco Vein, run Whip and Spur into Knight Errantry, so familiar and even congenial to the Italian, but much more to the Spanish and Portuguese Writers, that a thousand Don Quixots with all Cervante's Satyr will never be able to reform them; yet a Critical Reader may glean many pretty things from Them. The Accounts of some Learned Jesuits (whose Order hath seen more of China then all the rest of the Europeans) seem to be more judicious and authentick; especially if we in∣dulge them a little in the Story of their Reli∣gion. Among these we ought to mention with respect the Ingenious Fathers, Ricci, Tri∣gault, Semedo, Martini, Rhodes, Boym, Grueber, Adam Schall (whose Letters are very considera∣ble) Father Greslon, Father Rougemont, with many other Missionaries of the Church of Rome, from whom Kircher took all his Mate∣rials; and Monsieur Thevenot in that part of his Collections relating to China, has only a∣bridg'd some of their Diaries and Journals. The Relation that Linschoten gives of China is not equal to the other Parts of Asia, which he himself saw; the same may be said of Man∣delslo.
The Dutch Impression of Nieuhof, and the Parisian of Magaillans, are deservedly most in esteem for their Chinese Observations, as well by their Exactness and Sincerity, as the choice of things they relate; the one being Secretary to a Solemn Embassy from Batavia to Pekin, and the other Resident above Thirty years in many of the Provinces of China, where he made it his business to correct the Errors, and supply the Defects of all the Writers before him; but he did not live to publish his own Work, which afterwards came forth by Order of Cardinal d'Estrees. As for our Country-man Ogilby, he only copy'd and compil'd without any discretion from Purchas, Kircher, and Nuhof; but of all the Copists, the Commentator upon Magaillans has shewn the best judgment, so that indeed he might pass for an Original Master-piece, ha∣ving sill'd up the Posthumous Fragments of that excellent Father with fidelity and accurate∣ness. There are great numbers of other Writers upon China among the Religious Missionaries, but they have rarely follow'd the Rule of Truth in their Relations of the State of Re∣ligion in that Kingdom (so difficult is it for Men o be honest in their own Trades and Cal∣lings) often forging false Miracles, multiply∣ing Conversions, and composing such Legends, as they thought most agreeable, without ever promulging the true Gospel, or propagating
the Catholick Faith; which hath been very in∣genuously own'd by a famous Bishop of Mala∣ga, by Mounsieur Arnaud, and many other wor∣thy Clergy-men of the Church of Rome, who confess that some Orders of their Communion have prepar'd and preach'd several Systems of Christianity according to the Climates they travell'd; So in China the subtle Iesuites have adapted their Model to the Philosophy of Confucius, seldom or never Teaching the Cru∣cifixion and Godhead of Christ, and frequent∣ly allowing the Worship of Pagods. Some of those Politick Apostles traffick wholly in Chinese Merchandize, others turn Mandarins, and become Ministers of See the Theatro Iesuitico, printed at Conimbre in Fol. Al∣so the Morale Pra∣tique des Peres Iesu∣ites in 8 Vol. 8o. par∣ticularly the second and third Parts. State, whereby they get Riches, In∣terest and Power, not only to drive away the rest of the Religious Orders, but all Chri∣stian Strangers whatsoever, that are not in the Secrets of their Empire. 'Tis computed that since the Year 1580, a∣bout 630 Jesuits, and 200 Priests of other Orders, have been sent out of several Parts of Christendom to China; half of which never landed in that Kingdom, and but very few of them ever return'd, being taken off either by Diseases, or intercepted by the Dutch in the Straits of Sundy, and Malaca, or else executed by the Civil Powers for disturbing the Publick Peace; however, I cannot but admire the in∣defatigable
defatigable Industry and Policy of the Church of Rome in the Schemes and Projects, she lays, for reducing the whole World under her Do∣minion; which may be a Lesson to the rest of Christendom to be more unanimous and crafty, if they intend to stand their ground against such a Church Militant, as commands all the Ca∣tholick Legions, and observes a Discipline fit for Conquest. But 'tis high time to come nearer the Letters here publish'd, the Author whereof was well prepar'd, and very willing to make Observati∣ons, Natural, Mechanical, Astronomical, and Civil, notwithstanding the Duty of his Reli∣gious Employment: He is pleas'd to begin his Journey where Father Tachart, and Mounsieur Loubere (whose Voyages from Brest to Siam have been already Translated into English) left off theirs, and so carries on the Itinerary to Pekin by way of Letters, rather then Diary. 'Tis well known the French Court hath been very curious of late (fas est & ab Hoste doceri) to improve Astronomy, Geography, Natural Hi∣story, Commerce, and indeed all such Arts and Sciences, (to the shame of some of their Neigh∣bour) as prove more serviceable to Humane Life, and Empire, then all the Scholastick Cob∣webs, Logical Quibbles, Metaphysical Phan∣tomes, or Poetick Chimes. Vox praetereà Nihil. Upon the first Foundation of this mighty French Monarchy, 'twas thought necessary to set up, and encourage divers sorts of Domestick
Manufactures, and to discourage all Forreign; to open Publick Schools for Navigation, For∣tification, and the other Parts of Mathematicks, to found and endow several Academies; and of late to establish Missions for the remote Quarters of the World: out of all these many able Persons have been dispatch'd away under Royal Pensions to the most distant places of the World, there to observe the Heavens; Air, Water, and Earth; comparing their several Remarks in the Academy, and Observatory at Paris; of which we have already many admi∣rable Collections extant in all Observations Phy∣siques & Mathema∣tiques envoyées de Si∣am. Avec les Reste∣xions de Messieurs de l`Academic, & Notes du Pere Gouye. Paris 1688. in 8▪. Observations pour set∣vir a l' Histire Natu∣relle, & a la Verfecti∣on de l' Astronoinie, & de la Geographie. En∣voyes des Indes & de la Chine. Avec les Reflexions, &c. Paris 1692. iń 4. Recucil d' Observa∣tions faites en plusieurs Voyages par Ordre de sa Majesté, &c. Paris 1693. in Fol. Volumes (some of great use to adjust the Longitude) from the Cape of Good Hope, the Coasts of Malabar, Cor∣mandel, Siant, Borneo, Mala∣ca, Pegu, Manille, Macao, Canton, Nimpo, Nanquin, Can∣cheu, Feuken, and Pekin; Be∣sides from the Isles of Cayenne, Panama, and more are expe∣cted from California, and the South Seas. The Persons generally sent are skilful in the Mathematicks, in the Art of Designing, in Na∣tural Philosophy, and are always well provi∣ded at the King's charge with Materials sit for
such sort of Observations; as Compasses, Nee∣dles, Loadstones, Dials, Telescopes, Micro∣scopes, Levels, Sextants, Quadrants, Pendu∣lums, Barometers, Thermoscopes, Hygrome∣ters, Burning, Glasses, Pencils, Anatomical In∣struments, Tools for Drawing, Surveying, Collecting, Preserving, &c. The Priesthood it self hath not thought it below the Dignity of their Sacred Function to accept sometimes of these Employments; and therefore 'tis that we have of late so many ex∣cellent Pieces in this kind from Men of Holy Orders, who have apply'd themselves to such sort of Studies, as will render them renown'd in the Registers of Arts and Sciences, as well as in those of Martyrs and Confessors. Father Thomas has been pleas'd to promise his own Observations, and other Memoirs up∣on the undescribed Countries of Corea, and that part of Tartary lying between the Chinese Wall, and Muscovy; thro' which Caravans are said to pass yearly between Mosco and Pekin in the space of four Months; for the Longitude of the Cities in China are found by many Astro∣nomical Observations, made there, and com∣par'd with those at the Parisian Observatory, not to be so far Eastward by many Degrees as commonly placed in our Globes and Charts. Father Verbiest, Father Grimaldi, Father Couplet, Pereira, Richad, Fontanay, Father Beze, Noel, Bouchet, Gerbillon, and some o∣ther Fathers Missionaries, have Treasures of
Observations and Draughts made by themselves and their Fellow Travellers in the Oriental Re∣gions; The Priests, employ'd of late years in the Missions, being of a higher Rate in Know∣ledge then formerly. The Performances of Mounsieur Richer, M. Varin, Des Hayes, and De Glos, in the Afri∣can and American Plantations, deserve our No∣tice; where Monsieur Surian (Physician at Marseilles) and Friar Plumiere have design'd and describ'd very elegantly the Vegetables and Animals; Neither is that noble Present to be pass'd by, which our Author made the Royal A∣cademy, of the Pictures of Chinese Plants from the Life, together with a large new Map; which I suppose to belong to Dr. Claudius, mention'd by Father Tachart in his first Voyage to Siam. Besides all these we may expect several curi∣ous and useful Remarks from the South Seas, of Father Moralez, Father Van-Hamme, Father Ruggi, and others; who are now settled upon the Ladrones, and the Isles of Solomon, with a Stock of necessary Instruments and other Ma∣terials, requisite in the making of Observati∣ons. An Account of Borneo is also promis'd by a Portuguese Mission. No less commendable is the late undertaking in France for the drawing a most exact Chart of that Kingdom from the Astronomical Ob∣servations of Signor Cassini, Monsieur de la Hire, Picard, and others, made in the Ports and in∣land
Parts; whereby it appears that the Limits of that Country have been extended much too far towards the West, South, and North. By these Ways and Means Lewis the XIV. will deserve to be honour'd, and even Conse∣crated in future Ages; such Colours will give him Life and Beauty to all Posterity, and per∣haps may shade the Deformities, which the Poet, paints in Clotar's Court. We in England ought not to despair but that Heroick Arthur, who justly vies with the Grand Monarch in the same of War, will also contend with him for the Glory and Empire of Learning, and dispute every Art and Science, as the Ground in Flan∣ders; which peradventure will equal, if not surpass, the praise of Arms. Then let the British Homer sing his Apotheosis with the same Charms, as in the Prince, and King. I am sure there is a vast Wit and Genius in our Ministry, capable of the greatest Enterprize, Nil desperandum — and tho' at present a fatal Stop is put to the Growth and Propagati∣on not only of Letters, but Manufactures a∣mongst us, and the Treasure of Christendom flows daily to the Banians and Genteés; yet a fresh Circulation and a new Life is in Nature, if we have but Spirit and Vertue to move in the right Channel. But 'tis time to close up this tedious Preface, which I thought necessary to spin out in the same Method that I formerly observ'd in my Introduction to the Voyages of Sir Iohn Narho∣rough,
Captain Wood, Tasman, and Marten; not out of any Vanity or Inclination for Scri∣bling, or of being styl'd an Author; nor out of expectation of Applause or Reward (my Station in the World being below Envy, and just above Contempt) but purely out of good Will and Complaisance to the Booksellers (to whom I wish a prosperous Sale) and that I might own my self to be one of your Admi∣rers, And Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant.
THE AUTHOR's PREFACE. I Know not of the two which to blame most, him that publishes hasty indigested Relations of his Travels, or the Reader that runs 'em over slightly and heedlesly. The Business of writing Voyages is not altogether so light a Task as most are apt to Fancy, it requires not only Wit and Iudgment, to manage it successfully, but likewise Sincerity, Exactness, and a simple Insi∣nuating Stile, and Learning besides; for as a Painter, to be a Master in his Art, ought to know the propriety and force of all sorts of Colours, so whoever undertakes a Description of the People, Arts and Sciences, and the Religions of the New World, must have a large Stock of Knowledge, and in a manner an Universal Genius. That's not all neither, he must have been an Eye-witness of most of the Actions and Things he reports, he must be skill'd in the Customs and Language of the
Inhabitants, he must have corresponded with those of the best fashion among them, and been frequently in the Conversation of their principal Officers: In a word, to speak with certainty and assurance of the Riches, Beauty, and Strenght of an Empire, he ought to take an actual Survey of the Multitude of its Subjects, the Number and Scituation of the Ci∣ties, and the Extent of its Provinces, and be cu∣rious in searching after all the remarkable Rarities in the Country. I confess indeed this is something more borious and expenve than to frequent the Company of the Virtuosi  home, or supinely tum∣ble over the History of the World by the fire-side, and yet after all their fatigue, Travellers of all Men are the least esteemed upon the score of their Writings. There's a set of jolly People that amuse themselves with what passes daily before their Eyes, and are little affected with News from remote Parts of the Globe. 'Tis grown a Maxim with others to reject all Forreign Stories for Fables; these value them∣selves upon their Incredulity, and are such strict Friends to Truth, that they never acknowledge any. Another sort again throw away a Book of this kind for a Miracle, or some extraordinary Accident, any thing out of the way (beyond their common pre∣judices) that they find it, as tho' Nature having exhausted all her Treasures upon our portion of Earth, could produce nothing uncommon elsewhere, or as tho' God's Power were more limited in the new Eastern Churches than among us. Some there are 100 that run directly counter to
these, who enquire after nothing but Wonders, sa∣tisfied only with what raises their Admiration, they think all that's Natural flat and insipid, and if they are not rouz'd up with astonishing Adventures, and continual Prodigies, drop aleep over the best penn'd Relation; now to humor such Creatures, one had need to cast the World into a new Figure, and give Mankind other shapes. 'Tis certain, so ma∣ny different Tastes are not all to be pleas'd; hence Travellers when they come home are as hard put to it to gain a patient hearing from their own Coun∣try-men, as they were at first going abroad to make themselves be understood by Strangers. But in∣deed they are not always worth hearing, the empti∣ness or irregularity of their Relations, or else the Vein of Passion and Prejudice running through the whole, that turns a History into Slander; but a∣bove all, the boldness wherewith they sham the most ridiculous Tales upon us for credible Truths, justly distaste Men of Sence, and render suspected the more prudent and sincere Authors. Tho' ordina∣rily it falls out that those Travellers who impose up∣on other People were first deceived themselves, how many are there, who do but just touch at a strange Country, and imagine to be immediately inform'd of all that belongs to it, they step ashore, and scour about like famish'd Men, greedily catching at all that comes in their way, and so cram their Iour∣nals with idle popular Chat: upon this occasion a Spaniard said pleasantly of a certain Author, tha instead of intiuling his Book, A Relation of all the Considerable Rarities in the New World,
should rather have called it, An Account of what the Rabble of both Indies, the Moors, Cafres, and Slaves faithfully reported to me, in those Conferences which I duly held with them. Others perhaps are more reserv'd, and then 'tis Ten to One they are naturally bent to magnifie every thing; and really when a Man has rambled five or six thousand Leagues, out of pure Curiosity, 'twould fret him after all to meet with nothing but what he has seen fifty times over in Europe, then without a special Caution one is apt to set too migh∣ty a Character and Esteem upon the Climate, the Customs and the Wit of the People, and what at the bottom is most barbarous becomes most ravish∣ing, now in writing to others what we admire be∣fore hand our selves, the Idea's are heightned in the Description, and in the end grow monstrous, and all this to tickle the Reader forsooth, or our own Vanity, with being first in a Relation. I have known some very scrupulous this way in ap∣pearance, but in effect no less wide of the Mark than their Neighbours, who stedfastly believe themselves honest in their Assertions, but most un∣lukily make an ill choice of Terms and Modes of Expression: To speak intelligibly, we read every day one or other that tell us of certain Kingdoms in the Indies, much after the rate that we talk of those in Europe, The Metropolitan Cities, the Counties, the Government of Frontier Places, the Palace, the Ministers of State, the Generals of Armies, and a hundred other Terms of that stamp, presently we think our selves at another Paris,
Versailles, or in our formidable Armies; and when all comes to all, this same Louvre of a Pa∣lace is neither better nor worse than a rambling ill contriv'd wooden Building; the Courtiers a Crew of sorry Wretches half naked; the Vice-Roys it may be have fifteen or twenty petty Villages under their Government, scattered up and down in the Woods, and so of the rest. Undoubtedly these Terms that represent such grand Idea's to us, are very impro∣perly used to signifie such pitiful Kingdoms, that have have almost nothing common with ours, but the Name, 'tis my opinion we ought to manage them warily and skilfully, lest we should lie in telling the Truth. But when the Country we treat of has in good earnest something noble and singular in it, we are still apter to miscarry, then we are not content barely to draw Esteem from our Rea∣ders, we covet their Admiration too; in this Case a Man must stand upon his guard against his own Evidence, and deal with it just as those modest Persons, who in their Iudgment retrench half the Merit their own Imagination suggests to 'em, lest they should over-value themselves. Vpon the whole, we ought not to be so violently prepossess'd against Relations of Voyages, as to put good and bad un∣der the same Condemnation; for as on one hand it were indiscreet to take up with all that come out without Choice, Examination, or Distinction; so on the other hand, 'tis as foolish an Affectation to reject indifferently the Accounts of Travellers whose Disinterest, Condition, and Capacity recommend their Credit. For my part, notwithstanding I
have constantly cherished a steddy affection for Truth, I durst not venture to put together an en∣tire Story of all that came to my knowledge du∣ring a long abode in the Empire of China, ap∣prehending lest the want of other Qualifications, necessary in such a Work, should hardly be atton'd for by that single Vertue; nevertheless, not know∣ing well how to contain my self altogether at my return from so far a Country, and being less able to forbear publishing the Progress of Religion in the East, I confess I have been extreamly delight∣ed in communicating my self on that Subject to se∣veral Persons of Quality, well affected to our Ho∣ly Faith, and being under an Obligation to render an Account of my Voyage to some, or in Obedience to the express Commands of others; or lastly to make a Return for the Civility and good Offices done me by the rest, I wrote the following Letters, being an Abridgment of those particular Conversa∣tions they have honoured me with, which comprehend in great part the present State of China, and I con∣ceived in publishing this Collection, not as a regu∣lar Vniversal Account of that vast Empire, but as Memoirs and Heads for a General History, they might not be unserviceable to those who might one time or other take up such a design; mean time I may well fear that the same things which seem'd tolerable in Discourse, will not pass so currantly up∣on a nearer vi; Faults are ever easiest disco∣vered in writing, and that loose Irregularity which makes up the pleasure of Conversation, will hard∣ly be forgiven here: But to conclude, a Man that
has endeavoured Ten years together to forget his Mother Tongue, and to load his Memory with barbarous Words and uncouth Ideas, whatever he may have lost another way, ought to be allowed the priviledge of writing ill, after we have cut the Line four or five times, methinks our Stile should not be canvast by the Criticks, and for ought I know Politeness in a Missionary would be less edi∣fying than Negligence.
THE Heads of the LETTERS in the first Part. Letter I. THE Missionaries Voyage from Siam to Pe∣kin. p. 1 II. The manner of their Reception by the Emperor of Chi∣na, and what they found remarkable in the City of Pe∣kin. 32 III. Of the Cities, Buildings, and most considerable Works in China. 54 IV. Of the Climate, Soil, Canals, Rivers, and Fruits of China. 92 V. A Character of the Chinese Nation, their Antiquity, Nobility, Habits and Manners. 119 VI. Of their Oeconomy and Magnificence. 150 VII. Of their Language, Characters, Books and Morals. 179 VIII. A particular Character of their Wit and Genius. 219 LETTERS in the Second Part. I. OF the Chinese Policy and Government. p.241 II. Of their Religion Ancient and Modern. 312 III. Of the Establishment and Progress of Christianity in China. 345 IV. The Methods used by the Missionaries to propagate the Gospel in China, and of the Zeal of the New Converts. 384 V. Of the Approbation and Allowance of the Christian Re∣ligion by a Publick Edict throughout the Empire of Chi∣na. 441 VI. A General Scheme of the Observations made by the Missionaries in the Indies and China. 482
ca cai cam can cao co cou coué coum cha chay cham chan chao ché chin chéou chï chiao chim chin cho choa chou chouaon chouê choui choun choum fa fam fan féou fi fo foe foi fou fouen foum guei haï ham han hao he hem hen heou hi hia hiai hiam hiao hie hien hieou him hin hio hiu hiué hiuen hioum hiun ho hao hoai hoam hoan hoé hoei hoen hou houm houon y ya yai yam ïao ie ien ieou im in ïo ïu ïué ïuen ïum ïun ke kem ken keou ki kia kiao kié kien kieou kim kin kio kiu kiué kieuen kioum kiun la laï lam lan lao le leam leao lem leou lh li lié lien lieou lim lin lio liu lo lou louï loum louan louon lun ma maï mam man mao mau me mem men meou mi miao mié mien mim min mo mou mouen moui moum mouon na naï nam nan nao nem ngaï ngan ngao ngué nguén ngeou ngo ni niam niau niao ni nien nieou nio nim niu no nou noui noum nouon nun o,ou pa paï pam pan pao pe peou pi piao pié pien pim pin po poi pou pouen poum pouon qua quoué quouai quouam quoueï quouen qouo qouon sa saï sam san sao sé sem sen seou si siam siao sié sien siéou sim sin sio siou siuè suien siun so sou siu soui su soum sun souon ta taï tam tan tao te tem teou ti tiao tie tien tieou tim to tou touï toum tun touon tsa tsaï tsam tsan tlao tle tlem tléou tsi tsiam tsiao tsié tsien tsieou tsim tsin tho thu thué uen thoum thou tso tsou tsu tsui tsoum tsin tsouon tcha tchaï tcham thcan tchao tché tchen tcheou tchi tchim tchin tcho tchoua tchouam tchu tchou tchouen tchouè tchoum tchun üa va vaï vam van ven ve vi vo von vou voum oum 328.                     Place this between Fol. 180 and 181.
THE Present State OF CHINA. A Letter to my Lord Pontchartrain, Se∣cretary of State to his most Chri∣stian Majesty. The Voyage from Siam to Pekin. My Lord, THO' Men generally take no little Pride in recounting their Travels, and that of China be the most entertaining to this part of the World, I could never yet be recon∣ciled to the thoughts of writing a Formal Account of my Voyage thither. That Subject indeed is worn so thread-bare that People have little Curiosity after New Relations; and indeed the World is sufficiently taken up with the Business of the Times, the Wars,
Negotiations, and divers Movements Europe is in at present: take 'em off from enquiring into the Affairs of Remote Countries. But you, my Lord, (whose Genius is as far extended as your Zeal, and who no less rejoyce at Victories ob∣tained by Christ's Doctrine over Idolatry, then at those by our Arms) will, I dare hope, give us his Ministers a patient Hearing. I have already had the ho∣nour to be heard by you on this Subject at spare hours, and I may say, that besides those Divine Helps which support us in all our Labours, nothing could more encourage our Industry then that Goodness with which you are pleased to countenance it. The Project of sending Missionaries skill'd in the Mathematicks, into the utmost parts of the World, was conceiv'd of that Glory for his Majesty's Reign, and that Advantage to our Religion, that his Mini∣sters have ever used their best Endeavours to carry it on. Monsieur Colbert not only brought the King to approve of the Design, but also himself gave Orders for the preparing of all necessary Instruments, for a considerable number of Mathematicians, who were all bound for China, some thro' Muscovy and Tartary, others thro' Syria and Persia, and the rest on Board the Vessels belonging to the East-India Company. His Death put some stop to this great Design, but the Marquis de Louvois no sooner succeeded him in the Super-intendency of Arts and Sciences, but he did by Order from his Majesty command our Su∣periours, to look out for Men, whose Zeal and Ca∣pacity, might enable them for such an Underta∣king; for whom he procured all sorts of Instru∣ments, and furnished them with Money, Letters of Commendation, and in short, all that might contri∣bute to the Success of the Enterprise. Monsieur De Seignelay judging that these new
Missions needed the support of the Admiralty, desi∣red they might be intrusted to his Care; but tho' Monsieur De Louvois gave up to him the Manage∣ment of them, yet did he not wholly abandon them, but largely and bountifully contributed to the ma∣king their Journey the shorter, thro' Poland, Russia, Siberia, and the greater Tartary to the Eastern Ocean. Thus, my Lord, has Providence led three great Men to forward so Noble a Work, the perfecting of which it has left to you. The several Reasons which induced them to it will, no doubt, be as prevalent with you, who are no less desirous of the Honour of Religion, the Glory of our King, and the Advan∣tage of his Subjects, and no less careful in your Em∣ployments, which respect both to Arts and Sciences and Trade and Navigation. Your Protection has hitherto been so Benevolent to those Zealous Missionaries, that they cannot doubt of a happy Success. But besides this Acknowledgment, they are bound to give you an exact Account of their Actions, their Travels, and the Use they have made of his Maje∣sty's Bounty. These Memoirs, my Lord, I offer to you on their behalf. The King, about Ten years since, commanded Six of his Subjects, Jesuits, for China, with the Cha∣racter of his Majesty's Mathematicians, that under cover of that Learning they might the easier insiu∣ate the Gospel. I was one of them, and set ai with the rest in the beginning of the Year 1685. in the same Ship on Board which was Monsieur Chau∣mont, sent by his Majesty on an Extraordinary Em∣bassy to the Court of Siam. Our Voyage thither was very fortunate, but the Sea∣son forbad our going farther, and we were detained there near a Twelve-month, till the time of year pro∣per for our Design.
The K. of Siam, a Pretender to Astrology, desired to be a Sharer in our Astronomical Observations. He ad∣mired above all our exactness in foretelling an Eclipse of the Moon, and from that time had thoughts of keep∣ing us at his Court. But having informed him what our Orders were, he consented that Four of us should depart for China, provided Father Tachard should re∣turn to France to request the King for more Mathe∣maticians, and that I the whilst should remain with him. Accordingly he went for Europe, and I continued at Siam, while the Fathers Fontaney, Gerbillon, De Vis∣delon, and Bouvet took Ship for Macao, a small City situate on the Point of an Island adjacent to China, where the Portugueze have a Fortress. Father Tachard arrived safe at Paris, with the Sia∣mite Ambassadors: But those who were failed for Chi∣na, were in a few days after their departure, surprised by a Tempest which put a stop to their Voyage; they were in a stout Vessel of Monsieur Constance's, but it was so terribly shattered, that in a little time it began to be leaky. The Shipwreck being inevitable, it was thought better to strand on the Shoar with some hopes of Life, then by Loosing up against the Wind to keep the Sea and Founder in a desperate Condition. So before Night they reached an unknown Land. The Ship often run upon Shoals, but did not split, and with much ado they got to the Leeward of an Island near Cssomet a Province of the Kingdom of Siam, bordering upon that of Camboja. The Captain then despaired of proceeding on his Voyage, being fallen under a Wind, which accord∣ing to the Season was like to keep the same Corner for several Months, and hindred him from doubling the Cape of Camboja, the Ship being very much dis∣abled.
The Missionaries more concerned at this loss of time than at the danger they had escaped, resolved upon returning to Siam by Land, that they might get on Board an English Vessel bound for Canton, which was to Sail about the beginning of August. They entered the Woods, in hopes to meet with a Town and some Guides that might conduct them, but they soon lost their way, and encountered no less Perils at Land then they had before met with at Sea. The great Rains had caused a Land-flood, so that walking barefoot thro' the Fields overflowed, an in∣numerable quantity of Leeches, and Musketoes so troublesome to Strangers, were their continual Tor∣ment. On the other hand great number of Serpents, Tigers, Buffles and Elephants, of which the Forests are full, kept them in continual Apprehension. But their greatest Misery was want of Food; for the little Victuals they had brought out with them being soon spent, they had been starved had not Pro∣vidence directed them to a small Village. Not that the Inhabitants could afford them much help, being themselves unprovided of all things; but they con∣ducted them back again to their Ship, where they arrived after a Fortnights Wandring, half dead with Weariness and Hunger. As for me I was almost in as ill a Case: I had ob∣tain'd of Monsieur Constance that he should place me into a Convent of Talapoins, (so are their Priests cal∣led) for not one of them had yet been prevailed with to acknowledge Christ, tho' their Conversion might be an effectual Means to that of the whole Na∣tion. I judged the best way to bring it about, would be a free Converse with them, Dressing as they did, and Living with the same Austerity. I had a Presi∣dent in the Mission at Madura, and all reason to hope for the like Success at Siam. But the Conspiracy of the Malais and Macossars, which happened at that
time gave Monsieur Constance so much trouble, that he had not the leisure to think of me. The King who countenanced the Christian Faith, and his Mi∣nister who was its chief Support, with all hose who professed it, were in danger of being murthered in one Night, had not our Redeemer saved us from that Peril; but the Plot was discovered, and the Criminals brought to a condign Punishment. This Accident was the Cause that the Fathers came back by Sea to Siam, before I was too far engaged in the New Life I designed to lead; and I yielded to their Intreat that I would embark with them when the Season should permit, which I did the more willingly, because it was about the time that Father Tachard was to return with a Recruit of Missionaries and Mathe∣maticians. On the 17th of Iune in the Year 1687. we failed for Nimpo, a considerable City and Haven in Cheki∣am a Province of China; for we thought it not sit to go to Macao as was designed the Year before, having been informed that we should be no welcome Guests to the Portugueze. I scarce believe, My Lord, that you are over curious of knowing how we steered our Course. Those Jour∣nals wholly made up of East, West, North, and South, and a thousand barbarous Words which seem proper for no other use then Hussing and Hectoring the Winds, can scarce be relished by so nice a Palate as yours. However, they are very useful to Seamen, and those who make Navigation their study, would not find the Style unpleasant. But I shall take ano∣ther opportunity of giving you an Account of it, in offering you some Geographical Memoirs. Permit me then to wave this for the present, and to speak on∣ly of what concerned our selves. Spight of the King of Siam's express Orders for our good Treatment, God was pleased in his Wisdom
to give us an Occasion of Exercising our Patience. We were on Board a small Chineze Vessel, called a Somme by the Portugueze, without any Shelter against the Weather, and so streightned for want of Room, that we could not lye at length: Placed near an I∣dol black with the smoak of a Lamp continually burning in its Honour, and (which was our great Eye-foe) worshipped each day with a Diabolical Su∣perstition. The Sun was directly over our Heads, and we had scarce any Water to quench our immoderate Thirst, caused by the excessive Heat of the Climate. Three Meals of Rice were our daily Allowance, tho' the Captain I confess often invited us to eat some Meat with him, but that being always first offered as a Sacrifice to the Idol, we looked on it with more Hor∣rour than Appetite. In this manner we spent above a Month, endeavouring, by our Patience and our Prayers, to inspire those Idolatrous People with an Esteem for our Holy Religion, our little Skill in their Language not permitting us to do it by declaring its most Sacred Truths. 'Tis true we sometimes, with the help of an Inter∣preter, attempted to convince them of the Absurdity of that Worship their Education had unfortunately en∣gaged them in. One day especially they slocked a∣bout us; the Dispute grew something sharp, and at length became so hot, that we were forced to give it over. All Seamen are generally very untractable. These took great Offence at what we had said of their Idol, and a short while after came toward us, arm'd with Lances and Half-Pikes, with Looks that seem'd to menace us. Having with some Impatience doubted what would be the Event, we found at last we had no Cause to fear. The Mariners had armed themselves only to prepare for a Procession in Honour of their Idol; perhaps to appease the Anger she might have concei∣ved
at what in the Dispute had been said to her Dis∣paragement. I scarce believe there is a Nation more Superstitious then the Chineze who worship the very Compass they steer by, continually censing it with Perfumes, and often offering it Meat as a Sacrifice. Twice a day regularly they threw little pieces of gilt Paper in likeness of Money into the Sea, as it were to keep it at their Devotion by that Salary. Some∣times they would present it with little Boats made of the same Stuff, that being busied in tossing and ruin∣ing them, she might neglect ours. But when the un∣ruly Element, maugre their Courtesie, would grow troublesome, being, as they thought, agitated in an ex∣traordinary manner by a Daemon that governs it; They burned some Feathers, whose noisom smoak and pestiferous scent, were indeed more then suffici∣ent, had the Fiend been endued with Sence, to send him going, were he the Cause. Once passing near a Hill on which one of their Temples is built, their Superstition then out-did it self; for besides the usual Ceremonies consisting in Meat∣Offerings, burning of Candles and Perfumes, throw∣ing little Baubles of gilt Paper into the Sea, and infi∣nite such other Fopperies, all Hands were at work for five or fix hours together, in making a little Vessel in the likeness of ours, of about four Feet in length. It was very artificially wrought, wanting neither Masts, Tackling, Sails or Flags, it had its Compass, Rud∣der, and Shalop, its Arms, Kitchin-stuff, Victuals, Cargo and Book of Accompts. Besides, they had daubed as many small pieces of Paper as we were Men in the Ship, which were disposed of in the same places we were in. This Machine being placed on two Staves, was with no lie Ceremony, at the noise of a Tabor and a Brazen Bason, raised up in view of all the Crew. A Seaman in a Bonze's Habit was the Chief Man among 'em, playing several Apish Tricks
with a Quarter-staff, and now and then shouting forth loud Huzza's. At length the Mysterious Toy was committed to the Waves, and eyed as far as sight could reach, accompanied with the Bonze's Ac∣clamations, who roar'd with all his might. This ri∣diculous Entertainment diverted the Sailors, while we were struck with a sensible Grief at the sight of their blind Error, which it was out of our Power to cure. An Accident happened soon after, which at first gave them less Pleasure, but in the end proved an e∣qual Diversion to us all. The Mariners fancied they saw a Ship in a part of the Sea much infested with Pyrates. They had excellent Spying-glasses, thro' which they could perceive the Masts, the Sails, nay some saw the very Tackling, and by the manner of her Sailing, it was plain she designed us a Visit. All were very diligent in putting their Ship in a Posture of Defence; The Chineze, who of all Men love best to sleep in a whole Skin, were in great Consternation; and the Fear we saw painted in their Faces, while they made ready their Cimeters, Pikes, and Guns, (for they had no Canon) more terrified us than the fancied Enemy, which yet caused in us no little Ap∣prehension; for indeed, I must confess, we were then grown as fearful, if possible, as the Chineze themselves. Religion or Martyrdom was not then the thing in question, we were in danger of being immediately strangled by Villains who give no Quarter, for such is their Custom, which they would not have altered for our sakes. The only Remedy would have been to have leaped into the Sea, and by drowning our selves deferred our End for a few Minutes; but the Medicine was somewhat violent, and we did not care for the Experiment. Our Prospective Glasses were often made use of, and, to our no little surprize, the mighty Vessel as it came near us lessened, as did our ill-grounded Terror, for we now doubted whether it
was a Ship. At length it grew a Floating Island, then a Sea Horse, and then I know not what, till at last being in sight it proved to be a Tree, which a violent Wind had torn from the Coast. The Earth and Peb∣bles about its Root made it swim upright, so that its Trunk, which was very high, resembled a Mast, and some Branches spread on each side for a Yard, with lesser Boughs broken down for Ropes, had, with the help of the Wind and the Sea's beating about it (which formed a Tract not unlike that a Ship makes) thus causlesly alarm'd us; Besides that People who trem∣bled as they looked thro' their Glasses, might easily be deceived. The dreadful Enemy was no sooner known but the Preparations were given over, to their great grief, who desired nothing more then a Battel, and were heartily vexed at the Disappointment. But we much suspecting their Courage was affected, (for it appeared not till all the Danger was vanisht) thought not our selves safe till we were landed. This was not the only Peril we were likely to en∣counter; for scarce were we in sight of Enouis, an I∣sland of China, famous for the Commodiousness of its Harbour, and the abundance of Ships of all Nations which resort thither, when the sudden veering of the Wind, a Calm that followed, and black Clouds which on every side darken'd our Horizon, made the Pilots fear the approach of some Typhon, than which nothing is more terrible in the Seas of China and Iapan; for unless the Captain be well skill'd, the Crew nume∣rous, and the Vessel stout, their ruin is most certain. This Typhon is a furious Wind, or rather a blowing of all the Winds at once; so that the Waves confu∣sedly rolling one upon another, beset a Ship on all sides, and toss it after an extraordinary manner. This Wind is so violent, that there is no bearing any Sail, and so obstinate, that the third day scarce sees the
end of it. At first the Seamens Pains and Industry withstand the Storm, but continual Labour tires and disheartens them; they yield to the over-ruling Winds, the Masts break, the Rudder is carried off, and the Ship founders; or if she be so well built as to sustain the Fury of the Waves, she splits against a Rock, and not a Man escapes. Four days had been spent in expectation of the like Fate, and the dreadful Omens increased, when it came into our Minds to address St. Francis Xavier, whose Miracles had once rendred those Seas so fa∣mous. We prayed him to divert the Tempest, and inforced our Prayers by a Vow. Scarce were we off our Knees, but whether by a Miracle or the ordi∣nary Course of Nature, there blew a favourable Gale of Wind, which carried us thro' some Islands into our desired Port. I never saw any thing so Frightful, as that infinite number of Rocks and Desert Islands thro' which we were to pass. The Channels are in some places so narrow, as not to exceed ten Paces in breadth, to the great danger of those who Sail thro' 'em: We also steered thro' a pretty wide Bay, in which the Chi∣neze observe an exact Silence, for fear, say they, of disturbing a neighbouring Dragon, and made us fol∣low their Example. I know not how they call it, as for us, we named it the Dumb Man's Bay. Having spent some time among those horrid Rocks, we at last had sight of a little City they call Tim-bai, that is, Sea's Limit, situated at the Mouth of the Ri∣ver, up the which we tided, and dropt Anchor three Miles higher, near the City of Nimpo, a sight of which we so earnestly had wisht for, during a Six and thirty days Navigation, which the continual Danger and Hardships we were exposed to, had rendred very edious. It was with no little Joy that we reached that Land,
in which we had, during so many years, long'd to preach the Gospel. It's sight inspired us with an un∣usual Zeal, and the Joy of viewing that happy Soil which so many good Men had Consecrated by their Labours, we thought a large amends for ours. But tho' we were so near the City, it was not so easie for us to enter it. China is a very Ceremonious Country, wherein all Strangers, but especially the French, need have a good stock of Patience. The Captain of our Vessel thought sit to hide us, and on our arrival we were let down into the Hold, where the Heat which increased as we came nearer the Land, and several other Inconveniencies we lay under, made our Condition almost insupportable. But spight of all Caution we were found out, an Officer of the Customs spied us, and having taken an Account of the Ship's Cargo, set a Man in her, and withdrew to let his Master know it. That Mandarine who holds his Commission immediately from Court, and is therefore much respected, ordered us to be brought before him, whom we found in a large Hall assisted by his Assessors and other inferiour Officers, having been waited on thither by a multitude of People, who there are more curious of seeing an European, then we should be here of viewing a Chineze. No sooner were we enter'd, but we were admonish∣ed to kneel and bow our Heads nine times to the ground, that being the Custom in those Parts of doing Obeisance to the Prime Mandarine, who in that Qua∣lity represents the Emperor's Person. His Counte∣nance was very Severe, and bore a Gravity that chal∣lenged Veneration, and a Dread, which increased at the sight of his Executioners, like Roman Lictors, at∣tending with Chains and great Sticks, ready to bind and cudgel whom his Mandarineship should think fit. Having paid him our Devoirs, he asked us Who we were, and what was our Errand. My Lord, (answer∣ed
we, by the means of our Interpreter) we have heard in Europe that several of our Brethren, and parti∣cularly Father Verbiest, laboured with success to spread the Knowledge of our Holy Religion in these remote Parts; The same Zeal has moved us, and the Noble Idea we have framed to our selves of this Empire, and of the Wit and Politeness of its Inhabitants, has prevailed with us to pro∣cure them the only thing that is wanting to compleat the Grandeur of so flourishing and renowned a Nation, to wit the Knowledge of THE ONLY TRUE GOD, without which it cannot be truly Great. We have besides under∣stood how kind his Imperial Majesty has been to them, and hope his Mandarines, who know his Intentions, will be so favourable as not to molest us. This Declaration seemed something bold, in a Pro∣vince where our Religion was scarce tolerated, and in a City, where there was not one Christian. But we were unacquainted with these Circumstances, and had thought that since the Freedom of Trade had been granted, Strangers might come and settle there, which is directly opposite to the Laws of the Land. The Mandarine, who must needs be surprised at the Liberty we took, dissembled his Thoughts, and as if he approved of our Zeal, told us it was true the Em∣peror had a particular Esteem for Father Verbiest, whose Merit was well known throughout the whole Empire, that as for himself he was very desirous to serve us; But, continued he, I must first advise with the Gover∣nor, and we shall consider of it together: In the mean while return to your Ship, where you shall hear further from us. Some days after the General of the Militia in and about the City, which might consist in about fif∣teen or twenty thousand Men, was willing to see us, and entertained us very kindly, insomuch that when we left him to wait upon the Governor, he sent an Officer to desire him that he would use us kindly, as∣suring him we were very honest People. The Gover∣nor
nor expressed some Consideration for us, but said he could determine nothing in our Case till he had first conferred with the Chief Officers of the City; so that we were forced again on Board our hared Ship, which seemed to us a very severe Prison. Most of us were sick, but Our Lord, who permit∣ted these Delays to try our Patience, did at last soften the hardened Hearts of these Infidels, who took Com∣passion on us. Eight days being spent in Consultati∣ons, the Mandarine of the Customs held his Court in a House not far from the Port, where his Clerks usu∣ally kept their Office. There having sent for us and our Goods, being several Bales of Books, Images, and Mathematical Instruments, they opened but three of our Trunks, without demanding any Custom; and his Lordship told us we might lodge in the Sub∣urbs till they had heard from the Viceroy, to whom the Governor had wrote concerning us. We thank∣fully accepted of his Civility, and in our new Habi∣tation enjoyed a Rest we stood in great need of. Permit me, My Lord, before I go on, to give you a general Description of that great Empire, framed according to the Observations of Ancient Geogra∣phers, rectified by those we have since made with much Care and Exactness. CHINA, which the Inhabitants call Tchoum-coev, the Middle Kingdom, because they formerly thought themselves seated in the midst of the World, is divided into fifteen very large Provinces. Quamtom, Fokien, Chekiam, Nankin, Chanton and Pecheley lye along the Eastern Ocean; from South to North. And from North to South on the Western side, are extended Chansi, Chensi, Sout-chen, Yunnan and Koansi, and then Kouei-tchéou, Kiansi, Houguam and Honan, are locked in by the other eleven, and form the midst of the Em∣pire, which a Channel divides from Iapan and the
Island Formosa, and a very long wall from Tartary. Here, My Lord, I must beg your Patience awhile, to give you an exact account of its Situation, and put you in mind of two considerable Faults Geographers are guilty of. The first is, that they have misplaced the whole Province Leanton within the Wall, whereas it is undoubtedly without, tho' it ever made part of the Chineze Dominions. This is Matter of Fact, and whoever questions it needs but to take a Journey thi∣ther, as we did, to be convinced. The second is, that they place the whole Empire five hundred Leagues more Eastward than it really is; this is not so palpable a mistake as the last, but is by our Obser∣vations clearly demonstrable; so that China is much nearer Europe then had always been thought. Could succeeding Observators but bring it each Journey so many Leagues nearer, our Voyages would soon be shortned, and those who are so fond of see∣ing unknown Countries, might with ease satisfie their Desires; but the mischief is that it is out of their power; and I dare say, our Observations and those of the Royal Academy of Sciences, will scarce be out-done; unless Mr V— who has so much in∣veighed against our Manner of Proceeding herein, gives himself that trouble; then indeed I should not despair (did he give us a Map of his Travels) of seeing China beyond Iapan, or Iapan near Mexico. Besides these two Essential Blunders, they have failed in the Situation of each several City; but a more particular Account would be too tedious to in∣sert here, and may besides be expected from Father Gouye a Mathematician of our King's Colledge, with whom I have lest our Geographical Observations, which he will shortly produce to the World. How∣ever, my Lord, be pleased that I give you the true Extent of the Empire. From the City of Canton, which we place a little above the 23 Degree to Pekin
which lyes in the 40th, there are from North t South 17 Degrees. But we may reckon 18, be∣cause beyond Pekin and Canton to the outmost Bounds is 20 Leagues more: These 18 Degrees amount to 450 Common Leagues, and are the entire Length of that Country. Its Extent from East to West, is little less; so that on the whole, China, which is almost of a Circular Figure, is very near Fourteen hundred Leagues in Circuit. This Account, My Lord, I can warrant to be just, and grounded on very exact Re∣marks. You see, My Lord, that I have left out the Islands Formosa, Haynan, and others of less Note, (which of themselves would make a very great Kingdom) as also all the Province Leauton, because it is with∣out the Wall. As for the Corea, Tunquin, and Siam, they depend indeed on China so far, as that they pay a Tribute to that Crown, and that their Kings, at their admission, are Confirmed by its Emperor; but they are separate Kingdoms, and differ much from that of China, which whether in respect of the Pro∣duct and Fertility of its Soil, or the Beauty and Num∣ber of its Cities, the Wit, Politeness, Religion or Manners of its Inhabitants, is quite another thing. The Chineze know it, and are so proud of it, that they call all the rest Barbarous Nations, taking great care in their Marriages not to match with them, or any of the other Indians, and fearing nothing more then that their mean Blood should run in a Noble Chineze's Veins. I also omitted a great part of Tartary which be∣longs to this State, to the great increase of its Pow∣er, for the Tartars are Valiant, and withal Men of Sence; and besides, tho' Tartary be full of Woods and Sandy Desarts, yet it is not wholly unfruitful; those sine Furs of which they rob their Zibelines, Foxes, and Tigers, a great diversity of Simples useful in Phy∣sick,
and the fine Horses which come from thence, are Commodities China could not be without. Yet tho' they reap so great a Profit by it, it cannot be i∣magined what a Vexation it is to them to be so strict∣ly united and mixt with that Nation; and one must be well acquainted with the Excess of their Vanity, and of the Conceit they have of their Grandeur, to know how grievously the Tartarian Conquest has humbled them. I question not, My Lord, but you have heard of it, but perhaps have not had the lei∣sure of inquiring into Particulars, and therefore a short Account of that great Revolution may not be unwelcome. One of the Petty Kings of the Eastern Tartary (for there are not afew) whose Subjects called Mouant∣chéou, had settled a Trade near the Long Wall, ha∣ving complained at Pekin of some Knaveries commit∣ted by the Chinse Merchants, and having received no Satisfaction, resolved to right himself, and entered the Province of Leauton with a numerous Army. The Emperor presently sent some part of his Forces to op∣pose him, and the War continued some time, with equal advantage. But one LI a Chineze took that Opportunity to hatch a Rebellion in the Provinces which were most remote from Court. Great num∣bers of Malecontents flocked about him, who having made themselves Masters of the greatest Cities, like a Torrent overflowed the whole Country, driving all down before them. The Sacred Majesty of their Emperor could not save Pekin from their Fury, the Rebel who knew the best Forces were drawn out of it, marched directly to attack it. There was indeed a Garrison of Seven∣ty thousand Men, but most gain'd upon by the pra∣ctises of Li's Emissaries; so that while some with a pretended Zeal perswaded the Prince to remain in his Palace, others open'd the City Gates to the Trai∣tor,
who solemnized his Entry by a Cruel Slaughter. The unfortunate Monarch finding himself betrayed, would have marched out against him with Six hun∣dred Guards who still remained with him, but at the mentioning of this Heroick Proposal their Hearts failed 'em, and they ungenerously abandoned him. Then knowing no greater Evil then that of falling quick into the Hands of his Enemies, he retired in∣to a Garden with an only Daughter he had, and ha∣ving wrote with his Blood these words on the bor∣dure of his Vest, My Subjects have basely forsaken me, spend thy Rage on my Body, but spare my People. He first stabb'd the Princess, whose Tears must needs have rent a Heart of Flint, and then hang'd himself on a Tree; more Unjust to his Daughter, and Cruel to Himself, then could have been the most barbarous Foe. The Emperor being dead, all bowed to the Usur∣per except Ousanguey, (whom the late Prince had in∣trusted with the Command of the Forces he had sent against the Tartars,) who never would acknowledge him, and chose rather to pull down his Tyranny then ignobly to accept of a share in it. The new Mo∣narch having in vain beseged him in the Province Leauton, to engage him to Surrender himself, shewed him his Father loaded with Irons, protesting he would put him to Death in his sight, if he did not immedi∣ately submit. But that generous Lord more Faith∣ful to the Memory of his deceased Prince then ten∣der of his Father's Life, suffered the Duty of a Sub∣ject to prevail over of that of a Son, and seeing that Blood spilt of which his once was Part, resolved to dye or revenge at once his Fathers and his Emperor's Death. He made his Peace with the Tartar, who ha∣ving joyn'd him, no sooner enabled him to Cope with his Enemy, but he marched against him. But the Tyrant, whose Cowardize was even greater then
his Cruelty, durst not appear against those two Ar∣mies. He fled to Pekin, where having burned the Palace, and all that had not perished at his first En∣try, he retired into the Province of Chensi, loaded with the Spoil of the Empire and the Curse of all. He was pursued, but in vain, for he met with so pri∣vate a Retirement, that all the Art of Man could ne∣ver find him out. In the mean while the Tartars entered Pekin, and so imposed upon the poor Chineze, that of themselves they, begged their new Guests to take care of their di∣stressed State. The others too Cunning not to im∣prove so favourable a Hint, whether by Force or Po∣licy, are since grown absolute Masters of it. And here it is hard to determine which is most to be wondred at, the Courage and Conduct of that Nation, which gave them Success in so Noble an Enterprize, or the Supineness or ill Management of the Chineze, who thus basely submitted to a People so inconsiderable for their Number, that they would have been asha∣med not long before to own them for their Subjects. So true it is we ought not to look on any thing as be∣neath us, since all Temporal Grandeur is subject to Change, and that nothing is Constant in this World but Inconstancy. The Tartarian King Tsouté had not the leisure to enjoy his Conquest; scarce had he taken Possession but he died, leaving the Administration of the Go∣vernment, and Care of his Son, who was then but Six years old, to his Brother. This Brother of his, named AMAVAN, conquered all the Provinces which had not yet submitted; a Prince deservedly admired, not only for his Valour and Conduct, ever attended with Success, but also for his Fidelity and Moderation. For the young Prince being come to Age, he discharged his Trust, and took as much Care to secure him in the Empire, as he had done to Conquer it for him.
This Union of the two Nations has made one Em∣pire of a prodigious Extent, for tho' all Tartary does not belong to China, yet most is Tributary to it. In∣somuch that the great and mighty CHAM, to whom the Chineze themselves paid Tribute, is dwind∣led away to nothing. But I do not wonder how we in Europe could be misinformed in this Point, since Monsieur Constance himself, who so frequently con∣versed with them, knew no better. I know not up∣on what Reports he had credulously taken up a Re∣port that Tartary obeyed one sole Emperor, from whom the Chineze defended themselves only by Pre∣sents and Money. This will make me take more care for the future how I credit Relations which are grounded on Common Fame. Since the Peace between Russia and China, it is ea∣sie to give the true length of the whole Empire, for on that occasion the Bounds were fixed by Consent to the 55th Degree, the rest of the Land stretching from North to East remaining still undecided by that Trea∣ty. So from the most Southerly Point of Haynan to the utmost Limits of that part of Tartary which be∣longs to the Emperor of China, may be reckon'd a∣bove 900 Leagues. Those Lands are not alike fruit∣ful, but all may yield Religion a plentiful Harvest, and were all the Missionaries in the World employ'd in so vast a Field, it would yet want for Rea∣pers. We were well informed at Nimpo of the Good we could do there, and were ready to take a Spiritual Possession of the Promised Land, when we had in∣telligence that the Viceroy of that Province, was much offended at our having been suffered to Land, and was resolved to send us back to the Indies. He wrote indeed a sharp Reprimand to the Governor of Nimpo, and at the same time an Account of what had passed to the Grand Tribunal of Pekin, which is
entrusted with the Care of Foreign of Affairs, and ever was averse to the Christian Religion. He did it so partially, that tho' he was well acquainted with our Design, he represented us as five Europeans, who for some Private Ends designed to settle there, in op∣position to the Fundamental Laws of the Realm; so that the Court decreed we should be banished, and, according to Custom, presented an Order to that Effect, to the Emperor, for his Signature. Had this Order been confirmed, we had been un∣done, and ten to one but the Mandarines at Nimpo had been so too, for treating us so favourably. The Viceroy, who bore as great a Love to our Money as he did Hatred to our Belief, would have seized our Bales, and as a Punishment on the Captain of our Ship, Confiscated his Merchandizes, and ordered him forthwith to be gone, and take us along with him; so that this Man, whose Ruin we should have occasioned, would certainly have thrown us over∣board. Our Peril was certain, had we not prevented it by our Care in writing, as we were in Duty bound, to Father Intorcetta an Italian Missionary, and Father Geneal of our Order in those Parts. Father Fnta∣ney had also given Father Verbiest notice of our Arri∣val, desiring him that he would instruct us what we had to do. The Father had all the reason in the World to leave us to our selves, for by taking us un∣der his Protection, he exposed himself to the Anger of the Viceroy of Goa, and the Governor of Macao, from whom he had received Letters, which were nei∣ther conformable to the King of Portugal's Intenti∣ons, nor to Christian Charity. But who could have expected that a Man, ever ready to Sacrifice his Life for the Insides Salvation, should have looked uncon∣cernedly on, while his Brethren, who were come from the remotest parts of the Earth to assist him in
his Task, had miserably perished. When he recei∣ved our Letters the Emperor was in Tartary, so that he was forced to write to a Friend at Court, that he would inform his Majesty of our Arrival, and cau∣sed his Letter, by a wilful mistake, to be put into a Pacquet which he knew would be delivered into the Emperor's own Hands. It happened as he desired, the Emperor opened it and read it, so that being well informed of all the Truth, when the Tribunal's Or∣der was delivered to him, he answered, That he would consider of it at Pekin, and remained there a Fornight longer a hunting. That Court was sur∣prized at the Delay, it being Customary for the Prince, in three days time, either to Sign or Cancel these kind of Writs. Father Verbiest was no less im∣patient to know the Fate of his Letter and the Em∣peror's Resolutions; and as for us, we endeavoured by our Prayers to obtain His Favour who Rules the Hearts of Kings. Father Intorcetta, our Superiour, who best knew our ill Circumstances, did by Publick Prayers in his Church at Hamt-chéou, beg God to deliver us out of them; and firmly believing that the Cry of inno∣cent Babes is very prevalent with his Divine Maje∣sty, gathered all the Christian's Children from Six to Ten together into the Church, where lying pro∣strate on the Ground, they unanimously lifted up their harmless Hands to Heaven, saying, Efsunde Iram, tuam in Gentas quae Te non noverunt, Psal. 58. Ne tradas Bestiis animas confitentes tibi, Psal. 73. Pour out thine Indignation, O Lord, upon the Heathen that have not known thee, and upon the King∣doms that have not called upon thy Name; but defend those who worship thee, and deliver not unto their Ene∣mies thy Servants, who come hither from the Extremities of the World to confess thy Holy Name, and to shew forth thy Praise. These Prayers
were accompanied with the Tears of the whole Con∣gregation, especially with those of Father Intorcetta, who having been so happy as to suffer Chains, Prisons and Banishment for his Saviour's sake, was most fit to obtain the Blessing we begged for. The Emperor was no sooner returned at Pekin, but Father Verbiest informed him that we were his Brethren, and by our Skill in the Mathematicks, might be useful to his Majesty. To which he an∣swered, If it was so, he saw no Cause why he should Ex∣pel us out of his Dominions. He Summoned his Privy Council, to which the Princes of the Blood are ad∣mitted, and with their Advice and Consent, Decreed we should all be honourably sent for to Court. An Order to that Effect was sent to the Lipou, (the same Tribunal which had presented the Writ against us) and by them transmitted to the Viceroy of Hamt∣chéou: So that by an especial Providence, he who had endeavoured to turn us shamefully out of China, was himself obliged to introduce us, and that with more Advantage, than, had he been our Friend, he could have procured us. His Vexation was the great∣er, because without doing us any Harm, he had run the risque of incurring the Emperor's Displeasure by his false Informations. It was indeed no Little Mor∣tification to him; and it was a Fortnight before he would acquaint us with our good Fortune. In the mean while the Stay we made at Nimpo gave us an opportunity of improving our Acquaintance with the Mandarines. Some sent us Presents, others invited us to their Houses, and all in general were very kind to us. We indeavoured to make use of this opportunity in converting them from Idolatry, but it is hard for Souls wholly buried in Flesh and Blood, to savour the Things which are of God. However, the Governor of the City made one Step towards it, which gave us great Hopes: It was this.
They had for five Months time been afflicted with a continual Drought, so that their Rivers, and the Channels they cut out into their Land to water it, were now quite dry, and a Famine much appre∣hended. The Priests had offered numberless Sacri∣fices, and the Mandarines left nothing undone which they thought might Appease the Anger of the Gods. They had often asked us what Methods we used in Europe in such Cases; and being answered, that by Humiliation, Penitence, and the Fervency of our Prayers we moved Heaven to Compassion, they hoped by the like Means to procure their Idols Pity; but alas, they called upon Gods that have Ears and can∣not hear: So the Governor tired with Delays, resol∣ved to worship the only God whom all Nature o∣beys. Having understood that in our House we had a pretty handsome Chappel, in which we every day celebrated the Sacred Mysteries of our Religion, he sent to us to know if we would permit him to come in State, and joyn his Prayers with ours. We an∣swered we desired nothing more than that he should worship as we did, and that all the City would fol∣low his Example; and assured him moreover, that if he begged with Faith and Sincerity, he should undoubtedly obtain. We presently went to work to put our Chappel in order, and make all things ready to Solemnize his coming, when to our great surprize his Secretary came to tell us, That his Lord would be with us the next day very early, being ne∣cessitated to meet at Eight the same Morning at a neighbouring Hill, where with some Mandarines he was to offer a Sacrifice to a Dragon. In answer to this unexpected Message, we ordered our Interpreter to wait on him, and make him sensible that the Chri∣stian's God was a Iealous God, who would not allow of his paying to any others the Honours due to Him∣self alone; that his Gods were Statues or Creatures
that had no Power to help themselves nor him; and that we humbly craved him to despise those idle Fan∣cies, fit only to amuse a credulous sensless Mob, but far beneath a Man of his Sence and Merit, and to trust in the Only God of Heaven, whom his Reason alone must convince him to be the True one. I re∣ally believe he was almost perswaded, but he had en∣gaged himself to the Mandarines, and for some world∣ly Respect durst not break his Promise; so he wor∣shipped his Idols, whom, doubtless he had no Faith in, and withdrew from the Only True God, of whose Being he was inwardly convinced. Then, My Lord, moved with Indignation at their Blindness and the Devils Tyranny, some of us thought of imitating what St. Francis Xavier had done on some like occasion, by erecting a Cross in the City under these Conditions: First that we would prevail with Heaven to grant the Rain they stood in such want of: And secondly, that if we did, they should pull down their Idols, and own That God who should have been so favourable, as to grant them their Request. Our Minds were diffe∣rent, as was our Zeal: Some full of Lively Faith, which the miraculous and continual Support of Pro∣vidence, thro' the several Perils we had encounter'd, had inspired them with, could not question the Suc∣cess of so Bold, but Holy an Undertaking: Others not so Zealous, but perswaded that Prudence ought to be our Guide, where the Inspiration is not Evi∣dent, were of Opinion nothing should be hazarded which failing might Expose our Religion. So we were content to mourn within our selves, and beg of God not that he would give them Rain, but that Celestial Fire which Our Saviour hath brought into the World, and desires all Nations may be inflamed with.
While we were thus busied in promoting the Inte∣rest of our Religion, the Viceroy was no less in thinking how to Execute the Orders he had received from Court. He left our Journey as far as Hamt∣chéou, to the Governor's Care, who provided Boats for us, and commanded an inferiour Mandarine to attend us, that we might lack for nothing. We per∣formed it in five days time, without meeting with a∣ny of those Accidents which Strangers there, are sub∣ject to when they are thought to carry things of va∣lue with them. The Christians at Hamt-chéou were lavish in the Expressions of their Affection to us. They came in Crouds to the River, whence we were carried as in Triumph to their Church, with more Kindness perhaps then Prudence. For they had, un∣known to Father Intorcetta, provided for each of us an Elbow-Chair, borne by four Men, and attended by as many, into which we were obliged to suffer our selves to be set, not knowing what they meant, for our little skill in their Language did not permit us to learn it from themselves. Having locked us in, we were forced to make our Entry as they would have it, which was in this manner. A Musick of ten or twelve Hands with some Trumpets led the Van; next came some Horse and Foot, the former bearing several Standards and Flags, and the latter armed with Launces and Pikes; and next to these four Of∣ficers who supported a large Board varnished with Red, on which these words were written in large Golden Characters, Doctors of the Heavenly Law, sent for to Court. We came in the Rear, surrounded by a throng of Christians, and Gentiles whom the Novel∣ty of the Show had drawn thither. In this mortify∣ing Pomp we went thro' the whole City, being a long League in length, vexed that we had not fore∣seen their Indiscretion, and resolved to reprimand them for it. Father Intorcetta waited for us in the
Church-door, whence he carried us to the Altar. There having nine times bowed our selves to the Ground, and returned Thanks to the Good God, who thro' so many Hazards, had, in spight of our Enemies, brought us to the Promised Land, we re∣turned to the Chief of the Christians. These we desired the Father to acquaint, that we were not un∣thankful of their Love, nor ill satisfied with their Zeal for God's Glory, but that the Splended Manner in which they had received us, was no ways conformable to a Christian's Humility; Hi in Curris & in Equis, Nos au∣tem in Nomine Do∣mini. That the Heathen might, indeed, celebrate their Triumphs with such Earthly Pomps and Mundane Vanities, but that a Christian's Glorying was in the Name of the Lord. These returned no Answer, but all on their Knees implored our Blessing. Their Fervency and a Meek and Devout Look, in which the Chinee do, when they will, exceed all other Nations, whol∣ly disarmed our Wrath; we wept for Joy and Com∣passion; and I protest, My Lord, that one Moment made us a large amends for all the Troubles we had undergone. But how great was our Bliss when we were at li∣berty to receive the Caresses of the Father Intorcetta, whom God had made use of to procure our Admit∣tance into that Empire. We already bore him a Ve∣neration due to the Glorious Name of Confessor, which his Imprisonment and Sufferings at Pekin had intitled him to, but his Goodness, Meekness and Cha∣rity, entirely won our Hearts, and made us respect him, as the true Pattern of a Perfect Missionary. The Character we bore of Persons sent for to Court, as Considerable as that of Envy, obliged us to visit and be visited by the Chief Mandarines. The Viceroy our Enemy was ashamed to see us, which he sent us word, the multitude of Business he had then on his
Hands would not permit: but the General of the Tartars received us with all Civility, and among o∣ther Demonstrations of his Kindness, made us a ve∣ry considerable Present. However, when we were going, the Viceroy who was affraid least he should be informed against, sent some Chairs to carry us to the Imperial Barge he had provided for us; he order'd some Trumpets and Hautboys to attend us, presented us with ten Pistols, and gave us an especial Order from Court intituled a Cam-bo, in pursuance to which all Places we passed thro' were to find us Boats well man'd while we went by Water, or sixty two or more Porters in case the Frost obliged us to go by Land, and each City to give us about half a Pistol, the same being allowed to the Chief Mandarines, who are reputed to have their Charges born by the Emperor, tho' this will not amount to the tenth part of their Expence. Be∣sides he order'd a Mandarine to accompany us, and see all due respect was paid us. We would gladly have avoided it, but were forced to go thro' what we undesignedly had engaged in. The Barge we were on Board was a Second Rate, containing in Breadth sixteen feet, and in Length se∣venty, and proportionable in Heighth. Besides the Cook-room, the Master and his Family's (for they have no other Dwelling) Apartment, that of his Crew, and another for our Men, there was a pretty large Parlour where we dined, and three Rooms in which six Persons might lye at ease, all which were Vernished, Gilt and Painted. Now for the manner of our Travelling. As soon as Anchor was weighed, the Trumpets and Hautboys founded a March, then they took their Leave with a kind of Chest wherein were three Iron Barrels. which made a greater Re∣port than so many Muskets, they were discharged one after another, and between each the Musick
founded, and so continued playing for some time. Whenever we met a Mandarine's Barge, or some Town in our way, the same thing was repeated; as also when Night or a contrary Wind obliged us to come to an Anchor. This to a Mandarine had not only been a great Honour, but a very entertaining Con∣sort: As for us, we thought it a very inharmonious one, whose tediousness made us pay dear for our Honour. We had besides a Watch every Night to guard us, the manner of which was this: About Eight at Night, ten or twelve Inhabitants of the Town nearest to the place we anchored in, appeared in one Row on the Shoar, then the Master came upon the Deck, and thence made them a fair Speech, concerning the Ob∣ligations they lay under of preserving all that be∣longed to the Emperor, and watching for the Man∣darines Safety, who themselves did so for that of the State. Then he descended into Particulars of all the Accidents they were liable to, Fire, Thieves, and Storms, exhorting them to be Vigilant, and telling them they were responsible for all the Mischief which might happen. They answered each Paragraph with a Shout, and then retired as a form to Corps de Garde, only one Centry was left there, who continually struck two Sticks one against another, and was hour∣ly relieved by others, which made the same Noise, that we might know they did not fall asleep, which we would gladly have permitted them to do, on con∣dition we might have done so our selves. But this is the Custom when any Mandarine travels by Water. How teazing soever all these Ceremonies might be, I must confess that I never met with any way of Travelling less tiresome than this; for after Thirteen days Voyage we arriv'd at Yamt-chéou on Ianuary the 3d, as fresh as if we had not stirr'd out of our House. There we found Father Aleonisa a Franciscan, Pro∣Vicar to the Bishop of Basilea, and Father Galiani a
Jesuit, who were come thus far to meet us; the one from the Bishop to proffer us that Prelate's Assistance, and the other by his Credit and Experience, to make the rest of our Journey as easie as he could. Both knew we had Letters of Commendation from the King, and were willing to shew us all the Respect due to those who are under his Majesty's Protection. This was not the only Civility we received from them, but they have since obliged us so highly, that we never can enough express our Gratitude. Here the Frost forced us to leave the Great Canal, and we had Horses found us for our Men, and Por∣ters for our Goods. As for our selves, the great Cold and Snow, which we were unaccustomed to, made us choose to go in Litters, some of our Horse-men ri∣ding about us that we might be the more Secure. We shifted our Porters at each City or pretty big Town; and what may be wonder'd at is, that we could get above a hundred, with as much speed and ease, as in France we might five or six. The Cold in∣creased hourly, and became at last so violent, that we found the River Hoambo, one of the greatest in China, almost frozen over; a whole Day was spent in breaking the Ice, and we passed not without much Trouble and Danger. We left Nimpo on the 27th of November 1687. and arriv'd at Pekin the 8th of February following; but we rested so often by the way, that indeed we had not spent above a Month and an half in our Journey. These Honours paid us by so potent a Prince, and the good Success of so long and perillous a Voyage, together with a prospect of the Benefit our Religion might reap by it, would have occasioned in us a well∣grounded Mirth, had not our Thoughts been cruelly diverted from it. Scarce were we in sight of Pekin, but we received the most afflicting News of Father Verbiest's Death. It struck us with an Astonishment
which lessened but to make our Grief more sensible. He it was who had procured our Admittance into China; who besides, in delivering us from the Vice∣roy of Hamt-chéou, had saved our Lives, and which we looked on as a greater Kindness, was ready to as∣sist us with his Credit, in the Designs we had to pro∣mote God's Glory and the Interest of our Holy Faith. We were not the only Loosers by his Death, but I dare say that every Body mist him; To his Care, Zeal and Prudence, was owing the Restauration of the Christian Religion, which had been almost ruined by the late Persecutions: He encouraged the Old Christians Constancy, and supported the Weakness of the New, by taking them under his especial Pro∣tection; His Recommendation gained our Missiona∣ries, Respect; He had saved Macao, of which the Tartars had entertained some Jealousies; and the State it self, to which he had rendred considerable Services, was not a little beholding to him; so that the Eu∣ropeans, the Chinese, and the Emperor himself did e∣qually look on him as their Father. This Great Man, so much respected in the East, deserved, My Lord, that you should take Notice of him, and in pursuance to my Design, which was in this Let∣ter to give you an Account of our Journey from Si∣am to the chief Town of China, I could not end with a Subject that might better challenge your Attention. I am with all Respect, My Lord, Hour Honours most humble and obedient Servant L. J.
LETTER II. To her Highness the Dutchess of NEMOURS. The Manner of our Reception by the Em∣peror, and what we observed at Pekin. MADAM, NONE but a Lady of an unbounded Genius and an unlimited Zeal, could, as you do, concern her self in what passes at so great a Distance. The Curiosities of Europe were too few for your vast Mind, which would be a Stranger to nothing that might Inform or Edifie it, and I may without Flattery say, that the East has no Secrets you have not pried into, nor any Rarities you are unac∣quainted with. I have my self learned from your Highness several things unknown to most Travellers, and having been as far as the World reaches, must confess that your Knowledge has travelled farther yet than me. What then, Madam, can I tell you of China more than you already have discover'd, unless it be some Particulars of my Voyage, which, being the latest any European has made thither, cannot want the Charms of Novelty? It being my Duty to give a a Great States-man an Account of it, I make bold
to send your Highness the Letter I wrote to him some days since; and what I now add, shall at once be a Continuation of it, and a Token of the Respect I bear you, and the Readiness I shall ever be in, to o∣bey your Highness's Commands. On our Arrival at Pekin, we found the Court in Mourning for the Empress Dowager: The Courts of Justice were shut up, and the Emperor gave no Audience. But the 27 Days being spent, during which the Laws obliged him to remain Solitary, he sent one of his Officers to our House, to see how we did, and put some Questions to us. The Mes∣sage was very obliging, and besides a thousand o∣ther Civilities, we were told the Emperor would be no less kind to us than he had been to the Fa∣thers at his Court, since we were all of the same Society. The Gentleman told us his Imperial Majesty would gladly know what the French Court thought of his Progress into Tartary, and the Defeat of Ousan∣guay, (who was a Chinese Rebel that had given him no small Trouble). He asked us in what Perfection Learning was in Europe, whether any new Inventi∣on had lately made been, or any considerable Dis∣covery. Then he spoke much of the Honours the Emperor designed to pay to the Memory of Father Verbiest, for whom his Majesty had a particular af∣fection. That Name, Madam, cannot be un∣known to you, and you are too much concern'd, in what relates to the Eastern Church, to be ig∣norant of her Loss in that Illustrious Missonary's Death. We all replyed that we gratefully acknowledged the Emperor's Bounty, but that among the Ceremo∣nies with which the Chinese used to express their Re∣spect for their deceased Friends, there were some which seemed to disagree with the Sanctity of our
Religion. How! answered he, Do you oppose the mperor's Will? To this a Father returned, My Lord, Our Lives are the Emperor's, he may take them away when he pleases, but nothing in the World is able to make us altr the least tittle of our Belief. My Orders, said he, are not to dispute it with you, but to ask you for the Petition, which, according to Custom, you are to present to him upon this Occasion. The Emperor, by an unpresidented Goodness, would gladly peruse and correct it himself, if it should need any amendment: but he commands you to keep this Favour secret. All that is presented to the Emperor, ought to be indited in Terms so nicely conformable to the Laws and Customs of the Country, to his Quality who speaks, and to the Business he treats of, that the Penning of it is no little trouble, especially for a Stranger. An improper Expression, a Word, nay a Letter misplaced, is sufficient to undo a Manda∣rine, and several have lost their Places for being Guilty of the like Faults, whether thro' Inadverten∣cy or Ignorance. The Emperor, well skill'd in all these Formalities, questioned our Capacity in that respect, and would trust no body but himself; so that by an incredible Goodness he took the pains to compose it, that it might stand the most Critical Ex∣amination. Some days after the same Gentleman came with several new Queries. He inquired particularly into the Motives of the late Dutch War, and into the famous Passage of the Rine. For in truth, said he, what has been told the Emperor is not to be be∣lieved. Perhaps the River is neither so broad, so deep, nor so rapid as is reported; and that as for the Dutch▪ they had some private Reasons not to oppose your King's Conquests with more vigour.
Then, Madam, did we wish for a more perfect Knowledge of his Language, that we might repre∣sent to him the Great Soul, the Good Fortune, and the unshaken Valour of Lewis the Great, to whose Soldiers nothing is impossible while they fight in his View, and are animated by his Example. The Father, who was our Interpreter, told him however as much as would perswade him, that none but such a Hero could frame and carry on the like Enter∣prises: He was astonished at our Recital of them, and rose immediately to go and report it to his Prince. As he was going out he turned to us, saying, Gentlemen, All I have heard is indeed wonderful, but what my Eyes behold seems no less surprising: Who could think that these Fathers who have dwelt here so long, who are of a different Nation, and never saw you before, should look on you as their Brethren; that you should treat them like yours, and that you should be as kind to each other, as if you had been acquainted all your Lives. I really am extreamly taken with this Charity, and can no longer doubt the truth of what you profess. So open a Confession might give us some hopes that He was not far from the Kingdom of God: It is true he believed, but alas, of what use is that Be∣lief, when we have not the Courage to Act accord∣ingly, but to inhance our Guilt? If we had come thither Incognito the Mandarines would have had nothing to say to us; but it be∣ing in pursuance of an Order from the Lipon, which, as I have already hinted, is one of the most noted Courts of Justice in the Empire, the Viceroy of the Province we came from remitted us into their Hands, and we were, according to Custom, to be delivered up by them to their Sovereign. So as soon as the Mourning ended, and they had leave to sit, we were Summon'd before them, with Or∣ders
to carry thither all our Mathematical Machines and Instruments, of which they already had an In∣ventory. The Emperor, who would not have us do any thing without his Advice, was acquainted with it, and sent us word it was not fitting we should shew our Instruments, and that we might, if we thought fit, decline making a Personal Appearance. We went thither however, being several times invited in a most obliging manner, and not judging it con∣venient by a blunt Refusal to offend so considerable a Body, which besides was our Judge, and already but too great an Enemy to our Religion. Some Mandarines deputed by their President to that effect, made us a very Civil Reception: They desired us to sit down, and presented us some Tea before they had drunk any themselves; a Respect they do not pay even to Ambassadours, as Father Pereira, a Portuguese, assured us, who had been pre∣sent at an Audience they had lately given to those of Portugal. This Visit was indeed but for Form's sake, to the end they might inform the Emperor of our being safely arrived to Town, according to his Majesty's Commands. So that after some Complements on each side, we were desired to attend the next day at the Palace, when they would discharge us. We went thither accordingly at the appointed time, and having staid during some hours in a large Court, where the Mandarines usually wait who have any business there; their Pesident, or Chief Justice, bought us the Answer to an Address he had according o Custom presented on ur Account. This Answer was written on a smll varnished Brd, wrapped up in a piece of yellow Taffety: The Contents were, That we might use ur Instru∣ments, and settle in what part of the Empire we pleased,
according to the first Orders from Court, when we were sent for thither. And that in the mean while, the Lipou might deliver us up to the other Fathers, who were to in∣troduce us into the Emperor's Presence, when his Majesty should think fit. Yet that Prince's Intentions were not that we should leave Pekin; but on the contrary, he would have kept us all there, and lodg'd us in his Palace. He had expressed himself so clearly on that Point, that we had need of all the Interest and Dexterity of Father Pereira, to divert the Storm. That Father, who was then Superiour of all the Missionary's, moved with Compassion at so many Vineyards being ruined for want of Husbandmen, judged we might be more useful in the Country. He knew besides what an aversion we had to a Courtier's Life, which our continual Complaints against it could not let him be ignorant of. These and several other Rea∣sons induced him to intreat the Emperor that he would not oppose it, and his Zeal inspired him with such effectual Methods, that the good Prince at last consented: But, said he, it shall be on conditi∣on we divide the Spoil; le take two at your choice, and you shall dispose of the other three; What can you say a∣gainst this, I quit you the better half? We had not yet had the Honour to attend his Im∣perial Majesty, for the Formalities I last mentioned were to precede our Audience: But the Lipou had scarce delivered up their Charge, when two Eu∣nuchs came to the Colledge, to warn the Superi∣our that he should attend with his Brethren in a Court of the Palace which was appointed. We were instructed in the Ceremonies usual on such Occasions, which was done with little Trouble, being already half lickt into a Chinese form.
First then, We were carried in Chairs to the first Gate, whence we went on foot thro' eight Courts of a prodigious length, built round with Lodgings different in Architecture, but all very ordinary, ex∣cept those large square Buildings over the Arches thro' which we passed from one Court to another. Those indeed were stately, being of an extraordina∣ry thickness, and proportionable in breadth and heighth, and built with fair white Marble, but which was worn rough thro' age. Thro' one of these Courts ran a small Rivulet, over which were laid several little Bridges of the same Marble, but of a whiter Colour and better Workmanship. It were hard, Madam, to descend into Particulars, and give you a pleasing Description of that Palace, because its Beauty does not consist so much in being composed of several curious Pieces of Architecture, as in a prodigious quantity of Buildings, and an in∣finite number of adjoyning Courts and Gardens which are all regularly disposed, and in the whole make up a Palace really Great and Worthy of the Monarch who inhabits it. The only thing which surprised me, and seemed singular in its kind, is the Emperor's Throne. The best Description of it, which my Memory will af∣ford me, is this: In the midst of one of those great Courts stands a square Basis or solid Building of an extraordinay bigness, whose top is adorned with a Balustrade, much after our fashion; this supports a∣nother like unto it, but framed Taper-wise, over which are placed three more, still loosing in bulk as they gain in heighth. Upon the uppermost is built a large Hall, whose Roof being covered with gilt Tiles, is borne by the four Walls, and as many rows of varnished Pillars, between which is seated the Throne.
The Throne of the Emperour of China▪ Scituated, in the Middle of the Greatest Court of his Pallace  and raised vpon five bases of White Marble.
These vast Bases, with their Balustrades made of white Marble, and thus disposed Amphitheater-wise, which when the Sun shines seem covered with a Pa∣lace glistering with Gold and Varnish, make, indeed, a glorious show, considering too, that they are thus placed in the midst of a spacious Court, and sur∣rounded by four stately rows of Building: So that were its Beauty inhanced by the Ornaments of our Modern Architecture, and by that Noble Simplicity which is so much valued in our Buildings, it would doubtless be as magnificent a Throne as ever was rais∣ed by Art. After a quarter of an hours walk, we at length came to the Emperor's Apartment. The Entrance was not very splendid, but the Anti-Chamber was adorned with Sculptures, Gildings and Marble, whose Neatness and Workmanship were more va∣luable than the Richness of the Stuff. As for the Presence Chamber, the second Mourning not being over, it was still disrobed of all its Ornaments, and could boast of none but the Sovereign's Person, who sate after the Tartar's Custom on a Table or Sopha raised three Feet from the Ground, and covered with a plain white Carpet, which took up the whole breadth of the Room. There lay by him some Books, Ink and Pencils; he was cloathed with a black Satin Vest furred with Sable; and a row of young Eunuchs plainly habited, and unarmed, stood on each Hand close legged, and with their Arms ex∣tended downwards along their sides; which is looked upon there as the most respectful Posture. In that State, the most modest that even a Private Man could have appeared in, did he chuse to be seen by us, desiring we should observe his Dutifulness to the Empress his departed Mother, and the Grief he conceived at her Death, rather than the State and Grandeur he is usually attended with.
Being come to the Door, we hastned with no little speed (for such is the Custom) till we came to an end of the Chamber opposite to the Emperor. Then all abreast we stood a moment in the same Posture the Eunuchs were in. Next we fell on our Knees, and having joyned our Hands, and lifted them up to our Heads, so that our Arms and Elbows were at the same heighth, we bowed thrice to the Ground, and then stood again as before: The same Prostration was repeated a second time, and again a third, when we were or∣dered to come forward, and kneel before his Ma∣jesty. The Good-natur'd Prince, whose Mildness I can∣not enough admire, having enquired of us of the Grandeur and present State of France, the Length and Dangers of our Voyage, and the Manner of our Treatment by the Mandarines; Well, said he, see if I can add any new Favour to those I have already con∣ferred upon you. Is there any thing you would desire of me? you may freely ask it. We returned him humble Thanks, and begged he would permit us, as a Token of our sincere Gratitude, to lift up each day of our Lives our Hands to Heaven, to procure to his Royal Person, and to his Empire, the Blessing of the True God, who alone can make Princes really happy. He seemed well satisfied with our Answer, and permitted us to withdraw, which is performed with∣out any Ceremony. The great Respect and Dread which the Presence of the most Potent Monarch in Asia inspired us with, did not yet awe us so far, but that we took a full view of his Person. Indeed, least our too great Freedom herein should prove a Crime, (for in what concerns the Emperor of Chi∣na, the least Mistake is such,) we had first obtained his Leave.
He was something above the middle Stature, more Corpulent than an European Beau, yet somewhat more Slender than a Chinese would wish to be; full Visaged, Disigured with the Small Pox, had a broad Forehead, little Eyes, and a small Nose after the Chi∣nese fashion; his Mouth was well made, and the lower part of his Face very agreeable. In fine, tho' he bears no great Majesty in his Looks, yet they shew abundance of Good Nature, and his Ways and Action have something of the Prince in them, and shew him to be such. From his Apartment we went into another, where a Mandarine treated us with Tea, and presented us as from the Emperor, with about a hundred Pistols. The Gift seemed but Mean, considering whom it came from, but was very Considerable in respect to the Custom of China, where it is the Maxim of all Great Persons to take as much, and give as little as they can. On the other hand he loaded us with Ho∣nours, and ordered one of his Officers to wait on us to our House. I confess, Madam, that a Man must be wholly in∣sensible to all the Concerns of this World, not to be moved with a secret Complacency, at the having such Respect paid him by one of the mightiest Prin∣ces in the World. But one must not judge of us on that account, by what is usual with the Men of this World in the like Occasions. The truest Cause of the Pleasure we receive from the Favour of Princes, is Self-Interest. It is well known that their Caresses are ever beneficial, and a Courtier would never be so over-joyful at a kind Look or Expression from his King, if he did not expect some more solid Bounties would follow: But as for us, whom our Vows and Missions forbid to have such hopes, we look unconcernedly on all this World, and especially that Part of it, can do to elevate us.
It is true, God is sometimes well pleased to see Religion respected in the Persons of his Ministers: That he often uses those Methods to strengthen the Faith of New Converts, who need such Natural Supports to fortifie them against Trials and Tempta∣tions; and that it breeds even in the Gentiles a Disposition to embrace Christianity. These Thoughts indeed made us take more Delight in those Tokens of the Emperor's Favour, or to speak more properly, made us find them less disagreeable. Your Highness is, perhaps, astonished to see the Sovereign of an Idolatrous Nation, so openly coun∣tenance our Religion, and would gladly know what Motives had induced him to it. His Kindness for such Strangers as we, proceeds, doubtless, from the great Esteem he has long since had for the Missiona∣ries at Pekin. Besides the Commendation of their Learning, he has always found them Sincere, Honest, very Zealous and Affectionate to him, ever ready to obey his Will, where their Faith did not forbid them, Harmless to a Degree, he never could give over admi∣ring, and ever desirous to proclaim the True God. He is above all so well perswaded that this is the sole End of all their Enterprises, that he takes a se∣cret Delight in contributing to the Propagation of the Faith, thinking he can no other way better Re∣compense these Fathers earnestness in his Service. And so Father Verbiest, on his Death-Bed wrote a Letter to him, in part of which he thus expressed himself; Dread Sir, I die contented, in that I have spent almost all my Life in your Majesties Service; But I beg your Majesty will be pleased to remember when I am dead, that my Only Aim, in what I did, was, to gain in the greatest Monarch of the East, a Protector to the most Holy Religion of the World.
Perhaps, Madam, you may have seen certain Li∣bels, (for I know not what to call them else) which represent our Society as a sort of Men possessed with Avarice and Ambition, who undertake these Long and Painful Travels, only to enrich themselves by a Sacrilegious and Scandalous Traffick. Your High∣ness might have expected that Calumny, (the inse∣parable Companion of a Spirit of Sedition and He∣resie) not satisfied with Persecuting our Religion in Europe, should come even to the utmost Parts of the World, to slander those who endeavour to settle it there, as pure as we received it from our Forefathers; and you will not be sorry to hear, how That very Ido∣latry which we destroy, cannot forbear witnessing our good Intentions, and that if China saw what Pi∣ctures are drawn here of her Missionaries, she would hardly know them. But it is not before your High∣ness they need an Advocate. Among the several things which happened then at Pekin, nothing was more Doleful, and at once more Honourable to us, than the Funeral of Father Ver∣beist, which his Imperial Majesty had ordered to be put off till the last Devoirs had been paid the Em∣press Dowager. Father Thomas a Jesuit, has descri∣bed this Ceremony at large. I dare hope an Extract of what he has wrote will not be unwelcome to you both because it will give you some insight into their Customs on the like Occasions, and that you will thereby grow better acquainted with a Man whom his Merit has made known to all the World. Be pleas∣ed then to accept of it as follows. It seemed good to Divine Wisdom, to take to himself from this Mortal Life, Father Ferdnando Ver∣biest, a Fleming, and to bestow on him the Recom∣pence of Saints. Our Missionaries Affliction may not easily be expressed, but much harder would it be
to reckon by how many Exemplary Vertues, and Considerable Services he has merited their Esteem and Gratitude. Besides several other good Qualities, the Greatness of his Soul is particularly to be admired, which has never failed him in the most Cruel Persecutions, so that he was ever Triumphant over the Enemies of the Faith. The Survey of the Mathematicks was at first proffered him, which Dignity he accepted of, in hopes it would enable him to set on foot our Missions, which were then wholly laid aside. He did, indeed, obtain a Toleration for Evange∣lical Pastours, who after a long Banishment had their Churches restored them. He stied some Per∣secutions in their Birth, and others he prevented, which threatned the tender Flocks. The Mandarines no sooner knew him, but they had a Respect for him, and the Emperor entertained so Good an O∣pinion of his Capacity, that he kept him above a quarter of a Year near his Person, and during that time, spent three or four hours every day with him in private, discoursing of several Sciences, especially Mathematicks. In these Conversations, our Zealous Missionary endeavoured to bring him into a Liking of our Re∣ligion: He would explain to him its most stupen∣dious Mysteries, and made him observe its Holiness, its Truth, and Necessity; insomuch that the Empe∣ror, struck with his powerful Arguments, often own∣ed that he believed a God: He assured him of it by a Writing under his Majesty's own Hand, wherein he said among other things, That all the Religions of hi Empire seemed to him Vain and Superstitious, that the Idols were nothing, and that he foresaw Christianity would one day be built on their Ruins. A Chinese Doctor having in one of his Books taken the liberty to place the Emperor's Religion among the several Heresies
China was infected with; the Emperor upon the Fa∣ther's Complaint, struck out those Lines himself, telling him all the Empire should know what he had done. Father Verbiest's Interest was such, that at his In∣stigation the old Instruments which stood on the Platform of the Observatory were pulled down, to make room for new ones of his Contriving. He gave Directions for the casting of Brass-Guns, which saved the States from Ruin. He applyed himself to several other Works, to serve the Publick, or satisfie the Emperor's Curiosity; and one may say, that on this last account, he has searched into the most rare and and ingenious Inventions, that Arts and Scien∣ces have ever offered us. The whole Court looked upon him as the Wisest man of his Age, but, above all, was charmed with his Modesty. It is true, no Man ever was more Mild and Tractable than he; humbling himself be∣fore every one, while every one strove to Exalt him; Insensible to all the Things of this World, except where Religion was concerned; for then he was no more the same Man, and as tho' he had been anima∣ted by a new Spirit, his Looks, his Words, his Acti∣ons, all were Great, and becoming a Christian He∣ro. The very Emperor dreaded him at such times, and was not easily perswaded to admit him into his Presence; He will fly out, would he say, into some un∣decency, which I must be forced, tho' unwillingly, to re∣sent. This holy Boldness proceeded from a lively Faith, and a great Confidence in God. He despaired of nothing, though humanly impossible; and would often say, We must never forget two of the Chief Max∣ims of Christian Morality: First, That let our Projects be never so well laid, they will certainly fall, if God leaves us to our own Wisdom. Secondly, That it were in vain
the whole Universe should arm it self to destroy the Work of God; nothing is Powerful against the Almighty, and every thing Prospes that Heaven approves of. So he never entered on any Enterprise without imploring its help, tho' however he left no Means untried that Reason and Christian Prudence offered him. Thus did his Zeal each day increase in Strength and Purity: The Establishment of our Faith whol∣ly employed his Thoughts, and whatever Occupati∣on else he was put upon, proved a Torment to him. He avoided all idle Visits and Conversations, and could not endure to see People study only for Cu∣riosities sake: He never so much as read the News that came from Europe, which at such a Distance we are usually so greedy of; only he would hear the Chief Heads, provided you would speak them in a few words. He would spend whole Days and Nights in writing Letters of Consolation, Instruction or Re∣commendation for the Missionaries; in composing di∣vers Works for the Emperor or Chief Lords at his Court; and in Compiling the Kalendar, Calculating with an indefatigable Industry, the Motion of the Stars for every Year. This and the Care of all the Churches, so impaired his Strength, that in spight of the Strength of his Constitution, he fell at last into a kind of Consump∣tion, which yet did not hinder his framing great Designs for the Advancement of his Religion. He had taken such exact Measures for the settling of it in the most remote Parts of China, in the Eastern Tar∣tary, and even in the Kingdom of Kovia; that no∣thing but his Death could have prevented the Execu∣tion of so well contrived a Project. Let us view him now in Private. At his first Admit∣tance into our Order he was a true Monk, strict in the Performance of its Rules, very observant to his Superiours, and loving Study and Retirement above
all things, which he persisted in, even among the multitude of Business, in the midst of which he would be as Sedate as a Hermit in his Cell. His Conscience was Nice to Extremity, so that no Man could take more Care than he did to be always ready to make his Appearance before him who can espy Faults even in Saints and Angels. To preserve his Innocence, he never went out without a severe Cilice or an Iron Chain, and used to say, It was a shame for a Jesuit to be clothed in Silks, and in the Livery of the World, and not to wear the Livery of Christ. His Soul was naturally great, and when others Necessities wanted a Supply, his Charity was bound∣less. But he was hard-hearted to himself, courting Poverty even in Plenty to that degree, that the Em∣peror, who took great Notice of him, often sent him Stuff with express Orders to wear it, and be more Sumptuous in his Apparel. His Bed, Table, and Furniture were indeed too mean for a Mandarine; but he ever preferred his Station in the Church be∣fore that in the State. He has often protested, He would never have accepted of that Office, had he not hoped by seeming to the Gentiles the Head of the Christians, to have thereby born all their Envy, and been the most exposed to their Malice, and the first Sacrificed in case of Persecution. This Hope made him be satisfied with his Condi∣tion, and his Writings expressed so ardent desire of Dying for Iesus Christ, that nothing but Martyrdom was wanting to his being a Martyr; yet he might in some measure be reckon'd such, since he begged it of God with that Groaning in Spirit, which is a conti∣nual Suffering to those that cannot obtain it, Reckon me, O Lord, did he often cry out, among those who have desired, but never could shed their Blood for thee. I have, indeed, neither their Innocency, their Vertue, nor their Cou∣rage,
but thou may'st apply their Merits to me, and (which will make me much more agreeable in thy sight) thou canst cloath me with thine own. Under that Vl of thine Infi∣nite Mercy, I dare offer my Life as a Sacrifice to thee. I have been so happy as to Confess thy Holy Name among the People, at Court, before the Tribunals under the weight of Irons, and in the darkness of Prisons, but what will this Confession avail me, unless signed with my Blood? Being penetrated with these Lofty Thoughts, and already ripened for Heaven, by the Practise of every Christian Vertue, he was seiz'd with a Sickness of which he died. It began with a Faintness and an Univer∣sal Decay of Nature, which grew into a Consumpti∣on. The Emperor's Physicians kept him up some time with the help of Physick, especially Cordials, in which the Chinese have a wonderful Success; but his Fever increasing, Art at length was forced to yield to Nature. He received the Sacraments with a Zeal that charmed all that were present; and when he yielded up the Ghost, they were equally struck with Devotion and Sorrow. The Emperor, who the day before had lost the Em∣press his Mother, felt a double Grief when he heard the News. He ordered the Burial to be put off till the Court should be out of Deep Mourning; and then he sent two Lords of the highest Quality to pay him on his behalf the same Devoirs which private Men usually pay to their Dead. They kneeled before the Coffin, which was exposed in a Hall, bowed several times, remaining a long while with their Faces to the Ground, and wept and groaned heavily, for that is the Custom. Then after those, and several other Ex∣pressions of their Sorrow, they read aloud his En∣comium which the Emperor himself had composed, and which was to be set up near the Corpse. It runs thus:
We seriously consider within our selves, that Father Fer∣dinando Verbiest, has of his own good will, left Eu∣rope to come into our Dominions, and has spent the greatest part of his Life in our Service; We must say this for him, That during all the time that he took Care of the Mathematicks, his Predictions never failed, but always agreed with the Motions of the Heavens. Besides, far from neglecting our Orders, he has ever approved himself to be Exact, Diligent, Faithful, and Constant in his La∣bour, till he had finished his Work, and ever the same. As soon as We heard of his Sickness, We sent him Our Physician, and when We knew that a dead Sleep had ta∣ken him away from Us, Our Heart was wounded with a lively Grief. We give Two hundred golden Crowns, and some Pieces of Silk, as a Contribution to the Charges of his Funeral: And it is Our Pleasure that this De∣claration bear Witness of the Sincere Affection We bore him. The prime Mandarines and several Lords at Court followed their Sovereign's Example. Some wrote Speeches in his Praise on large Pieces of Satin, which were hung up in the Hall where the Body lay in State; others sent in Presents, and all mouned for his Loss. At length the Day of his Obsequies being agreed upon, which was the 11th of March 1688. every Body was willing to contribute something to∣wards the Ceremony. The Emperor in the Morning sent his Father-in-law, who is also his Uncle, with one of the Chief Lords of his Court, attended by a Gentleman of the Bed-chamber, and five Officers of his House∣hold, to represent his Person; who all began by falling down before the Corpse, and wept a pret∣ty while; during which, all things were disposed for the Procession.
The Colledge is Situated near the South Gate, whence you go to the North Gate by a Street built in a strait Line, about a hundred Foot broad, and a League long, which near the middle is crossed by another exactly like it, one end of which leads to the Western Gate, being within six hundred Paces of our burying place, which the Emperor Vauli had for∣merly bestowed on Father Recin, but had been taken away during the late Persecution, and not restored till now by a special Favour from the present Emperor. Thro' these two Streets the Funeral passed, in the Order I am going to describe. First was seen a Pageant of about thirty Feet in heighth, varnished over with Red, on which was written in large Golden Characters, the Name, and Tiles of Father Verbiest. This was, as one may say, the Signal of the ensuing Pomp, which began by a great Cross stuck with Flags, and carried be∣tween two Rows of Christians all clothed in White, holding in one hand a lighted Taper, and in the other a Handkerchief to wipe off their Tears. The Gentiles are used on such Solemnities to shed feign∣ed ones, but These had suffered a loss, which forced most true ones from them. Next, some distance off, followed in the same Order the Picture of the Virgin Mary, in a Frame, ound which were pieces of Silk, neatly plated in several manners instead of Carving; and then St. Michael's Representation was born with the like Ceremonies. And I may say, that the Christians who walked on either side, de∣voutly praying, inspired even the Heathen with a Veneration for those precious Tokens of our Faith. Immediately after came the Father's Encomium, of the Emperor's own Composing, written on a large piece of yellow Satin; a Crowd of Christians surrounded it, and two Rows of those who had
been invited, followed it in a Respectful manner. At length appeared the Corpse, in a Coffin made of an ordinary Wood, but varnished and gilt after the Country fashion, carried by sixty Bearers, and attended by the Missionaries, the Deputies from Court, and a Throng of Lords and Mandarines, who closed up the Procession. It took up above a thousand Paces which were hem'd in on each side, by an infinite number of Spectators, who astonished beheld our Christian Rites triumphing, even in their Capital City, over Pagan Superstition. When we were come to the Burying place, the Missionaries in their Surplices read the Prayers of the Church, before the Mandarins. The Body was besprinkled with Holy Water, and perfumed with In∣cense in the usual manner; then it was let down into a very deep square Vault, enclosed with four good Brick Walls. It was like a Chamber under∣ground, and in the Scripture Phrase became to him an Everlasting Habitation. Having pray'd near it some time, we remained on our Knees to hear what the Emperor's Father-in-law had to say to us; which was this: Father Verbiest has been considerably service∣able to the Emperor and the State; of which his Imperial Majsty being sensible, has sent me with these Lords to make a Publick Acknowledgment of it on his behalf, that all the World may know the singular Affection his Majesty did ever bear him while he lived, and the great Grief he has received by his Death. We were so moved with the Dismal Ceremony, the Christians continual Lamentations, our own great Loss, and the Emperor's surprising Bounty, that we were not able to Reply. Every one melted into Tears; but that Pince, who expected another An∣swer from us, was obliged to press us for it, when, at length, Father Pereiva thus spoke on our behalf: My, Lord, our Anguish was not so much the cause of our Silence,
as the Emperor's unparallel'd Goodness; for what can we say or think, when we consider that so great a Monarch uses us who are Strangers, Unknown, Useless, and per∣haps Troublesome to him, as if we had the Honour to be in his Service? Were we his Children he could not love us more; he takes care of our Health, of our Reputation, of our Life: He honours our very Death, not only with his Elogies, his Liberality, the Presence of the most Noble Lords of his Court, but (which never can enough be pri∣zed) by his Grief. What Return, My Lord, can we then make, not to all his Favours, but to that alone which your Highness has been pleased to deliver? We will only be bold to beg your Grace would acquaint his Majesty, that we Weep because our Tears may indeed make known our Sorrow, but that we remain Silent, because no Words can express our Gratitude. The Emperor was informed of what had passed, and some days after the As with us the Colledge of Heralds. Chief Court of Rites, presented a Petiti∣on, That his Majesty would suffer them to Decree some new Honours to be paid that Illustrious Father's Memory. The Emperor not only granted it, but willed them to consider that Stranger of so extraordinary a Merit, was not to be look'd upon as an ordinary Man. In the very first Meeting they ordered seven hundred golden Crowns should be laid out on a Tomb for him, and the Encomium which the Emperor had wrote, should be ingraved on a Marble Stone, and that some Man∣darines should be once more deputed to pay him their last Devoirs in behalf of the Empire. Then they pro∣moted him, that is, gave him a higher Title than any he had enjoyed during his Life. While the Emperor honoured the Saint on Earth, he, no doubt, pray'd for him in Heaven: For it is very observable, that that Prince never was more inquisi∣tive about Religion then at that time. He sent one
of his Gentlemen every Minute to the Fathers, to in∣quire about the Condition of Souls in the other World, about Heaven, Hell, Purgatory, the Exi∣stence of a God, his Providence, and the Means ne∣cessary to Salvation: So that God seemed to move his Heart after an extraordinary Manner, and to affect it with those Holy Doubts which usually precede our Conversion. But that happy Moment was not yet come. However, who knows but Father Verbiest's Prayers, and the Care of several zealous Missionaries who have succeeded him, may hasten the Execution of those Designs which Providence seems to have on that great Prince? I am most respectfully, Madam, Hour Highnesses most humble and obedient Servant L. J.
LETTER III. To his Highness the Cardinal of FURSTEMBERG. O fthe Cities, Houses, and Chief Build∣ings of China. My Lord, AMONG the several Empires into which the World has hitherto been divided, that of China has ever obtained so considerable a Place, that a Prince cannot be wholly ignorant of what concerns it without neglecting one of those Sciences which seem a part of his Prerogative. This, My Lord, was, no doubt, the Motive that induced your Highness to inquire so particularly into the State of that Country, and to desire an Exact Account of the Number and Bigness of its Cities, the Multitude of its Inhabitants, the Beauty of its Publick Buildings, and Manner of its Palaces. By this it plainly appears that the vast Genius you have for Business, does in no wise lessen the Acute∣ness of your Judgment in the Sublimest Arts, and e∣specially in Architecture, of which, the most Excel∣lent Works raised by your Directions at Modave, Sa∣verne, Berni, St. Germans, and above all in the famous Cathedral of Strasbourg, are several Instances.
It having been my Business to run over all China, where in Five years time I have travelled above Two thousand Leagues, I may perhaps satisfie your High∣ness with more ease than any one besides, and shall give a Description of what has seemed to me most worth my Observation. Pekin, that is, the North-Court, is the chief City of China, and the usual Seat of its Emperors. It is so named to distinguish it from Nankin, the South-Court, another very considerable City, so called from the Emperor's Residing there in former Ages, it be∣ing the Finest, the most Commodious and best Situa∣ted of the whole Empire; but the continual Incr∣sions of the Tartars, a Warlike and very Trouble∣some Neighbour, obliged him to settle in the most Northerly Provinces, that he might be always ready to oppose them, with the numerous Army he usually keeps near his Court. Pekin was the place fixed upon, being Situate in the 40th Degree of Northern Latitude, in a very Fer∣tile Plain, and not far from the Long Wall. Its Neighbourhood to the Sea on the East, and the great Canal on the South, afford it a Communication with several fine Provinces, from which it draws part of of its Subsistence. This City, which is of an exact Square Form, was formerly four long Leagues round, but Tartars settling there, forced the Chinese to live without the Walls, where they in a very short while built a new Town, which being more Long than Large, does with the old one compose an irregular Figure. Thus Pekin is made up of two Cities; one is called the Tar∣tar's, because they permit none else to inhabit it; and the other the Chinese, as large, but much more full than the first. Both together are Six great Leagues in Circuit, allowing 3600 Paces to each League. This I can aver to be true, it having been measured by the Emperor's special Command.
This, My Lord, will seem strange to those who are acquainted with Europe only, and think Paris the Largest, as it is doubtless the Finest City in the World; yet the Difference between them is great. Paris ac∣cording to the Draught Mr. Blondell has made, by Order from our Magistrates, on the account of a De∣sign they have to surround it with new Walls, contains in its greatest Length but 2500 Paces, and In the Draught the Length does not bear a reciprocall Pro∣portion to its Cir∣cuit. consequently, tho' we should suppose it Square, would be but 10000 Paces round; so we should find it half as big as the Tartar's Town alone, and but a quarter as large as all Pekin. But then if one reflects that their Houses are gene∣rally but one Story high, and ours, one with another, are four, it will appear that Pekin has not more Lodg∣ings than Paris, but rather less, because its Streets are much wider, that the Emperor's Palace, which is of a vast Extent, is not half inhabited, that there are Magazines of Rice for the sustenance of above 200000 Men, and large Courts filled with little Houses in which those who stand for their Doctor's Degree are examined; which alone would make a very big City. It must not however be inferred that there are at Paris and Pekin the like number of Inhabitants; for the Chinese are very close together in their Dwellings, so that Twenty or more of them will lye in as little room as Ten with us; and it must needs be so, since the multitude of People in the Streets is so great, that one is frightned at it; it being such that Persons of Quality have always a Horseman going before them, to make way. Even the widest Streets are not free from Confusion; and at the sight of so many Hor∣ses, Mules, Camels, Wagons, Chairs, and Rings of 100 or 200 Persons who gather here and there round
the Fortune-Tellers, one would judge that some un∣usual Shew had drawn the whole Country to Pekin. Indeed, to outward appearance our most populous Cities are Wildernesses in respect of this, especially considering there are more Women then Men, and that among so vast a Multitude you shall very seldom meet with any. This I suppose has made some Peo∣ple think both Cities might contain Six or Seven Mil∣lions of Souls, which was a great mistake. By the fol∣lowing Reflexions it will, perhaps, appear that one must not always guess at the Number of Inhabitants in a Place by the Crowds that are seen in it. First, From all the Neighbouring Towns a Multi∣tude of Peasants daily flock to Pekin, with several useful and necessary Commodities; now no River coming up to the City, these must be brought by Land, which increases the number of Carters, Wa∣gons, Camels, and other Beasts of Burthen. So that Morning and Night, at the opening or shutting of the Gates, there are such Throngs of People going in or out, that one must wait a long while before they can go by: Now all these, who spread about the Streets, must not be reckoned among the Citizens. Secondly, Most Artificers in China work in their Customers Houses; as for Example, If I want a Suit, my Taylour comes in the Morning to my Lodging, where he works all Day, and at Night returns home; and so of the rest. These are continually about, look∣ing out for Business, to the very Smiths, which carry with them their Anvil, their Furnace, and other Im∣plements for their ordinary use. This helps to increase the Multitude. Thirdly, All Persons that are pretty well to pass, never go abroad but on Horseback or in Chairs, with a numerous Train. If at Paris all Officers, Gentlemen, Lawyers, Physicians, and wealthy Citizens were al∣ways thus attended, the Streets would not be so free.
In the fourth place, When a Mandarine goes any where, all his Inferiour Officers follow him in all their Formalities, so that they form a kind of Procession. The Lods at Court, and Princes of the Blood, never are without a great Guard of Horse, and being ne∣cessitated to go almost every Day to Court, their ve∣ry Equipage is sufficiently cumbersome to the City. It is evident that these Customs which are peculiar to China, do very much increase the Throng, and it must not be wondred at, that the City should seem much more Populous then it really is: And what must con∣vince us, is, That as I have shewn there may more People lodge in Paris then in Pekin. Then taking it for granted that 20 or 25 Persons there, take up no more room then 10 here, as I have already said, we must conclude on the whole, that Pekin contains near twice as many as Paris does, and I think I shall not be very wide of the Truth, if I allow it Two Millions of Inhabitants. I have been something prolix upon this Point, be∣cause I find it but slightly enquired into by most Hi∣storians. Nothing is more deceitful then Number at first sight. We think upon a view of the Sky that the Stars are numberless, and when told, are surpri∣sed to find they are so few. To see an Army of a hun∣dred thousand Men in the Field, you would imagine all the World were there; and even those who are u∣sed to such a sight, are apt to mistake if they are not aware. It is good to examine every thing our selves, espe∣cially in China, where they never reckon but by Mil∣lions; and tho' in these Cases one cannot be so very exact, it is not impossible to come something near the Truth, that we may not deceive the inquisitive Reader. Almost all the Streets are built in a direct Line, the greatest being about a hundred and twenty foot
broad, and a good League long, and the Shops where they sell Silks and China-ware, which generally take up the whole Street, make a very agreeable Perspe∣ctive. The Chinese have a Custom which adds to the Beauty of the Sight. Each Shop-keeper puts out be∣fore his House, on a little kind of Pedestal, a Board twenty or two and twenty Foot high Painted, Var∣nished, and often Gilt, on which are written in large Characters, the Names of the several Commodities he sells. These kind of Pilasters, thus placed on each side of the Street, and almost at an equal Distance from each other, make a pretty odd show. This is usual in almost all the Cities of China, and I have in some places seen so very neat ones, that one would think they had designed to make a Stage of the Street. Two things however detract much from their Beauty. The first, That the Houses are not propor∣tionable, being neither well built nor high enough. The second, That they are always pester'd with Mud or Dust. That Country, so well regulated in every thing else, is very deficient in this: Both Winter and Summer are equally troublesome to those that walk abroad, and therefore are Horses and Chairs so much in request: For the Dirt spoils the silken Boots which they wear there; and the Dust sticks to their Clothes, especially if they are made of Sattin, which they have a way of oyling, to give it the more lustre. There is so much of the latter raised by the multitude of Horses, that the City is always covered with a Cloud of it, which gets into the Houses, and makes its way into the closest Closets, so that take what care you will, your Goods should ever be full of it. They strive to allay it by a continual besprinkling the Streets with Water, but there is still so much lef, as is very of∣fensive, both as to Cleanliness and Health. Of all the Building this mighty City consists in,
the only remarkable one is the Imperial Palace, which I have already described to your Highness. I shall only add, to give you a more exact Notion of it, that it not only includes the Emperor's House and Gar∣dens, but also a little Town inhabited by the Officers at Court, and a great number of Artificers who are employed and kept by the Emperor for none but the Eunuchs lye in the inner Palace. The outward Town is defended by a very good Wall without, and divided from the Emperor's House by one of less strength. All the Houses are very low and ill con∣trived, far worse than those in the Tartars City; so that the Quality of its Inhabitants, and the Conve∣niency of being near the Court, are the only things that it is commendable for. The inner Palace is made up of Nine vast Courts, built in one Line, in length, for I comprehend not those on the Wings, where are the Kitchin, Stables, and other Offices. The Arches thro' which you go from one to another are of Marble, and over each there stands a large square Building, of a Gothick Architecture, the Timber of whose Roof becomes an odd kind of Ornament; for the Rafters being left of a length sufficient to come out beyond the Wall, have other shorter pieces of Wood put upon them, which forms a kind of Cornish that at a di∣stance looks very fine. The sides of each Court are closed by lesser Apartments, or Galleries; but when you come to the Emperor's Lodgings, there, indeed, the Portico's supported by stately Pillars, the white Marble-steps by which you ascend to the inward Halls, the gilt Roos, the Carved-work, Varnish, Gilding and Painting, they are adorned with, the Floors made of Marble or Porcelain, but chiefly the great number of different Pieces of Artichecture which they consist of, dazle the Beholders Eye, and truly look great, becoming the Majesty of so great a
Monarch. But still, the imperfect Notion the Chi∣nese have of all kind of Arts, is betrayed by the un∣pardonable Faults they are guilty of. The Apartments are ill contrived, the Ornaments irregular, and the former wants that Connexion which makes the Beau∣ty and Conveniency of our Palaces. In a word, there is as it were an unshapenness in the whole, which renders it very unpleasing to Foreigners, and must needs offend any one that has the least Notion of true Architecture. Some Relations, however, cry it up as Arts Ma∣ster-piece: The reason is, because the Missionaries who wrote them, had never seen any thing beyond it, or that long use has accustomed them to it; for it is observable, that let us measure a thing never so, Time will at length make it supportable. Our Fancy habituates it self to any sight, and therefore an Eu∣ropean, that has spent Twenty or Thirty years in China, can seldom give so good an account of it, as he that makes no stay there. As the true Accent of a Language is often lost among those who pronounce it ill, so the Sharpness of a Man's Judgment is blunt∣ed by conversing with those who have none. The Guards placed in the Gates and Avenues of the Palace have no other Arms but their Cimeters, and are not so numerous as I had at first imagined; but there is a multitude of Lord and Mandarines, con∣stantly attending at the usual time of Audience. For∣merly the whole Palace was inhabited with Eunuchs, whose Power and Insolence was grown to such a pitch, that they were become an insupportable Grie∣vance to the Princes of the Empire; but the last Em∣perors of China, especially those descended from Tar∣tary, have so▪humbled them, that they make at pre∣sent no Figure at all. The youngest serve as Pages, the other are put to the vilest Employments, their Task being to sweep the Rooms and keep them clean;
and for the least Fault they are severely punished by their Overseers, who are very strict. The number of the Emperor's Wives or Concu∣bines is not easily known, it being very great, and never fixed. They never were seen by any one but himself, and scarce durst a Man inquire about them. They are all Maidens of Quality which the Manda∣rines or Governors of the Provinces choose, and as soon as they are entered the Palace they have no far∣ther Correspondency with their Friends, no not with their very Fathers. This forced and perpetual Solitude, (for most of them are never taken Notice of by the Emperor) the Intreagues they set on work to get in∣to his Favour, and the Jealousie they have of one a∣nother, which wracks them with Suspicions, Envy and Hate, makes the most part of them very misera∣ble. Among those who are so happy as to gain their Prince's approbation, Three are chosen which bear the Title of Queens. These are in a far higher De∣gree of Honour than the rest, having each their Lodgings, their Court, their Ladies of Honour, and other Female Attendants. Nothing is wanting that can contribute to their Diversion. Their Furniture, Cloaths, Attendance is all Rich and Magnificent: It is true, all their Hap∣piness consists in pleasing their Lord, for no Business of any Consequence comes to their Knowledge; and as they do not assist the State with their Counsels, so they do not disturb it with their Ambition. The Chinese differ very much from us in that Point; They say Heaven has indued Women with Good Nature, Modesty, and Innocence, that they might look after their Families, and take care of their Chil∣drens Education; but that Men are born with strength of Body and Mind, with Wit and Gene∣rosity, to Govern and Rule the World. They are astonished when we tell them that with us the Scepter
often falls into a Princesses Hands, and often say by way of Jest, That Europe is the Ladies Kingdom. This, My Lord, is all that can be said in General of the Emperor of China's Palace, so much boasted of by Historians, because perhaps in all Pekin they met not with any worth their notice: For indeed all besides are so mean, that it would be, if I may say it, a de∣basing of our Terms to give the Name of Palace to their Grandees Houses. They are but one Story high, as are all the rest; tho', I confess, the great number of Lodgings for themselves and their Servants, does make some amends for their want of Beauty and Magnificence. Not but that the Chinese are as much as any Nation, in love with looking great and spend∣ing high, but the Custom of the Country, and the Danger of being taken notice of, is a Curb to their Inclinations. While I was at Pekin, one of the Chief Mandarines (I think he was a Prince) had built him a House something more lofty and stately than the rest; this was imputed to him as a Crime, and those whose Pro∣vince it was, accused him before the Emperor, inso∣much that the Mandarine, fearful of the Event, pul∣led down his House while the Business was under Ex∣amination, and before it had been decided. This Policy, in former Ages, made sure the Foundation of the greatest Monarchies, and could the Romans but have ever observed it, they might perhaps still be as powerful in Europe, as the Chinese are in Asia. Their Halls, where they plead, have little advan∣tage over the rest. The Courts are large, the Gates lofty, and sometimes imbellished with Ornaments of Architecture something tolerable; but the inward Halls and Offices can boast neither State nor Clean∣liness. Religion indeed has made her Party better; you frequently meet with their Idols Temples, which the
Princes and People, equally Superstitious, have raised at a vast Expence, and beautified with great numbers of Statues. The Roofs especially are observable, for the splendor of their Tiles varnished with yellow and green, numberless Figures curiously wrought, which are placed on every side, and Dragons shooting out at the Corners, painted with the same Colours. The Emperors have founded several within the outward Bounds of the Palace, among which Two more e∣minent then the rest were built by the late Monarch, at the Prayers of the Queen his Mother, who was very much infatuated with the Religion of the Lama's, a sort of Tartarian Priests, and the most Superstitious of all the Bonzes. We were forbidden the Entrance of these Temples, being told it would prove of an ill Consequence, and give great Offence to our fellow Christians, so that Curiosity gave place to our desire of Edifying them. But we had the liberty of seeing the famous Imperi∣al Observatory, so much celebrated by all Travellers. Be pleased, My Lord, to read what one of our ablest Mathematicians, has upon their Report spoken of it. Nothing in Europe is to be compared to it, whether for the Magnificency of the Place, or the Bigness of those vast Brazen Machines, which having been during these Seven hundred years exposed on the Platforms of those large Towers, are still as fair and entire as if they were but new molten. The Divisions of those Instruments are most ex∣act, the Disposition most proper for their Design, and the whole work performed with an unimitabl neatness. In a word, it seemed that China insulted her Sister Nations, as if with all their Learning and Riches they could not come up to her in that point. Indeed if China insults us by the Sumptuousness of her Observatory, she is in the right to do it thus, at 6000 Leagues distance, for were she nearer, she durst no, for shame, make any Comparison.
Full of these great Thoughts of it we visited this famous Place, and found it to be as follows. First, Being entred into a Court of a moderate Extent, we were shewn a little House, their Dwelling, who look after the Observatory. Turning to your right Hand, as you come in, you meet with a very narrow Stair∣case, by which you mount to the top of a square Tower, such as we formerly used to fortifie our City Walls withal; it is indeed contiguous on the inside to that of Pekin, and raised but Ten or Twelve Feet above the Bulwork. Upon this Platform the Chinese Astronomers had placed their Instruments, which tho' but few, yet took up the whole Room: But Fa∣ther Verbiest, when he undertook the Survey and Management of the Mathematicks, having judged them very useless, perswaded the Emperor to pull 'em down, and put up new ones of his own contriving. These old Instruments were still in the Hall near the Tower, buried in Dust and Oblivion. We saw them, but thro' a Window close set with Iron Bars. They appeared to us large, well cast, and of a shape not much unlike our Astronomical Rings. But they had laid in a by-Court a Celestial Globe of about three Foot Dia∣meter; that we had a full view of; it was something enclining to an Oval divided with little Exactness, and the whole Work very Course. They have in a lower Room near that place con∣trived a Gnomon. The Slit which gives Entrance to the Suns Rays, is raised about 8 Feet from the ground, Horozontally placed, and made of two Copper Plates suspended, which may be moved too and fro, to make the Orifice larger or smaller. Under it lyes a Table trimm'd with Brass, in the midst of which length-ways, they have struck a Meridian Line 15 Feet long, divided across by other Lines, which are neither exact nor fin. They have cut little holes out into the sides wherin to put water, to set it exactly Horison∣tal;
and this indeed is of a Chinese Contrivance the most tolerable of any'I have seen, and might be ser∣viceable to a careful Astronomer; but I question whe∣ther their Skill who invented it is so great as to use it rightly. This Observatory, of little worth, as to its ancient Machines, and less as to its Situation and Building, is now enriched with several Brazen Instruments which Father Verbiest has set up in it. They are large, well cast, imbellished with Representations of Dragons, and very well disposed to the Use they are designed for; and was but the niceness of their Divisions an∣swerable to that of the Work, and Telescopes fastned to them instead of Pins, according to the new Me∣thod used by the Royal Academy, nothing that we have of that kind, might be brought into Competition with them. But tho' the Father was, no doubt, very care∣ful of the Division of his Circles, the Chinese Artificer either was very negligent, or very incapable of fol∣lowing his Directions: so that I would rather trust to a Quadrant made by one of our good Workmen at Paris, whose Radius should be but one Foot and a half, than to that of six Feet which is at this Tower. Perhaps your Highness may be willing at one view to see how they are disposed. This Draught is very conformable to the Original, and far from flattering it, as Pictures and Cuts generally do, I may say that it does not express half its Beauty. But each several Piece shewing but confusedly in this little space, I have added, in as few words as I could, an Explanation of the Frame and Embellishments of those Noble Instru∣ments.
a. Steps going vp to the Observatory b. A Rotrng Room for those that make Observations 1: a Zodical Sphere 2 an Equinoclial Sphre 3 an Amuthall Horizon 4 a Quadrant 5 A Sextant 6 a Coelestiall Globe
I. SPHAERA ARMILLARIS ZODIACALIS, of six Feet in Diameter. This is supported by four Dragons Heads, whose Bodies after several windings are fastned to the ends of two Brazen Beams laid a-cross, that bear the whole weight of the Sphere. These Dragons, which were picked out among all other Creatures, because the Emperor bears them in his Coat of Arms, are as the Chinese represent them, wrapt up in Clouds, with long Hair on their Heads between their Horns, a fuzzy Beard under their lower Jaw, flaming Eyes, long sharp Teeth, their Mouth open, and breathing a whole Stream of Flame. Four Lions of the same Metal, stand under the End of the aforesaid Beams, whose Heads are raised higher or lower by Screws fastned with them. The Circles are divided both in their Exteriour and Interiour Surface by Crosslines into 360 Degrees each, and each Degree into 60 Mi∣nutes, and the latter into portions of 10 Seconds each by small Pins. II. SPHAERA EQUINOXIALIS of six Foot Diameter. This Sphere is supported by a Dragon, who bears it on his back bowed, and whose four Claws seize the four Ends of its Pedestal, which as the former is formed of two Brazen Beams Cross-wise, whose Ends are also born by four small Lions, which serve to set it right. The Design is noble and well performed. III. HORISON AZIMUTHALE, six Feet in Diameter. This Instrument, useful for the taking of Azimuths, is composed of a large Circle horisontally placed. The double Alhidada, which serves it for a Diameter,
runs over all the Limb, and carries round along with it an upright Triangle, the upper Angle of which is fastned to a Beam raised perpendicular from the Cen∣ter of the said Horison. Four folded Dragons bow their Heads under the inferiour Limb of that Circle, to make it fast; and two others wound round two small Columns, mount on either side Cemicircular∣wise, as high as the said Beam, to which they are fastned, to keep the Triangle steady. IV. A large QUADRANT whose Radius is six Foot. The Limb is divided into Portions of 10 Seconds each; the Lead which shews its Vertical Situation, weighs a Pound; and hangs from the Center by a ve∣ry fine Brass-wyre. The Alhidada moves easily round the Limb. A Dragon folded in several Rings, and wrapt up in Clouds, seizes on all parts the several Plates of the Instrument to fasten them, least they should start out of their due Position. The whole Body of the Quadrant hangs in the Air, and a fixed Axis runs thro' its Center, round which the Quadrant turns towards the Parts of the Heavens which the Mathematician chooses to observe: And least its weight should cause it to shiver, and lose its Vertical Position, a Beam is raised on each side, secured at the bottom by a Dragon, and fastned to the middle Beam or Axis by Clouds which seem to come out of the Air. The whole Work is solid and well contrived. V. A SEXTANT, whose Radius is about eight Feet. This represents the sixth Part of a great Circle born by a Beam, the Basis of which is Concave, made fast with Dragons, and crossed in the middle by a Brazen Pillar, on one end of which is an En∣gine, the help of whose Wheels serves to facilitate the
Motion of that Instrument. On this Engine rests the middle of a small Brazen Beam which represents a Radius of the Sextant, and is fastned to it. Its up∣per part is terminated by a big Cilinder, which is the Center, round which the Alhidada turns, and the low∣er is extended above two Feet beyond the Limb, that it may be grasped by the Pully which serves to raise it. These large and heavy Machines are of greater Or∣nament than use. VI. A CELESTIAL GLOBE of six Feet Diameter. This in my opinion is the fairest and best fashion∣ed of all the Instruments. The Globe it self is Bra∣zen, exactly round and smooth: The Stars well made, and in their true places, and all the Circles of a pro∣portionable breadth and thickness. It is besides so well hung that the least touch moves it, and tho' it is above Two thousand weight, the least Child may elevate it to any Degree. On its large Concave Ba∣sis rest in an opposite Station four Dragons, whose Hair standing up an end, support a noble Horison commen∣dable by its Breadth, its several Ornaments, and the Delicacy and Niceness of the Work. The Meridian in which the Pole is fixed, rests upon Clouds that is∣sue out of the Basis, and slides easily between them, its motion being facilitated by some hidden Wheels, and moves with it the whole Globe to give it the re∣quired Elevation. Besides which the Horison, Dra∣gons, and two Brazen Beams which lye cross in the Center of the Basis's Concavity, are all moved at pleasure, without stirring the Basis, which still remains fixed; this facilitates the due placing of the Hoison, whether in respect of the Natural Horison, or in re∣spect of the Globe. I wondred how Men, who live Six thousand Leagues from us, could go through such a piece of Work; and I must own that if all the
Circles which are divided, had been corrected by some of our Workmen, nothing could be more per∣fect in that kind. These Machines being most of them above 10 feet from the Ground, have for the Astronomers greater conveniency, Marble Steps round them, cut Amphitheater-wise. How inviting soever these new Instruments may seem, the Chinese could never have been perswaded to make use of them, and leave their old ones, without an especial Order from the Emperor to that effect. They are more fond of the most defective Piece of Antiquity then of the perfectest Novelty, differing much in that from us who are in love with nothing but what is new. Indeed we are all to blame, for Time can add to or detract nothing from the real worth of things: But if we do not take great care of our selves, Fancy, Custom, and Prejudice, will pre∣vail over our Understanding, which only perceiving the Difference of things, is only able to judge of it. If this Failing of the Chinese extended but to their Temporal Concerns, the Mischief perhaps would not be great; but it unhappily reaches o the Point of Religion; and whereas in Europe it seems that a Do∣ctrine, tho' never so absurd, has a Title to our Belief when recommended by Novelty, in China it is quite contrary; or they think it a sufficient reason to re∣ject the Christian Faith, because in respect of their Monarchy it is not old enough: As tho' Time and Ignorance were to be preerred to Truth, or that long standing could render Superstition lawful or reasona∣ble. The Fondness or Antiquity and for the Observance of ancient Customs, is perhaps what keeps the Chinese so close to their Astronomical Observations, for it has ever been their continual Practise, but it is a shame, that they have during so long a time made no great∣er Improvements. One would think, that having
watched the Motions of the Stars above 4000 years, they should be perfectly acquainted with them; yet when our Missionaries entered that Country, they found them to be so unskilful herein, that with all their care they never could arrive to the Composing of an Exact Calendar; and their Tables of Eclipses were so uncorrect, that scarce could they foretel a∣bout what time that of the Sun should happen. As for those two Points they are now at rest, for those Fathers have settled the Calendar, and that which is given out in the beginning of each year, notes with the greatest nicety all the Motions of the Heavens which are during the year to happen out of Course. However they still continue their Observations. Five Mathematicians spend every Night on the Tow∣er in watching what passes over head; one is gazing towards the Zenith, another to the East, a third to the West, the fourth turns his Eyes Southwards, and a fith Northwards, that nothing of what happens in the four Corners of the World may scape their diligent Observation. They take notice of the Winds, the Rain, the Air, of unusual Phenomena's, such as are Eclipses, the Conjunction or Opposition of Planets, Fires, Meteors, and all that may be useful. This they keep a strict accompt of, which they bring in every Morning to the Surveyor of the Mathematicks, to be registred in his Office. If this had always been pra∣ctised by able and careful Mathematicians, we should have a great number of curicus Remarks; but besides that, these Astronomers are very unskilful, they take little care to improve that Science; and provided their Salary be paid as usual, and their Income constant, they are in no great trouble about the Alterations and Changes which happen in the Sky. But if these Phe∣nomena's are very apparent, as when there happens an Eclipse, or a Comet appears, they dare not be alto∣gether so negligent.
All Nations have ever been astonished at Eclipses, of which they could not discover the Cause; there is nothing so extravagant as the several Reasons some have given for it, but one would wonder that the Chi∣nese, who as to Astronomy may justly claim Seniori∣ty over all the World besides, have reasoned as ab∣surdly on that Point as the rest. They have fancied that in Heaven there is a prodigious great Dragon, who is a professed Enemy to the Sun and Moon, and ready at all times to eat them up. For this reason, as soon as they perceive an Eclipse, they all make a terrible rattling with Drums and brass Kettles, till the Monster frightned at the noise has let go his Prey. Persons of Quality, who have read our Books, have for these several years been undeceived, but (especi∣ally if the Sun looseth its Light) the old Customs are still observed at Pekin, which (as is usual) are at once very Superstitious and very Ridiculous. While the Astronomers are on the Tower to make their Obser∣vations,the chief Mandarines belonging to the Lipou fall on their Knees in a Hall or Court of the Palace, looking attentively that way, and frequently bowing towards the Sun, to express the pity they take of him, or rather to the Dragon, to beg him not to molest the World, by depriving it of so necessary a Planet. Now all that the Mathematicians have foretold concerning the Eclipse must prove true, should it hap∣pen sooner or later, be greater or less, longer or short∣er, the Surveyor and his Brethren would go near to lose their Places. But they never run that hazard, let what will happen the Registers are ever exact; and provided the Officers be well paid, they are ever in Fee with the Heavens. I am afraid, My Lord, that I have been too tedious in this Digression; your Highness having for these se∣veral years been busied in Affairs of greater moment, must needs have little regard for such obstruse Noti∣ons,
unfit to excite you to those elevated Sentiments so natural to such great Souls as yours, and I might have spent my time more to your Satisfaction in wri∣ting the Wars of the Tartars, and the Conquest of China. But besides the inclination every Man has to speak of what belongs to his Profession, I have per∣haps been over-ruled by the habit we contract in Chi∣na to entertain great Persons with these Matters; and have hoped, that a Prince curious, and endued with a Genius to which nothing is impossible, would with pa∣tience hear, that which makes the Delight of the Greatest and most Learned Emperor in the whole World. I should do Pekin a very great injustice if I passed over in silence its noble Gates and stately Walls, which indeed become an Imperial City. The former are not embellished with Statues or other Carving as are most Publick Buildings in China, but all their Beauty consists in a prodigious height, which at a Distance makes the finest shew in the World. They consist in two large square Buildings built separately, but bound together by two tall and very thick Walls, so that they form a Square which may contain above Five hun∣dred Men in Battel. The first Building, which looks like a Fortress, faces the Road. There is no way thro' it, but you go in at the Side wall, where there is a Gate proportionable to all the rest; then you turn to the Right, and meet with the second Tower which commands the City, and has a Gate like the former, but whose Gate-way is so long that it grows dark to∣wards the middle. There they constantly keep a Corps du Guard, and a small Magazine to supply it rea∣dily with Stores in case of Necessity. If you respect only the neatness of the Workman∣ship, and the Ornaments of Architecture, I must, in∣deed, confess, that the Gates of Paris are incompara∣bly finer. But yet, when a Man approaches Pekin,
he must own that these immense Buildings, and, if I may speak it, those proud Masses have in their un∣shapeness a State preferrable to all our Ornaments. The Arches are built with Marble, and the rest with very large Brick, bound with excellent Mortar. The Walls are answerable to their Gates, so tall that they hide the whole City, and so thick that Cen∣tries on Horse-back are placed upon them. From place to place, at a Bow-shots distance, they are defended with square Towers. The Ditch is dry, but very broad and deep. All is regular, and as well kept as if they were in continual Apprehension of a Siege. This, My Lord, is a pretty exact Description of the chief City of all China, valuable by its Extent, large Gates, strong Walls, sumptuous Palace, good Garri∣son, (which consists in the best Forces of the whole Empire) and the Number of its Inhabitants, but com∣mendable for nothing else. What may be said of all the rest in general is this; The Chinese divide them into two kinds. Those which are solely designed for the Defence of the Country they call Cities of War, and the rest Towns of Traffick. The fortified Places which I have seen are not much stron∣ger than the others, unless it be by their Situation, which makes some almost inaccessible. The Fron∣tier Towns, especially those near Tartary, are some∣what singular; and our Missionaries have assured me, that there were several narrow Passages so well forti∣fied, that it was almost impossible to force them: I my self have seen some which a hundred Men might easily defend against a whole Army. Their usual For∣tifications are a good Bulwork, some Towers, Brick∣walls, and a large and deep Ditch, filled with run∣ning Water. This is all the Chinese Engineers skill consists in, which indeed is no wonder, since our selves knew no better, before Cannons were in use, which has put us upon inventing new ways of defend∣ing
our Cities, as there were new ones contrived of attacking them. I confess, My Lord, that running over all those Ci∣ties, which their Inhabitants esteem the strongest in the World, I have often with no little pleasure reflect∣ed on the facility with which Lewis the Great would subdue those Provinces, if Nature had made us a lit∣tle nearer Neighbours to China; he whom the stout∣est Places in Europe can at best withstand but during a few days. God has, by an equal and just Distribu∣tion, given the Chinese but Ordinary Commanders, because no Extraordinary Actions could be performed there; but to vanquish such Enemies as ours, so great a Hero was wholly necessary. It must however be granted, that in the way of Fortification the Chinese have outdone all the Ancients in the prodigious Work that defends part of their Country. 'Tis that which we call the Great Wall, and with themselves stile Van li Cham, Chim, The Wall 10000 Stadium's long, which reaches from the Eastern Ocean to the Province of Chansi: Not that its length is so great as they speak it; but if you reckon all its windings, it will really appear to be no less than 500 Leagues. You must not conceive it as a plain Wall, for it is fortified with Towers much like the City Walls I have mentioned; and in the places where the Passes might be more easily forced, they have raised two or three Bulworks one behind another, which may give themselves a mutual Defence, whose enor∣mous Thickness, and the Forts which Command all the Avenues, being all guarded by great numbers of Forces, protect the Chinese from all Attempts on that side. China being divided from Tartary by a Chain of Mountains, the Wall has been carried on over the highest Hills, and is now tall and then low as the Ground allowed; for you must not think, as some
have imagined, that the Top of it is level through∣out, and that from the bottom of the deepest Vales it could have been raised to be as high as the tallest Mountains. So when they say that it is of a wonder∣ful height, we must understand it of the Spot of Ground it is built on; for of it self it is rather lower than those of their Cities, and but four, or at most, five feet in thickness. It is almost all built with Brick, bound with such strong Mortar, that not only it has lasted these several Ages, but is scarce the worse. It is above 1800 years since Emperor Chihohamti raised it to prevent the In∣surrections of the Neighbouring Tartars. This was at once one of the greatest and maddest Undertakings that I ever heard of; for tho' indeed it was a pru∣dent Caution of the Chinese thus to guard the easiest Avenues, how ridiculous was it of them to carry their Wall to the top of some Precipices which the Birds can scarce reach with their Flight, and on which it is impossible the Tartarian Horse should ascend: And if they could fancy that an Army could have clam∣bered up thither, how could they believe that so thin and low a Wall as they have made it in such places, could be of any Defence. As for my part, I admire how the Materials have been conveyed and made use of there; and, indeed, it was not done without a vast Charge, and the loss of more Men then would have perished by the greatest Fury of their Enemies. It is said, that during the Reigns of the Chinese Emperors, this Wall was guard∣ed by a Million of Soldiers; but now that part of Tartary belongs to China, they are content with man∣ning well the worst situated, but best fortified Parts of it. Among the other Fortresses of the Kingdom, there are above a Thousand of the first rate; the rest are less remarkable, and indeed scarce deserve that Name;
yet all are very well garrisoned, and by that one may judge what vast Armies are constantly kept on foot. However, that is not the Chinese's chiefest boast, for if they are considered but as to the Military part, they will raise our wonder, but who can enough admire the Numbers, Greatness, Beauty, and Government of their Trading Towns? They are generally divided into three Classes; of the first there are above 160, of the second 270, and of the third near 1200, be∣sides near 300 walled Cities more, which they leave out as not worth observing, tho' they are almost all well inhabited and traded. The greater and lesser Villages are numberless, especially those of the Sou∣thern Provinces. In the Province of Chani and Cheni they are for the most part surrounded with Walls and good Ditches, with Iron Gates which the Country People shut at Night, and guard in the Day-time, to protect themselves from Thieves, as also from the Sol∣diers, who as they pass by, which they continually do, would in spight of their Officers insult them. The largeness of these Cities is not less amazing then their number. Pekin, which I have already had the honour to mention to your Highness, is not to be compared to Nankin, or, as it is now called, Kiam∣nin, a Town formerly enclosed within three Walls, the outermost of which was 16 long Leagues round. Some Works of it are still to be seen, which one would rather think to be the Bounds of a Province then a City. When the Emperors kept their Court there, its Inhabitants were, no doubt, numberless. Its Si∣tuation, Haven, Plenty, the Fertility of the Neigh∣bouring Lands, and the Canals made near it for the Improvement of Trade, could not but make it a fine City. It has since lost much of its former Splendour, however, if you include those who live in its Sub∣urbs, and on the Canals, it is still more populous than Pekin, and tho' the unarable Hills, the ploughed Lands,
Gardens, and vast empty Places which are within its Walls, render it really less then it seems, what is in∣habited does still make a prodigious big City. The Streets are moderately broad, but very well pa∣ved; The Houses low, but cleanly, and the Shops ve∣ry rich, being filled with Stuffs, Silks, and other cost∣ly Wares: In a word, it is as the Center of the Em∣pire, where you may find all the Curiosities which are produced in it. There the most famous Doctors and the Mandarins who are out of Business, usually settle themselves, having the conveniency of several Libraries filled with choice of good Books; their Printing is fairer, their Artificers are better Work∣men, the Tongue more polite, and the Accent smo∣ther than any where else; and truly no other City were more proper for the Emperor's Seat, were it not for the State's advantage that he should reside near the Frontiers. It is also famous for several other Reasons. First, Because of the River Kiam on which it is si∣tuated, which is the Largest, Deepest, and most Na∣vigable in the whole Empire; being, in that part of it which bathes the City, near half a League broad. Secondly, The Royal Observatory on the Top of a Mountain, where stood formerly a Platform and proper Instruments (which were since removed to Pekin) but now only some old Buildings remain, and a large square Hall, newly built as an Acknowledg∣ment of Emperor Camhy's kind Visit to that City. This was a Trick of the Mandarins, who under pre∣tence of raising a Monument of that Prince's Favour, got considerable Sums of Money from the Inhabi∣tants, not half of which was laid out. In the third place for a large Tower, vulgarly called the China Tower. There is without the City (and not within, as some have wrote) a House named by the Chinese, The Temple of Gratitude, (Pao-gren-sse) built 300 years ago by Emperor Yonlo. It is raised on a
Massive Basis, built with Brick, and surrounded with a Rail of unpolished Marble: There are ten or twelve Steps all round it, by which you ascend to the low∣ermost Hall, the Floor of which stands one foot higher than the Basis, leaving a little Walk two feet wide all round it. The Front of this Hall or Temple is adorned with a Gallery and some Pillars. The Roofs (for in Chi∣na there are usually two, one next to the top of the Wall, and a narrower over that) are covered with Green varnished shining Tiles; and the Ceiling within is painted, and made up of several little ieces differently wrought one within the other, which with the Chinese is no little Ornament. I confess that med∣ley of Beams, Jices, Rafters and Pinions, bears a sur∣prising singularity, because we must needs judge that such a Walk was not done without great Expence: But to speak truth, it proceeds only from the Igno∣rance of their Workmen, who never could find out Noble Simplicity which becomes at once the Solidity and Beauty of our Buildings. This Hall has no Light but what comes in at the Doors, of which there are three very large ones that give admittance into the Tower I speak of, which is part of this Temple. It is of an Octogonal Figure, about 40 Feet broad, so that each side is 15 Foot wide. A Wall in the like form is built round it, at two Fathoms and a half Distance, and being mode∣rately high, supports the one side of a Pent-house, which issues from the Tower, and thus makes a pret∣ty kind of a Gallery. This Tower is nine Stories high, each Story being adorned with a Cornish three Feet wide, at the bottom of the Windows, and di∣stinguished by little Pent-houses like the former, but narrower, and (like the Tower it self) decreasing in breadth as they increase in height. The Wall is, at the bottom, at least twelve Feet
thick, and above eight and a half at the top; incrust∣ed with China Ware laid flat-wise; for tho' the Wea∣ther has something impaired its Beauty, there is yet enough remaining to shew that it is real China, tho' of the courser sort; since 'tis impossible that Bricks could have retained that Lustre above 300 years. The Stair-case within is narrow and troublesome, the Steps being very high. Each Story is made up of thick pieces of Timber laid cross-wise, and on them a Floor, the Cieling of each Room being enriched with Paintings, if their Painting can enrich a Room. The Walls of the upper Rooms bear several small Niches full of Carved Idols, which makes a pretty kind of Checker. The whole Work is Gilt, and looks like carved Stone or Marble; but I believe it to be only Brick, for the Chinese are very skilful in stamp∣ing all kind of Ornaments on it, which thro' the fine∣ness of their sisted Mould, becomes more easie to them then to us. The first Floor is the most lofty, but the rest are of an equal height. I have told the Steps, which are 190 in number, being almost all 10 large Inches high, having measured them very nicely, which amounts to 158 Feet. If you add to this the height of the Ba∣sis, that of the ninth Story, which has no Steps to mount thence to the Top, and the Cubilo, the Sum will be at least 200 Feet in height from the Ground. This Cubilo is not one of the least Ornaments of that Building, being, as it were an extraordinary thick Mast, or May-Pole, which from the Floor of the eighth Story rises above 30 Feet higher than the top of the Tower. Round it a great piece of Iron runs in a Spiral-line, several Feet distant from the Pole, so that it looks like a hollow Cave, on the top of which is placed a very large golden Ball. This it is that the Chinese call the Porcelain Tower, and with some Europe∣ans would name the Brick-one. Whatever it may be
made of, it is undoubtedly the be contrived and no∣blest Structure of all the East. From its Top you have a Prospect of the whole City, and especially of the Mountain on which stands the Observatory, which lyes a good League North-East and by East from it. Nankin was also famous for the bigness of its Bells, but their weight having worn down the Steeple which they were hung in, the whole Building fell down, and they still lye upon the ground. There is one in the way between our Colledge & the Observatory whose height is 11 Feet, and that of its Handle or Ear by which it hangs 2, and its Diameter is 7; the outward Circumfe∣rence is 22 Feet, which indeed lessens towards the top, but not in the same proportion with our Bells here, for the Figure is almost a Cilinder, if you take away a considerable Swelling towards the middle where the Circumference is equal to that of the bottom. Its lower Brim is six Inches and a half thick, but grows thinner and thinner, to the bowing where the Cone begins, so that under the Ear it is not above two Inches thick, which may be measured exactly enough, be∣cause they bore their Bells at the top to increase their Sound, as they conceit it. The Metal is brittle, and the Cast not clear, being full of little knobs. These Bells were cast during the Ninth Reign be∣fore this. Each have their particular Name; the one being called Tchoui, The Hanger; another Che, The Eater; a third Choui, or So, The Sleeper; and a fourth Si, The Flyer; for tho' there are but three in the City, the Chinese Geographers place a fourth beyond the River Kiam. Now supposing that a Cubical Foot of Brass weigh 648 Pound, the Bell which I measured should weigh about 90 Thousand, supposing it to be of an equal bigness and thickness. As for the bigness, there is no great difference, but the thickness lessens from the bottom to the top, where, as I have said, it is but two Inches think; so that allowing it be one
with another four Inches thick and better throughout, the Bell will weigh about 50000 l. and be twice as heavy as that at Erfort, which Father Kircer affirms to be the biggest in the World. But this is nothing to what there is at Pekin, which can shew seven cast under the Reign of Emperor Youlo near 300 years ago, weighing 120000 l. each. They are 11 Feet wide, 40 round, and 12 high, be∣sides the Ear, which is at least 3 foot in height▪ This, My Lord, I own is surprising, and could scarce be believed, had we not Father Verbiest's word for it, who himself has exactly measured them. But as much as their Bells exceeds ours in bigness, so much do ours exceed them in Sound, whether our Metal or Cast be better. Be pleased however to read what Father Magalbaens writes of that which is in the Palace at Pekin. Its sound, says he, is so clear, so plea∣sant, and armonious, that it seems to proceed from a Mu∣sical Instrument much rather than a Bell. All this must be understood comparatively; and perhaps the Au∣thor had never heard any thing of that kind like it. As for my part, all the Bells I have heard there, have seemed to me to make but a dull, obscure noise, as one may easily imagine, for their Clappers are not made of Iron, but Wood. However the thing be (for it deserves not a longer Enquiry) it is certain that the Chinese have in all their Cities very big ones, with which they distinguish the Watches of the Night. Of these they usually reckon five, from seven or eight of the Clock in the Evening: They begin the first with striking once, which they repeat a moment after, and so on till the second Watch, when they strike two strokes, at the third three; and so on: So that these Bells are as so many repeating Clocks, which every other moment inform you what time of Night it is. They also use for the same purpose a very great Drum, which they beat in the same manner.
These two Imperial Cities, which I have now been describing, might alone render China deservedly fa∣mous, but the Metropolis of most Provinces are so big, that each were fit to be the Chief of an Empire. Signanfou, the Capital City of Chensi, is three Leagues round. I have had the Curiosity to measure it my self, which was not difficult, the Walls which inclose it making an exact Square. Its Ditches, which are partly dry and partly filled with water, are very fine; its Walls thick and tall, as well as the square Towers that defend them; its Bulworks very broad; and its Gates, at least some, most stately, and like those at Pekin. The City is divided into two Parts by an Earthen Wall, which runs almost from one End to the other. The one half is inhabited by the Tartar, who keep the biggest Garrison, tho' in the other where the Chinese dwell, there be also a good Body of Troops. There may still be seen an old Palace, the former Residence of the ancient Kings of that Coun∣try, who were powerful, not only because of the vast Extent of their Dominions, but also thro' the Bravery and Courage of their Subjects; for among all the Chinese, there are not any better proportioned, or more strong, stout and laborious than these. As for the Houses, they are, as every where else in Chi∣na, low and not over-well built; their Furniture is not so neat as in the Southern Parts, their Varnish not so smooth, their China so abundant, or their Work∣men so ingenious. Hamt-céou, the Chief City of the Province of Chekiam, is also one of the richest and greatest in the Empire. The Chinese say it is four Leagues round, and, I believe, they tell no lye. The Streets are as full of People as at Paris, and the Suburbs besides be∣ing very large, and the Canals crowded with an in∣finite number of Boats, I believe it to be as populous as the greatest Cities in Europe. The Garrison consists
in 10000 Men, 3000 of which are Chinese. The Wa∣ter of their Canals is not clear, nor their Streets broad, but the Shops are neat, and the Merchants there are reputed to be very rich. Eastwards from the City runs a River half a League broad, being near the Sea, but indeed not very con∣siderable, for a little higher it is but an useless Tor∣rent, which runs thro' abundance of Rocks. A Lake lyes close to it to the Westwards, which at most is two Leagues round. The Water is clear, but very shal∣low; Deep enough however for some large Flat-bot∣tom'd Boats, which the Chinese keep there, like so many floating Islands, where their young People take their Pleasure themselves. In the middle stands an Island where they usually land, having built there a Temple and some Houses for their Diversion. Of this Lake some Relations have made an Inchanted Place. I have read that it was built round with stately Hou∣ses and noble Palaces. This might be; but if true, a great care was certainly taken that not so much as the least Track or Memory of it should remain. But perhaps they gave that Name to some Wooden thatched Dwellings, in which China does every where abound, then indeed a short while might make great Alterations, for Time needs not use it's utmost Ef∣forts to pull them down. However, if this City is not so eminent for Buildings, it is commendable for being one of the best situated in the Empire, for the prodigious Number of its Inhabitants, the Conveni∣ency of its Canals, and the great Traffick which is made there in the finest Silks in the World. What is surprising in China is, That whereas, being gone thro' one of these Cities, you would scarce ex∣pect to meet with the like, you are hardly out of sight of it before you are in view of such another. As for example; Going along the great Canal from Hamt-chéou you come to Sout-chéou, which is not far
from it, and if you believe the Inhabitants, contain four Leagues in Circuit, being indeed of a vast Ex∣tent. It is also the usual Residence of a Viceroy, and has as great a Trade as any City in the Empire. I do not find it to be proportionably as Populous as those I have mentioned; but the Suburbs, and multitude of Boats amaze new Comers. Those who have the Pa∣ience to spend a few Minutes on the Water-side, and view the Throngs of People that come to cheapen Commodities, would imagine it to be a Fair to which the whole Empire were crowding; and the Officers there, tho' not over strict, are so busied in receiving the Customs, that they are obliged to put off to the next day a great many Traders, who come to make their Payments. This continual Hurry among the most covetous Nation in the World, should occasion frequent Quarrels, but their Government is so good, and the Mandarines Orders so strictly observed, that besides Abusive Language, in which the Chinese are very fluent, other Injuries are seldom offered. Not far from Sout-chéu you meet with other Cities at small Distances from each other, some a League and a half, and some two Leagues round. As soon as you are come to the River Kiam, you meet with Shin Kiamson, a Town built on its Banks, one of whose very Sub∣urbs▪ which lyes North-west, is a large German League in Circuit; This Place is so Populous, that when I passed thro' it, it was no small trouble to me to make my way thro' the Crowd, and is usually as great in those Streets as here at a Solemn Procession. Over against it, on the other side of the River, stands Qua-chéou, another great trading Town; a little be∣yond lyes Yam-chéou, one of the most remarkable Ci∣ties in the whole Empire, which, according to the Chinese, contains two Millions of Inhabitants. If I did not here recal my self, I should unawares describe all the Cities of China; but designing only
to give your Highness a general account of their Large∣ness and Number, I shall without a needless, tedious descending into Particulars, assure your Eminency that my self have seen seven or eight of them as big at least as Paris, besides several others where I have not been, which I am assured are not less. There are four∣score of the first Rank, equal to Lyons or Bourdeaux. Among 260 of the Second, above a Hundred are like Orleance; and among 1200 of the Third, there are five or six hundred as considerable as Rochel or Angou∣lesme; besides an innumerable quantity of Villages greater and more populous than Marenes and St. Iohn de Luz. These, My Lord, are no Hyperbole's, neither do I speak by Hear-say, but having travelled in Per∣son over the greatest part of China, I hope your High∣ness will favour me so far, as not to question the sin∣cerity of my Relation. I shall conclude with the several Ports and Havens of China, which do not a little contribute o the In∣crease of its Wealth. Its Chinese Emperors had forbid the Entrance of them to Foreigners; but the Tartars, more sond of Money than of Ancient Customs, have of late years granted a free Access to all Nations. The first, beginning Southwards, is Macao, famous for the great Traffick which the Portuguese formerly made there, before the Dutch had expelled them out of the greatest part of the Indies. They still have a Fortress in it, but their Garrison is small, as indeed they are not able to keep a very great one. Besides, their best way to maintain themselves in this Post is, to ingratiate themselves with the Chinese, by a blind obseqiousness to all their Commands, which they do very wisely. The Town, if I may so call a few Hou∣ses not inclosed with any Walls, is built on a narrow uneven Soil, on the Point of a small Island which commands a good Road where Ships, by the means of several other little Islands which lye to the Wind∣wards,
are secure from any Storm. The Haven is Narrow, but Safe and Commodious. All the Cu∣stoms belong to the Emperor; and tho' the Portuguese do still preserve a Form of Government among them∣selves, yet they obey the Mandarines in whatsoever bears the least Relation to the Chinese. The second Haven of this Coast is formed by a pretty wide River, up the which great Vessels can go as far as Canton. This place is very convenient to Foreigners, because the City supplies them with abun∣dance of all kind of Merchandises and Refreshments; but the Mandarines are not fond of letting them ap∣proach too near their Walls, least they should be sur∣prised, or rather, they are unwilling that their Merchants should deal with ours, to whom themselves do underhand sell their Commodities by the means of their Brokers. The Province of Fokie adjoyning to that of Can∣ton has another celebrated Haven, which they call E∣moui, from the Island which forms it, for it is pro∣perly speaking, but a Road lockt in on the one hand by the Continent, and on the other by the said Island. The biggest Ships ride here secure, and the Banks so high, that they may come as near the Shoar as they will. The late great improvement of Trade in that City, invites to it a considerable number of People, and this Post has been judged of such a Consequence, that the Emperor has for some years past kept there a Garrison of six or seven Thousand Men under a Chi∣nese Commander. The fourth called Nimpo, lyes in the most Easter∣ly part of China: There it was we landed. The En∣trance is very difficult, and wholly impracticable to great Vessels, the Bar at the highest Tides not being above 15 Foot under Water. That Place is neverthe∣less very well traded, for thence they make a speedy Voyage to Iapan, being but two days in their passage
to Nangazaki. Thither they carry Silks, Sugar, Drugs and Wine, which they Exchange for Gold, Silver and Brass. Nimpo is a City of the first Class, and was in for∣mer times very remarkable, but has been much da∣maged by the late Wars; however, it daily regains something of its former Splendour; the Walls are in a good Condition, the City and Suburbs well inhabi∣ted, and the Garrison pretty numerous. The Town is still full of a kind of Monuments called by the Chinese Paifam, or Pailou, and by us Triumphal Arches, which are very frequent in China. They consist in three great Arches abreast, built with long Marble Stones. That in the middle is much higher than the other two. The four Columns which support them are sometimes round, but ofner square, made of one only Stone placed on an irregular Basis. In some this Basis is not to be seen whether they ne∣ver had any, or that thro' Age it was sunk into the Ground. They have no Capitals, but the Trunk is fastned into the Architrave, if we will give that Name to some Figures over the Pillars. The Frize is better distinguished, but too high in proportion to the rest; they adorn it with Inscriptions, Figures and Embossed Sculptures of a wonderful beauty, with Knots wrought loose one within another, with Flowers curiously car∣ved, and Birds flying as it were from the Stone, which in my Mind are Master-pieces. Not that all these Arches are of this make: Some are so ordinary that they are not worth the seeing; but others there are which cannot enough be prised. Instead of a Cornish, they have before and behind large flat Marble Stones like Pent-houses There are so many of these Monuments at Nimpo, that in some places they are more a Trouble then an Ornament, tho' at a Distance they make an agreeable Prospect. I have omitted the Haven of Nankin, which, me∣thinks,
because of the breadth and depth of the Ri∣ver Kiam should have been first in order; but not a∣ny Ships put in there at present. I do not know whe∣ther the Mouth of the said River is now choaked up with Sand; but sure I am, that the whole Fleet of that famous Pyrat who besieged Nankin during the late Troubles, passed it without any difficulty; and perhaps it is to prevent any such Accident for the fu∣ture, that the Chinese will not make use of it, that by degrees it may grow out of knowledge. This, My Lord, is in general what may be said of the Ports, Fortresses and Cities of China, the number of which is so great, that scarce can a Traveller di∣stinguish them, they lye so thick together. There∣fore the Chinese have ever thought that no Nation in the World was to be compared to them, much like those People whom the Prophet represents, saying, Zeph. 2.15. This is that great and glorious City which has sub∣sisted for so many years, and saith, I truly am a City, and there is none besides me. The Chinese indeed were some∣thing excusable in this Point, since they knew of no∣thing beyond the Seas of Iapan and Forests of Tarta∣ry; but what we have told 'em, That the West had also its Cities and Kingdoms, which in several things exceeds theirs, has very much humbled them, being not a little vexed that their Title to the Universal Monarchy should now be questioned, after having en∣joyed it above 4000 years. Our Comfort, My Lord, is, that these proud Ci∣ties which stiled themselves Ladies of the Universe, have been forced to open their Gates to the Gospel, and art partly subdued by our Re∣ligion. Isaiah 26.5. Those that dwelt in high places have bowed their heads, and the Lord has in a holy manner brought low the lofty Cities. This, My Lord, has often supported me in the midst
of my Labours and Travels. I have seen but few Cities where Christianity had made no Progress; and among those Crowds of Worshippers of Belial, I have observed a chosen People which worshipped the Lord in Spirit and in Truth. Our Churches are now the Ornament of those very Cities, which during so ma∣ny Ages had been defiled with Idols; and the Cross raised above their Houses, confounds Superstition, and gains it self Respect from the very Gentiles. What then remains, My Lord, but that we labour with the utmost Diligence to the perfecting of a Work worthy the Zeal of the first Apostles. Woe to those who are kept there by the Care of the Head of the Church, and the Liberality of Christian Princes, if thro' Negligence, or an ill-groundd Cowardice, they fail of rendring the Inhabitants of those vast Cities a Holy Nation. Hitherto, thro' God's good Grace, the Ministers of the Gospel have not been ashamed of their Profession, not before the Pagan Magistrates; and when forced by a long Exile to quit their beloved Churches, they all might with St. Paul say, You know I have endeavoured to serve the Lord in all humility, with many tears, and notwithstanding the Crosses I have met with from the Heathen; that I have hid nothing from you that might be to your advantage, no hinderance being strong enough to prevent my preaching it both in publick and pri∣vate; but rather admonishing you all to be pnitent towards God, and faithful to our Lord Iesus Christ. I know that those who have Composed whole Vo∣lumes to cry down our Catholick Missions, will not agree to what I have said. Men, who have once pro∣fessed themselves Enemies to the Orthodox Doctrine, attack it every where, and make it their Business to slander such as preach it▪ But it may be a Comfort to us, that we have no other Adversaries but those who are such to our Church, and that we are only bla∣med by those whose Praise would be a Reproach to us.
However, we stand in daily need of the Assistance of our kind Protectors; For in what part of this World can Naked Truth and Distressed Innocence withstand alone the Force of Inveterate Malice? In you, My Lord, we hope to find one full of Zeal and Justice. The Approbation of so great a Prince, whose Wit, Judgment and Uprightness are well known to all Europe, is able alone to Silence and Confound our Enemies. And when it is once known that you are in some Concern for our Affairs, that you are sensi∣ble of our Labours, perswaded that our Designs are good, and willing to contribute to carry them on; none sure will then be so daring and hardened a Ca∣lumniator as to speak against our Missions to China, or reflect on our Conduct in that Country▪ I am with a profound Respect, My Lord, Hour Eminences most umble and obedient Servant I. J.
LETTER IV. To the Count de CRECY. Of the Clime, Soil, Canals, Rivers and Fruits of China. My Lord, THE French Missionaries to China, are so highly obliged to your whole Family, that among the most important Commands, they have honoured me with for Europe, that of returning you their hearty Thanks was earnestly recommended to my Care. I know, My Lord, that how great soever your Fa∣vours may have been, your several Employments, and the unbounded Application with which you serve his Majesty, have somewhat curbed your Zeal. But what is not owing from us to that other Self of yours, (pardon the Expression) whom his Blood, Name, Wit, and a thousand excellent Qualifications, do so confound with you, that we can scarce distin∣guish the one from the other? In all our Travels in which some of us have already reckon'd above 40000 Leagues, we have not made a Step without his Or∣ders and Assistance. His Zeal has excited us to No∣ble Enterprises, his Prudence directed us how to car∣ry them on, his Courage strengthned us against all Opposition, and I hope his unshaken Constancy will
at last give Success to one of the most Noble Atchieve∣ments that this Age has produced, to our Churches good, to the Improvement of Learning, and to his Glory who Sways the Gallick Scepter. Thus, My Lord, while you make known his Name in the several Courts of Europe, he spreads yours a∣broad thro' the new World, where he is equally re∣verenced by the Preachers of the Gospel, whose Sup∣port he is, and dreaded by those of Paganism and Idolatry, whose Ruin he is the occasion of. I the more willingly do Justice to his Merit, because I can∣not write on a Subject more agreeable to your Lord∣ship; and if I had not already spoke to it in a private Conversation, I were to blame, to give over so soon. But after having indulged a Father's Tenderness, is it not time you should satisfie a State-man's Curiosity? I have often described Europe to the Chinese, who have admired its Politeness, Beauty and Magnificence; it is but just that I make China known to that European who is best able to judge of its true Grandeur. I have, My Lord, pitched upon the following Particu∣lars, being such as will give you a true Idea of that Country, and will perhaps give some pleasure in the reading. China being of a large Extent, the Nature of the Soil is different, according to its particular Situation, as it lyes more or less Southwards. I can however as∣sure your Lordship, that the least of its fifteen Pro∣vinces, is so Populous and Fertile, that in Europe it would make alone a considerable State; and a Prince who should enjoy it, might have Wealth and Subjects enough to content a moderate Ambition. This Land, like all others, is divided into Hills and Plains; but the latter are so even that one would think the Chinese have ever since the Foundation of their Monarchy been employ'd in nothing else but levelling them, and making them into Gardens; and
their manner of meliorating their Ground being to let Water thro' it, they could not think of a better way to distribute it equally; else those Parts which lye highest would have laboured under a continual Drought, and the rest lain always under Water. This is also their way even in Filling and Manu∣ring their Hills, for they cut them out like a pair of Stairs from the Foot to the Top, that the Rain-water may spread equally, and not wash down the Ground with its Seeds. Thus they have, as it were, forced Nature by ma∣king Artificial Plains, where she had raised Moun∣tains; and a long Series of such Hills surrounded and crowned, as I may say, with a hundred such Terras∣ses, losing in Breadth as they gain in Height, and whose Soil is as fruitful as that of the best Cultivated Val∣leys, must needs make a very entertaining Landskip. It is true that their Mountains are not for the most part so Stony as ours, their Mould is rather Light, Porous, and easily Cut; and what is most surprising, so deep, that in most Provinces you may dig three or four hundred Feet in depth before you come to the Rock. This does not a little contribute to its good∣ness, because the continual Transpiration of Salt Spi∣rits is ever renewing it, and thus endues the Soil with a perpetual Fertility. Nature has not however been equal in her Distri∣bution, she was less lavish to the Provinces of Chensi, Honan, Canton and Fokien. Yet even their Mountains are not wholly useless, bearing all kind of Trees, which grow tall and streight, and are fit for all kind of Building, especially for Shipping. The Emperor reserves some for his private use, and sometimes sends 300 Leagues for Trees of a prodigious bigness, of which he makes Pillars to his Temples or other Publick Buildings. The Inhabitants also trade much in them, for having
lopt off all the Branches, they tye 80 or 100 of them together, and fasten so many such Rows one behind another as reach almost a Mile, which they drag in that manner along the Rivers and Canals till they have sold all; for they build them little convenient Houses on these kind of Floats, where the Timber-Merchant, his Family and Servants lye during the whole Voyage, which is sometimes three or four Months long. They have other Mountains which are of a great∣er and more publick Advantage. Those produce I∣ron, Tin, Brass, Mercury, Gold and Silver. It is true, the Silver Mines are not now made use of, whe∣ther they think the Empire is sufficiently stocked with it, or that they are unwilling to Sacrifice the Lives of poor People, by putting them upon so laborious and dangerous a Task. As for their Gold the Torrents wash a great quan∣tity away into the Plains, which proves the occasion of a great many Peoples livelyhood, who have no o∣ther Occupation then to look for it among the Sand and Mud, where they find it so pure, that it need no Refining as at Peru. If you will believe the Chinese, who themselves are Credulous to an Excess, their Mountains have won∣derful Properties. Some, they say, are ever covered with Clouds, while others always continue Calm and Serene. Some produce none but useful, wholesome Herbs, while not a rank poysonous Weed can grow there. They affirm that a Hill in the Province of Chensi is shaped like a Cock, and Crows sometimes so loud as to be heard three Leagues off; and that ano∣ther in that of Fokien, moves too and fro when a Storm approaches, like a Tree agitated with the Wind. The hoary Heads of others are cover'd with a conti∣nual Frost; and there is one in the Province of Ki∣amsi, called the Dragon-Tiger, because the Bonzes pre∣tend
that its upper part is shaped like a Dragon, and seems to Assault the lower that is like a Tiger. That of Fokien especially is admired, the whole Ex∣tent of which is nothing else but a Representation of the Idol Fo, so hugely big, that its Eyes are several Miles broad, and its Nose many Leagues in length. I cannot suppose it to be a piece of Chinese Work∣manship, for they would not certainly have made its Nose so big, who love theirs should be little, which they look upon as a great Beauty. The Mountain of Chensi is no less wonderful, for at the Sound of a Drum, or any other Instrument, it breathes out Fire and Flames, raises Wind, Rains; Storms and what not: And, to conclude, one in the Province of Houkam has this strange property, that it makes Thieves so giddy, that should they steal any thing on it, it would be impossible for them to go off with their Booty; whereas an easie Egress and Re∣gress is allowed to such as come thither with an Ho∣nest Mind. China abounds in such like Curiosities which some of our Philosophers admire, and endeavour to reduce to Natural Principles, but I should rather advise them to leave that Discussion to the Chinese, who being the Authors, should best know the Causes of these fancied Effects. The idlest Dream, and that to which they give most Faith, is, That there is a Dragon of an extra∣ordinary strength and Sovereign Power. It is in Hea∣ven, in the Air, on the Waters, and usually among the Mountains. They also believe that in those Moun∣tains live a sort of Men which they call the Immortal Race, believing really that they never dye; and some are so infatuated with this ridiculous Opinion, that they wander among those Rocks, and there loose themselves in quest of Immortality. There are se∣veral famous Grotto's, where some Bonzs lead a very
ustere Life; but for a few that behave themselves well, abundance thro' their execrable Vices, are grown Contemptible to Persons of Quality, and Odious to the People, who only tolerate them, thro' a mistaken Zeal. The most famous Temples are also built on Moun∣tains. Pilgrims repair thither from 200 Leagues off, and their Number is sometimes so great, that the Roads are crowded with them. The Women espe∣cially are very exact in the performance of this piece of Devotion, for having no other Opportunity of going abroad, they are glad of that Pretext. But these Holy Travels being somewhat prejudicial to their Vertue, their Husbands are not over-well pleased at it; therefore only your ordinary sort of Women perform these Journeys; but as for Persons of Quali∣ty, they force their Wives Zeal into a narrower Com∣pass. If after having viewed their Mountains, we take a Prospect of their Plains, it must be confessed that no Art can equal their Natural Beauty. They are all Cultivated, and have neither Hedge nor Ditch, nor scarce a Tree, so much they are afraid of losing an inch of Ground. In most Provinces they make Har∣vest twice a year, and between those two Seasons they sow Herbs and Pulse. All the Northern and Western Provinces, as Pekin, Chansi, Chensi, Sout chouen, bear Wheat, Barley, seve∣ral kinds of Millet, and Tobacco, with black and yel∣low Pease, with which they feed Horses as we do with Oats. Those to the South, especially Houquam, Nankin, and Shekiam are fruitful in Rice, it being a low, warry Country. The Husbandmen at first sow it disorderly like other Corn, and when it is grown a∣bout two Feet from the Ground, they pull it up by the Roots, and transplant it in a strait Line, in small par∣cels like little Sheaves, checkerwise, that the Ears may
support each other, and the easier resist the Wind; so that these Plains look more like spacious Gardens than a plain Field. The Soil is proper for all manner of Fruits; it bears Pears, Apples, Apicocks, Peaches, Figs, Grapes of all kind, and especially excellent Muscadines. There are also Pomegranates, Walnuts, Chesnuts, and ge∣nerally all that we have in Europe. Their Olives are different from ours; they press no Oyl out of them, because, perhaps, they are not fit for that purpose, or that the Chinese have not yet thought of it. Their Fruit generally speaking, is not near so good as ours, being wholly Strangers to the Art of Grating. But they have three kind of Melons which all are excel∣lent: The first are small, yellow within, and of a sweet Sugar-taste, which they eat with the Rind as we do an Apple: I have not met with those any where but in the Province of Chensi. The others are very big and long, their inside being of some white, and of others red; tho' they are full of a cooling Juice which tastes like Sugar, they never prove offensive, and may be eaten during the greatest Heats of Sum∣mer, without fear of a Surfeit; those are called Wa∣ter-Melons. The third sort are like our ordinary Me∣lons. Besides the Fruits which they have in common with us, others grow there which are not known in Europe. The most delicate they call Letchi, and is found in the Province of Canton. It is as big as a Nut, the Sone is long and big, and the Meat on it soft and waterish, but of a most dilicious Taste; I know not any Fruit in Europe that comes near it. All this is inclosed in a rough thin Rhind, and the whole is shaped like an Egg. It is unwholesome to eat a quan∣tity, and of so hot a nature, as to cause a Man's whole Body to break out into Pimples. The Chinese dry it with the Rhind, and then it grows black and
rinkled like our Prunes, and so it is preserved and eat all the year round, being used especially in Tea, to which it gives a little sharp Taste, more agreeable than that of Sugar. In the same Province, and in that of Fokien, grows another small Fruit which they call Louyen, Dragon's-Eye. The Tree that bears it is large as those which produce our Walnuts. This Fruit is exactly round, the outer Rhind being smooth and grey, but as it ri∣pens it grows yellowish. The Meat is white, sowerish, and very full of Juice, and is fitter for a Dessert to those who have well dined, then to satisfie the hun∣gry Stomach: It is very cool and inoffensive. The Sze, another kind of Fruit peculiar to China, grows almost in all parts of it; of this, as of Apples, there are several kinds. Those in the Southern Pro∣vinces taste much like Sugar, and melt in ones Mouth. In the Provinces of Chansi and Chensi, it is more firm, bigger, and may easier be preserved. The Rhind of the former is clear, smooth, transparent, and of a shining red Colour, especially when the Fruit is ripe. Some are in shape like an Egg, but usually bigger, the Pips black and flat, and the Meat very watery and almost liquid, which they suck out at one of the ends. When they are dried like our Figs they be∣come mealy, but in time there grows a sort of a su∣ga'd Crust upon them, from which they receive a most delicious flavour. Those in Chansi are, as I have said, much more firm, their Meat being like that of our Apples, but of a different Colour. Those they either gather early to ripen them on the Straw, or dip in scalding Wa∣ter, to free 'em of an ill sower Taste which they have at first gathering. The Chinese are not over careful of this Fruit, it being a Natural Product of the Earth which grows in any Soil. But did they endeavour to bring it to perfection by grasting, I question
not but it might be made an excellent one. I purposely omit their Anana's, Goyaves, Coco's and other Fruits, for which they are indebted to the In∣dies, and which have been abundantly described in o∣ther Relations; but I cannot pass by their Oranges, commonly known with us by the Name of China O∣ranges, because the first we saw of that kind came from thence. The first and only Tree out of whose Stock all ours are said to be produced, is still preser∣ved at Lisbon in the Garden of the Count de St. Lau∣rence, and we are, indeed, beholding to the Portuguese for that Delicious Fruit; but they brought only of one kind over, tho' there be several in China. That which is most valued, and sent as a Rarity to the Indies, is no bigger than the Balls with which they usually play at Billiard; the Rhind is of a red∣dish yellow, fine, clear, and very smooth. Yet the bigger sort seem to me the best: Those of Canton espe∣cially are very agreeable both to our Palate and Con∣stitution. They are commonly given to sick People, being first softned with the fire, then filled with Su∣gar, which incorporating with their Juice, makes a very sweet wholsome Syrup, then which nothing can be better for the Lungs. I know not how to distin∣guish them from those we have in Provence, and that are brought from Portugal; unless by their being more fim, that they are not easily parted from the Rhind, neither are they divided into Segments like ours, tho' else they do not differ in shape. When I was at Siam, most of my Country-men were transported with the goodness of certain Oran∣ges whose Rhind is rough, thick, almost all over green. They may perhaps be willing to know if Chi∣na can shew any as good. As to matter of Taste, a Man does not always agree with himself, much less can he do so with others. All I can say to it is, that each is excellent in its kind, and that usually the last eaten seem best tasted.
Lemons, Citrons, and what the Indians call Pam∣pelimonses, are very common there, and therefore not so much regarded as in Europe; but they Cultivate with a great deal of Care a particular Species of Le∣mon-Trees, whose Fruit being no bigger then a Wal∣nut, perfectly round, green and sowerish withal, are excellent in all kind of Ragousts; and these Shrubs they often plant in Boxes to adorn their Courts and Halls therewith. But of all the Trees that grow in China, that which produces Tallow is in my Opinion the most prodigi∣ous. This very Proposition is no doubt surprising, and there being no where else any thing like it, will seem a Paradox; yet there is nothing more true, and perhaps, My Lord, a particular Account of the Na∣ture and Properties of so extraordinary a Tree, will not be unwelcome. It is about the height of our Cherry-Trees; the Branches are crooked, the Leaves shaped like a Heart, of a lively brisk red, its Bark smooth, the Trunk short, and the Head round and very thick. The Fruit is inclosed within a Rhind divided into three Segments, which open when it is ripe, and discover three white Kernels of the bigness of a small Nu. All the Bran∣ches are very thick of it; and this mixture of white and red makes at a distance the finest Prospect in the World; the Fields, where these Trees are planted, which they usually are in a direct Line and Checker∣wise, shewing afar off like a vast Parterre of Flower-Pots. But the wonder is, that this Kernel has all the qua∣lities of Tallow; its Odour, Colour, and Consisten∣cy; and they also make Candles of it, mixing only a little Oyl when they melt it to make the Stuff more pliant. If they knew how to purifie it as we do our Tallow here, I doubt not but their Candles might be as good as ours, but they make them very awkwardly;
so that their Smell is much stronger, their Smoak thicker, and their Light dimmer than ours. It is true, the Fault does not a little lye in the Wiek; for instead of Cotton, tho' they are well stocked with that Commodity, they use a small stick of a dry light Wood, wrapt round with the inner part of a Rush, which is very porous, and thereby itted for the Filtration of the small Particles of that greasie Matter by which the Flame is preserved. This wooden Wiek, besides that it does not burn so clear as Cotton, increases the Smoak, and causes an offen∣sive Smell. Among the Trees peculiar to the Country I am speaking of, I must not omit those which bear Pep∣per, not like that which we make use of in Europe, but another sort of Seeds indued with the same quali∣ties. They grow on a Tree like those who bear our Walnuts, about as big as a Pea, and of a greyish Colour, with little red streaks. When they are ripe they open of themselves, and discover a little Stone as black as Jet, casting so strong a smell very offen∣sive to the Head, for which reason they gather them by intevals, not being able to remain on the Tree any considerable time. Having exposed these Grains to the Sun, they cast away the Stone which is too hot a strong, and only use the rest, which tho' not quite so agreeable as our Pepper, is however of good use in Sauces. I shall add, My Lord, that you may better judge of the Fetility of that vast Empire, that there is no place in the World like it for the abundance of Roots and Pulse; it is almost the only Food of the Inhabi∣tants, who omit nothing to have them good. It would be too tedious to give you a List of all those different Herbs; for besides those we have here, their Ground brings forth several others unknown to us, on which they set a greater value. Their Care and
Dexterity herein is beyond all our Gardners perfor∣mances; and if our Parterre excels theirs, they exceed us in their Kitchin Garden. Tho' this Subject, common in it self and not worth your notice, yields no great Rarity, I cannot forbear speaking of a kind of Onions which I have seen; they do not seed like ours; but towards the latter end of the Season their Leaves bear some small Filaments, in the midst of which is a white Onion like that in the Ground. This does in time produce its Leaves, and those a like Head, and so on, which grow less and shorter as they are farther from the Ground; the Dimensions are so just, and the Proportions so exact, that one would think them Artificially done; and it seems as if nature were minded to shew us that even Sporting, it can exceed the Skill of the nicest Artist. If what has been written of what they call Petsi were true, it would be a great wonder. It is a kind of Lenufar, that grows under Water, whose Root is fastned to a white Matter covered with a red Skin, that divides it self into several Heads, which when fresh, taste like a small Nut. I have been assu∣red that it has this Property, that it softens Brass, and as it were renders it eatable, if a piece of the Metal be put into the Mouth with one of this Plant. This seemed the stranger to me, because the Juice which issues from it is very mild and cooling, and not endued with any of those Corrosive qualities which seem necessary to work such an Effect. As soon as we were arrived at Hamt chéou, where this Petsi is much eaten, we had the Curiosity to enquire into the truth of it; and to that purpose took a piece of their Money, which was made of a very brittle sort of Molten Brass, and wrapt it up in a slice of this Root. One of us who had stronger Teeth than the rest, broke it into several pieces, which the others,
loath to strain their Jaws, had not been able to do: But these broken pieces were as hard as ever, which made us think that the Root had indeed no other Vir∣tue then that by being wrapt up round the Brass it saved his Teeth; which a piece of Leather might have done as well. We often repeated the Experiment at Kiahin, but with no better success; so true it is that these mighty Wonders should be heard twice, before they are once believed. Tho' China were not of it self so fruitful a Coun∣try as I have represented it, the Canals which are cut thro' it, were alone sufficient to make it so. But besides their great usefulness in that, and the way of Trade, they add also much Beauty to it. They are generally of a clear, deep and running Water, that glides so softly, that it can scarce be perceived. There is one usually in every Province, which is to it in∣stead of a Road, and runs between two Banks, built up with flat course Marble Stones, bound together by others which are let into them, in the same man∣ner as we use to fasten our strong wooden Boxes at the Corners. So little Care was taken, during the Wars, to pre∣serve Works of Publick Use, that this, tho' one of the Noblest in the Empire, was spoiled in several places, which is a great pity; for they are of no little use, both to keep in the Waters of these Canals, and for those to walk on who drag the Boats along. Besides these Cawseys they have the conveniency of a great many Bridges for the Communication of the oppo∣site Shoars; some are of three, some five, and some seven Arches, the middlemost being always extraor∣dinay high, that the Boats may go through without putting down their Masts. These Arches are built with large pieces of Stone or Marble, and very well famed, the Supporters well fitted, and the Piles so small that one would think them at a distance to hang
in the Air. These are frequently met with, not be∣ing far asunder, and the Canal being strait, as they usually are, it makes a Prospective at once stately and agreeable. This great Canal runs out into smaller ones on ei∣ther side, which are again subdivided into small Ri∣vlets, that end at some great Town or Village. Some∣times they discharge themselves into some Lake or great Pond, out of which all the adjacent Country is watered. So that these clear and plentiful Streams, embellished by so many fine Bridges, bounded by such neat and convenient Banks, equally distributed into such vast Plains, covered with a numberless multi∣tude of Boats and Barges, and crowned (if I may use the Expression) with a prodigious number of Towns and Cities, whose Ditches it fills, and whose Streets it forms, does at once make that Country the most Fruitful and the most Beautiful in the World. Surprised and as it were astonished at so Noble a Sight, I have sometimes bore a secret Envy to China in Europe's behalf, which must own that it can boast nothing in that kind to be compared to the former. What would it be then, if that Art which in the wildest and most unlikely Places has raised magnifi∣cent Palaces, Gardens and Groves, had been employ∣ed in that rich Land, to which Nature has been la∣vish of her most precious Gifts. The Chinese say their Country was formerly totally overflowed, and that by main Labour they drained the Water by cutting it a way thro' these useful Ca∣nals. If this be true▪ I cannot enough admir at once the Boldness and Industry of their Workmen who have thus made great Artificial Rivers, and of a kind of a Sea, as it were created the most Fertile Plains in the World. It will scarce be believed, that Men so ignorant in the Principles of Physicks, and the Art of Levelling,
could bring such a Work as that to Perfection; yet it is certain that these Canals are natural. For they are usually strait, the Distribution is equal and order∣ly; there are Flood-gates made for the Rivers to let in their Water at, and others to let it out when they are too full; so that it cannot be doubted but that the Chinese are only beholding to their own Industry for that great Conveniency. Among all those Canals in the Southern Provinces, one above the rest is called the Great Canal, because it goes thro' the whole Country from Canton, which lyes Southwards to Pekin, situated in the most Nor∣therly parts of the Empire. You must only travel a short days Journey by Land to cross the Hill Moilin, that does on one side bound the Province of Kiamsi. From this Mountain issue two Rivers; one runs South∣wards to the Sea, and the other Northwards as far as the River of Nankin, whence by the yellow River, and several Canals, you may proceed by Waer to the ve∣ry Mountains of Tartary. But, by reason in this huge Extent of Ground, of above four hundred Leagues in length, the Earth is not Level, or, hath not a Descent proportionable to the Emanation of the Waters, it was necessary to set a great number of Sluices awork. They call them so in the Relations, notwithstanding they be much different from ours. They are Water-falls, and as it were certain Torrents, that are precipitated from one Canal into another, more or less rapid, according to the difference of their Level: Now, to cause the Barks to ascend, they make use of a great Company of Men, who are maintained for that purpose near the Sluice. After they have drawn Cables to the right and left to lay hold of the Bark, in such a manner that it cannot escape from them; they have several Capstans, by the help of which they raise it by little and little, by the main force of their Arms, till such time as it be in
the upper Canal, in a Condition to continue its Voyage whither it is bound. This same Labour is te∣dious, toilsome, and exceeding dangerous. They would be wonderfully surprised, should they behold with what easiness one Man alone, who opens and shuts the Gates of our Sluices, makes the longest and heaviest laden Barks securely to ascend and descend. I have observed in some Places in China, where the Waters of two Canals or Channels have no Commu∣nication together; yet for all that, they make the Boats to pass from the one to the other, notwithstand∣ing the Level may be different above fifteen Foot: And this is the way they go to work. At the end of the Canal they have built a double Glacis, or sloping Bank of Free-stone, which uniting at the Point, ex∣tends it self on both sides up to the Surface of the Water. When the Bark is in the lower Channel they hoist it up by the help of several Capstanes to the plane of the first Glacis, so far, till being raised to the Point, it falls back again by its own weight along the second Glacis, into the Water of the upper Channel, where it skuds away during a pretty while, like an Ar∣row out of a Bow; and they make it descend after the same manner proportionably. I cannot imagine how these Barks, being commonly very long and heavy Laden, escape being split in the middle, when they are poised in the Air upon this Acute Angle; for, con∣sidering that length, the Lever must needs make a strange effect upon it; yet do I not hear of any ill Accident happen thereupon. I have past a pretty many times that way, and all the Caution they take, when they have a mind to go ashoar, is, to tye ones self fast to some Cable for fear of being tost from Prow to Poop. We meet with no such Sluices in the Grand Canal, because the Emperor's Barks, that are as large as our Frigots, could not be raised by force of Arm, nay,
and would infallibly be split in the Fall, all the diffi∣culty consists in ascending back again upon these Tor∣rents, of which I have spoken; yet this is what they perform successively, tho' not without some Trouble and Expence. The Canal to sail upon, was necessary for the Transportation of Grain and Stuffs, which they fetch from the Southern Provinces to Pekin. There are, if we may give Credit to the Chineses, a Thou∣sand Barks, from Eighty to an Hundred Tun, that make a Voyage once a year, all of them Freighted for the Emperor, without counting those of particular Persons, whose number is infinite. When these pro∣digious Fleets set out, one would think they carry the Tribute of all the Kingdoms of the East, and that one of these Voyages alone was capable of supplying all Tartary where-withal to Subsist for several years; yet for all that Pekin alone hath the benefit of it; and it would be as good as nothing, did not the Province contribute besides to the Maintenance of the Inhabi∣tants of that vast City. The Chineses are not only content to make Channels for the Convenience of Travellers, but they do also dig many others to catch the Rain-water, wherewith they water the Fields in time of Drought, more e∣specially in the Northern Provinces. During the whole Summer, you may see your Country Peo∣ple busied in raising this Water into abundance of small Ditches, which they contrive across the Fields. In other places they contrive great Re∣servatories of Tuf, whose Bottom is raised above the Level of the Ground about it, to serve them in Case of Necessity. Besides that, they have every where in Chnsi and Chansi, for want of Rain, certain Pits from Twenty to an Hundred foot deep, from which they draw Water by an incredible Toil. Now if by chance they meet with a Spring of Water, it is
worth observing how cunningly they husband it; they Sustain it by Banks in the highest places; they turn it here and there an Hundred different ways, that all the Country may reap the benefit of it; they divide it, by drawing it by degrees, according as e∣very one hath occasion for it, insomuch that a small Rivulet, well managed, does sometimes produce the Fertility of a whole Province. The Rivers of China are no less considerable then its Canals, there are two especially, which the Rela∣tions have made famous. The first is called Kiam or Yamçe, which they commonly Translate the Son of the Sea: But I am afraid they are mistaken; for the Letter the Chineses use for to write Yam is different from that which signifies the Sea, altho' the Sound and Pronunciation may have some Affinity: Amongst se∣veral significations that this Letter may have, that which they gave it in former times makes for our purpose. Under the Reign of the Emperor Yon it signified a Province of China, limitted by this River on the North; and it is somewhat probable that they gave this same Name to the River, because that Prince drain'd all the Water that overflow'd the whole Coun∣try into it. This Floud takes its rise in the Province of Yunnan, crosses the Provinces of Soutchouen, Houquam, and Nankin; and after it hath watered four Kingdoms far and wide for 400 Leagues together, it disimbogues into the East-Sea over against the Isle of Tçoummim, cast up at its Mouth by the Sands which it carries a∣long with it; the Chineses have a Proverb amongst them that says, The Sea hath no bounds, and the Kiam hath no bottomHal vou pim: Kiam vou ti.. And, in truth, in some places there is none to be found; in others they pretend there is Two or Three hundred Fathom wa∣ter. I am nevertheless perswaded that their Pilots,
that carry not above Fifty or Sixty Fathom Cord at longest, never had the Curiosity to Sound so deep as Three hundred Fathom; and the impossibility of finding the bottom with their ordinary Plummet, is sufficient, in my opinion, to incline them to such like Hyperboly's. I have many times sailed upon this River; I have moreover taken a diligent account of its Course and Breadth from Nankin, to the Mouth of another River, into which Men enter to pursue the way to Canton. It is off of Nankin Thirty Leagues from the Sea, a little half League broad; the Passage along it is come dangerous; and becomes more and more infa∣mous every day for its Shipwracks. In its Course, which is exceeding rapid, it forms a great number of Isles, all of them very beneficial to the Province, by reason of that multitude of Bull-rushes Ten or Twelve foot high that it produceth, serving for Fuel to all the Cities thereabouts; for they have scarce Wood e∣nough for Buildings and Ships. They yield a great Revenew, and the Emperor draws considerable Du∣ties from them. The River which the Torrents of the Mountains do sometimes swell extraordinarily, grow so rapid, that many times they bear away the Isles with them, or lessen them by the half; -and for the same reason form other new ones in some other place; and one cannot but admire to see them change place in such a short time, just as if by diving, they had past under Water from one place to another; that does not al∣ways come to pass: But there is observed such con∣siderable Change every year, that the Mandarins least they should be mistaken, get them to be measured e∣very Three years, to augment, or diminish the Im∣posts and Duties, according to the Condition they are found to be in.
The second River of China is called Hoamho, as much as to say, The yellow River, because the Earth it sweeps away with it, especially in times of great Rains, give it that Colour. I have seen a gret ma∣ny others, whose Waters at certain Seasons of the year, are so over-charged with slime, and so gross and thick, that they rather resemble Torrents of Mud, than real Rivers. The Hoamho takes its source at the Extremity of the Mountains that bound the Province of Soutchouen in the West: From thence it throws it self into Tartary, where it flows for some time all a∣long the great Wall, at which it re-enters China be∣tween the Province of Chansi and Chensi. After that it waters the Province of Honan; and when it hath run cross one part of the Province of Nankin, and flowed above Six hundred Leagues into the Land, it disimbogues at length into the East-Sea, not far from the Mouth of Kiam. I have crost it, and coasted it in divers places; it is every where very broad and ra∣pid, yet neither deep nor navigable, to speak of. This River hath in former times caused great Deso∣lation in China, and they are still forced to this very day to keep up the Waters in certain places by long and strong Banks, which notwithstanding does not exempt the Cities thereabouts from Apprehensions of Inundation. So likewise have they been careful, in the Province of Honan, the Ground lying very low thereabouts, to surround the greatest part of the Ci∣ties, about a Mile from the Walls, with a Terrace, cased with Turf, to prevent being surprised by Acci∣dents and Casualties in case the Bank be broken, as happened about Fifty two years ago. For the Empe∣ror, endeavouring to force a Rebel (who, for a long time laid close Siege to the City of Honan) to draw off, caused one part of the Banks to be broken down, thereby to drown the adverse Army. But the Relief he afforded the City proved more fatal than he Fury
of the Besiegers would have been; the whole Pro∣vince almost was laid under Water, together with ma∣ny Cities, and abundance of Villages, above Three hundred thousand Persons drowned in the Metropo∣lis, amongst whom were some of our Missionaries, who at that time had a numerous Flock of Christians; there they, and their Church lost their Lives. The Low Country ever since is become a kind of a Marsh or Lake; not but that they have some de∣sign to repair this loss, but the Undertaking is diffi∣cult and very expensive. The Sovereign Court that takes care of Publick Works, importuned the Emperor more than once to send Father Verbiest thither, and peradventure, that Prince would have consented there∣to at last, but he discovered that the Mandarins made use of this pretence, to remove the Father at a di∣stance from Court, and that their Design was to en∣gage him in a difficult Enterprise, that was enough to destroy him; or out of which he could never have disintangled himself with any honour. There is to be seen in China abundance of other Ri∣vers less Famous, but yet more Commodious for Com∣merce and Trade. Since they afford nothing uncommon, it would be to abuse your Patience, Sir, to descend to the Particu∣lars. As to what concerns Fountains, it were to be wisht there were more of them, and better. 'Tis cer∣tain that their usual Waters are not good, which, per∣haps, hath obliged the Inhabitants, especially in the Southern Provinces, to drink it always warm; but because warm Water is unpalatable and nauseous, they bethought themselves of putting some Leaves of a Tree to it, to give it a Gusto, Those of Tea seemed to be the best, and so they frequently make use of it. It may be also that God Almighty, whose Providence hath so universally provided for the Wants of his Peo∣ple, and if I may be bold to say it, for their Delight
and Pleasure, would not deprive China of that which is necessary to Life; so that for to Supply the Defect of Wells and Fountains, which the Nature of the Ground hath made every where salt and brackish, he hath been pleased to produce that Species of a parti∣cular Tree in abundance, whose Leaves serve not on∣ly to purge the Waters from their noxious Qualities, but also to make them wholsome and pleasant. We are assured that there is to be found in China amongst Fountains, several that suffer Flux and Re∣flux as regularly, as the Sea doth, whether it be that they have some Communication with the Ocean by certain Subterraneous Conveyances, and Conduits, or whether it be in passing through certain Earths, they are impregnated with Salts and Spirits apt to cause this Fermentation. I leave others to determine. Since I have begun to speak of the different Wa∣ters of China, I cannot pass over in Silence the Lakes and Ponds that are every where almost to be seen in all the Provinces. Those that are produced in Win∣ter by the Torrents from the Mountains, lay waste the Fields, and render the whole Country during Summer, barren, sandy, and full of Flints. Those that arise from Springs are abounding in Fish, and yield a considerable Revenew to the Emperor by the Salt they afford. There is one of them amongst the rest, if I be not mistaken it is in Chansi, in the mid∣dle whereof appears a small Island, where People di∣vert themselves, during the excessive Heat, to sprin∣kle Water all over. There is made in a little while, a Crust of a certain Salt very white, and of a pleasant Scent, which they continue all the Summer long, with that Success, that the Salt would be sufficient for the whole Province, if it were as Salt as that of the Sea; they commonly make use of it to Season Meat with∣al.
Altho' I have not seen all those famous Lakes in China, whereunto Historians ascribe so many Mira∣cles, yet shall I relate something, which I do not care to warrant for Gospel; which nevertheless, will let you understand the Genius of the Country, where People so easily give Credit to what seems most in∣credible. In the Province of Fokien there is one whose Water is green, and changes Iron into Copper. They have built a Palace upon the Banks of another not far di∣stant from the former, in an Apartment of which one hears the ringing of Bells every time Heaven threa∣tens a Storm. There are Waters in the Province of Canton that change Colour every year, in Summer and in Winer, they are very clear; in Autumn they turn blue, but of such a fine blue, that People make use of it to dye Stuffs. In that place is to be seen a Mountain full of Caverns, whose very Aspect is very terrible, in which is found a Lake of that Nature, that if one throw a Stone into it, one may hear a noise like Thunder; sometime after there ariseth a gross Mist, which im∣mediately dissolves into Water. But the most famous of them all, is, that of the Province of Iannan. The Chineses would make you believe that this Lake came all on the sudden, during an Earthquake that swallowed up all the Country with its Inhabitants: This was a just Judgment upon them for their wickedness, for they were very disso∣lute Livers. Of all that were there at that time, there was but one Child that was saved, which they found in the middle of the Lake born up upon a piece of Wood. In the Isle of Hainan, belonging to China, there is a sort of Water, whether it be Lake or Fountain, I know not, that petrifies Fish. I my self have bought over Crawfish, that preserving their intire Natural
Figure, are so far changed into Stone, that the Claws and Body of them are very hard, very solid, and lit∣tle differing from Stone. The Wonders of Nature are not so far particular to China, but the like may be met with elsewhere; and if one does not credit all the Chineses relate, it is not because there is some∣times no foundation for their Stories: But because they have somewhat of the Air of Fable, and Hyper∣bolical in them, that would make a Man even suspect their being true. I wish with all my heart, Sir, (that I may not o∣mit any thing that any way relates to this Subject) I were able to explain all the kinds of Fish that the Ri∣vers and Lakes furnish them with, as well as those that are Caught upon their Coasts; but to tell you the truth, I am not well enough informed to engage my self upon a particular Relation of them; I have seen, as far as I can guess, all the Fish in China, that we have in France: I have taken notice of a great many others that I did not know, no not so much as their Names; that is all I can say of it: Besides that I shall confirm to you, what possibly you may have read in the Relations touching the Fish they call the Golden and Silver Fish that are found in divers Provinces, and do afford particular Ornaments in the Courts and Gardens of great Persons. They are commonly of a fingers length, and of a proportionable thickness; the Male is of a most delicate red, from the head to the middle of the Body, and further; the rest, together with the Tail, is gilded; but with such a glittering, and burnisht Gold, that our real Gildings cannot come near it. The Female is white, its Tail, nay and one part of its Body, per∣fectly washt over with Silver; the Tail of both of them is not even and flat as that of other Fish, but fashioned like a Nosegay, thick and long, and gives a particular Grace to this pretty Animal, that sets it
off, being besides perfectly well proportioned. Those who would breed them, ought to have great Care, for they are extraordinary tender, and sensi∣ble of the least Injuries of the Air. They put them into a great Basin, such as are in Gardens, very deep and large; at the bottom of which they are wont to place an Earthen Pot turned upside down, full of Holes on the sides, that they may retire into it when it is very hot Weather, and by that means shelter them∣selves from the Sun. They likewise throw upon the Surface of the Water some particular Herbs that keep always green, and maintain the coolness. This Wa∣ter is to be changed two or three times a Week, yet so that fresh Water may be put in, according as the Basin is emptied, which must never be lest dry. If one be obliged to remove the Fish from one Vase to another, great care must be taken not to touch them with the Hand; all those that are touched dye quick∣ly after, or shrivel up; you must for that purpose make use of a little Thred Purse, fasten'd at the up∣per end of a wooden Circle, into which they are in∣sensibly ingaged; when they are once got into it of themselves, one must take heed of hurting them, and be sure to hold them still in the first, which emp∣ties but slowly, and gives time to Transport them to the other Water. Any great noise, as of a Cannon, or of Thunder, too strong a smell, too violent a mo∣tion, are all very hurtful to them, yea, and sometimes occasions their dying; as I have observed at Sea every time they discharged the Cannon, or melted Pitch and Tar: Besides, they live almost upon nothing; those insensible Worms that are bread in the Water, or that most Terrestrial Parts that are mixt with it, suf∣fice in a manner to keep them alive. They do, not∣withstanding, throw in little Balls of Past now and then; but there is nothing better than a Wafer, which seep't, makes a kind of Pap, of which they are ex∣tream
greedy, which indeed is very proportiona∣ble to their natural Delicacy and Tenderness. In hot Countries they multiply very much, provided care be taken to remove their Eggs, which swim upon the Water, which the Fish most commonly eat: They place them in a particular Vase exposed to the Sun, and there they preserve them till the heat hatcheth them; the Fish come out of a black colour, which some of them keep ever after, but is changed by lit∣tle and little in other Colours, into Red, White, Gold, and Silver, according to their different Kind: The Gold and Silver begins at the extremity of the Tail, and expand themselves somewhat more or less, ac∣cording to their particular Disposition. All this, Sir, and other Marvels of the Universe, makes us acknowledge the Finger of God every where, who for our sakes hath embellished the World many thousand ways. He is not only content to en∣lighten the Heavens, and enrich the Earth, but de∣scends into the Abysses, into the very Waters; he hath lest some Footsteps of his profound Wisdom, and not to mention those prodigious Monsters, that seem to be made to astonish Nature, he hath likewise crea∣ted those wonderful Fish I but now described, which, as little as they are, yet by their singular Beauty are the Subject of our Admiration, and furnish us with some faint Idea's of the Greatness of the wise Crea∣tor. Here I present you, Sir, in a Compendium, the Draught, and as it were the Map of that Country, which I design'd to give you some knowledge of; these are but the outside, and if I may so say, but the Body of that Empire, whose Soul and Spirit is di∣sperst through its Inhabitants. Peradventure, when you shall have read what I have writ to you about it, you will be apt to enquire what People they be who are so happy as to receive the greatest, fairest, and
most fertile Portion of the Earth for their Inheritance; such a Land, in a word, that it wants nothing to make it a real Land of Promise, but to be Cultivated by God's People, and inhabited by true Israelites in∣deed. If we had nothing, as the Hebrews had, but the Red-Sea and Wilderness to go through, probably Forty years might suffice to bring it under Subjection to the Gospel: But that vast Extent of Seas, those infinite and unpracticable Land Journeys, that were capable of putting a stop to Moses and the Prophets, do allay the Zeal of the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and lessen the number of his New Apostles. Oh! that I could, as the Hebrews did, whom Mo∣ses sent to discover the Promised Land, represent the immense Richness, and most precious Harvest that China promises to the Labourers in the Vineyards, we have hopes that probably the prospect of such an a∣bundant Crop, might in time prevail with all Europe to come and reap it: At least, I hope that my Testi∣mony will not be insignificant, and that the more than ordinary Zeal of the small Company of Missionaries that shall succeed me, will make amends for the vast Number of those which such a vast Empire might de∣mand. I am, with all the respect imaginable, SIR, You most humble and most affectione Servant I. J.
LETTER V. To the Marquis de TORSI, Secre∣tary of State for Foreign Affairs. Of the peculiar Character of the Chinese Nation, its Antiquity, Nobility, Manners, and its good and bad Qualities. My Lord, SEeing in the Employment wherewith the King hath honoured you, and which you do alrea∣dy discharge with so much Wisdom, nothing can contribute more to promote you to that high pitch of Perfection, that all Europe expects from you, than the exact Knowledge of the Manners and Genius of Foreigners, I made account that by ordering me to write to you concerning the Empire of China, you did particularly desire to learn what was the Genius of its Inhabitants. It is true, that to judge of the future by preceding Reigns, such Informations would perhaps stand you in no stead, Hitherto France hath had nothing to do with that People, and Nature seems not to have pla∣ced them at such a distance from us, but only intirely
to separate them from our Interests. But under the Reign of Lewis the Great, for whom Nature her self hath so often changed her Laws, is there any thing impossible? Nay, will not Heaven, which seems to have employed all Nations to make him Renowned, oblige China, as proud and haughty as it is, to con∣tribute something to his Glory? It is, according to all Human Probability, under your Ministry, My Lord, that we shall behold the most flourishing and mighty Empire of the West, u∣nite it self with the most puissant Realm in all Europe. And perhaps, if it had not been for this fa∣tal War, the dire Consequences of which have made themselves be felt as far as the Extremities of the Uni∣verse, you would e're this have given Audience to the Envoys of a Prince, who never acknowledged any o∣ther Sovereign besides himself in the World. This Negotiation, so glorious for you, and so much con∣ducing to the Establishment of Religion, which the Iniquity of the Times hath hitherto interrupted, may be hereafter set afoot again; and it is on purpose to dispose and incline you to the same, that I presume to take the liberty, My Lord, to let you understand the Character of those who are to be employed there∣in. The Chineses are so Ancient in the World, that it fares with them as to their Original, as with great Rivers whose Source can scarce be discovered. It is necessary for that purpose, to look back farther then all our Prophane Histories; and that very Time ob∣served by the Vulgar, is not so long to verifie their Chronology. It is very true, the Vulgar History of that Grand Monarchy, is not only dubious, but manifestly false besides, for it computes Forty thousand years since the Foundation of the Empire, but that wherein all Knowing and Learned Men agree, is so much in
vogue, so well circumstantiated, established by so con∣stant a Tradition, that one cannot call it in question among them, without passing for Ridiculous, and as they themselves express it, for Heretical. According to this History, which none of their Learned Men ever questioned, China hath had its Kings for above Four thousand years, that have con∣tinued to this present Time without any Interruption. The same Family hath not been always seated upon the Throne, there hath been Twenty two of them severally, that hath produced Two hundred thirty six Emperors. Several Doctors carry this Monarchy back Six hundred years higher yet, but, altho' their Opinion be very probable, yet may we nevertheless stick to the first. And this is the thing that makes the Grandeur and Nobility of this Empire plainly to ap∣pear, since Five or Six hundred years, more or less, does not produce any notable diminution in its Antiqui∣ty. Certainly, after all the Inquiries and Examinations that have been made into this Chronology, it is no longer left to our Liberty to doubt of it, than of the Histories that are the most authentickly received a∣mongst us: And it ought so much the rather to be believed, forasmuch as it was incapable of admitting any Alteration from Foreigners; forasmuch as it was always currant amongst the knowing Men of the Country, for true, sure, and uncontestable, for ha∣ving been written in a natural, plain uneffected Stile, that carries with it that Air of Verity that ever per∣swades: And because Confucius, esteemed for his great Capacity, Sincerity and Uprightness, never doubted of it; nay, and did even establish his whole Do∣ctrine thereupon, Five hundred and fifty years before the Birth of our Saviour, because his Books are very conformable to the Holy Scripture, in reference to the Age of the first Men; for they assure us that ohi
reigned an hundred and fifty years; Chinnum, an hun∣dred and forty; Hoamti, an hundred and eleven; Yao, an hundred and eighteen, and so for the rest, always decreasing, conformable to what Holy Writ teaches us. In a word, the Eclipses observed at that time, must needs happen in effect; which they could not know, but by observation, and not by any Calculati∣ons that were not extant enough: All this perswades us that there is little certainty in the Prophane Histo∣ry of the World, if we can reasonably doubt of that of China. In a word, this Empire was involved in the Com∣mon Fate of all others, whose Origin is still little con∣siderable. It seems probable that the Children, or Grand children of Noah, disperst themselves into A∣sia, and at length penitrated as far as this part of Chi∣na, that is most Westerly; which is called at this day Chansi and Chensi. They lived at the beginning in Families, and the Kings were Fathers, to whom a long continuance of years, abundance of Flocks, and other Country Pastoral richness added some authority. Fohi was the first that laid the Foundation of the Monarchy; his Wisdom, Discretion, his good Mo∣rals, Power, and Reputation, which his great Age had acquired him, made them give ear to him, as to an Oracle: He regulated all Private, as well as Po∣litick and Religious Matters; insomuch that the State became in a very flourishing Condition in a short time, his Subjects possessed the Province of Honan at first, and some years after all the Lands and Territories that are extended as far as the South Sea. It is probable that the Chineses, from their very o∣riginal, did look upon themselves as something more than other Men, like to those Princes, who as soon as they are born, discover a certain natural loftiness that ever distinguisheth them from the Vulgar. Whe∣ther it was that the neighbouring Kingdoms were
barbarous, or inferiour to them in point of Wisdom, I don't know; but at that very time they laid down a Maxim of State amongst themselves, To have no Com∣merce with Foreigners and Strangers, but just so much as should be necessary to receive their Homages. Neither did they court and seek after these Badges of Sovereignty out of a Spirit of Ambition, but whereby to have an occasion to prescribe to other People of the World Laws and Constitutions of perfect Government. So that when any one amongst their Tributaries failed to appear at the time appointed, they did not oblige him by open Force to submit, but on the con∣trary had Compassion on him. What do we lose by it, say they, if he still remain barbarous? since he is so averse to Wisdom, he needs to blame no body but himself as often as he shall fail in his Duty through Passion or Blind∣ness. This grave Policy acquired the Chineses so great a Reputation, that throughout all the Indies, all Tartary and Persia lookt upon them as the Oracles of the World; yea, and the People of Iapan had such an high Conceit of them, that when St. Xavier brought the Faith amongst them (altho' China at that time came short of her pristine Probity) one of the great Reasons they objected against the good Man, was, That a Nation so Wise, so intelligent, had not yet embra∣ced it. But this piece of Policy that induced them to dif∣ference themselves from others, which at first might probably be a profitable Maxim, degenerated after∣wards into Pride. They lookt upon themselves as a chosen elect People, that Heaven had produced in the Center of the Universe to give them a Law; a Peo∣ple only capable to Instruct, Civilize, and Govern Nations. They fansied other Men but as Dwarfs, and pitiful Monsters, that had been the Out-casts in∣to the Extremities of the Earth, as the Dross and Off-scouring
of Nature; whereas the Chineses placed in the middle of the World, had alone received from God Almighty, a rational Form and Shape, and a true Size. Their Ancient Maps are filled with such like Figures, and a great many Emblems apt to in∣spire that Disdain they shew'd of all Mankind. But perceiving the Europeans instructed in all sorts of Sciences, they were strucken with Astonishment. How can it possibly be, said they, that a People so far re∣mote from us, should have any Wit or Capacity? They have never perused our Books; they were never modelled by our Laws, and yet they speak, discourse, and argue aright as we do. Our Workmanship, as Stuffs, Clocks, Watches, Mathematical Instruments, and such like Curiosities, surprised them still more; for they imagined that dex∣trous and expert Artificers were no where to be met with but in China. Then they began to understand that we were not so barbarous as they imagined; and said in a joking way, We supposed all other People blind, and that Nature had bestowed Eyes upon none but Chine∣ses: that is not universally true, if the Europeans do not see so clearly as we, they have at least one Eye apiece. I have taken notice of some Frenchmen so moved at this ridiculous Vanity, that they were not Masters of their Passion; they would possibly have done better to have laught at it (at least the Chineses deserve Ex∣cuse) till that time, they had seen none but Indians and Tartars, and they beheld e West at a distance, as we at present behold the Terra Australis Incognita, and Forests of Canada: Now if at 300 Leagues di∣stance from Quebec we found Iroquian Mathematici∣ans, or Learned Alkonkins, that could discover to us a New Philosophy, more clear, comprehensive, and more perfect than ours, we should be no less blame-worthy than the Chineses, for preferring our selves to that People, and for having hitherto termed them Barbarians.
Abating this Pride, you must confess that the Chi∣nese Nation hath been endued with rare Qualities; with a great deal of Politeness in practising the World, with great Sense and Regularity in their Bu∣siness, with much Zeal for the Publick Good, True and Just Idea's of Government, with a Genius, mean indeed as to Speculative Sciences, but yet right and sure in Morality, which they have always preserved very conformable to Reason. The People principally applied themselves to the Education of Children in their Families; they e∣steemed Agriculture above all other things; they were Laborious to excess, loving and understanding Com∣merce and Trading perfectly well. Judges and Go∣vernors of Cities affected an outside Gravity, Sobrie∣ty at their Tables, Moderation in House-keeping, and Equity in all their Judgments, that gain'd the Love and Respect from all the People in general. The Emperor placed his Happiness in nothing more than to procure it for his Subjects, and lookt upon himself not so much a King of a Grand State, as a Father of a Numerous Family. This Character of China, My Lord, that I have gi∣ven you, is not flattering, but faithfully deduced from its own History, that furnishes us with an infinite number of Examples of the conspicuous Wisdom that hath been so long the Soul that informs its Govern∣ment. 'Tis true indeed, the Civil Wars, the Weak, or Wicked Kings and Foreign Dominion, have from time to time disturbed this goodly Order: But be it that the Fundamental Laws of the State were excel∣lent, or that the People from their Cradles were in∣dued with happy Dispositions, is not material; but it is most certain, these Fatal and Troublesom Intervals did not long continue; if so be they were but never so little lest to their own disposal, they took to their former Conduct again: And we see at this very day,
in the midst of Corruption, which the Domestick Troubles and Commerce with Tartars have introdu∣ced, some Footsteps of their ancient Probity remain∣ing. I do not pretend, My Lord, to enlarge any further upon this Subject. I know very well that it is a Letter that I have the honour to write to you, and not a History; besides, they are about Translating into French that History which the Chineses themselves have left behind them, and I am confident it will please, by its Novelty and Extraordinary Matters it contains. I content my self in this place to draw you out the Portraiture of the present State of China, in relation to the Manners and Customs of its People; I could decipher it in a few words, by telling you that they live there as we do in Europe. Avarice, Ambition, and Love, bear a great stroke in all Transactions. They Cozen and Cheat in Traffick; Injustice reigns in Sovereign Courts; Intrigues busie both Princes and Courtiers. In the mean time Persons of Quality take so many measures to conceal Vice; and the Out∣works are so well guarded, that if a Stranger be not careful to be instructed concerning Affairs to the bot∣tom, he imagines that every thing is perfectly well regulated. That is the thing wherein the Chineses re∣semble the Europeans. Now I will here shew you wherein they differ from them. Their Countenance, Air, Language, Disposition, Civilities, Manners and Behaviour, are not only different from ours, but also front those we may observe in all other Nations of the World. Without doubt, My Lord, you may have taken no∣tice that the Figures that are painted upon the Porce∣lain Dishes and Cabinets that come from China; our Pictures in Europe do always flatter us, but those of China make them maimed and ridiculous. They are
not so ill-favoured as they make themselves; it is true, they do not agree in the Idea that we frame to our¦selves of real Beauty. They would have a Man big, tall, and gross; they would have him have a broad Fore∣head, Eyes little and flat, a short Nose, great Ears, a Mouth of a midling size, a long Beard, a black Hair. That curious Feature, that lively Aspect, that state∣ly and noble Gate and Deportment the French so much esteem, does not at all please them. That is an handsome Man that fills an Elbow-Chair, that by his Gravity and healthful Constitution can make a good huffing Figure. As for their Colour, they are natu∣rally as fair as we, especially towards the North; but being the Men take no care of themselves, travel much, wear upon their Head nothing but a little Bon∣net not proper to defend their Face from the Sun-beams, they are commonly as Tawny as the Portu∣guese in the Indies: The People also of the Provinces of Canton and Iannon, by reason of the excessive Heat, working half naked, are of a Dun Complexion. As much as the Men neglect themselves in this particular, so much do the Women take all the care imaginable to preserve themselves. I am not sure if painting be usual with them; but some body told me that they rub their Faces every Morning with a sort of white Meal, more fit to ternish than to inhance their Beauty. They have all of them little Eyes, and short Noses; excepting that, they come nothing short of European Ladies, but their Modesty, so natural to them, doth infinitely set off their Handsomness; a little Collar of white Sattin fastened to a Vest, keeps them light, and covers their Neck all over. Their Hands are always hid in long Sleeves; they tread soft∣ly and gingerly, with their Eyes upon the Ground, their Head on one side, and a Man would imagine, to look on them, that they were a Company of Nuns or Devotees by Profession, set apart, and sequestred
from the World, only taken up in the Service of God. So that it is observable, That Custom hath many times more power to perplex and trouble the fair Sex, than the most austere and rigid Vertue: Nay, and it were a thing to be desired, that Christianity were able to obtain from Christian Ladies here, what the Practice of the World hath for so many Ages inspired into the Idolatrous Chineses. This Modesty nevertheless does not hinder them from being possest with Womanish Whimseys; the more they are confined, the less they love Solitude; they dress themselves gorgeously, and spend all the Morning in making themselves fine, thinking they may be seen in the day time, altho' perhaps they are not by any one but their own Domesticks. Their Head-dress, which usually consists of several Locks buckled up, interlaced with Flowers of Gold and Silver, is somewhat odd. But I neither can, nor will, My Lord, give you a particular Description of it, because I know you do not expect it from me. However, I am perswaded if People should see the Model of them in France, they would go near to be tempted to quit that extravagant Company of Orna∣ments they use, to dress their Heads a-la-mode▪ de Chi∣neses. The Ladies wear, as Men do, a long Sattin or Cloath of Gold Vest, red, blue, or green, according to their particular Phansie; the elder sort habit them¦selves in black, or purple; they wear besides that, a kind of Surtout, the Sleeves whereof, extream wide, trail upon the Ground, when they have no occasion to hold them up. But that which distinguisheth them from all the Women in the World, and does in a manner make a particular Species of them, is the lit∣tleness of their Feet, and here lyes the more essential point of their Beauty. That is miraculous, and can∣not be comprehended; this Affectation proceeds some∣times
even to that Excess that would pass for Folly, did not an extravagant and ancient Custom (which in the business of the Mode, evermore prevails over the most natural Idea's) oblige them to follow the Streams, and comply with the Custom of the Country. So soon as ever the Girls are born, the Nurses take care to tye their Feet extream hard for fear of grow∣ing; Nature that seems to be disposed for this Tor∣ment, does more easily buckle to it than one could imagine; nay, one does not perceive that their Health is impaired thereby. Their Shoes of Sattin, embroi∣dered with Gold, Silver, and Silk, are extraordinary neat; and tho' they be very little, yet do they study to let them be seen as they walk; for walk they do (which one would not be apt to believe) and would walk all day long by their good will, if they had liberty to go abroad. Some have been perswaded that it was an Invention of the ancient Chineses, who to bring Women under a necessity of keeping within Doors, brought little Feet in fashion. I have more than once inquired about it of the Chinese themselves, that never heard nothing of it. These are idle Tales, says one of them smiling, our Fore-fathers knew Women but too well, as we do, to believe that in retrenching half of their Feet, they could be deprived of the power▪ of walking, and of longing to see the World. If People would have given themselves the trouble to have consulted the Relations concerning the Coun∣tenance and Physiognomy of the China Women; it would not have been so easie a matter to impose upon the easiness of the Ladies of Paris, who entertain'd a poor French Woman the last year, giving her all manner of Relief, because she said she was an Out∣landish Woman, and of one of the best Families in China. This Accident surprised all Curious Persons, and the Marquis de Croisi intimated to me that I would do him a kindness in examining the truth of the story.
Charity, added he, is no less acceptable to God, al∣tho' it be misplaced upon Objects that deserve it not. If the Business were only a bare Mistake in Matter of Alms, one might, without any Scruple of Consci∣ence, leave those in an Errour whom one deceives under a false pretence of Necessity. But this Maid saith she was an Heathen, she is exhorted long since to be Converted; she conceives already, or at least makes as if she did conceive our Mysteries; in fine, she desires to embrace our Religion; and they are just upon the point to baptize her. If she be a Chi∣nese, well and good; and we have cause to admire Divine Providence from bringing this Soul from so remote a Place, to be admitted into the Bosom of the Church; but if she be a French Woman, who probably hath been baptized from her Infancy, this Abuse of the Sacrament that she's a going to receive a second time, is a Sacriledge deserving the severest Punishment; of which Sacriledge, those that assist her become Guilty themselves. I was already much prepossessed with an ill Opi∣nion of this pretended Chinese; but, besides the order of the Marquis de Croissi, I thought it would be good to sift out the Business to the bottom, to undeceive those that were any ways concern'd therein. When she understood that I would come and see her, she was not a little perplext. He is not a China Father, says she, but one of the Indian Missionaries, whom the Revolution of Siam hath made to come back. Nay, they had much ado to find her, when I appeared; they sought for her all up and down a good while, and at length unkennell'd her, and perswaded her to make Appearance. So soon as I saw her, I had no need of Examinati∣on, the Features of her Face, her Gate, her Feet, her whole Behaviour betray'd her. She feigned in speaking French, that she did not well understand the
Language; but, besides the placing of the words, which she endeavoured not to pronounce articulately, was altogether natural, which is scarce ever got by Strangers, she did also pronounce with a great deal of firmness several Letters not in use with the Chineses, which it is impossible for them to express. After the first Discourses, I demanded of what Pro∣vince, and what Family of China she was, and by what strange Adventure she was at such a great Di∣stance from her Country? I am of Pekin it self, says she, the Metropolis of the Empire, born in the Emperor's Palace, brought up at Court, and Daughter to Prince Co∣ronne: That is to say, who does dispose Sovereignly every thing; more a Master, and more powerful than the Emperor himself; whose Pleasures are never in∣terrupted by the Cares of Publick Affairs; who be∣ing little concerned at the good or bad Condition of the Empire, confines all his Ambition to the render∣ing himself happy, and to lead an easie and pleasant Life. I embarked with my Mother, who had a design to pass into Japan, there to treat of a Marriage for me. In the Passage our Vessel was attacked by an Holland Pi∣rate, that took it, and blew it up; and brought me away Prisoner. However the barbarous Pirate took such care of me, as was capable to sweeten my Captivity, if the loss of my Mother had not reduced me to a Disconsolate Condition, for she died before mine Eyes, and the Representation of so fatal an Accident that lay night and day heavy upon my Spirit, would scarce permit me to reflect upon the many kind Offices he did me. Nevertheless, my Condition was not so deplorable as I imagined; the victorious Hollander was at length over∣come by a French Privateer; I was a second time a Cap∣tive, and treated by the new Captain with so much harshness, that I was at that very moment apprehensive that my Grief might increase, and that the excess of Miseries that one en∣dure
in this World, is never so great, but one may become still more miserable. This Voyage was to me the longest, most dangerous, and accompanied with sorrow and bitter∣ness. At length we came ashoar at a place I know not; they brought me out of the Ship, and after they had drag∣ged me through several Provinces, they barbarously forsook me, and I found my self destitute, comfortless, and without any support, in the middle of this great City, which I hear called Paris. 'Tis true, Heaven hath not quite forsaken me; the word Pekin, the only word, by which I can make known my Country; and to that purpose did I so often repeat it; hath brought me out of Misery. Some Ladies, at the hearing of this word were moved with Compassion, took me into their House, and have ever since treated me with so much Cha∣rity, that, I do not know if I ought to complain of Fate that hath conducted me into so good hands. She had, indeed, some cause to be well pleased with her Lot, much better in effect, than she could naturally expect. They treated her as a Maid of some Noble Family; nay, it was an Hundred pound to a penny but they had given her the quality of Princess Couron∣né, a Name much better known in France than China, where this Dignity is still in fieri. They told me more∣over that divers Persons were impatient to do her a kindness, and that Monsieur N. one of our most fa∣mous Writers, had already Composed three extraor∣dinary eloquent Letters in her Name; one for the Emperor, another for Prince Couronné, and the third for some other Prince of her Family. He hath, with∣out doubt, what he deserved from the Persons that ingaged him in it; yet I do not believe that China will ever thank him for it. For my part, My Lord, I do confess that the bare recital of this Adventure appear'd to me somewhat fa∣bulous, and carries with it such a Romantick Air that is capable of undeceiving those, whom an excess of
Charity had not quite blinded. Prince Couronné is a Chimera, that hath not the least appearance of Truth in it. The Birth of a Maid in a Palace where there is none but Eunuchs, is still more hard to be belei∣ved. The Hollanders are not at War with the Chineses, and it is not their best way to fall out with them, by Assaulting their Ships. The Chinese Dames, that scarce ever stir out of their Houses, do not care for undertaking long Voyages at Sea: And the Match they were going to mannage is no more likely than that of a Princess of France that some body might feign to Embark at Brest, to Sail in∣to the Indies to espouse some Mandarin of Siam. Besides, We know all the Vessels that we have ta∣ken from the Hollanders, as well as those that are arri∣ved in France from the Indies: we know the Captains of them, we know their Prizes, their Engagements, their Adventures, and yet we hear not one word of what our Chinese relates. Now if she be so unfortunate as to be found in the Streets of Paris miserable, forlorn, and unknown, she ought not so much to lay the fault upon our French People, as upon her ill Fortune that took no care to place her better in this World. But to Convince all those who were present at our Interview, I put divers questions to her about the principle Cities in China; I examined her concern∣ing the Money, their Writing, the Characters and Language of the Country. She told me she had of∣ten travelled from Pekin to Nankin in less then Three days, notwithstanding it is above Three hundred Leagues from one to another; that they used Gold Money, altho' Gold is not currant through all the Empire, but as precious Stones are in Europe; that the Silver Coin was stamp as ours is, round, flat, bearing the Emperors Arms, with divers Figures according to the Custom of Eastern Nations, notwithstanding the Silver hath no regular Figure, they cast it into Ingots,
they reduce it to what form they please without Arms, Order, or Ornament, they clip into great Pieces, as occasion serves; and it is only by weight, not by the Emperor's Mark that they know its value. I writ down some Chinese Characters; for she had boasted that she could read, a Pèrson of her quality durst not say the contrary; but the Misfortune was, she mistook her self, and took the Paper at the wrong end, boldly reading the Letters, turn'd upside down, as if they had been right: upon the whole, that which she pronounced had no manner of relation to the ge∣nuine Sense of the Writing. At last I spoke Chinese to her, and for fear least she might avoid the difficul∣ty, I acquainted her that I spake the Mandarin Lan∣guage so currant throughout the Empire, which they constantly use at the Court. She was so impudent as to frame ex tempore a wild, ridiculous Gibberish, but so little understood, that it was evident she had not time enough to make it hang well together; so that not being able to understand what I said to her, I should have been sore put to it to explain what she meant, if indeed she did mean any thing. After this Trial and Examination, she might blush for shame, and ingeniously confess the Imposture; but she still keeps up her Conversation without being con∣cerned, and with such an Air of Confidence that would make any one judge that this China Romance was not the first Story she had made. I thought, My Lord, that you would be very glad to be acquainted with this; besides that it may af∣ford you some pleasure, it will also serve to let you understand, that the Mind, Countenance, and Beha∣viour of the Chinese Women have no Affinity with those of the Europeans; and that a French Woman must needs be brazen-fac'd, when under the borrow∣ed Name of a Chinese, she pretends to impose upon Per∣sons who have, as long as I have done, seen both Nations.
After this little Digression, you may be willing I should take up my former Discourse again. The Mens Habits, as every where else, are there much different from the Womens; they shave their Head all over, except behind, where they let grow as much Hair as is needful to make a long Tress. They do not use a Hat as we do, but wear continually a Bonnet or a Cap, which Civility forbids ptting off. This Bonnet differs according to the different Sea∣sons of the year: That which they use in Summer is in form of a Cone, that is to say, round, and wide below, but short, and strait above, where it termi∣nates in a meer Point. It is lined within with a pretty Sattin, and the top covered with a very fine Mat, ve∣ry much esteemed in the Country. Besides that, they add thereto a great slake of red Silk, that falls round about it, and reaches to the Edges; so that when they walk this Silk flows irregularly on all sides, and the continual Motion of the Head gives it a particular pleasing Grace. Sometimes in lieu of Silk they wear a sort of long Hair, of a vivid shining red, which Rain does not deface, and is more especially in use amongst Men when they ride. This Hair comes from the Province of Sout-chouen, and grows upon the Legs of certain Cows; its natural Colour is white, but they give it a tincture, that makes it dearer than the finest Silk. In Winter they wear a Plush Cap, bordered with a Sable Fox-skin; the rest is of a curious Sattin, black or purple, covered with a great flake of red Silk, like the Summer Cap. There is nothing more hand∣some than these Caps, which are sold sometimes for Eight or Ten Crowns; but they are so shallow, that they always discover the Ears, which is mighty in∣convenient in the Sun, or upon a Journey. When the Mandarins are in their Formalities, the upper part of the Bonnet hath a Diamond in the Crest, or some other
precious Stone ill cut, yet inchased in a Button of very curious wrought Gold: the others have a huge Tufft, or Button of Stuff, Agate, Crystal, or some other Matter. Their Habit is long, and convenient enough for Students, but cumbersome for Men on Horseback▪ It consists of a Vest that reaches to the Ground, the Skirts or Sides of which, are folded before one over the other, in such a manner that the uppermost is ex∣tended to the left side, where they fasten it all along, with four or five Gold or Silver Buttons. The Sleeves, that are wide towards the Shoulder, grow straiter and straiter to the Wrist, like the Sleeves of a Priest's Albe, but they do in a manner cover the whole Hand, and leave nothing to be seen but the Fingers ends: They keep the Vest close with a broad silken Sash, whose two ends hang down to the Knees. The Tartars stick an Handkerchief to it on both sides, with a Sheath for a Knife and Fork, and Tooth-pick, a Purse, and other pretty Implements. In Summer their Neck is all bare, which looks very ill, in Winter they cover it with a Collar of Sattin fastened to the Vest, or with a Tip∣pet of Sable or Fox-skin, about three or four Fingers broad, which is fastened before with a Button, which is very decent, and becomes Horsmen wonderfully. Besides the Vest they put on a kind of Surtout with short wide Sleeves like those of your Baresters Gowns; the Students wear them very long; the Gentlemen, and especially the Tartars, will have them short; and those they use reach no farther than their Pocket-holes: As for their under Garment, they use in Sum∣mer only a single pair of Drawers of white Taffaty, under a very broad and short Shirt of the same Stuff; but in Winter the Shirt is of Linnen, and under it they have Breeches of course Sattin quilted with Cotton, or raw Silk, which is warmer. All this is natural enough; but perhaps, My Lord,
you will be surprised to hear that the Chineses are al∣ways booted; and when any one renders them a Vi∣sit, if they chance not to have their Boots on, they make them wait till they go fetch them. We stand in need of this Example to authorize our ancient Custom, but we carried on the Mode far∣ther than they; for we have seen, that the French Men, not satisfied with walking booted along the Streets, armed them with huge jingling Spurs, that nothing might be wanting to the Ornaments of a Gentleman on Horseback; but we are recovered as to this Point, and several others; but the Chineses in all probability, that dote upon Antiquity, will not be cured of it in haste; it is indeed, in respect of them, an extravagant piece of Foppery, not to dare to go into the City without their Boots, because they are always carried in a Sedan. This Mode would be still the more pardonable in Winter; for their Boots being of Silk, and their Boot-hose of a pinked Stuff, lined with Cottons a good inch think, the Leg is thereby well defended against the Cold: But in Summer, where the Heat is excessive, no body living besides the Chineses, for the keeping up of an Air of Gravity, were able to endure to be at that rate in a kind of a Stove from Morning to Evening: And what is more strange, your People that work scarce ever use them, either by reason of the incon∣venience, or to save charges. The form of these Boots is somewhat different from ours, for they have neither heel nor top; when they ride any long Journey, they are made of obso∣lete, old fashion'd Leather, of thick, black, pinked Cotton; but in the City they usually wear them of Sattin, with a course border of Plush or Velvet upon the Knee. The People in publick, and Persons of Quality within Doors, are instead of Shoes, shod with Pattins of black Linnen, or some very pretty
Silk, very convenient; they stick close to the Foot of themselves, by a Border that covers the Heel, with∣out needing to try them before. They have not introduced the use of the Muff and Gloves into China; but the Sleeves of the Vest being very long, they draw up their Hand into them when it is cold to keep it warm. I know not if I may make hold, My Lord, to add another Custom, which is very ancient among the Chineses, and by no means suitable to the French Politeness; their Doctors, and other Learned Men, let their Nails grow excessively, insomuch that in some they are little shorter than their Fingers; it obtains amongst them not only for an Ornament, but a Distinction, by which it may be known, that by their Condition they are separated from Mechanick Arts, and are wholly addicted to Sciences. In short, since they affect a starched Gra∣vity in all their ways, which conciliates Respect, they imagine with themselves that a long Beard might con∣tribute thereto, so they suffer it to grow; now if they have not much, it is not for want of Cultivating: But Nature in this point has been very niggardly, there is not a Man of them that does not envy the Europeans, whom they look upon in this respect as the greatest Men in the World. Here you have, My Lord, a particular Description, that may in some measure acquaint you with the Deportment and Aspect of the Chineses; I do not be∣lieve, says a Spaniard to me one day, that they ought to be offended at it in France; In all likelyhood those Modes formerly reigned amongst you; for tell me, is there any one of them, that hath escaped the fertile Invention of the French; in Fourteen hundred years, which is as long as the Monarchy hath continued, there have been above Four∣teen hundred Modes. So that perhaps there is not that Habit in the World, that should seem strange to you; and all that we can say, when any Mode that is presented to
you, displeases you, is, that it is out of fashion. 'Tis true, the Chineses are not so sickle as we, but they have carried on things to another extremity: for rather than forsake their ancient Habit, they re∣newed a Cruel War against the Tartars; I, and the greatest part of them had as live lose their Head, as let their Hair be cut, of all the Excesses in point of Mode, none is more uncouth and phantastical than that, and how ridiculous soever the Chineses may fear to look, after they have parted with an Head of Hair, yet they might be convinced that a Man whose Head is lop'd off, is worse disfigured. However, we must grant that the Constancy of this People is admirable, for when the Tartars attacked them, they had kept their Habit for above Two thousand years, which can be ascribed to nothing but the good order observed in the Empire, the Government of which hath always been uniform, where the Laws have been exactly ob∣served in the least Punctilio's. Notwithstanding I am perswaded these ways would not please all our French People; nay, and the Modes, of which we are so fond, do not appear so handsome to the Chineses as we imagine; but above all, the Pe∣riwig does strangely run in their Mind; and they look upon us as a sort of People, who, for want of a Beard, would get an Artificial one clapt to the Chin, that should reach to the Knees. This Phantastical Head-dress, say they, and that prodigious heap of cur∣led Hair, are proper upon the Stage for a Man that would represent the Devil; But has one the shape of a Man when he is thus disguised? Insomuch that the Chinese Politeness will go near upon this Article alone to araign us of Barbarity. They have likewise much ado to be perswaded, that long Shanks discovered, with a Stocken drawn strait, and narrow Breeches, look handsome, because they are accustomed to an Air of Gravity that gives them other
Conceptions. They would sooner be reconciled with the Figure of a Magistrate shaven, without a Periwig, who should in his Lawyers Gown go booted, than with all this Attire that makes our Cavaliers have a fine Shape, and easie and fine Gate, a quick and dis∣ingaged Carriage; which will by no means go down with them. Thus Ridiculousness pleases, and one is often times offended at Real Prettiness, according as Prejudice or Custom have differently changed the I∣magination; there is notwithstanding in all these Modes some other intrinsick real Beauty, which na∣ked Simplicity, which Nature in her Innocence, and exempt from Passion, have inspired into Men, for the Necessity and Conveniency of Life. Altho' Persons of Quality observe exactly all the Formalities and Decencies suitable to their State, and never appear uncovered in Publick, how great soever the heat be, yet in Private, and among their Friends they assume a freedom even to a fault; they ever and anon quit their Bonnet, Surtout, Vest, and Shirt, reserving nothing but a single pair of Drawers of white Taffaty, or Transparent Linnen. That is the more surprising, because they condemn all Naked∣ness in Pictures, and are even offended that our En∣gravers represent Men with their Arms, Thighs, and Shoulders uncovered; they seem to be in the right for being displeased at the unchristian Licence of our Workmen; but yet they are ridiculous to blame that upon a piece of Linnen, or Paper, which they practise themselves with so much liberty and undecency in their own proper Persons. As for the Vulgar, they transgress in that respect all the Bounds of Modesty, especially in the Southern Provinces, where Water-men, and certain other Han∣dicrafs-men, are impudent to the highest degree; and intruth the most barbarous Indians, notwithstanding the Climate seems to excuse them, appear'd to me in this
respect much less barbarous than the Chineses; almost all the Artificers and inferiour Tradesmen go along the Streets with single Drawers, without Cap, Stock∣ings, or Shirt, which makes them much tanned, and of a swarthy hue. In the Northern Provinces they are a little more reserved; and the Cold, in spight of their Teeth, makes them modest, and keep within bounds. After having described to you the Modes of China, perhaps you may be desirous, My Lord, that I should speak of their Stuffs. Here is what I have observed of them in general: Their Silk, without question, is the finest in the World; they make of it in many Pro∣vinces, but the best and fairest is to be found in that of Tchekiam, because the Soil is very proper for Mul∣berry Trees, and because the Air is indued with a de∣gree of Heat and Moisture, more conformable to the Worms that make it. Every body deals in it, and the Traffick of it is so very great, that this Province alone is able to supply all China, and the greatest part of Eu∣rope. Yet the finest and fairest Silks are wrought in the Province of Nankin, the Rendevouz of almost all the good Workmen. It is there that the Emperor furnisheth himself with the Silks spent in the Palace, and with those he presents to the Lords of the Court; the Silks of Canton notwithstanding, are valued above all amongst Strangers; and the Silks of this Province are also more saleable, and go off better than those of all the other Provinces of China. Altho' all these Silks have some resemblance to ours, yet the Workmanship hath something in it that makes a difference. I have there seen Plush, Velvet, Tissa of Gold, Sattin, Taffaty, Crapes, and several others, of which I do not so much as know the name in France; that which I do not so much as know the name in France; that which is the most currant amongst them is called Touanze; it is a sort of Sattin, stronger, but not so
glossy as ours, sometimes smooth, and sometimes di∣stinguished by Flowers, Birds, Trees, Houses, and sha∣dy Groves. These Figures are not raised upon the ground by a mixture of raw Silk, as our Workmen are used to do in Europe, which makes our Work not so durable; all the Silk of that is twisted, and the Flowers are distin∣guished only by the difference of Colours, and shadow∣ing, when they mix Gold or Silver with it, it does much resemble our Brocado, or flower'd Silk, but their Gold and Silver is wrought a way that is parti∣cular to them alone; for whereas in Europe we draw the Gold as fine as possibly it can be twist∣ed with the thred, the Chineses to save the matter, or because they did not bethink themselves of this Trick, satisfie themselves to gild or silver over a long Leaf of Paper, which they afterward cut into little Scrowls, wherein they wrap the Silk. There is a great deal of Cunning in that; but this gilding will not last long, Water, or even Moistness it self, will ternish the Splendor of it quickly: yet for all that, when the Pieces come out of the Workmans bands, they are very fine, and one would take them for valuable Pieces. Sometimes they are contented only to put into the Piece these little Scrowls of gild∣ed Paper, without rolling them upon the Thred, and then the Figures, altho' pretty and finely turn'd, do not last so long by far; and the Silk thus flowered is at a lower rate. Amongst the different Figures they represent, the Dragon is the most ordinary: There be two sorts of them; one, to which they make five Claws, called Lom, is only used upon the Stuffs designed for the Em∣peror: that is his Arms, which Tobi, Founder of the Empire, first took for himself and Successors, above Four thousand years ago. The second sort of Dragons hath but four Claws, and is named Mam. The Empe∣ror
Vouvam, who reigned Two thousand eight hun∣dred thirty two years ago, ordain'd that every body might bear the same; and since that time, the use of it is grown common. They make use of another kind of Stuff in Summer, which the Chineses call Cha; it is not so close, nor hath so good a gloss as our Taffaty, but much more substan∣tial; altho' several People desire to have it smooth and even, yet most wear it powdered with great Flowers pierced through, and cut into Flowers like your Eng∣lish Lace; and many times these hollowings are in such a great number, that one can scarce discern the body of the Silk. These Summer Garments are ex∣traordinary convenient, and wonderful neat, so that all the Persons of Quality use them: Besides, the Taffa∣ty is not dear; a whole Piece, enough to make a long Vest and Surtout, will not amount to above 2 Guinea's. The third is a particular sort of Taffaty, that serves for Drawers, Shirts, Linings, they call it Tcheouze; it is close, and withal so plyant, that it is vain to fold and double it, and squeeze it with your hand; you can scarce ever rumple it. It is sold by weight; and is is so serviceable, that they wash it as they do Lin∣nen, without losing much of its former lustre. Besides the ordinary Silk of which I but now spoke, which we know in Europe, China hath of another sort, which you meet with in the Province of Chanton. The Worms from which they take it are wild, they go to seek for them in the Woods; and I am not sure, whe∣ther or no they breed of them in Houses. This Silk is of a grey Colour, void of any gloss; so that those who are not well acquainted with it, take the Stuffs that are made of it for red Linnen, or for one of the coursest Druggets; yet for all that they infi∣nitely value it, and it costs more than Sattin too, they call them Kien-Tcbeou; they will endure a long time; tho' strong and close, yet do they not fret; they wash
them as they do Linnen; and the Chineses assure us, that Spots cannot spoil them, and that they do not so much as take Oil it self. Wooll is very common, and withal very cheap, e∣specially in the Provinces of Chensi and Chansi, and Sout∣chouen, where they feed abundance of Flocks, yet do not the Chineses make Cloath. That of Europe, where∣with the English furnish them, is highly esteemed, but by reason they sell it much dearer than the finest Silks, they buy but little of it. The Mandarins make themselves studying Gowns for the Winter of a kind of course Russet, for want of better Cloath. As for Druggets, Serges, and Tammies, we scarce meet with better than theirs; the Bonze's Wives do com∣monly work them, because the Bonze's make use of them themselves; there is a great Trade driven of them every where in the Empire. Besides Cotton Linnen, that is very common, they use also for the Summer nettle Linnen for long Vests; but that which is the most valued, and is to be found no where else, is called Copou: because it is made of a Plant that the People of the Country call Co, found in the Province of Fokien. It is a kind of creeping Shrub, whole Leaves are much bigger than Ivy-leaves; they are round, smooth, green within, whitish, and cottony, or downy, on the out∣side; they let them grow and spread along the Fields. There be some of them as thick as your finger, which is plyable, and cottony as its Leaves are. When it begins to dry, they make the sheaves of it to rot in Water, as they do Flax and Hemp; they always peel off the first skin, which they throw away; but of the second, which is much more fine and delicate, they divide it by the hand into very slender and very small Filaments, without beating, or spinning it, they make that Linnen of which I spake; it is transparent, pret∣ty fine, but so cool and light, that one would think he had nothing on his back.
All Persons of Quality make long Vests of it du∣ring the excessive Heat, with a Surtout of Cha. In the Spring and Autumn they put on Kien-tcheou, and Touanze in Winter, that is to say, course Sattin, or flowered Silk. Grave Persons desire to have it even, others wear it flowered; but no body, except the Man∣darins in the Assemblies, or upon certain Solemn Vi∣sits, use Silk flowered with Gold or Silver. The Vul∣gar, that usually habit themselves in course Linnen dyed blue, or black, quilt it with Cotton, or line it with Sheepskin during the cold weather: But great Persons line their Vests and Surtouts with the noble Skins of Sable or Ermyn, Fox or Lamb: They use al∣so for the same purpose Plush and Petit-gris. Because Ermyn is very rare in China, they content themselves only to border their Vests and extre∣mity of their Sleeves with it; that which I have seen did not appear to me to be of a fair white. Sable is pretty well known in France, but much less common there than in China, where all the conside∣rable Mandarins wear it: One Skin only of a Foot long, and between four and six Inches broad (for the They call it In∣chu Tiochu. Animal is but small) will sometimes cost Ten Crowns: But when one chooseth some of the finest for a compleat Habit, the whole Lining of a Vest will cost between 5 and 6000 Livres; yet one may have a pretty handsome one for 200 Pistols. Fox-skins are likewise much used, those who would be magnificent take nothing but the Belly of this A∣nimal, where the Hair is long, fine, and softest; and of a great number of small pieces patched together, they compose an entire Lining, which for the Vest and Surtout comes to a matter of five or six hundred Livres. There are also several other sorts of Furs that Tar∣tary perhaps supplies them withal, which the Mandarins
make use of to sit upon the Ground, especially at the Palace when they wait, and expect the time of their Audience. They put some of them also under the Quilt, not only to heat the Bed, but also to take a∣way its dampness. Besides, there is another Fur of a particular Species, that is perfectly handsome and fine, the Hair of it is long, soft, very thick set; it is of a pretty whitish grey mixt with black, striped with black and yellow Lists as those of Tigres; they make great Winter Gowns of them to wear in the City, putting the Fur on the out-side, so that when the Mandarins are thick and short, (which is very common with them) besides two Furs underneath for the Vest and Surtout, when, I say, they have put on their back one of these furr'd Gowns with long Hair, they differ but a little from Bears, or from the Animal of whom they borrowed the Skin; altho' in this Condi∣tion they think themselves to be very gentile, and to make a graceful Figure. Of all the Furrings the most common are Lambskins Yam-pi.. They are white, downy, and very warm, but burthensome, and at first of a strong smell, in a manner like those greezy Gloves that smell, in a manner like those greezy Gloves that smell of Oil: I wonder they bring not up the Mode in France; those who delight in slender fine Shapes, would not submit to it, yet otherwise there is nothing more gentile, nor more convenient for Winter. Upon the whole, if great Caution be not used, all these Furs are easily spoiled, especially in hot and moist Countries, Worms breed in them, and the Hair falls off: To prevent them, the Chineses, so soon as e∣ver the Summer approaches, expose them to the Air for some days, when it is fair and dry Weather; then they beat them with Sticks, or shake them often, to get out the Dust; and when they have enclosed them in huge earthen Pots, into which they throw Corns of
Pepper, and other bitter Drugs, they stop it up very close, and there let them lye till the beginning of Winter. Besides their usual Garments, there are yet two sorts that deserve to be known: They put on one to defend them from the Rain; for the Chineses, who de∣light in Travelling, spare for no cost to travel com∣modiously; they are made of a course Taffaty, crust∣ed over with a condensed Oil, which is in lieu of Wax, which being once well dried, makes the Stuff green, transparent, and extraordinary gentile: They make Bonnets of it, Vests, and Surtouts, that resist the Rain for some time; but it gets through at last, unless the Garment be a choice one, and carefully prepared. The Boots are of Leather, but so little that the Stockings are spoiled at the Knee, except one be a Horse∣back, like the Tartars, with their Legs doubled up, and their Stirrups extream short. The Mourning Habit hath also something odd in it, The Bonnet, Vests, Surtout, Stockings and Boots are made of white Linnen, and from the Prince to the most inferiour Handicrafts-man, none dare wear any of another colour. In close Mourning the Bonnet seems phantastick, and very difficult to be represented; it is of a red and very clear Canvas Cloath, not much unlike the Canvas we use for packing up Commodi∣ties. The Vest is kept close with a Girdle of Canvas; the Chineses in this posture do at the beginning affect a careless Behaviour, and Grief and Sorrow seems paint∣ed all over the outward Man; but all being nothing but Ceremony, and Affectation with them, they ea∣sily put on their own Face again; they can Laugh and Cry both with a wind; for I have seen some Laugh immediately after they had shed abundance of Tears over the Tomb of their Fathers. Perhaps, My Lord, you may have the Curiosity to know after what manner the Missionaries, who labour about the Conversion of the Infidels, are habited; the
Laws, that suffer no Foreign Mode to take place, de∣termined the first Jesuits to take the Garb of the Bonzes at the beginning: But this Garb, though grave and modest enough, was so cried down by the ignorance and irregular Life of those wicked Priests, that that alone was sufficient to deprive us of the Company and Correspondence of honest People. In effect, nothing was so diametrically opposite to Religion: so that after a long deliberation, they thought it more adviseable to take the Students Habit, which, together with the quality of European Doctor, did ca∣pacitate us to speak to the People with some Authori∣ty, and to be heard by the Mandarins with some re∣spect. From that very time we had free Access every where, and God did so far vouchsafe a Blessing to the Labours of our first Missionaries, that the Gospel in a short time was propagated with considerable Suc∣cess. But in the late Revolution of the Empire, these Fathers, as well as the Chineses, were forced to go in the Tartarian Fashion, after the manner as I told you. In the Visits made to the Mandarins upon the account of Religion, we could not dispense from wearing a Vest and Surtout of common Silk; but in the House we are clothed in Serge or painted Linnen. So that, My Lord, preserving as much as lyes in us the Spirit of Poverty suitable to our Condition, we endeavour to become all things to all Men, after the A∣postles example, that we may the more easily win over some to Iesus Christ; being perswaded, that as to a Missionary, the Garment, Diet, Manner of Living, and exterior Customs ought all to be referred to the great Design he proposes to himself, to Convert the whole Earth. A Man must be a Barbarian with Bar∣barians, Polite with Men of Parts, Austere and Ri∣gid to Excess among the Indian Penetents, handsom∣ly Drest in China, and half Naked in the Wilderness
of Medura, to the end that the Gospel always uni∣form, always unalterable in it self, may the more easily insinuate it self into the Minds of Men whom an holy Compliance and Conformity to Customs regulated by Christian Prudence, have already pre∣possest in favour to us. I am with the most profound Respect, My Lord,  Your most humble and most obedient Servant . J.
LETTER VI. To the Dutchess of Bouillon. Of the Oeconomy and Magnificence of the Chineses. MADAM, THE Zeal that your Grace hath shewn to be fully informed of the present State of the Mis∣sions in China hath been an infinite Satisfa∣ction to me: But I confess, I was a little surprised, that amongst so many curious things to be met with in this new World, you have in a manner wholly in∣sisted upon that which relates to the Neatness and Magnificence of the Chineses. I know very well that it is the usual Subject of Discourse among the Ladies, and I could have almost expected no more from any other. But for you, Madam, when I had the honour to see you, I had prepared my self for Subjects of a quite dif∣ferent nature; I made account you would discourse with me concerning the Ingenuity, Sciences, and Po∣liteness of this People: And whereas Travellers do u∣sually affect to prefer what they have seen amongst Fo∣reigners, to that which is found in their Native Soil, I pleased my self that I could sincerely and safely tell you, that the French Ladies (I mean those, who like you, have raised themselves above those Toyish Cares,
that do in a manner totally possess the fair Sex) have more Wit, Capacity, and a more raised Genius, even in the solid and substantial Sciences, than all the great Doctors of that Empire; for as for Politeness, I can scarce believe, Madam, that you can doubt of it; and it is not necessary to be Mistress of as much of it as you are, to deface and eclipse the most Polite Courts of the East. But since, either by Chance, or by Reflexion, you have been pleased to confine your self to another Sub∣ject, and that you desire a Methodical Account of what I have had the honour to relate to you of it, I shall obey you, Madam, not only with that profound respect I owe to your Quality and Merit, but also with all the Sentiments of grateful Acknowledgment the Favours you have vouchsafed to honour me, have in∣spired me withal. The Chineses come far short of us in the Magnifi∣cence of their Houses, besides that the Architecture is not beautiful, nor the Apartments spacious, they do not study to adorn them; and that chiefly for two Reasons: The first is, Because in all the Palaces of the Mandarins belong to the Emperor, he lodges them (and I cannot tell whether they observe the same or∣der throughout the whole Empire) but the People fur∣nish them in some places. The People are always at as little Expence as they can; and the Mandarins do not care to ruin themselves to embellish Palaces, that they are every day in danger of forsaking, because their Places are properly nothing but Commissions, which are many times taken away upon the least Fault. The 2d Reason is fetch'd from the Custom of the Country, which does not allow to receive Visits in the inner part of the House, but only at the Entrance in a Divan they have contrived for the Ceremonies. It is a Banqueting House all open, that hath no other Ornament besides one single Order of Columns of
Wood painted or vernished, which they use only to up∣hold the Beams and Timber, that often appears under the Tiles, no body taking care to cover it with a Ciel∣ing. So that it is no wonder if they retrench all the superfluous Ornaments of their Apartments, seeing Fo∣reigners and Strangers scarce ever set foot in them; they have neither Looking glasses, Tapestry-hangings, nor wrought Chairs: Gildings are not in fashion, save only in some of the Emperors or Prince of the Bloods Apartments. Their Beds, which amongst them are one of the principal Ornaments, never come in sight, and it would be a piece of gross Incivility to carry a Stran∣ger into a Bed-chamber, even when you pretend to shew him your House. Insomuch that all their Magnificence may be redu∣ced to Cabinets, Tables, Vernisht Skreens, some Pi∣ctures, divers Pieces of white Sattin, upon which there is writ in a large Character some Sentance of Morali∣ty, which is hung here and there in the Chamber, to∣gether with some Vessels of Porcelain; neither have they occasion to use even them as we do, because there is no Chimney to be seen in the Chamber. Nevertheless all that is very handsome and neat, when one understands how to manage the Ornaments. Vernish, which is so common in China, is disperst all over; it takes all Colours, they mix Flowers of Gold and Silver with it, they paint Men, Mountains, Pala∣ces, Huntings, Birds, Combats, and several Figures, that make a bass relief in the Work, and renders it ex∣treamly pleasing and delightful, so that in this point the Chineses are Magnificent for small Charges. Besides the brightness and lustre which is the pro∣perty of Vernish, it hath moreover a certain quality of preserving the Wood upon which it is applied, especi∣ally if they do not mix any other Matter with it. Worms do not easily breed in it, nay, and Moisture scarce ever penetrates it, not so much as any Scent can
fasten to it; if during Meals there be any Grease or Pottage spilt, if it be presently wiped with a wet Clout, one not only finds no remainders or signs of it, but does not so much as perceive the least smell. People were mistaken when they fancied that Ver∣nish was a Composition, and a particular Secret, it is a Gum that distils from a Tree, much what after the same manner as Rosin doth. In the Tuns wherein it is transported, it resembles melted Pitch or Tar, ex∣cepting only that it hath no smell when it is used. There must be Oil mixt with it to beat it up with more or less, according to the quality of the Work. For Tables and ordinary Chairs, it is sufficient to lay on two or three layers of Vernish, which makes it so transparent, that one may discern every Vein of the Wood through it. Now if you would hide all the Mat∣ter on which you are at work, you must do it over and and over again, till at length it be nothing but Ice, but so fine at first, that it may serve for a Mirror. When the Work is dry, they paint upon it several Figures in Gold, Silver, or in any other Colour; they go over that again, if they please, with a sleight touch of Ver∣nish, to give them a lustre, and the better to preserve them. But those who would perform a finishing stroke, glew upon the Wood a kind of Pastboard composed of Paper, Packthred, Lime, and some other Substance well beaten with which the Vernish incorporateth. They compose a ground of it perfectly even and so∣lid, upon which is applied the Vernish by little and little, in little Stratums, which they let dry one after another. Every Workman hath a peculiar Secret to perfect his Work, as in all other Occupations. But in my opinion, besides the dexterity and slight of hand, and the due tempering the Vernish requires, that it may be nether too thick nor thin: Patience is one thing that contributes the most to the well succeeding
in this Operation. There are very pretty and curi∣ous Cabinets at Tonkin; but what is brought to us from Iapan, as to that matter, are no way inferiour to the China work. As for Porcelain, it is such an ordinary moveable, that it is the Ornament of every House; the Tables, the Side-boards, and very Kitchin is cumber'd with it, for they eat and drink out of it, it is their ordina∣ry Vessel: There is likewise made huge Flower-pots of it. The very Architects cover Roofs, and make use of it at times to incrustate Marble Buildings. Amongst those that are most in request, they are of three different Colours; some are yellow, yet tho' the Earth be very fine, they appear more course than the others; and the reason is, because that Colour does not admit of so fine polishing; it is used in the Emperor's Palace. Yellow is his own proper Colour, which is not allowed to any Person to bear; so that one may safely say, that as for the business of Porce∣lain, the Emperor is the worst served. The second sort is of a grey Colour, with abundance of small irregular Lines in it, that cross one another, as if the Vase were all over striped, or wrought with inlaid or Mosaic work. I cannot imagine how they form these Figures; for I have much ado to believe that they are able to draw them th a Pencil. Per∣haps when the Porcelain is baked, and yet hot, it is exposed to the cold Air, or that they infuse it in warm Water that opens it in that manner, on all sides; as it often happens to Crystals during Winter, after that they add a Stratum of Vernish to it, which covers these inequalities, which by means of a gentle fire into which they put it again, it is made as even and po∣lisht as before. However it is, these sort of Vases par∣take of a particular Beauty; and sure I am, the Curi∣ous amongst us would much value them. Last of all, the third sort of Porcelain is white, with
divers Figures of Flowers, Trees and Birds, which they paint in blue, just such as come hither into Eu∣rope: This is the commonest of all, and every body uses it. But in respect of Glasses and Crystals, as all Work is not equally beautiful, so amongst Porcelains some of them are but indifferent, and are not worth much more than our Earthen Ware. Those that have Skill do not always agree in their Judgment they pass upon them; and I perceive that in China, as well as in Europe, Phancy bears a main stroke in the matter; yet it is granted by all hands, that four or five different things are to concur to make them compleat and perfect; the fineness of the Matter, the whiteness, the politeness, the painting, the designing of the Figures, and fashion of the Work. The Fineness is discovered by its Transparency, in which respect is to be had to its Thickness, the Brims are commonly thinner, and it is in that place where they ought to be considered: When the Vessel is big, it is a difficult matter to determine any thing there∣upon, unless one have a mind to break off some pie∣ces below; for there the Colour of the inner part a∣lone, or as they term it, the Grain, affords a shrewd guess, which appears likewise, when the two pieces can be joyned together again so perfectly, that no rup∣ture appears therein, for that is a sure token of the hardness, and consequently of the fineness of the matter. The Whiteness is not to be confounded with the brightness of the Vernish by which the Porcelain is o∣verspread, which shews like a Mirrour; so that be∣holding it near to some other Objects, the Colours are painted upon it; and this Reflexion alone is capa∣ble of making one pass a wrong Judgment upon its native whiteness; it must be carried into the open Air, to be able to understand its beauty and defects. Albeit this Vernish be perfectly incorporated with the
Matter, and tho' it continues to perpetuity, yet is it ternished at long run, and loseth that brisk splendour it had at the beginning, from whence it comes to pass that the whiteness appears more taking and pretty in old Porcelains; not but the new ones for all that are as good, and will in time assume the same colour. The Smoothness and Politeness consists in two things, in the brightness of the Vernish, and even∣ness of the Matter. The Vernish should not be thick, otherwise there will be a Crust introduced, which will not be incorporated enough with the Porcelain; be∣sides, its lustre will be too great and sprightly. The Matter is perfectly equal and even, when it has not the least bump, when there is to be observed in it neither grain, rising, nor depression: There are few Vessels but have some one of these defects; there must not only be found no spots, nor flaws, but notice must be taken whether there be some places brighter than o∣thers, which happe when the Pencil is unequally poised; sometimes also that may happen when the Vernish is laid on, if every part be not equally dry; the least moisture causeth a sensible difference therein. The Painting is not one of the least beauties of the Porcelain; for that purpose one may make use of all Colours, but commonly they use red, and much more blue. I never saw any Vessel whose red was lively e∣nough; it is not because the Chineses have not very lovely red, but perhaps because this Colour is ter∣nished upon the Matter, and asperates, and makes rugged the subtilest and deepest colour'd parts: for the different grounds contribute much to the hight∣ning or lessening the lustre of the Colours. As for blue, they have it most excellent; however, it is very difficult to hit upon that exact temperature, where it is neither too pale, deep, intense, nor too bright. But that which Workmen most diligently seek after, is, to perfect the extremities of the Figures, so that the Co∣lour
do not extend beyond the Pencil, to the end that the whiteness of the Porcelain may not be sullied by a certain bluish Water, which flows, if special care be not taken, from the Colour it self, when it is not well pounded, or when the Matter on which it is laid, hath not attained a certain degree of driness; much after the same manner as happens to Paper that blots when it is moist, or when you write with naughty Ink. It were to be wisht, that the designs the Chineses use in painting Porcelain were fairer; they paint likewise Flowers upon them, but Humane Figures are all mu∣tilated. But in that very thing they disgrace themselves in the Opinion of Strangers, who do not know what they are but only by that, and who imagine, that they are in effect as monstrous in their shape, as they appear in the Pictures; yet those are their usual Ornaments. The more regular Designs and skilful Draughts would be sometimes less pleasing to them than these Anticks. To make amends, they are very ingenious and ex∣pert in turning their Vases well, of what size soever they be. The Figure of them is bold, well proporti∣oned, perfectly rounded, nay, and I do not believe that our skilfullest Workmen are able to fashion the great pieces better; they, as well as we, put a great value upon ancient Vases, but for a reason quite different from ours; we value them because they are fairer; they for their Antiquity; not but that the Artificrs are as expert, and the Matter as good conditioned now as heretofore: There are still very fine ones made at this day; and I have seen at some Mandarins Houses whole Services that were superfine. But the European Mer∣chants do no longer Trade with the good Workmen, and having no Skill in them themselves, they accept whatsoever the Chineses expose to Sale; for they vend them in the Indies. Besides, no body takes care to fur∣nish them with examples of Draughts, or to bespeak particular Pieces of Work before hand. If M Constance
had lived, we should quickly have known in France that China had not lost the secret Art of Porcelain: But this is not the greatest loss we have sustained by his death; what Religion suffers by it through all the East, will scarce give us leave to take notice of the Alterations it hath caused in Arts and Trading. There is yet another Reason that makes the curi∣ous Porcelain so rare; The Emperor has constituted in the Province where the Manufacture chiefly is, a particular Mandarin, whose care it is to make choice of the fairest Vases for the Court; he buys them at a ve∣ry reasonable rate, so that the Workmen being but ill paid, do not do their best, and are not willing to take any pains for that which will not enrich them. But should a private Man employ them, who would not spare for Cost and Charges, we should have at this day as curious Pieces of Workmanship, as those of the ancient Chineses. The China Ware that is brought to us from Fokien, does not deserve the name of it; it is black, course, and is not so good as our Fayance. That which is most lookt upon is that which is made in the Province of Quamsi, the Clay is found in one place, and the Wa∣ter in another, because it is clearer and cleaner; per∣haps also, this Water they make use of before any o∣ther, is impregnated with some particular Salts, pro∣per to purifie and refine the Clay, or by the more strictly uniting the parts, as it happens in Lime, which is good for nothing, if it be not slaked in some certain Waters, whereas others make it more compact, strong, and adhering. In brief, it is a mistake to think that there is requi∣site one or two hundred years to the preparing the Matter for the Porcelain, and that its Composition is so very difficult; if that were so, it would be neither so common, nor so cheap. It is a Clay stiffer than ordinary Clays; or rather, a kind of soft white Stone,
that is found in the Quarries of that Province. After having washt the pieces of it, and separated the hete∣rogenious Earth that may chance to be mixt with it, they bray it small till it be reduc'd to a subtil Powder. How fine soever it may appear, yet they continue pounding it for a long time, altho' by the touch no difference is to be perceived, yet they are perswaded that it is indeed made much more subtil, that the in∣sensible Parts are less mixt, and that the Work thereby comes to be whiter and more transparent. Of this subtil Powder they make a Paste, which they kneed, and beat a long while likewise, that it may become softer, and that the Water may be the more perfectly incorporated therewith. When the Earth is well ela∣borated, they endeavour the figuring of it. It is not likely that they use Moulds, as they do in some other sorts of Potteries; but it is more probable that they fashion them upon the Wheel like us. So soon as their Work pleases them they expose it to the Sun, Morn∣ing and Evening, but they retire it when the Sun waxes too hot, for fear of warping it. So the Vases dry by degrees, and they apply the painting at their leisure, when they judge the ground proper for to re∣ceive it; but because neither the Vases nor the Co∣lours have sufficient lustre, they make a very fine Broth or Ly of the Matter of the same Porcelain, wherewith they pass several strokes upon the Work, that gives them a particular whiteness and lustre: This is what I call the Vernish of the Porcelain. They assured me in the Kingdom of Siam that they mixt with it some common Vernish, with the Composition made of the white of an Egg, and shining Bones of Fish; but this is but a phansie; and the Workmen of Fokien, who work just as those of Quamsi, don't do o∣therwise. After all these Preparations, they put the Vases in the Furnace, wherein they kindle a gentle and constant uniform Fire, that bakes them without
breaking; and for fear least the exterior Air should do them damage, they do not draw them out till a long while after, when they have acquired their due consistance, and after they have been let cool at leisure. This is all, Madam, I have to say as to the Mystery of Porcelain, that they have so long sought after in Eu∣rope. Providence, and the Prosperity of Religion, that obliged me to run over the greatest part of China, did not carry me into the Province of Quamsi, where the Metal is found whereof they make it; so that I do not sufficiently know it, as to mine own particular, for to be able to describe the nature and particular qualities thereof; perhaps it is not much different from some soft Stones that are found in several Provinces of France. And if so be the Ingenious would please to make some Experiments, and operate diligently, by making use of several sorts of Waters, after the above-mentioned manner, it might not be impossible to succeed. Besides these Vernisht Cabinets and Vessels of Por∣celain, the Chineses adorn likewise their Apartments with Pictures: They do not excel in this Art, because they are not curious in perspective, notwithstanding they diligently apply themselves thereto, they take delight in it; and there are a great Company of Painters in the Country; some paint the Cieling, re∣presenting upon the Chamber-walls, an order of Ar∣chitecture without Symetry, by Bands or Fillets con∣tinued all along around at the top and bottom of the Wall, and above the Capital of the Co∣lomn, which contains only single Colomns, placed at an equal distance, without any other Ornament of Architecture. Others only whiten the Chamber, or glew Paper upon it. They hang the Pictures of their Ancestors up and down, with some Maps and Pieces of white Sattin, on which is painted Flowers, Fowls, Mountains, and Palaces; upon some others they write in Capital Letters Sentences of Morality, that explain
the Maxims and Rules of perfect Government. Some Chairs, vernisht Tables, some Cabinets, Flower-Pots, Lanthorns of Silk, all this well ordered, and placed in due proportion, makes a pretty handsome Apartment. Altho' you do not enter the Bed-chamber, yet are their Beds very fine; in Summer they have Taffaty Curtains powdered with Flowers, Trees, and Birds in Gold and Silk embroidery. This sort of Work that comes from the Province of Nankin are in request, and as to point of Moveables, I have seen nothing in all China more magnificent. Others have Curtains of the finest Gaze; that is not a sufficient Baracado against the Air, but close enough to defend them against Flies and Gnats, that are intollerable in the Night. In Win∣ter they make use of course Sattin stitched with Dra∣gons and other Figures, according as every ones Ca∣pricio leads them: The Counterpain is in a man∣ner the same. They do not use Feather Beds; but their Cotton Quilts are very thick; their Bedstead ordinarily is of Joyners work, beautified with Figures. I have seen some very fine and exquisite. By all that I have said, you may judge, Madam, that these People have shut themselves up within the Bounds of Necessity and Profit, without being over solicitous about Magnificence, which is very regular, tho' but very indifferent in their Houses. They like∣wise seem more negligent as to their Gardens, they have in that respect Conceptions much different from ours; and setting aside places designed for the Sepul∣chre of their Ancestors, which they leave untilled, they would think themselves out of their Wits, to put the Ground to no other use than to make Alleys and Walks, to cultivate Flowers, and plant Groves of un∣profitable Trees. The benefit of the Commonweal commands that all should be sowed; and their own particular Interest, that more nearly concerns them than the Publick Good, doth not permit them to prefer Pleasure to Profit.
'Tis true, the Flowers of the Country do not de∣serve their looking after; they have none curious; and tho' many may be met with like those in Europe, yet do they cultivate them so ill, that one has much ado to know them. Nevertheless there are Trees to be seen in some places, that would afford great Ornament in their Gardens, if they knew how to dispose them. Instead of Fruit they are almost all the year long laden with Flowers of a slorid Carnation; the Leaves are small, like those of the Elm, the Trunk irregular, the Branches crooked, and Bark smooth. If Alleys were made of them mixing therewith (which might easily be done) some Orange Trees, it would be the most pleasant thing in the World: But seeing the Chineses walk not much, Alleys do not agree with them. Amongst other Trees they might dispose of in Gar∣dens, there is one they call Outom-chu, resembling the Sycomore; the Leaves are in Diameter between 8 or 9 Inches, fasten'd to a Stalk a foot long; it is extream∣ly tusted, and laden with Clusters of Flowers so thick set, that the Sun cannot intersqueeze a Ray: The Fruit which is extraordinary small notwitstanding the Tree be one of the biggest, is produced after the man∣ner I am about to relate: Towards the Month of August, or end of Iuly, there Springs out of the ve∣ry point of the Branches, little bunches of Leaves diffe∣rent from the other, they are whiter, softer, and as broad, and are in lieu of Flowers, upon the border of each of these Leaves grow three or four small Grains, or Kernels as big as green Peas, that inclose a white Substance, very pleasant to the taste, like to that of an Hazle Nut that is not yet ripe. This Tree being fruit∣ful, and the manner of bearing its Fruit being some∣thing extraordinary, I was apt to believe, Madam, you might be desirous to see the Description of it, which I have caused to be engraven. The Chineses, who so little apply themselves to order
their Gardens, and manage the real Ornaments, are nevertheless taken with them, and are at some cost about them; they make Grotto's in them, raise little pretty Artificial Eminences, transport thither by piece∣meal whole Rocks, which they heap one upon another, without any further design, than to imitate Nature. If they could, besides all this, have the convenience of so much Water as is necessary to water their Cabbage and Ligumenous Plants, they would think they could desire no more as to that point. The Emperor hath Iets d'eau, or Fountains, of European Invention, but private Persons content themselves with their Ponds and Wells. Now if this People be careless in Domestick Orna∣ments, there are none who do more affect to appear magnificent in Publick. The Government that con∣demns, or rather does not allow, but regulates Expences as to other matters, does not only approve of this, but contributes to it on these occasions, for reasons that I shall tell you in the sequel of the History. When Persons of Quality receive Visits, or make any, when they go along the Streets, or when upon their Journey, but especially at such time when they appear before the Emperor, or make their Address to the Viceroys, they are always accompanied with a Train and Air of Grandeur that fills one with Astonishment. The Mandarins richly habited are carried in a Sedan gilded, and open, born upon the shoulders of 8, or 16 Persons, accompanied with all the Officers of their Tribunal, who surround them with Umbrello's and o∣ther Marks of their Dignity. There be some that walk before them two and two, bearing Chains, Fasces, Scutcheons of vernisht Wood, upon which may be read in large gold Characters, all the Titles of Ho∣nour annext to their Places of Trust, together with a broken Bason upon which they beat a certain num∣ber of strokes, according to the Rank they bear in the
Province; they continually speak aloud, and threaten the People to make way. Other Officers follow in the same order, and sometimes four or five Gentlemen on Horseback bring up the Rear. Such a Mandarin there is, that never appears in Publick without a Train f three or fourscore Domesticks. Those that belong to the Army go commonly on Horseback, and when they are of any considerable Rank, they are evermore at the Head of Twenty five, or Thirty Cavaliers. The Princes of the Blood at Pekin are preceded by four of their Officers, and fol∣low themselves in the middle of a Squadron that marches without order. In brief, they wear no Live∣ries in China, but the Domesticks are habited accord∣ing to the Quality of their Masters in black Sattin, or painted Linnen. Altho' the Horses be neither fine, nor well managed, yet are the Trappings and Harness very magnificent; the Bits, Saddle, and Stirrups are gilded, or else of Silver. Instead of Leather they make Bridles of two or three Twists of course pinkt Sattin two sin∣gers broad. Under the Horses Neck, at the begin∣ning of the Breast-plate, hang two great Tossels of that curious red Horse-hair wherewith they cover the Bon∣nets, which are fastened to two huge Buttons of Brass gilded or washt with Silver, hung at Rings of the same Metal, that makes a Horse look great upon a March, altho' upon a long Journey, especially upon a Course, it is cumbersome. Not only the Princes and Persons of the highest Rank appear in Publick with a Train, but even those of a meaner quality go always on Horseback along the Streets, or in a close Sedan, followed by several Foot∣men: The Tartarian Ladies do often make use of Ca∣lashes with two Wheels, but they have not the use of the Coach. The Magnificence of the Chinese Mandarins principal∣ly displays it self in the Journeys they take by Water;
the prodigious bigness of their Barges, that are little inferiour to Ships, the finery, carving, painting and gilding of the Apartments, the great number of Offi∣cers and Seamen that serve a board, the different Badg∣es of their Dignity every where display'd, their Arms, Flags, Streamers, all this, I say, does abundantly distin∣guish them from the Europeans, who are never worse accoutred, or more careless than when they Travel. Besides, the Chineses have their Solemn Feasts, which they celebrate with great pomp and charges; the first three days in the year are spent in rejoycing throughout the whole Empire; they Array themselves magnificently, they visit one another, they send Pre∣sents to all their Friends, and to all the Persons whom it any way concerns them to observe. Gaming, Feast∣ing, and Comedies take up every bodies time. Ten or twelve days before are committed abundance of little Robberies, because those who are destitute of Money, seek how to come by it, and are resolved to have some whoever go without, to supply them in these Diver∣tisements. The 15th day of the first Month is still more So∣lemn; they call it the Day or Feast of Lanthorns; be∣cause they hang them up in all the Houses, and in all the Streets, in such a great number, that it is a Mad∣ness, rather than a Festival: They light up, it may be, that day two hundred Millions. You will see, Ma∣dam, by what I am going to relate, that they have run into Extremes in this Ceremony, which otherwise might have been tolerated, as several other Customs are, to comply with that Peoples humour, which are become the most serious delight of Persons of Quality. They expose to view that day Lanthorns of all pri∣ces; some of them cost Two thousand Crowns; and such a Grandee there is who retrenches every year something from his Table, from his Apparel, and from
his Equipage, to appear magnificent in Lanthorns. It is not the Materials that is dear, the Gilding, Sculp∣ture, the Painting, Silk, and Vernish make all the shew. As for the bigness, it is immense. There are some of them to be seen of upward of Twenty seven foot Dia∣meter: These are Halls, or Chambers, and three or four of these Machines would make pretty handsome Apartments; insomuch that you will admire, Madam, to understand that in China we may Eat, Lye, receive Visits, represent Comedies, and Dance Balls in a Lanthorn. There would be to enlighten it need of a Bonefire, such as we kindle in one of our Publick Squares; but because it would be inconvenient, they are satisfied with an infinite number of Wax Candles or Lamps, which at a Distance shew very pretty. There is also represented divers shews to gratifie the Vul∣gar; and there are Persons concealed, who, by the help of several little Machines make Puppets to play of the bigness of Men and Women, the Actions of which are so natural, that even those who are ac∣quainted with the Trick, are apt to be mistaken: For my part, Madam, I was not deceived, because I was never present at these Spectacles. What I relate is up∣on the report of the Chineses, and upon the credit of some Relations whose Authors are well known, and whom I should be loath to condemn. Besides these prodigious Lanthorns, there are an in∣finite number of a middle size, of which I can more safely speak; I have seen of them not only neat, but magnificent; they are commonly composed of six Faces, or Pains, each of which makes a frame of four foot high, a foot and an half broad, of vernisht Wood, and adorned with some Gildings. They hang it on the inside with a Web of sine Transparent Silk, where∣on is painted▪ Flowers, Trees, Rocks, and sometimes Humane Figures. The painting is very curious, the
Colours lively, and when the Wax Candles are light∣ed, the Light disperseth a Splendor that renders the Work altogether agreeable. These six Pannels joyn'd together compose an Hexa∣gone surmounted by the Extremities of six carved Fi∣gures, that make the Crown of it. There is hung round about broad strings of Sattin of all Colours, like Ri∣bonds, together with divers other silken Ornaments that fall upon the Angles, without hiding any thing of the Light, or Pictures. We sometimes use them for an Ornament to our Churches. The Chineses hang of them in the Windows, in their Halls, and sometimes in Publick Places. The Feast of Lanthorns is also celebrated by Bone∣fies that are kindled at that time in all Quarters of the City, and by Fireworks; for there is no body but lets off Squibs and Crackers. Some have spoken of these as the finest Fireworks in the World. There is repre∣sented (according to them) whole Trees covered with Leaves and Fruit, you may there distinguish the Cher∣ries, Raisins, Apples, and Oranges, not only by their Figures, but also by their particular Colour, every thing is painted to the Life, insomuch that one would really imagine that they are naturally Trees that are enlightned in the Night, and not an Artificial Fire, on which they have bestowed the Figure and Appear∣ance of Trees. These Descriptions that are to be read in some Re∣lations of China, excite in those who travel thither, a real Passion to behold all these Miracles; I should have been very glad, as other are, to have upon mine own Personal knowledge been able to have related them. I have often sought for an occasion, but all in vain. These Fires are not so ordinary as People imagine; and to retrieve them, it will perhaps be necessary to go back to their time who writ of them. The Father Missionaries that sojourn at Pekin, who have been
Eye-witnesses of what was performed upon this ac∣count in the Emperor's Palace, have often told me, that it was not at all as they imagined it to be, and, at the bottom, that there was nothing very extaordi∣nary in it. Nevertheless, Madam, it is not just wholly to con∣demn these Authors, as Persons of no Credit, they are good honest Missionaries, who would not impose up∣on us at pleasure, and what I have seen in India, and especially upon the Coast of Coromondel, may justifie them in some respect; they do there really represent all sort of Figures, not by Artificial Works that burst in the Air like our Squibs (for to me it seems not possi∣ble to reduce Flame to such determined Figures as would be necessary to distinguish Raisins, and Leaves, and much less to imitate every respective Colour that are natural to Fruits) but by means of a combustable Matter compounded of Sulphur, Camphire, and some other Ingredients, wherewith they dawb pieces of Wood in form of a Cross, of Trees, and Flowers, or in any other form they please. As soon as they have given fire to it, that expanded Gum is set on fire on all sides like Coal, and represents, till it be totally consumed, the Figure of the Wood on which it was apply'd; so that it is no great wonder that they should make Trees and Fruits of Fire; and I do imagine those they so much magnifie in China, may be some such thing. Not but that these sorts of Fires have their Beauty; for, besides their particular Colour, the prettiest, most splendid, and withal the most pleasant to the Eye i∣maginable, it is no mean Ornament in a Publick il∣lumination, to be able to represent Men, and Horses of Fire, Palaces all on fire, with their order of Archi∣tecture, Cartouches, and Armories of Light, and a great company of other Representations, that might be made in Europe with a great deal more exactness than
in the East; where the Artificers neither have Inge∣nuity to contrive great Designs, nor Dexterity enough perfectly to Execute them. Perhaps, Madam, you will have the Curosity to learn what might have given occasion to the Chineses to or∣dain such an extravagant Festival as this, whereof I have the honour to speak to your Grace. As it is ve∣ry ancient, so the original seems very obscure. The Vulgar ascribe it to an Accident that happened in the Family of a famous Mandarin, whose Daughter walk∣ing one Evening upon the Banks of a River, fell in, and was drowned; this afflicted Father, with his Fa∣mily, run thither, and the better to find her, he caused a great Company of Lanthorns to be lighted. All the Inhabitants of the place thronged after him with Torches, they searched for her all Night to no pur∣pose, and the Mandarin's only Comfort was to see the willingness and readiness of the People, every one of which seem'd, as if he had lost his own Sister, because they lookt upon him as their Father. The year ensuing they made Fires upon the Shore on the same day, they continued the Ceremony every year, every one lighted his Lanthorn, and by degrees it commenc'd into a Custom. The Chineses are pret∣ty Superstitious in that respect; but there is no pro∣bability that such a small loss should have such a lively influence upon a whole Empire. Some Chinese Doctors pretend that this Festival de∣duceth its Original from a Story which they report in the manner following: Three thousand five hundred eighty three years ago, China was governed by a Prince named Ki, the last Emperor of the first Race, whom Heaven was pleased to endue with Qualities capable of constituting an Hero, if the love to Women, and the spirit of Debauchery, that took possession of his heart, had not reduced him to a Monster in the Empire, and an Object of Abhorrence in Nature▪
He had rare Parts, a winning, pleasing way with him, great Courage, and of such extraordinary strength of Body, that he broke Iron with his Hand. But this Sampson had his Mistresses, and grew weak; amongst other Extravagancies, they relate, that he exhausted all his Treasures in building a Tower of precious Stones to honour the Memory of a Concubine; and that he fill'd a Pool with Wine, for him and Three thousand young Men to bathe in, after a Lasclvious manner. These Excesses, and many other Abomina∣tions prevailed with the wisest of his Court to offer him some Advice, according to the Custom, but he put them to death; yea, and he imprisoned one of the Kings of the Empire, who endeavoured to divert him from these Disorders: At length he committed a Fact that consummated the Destruction of himself and all his Family. One day, in the heat of his Debaucheries and Jol∣lity, complaining that Life was too short, I should be content, says he to the Queen whom he doted on, if I could make you eternally happy; but in a few years, nay in a few days peradventure Death will, in spight of us, put an end to our pleasures; and all my Power will not suffice to give you a Life longer than that which the lowest of my Subjects hopes to have; this thought continually troubles my Spirit, and dispenses into my Heart a bitterness that in∣ders me from relishing the sweetness of Life: Why cannot I make you reign for ever? And seeing there are Stars that never cease shining, must you needs be subject to death? you that shine more bright upon Earth, than all the Stars do in Heaven? 'Tis true, My Lord, saith this foolish Princess, that you cannot make your Life eternal, but it depends on you to for∣get the brevity of it, and to live as tho' you should never die: What need have we of the Sun and Moon to measure the duration of our Life? The morning Star that rises every morning, and the night that comes every evening, do conti∣nually
put in us mind of the beginning and end of our days; as those begin and end, so do ours that are begun, advance with precipitation, and will speedily be at an end. Come, come, Sir, let us no longer cast our Eyes upon these Globes that roll over our Heads: Have you a mind once for all to cure your imagination? Build your self a new▪ Hea∣ven, ever enlightened, always serene, always favourable to your desires; where we shall perceive not the least footstep of the instability of humane things. You may easily do it, by erecting a great and magnificent Palace, shut up, on all sides, from the light of the Sun; you may hang up all around magnificent Lanthorns, whose constant splendor will be pre∣ferrable to that of the Sun. Cause to be transported thither whatsoever is capable of contributing to your pleasure; and for fear of being one mo∣ment distracted by them, break off all correspondence with o∣ther Creatures. We will both of us enter into this new World that you shall create: I will be to you in lieu of all things, you alone will there yield me more pleasure then all the old world can offer; yea, Nature it self, that will be renowed for our sakes, will render us more happy than the Gods are in Heaven. 'Tis there that we will forget the vicisatude of days and nights; Time shall be no more in re∣spect of us; no more incumbrance, no more shadow, no more clouds nor change in Life: And provided, My Lord, that you on your part will be always constant, always passionate, my felicity will seem to me unalterable, and your happiness will be eternal. The Emperor, whether it was that he thought he could deceive himself, or whether he had a mind to please the Queen, is not certain; but he caused this inchanted Castle to be built, and there immured her and himself. There he past several Months steeped in delights, and wholly taken up with his new Life; but the People not being able to endure such Excess, obliged one of the wisest Kings of the Empire to de∣clare against him.
So soon as the Emperor had notice of the Conspi∣racy, he appeared presently in the old World, which, whether he would or no, stuck more to his heart than the new: He appears at the Head of an Army to pu∣nish this Rebel; but seeing himself abandoned by the People, whom he had so foolishly deserted, he thought it his wisest course to abdicate, and betake himself to flight. During the three remaining years of his Life, he wandered from Province to Province incognito in a poor Condition, always in danger of being discover∣ed, as if God by his disquietness and continual agita∣tion, had a mind to punish him for that soft and ef∣feminate Repose, wherein he thought to have found constant Delights and eternal Felicity. In the mean time they destroyed his Palaces, and to preserve the Memory of such an unworthy Action to Posterity, they hung up Lanthorns in every quarter of the City, this Custom became Anniversary, and since that time a considerable Festival in the whole Empire; it is solem∣nized at Yamtcheou with more magnificence than any where else: And the report goes that the Illuminations there are so splendid, that an Emperor once not daring openly to leave his Court to go thither, committed himself, with the Queen, and several Princesses of his Family, into the hand of a Magician, who promised him to transport them thither in a trice. He made them in the Night to ascend magnificent Thrones that were born up by Swans, which in a moment ar∣rived at Yamtcheou. The Emperor saw at his leisure all the Solemnity, being carried upon a Cloud, that hovered over the City, and descended by degrees; and came back a∣gain with the same speed and Equipage, no body at Court perceiving his absence. This is not the first Fable the Chineses have told; they have Stories upon every thing, for they are Superstitious to excess. And in point of Magick, be it seigned or true, there is no
People in the World that have come near them. However it be, certain it is that they take huge delight in Publick Illuminations; and one of their Kings, who for his good qualities was become the darling of the People, once thought he could not better demonstrate to them his reciprocal Affection, than by inventing for their sakes such like Feasts. So that once a year, for eight Nights one after another, he opened his Palace, which they took care to illu∣minate by abundance of Lanthorns and Fireworks. He appeared in Person without any Guards, and was pell mell in the middle of the Croud, not suffering them to distinguish him from others, to the end that every one might enjoy the liberty of speaking, playing, and hearing divers Consorts of Musick there performed. This Action hath rendred this Prince renowned in the China History; but what would they have said if they had chanced to be in the Apartments of Versailles, where the best and most potent of Kings so often as∣sembles all the innocent Pleasures that Christianity al∣lows, to make his Court, if possible, as happy as him∣self; if they did but behold those Illuminations, those Consorts, those Sports, those magnificent Banquets, and the Prince himself striving to mix with the Multitude; nay, and would be unknown, were it not for an Air of Grandeur which is not annext to his Dignity, and whereof he cannot devest himself, distinguish him from all the rest? Since I am speaking, Madam, of the Magnificence of the Chineses, I cannot, without being wanting in a material point, pass over in silence what relates to their Emperors, who never appear in Publick, but as so ma∣ny Deities, environed with all the Splendor that may attract the respect and veneration of the People. Here∣tofore they rarely shewed themselves; but the Tartars, who reign at present, are much more Popular, and the late King did not stand so much upon nice Punctilio's.
The present Emperor in that, as well as in all things else, observes a Medium, which contents his Nation, without totally displeasing the Chineses. Nevertheless, as moderate as he is, in comparison of the Ancients, one may boldly say he never marches but at the head, or in the midst of an Army. At such time he is accompanied with all the Lords of the Court: There is nothing but Silks, Gildings, and precious Stones, every thing there is splendid and pompous; the Arms, the Horses Harness, the Umbrel∣lo's, the Streamers, and a thousand other Badges of Dignity Royal, or of the particular quality of every Prince, every where sparkles at that time. In a word, there is nothing more regular on these Occurencies than this Croud; every one knows his respective Rank; and the Head of that Man, or at least his For∣tune, lyes at stake, who shall presume indiscreetly to discompose the order of the March. When he takes a Progress to visit the Provinces of the Empire, he goes commonly Post, followed by a few Guards and some Officers of his Considents; but in all the Cities upon the Road, and in all the difficult Passages, there are so many Troops drawn up into Batalia, that he seems to ride Post cross an Army. He goes sometimes into Tartary to take the divertise∣ment of Hunting, but yet always accompanied as if he went to the Conquest of some new Empire. He carries along with him no less than Forty thousand Men, who endure a grat deal of hardship, whether the Weather be hot or cold, because they encamp in a very incon∣venient manner; nay, and it sometimes happens, that in one of these oilsome Huntings their dies more Hor∣ses then he would lose in a pitch'd Battel; but he counts the Destruction of Ten thousand Horses as nothing. The Fathers that accompany him thither say, That never does his Magnificence more display it self than
upon this occasion; there he sees sometimes thirty or forty petty Tartarian Kings, that come to address him, or pay him Tribute; yea, there be some of them that bear the name of Ham or Kam, that is to say, Emperor; they are all of them, just as the Mandarins of the first order, his Pensioners; he gives them his Daughters in Marriage; and to make them the more sure to his In∣terest, he declares himself their Protector against all the Western Tartars who often annoy them; nay, and have sometimes Forces enough to attack China it self with good Success. Whilst the Croud of these petty Sovereigns appears in the Emperor's Camp, the Court is wonderful sump∣tuous: and to the end he may possess these Barbarians with some Idea of the Power of China, the Train, Ha∣bits, and Tents of the Mandarins, are rich and glorious, even to excess and profusion. This is what the Missio∣naries, who have been witness of the same, do report; and I suppose we may give credit to their Relations, not only because they all unanimously agree in this Matter, but also because what they say does altogether comport with the Genius of the Chineses. That which the Relation of Father Magalhens re∣ports, newly translated with Notes, equally learned and instructive, concerning the pompous March of the Emperor, when he goes to the Temple to offer Sacri∣fices to Heaven, hath something odd in it, and deserves here to be repeated; and so much the more, because these things can neither be supposed, nor magnified, for the orders observed in Publick Ceremonies is known to every body to be so regular, that the very Emperor dares not add or diminish the least Article. This pompous Ceremony begins with Twenty four Trumpets, adorned with Golden Coronets with 24 Drums ranked, each of them into two Files; 24 Men armed with Truncheons vernisht and gilt, 6 or 8 foot long, follow them in the same order, and front; after
that follow 100 Soldiers bearing noble Halbards, arm∣ed with a Semicircle of Iron in form of a Cressant, followed with 100 Serjeants at Mace, and two Officers whose Pikes are painted with red Vernish, in different places with Flowers and golden Figures. Next after this first File is born 400 curiously wrought Lanthorns, 400 Flamboys of a gilded Wood that flame like our Torches, 200 Lances charged with huge Tufts of Silk, 24 Banners whereon are painted the Signs of the Zodiak, and 56 others that represent the Celestial Constellations: There is to be seen more∣over 200 Fans with Figures of Dragons, and other A∣nimals; 24 Umbrello's still more magnificent, and a Livery Cupboard born by the Officers of the Palace, whose Utensils are of Gold. All this does immediately precede the Emperor, who at last appears on Horsback, gloriously attired, sur∣rounded with six white led Horses, whose Harness is covered with Gold and precious Stones, with 100 Life-guard and Pages of Honour; they bear up before him an Umbrello that shades him and the Horse, and dazles the Sight with all the Ornaments that Man could possibly invent to enrich it. The Emperor is followed by all the Princes of the Blood, by the Mandarins of the first order, by the Viceroys and principal Lords of the Court, all in their Formalities: Immediately after is seen 500 young Gentlemen of Quality, which may be called the Band of Gentlemen Pensioners, attended by 1000 Foot∣men, array'd in Carnation Silk, bordered with Flow∣ers, stitched with little Stars in Gold and Silver. This is properly the King's Houshold. This Retinue is still more extraordinary by what follows, then by what went before: For immediate∣ly 36 Men bear an open Sedan that resembles a Tri∣umphant Chair, 120 Bearers support another close one, and so big that one would take it for an intire Apart∣ment.
Afterwards there appear four Chariots, the two first of which are drawn by Elephants, and the other two by Horses. Each Sedan and Chariot hath a Company of 50 Men for its Guard: The Chario∣teers are richly apparelled, and the Elephants as well as the Horses, are covered with embroidered Housings. At length this proud Cavalcade is brought up in the Rear by 2000 Mandarin Officers, and 2000 Officers of the Army, all most richly cloathed, marching in or∣der, and according to their Custom, with that Gra∣vity that commands respect. It is not needful that the Court should be at great Charges for this Pomp; and as soon as ever the Emperor is pleased to go offer Sacrifice, they always are in readiness to attend him in this order. I do not know, if in our Carousels and Solemn Festivals, we have any thing more splendid and magnificent. But the King of China never appears greater, then when he gives Audience to foreign Ambassa∣dors; that prodigious number of Troops who are at that time in Arms, that incredible number of Mandarins in their Formalities, distinguished ac∣cording to their rank and quality, placed in or∣der without confusion, without noise, without im∣barasment, in such order as they would appear in the Temples of their Gods; the Ministers of State, the Lord Chief Justices of all the Sovereign Courts, the petty Kings, the Princes of the Blood, the Heirs of the Crown, more humbled before this Prince, then they are exalted above the People: The Emperor himself seated on a Throne, who beholds prostrate at his feet all this Crowd of Adorers; all this, I say, bears an Air of Sovereignty and Grandeur in it, that is to be found no where but in China, which Christian Humility does not so much as permit Kings to desire in the most glorious Courts of Europe. I should never make an end, if I had a mind to de∣scend
to all the particulars of the Publick Ceremonies, where the Chineses display all their Magnificence; I suppose, Madam, I have spoken enough to inform you with a just Idea of it; now if you please to permit me, in the close of this Letter, to add what I think of it my self in reference to France, where the Riches and Ambition of private Persons have carried stateliness to an higher pitch, than in any other Realm in Europe; It seems to me that the Chineses do almost ever surpass us in Common and Publick Actions, by a more affe∣cted and specious outside; but, that in Domestick Things, our Apartments are incomparably richer, th Retinue of Persons of Quality more decently clothed, tho' not so numerous, the Equipages more commodi∣ous, the Tables better served, and generally speaking, the Expence more constant, and better regulated. I am with a most profound respect, Madam, Your most humble and most obedient Servant L. J.
LETTER VII. To the Archbishop of Rheims, first Peer of France. Of the Language, Characters, Books, and Morality of the Chineses. My Lord, AFter having had the Honour to entertain your Grace at your spare hours, concerning the different Properties of the Empire of China, I believed you would not take it amiss to see from me in writing that which relates to their Language, Cha∣racters, Books, and Morals. There are certain Points of History that one cannot enter upon without much preparation, and especially when one is to explain them to such a Person as your self, whose particular Character it is, to know to the bottom, and with the greatest exactness, whatsoever you do know, there is required an exactness, and a cer∣tain order, which is scarce ever met with but in wri∣ting. I well know, My Lord, that it is difficult to add, upon this Subject, any new Knowledge to that which hath rendered you one of the most knowing Prelates of the Age; how good and diffusive soever the Morality
of China may be, yet are there but faint Glimpses in it of a circumscribed Reason, that disappear, as soon as they are brought near those Divine Lights that Re∣ligion discovers to us, and whereinto you have so long dived by the continual reading of Fathers, Ca∣nons, and Councils. Nevertheless, altho' all the Philosophy of that re∣nowned Nation be not able to instruct us, yet is it worth our enquiry to know, To what pitch of Per∣fection it heretofore brought Sciences, and that too at a time when other People in the World were either ig∣norant or barbarous; and to begin at their Tongue and Character, which among them contain the chief Points of Literature, this is what I have observed of them. The Chinese Language hath no Analogy with any of those that are in vogue in the World, no Affinity neither in the Sound, in the pronounciation of the Words, nor yet in the disposing and ranging of the Conceptions. Every thing is mysterious in this Lan∣guage, and you will, no question stand amazed, My Lord, to understand, that all the terms of it may be learnt in two hours, altho' there is required several years study to speak it, that one may be able to read all the Books, and to understand them perfectly, with∣out apprehending any thing, if another read it; that a Doctor may compose a Book with all the elaborate∣ness possible, and this very same Doctor may not know enough of it to explain himself in ordinary Con∣versation. That a Mute instructed in the Chara∣cters, might with his fingers, without writing, speak almost as fast as is necessary, not to weary the Audi∣tors. In a word, that the self same words do often signifie quite different things, and of two Persons that shall pronounce them, it will be a Complement in the Mouth of the one, and foul Language in the Mouth of the other. These Paradoxes, how surprising soever
they may seem, are very true notwithstanding; and your Grace will grant it, if you please to give your self never so little trouble to cast your Eyes upon that which I have to write to you about it. This Tongue contains no more than Three hundred and thirty words, or thereabouts, all of one Syllable, or at least they seem to be so, because they pronounce them so succinctly, that a Man can scarce distinguish more than one: Altho' it be a tedious thing to read the whole Series of them, yet shall I describe them in this place, as well to let you understand the Tone, as to give you the Satisfaction to see, at one Glance of your Eyes, comprised in one single Page, a Language so ancient, so famous, and I may say, so eloquent as this is. These few words would not be sufficient to express a Man's self roundly upon all Subjects, to supply words to Arts and Sciences, to maintain Eloquence in a Dis∣course, or in a Work, which is very different among the Chineses, if he had not found out the Art to mul∣tiply the Sense, without multiplying the Words. This Art chiefly consists in the Accents they give them; the same word pronounced with a stronger or weaker in∣flexion of the voice, hath divers significations; so that the Chinese Language, when it is spoken exactly, is a kind of Musick, and contains a real Harmony, which composeth the Essence and particular Character of it. There are five Tones that are apply'd to each word, according to the Sense one means to give it. The first is an uniform Pronunciation without lightning or falling the Voice, as if one should continue for some time the first Note of our Musick: the second raiseth the Voice notably higher: the third is very acute: in the fourth you descend all on the sudden to a grave Tone: in the fifth you pass to a more deep Note, if I may presume
so to express my self, by hollowing, and framing a kind of Base. A Man cannot make himself be understood in this Matter but by the Language it self. However you already see, My Lord, that by this di∣versity of Pronounciation of 333 words, are made 1665. besides that, one may pronounce smoothly, or asperate each word, which is very usual, and does still increase the Language by half. Sometimes these Monosyllables are joyned together, as we put our Letters together, thereby to compose different words: Nay, they do more then all that, for sometimes a whole Phrase, ac∣cording as it follows, or goes before another, hath a quite different sense; so it plainly appears that this Tongue, so poor, so seemingly succinct, yet for all that is in effect very rich and extensive, to express a Man's self. But these Riches cost Foreigners dear to come by them; and I cannot tell whether some Missionaries had not better have labour'd in the Mines than to have ap∣ply'd themselves for several years to this Labour, one of the hardest and most discouraging that one can expe∣rience in matter of study. I cannot apprehend how any one can have other thoughts; and I must confess I admired to read the new Relation of Father Magalben, that the Chinese Language is easier than the Greek, Latin, and all the Languages in Europe. He adds, one cannot doubt of it, if it be considered that the difficulty in Tongues proceeds from the Memory; now one hath no trouble at all in this, that hath but very few words in comparison of others, nay, and may be learnt in a days time. To argue as this Father does, Musick must cost us but an hours time, seven Words, and seven Tones, do  much burthen the memory, and if one have but a Voice never so little flexible, one would think it were no hard matter to learn them; nevertheless, we see by daily experience, whoso begins at thirty or forty years,
unless he have a more than ordinary inclination for Musick, scarce ever learns it to purpose; nay, and af∣ter much application, and long exercise, is still to his dying day but a pitiful Musician. How will it fare with a Person who hath six Tones to combine with above 300 Words, that he does not know by the wri∣ting, which he must call to mind ex tempore, when he would speak fluenly, or when he is to distinguish in another person that precipates his words, and who scarce observes the Accent and particular Tone of each word? It is not the Memory that is put to a stress upon this occasion, but the Imagination and Ear, which in some certain Persons never distinguish one Tone from ano∣ther; the turn of the Tongue also conduces infinitely thereto; and there are certain Persons that have Me∣mory sufficient to learn a Book in few days, who will tug at it for a Month together to pronounce only one word, and all to no purpose: How happens it that, let him take what care he will, a Man has never a good Accent in our Language, when he is born in certain Provinces, and when he departs from them when he is well stricken in years. Nevertheless, to make your self understood in Chi∣nese, you must give to each word its peculiar Accent; vary but never so little, and you fall into another Tone that makes a ridiculous Counter-sense; so that one would call Him a Beast, whom he intends to call Sir, because the word that is common to them both, hath not a different Sense, but only by the different Tone they give it: So that it is properly in this Language that one may say, the Tone is all in all. This is that also that makes the Chinese Tongue more difficult than others. When a Stranger that hath but a smattering, intends to speak French, if he pronounce some words but never so little well, we easily guess at those he speaks ill, and we know his meaning; but in
China one single word badly pronounced, is enough to render the whole Phrase unintelligible; and one Phrase at the beginning that is not well heard and under∣stood, hinders the understanding of what follows. So when one chances to come into a Congregation, where they have already begun to speak about some Business, he stares about a good while, without understanding, till such time as by degrees they put him in the way, and till he gets hold of the thread of the Dis∣course. Besides what I have been saying, this Tongue hath particular Characters that distinguish it from all others. First of all they do not speak as they write, and the most quaint Discourse is barbarous, harsh and unplea∣sant when printed. It is necessary to write well, to make use of more select Terms, more noble Expressions, more particular Turns, that do occur in common practice, which are proper to the composing of Books, the stile of which is more different from the common Elocution, then our obscurest Latin Poets are from the smoothest and most natural Prose. Secondly, Eloquence does not consist in a certain disposition of Periods, such as Orators affect, who, to impose upon the Auditors, stuff it sometimes with a parcel of words, because they have but few things to tell them. The Chineses are eloquent by their lively Ex∣pressions, noble Metaphors, bold and succinct Compa∣risons, and above all, by abundance of Sentences and Passages taken from the Ancients, which amongst them are of great moment: they deliver a great many things in a few words, their Stile is close and mysterious, ob∣scure, and not continued, they seldome make use of all those Particles that illustrate, and connect our Dis∣course. They seem sometimes to speak not to be un∣derstood, or, as tho' they pretend that a Body may un∣derstand them, even when they do not speak, so much sense, and thought, do they inclose in a few words.
It is true, this obscurity almost quite vanishes in re∣spect of those who have a perfect knowledge in the Characters; and a Learned Man that reads a Work, is seldom mistaken in it, but in speaking one is often at a stand: And I have converst with some Doctors, who to understand one another in familiar Discourses, were obliged to describe with their Finger, in the Air the particular Letter that exprest their words, whose Sense could not be determined by the Pronuncia∣tion. Thirdly, The Sound of the words is pretty pleasing to the Ear, especially in the Province of Nankin, where the Accent is more correct than in any other part; for there many pronounce the different Tones so fine and delicately, that a Stranger hath much ado to perceive it. Besides, they never use R, which contributes not a little to mollifie that Language; yet must it be allow∣ed that most part of the Chineses, that pretend to speak correctly, have something of unpleasant in the Lan∣guage, they drawl out their words in length intollera∣bly; and tho' they be all Monsyllables, yet by meer extending them, they make words infinite and like to intire Phrases. They have moreover a Termination which often oc∣curs, which we express commonly by a double ll; the sound comes from the bottom of the aspera arteria, so uncouth and unnatural, that it alone is capable of spoil∣ing a Language: But as certain forc'd Aspirations in the Castillian Tongue, do notwithstanding please the Spaniards; so the Chineses are perswaded that these same Gutturals that displease us, are a real grace; and that these more Masculine and stronger Tones, gives a body to their Language, without which it would be apt to degenerate into a Puerile delicateness, which would at best have no grace but in the Mouth of Wo∣men and Children.
Fourthly, They want abundance of Sounds which we express by our Letters; for Example, they do not pronounce A, b, d, o, r, x, z, after the same manner as we do in France; and when any one forces them to pro∣nounce them, they always make some alteration, and use sounds, that in their Language comes the nearest to them, never being able almost to express them exactly. That formerly was a great difficulty for the Chinese Priests in Consecrating the Host, who could not say Mass in Latin without falling into a ridiculous jargon. Yet there was so much pains taken to frame their Tongue, that at length they have succeeded to admi∣ration: So that the Latin in their mouth is not much more different from that of the Portuguese, than that of the Portuguese is from ours. All that I have been saying, My Lord, is to be under∣stood of the Mandarin Language that is currant all o∣ver the Empire, which is universally understood every where; for the common People at Fokien besides that, speak a particular Tongue, that hath no affinity with the same, who look upon it in China, as we do upon the Biscay Language, or Bsbreton in France. What relates to the China Character is no less sin∣gular than their Tongue; they have not any Alphabet as we have, that contains the Elements, and as it were the Pinciples of Words; nay, they cannot so much as comprehend, how we are able, with so small a number of Fige, each of which signifies nothing, to express upon a piece of Paper all our Conceptions, to compose such an infinite number of Books, as to stock whole Li∣braries. This Art of putting Letters together, to compose words of them, to combine them both into a prodigi∣ous number of Senses, is to them an hidden Mystery, and that which is so common amongst other Nations, never obtained amongst them, either thro' the little Converse they have had with other neighbour Nations, or thro' the small account they made of Foreign In∣ventions.
Instead of Characters, at the beginning of their Mo∣narchy they used Hieroglyphicks; they painted instead of writing; and by the natural Images of things, which they drew upon Paper, they endeavoured to express, and convey their Idea's to others; so that to write a Bird, they painted its Figure; and to signifie a Forest, they represented a great company of Trees; a Circle signified the Sun, and a Crescent the Moon. This sort of writing was not only imperfect, but ve∣ry inconvenient; for besides that one exprest his Thoughts but by halves, even those few that were ex∣prest, were never perfectly conceived, and it was be∣sides utterly impossible not to be mistaken: More∣over, there needed whole Volumes to express a few things, because the painting took up a great deal of room. Insomuch that the Chineses by little and little changed their writing, and composed more simple Fi∣gures, tho' less natural; they likewise invented many to express some things that painting could not repre∣sent, as the Voice, Smell, the Senses, Conceptions, Pas∣sions, and a thousand other Objects that have neither Body nor Figure; of several simple Draughts, they af∣ter made compound ones; and at this rate they mul∣tiplied their Characters ad infinitum, because they destined one or more of them for each particular word. This abundance of Letters is in my opinion the source of the Chineses ignorance, because they imploy all their days in this study, and have not leisure so much as to think of other Sciences, phansying them∣selves learned enough if they can but read. However, they are far from understanding all their Letters: It is very much, if after several years of indefatigable study, they be able to understand fifteen or twenty thousand. The vulgar sort of the Learned, con∣tent themselves with less: and I cannot believe that there was ever any Doctor that understood the third
part; for they reckon upward of Twenty four thou∣sand. As for Strangers, it is scarce credible how much this study disgusts them; it is an heavy Cross to be forc'd all a Man's life long (for commonly it is not too long for it) to stuff his Head with this horrible multitude of Figures, and to be always occupied in deciphering imperfect Hieroglyphicks, that have in a manner no analogy with the things they signifie, there is not the least Charm in this, as in the Sciences of Europe, which, in fatiguing, do not cease to captivate the Spirit with Delight. It is necessary in China, that a Man may not be discouraged, to seek out more sublime Motives, in defect of natural Inclination; to make a Vertue of a Necessity, and to please ones self to think, that this study, how crabbed and ingrateful soever it seems, is not sterile, because it is a sure way to bring Men to the Knowledge of Jesus Christ. It is that way whereby we make our selves under∣stood by great ones; whereby we insinuate our selves into their Spirits, and thereby prepare them for the grand Truths of Christian Religion; there is not that Person to whom this hope of preaching the Gospel successfully, does not incourage, and inspirit. We can∣not also doubt, but that our blessed Lord may accom∣pany the Effects of our good Will, with a particular Blessing; and it is more than probable, that if it had not been for the Assistance from above, the Missio∣naries would never have been so great Proficients, as to make such a progress that has astonisht the ablest Doctors of the Empire. Amongs these Characters there are some of divers sorts. The first are almost out of use, and they pre∣serve them only out of Veneration to Antiquity. The second not so ancient by far, take place only in Pub∣lick Inscriptions; when there is occasion for them, they consult Books, and by the help of a Dictionary
it is easie to decipher them. The third much more regular and fair, serve for the impression, and also for the ordinary writing: Nevertheless, the strokes or draughts of them being very exact and curious, there needs a considerable time to write them in. And for that reason they have contrived a fourth kind of wri∣ting, the strokes whereof being more joyned, and less distinguisht one from another, facilitate the wri∣ting faster; for that reason they are called voluble Let∣ters: These three last Characters do much resemble one another, and do answer to our Capital Letters, to the printed Letters, and ordinary Writing. Instead of a Pen they use a Pencil held in the hand, not obliquely, as our Painters, but directly, as if the Paper were to be prickt. The Chineses always write from top to bottom, and begin their first Let∣ter where ours ends; so that to read their Books, the last page must first be sought for, which with them is the beginning: There Paper being very thin, and almost transparent, they are fain to double it, for fear least the Letters do run one into another when they write on the backside: But these doubled Leaves are so even, that one can hardly perceive it. To write a bad Hand, was never in China, as for∣merly in France, a sign of Nobility; every Body is ambitious to write fair; and before one stands Can∣didate to be admitted to the first degree of Learning, he must give a Specimen of his fair Hand. A Letter ill cut in a Composition, in a Work, in a Petition, is a considerable fault; and because one stroke often al∣ters the whole Sense, there needs no more to make one, upon examination, to lose the Degree of Do∣ctor, and consequently to ruin his Fortune. So that all the Mandarins write fair, and the Emperor excels in that, as in all other things.
Printing, which is but an Art in its infancy in Eu∣rope, hath been, from all Antiquity in use in China; however it is something different from ours; as we have but few Letters, from which we can compose huge Volumes, by putting them together, few Cha∣racters suffice, because those that have served for the first Leaf, are still employed for all the others. The prodigeous number of China Characters hinder you from using this way, except only in some Restricti∣ons that concern the Palace, and Title pages, into which few Letters can come in: On all other occa∣sions, they find it more easie to Engrave their Let∣ters upon Wooden Boards, and the Charge is much less. This is the way they go to work. He who intends to print a Book, gets it fair written over by a Master Scribe, the Engraver glews each Leaf upon an even smooth Table, and then the Draughts with the Graving Tool are done so exactly, that the Characters have a per∣fect resemblance with the Original; so that the Im∣pression is good or bad, according as a good or bad Scribe hath been employed; this Skill of the Gravers is so great, that one cannot distinguish that which is imprinted, from what was written by the Hand, when they have made use of the same Paper and Ink. It must be confest that this sort of Printing is some∣what incommodious, inasmuch as the Boards must be multiplied as much as the Leaves, so that an indiffe∣rent big Chamber will not suffice to contain all the little Tables, that served for the Impression of a large Volume; yet when the engraving is finisht, one is not obliged at the same time to draw off all the Copies, by running a venture of not selling above half, and ruin his Estate by a needless Charge. The Chineses print their Leaves according as they put them off; and the Wooden Plates, which they easily run over again, after they have drawn off Two or Three hundred
Copies, serve for many other different Impressions. Besides that, they have no occasion for a Corrector of the Press; for provided that the Leaf be exactly written, it is very rare that the Engraver makes any Faults, which is none of the least Advantages. The Paper of China seems so fine, that they ima∣gined in France that it was of Silk, or Cotton; but Cotton is not so proper for that purpose as People imagine; and the Artificers have assured me, that the little threads of Silk cannot be beat small enough to compose an uniform Paste, such as is requisite for the Leaves. All the China Paper is made of the Bark, or inward Rhind of Bambou; it is a Tree, more e∣ven, thicker, straiter, and stronger than the Elder: They throw away the first Rhind, as too hard and thick; the undermost, as being whiter, softer, pound∣ed with fair Water, serves for the Matter whereof they compose Paper, which they take up with Frames or Moulds, as long and broad as they think fit, as we do here: There are Leaves of ten and twelve foot long; and the Paper of the Leaves is as white, and much more even and smoother than ours. Instead of Glew, they pass Alom upon it, which does not only hinder it from sinking, but renders it also so shining, that it appears as washt over with Silver, or impregnate with Vernish: It is extream smooth under the Pen, but especially under the Pen∣cil, that requires an even Ground; for it be rugged and knotty, like our Paper, the little threads sepa∣rate, and the Letters are never well terminated. Yet for all that the China Paper is not lasting, it is subject to fret; any Moisture or Dust sticks to it; and by reason of its being made of the Bark of a Tree, Worms infallibly breed in it, if care be not ta∣ken to beat the Books now and then, and expose them to the Sun. So that they cannot preserve in China, as we do in Europe, ancient Manuscripts; and they
continually renew the Libraries, that are therefore ancient, because they consist of Authentick Copies of Ancient Originals. Since I have told your Grace all things that con∣cern the Books and Printings of China, I hope you will not take it amiss, if I speak a word or two con∣cerning the particular quality of their Ink: It is most excellent; and they have hitherto vainly tried in France to imitat it: that of Nankin is most set by: And there be Sticks made of it so very curious, and of such a sweet Scent, that one would be tempted to keep some of them tho' they should be of no use at all. I say Sticks of Ink, for it is not a Liquor like ours; it is solid, and resembles our Mineral Colours, tho' lighter by far: They make it into all Figures; the more usual are four-square, but not so broad as long; about half an Inch thick. There are some of them gilded with Figures of Dragons, Birds, and Flow∣ers; they contrive for that purpose pretty Moulds of Wood so curiously wrought, that one would have much ado to make any thing more compleat upon Metal. When one has a mind to write, they have a little po∣lisht Marble upon the Table, made hollow at the end, proper to hold water; they infuse one end of the stick therein, which they rub gently upon the smooth part of the Marble; and in a moment, according as they rub, there is produced a Liquor, more or less black, wherein they dip the point of the Pencil to write with. This Ink is shining, extream black, and altho' it sinks when the Paper is so fine, yet does it never extend further than the Pencil, so that the Letters are exactly terminated, how gross soever the strokes be.
Outom-Chu A Tree in China
It hath moreover another quality, that makes it admirable good for designing, that is, it admits of all the Diminutions one can give it; and there are many things that cannot be represented to the Life without using this Colour. In a word, it is not so difficult to be made as People imagine; altho' the Chineses use Lamb-black, drawn from divers Mat∣ters, yet the best is made of Hogs-grease burnt in a Lamp: They mix a sort of Oil with it, to make it sweeter, and pleasant Odours to suppress the ill smell of th Grease and Oil. After having reduc'd it to a Consistence, they make of the Paste little Lozenges, which they cast in a Mould; it is at first very heavy, but when it is very hard, it is not so weighty by half, and that whih they give for a Pound, weighs not above eight or ten Ounces. The binding of Books in China is likewise very pretty and curious, tho' it comes much short of ours. They don't gild upon the Edges, nor so much as co∣lour them. The ordinary Books are covered with a grey Pastboard, handsom enough. They bind others according as they please; in a fine Sattin, or a kind of flowered Taffity, that is very cheap, and is com∣monly made on purpose for this use. I have seen some covered with rich Silk, flowered with Gold and Silver; the Form is always the same, but they are at Cost, according to the Matter they are willing to employ. I should never have presumed, My Lord, to take the liberty to set down all these minute Cir∣cumstances, if I were not perswaded, that a little Account is not always disagreable to Learned Men, who, like you, are acquainted beforehand with the most essential Matters. Hence I present you with something more solid, which, without doubt, you may have read; but I add it in this place brief∣ly, only to refresh your memory.
The first History that was in the World, was without all Controversie the Book of Genesis; but it must be granted, that of all the Books that have reached our knowledge, those of China are the first that have been published: They name them by way of Excellence, The five Volumes; and the Chineses hold nothing more Sacred than the Doctrine therein taught. It is about Four thousand three hundred years since the Emperour Hoamti, after he had invented the Cha∣racters, composed Treaties of Astronomy, Arithme∣tick, and Medicine. Near upon Three hundred years after, they made a Collection of all the Ordinances, and writ the Hi∣story of King Yao, a Prince recommendable for his Piety, Prudence, and the mighty Care he took to establish a Model of Government in the State. Cun and Isu his Successors, were no less famous; they re∣gulated the Ceremonies of the Sacrifice, that they were bound to offer to the Supream Master of Hea∣ven, and to the inferiour Spirits that presided over Rivers and Mountains; they divided the Empire in∣to Provinces; they fixt their different Situation with respect to the Constellations of Heaven; they regu∣lated the Taxes that the People were to pay; they made several other Constitutions very wholsome and proper for introducing good Manners, and very ne∣cessary for the Publick Quiet. All these things were written; and whatever these three Emperors have left behind them to Posterity, hath been always con∣sidered by the Chineses as Oracles. Nevertheless, being the first Laws never compre∣hend all things, the Emperors who reigned a Thou∣sand seven hundred seventy six years before our Savi∣our, upon mature deliberation, and by the Counsel and Advice of their Sage Ministers, thought them∣selves obliged to make an Addition of new ones. They report that Cootson, a Prince, in whom Piety
and Zeal in Religion, did infinitely inhance the Noble qualities he had received from Nature, saw in a Dream the Figure of a Man coming from Heaven. After he was awake, the Image remained so lively engraven upon his Mind, that he caused him to be sought for, and found him at length amongst the Masons. So soon as this Man apply'd himself to the Government, he seemed to be inspired, and made several beneficial Regulations, that perfected the an∣cient Ordinances, which were again augmented un∣der succeeding Reigns; insomuch that being all colle∣cted together, there was a Book com∣posed of them which the Chinese call The first Book called Chu-kim. Chukim, which amongst them is of as great Authority, in reference to the Politick State, as Moses and the Prophets are amongst the Jews, as to what concerns the Worship of God, and Form of Religion. The Second Book, which the Chineses reverence for its Antiquity, is a long Continuation and Series of Odes, and Poems composed under the Reigns of the third RaceThe second Book Chi-kim.. Where are described the Manners and Customs of the petty Kings of China, who governed the Provinces in dependance upon the Emperor. Confucius mentions them with great Elogiums; which makes us incline to judge that in process of time they had been corrupted by a mixture of several bad Pieces; there are some such found in them very ridiculous, not to say impiou. oi, Founder of the Monarchy, composed before that time Poems of that Nature, but they were so obscure, that what care soever they took to put a good Construction on them, yet have they been fain to confess that they were not intelligible. This Ob∣scurity, so impenitrable by all the Lights of the Learned, hath given occasion to many Superstitions.
The Bonze's wrest them to a wrong use, that they may say what they please; they are in respect of them an inexhaustible Fountain of Fables and Chimera's, which they make use of, for to cause the People to pin their Faith upon their Sleeve. However, they have compiled a The third Book V-kim. Tome of them, which holds the third Rank amongst Classick Au∣thors. The The Fourth Tchun-tsiou. Fourth contains the Hi∣story of several Princes, their Ver∣tues, Vices, and Maxims of the Government, that have been collected by Confucius, and Commented upon by his Disciples. The The fifth Li-ki. Fifth treats of Customs and Ceremonies. There is menti∣on made of Temples, Sacred Ves∣sels; of the Duty of Children to their Parents, and Wives to their Husbands; Rules of real Friendship, Civilities at Feasts; of Hospitality, Musick, War; of Funeral Honours, and of a thousand other things that regard Society. These five Books are very ancient, and all the others that have any Authority in the Empire are nothing but Copies, or Interpretations of them. Amongst a∣bundance of Authors, who have taken pains about these so famous Originals, none is so conspicuous and eminent as Confucius; they have a great esteem, espe∣cially of that which he compiled in four Books, up∣on the ancient Laws, which are lookt upon as the Rule of Perfect Government. There he treats of the grand At of Reigning, of Mediocrity, Vertues and Viccs, of the Nature of Things, and of common Duties. This last Tome notwithstanding, is not so much the Work of Confucius, as of Mencius his Disci∣ple, of a Life less regular than that of his Master, but of a Stile more eloquent and pleasant.
Besides these Nine Books, there be some others much in vogue, as the Universal History of the Em∣pire, the truth of which is no less confirmed in Chi∣na, than it is in our most noted Histories in Europe. The Books that treat of the Education of Children, of Obedience, of Loyalty, are ascribed to Confucius. Some of them may be met with that Discourse of Medicine, Agriculture, Plants, of the Military Art, of Arts Liberal and Mechanick, of particular Histo∣ries, Astronomy, Phylosophy, and a great many o∣ther Parts of Mathematicks. In short, they have their Romances, Comedies, and what I place in the same rank, a plain, abundance of Treaties composed by the Bonze's, concerning the Worship of the Dei∣ties of the Country, which they alter, diminish, and increase, according as they find it necessary to in∣veigle the People, and swell their Revenues. Of all these Books they have compiled numerous Libraries, some whereof were composed of above Forty thousand Volumes; but all these brave Works that Antiquity took so much pains to bring forth, which private Persons had amassed with so vast Ex∣pences, were well-nigh all destroy'd by the Tyran∣nical order of one Emperor. Three hundred years, or thereabouts, after the Death of Confucius, that is to say, Two hundred years before the Birth of our Saviour Christ, the Emperor Chihoamti, illustrious by his Valour and Military Science, of which he was Master beyond all his Predecessors; and still more conspicuous by the prodigious Wall he caused to be built, to secure his Territories from the Irruptions of the Tartars, resolved to extirpate all Sciences; and not satisfied with putting a great number of Doctos to death, he ordered his Subjects upon pain of death, to set fire on all the Books in the Empire, except those that treated of Agriculture, Medicine, and Sor∣cery.
This Conslagration, the most remarkable that ever the Republick of Letters suffered, was like to have utterly ruined the Empire, and would have made in time, of the most polite and accomplisht State, the most barbarous and ignorant Kingdom in the World, if after the Tyrant's death, the Love of Sciences, that began to Revive in all Men's Breasts, had not in some measure repaired this loss. The old Men, who according to custom had, du∣ring their youth, learnt almost all these Books by heart, received order to write them faithfully over: They found some of them in the Tombs, that the most zealous had concealed, to which they gave a Resurrection, by publishing them in another Edition. Some of them they fetched from the Graves, and Holes of Walls, that indeed suffered great Damage by Moisture and Worms, however, in a Condition to serve their turns that laboured after their Restora∣tion, what was defaced in these latter, being pretty intire in some others. All this Care did not hinder the new Edition to be defective; there remains in some places Lacuna's, and there hath been inserted into others, some Pieces by the by that were not in the Originals. The Chi∣neses themselves take notice of these Faults, and of some others of less moment; but they are so Super∣stitious in peserving what was handed down to them from Antiquity, that they even pay Reverence to its Faults. I should not, My Lord, afford you a Light diffusive enough into the Chinese Literature, should I not speak more particularly of Confucius, who makes the principle Ornament of it. He is the most pure Source of their Doctrine; he is their Philosopher, their Law∣gver, their Oracle; and albeit he was never King, one may nevertheless avouch, that during his Life, he hath governed a great part of China, and that he hath
had since his death a greater share then any one in the Administration of the Affairs of State, by the Maxims that he hath promulgated, and the fair Ex∣amples that he hath exhibited; so that he is still the Model of all honest Men: His Life hath been writ by several Persons: I shall report what they com∣monly say of it. Confucius, whom the Chineses name Coum-tse, was born in the Province of Chauton, the Thirty seventh year of the Reign of the Emperor Kim, Four hun∣dred fourscore and three years before the Incarnation of our Saviour; the Death of his Father that prece∣ded his Birth, made them call him Tcesse, which sig∣nifies Child of Sorrow; he derived his Pedigree from Tiny, Twenty seventh Emperor of the Second Race: How illustrious soever this Family might be by a long Series of Kings, it became much more so by the Life of this great Man: He eclipsed all his Ancestors, but he gave his Posterity a lustre that still continues, after more than Two thousand years. China acknowledges no true Nobility but in this Family, equally respect∣ed by Sovereigns, who have derived from thence, as from the Source the Laws of Perfect Government, and beloved by the People, to whose Happiness he hath so successfully contributed. Confucius did not proceed by the ordinary degrees of Childhood, he seem'd Rational a great deal sooner than other Men; for he took delight in nothing that other Children are fond of: Playing, going abroad, Amusements proper to his Age, did not at all con∣cern him; he had a grave, a serious Deportment, that gained him respect, and was at that very time a Presage of what one day he was like to be: But that which distinguisheth him the most, was his Exempla∣ry and Unbiassed Piety. He honoured his Relations; he endeavoured in all things to imitate his Grand∣father, who lived in China all that time, and whose
Memory was precious for his Sanctity: And it was observable that he never eat any thing but he prostra∣ted himself upon the Ground, and offered it to the Supream Lord of Heaven. Being yet a Child he heard his Grandfather fetch a deep Sigh, he came-up to him, and when he had saluted him, bowing several times to the very ground, May I be so bold, says he, without losing the respect I owe you, to ask you the occasion of your Grief? Perhaps you are afraid that your Posterity may neglect the Care of Ver∣tue, and may dishonour you by their Vice. What put this Thought into your head? says Coum-tse to him, and where have you learnt to speak after this manner? From you your self, replyed Confucius; I attentively hear you every time you speak, and I have often heard you say, that a Son, who by his manner of living does not keep up the Reputation of his Ancestors, degenerates from them, and does not deserve to bear their Name. When you spoke after that manner, did not you think of me? and might not that be the thing that troubles you? This good old Man was overjoy'd at this Discourse, and after that seemed not to be disquieted. Confucius, after his Grandfathers death, was a con∣stant adherer to Tcem-se, a famous Doctor of those times; and under the Conduct of so great a Master, he became in a short time a considerable Proficient in the Knowledge of Antiquity, which he lookt upon, even there, as the most perfect Model. This Love for the Ancients had like ne day to have cost him his Life, tho' he was then but Sixteen years of Age: For discoursing with a Person of the highest quality, who spoke of the obscurity and unprofitableness of the Chinese Books, this Child read him somewhat too sevee a Lecture concerning the respect that is due to them. The Books you speak of, says Confucius, contain profound Doctrine, the Sense of which is not to be penetrated but by
the Learned: the People would undervalue them, could they comprehend them of themselves. This dependance of Spi∣rits, by which the more Stupid are subject to the more en∣lightened is very profitable, and useful in Humane Society: Were all Families equally rich, equally powerful, there would remain no form of Government: But there would happen yet a more strange disorder, if Men were equally knowing, every one would be a governing, and no body would believe himself obliged to obey. Some time ago, added this witty Child, one of the Skum of the Vulgar spoke to me as you do, I did not won∣der at it; but I admire at present that a Doctor, as you are, should speak to me like this Man of the Dregs of the People. This Discourse was capable to gain the affe∣ction and respect of the Mandarin: But Confusion that possest him to be thus gravelled by a Child, did so nettle him, that he resolved to be revenged. He caused his House to be invested by his Menial Ser∣vants, and, without doubt, he would have flowen out into some Extremity, had not the King, who had notice of it, given him order to withdraw. When Confucius was a little more advanced in years, he made a Collection of the most excellent Maxims of the Ancients, which he intended to fol∣low, and inspire into the People. Each Province was at that time a distinct Kingdom, that a Prince, who depended upon the Emperor, governed by par∣ticular Laws: He levied Taxes, disposed of all Pla∣ces of Trust, and made Peace as he judged expedi∣ent. These petty Kings had sometimes Differences amongst them; the Emperor himself stood in fear of them; and had not always Authority enough to make himself be obey'd by them. Confucius being perswaded that the People would never be happy, so long as Interest, Ambition, and false Policy should reign in all these Petty Courts; resolved to preach up a severe Morality, to prevail
upon Men to contemn Riches and worldly Pleasures, and esteem Temperance, Justice, and other Ver∣tues; to inspire them with Grandeur and Magnani∣mity proof against all Humane Respects, a Sincerity incapable of the least disguise, even in respect of the greatest Princes; in fine, a kind of Life that should oppose the Passions, and should intirely cultivate Reason and Vertue. That which is most to be admired is, That he preached more by his Examples, than by his Words; so that he every where reapt very considerable Fruit of his Labours. Kings were governed by his Coun∣sels, the People reverenced him as a Saint; every Body commended him; and even those who did not comply to follow his Examples, did nevertheless admire them: but sometimes he took upon him such a Severity, that made his very Friend have an aver∣sion for him. Being chosen to fill a considerable Place of Trust in the Kingdom of Lou, in less than Three Months time, after he exercised the Charge, he introduced such a prodigious Change, that the Court and Pro∣vinces were quite another thing than they were be∣fore. The neighbouring Princes began to be jea∣lous; they perceived that a King ruled by a Man of this Character, would quickly render himself too powerful, there being nothing that can be more ca∣pable to make a State flourish than Order, and an exact observance of Laws. The King of Tci assem∣bled his Ministers, and propounded to them an Ex∣pedient to put a stop to the Cariere of this new Go∣vernment: After a long deliberation,this was the Ex∣pedient they bethought themselves of. They chose a great Company of young Maids, handsome, well educated, and perfectly well instruct∣ed in whatsoever might please. Then, under pre∣tence of an Embassy, they presented them to the
King of Lou, and to the principal Officers of his Court; the Present was joyfully accepted, and obtained its desired effect. They thought of nothing but of di∣vertising the fair Strangers; for several Months toge∣ther there was nothing but Feasting, Dancing, and Comedies, and Pleasures was the whole Business of the Court. Confucius perceiving that the Publick Affairs would suffer by it, endeavoured to bring Men to themselves again; but this new kind of Life had so charmed them, that all his endeavours proved ineffectual: there was no remedy, the Severity of the Philoso∣pher, whether he would or no, must give place to the Gallantry and Irregularities of Courtiers. So that he thought it did not stand with his Reputation to remain any longer in a place where Reason was not listened to, and so he resigned up his place to the Prince; and sought other Kingdoms more inclinable to improve his Maxims. But he met with great Obstacles, and run from Province to Province almost, without reaping any advantage; because the Politicians dreaded him, and the Ministers of Princes had no mind to have a Com∣petitor, that was in a capacity to lessen their Autho∣rity, or deprive them of their Credit. So that for∣saken by all the World, he was often times reduced to utmost Extremity, in danger of being starved, or to lose his Life by the Conspiracy of mischievous Men. Nevertheless, all these Disgraces did not move him; and he would often say, That the Cause be de∣fended was too good, to apprehend any evil Consequences from it; That there was not that Mn so powerful, that could hurt him; and that when a Man is elevated to Hea∣ven by a sincere desire of Perfection, be is so far from fearing a Tempest, that he did not so much as hear the noise in this lower World.
So that he was never weary of instructing those who loved Vertue. Amongst a great Company of Disciples that put themselves under his Tuition, he destined some to write a fair hand, others apply'd themselves to argue exactly, and to deliver themselves eloquently in Publick. He would have others to stu∣dy to frame to themselves a true Idea of a good Go∣vernment: But he counselled those for whom he had a more particular kindness to govern themselves well, to cultivate their Mind by Meditation, and to puri∣fie their heart by Vertue. Humane Nature, said he often to others, came from Heaven to us most pure and perfect, in process of time Ig∣norance, the Passions, and evil Examples have corrupted it; all consists in the re-instating it, and giving it its pri∣mitive Beauty: and that we may be perfect, we must re∣ascend to that point from whence we have descended. Obey Heaven, and follow all the Ordrs of him who governs it. Love your Neighbour as your self; never suffer your Sen∣ses to be the Rule of your Conduct, but hearken to Rea∣son in all things: It will instruct you to think well, to speak discretely, and to perform all your Actions holily. He sent Six hundred of his Disciples into different places of the Empire, to reform the Manners of the People; and not satisfied to benefit his own Country, he often took a Resolution to pass the Seas, and extend his Doctrine to the Extremity of the Universe. There is scarce any thing can be added either to his Zeal, or to the purity of his Morality, they were so Superlative. Methinks he sometimes speaks like a Doctor of the New Law, rather than like a Man that was brought up in the Corruption of the Law of Nature: and that which perswades me that Hypocrisie had no share in what he said, is, That his Actions never bely'd his Maxims. In fine, his Gravity and Mildness in the Use of the World, his rigorous Abstinence, (for he past for the soberest Man of the Empire) his Con∣tempt
of the Good Things of the World, that con∣tinual Attention and Watchfulness over his Actions, and then, what we find not amongst the Sages of Antiquity, his Humility and Modesty would make a Man apt to judge that he was not a meer Philosopher formed by Reason, but a Man inspired by God for the Reformation of this New World. The Chineses report that he had frequently this saying in his Mouth, It is in the West where the True Saint is found: And this Sentence was so imprinted upon the Spirit of the Learned, that Sixty five years after the Birth of our Saviour, the Emperor Mimti touched with these words, and determined by the Image of a Man that appeared to him in a Dream coming from the West, sent Ambassadors that way, with strict order to continue their Journey till they should meet the Saint whom Heaven had acquainted him with. It was much about the same time that St. Thomas preached the Christian Faith in the Indies; now if these Mandarins had followed his Orders, peradven∣ture China might have received benefit from the Preaching of this Apostle. But the danger of the Sea, that they feared, made them stop at the first Island, where they found the Idol Fo, or Foe, who had corrupted the Indies several years before with his damnable Doctrine: They learnt the Superstitions of the Country; and at their return propagated Idolatry and Atheism in all the Empire. Confucius lived secretly Three years, but spent the latter end of his days in Sorrow, in seeing the Wick∣edness that reigned amongst the People. He has been often heard to say, The Mountain is fallen, and an high Machine was destroyed; to denote that the grand Edi∣fice of Perfection, that he had Erected with so much Care in all the Realms, was as good as overthrown. Kings, said he, one day during his last Sickness, do
not follow my Maxims; I do no good in the World, so it is time I should depart out of it. At that very Moment he fell into a Lethargy, that continued Seven days, at the end of which he gave up the Ghost in the Em∣braces of his Disciples. He was Lamented by the whole Empire, that from that very time honoured him as a Saint, and influenced Posterity with a Veneration of him, which in all probability will never have an end but with the World. Kings have built Palaces for him after his death in all the Provinces, whither the Learned at certain times go to pay him Honours. There is to be seen in several places, these Titles of Honour writ in huge Characters, To the great Master, to the head Doctor, to the Saint; to him who taught Emperors and Kings. However, what is very extraordinary, never did the Chineses Deifie him; they, I say, who have given the quality of God, or as they speak, the quality of pure Spirits to many Mandarins, not so e∣minent as he; as if Heaven, that had given him Birth for the Reformation of Manners, was unwilling that such a well-ordered Life, should, after his death, administer occasion of Superstition and Idolatry. They preserve to this day in China Anticks that represent him to the Life, and pretty well agree with what History hath left us concerning him. He was no handsom Man; he had moreover upon his Fore∣head a Swelling, or a kind of Wen, that disfigured him, which he made others often to take notice of to humble him. As for the rest, his Stature was so comely and proportionable, his Behaviour so grave, his Voice so strong and shrill, that if he was but ne∣ver so little pathetical, one could not choose but be affected, and hear him with respect. But the Maxims of Morality he hath scattered here and there in his Works; or which his Disciples took care to collect, draw a much more lively and advantagious Pour∣traiture
of his Soul. There would need an entire Volume to relate them all. Here are some of them that came to my knowledge, that I have taken out of a Book composed by one of the principle Manda∣rins of the Empire, who Rules at present in Pekin. Maxim I. Beauty is not to be desired by a wise Man. Confucius going to see the King of a Province, he found him with his Favourite that was a Lord won∣derful handsome. The King, so soon as he saw him come in, said to him smiling, Confucius, if thy Coun∣tenance could be changed, I would willingly give you all the Beauty of this young Courtier. Sir, answered the Philosopher, that is not the thing I wish; the exterior form of a Man is of little use to the Publick Good. What do you desire then, said the Prince? I desire, My Lord, says he, in all the Members of the Empire that just Syme∣try that makes up the Beauty of the Government, and hin∣ders the Body of the State to be deformed. Maxim II. A Man must confine himself, if he means to be happy. So soon as he understood that his Mother was dead, he came into his Country to pay his last De∣voirs to her, he wept for her bitterly, and spent three days without eating; that was perhaps too much, yet
a Philosopher of that Country thought it not enough. As for me, says he, I have been seven days without take∣ing Sustenance, upon the death of my Relations; and you, who are Grandson to a Saint, on whom all the World casts their Eyes to see ow you will imitate him, you have satis∣fied your self with three days Abstinence. Confucius an∣swered him, The Ceremonies have been regulated by the Ancients to restrain the indiscreet, and stir up the backward. It is our duty to be obedient to the Laws, if we would not go astray: It is in this golden mean, that Wisdom, and the wise Man reside? that you may never stray out of it. Remember that Vertue is not an excess, and that Per∣fection hath its limits. Maxim III. A Man ought to change often, if he would be constant in Wisdom. A Person of Quality said one day to Confucius, Your Grandfather was never wanting in any duty of Civility in respect of great Persons; nevertheless his Doctrine, tho' holy, never obtain'd, or got footing: How do you ima∣gine then that yours should be followed, seeing you have a Magisterial Gravity that repulses Men, and proceeds some∣times to haughtiness? This is not the way to be welcome at Princes Courts. Every Age hath its ways, answered Confucius, in my Grandfather's time Princes and Officers were polisht; they delighted in order, every one kept his Station; to insinuate a Man's self in their Affections, it behoved a Man to be polisht, and regular like them. At this day Men value nothing but Courage and Haughtiness, wherewith Princes endeavour to inspire their Officers; a Man ought to change with the World, that he may be in a
capacity to win it: A wise man would cease so to be, should he always act as the wise men of former times acted. Maxim IV. The Grandees of a Kingdom are not al∣ways the great Men of the State. Confucius coming to the Court of one of the Kings of China, was very well received. This Prince al∣lowed him an Apartment in his Palace, and came to visit him there himself: At the end of the Visit, he said to him, You come not for nothing into my State; probably you have a design to do me some good, My Lord, replyed Confucius. I am but an unprofitable Man, yet I avow if your Majesty will but follow my Counsel, you will not be the worse for it. My intent is to present to you wise Men, to occupy the principle places of your State. Withal my heart, says the Prince, Who are they? My Lord, Li-in, the Son of a Husband-man is a Man on whom you may rely. The King burst out a laughing; How, says he, an Husband-man? I have not Employments e∣nough for the Lords of my Court, and would you have me take a Labourer into my Service. The Philosopher, without being moved, replyed; Vertue is of all Trades and Conditions, although it is more commonly annext to a mean Condition: We have two Kingdomes in the Empire that have been founded by two Labourers Tcheou-coum, and Cham-tcho.. What Inconvenience is there, tho' a Man of that Character govern yours? Believe me, Sir, the Court hath hitherto supply'd you with a good Company of evil Ministers: Suffer a Country Vil∣lage to present you with a wise Man. You want Employ∣ments,
you say, to place all the Lords that encompass you. If Vertue alone were rewarded, you would find in your Court more places than Officers; nay, and perhaps would be fain to call for Labourers to supply them. When the Body of the Nobility does not furnish the State with great Men, the great Men that may be found a∣mongst the People must be chosen, and of them must be composed the Body of the Nobility. Maxim V. A small Fault often denotes great quali∣ties. He one day advised the King of Oi to set a cer∣tain Officer of Reputation at the Head of his Army; but the King excused himself for not doing it, because that being formerly a Mandarin, he took a couple of Eggs from a Country Fellow. A Man who hath abu∣sed his Authority, says he, deserves not any longer to com∣mand. These Sentiments of Equity, replyed Confucius, are very laudable in a King; but perhaps the Mandarins Moderation, that stole but two Eggs, is no less to be admi∣red. Such a small fault in the whole Life of a Man de∣notes in him great qualities: In a word, a prudent Prince makes use of his Subjects in the Government, as a Car∣penter uses Timber in his Works, he does not reject one good Beam, because there is a flaw in it, provided it be strong enough to support a whole Edifice: I would not advise your Majesty, for the loss of a couple of Eggs, to turn off a Captain, who may conquer you two Realms.
Maxim VI. The Prince is void of Counsel who hath too much Wit, and when e delivers his Opinion the first. The same King one day held a Counsel in pre∣sence of Confucius, where he spoke of some Affairs with so much vehemence of Spirit, that his Mini∣sters applauded him, and forthwith allowed him to be in the right, and comply'd with him without more ado. At the close, this King said to Confu∣cius; What's your Iudgment of the course we have ta∣ken in our last Deliberation? Sir, says the Philoso∣pher, I do not perceive that they have yet deliberated; you spoke with a great deal of Wit; your Ministers very attentive to please you, have faithfully repeated the Dis∣course; they have told your Opinion, and not their own; and when you adjourned the Assembly, I still expected the beginning of the Counsel. Some days after the same King asked him his Ad∣vice concerning the present Government. He an∣swered him; No body speaks ill of it. That is my de∣sire, says the King. And that, Sir, is what you ought not to desire, reply'd Confucius: A sick Person forsaken, whom they flatter that he is well, is not far from death: a Man is bound to discover to the Prince the defects of the Mind, with the same liberty Men discover to him the ma∣ladies of the Body.
Maxim VII. The wise Man goes forward apace, be∣cause the right way is always the shortest; on the contrary, the crafty Po∣litician arrives later at his end, because he walks in By-ways and crooked Paths. The King of Ouei confessed to Confucius, That there was nothing so fine as Wisdom; but the diffi∣culty of acquiring it, discouraged the most Coura∣geous, and diverted the best disposed Minds. As for my part, added he, I have used endeavours, but all in vain; I am resolved to torment my self no longer about it, and a small parcel of Policy will supply the defect of that Wisdom that is necessary to good Governing. Sir, an∣swered Confucius, 'tis true, Wisdom is seated on a lofty Place, but the Road to it is not so impracticable as People imagine, it grows plainer and plainer, according as you go on; and once got at it, one cannot go back without run∣ning great danger to fall down the Precipice; in such a sort, that a wise Man cannot cease being so, without doing vio∣lence to himself in some respect. But do you think that a Prince hath no trouble when he marches in the indirect Paths of a too Artificial and Knavish Policy? All these Refinements and Subtilties per∣plex the Spirit: But which is the way to unravel all these Intrigues? None ingages in a Labyrinth without fear; oftentimes a man loseth himself therein; and when one gets out, it is after a great many wandrings, and mis∣sing
the way, that disquiets the Mind. Take you which way you please; as for me, Sir, I am perswaded that in a Popular Government, solid and constant Vertue goes farther than the most subtle and refined Policy. Maxim VIII. Those who desire the most perfect State, do not always search the Perfection of the State, but the Sweetness. Would you be fixt in the World? let this sink into your Mind, That to take up a new Course of Life, is nothing else but to pass from one Trouble to another. The Son of a King being wrought upon by the Life that Confucius lead, perceived those first desires of Wisdom to spring up in his heart, that a good E∣ducation, and good Examples are wont to infuse in∣to young Persons, when they have not been yet cor∣rupted by the Commerce of the World. He went to find him out, and told him, That he was resolved to abandon all things for to become one of his Disciples; for, the truth is, there are a thousand Sorrows to be under∣gone in that Course of Life, wherein my Birth engageth me; whereas yours seems to me full of Sweetness and De∣light. Since 'tis the Sweetness you look for in my state, an∣swered Confucius, I should not advise you to enter upon it: A Man often times meets with Trouble, the more he avoids it. Heaven hath inspired me with the love of a
Private Life, hath been pleased to make you to be born to Rule. Be a King, and do not seek after Peace too much: On the contrary, If you be not willing to lose your States, wage an advantageous War with your Enemies; but fight more couragiously against your Passions, and against being in love with a sweet and easie Life, if you have not a mind to destroy your self. Maxim IX. Those who are diligent, and would do all, put off many things till the next day. His own Son said to him one day, I carefully apply my self to all sorts of study, I omit nothing whereby to become a good Scholar, and yet I make small progres. This wise Father said to him, Omit something, and you will make a great progress. Amongst all those that take long Iourneys afoot, did you ever see one of them that ran? In all things one must go orderly to work, and not desire to embrace that which is not for the length of his Arms; otherwise you will give your self unprofitable mo∣tions. The Saints have first of all apply'd themselves to the most easie things; Success gave them courage and strength to grapple with more difficult things, by little and little they became perfect. Those, who like you, would do all in one day, do nothing all their Life: On the other hand, those who never apply themselves but to one thing, find at the long run that they have done all.
Maxim X. One ought not to wonder that the wise Man walks slower in the Way of Ver∣tue, than the ill Man does in that of Vice; Passion burries, and Wisdom guides. One of his Friends complained of the small pro∣gress he made in Vertue; I labour, said he, these seve∣ral years to imitate the Primitive Saints, and I am still imperfect. Had I but never so little applyed my self to imitate the Wicked, and follow their Example, I should have rid a great deal of Ground in a short space: Why is it not so easie to attain to Perfection, as to abandon ones self to Vice? This is no wonder, says Confucius, Vertue is on high, and Vice is in the lowest place. It requires pains and time to go upward, one Minute sufficeth to fall down the Precipice. However, let me intreat you not to let your self be abused by th seeming easiness. It is true, that one is sooner determined to evil than to good; but seeing one repents of it at length, it is a certain sign that there is less trouble to do well, than to persevere in evil. Maxim XI. True Nobility does not consist in Blood, but in Merit; we are of an elevated Station indeed, when Vertue prevents our groveling with the rest of Mankind. Confucius seeing a Man carry a Fish, sighed, and told them who demanded the Reason of it; This Fish,
that might have easily preserved its life, hath lost it not∣withstanding, for letting it self be allured by the pleasures of a deceitful Bait. The want of Reason pleads for its greediness; but are Men excusable for to lose Vertue that  much more precious than Life, in letting themselves be catched by the Bait's that the Good Things and Vanity of the World presents them with? If one knew, what he lookt after, he would take another Road to find it. Would you be rich? contemn every thing, nay, even the Contempt and Scorn Men cast upon you: That Man is raised to a pitch far above others, when Calumny and Reproaches cannot reach him. Maxim XII. In the state wherein we are, Perseverance in well-doing consists not so much in not falling, as to rise again as often as we fall. You are very happy, Confucius, says some Manda∣rins that he instructed, for having arrived at the high∣est degree of Vertue; It is a long time, I'le warrant you, since you left sin: As for us, what Efforts soever we make to become good Men, there passes not a day but we commit considerable Faults. Although every fault be blameable, says Confucius, you are not so unhappy as you think in committing many: your Life, as well as mine, is a long Iourney; the way is difficult, and our Reason half extinct by Passions, furnishes but little Light to guide us: What means is there to avoid stumbling some∣times in the dark? When one gets up again, the fall retards our Iourney, but does not quite put it off and interrupt it. It would be an unhappiness for us, to com∣mit no more but one, like the wicked that fall but once, because the first Precipice stops them; but honest good Men that continue their walking, fall often.
Maxim XIII. There is not that Man living but hides half of his Faults; however, as much flattered as he is, he would blush to appear to the Eyes of others, what he appears to himself. One complained one day, That Nature in bestow∣ing two Eyes upon Men to behold the Beauty of Bodies, had bestowed none on them that are able to see Minds, and discover the Secrets of Hearts: Thus Vertue and Vice, say they, are confounded in the World. Confucius said, you and I should be in a woful taking, if we were not cut short as to that matter, for we should not secure our own Failings and Weaknesses, we gain more by it than you are aware of; for I maintain that the Phi∣losopher would suffer more to appear weak, than the wick∣ed Man to appear vicious. Maxim XIV. Never speak of your self to others, neither good nor bad; not good, because they will not believe you; not evil, be∣cause they know more already than you would have them. Thus he spoke one day to his Disciples, who took a pride ever and anon to blame themselves: To which he added,
For a Man to confess his Faults, when he is reproved for them, is Modesty. To lay them open to his Friend, is Ingenuity, is Con∣fidence. To reprove himself for them, is Humility. But to go preach them to every body, is, if one have not a great care, a piece of Pride. By this Scantling of Confucius his Philosophy you may judge, My Lord, that Reason is of all Times, and of all Places. Seneca hath spoken nothing better; and had I the esue, as I have a Design to make an intire Collection of the Maxims of our Philosopher, peradventure there might be whatsoever might be requisite to give him a place amongst our Sages of Antiquity. I wish at least, My Lord, that the Pour∣traiture I have offered, may not displease you: were he still alive at this day, as much a Philosopher as he is, I am sure he would be sensible of the Approbation you should afford him. Such a Testimony as yours, always clear, always sincere, must needs do a kind∣ness to the greatest Men. Perhaps, hitherto in France they have not a due Estimate of the Idea all the East have of him, but so soon as you shall please to ho∣nour him with your Esteem, every Body will be per∣swaded that Antiquity hath not flattered him, and that China, in chosing him for a Master and a Do∣ctor, hath done Justice to his Merit. I am with a most profound respect, My Lord, Your Grace's most humble and mst obedient Servant L. J.
LETTER VIII. To my Lord Philipeaux Secretary of State. Of the particular Character of the Wit and Temper of the Chineses. My Lord, IF in this Letter, which I have the honour to write to you, I confine my self to what relates to the particular Character and Genius of the Chineses, it is not but that I know the Obligati∣on wherein I stand, to give you an exact Account of all the other Things we are acquainted with in our Voyages; yet I supposed that I could not more itly begin to discharge this Duty, than by entertain∣ing you, at the first sight, with that which naturally ought to be more pleasant to you; a Captain would more willingly hear a Discourse of Wars, and of the Bravery of the Tartars, and a Courtier of the Gen∣tility of the Chineses; but when a Man has such ex∣traordinary Parts as you have, and is Heir to a Fa∣mily that hath always signalized it self by its insight into Sciences, and penetration in the management of the most important Affairs, I was apt to believe that
one could not treat of a Subject that can be more proper, and more delightful to you. Of all the People of the habitable World, there is not any one that does not stand upon Wit and In∣genuity, and oftentimes the most barbarous prefer themselves before the most polite and accomplisht. The Inhabitants of the Cape of Good Hope, whom we cannot represent to our selves, but with a kind of horrour, whom we can sace give our selves leave to rank amongst Men, do nevertheless look upon the Europeans as Slaves, and look upon the Hollanders as no other than a Company of stupid Fellows, not verst in the method of Government. The People of Sia, whose Physiognomy is well enough known in France, who have, in respect of the Indies, Souls a∣dapted to their Bodies, do usually say, That Hea∣ven, in distributing its Benefits and Natural Quali∣ties, hath granted to the French the Bravery and Science of War; to the English the Art of Naviga∣tion; to the Hollanders a particular knack in Trade∣ing; to the Chineses the Wisdom of Well-governing, but that it hath given Wit to the People of Siam. Had not they intimated it to us, perhaps we should not have made such a Reflection, and it is a Discovery that we owe to them. After all this, we must not wonder if the Chineses, who term all the People of the East blind, have reserved to themselves the Preheminence, and have believed themselves to be, without all dispute, the most intelligent Nation in the World. There is no question to be made but they are an ingenious People, but methinks no Body yet hath been truly acquainted with their Character. To see their Libraries, Universities, the prodigious number of their Doctors, their Observatories, and the care they take to be exact in their Observations, one would be apt to conclude, That this Nation is not
only ingenious, but perfectly well verst in all sorts of Sciences, that they have a vast reach, invention, and a genius for every thing. Nevertheless, albeit for these Four thousand years, they have allowed Recom∣pences to learned and expert Men; and tho' the Fortune of an infinite number of Men depends upon their good Parts, yet have they not had one single Man, of great Atchievements in Speculative Sci∣ence: They have detected all these precious Mines, without ever seeking for them themselves: Enjoying peaceably for so many Ages, the Reputation of the most Knowing Men in the World, because they see no Body more Ignorant than themselves. So that I suppose I may safely aver, without of∣fering them any Injury, That amongst the Qualities wherewith Heaven hath respectively inriched the People of the World, they have not shewed that Spirit of Penetration and Nicety, so necessary to those who addict themselves to the re-search of Na∣ture. That Logick which we have so much impro∣ved, that Geometry that we in France have brought to such a high degree of Perfection, which may pass for the Master-piece of Humane Understanding, will never get admittance into their Academies; and maugre all the Natural Pride that possesses them, they will not stick to confess, That as to these Mat∣ters, the Europeans will in all Humane probability be their Masters. It is true a Philosophy they have; it is likewise true that they lay down certain Principles for the explaining the Composition of Bodies, their Propri∣ety, their Effects. Neither are they altogethe igno∣rant in Anatomy; nay, they grant a Circulation of the Blood and Humours; but all their Notions are so general, confused, and generally so false, that I am afraid in this place to particularize them.
Their Arithmetick is more perfect, altho' they do not make use of the Cypher, as we do, which is notwithstanding a great help. They do not practise the Rules of Arithmetick by Calculati∣on; but they use an Instrument composed of a little Board a Foot and an half long, cross which they score Ten or Twelve little parallel Lines, or Sticks, upon which are strung several moveable Buttons, by putting them together, or by separating them one from another, they reckon, almost as we do, by Counters; but with such great dexterity and easi∣ness, that they will keep pace with a Man, let him read a Book of Accompts never so fast. At the end they find the Operation performed, and want not a certain way to prove it. Their Geometry is very Superficial, it is restrained to a very few Propositions, and to some Problems of Algebra, which they resolve without Elements or Principles, and that only by Induction. They pretend to be the Inventers of Musick, and to have heretofore carried it to its Acme of Perfection: But either they are mistaken, or they have quite lost it; for that they practice at this day is so imperfect, that it does not so much as deserve the Name of Mu∣sick. As for Astronomy, it must be confest that never did People in the World addict themselves so con∣stantly to it. This Science is beholding to them for abundance of Observations; but the History that re∣ports them in general, hath not been careful to de∣scend to particulars, which would be necessary for the reaping all the benefit such Elucubrations seem to promise. However, it hath not been unprofitable to Posterity. We have above Four hundred Obser∣vations, as well of the Eclipses and Comets, as Con∣junctions, that make good their Chronology, and may conduce to the perfecting of ours.
Altho' their Tables were imperfect, yet have they been very serviceable to regulate the Time; but after a certain continuance of years, their A∣stronomers were obliged to make some Amendments therein, because they did not exactly agree with the Heavens till the beginning of this Century, that they attained some Skill in our Astronomy. The Europeans since have every way reformed their Ka∣lender, which Business has made them so famous, and so necessary in that State, that nothing hath so much contributed to settle Religion in that Country, and also to defend it in the various Circumstances of Persecution it hath lain under. If China hath been deficient in excellent Mathe∣maticians; they have at least had perfect Astrolo∣gers; because for the well succeeding in judicious Astrology, it sufficeth to be an able Deceiver, and to have a knack of Lying handsomly, which no Nation can dispute with China. There have been for this many Ages cheating Mountabanks by Pro∣fession, who promise, by the insight they have in the Motion and Influence of the Stars, the Philosophers Stone, and Immortality, they mark in the Almanack every year, the good and bad days for Building, Marriages, for undertaking Journeys and Voyages, and for such like Actions, the Success whereof de∣pends more upon the Wisdom and Discretion of Men, than upon the Influence of the Heavens. The Missionaries fearing least they might ascribe these Fooleries and ridiculous Superstitions to them, because they make them the Authors of the Kalen∣dar, thought themselves obliged to make a publick Declaration how little hand they have in the Mat∣ter, they protested that they absolutely condemned them: And the Emperor, that is not subject to these Weaknesses, was willing they should explain them∣selves, as to that business, for his particular Satisfaction.
Medicine hath not been quite neglected and laid aside; but because they wanted Physicks, or Natural Philosophy and Anatomy, the Principles thereof, they never make any great progress therein; yet must it be confessed that they have acquired a particu∣lar skill in Pulses, that hath made them famous in the World. The Emperor Hoamti composed a Trea∣tise of the same above Four thou∣sand years ago It is just 4392 years.. Ever since that time the Physicians of China have lookt upon that Science as the Foundation of all Medicine. They feel the Pulse after such a manner as would make a Man smile that is not accustomed to it. After they have apply'd their four Fingers along the Artery, and have prest strongly and uniformly the Patients Wrist, they relax their Finger by degrees, till the Blood that was stopt by the pressing, hath retaken its usual Course; then, a moment after, they begin again to press the Arm close, which they continue a considerable time; after that, just like Men that intended to touch the fret of a Musical Instrument, they raise and fall their Fingers successively one after another, pinching softly, or hard, sometimes slower, sometimes faster, till such time as the Artery answers to the Touches which the Physician moves, and till the Strength, Weak∣ness, Disorder, and other Symptoms of the Pulse be manifest. They pretend that there never happens any extra∣ordinary Accident in the Constitution, but does al∣ter the Blood, and consequently causes a different impression upon the Vessels. It is not so much by Reasoning and Arguing that they are instructed in this Point, as by a long Experience, which much better discovers to them all these wonderful Changes than Theory and Speculation.
When they have a long time been attentive to the Voice of Nature, that explains it self by the Beatings of the Pulse, they perfectly and truly per∣ceive those Differences, which otherwise seem im∣perceptible. The Pervigilium and Lethargy, Loss of Appetite, or Desire to Eat, the Head-ach, Weakness of Stomach, Fulness or Emptiness; all these, are the Cause or the Effect of some Distemper in the Mass of Blood. So that its Motion will be at that time less fre∣quent or quicker, fuller or weaker, uniform or irre∣gular. Sometimes there will be an Uudulation or Trembling, caused by the Ebullition of the whole Mass of the Humours; which may be perceived like to a Bell that trembles after it hath been rung; some∣times also the Artery will not beat a stroke, but will swell by little and little. By pressing it, one will moreover be able to perceive several Effects that do not declare themselves to the bare touch; for at that time the Course of the Circulation, which is suspend∣ed or lessened, which begins again immediately after, with more force, will give occasion to judge various∣ly and differently of the Disposition of the Heart, of the Fermentation there performed, of the Quality of the Blood there prepared, of the Obstacles that impede its passages, of Gross and Crude Matter that over-charges it, of the Nature of the Spirits that too much rarifie it, and precipitate Transpiration. The Chinese Physicians pretend to have, by a long Expe∣rience distinguished all these Differences of Pulses, and to have been able to know all the Distempers that are incident thereto; so that they hold the Pa∣tient's Hand a quarter of an hour at least; some∣times the right, sometimes the left, and sometimes both of them at the same time. And after all, as if they were inspired, they play the Prophet; You were never troubled with the Head-ach, say they, but
with an Heaviness that hath made you drowsie; or else you have lost your Appetite, you will recover it again within Three days precisely. This Evening, about Sun∣set, your Head will be freer; your Pulse indicates pain in the Belly, without you have eaten such or such Meat; This Indisposition will last five days, after which it will cease. And so for other Symptoms of the Malady which they find out, or prognosticate pretty exactly, when they are expert in the Science; for, as for others, they are commonly false Prophets. It is not to be questioned, after all these Testi∣monies we have, but that in this respect they have something extraordinary, nay, and even wonderful: However, a Man should always mistrust them, and one cannot be too much upon his guard against them, because they make use of all means imagina∣ble to get themselves secretly instructed concerning the Patient's Condition before they visit them. Nay, they are so cunning (to get themselves Reputation) as to feign a kind of Distemper, which sometimes they themselves procure afterward. A Person told me, that sending for a Physician, and a Chyrurgeon to cure him of a Wound, one of them told him, That the Malady was occasioned by a small Worm that was insinuated into the Flesh, which would infallibly produce a Gangreen, if by some Remedy or other it were not fetch'd out: That he was the only Man in all the Country that had this Arcanum, and would put it in practice for his sake, provided be would not grudge him a considerable Sum of Money. The sick Person promised him he would not; and paid him part of it before-hand. But this cheating Sophister, after divers unprofitable Medicines, entangled at last a little Worm in his Plaister, which he pull'd out an hour after in triumph, as if it came out of the very Wound. His Companion, that gain'd nothing by the management of this Business, afterward detected
it, but it was too late; and the Chyrurgeon com∣forted up himself more easily for the loss of his Re∣putation, than the sick Person for the loss of his Mo∣ney. However the Case may stand as to the Capacity of the Chinese Physicians, yet certain it is, that they Predict the Distemper easier than they Cure it; and Men dye in their hands as they do elsewhere. They prepare their own Remedies, that ordinarily consist of Pills; thereafter as they are prepared, they are either Sudorifick, purge the Blood and Humours, fortifie the Stomach, suppress Vapours; or are Re∣stringent, dispose to Evacuation; but seldom work by Stool. They do not let Blood, nor know the Clyster, but since they have had Correspondence with the Physicians of Macao. They do not disap∣prove the Remedy, but name it The Remedy of the Barbarians. They apply Cupping-Glasses not only upon the Scapulae, but also upon the Belly, to asswage the pain of the Colick. They are in a manner all perswaded, that the majority of Diseases are caused by malignant and corrupted Wind that have slipt into the Muscles, and do ill affect all the Parts of the Body: The most sure means to dissipate them, is to apply, in diffe∣rent places, red hot Needles, or Buttons of Fire: This is their ordinary Remedy. One day a Chinese said to me, seeming to be surprised at it, alluding to Phlebotomy, They treat you in Europe with the Sword, but here they martyr us by fire; this Mode will probably never alter, because Physicians feel not the Mis∣chief they do us, and are no worse paid for tormenting of us, than for curing us. I cannot tell whether or no they might have learnt this violent Remedy of the Indians; or whether the Indians themselves might not have received it from
the Chinese Physicians; but they pretend in the Indies that Fire cures all Diseases: This Perswasion they persisting in, makes every day a great many misera∣ble Persons, whom they Cauterize upon the slightest inconvenience. Yet there be some Maladies that are not curable, but by that means. The People of the Country, but especially the Slaves, are much troubled with a vio∣lent Colik, which the Portuguezé call Mordetchin, oc∣casioned by the indigestion of the Stomach, and ac∣companied, for the most part, with continual Vo∣mitings; the Gripes it produceth are cruel, and the Grief and Angish often deprives them of their Wits. This Grief is infallibly mortal, if they dot not reme∣dy it after the following manner: They lightly ap∣ply an Iron-peal red hot to the Soles of the Feet; if the Patient shews no signs of feeling, they pass no farther, and he is cured: if he be insensible of this first Operation, they lay it on harder, and still con∣tinue to press the Peal, burning unmercifully to the very Bone, without desisting till the Patient com∣plain, which puts an end to the Malady and Remedy. But if the Fire, how violent soever, makes not it self be felt, they despair of healing, and in a short time the Patient dies. Amongst all the China Remedies there are none so much esteemed as Cordials; they are provided with all sorts of them, and very natural ones; for they consist for the most part of Herbs, Leaves, and Roots. Their Simples are numerous; and if the People of the Country may be believed, they have all of them Sovereign and Experienced Virtues. I brought along with me hither near Four hundred, designed in their natural Colours and Figure, according to those the Emperor caused to be painted for his Closet. Father isdlou, one of the six Jesuits his Majesty sent thi∣ther
Anno 1685, is very intent upon the Translation of the Chinese Herbal; wherein are all the Vertues and Qualities of all those Plants explained. This Father, who hath accomplisht himself in the Knowledge of Books, will thereto add particular Reflexions of his own; and I make no question but what he supplys us with thereupon, will enrich our Botany, and satisfie the Ingenious and Curious. Amongst these Simples there are two that I may speak of before hand: The first is the Leaf of Thee is a corrupt word of the Province of Fokien, it must be called Tçha, it is the term of the Mandarin Language. Thee, as they call it in China; they are much divided in their Opinions touching the Properties they ascribe to it. Some do maintain that it hath admira∣ble ones; others, that it is but a phancy and meer whim of the Europeans, that are always doters on Novelties, and put a value upon that which they do not understand: In that, as in all other things where Men do not agree, I believe there is a medium to be taken. In China they are subject neither to Gout, Scia∣tica, nor Stone; and many imagine that Thee pre∣serves against all these Distempers. The Tartars that feed upon raw Flesh, fall sick, and suffer continual Indigestions so soon as ever they give over drinking of it; and that they may have plenty of it, they bargain to furnish the Emperor with almost all the Horses that serve to remount his Cavalry; when a∣ny one is troubled with a Vertigo that over-charges the Brain, he finds himself extreamly relieved so soon as he accustoms himself to Thee. In France there are abundance of People that find it good for the Gra∣vel, Crudities, Head-aches; and there are who pre∣tend to have been cured of the Gout by it, almost miraculously; so quick and sensible has been its effect. All this proves that Thee is no Chimera, and Con∣ceit.
Nay, some after drinking of it sleep the better, which argues that it is not proper to suppress Fumes: Some there be who never take it after Meals, with∣out experiencing mischievous Effects; their Digesti∣on is interrupted and disturbed; and they find along time after Crudities, and a troublesome Repletion. Others find no benefit by it neither in Gout nor Scia∣tica. A great many say that it dries, makes lean, and that it obstructs; and that if there be any good qualities in it, the most part of other leaves would in a manner produce the same effect. These Experi∣ments evince that its Virtue is not so Universal as Peo∣ple imagine. So that in my opinion, one should speak moderate∣ly of it, both as to its good and bad qualities. Perhaps warm Water alone is a good Medicine against Distem∣pers, the cure of which they attribute to Thee: And there are several People that are exempt from many Inconveniencies because they are used to drink warm Liquors. Nevertheless it is certain that Thee is of a corosive nature, for it attenuates hard Victuals where∣with it is boiled, and consequently is proper for digesti∣on, that is to say for dissolution. That very thing proves that it resists Obstructions, and that Liquors impreg∣nated with its Particles or Salts, carry off, and more easily separate all that which adheres to the Tunicks of the Vessels. This very quality is proper to consume superfluous Humours, to put into motion those that stagnate and corrupt, to evacuate others, that cause the Gout and Sciatica: So that Thee, with caution, is a very good Remedy, altho' it be not so effectual, nor universal, but that the temperament of certain Persons, the height of the Distemper, together with certain oc∣cult Dispositions, may many times retard the Effect, or even frustrate its Virtue. To use it with benefit, it is requisite to know it, for there is more than one sort of it. That of the Pro∣vince
of Chensi is course, harsh, and unpleasant. The Tartars drink of it: There is necessary to them a stronger Menstruum than to the Chineses, by reason of the crude Flesh they feed on. It is exceeding cheap in the Country, and a pound of it will cost Three pence. In this same Province there is found a par∣ticular Species of it, more resembling Moss, than the Leaves of a Tree; and they pretend that the oldest is of excellent use in Acute Distempers. They like∣wise administer to sick People a third sort, whose Leaves are very long and thick, and its goodness in∣creases in proportion to its being kept; but that is not the Thee in use. That which they commonly drink in China, hath no particular Name, because it is ▪ gather'd hand over head in different Territories and Soils: It is good, the Infusion is reddish, the Taste faint and somewhat bit∣ter: The People use it indifferently at all hours of the day, and it is their most usual drink. But Persons of Quality use two other kinds that are in request in China. The first is called Thee Soum∣lo; it is the name of the Place where it is gathered; the Leaves are somewhat long, the Infusion clear and green when it is fresh, the Taste pleasant; it smells, as they say in France, a little of Violets, but this Taste is not natural; and the Chineses have often assured me, that to be good, it ought to have no Taste at all. This is that they commonly present at Visits; but it is exceeding corosive; perhaps the Su∣gar they mix with it here corrects its Acrimony; but in China, where it is drunk pure, too great a use of it would be apt to spoil the Stomach. The second kind is called Thee Voiii; the Leaves that are little, and inclining to black, tinge the Wa∣ter with a yellow Colour. The Taste is delicious, and the weakest Stomach agrees with it at all times. In winter it is to be used temperately, but in Summer
one cannot drink too much. It is especially good in Sweating, after Travelling, Running, or any other violent Exercise. They give of it also to sick Peo∣ple; and those who have any Care of their Health, drink no other. When I was at Siam, I heard them often talk of the Flower of Thee, of Imperial Tee, and of several other sorts of Thee, the price of which was yet more extraordinary than the Properties they ascribe to it: but in China I heard no such thing. Generally speaking, that the Thee may excel, it ought to be gathered early, when the Leaves are yet small, tender and juicy. They begin commonly to gather it in the Months of March and April, accord∣ing as the Season is forward; they afterward expose them to the steam of boiling Water to soften them again; so soon as they are penetrated by it, they draw them over Copper-plates kept on the fire, which dries them by degrees, till they grow brown, and rowl up of themselves in that manner we see them. If the Chineses were not such great Cheats, their Thee would be better; but they oftentimes mix other Herbs with it, to swell the size at a small charge, and so get more Money by it: So that it is a rare thing to meet with any purely without mixture. It commonly grows in Valleys, and at the foot of Mountains; te choicest grows in stony Soils; that which is planted in light Grounds holds the second rank. The least of all is found in yellow Earth; but in what place soever it is cultivated, are must be taken to expose it to the South; it gets more strength by that, and bears Three years after being sowen. Is Root resembles that of a Peach Tree, and its Flowers resemble white wild Roses. The Trees grow of all sizes, from two foot to an hundred, and some are to be met with that two Men can scarce grasp in their Arms; this is what the Chinese Herbal relates. But this is what I have seen.
Entring upon the Province of Fokien, they first made me observe Thee upon the declining of a little Hill; it was not above five or six foot high, several Stalks, each of which was an inch thick, joyned to∣gether, and divided at the top into a many small Branches, composed a kind of Cluster, much what like our Myrtle. The Trunk, tho' seemingly dry, yet bore very green Branches and Leaves. These Leaves were drawn out in length at the point, pretty strait, an inch, or an inch and an half long, and in∣dented in their whole Circumference. The oldest seemed somewhat white without, they were hard, brittle, and bitter. The new ones, on the contrary, were soft, plyable, reddish, smooth, transparent, and pretty sweet to the Taste, especially after they had been a little chewed. It being the Month of September, I found three sorts of Fruit. In the new Branches there were lit∣tle slimy Pease, green without, and full of yellow Grains within. In others, the Fruit is as big as Beans, but of different Figures; some round, containing a Pea; others drawn out in length, that contained two; some others of a Triangular Figure, bore three, very like to those that bear the Tallow-grain, so famous in China. The first Membrane or Skin wherewith these Grains are infolded, is green, very thick, and somewhat even. The second is white, and thinner; under which a third very fine Pellicle covers a kind of Gland, or small Nt perfectly round, that sticks to the Bark by a little Fibre, from whence it derives its Nourishment. When this Fruit is young, it hath bitterness in it; but a day or two after it has been gathered, it withers, grows long, and yellow, and wrinkles even like an old Hazel Nut; at length it be∣comes unctious and very bitter. Besides that, I found a third sort of hard, old Fruits, the first Skin of which, between open and shut, shewed within a hard
bark, brittle, and altogether resembling that of a Chesnut. After I had broken it, scarce did I find any sign of Fruit, so dry and flat was it grown. In some others the same Fruit was pulverized; in others was found a little Nut quite dried up, and covered with its first Pellicle. Amongst these Fruits, a great number of them have no Germ or Bud, which they call Females; those that have any may be sowen, and produce Trees: but the Chineses do commonly make use of Graffs to plant. The better to understand the na∣ture of this Tree, I had the Curiosity to taste the Bark of the Trunk and Branches. I chewed likewise some of the Wood and Fibres; both of them seem∣ed to me not to have any bitterness, nay, at least, I found a pretty taste of Liquorish, but scarce discern∣able, and is not discovered till after making some re∣flexion upon it. Altho' this particular Account may displease those that are not concerned in the Know∣ledge of Plants, yet I am sure that the more Curi∣ous could wish a more Specifical Account, as the de∣licate mixture of Colours in the Flower, the orderly disposition of their Fibres, the conformation of the small Branches and Roots, and a thousand other Par∣ticulars relating to the Anatomy of them; but that is the business of time and leisure: I had but a quar∣ter of an hour to examine the Tree of which I have the honour to write to you. There is in China another Simple much less com∣mon than Thee, and upon that very account more valued, which they call Gin-sem: Gin signifies a Man, and Sem a Plant, or Simple, as much as to say, The Humane Simple, the Simple that resembles a Man. Those who till this time have given another constru∣ction to these words are excusable, because they do not understand the Emphasis of the Chinese Chara∣cters, which do alone contain the true signification
of terms: The Learned give it abundance of o∣ther Names in their Writings, that sufficiently de∣clare how much they set by it; as the Spirituous Sim∣ple, the pure Spirit of the Earth, the Fat of the Sea, the Panacea, and the Remedy that dispenses Immor∣tality, and several others of that Nature. It is a Root as thick as half the little finger, and as long again. It is divided into two Branches, which makes a Figure pretty like a Man with his two Legs; its Colour inclines to yellow, and when it is kept any time it grows wrinkled, and dry'd like Wood; the Leaves it shoots forth are little, and terminate in a point; the Branches are black, the Flower vio∣let, and the Stalk covered with hair; they say that it produces but one of them; that this Stalk produces three Branches, and that each Branch bears the Leaves by fours and fives; it grows in the shade, in a moist Soil, yet so slowly, that it comes not to per∣fection till after a long term of years. It is com∣monly found under a Tree called Kia-chu, little dif∣fering from the Sycomore. Altho' they fetch it from several places, yet the best came heretofore from Pet∣cij. That which is at this day in use is taken in Leau∣tom, a Province depending upon China, and situate in the Oriental Tartary. Of all Cordials, according to the Chineses opinion, there are none comparable to Gin-sem; it is sweet and delightful, altho' there be in it a little smack of bitterness: Its effects are marvellous; it purifies the Blood, fortifies the Stomach, adds motion to a lan∣guid Pulse, excites the Natural Heat, and withal aug∣ments the Radical Moisture. Physicians never know how to make an end when they specifie its Virtues, and have whole Volumes of its different uses. I have a Collection of their Receipts that I should report intire in this place, if I were not afraid to be tedi∣ous, and trespass upon your Patience. I may print
them at last, together with a great many Treatises relating to Physick or Medicine of the Chineses. I shall only add, to what I have but now spoken, the usual Course they take in Distempers attended with Faintness and Swowning, whether it proceeds from some Accident, or from old Age. Take a Dram of this Root, (you must begin with a little Dose, and may increase it afterward, accord∣ing to the Effect the former Doses shall produce) dry it before the fire in a Paper, or infuse it in Wine, till it be imbued and penetrated by it; then cut it in little pieces with your Teeth (and not with a Knife, Iron diminishing its Virtue) and when it is calcined, take the Powder in form of a Bolus, in warm Water or Wine, according as your Distemper will permit. This will be an excellent Cordial, and by continuing it you will find your self sensibly fortified. Take also the same quantity of Gin-sem, or more if you be extream weak, and when you have divi∣ded it into little pieces, infuse it in half a Glass full of boiling Water, or else you may boil it with the Water it self; the Water, if you drink it, will have the same effect. The Root may serve a second time, but it abates of its force. They likewise make Broths of it, Electuaries, Lozenges, and Syrups, which are excellent Remedies for all sorts of Distempers. They have also another Root which the Portuguese in the Indies call Pao-China, which is an excellent Su∣dorifick, very proper to purge the Humours and cor∣rupted Blood; but the Description of all these Sim∣ples would make me deviate too much, and is not proper for such a short Letter as this. The Physicians of China do not employ Apothe∣caries for the Composition of their Medicines, they prescribe and give them at the same time themselves.
Sometimes in the Patients Chamber, when it may be conveniently done; and sometimes in their own Houses. They think it strange the Europeans should act otherwise, and that they commit the principal point of the Cure to Men that are not concerned in curing them; and are not solicitous about the good∣ness of the Drugs, provided they get rid of them to their advantage. But there is another disorder in China a great deal more dangerous than that they lay to our charge; and that is, That there, every Body is admitted to practise Physick, like other Mechanick Arts, without Examination or Taking their Degrees. So that a pitiful Fellow, that knows not where to put his Head, studies perhaps a Physick Book two or three Months, and sets up for a Doctor cum privilegio at the Expence of the Patient's Life, whom he choos∣eth to kill, rather than be forced to starve himself for lack of Employment. The Vulgar, tho' ill served by them, take a strong phansy for these Pickpockets; and they would reprove themselves for their Cove∣tousness, when they are indisposed, if they did not dye, or cause their Relations to dye some other way, than by the way of Nature. Yet some of them you shall have confess their Fault when it is too late; and I remember that an Inhabitant of the City of Soutcheou, losing his Daugh∣ter more through the Ignorance of the Physician, than by the Power of the Disease, was so enraged, that he caused a Paper to be printed, wherein the bad Conduct of the pretended Doctor was laid open with several Reflections tending to decry him; he affixt Copies of it in all the publick Places, and caused of them to be distributed to the principal Houses of the City. This Revenge, or, as he termed it, this Zeal for the Publick Good, had the Effect he pro∣mised himself. The Physician lost, togher with his Reputation, all his Practice, and was edc'd o
so great an Extremity, that he quickly found himself not in a Condition to kill any Body. The Chineses that are mean Proficients in Sciences, succeed much better in Ats; and tho' they have not brought them to that degree of Perfection we see thm in Europe, yet know they in this respect not only what is necessary for the common use of Life, but also whatever may contribute to Conve∣nience, Neatness, Commerce, and even to well-regulated Magnificence: They would have got a great deal farther, had not the form of Govern∣ment, that hath prescribed Bounds to the Expences of private Persons, put a stop to them. The Work∣men are extraordinary industrious, and if they be not so good at invention as we, yet do they easily comprehend our Inventions, and imitate it so and so. There is made in several places of the Empire Glass, Watches, Pistols, Bombs, and a great company of Pieces of Workmanship that they may thank us for; but they have had time out of mind Gun-powder, Printing, and the Use of the Compass, which are Novel Arts in Europe, for which perhaps we are ob∣liged to them. They divide the Compass in 24 parts only, where∣as we describe 32; they evermore imagined that the Needle did every where shew the true place of the Pole, and by divers Experiments which we made before them, they have observed some Variation and Declension: The Loadstone is found almost in every Province; it comes also to them from Iapan: but the grand use they make of it is in Physick; 'tis bought by weight, and the best are not sold for a∣bove Eight pence or Ten pence an Ounce. I have brought one with me an Inch and an half thick, which tho' indifferently guarded, takes up neverthe∣less Eleven pound weight; it will raise Fourteen or Fifteen when it is right fixt. In fine, they are very
dexterous in cutting them; for in France, tho' they bring them into all Figures, yet it is not without great labour and cost. They cut mine in Nankin in less than two hours; the Engine they make use of to that purpose is a plain one; and if our Work∣men would use it, they would abridge their Labour. I supposed, Sir, that you would not be unwilling to see the Figure of it, of which see here the Explana∣tion. It is composed of two Jaumbs three or four foot high, Arch-like, with two Strings like a Setting-iron, and parted by a Board or Shingle, which goes cross to it, and closed by a Mortise in the Lee-board. On the head of the Jaumbs is set flat a little Rolling-pin or Cylinder, of an Inch and an half diameter, which can turn circularly by means of a string rol∣led in the middle, whose two ends hanging are tied to a step, on the which the Work man sets his foot. At one of the Extremities of the Cylinder a flat piece of Iron is fastned with Mastick by its Center, that piece of Iron is very thin, very round, and very sharp all about; it is 8 Inches diameter, and moves with a great swiftness, according as the Steps are set high or low. In the mean time the Workman presents the Loadstone in one hand, and in the other the Mud made of a very fine Sand, which cools the Iron, and serves to cut the Stone; but because the Iron, in going thorow the Sand, throws it about with violence, which might blind the Workman, care is taken to place just un∣der it a little Blead, turned in the mannr of a half Circle, which receiveth it and defends the Work∣man. Navigation is another Point that shews the address of the Chineses; we have not always been in Europe such able and adventurous Sailors as we are at pre∣sent; the Ancients were not so forward to venture
themselves upon the Seas, where it is necessary to lose the sight of Land for a long time together. The danger of being mistaken in their Calculation (for they had not then the use of the Compass) made all Pilots circumspect and wary. There are some who pretend that the Chineses, a long time before the Birth of our Saviour Christ, had sailed all the Seas of India, and discovered the Cape of Good Hope: However it be, it is most cer∣tain that from all Antiquity they had always stout Ships; and albeit they have not perfected the Art of Navigation, no more than they have done the Sci∣ences, yet did they understand much more of it than the Greeks and Romans; and at this day they sail as securely as the Portuguese. These Vessels are like ours of all Rates, but the Model is not so fine; they are all flat-bottom'd; the Fore-castle is cut short without a Stem, the Stern o∣pen in the middle to the end, that the Rudder, which they shut up as in a Chamber, may be defended on the sides from the Waves: This Rudder, much lon∣ger than ours, is strongly tied to the Stern-post by two Cables that pass under the whole length of the Vessel to the sore-part, two other such like Cables hold it up, and facilitate the hoisting or lowering it, as occasion serves; the Bar is as long as is necessary for the guiding it; the Seamen at the Helm are also assisted by Ropes fastened to the Larboard and Star∣board, and rolled upon the extremity of the Bar they hold in their hand, which they fasten or slacken as they see occasion, to thrust or stop the Helm. The Misen-mast is quite toward the fore-part, the Main-mast is not far from the place where we place our Misnes. A Cord that goes from Starboard to Laboard, according as the Wind chops about, serves them for a Stay and Shrowds; the Bolsprit, which is
very weak, is at the Larboard, at a considerable di∣stance from the middle, where we are wont to place them. The Round-tops they use are very short, but the Main-mast is of a prodigious height and thickness; it is strongly seized, as far as the upper part of the Deck, by two side Beams that strengthen it wonder∣fully, yea, and deprive it of playing, which we leave to ours, because it serves to give the Vessel Air, and to quicken its motion. The low Sails are of very thick Matt, trimm'd up with Laths and long Poles to strengthen them, from two foot to two foot, fastened to the whole length of the Masts by several little loops; they are not fastened in the middle, but have three quarters of their breadth loose, that they may be accommodaed to the Wind, and readily tackt about as occasion serves. A great many small Cords, hanging at the sides of the Sail, where they are placed at several distan∣ces from the Sail-yard to the bottom are gather∣ed up and keep tight the whole length of the Matt, and further the motion when the Ships Course is to be changed. As for the Okam to calk withal, they do not use melted Pitch and Tar, but a Composition made of Lime and Oil, or rather of a particular Gum with Flax of rasped Bambou; this Matter is not subject to the Accidents of Fire, and the Okam is so good, that the Vessel seldom or never Leaks, neither do they ever use the Pump, a Well or two serves to keep the Keel dry. In your huge Vessels the Anchors are of Iron; in the middle sort they are of an hard, heavy Wood, and they only strengthen the ends; but I have observed that that was not sufficient: a Spring-tide, or a fresh Gale of Wind, runs the Ship adrift, when it is not well anchored: And to spare the cost of an Iron Anchor, they often run the risk to be cast
away. As for the Cables they are of Flax of Coco, Canvas, or Rotin. The Rotin is a kind of long Cane which they make into Tresses like little Cords, the Twists of them are usually flat, and are stronger then all the other; but because they easily snap un∣der Water when they come to touch upon any Rock, they do not much use them but only upon Rivers, for to tow against the Tide. The Chineses have in their Vessels a Captain, as we have; but his chief business is to keep the Crew in awe, and victual them; the Pilot marks out the Rhumb, and places the Compass. When they can discover no Land, or when they do not ken it, those upon duty at the Helm, steer as they please; so soon as they come within ken of the Coast, or enter into the Port, the Mariners are so vigilant, and so intent upon their duty, that they don't ex∣pect to be commanded. You see, My Lord, by what I have said, that we far surpass the Chineses at Sea in the Art of Navigati∣on; but it must be confest that upon Rivers and Channels, they have a particular address that we are not Masters of; they there mannage with a few Ma∣riners, huge Barks as big as our Ships; and there is such a great number of them in all the Southern Pro∣vinces, that they always keep Nine thousand, nine hundred, ninety nine ready equipped amongst those that are designed for the Service of the Emperor.Kiou-tchien, Kiou-pé, Kiou-ché, Kiou. After this man∣ner do the People speak; for this way of expressing themselves hath a greater Emphasis in their Lan∣guage, and seem to denote something more, than if they should say in one word, that there are Ten thousand of them; it is a hard matter to convince them of an untruth; for really there is such a pro∣digious number of them, that they cannot be reckoned;
they are all flat bottom'd, their Sails and Masts are not much different from those I but just now descri∣bed; but the Model is not the same. The Body of the Vessel, that is alike broad from Prow to Poop, hath two Wells; upon the first, or upon the Deck, they build from one end to another, little Cabins, that are raised above the sides Seven or Eight foot, or thereabouts; they are painted within and without, varnisht, gilded, and all over so neat and handsome, that they are capable of making the longest Voyages too short, tho' some they take that last four or five Months without intermission; for they lodge, they diet, and are always aboard these noble Barks; and when a good company of Mandarins go together (which pretty often happens) there is no place where they pass the time away more delightfully. They visit one another almost every day without Comple∣ment; they Play, they Treat one another mutual∣ly, as if they were all of a Family. This Society seems so much the more acceptable to them, because it is not forced, and constrained, as in other places, by the Incumbrances of nice Ceremonies, nor sub∣ject to Suspicions that such a free Correspondence would not fail to soment, if they behaved themselves so in the Cities. Notwithstanding these Barks be extraordinary big, and tho' they always be either under Sail, or tugg'd along by Ropes, yet do they by times make use of Oars, when they are upon great Rivers, or cross Lakes. As for ordinary Barks, they do not row them after the European manner; but they fasten a kind of a long Oar to the Poup, nearer one side of the Bark than to the other, and sometimes another like it to the Prow, that they make use of as the Fish does of its Tail, thrusting it out, and pulling it to them a∣gain, without ever lifing it above Water. This Work produces a continuing rolling in the Bark;
but it hath this advantage, that the Motion is ne∣ver interrupted, whereas the Time and Effort that we employ to lif up our Oars is lost, and signifies no∣thing. The knack the Chineses have to Sail upon Tor∣rents is somewhat wonderful and incredible: They in a manner force Nature, and make a Voyage with∣out any dread, which other People dare not so much as look upon without being seized with some Ap∣prehension. I speak not of those Cataracts they as∣cend by meer strength of Arm, to pass from one Canal to another, which in some Relations are cal∣led Sluices; but of certain Rivers that flow, or ra∣ther run headlong quite cross abundance of Rocks, for the space of Three or Fourscore Leagues. Had I not been upon these perillous Torrents my self, I should have much ado to believe, upon anothers re∣port, what I my self have seen. It is a rashness for Travellers to expose themselves, if they have been but never so little informed of it; and a kind of madness in Sailors to pass their Life in a Trade, wherein they are every moment in danger of being destroy'd. These Torrents whereof I speak, which the Peo∣ple of the Country call Chan, are met with in several places of the Empire; many of them may be seen when one Travels from Nam-tchamfou, the Capital City of Kiam-si to Canton. The first time I went that way with Father Fontany, we were hurried a∣way with that Rapidity, that all the Endeavours of our Mariners could not overcome, our Bark, aban∣doned to the Torent, was turn'd round like a Whirle∣gigg for a long time, amongst the sinuosities and windings that the Course of the Water formed; and at last dasht upon a Rock even with the Water, with that violence, that the Rudder, of the thickness of a good Beam, broke like a piece of Glass, and the
whole Body of it was carried by the force of the Currant upon the Rock, where it remained immo∣veable: If instead of touching at the Stern, it had hit sideways, we had been infallibly lost; but those are ot the most dangerous places. In the Province of Fokien, whether one comes from Canton, or Hamt-cheou, one is, during Eight or Ten days, in continual danger of perishing. The Cataracts are continual, always broken by a Thou∣sand Points of Rocks, that scarce leave breadth e∣nough for the passage of the Bak; there are no∣thing but Turnings and Windings, nothing but Cas∣cades and contrary Currants, that dash one against another, and hurry the Boat along like an Arrow out of a Bow; you are always within Two foot of Shelves, which you avoid only to fall foul upon a∣nother, and from that to a third; if the Pilot by an address, not sufficiently to be admired, does not escape from Shipwrack that threatens him every mo∣ment. There are none in all the World besides the Chi∣neses capable of undertaking such like Voyages, or so much concerned or interessed, as not to be discou∣raged, maugre all the Accidents that befal them, for there passes not a day that is not memorable for Shipwracks; nay, and I wonder all Barks do not perish. Sometimes a Man is so fortunate as to split in a place not far distant from the shoar, as I chan∣ced twice to do, then indeed one escapes by swim∣ming, provided one has strength enough to struggle out of the Torrent, which is usually very strait. O∣ther times the Barks run adrit, and in a moment is up∣on the Rocks, where it remains aground with the Pas∣sengers; but sometimes it happens, especially in some more rapid Vortices, that the Vessel is in pieces, and the Crew buried before one has time to know where they are. Sometimes also when one descends the Cas∣cades
formed by the River, that altogether runs head∣long, the Boats by falling all on sudden, plunge into the Water at the Prow, without being able to rise again, and disappear in a trice. In a word, these Voyages are so dangerous, that in more then Twelve thousand Leagues that I have Sail'd upon the most tempestuous Seas in the World, I don't believe I ever run through so many Dangers for Ten years, as I have done in Ten days upon these Torrents. The Barks they make use of are built of a very thin, light Timber, which makes it more fit to fol∣low all the impressions one has a mind to give them. They divide them into five or six Apartments sepa∣rated by good Partitions, so that when they touch at any place, upon any point of a Rock, only one part of the Boat is full, whilst the other remains dry, and affords time to stop the hole the Water has made. For to moderate the Rapidity of the Motion, in places where the Water is not too deep, six Seamen, three on each side, hold a long Spret or Pole thrust to the bottom, wherewith they resist the Currant, yet slackning by little and little, by the help of a small Rope made fast at one end to the Boat, and twi∣ned at the other round the Pole, that slips but very hardly, and by a continual rubbing, slackens the motion of the Bark, which, without this Caution, would be driven with too much Rapidity: insomuch that when the Torrent is even, and uniform, how precipitous soever its Course be, you float with the same slowness, as one does upon the calmest Canal; but when it winds in and out, this Caution is to no purpose; then indeed they have recourse to a double Rudder, made in fashion of an Oar, of forty or fif∣ty foot long, one whereof is at the Prow, and the other at the Poup. In the plying of these two great Oars consists all the Skill of the Sailors, and Safety of the Bark; the reciprocal Jerks and cunning Shakes
they give it, to drive it on, or to turn it right as they would have it, to fall just into the Stream of the Wa∣ter, to shun one Rock, without dashing on another, to cut a Currant, or pursue the fall of Water, with∣out running head-long with it, whirles it about a Thousand different ways: It is not a Navigation, it is a Manege; for there is never a managed Horse that labours with more fury under the hand of a Master of an Academy, then these Boats do in the hands of these Chinese Mariners: So that when they chance to be cast away, it is not so much for want of Skill as Strength; and whereas they carry not above eight Men, if they would take fifteen, all the Violence of the Torrents would not be capable to carry them a∣way. But it is a thing common enough in the World, and especially in China, rather to hazard a Man's Life, and run the risk to lose all he has, then to be at indifferent Charges one thinks not absolutely necessary. Seeing I am speaking of the Address and Skill of the Chineses upon Rivers, I cannot forbear, My Lord, letting you observe what they are Masters of in mat∣ter of Fishing, besides the Line, Nets, and the or∣dinary Instruments we make use of in Europe, which they employ as well as we, they have moreover two ways of catching Fish, that seem to me very singular, and odd: The first is practised in the Night, when it is Moon-shine; they have two very long, strait Boats, upon the sides of which they Nail from one end to the other, a Board about two foot broad, up∣on which they have rub'd white Varnish, very smooth and shining; this Plank is inclined outward, and al∣most toucheth the Surface of the Water: That it may serve their turn, it is requisite to turn it towards the Moon-shine, to the end that the Reflexion of the Moon may increase its brightness, the Fish playing and sporting, and mistaking the Colour of the Plank,
for that of the Water, jerk out that way, and tumble before they are aware, either upon the Plank, or in∣to the Boat, so that the Fisher-man, almost without taking any pains, hath in a little time his small Bark quite full. The second manner of Fishing is yet more plea∣sant: They breed, in divers Provinces, Cormorants, and they order and mannage them as we do Dogs, or even as we do Hawks for the Game; one Fisher∣man can very easily look after an hundred; he keeps them perched upon the sides of his Boat, quiet, and waiting patiently for orders, till they are come at the place designed for fishing in; then, at the very first signal that is given them, each takes its flight, and flies toward the way that is assigned it. 'Tis a very pleasant thing to behold how they divide amongst them the whole breadth of the River, or of the Lake; they seek up and down, they dive, and come, and go upon the Water an hundred times, till they have spy'd their Prey; then do they seize it with their Bek, and immediately bring it to their Ma∣ster. When the Fish is too big, they help one ano∣ther interchangeably, one takes it by the Tail, another by the Head, and go after that manner in company to the Boat, where they hold out long Oars to them; there they perch themselves with their Fish, which they part not with till they go seek for another. When they are weary, they let them rest a while; but give them nothing to eat till the Fishing is over; du∣ring which time their Throat is tied with a small Cord, for fear they should swallow the little Fish, and may have no list to work longer. I forbear speaking, My Lord, of their dexterity and neatness in the Manufactures of Silk, Earthen Ware, Vernish, Architecture: These Matters have been exhausted in publick Relations. It is well known that the Silk-Stuffs of China are not only
handsome, but good and serviceable; that their Por∣celain is of a neatness and matter unimitable; that their Vernish, and the use they make of it upon their Cabinets, Tables, Skreens, have procured them the admiration of all Europe. As for their Architecture, altho' they have an inclination far different from ours, and coming short of that Perfection that we suppose our selves arrived to; yet must it be confest however, that there are some pieces of Sculpture in China perfectly well wrought, and the Publick Edi∣fices, as Gates of great Cities, Towers, and Bridges, have something in them most noble and beautiful. In fine, the Chineses in point of Arts are dexterous, laborious, curious to find out the Inventions and Con∣trivances of other Nations, and very apt to imitate them. But what is peculiar to them, is, that in all their Works they perform with a very few Instru∣ments and plain Engines, what our Artificers in Europe do not execute with almost an infinite number of Utensils. The better to let the Character of their Ingenui∣ty be known, I shall add, That there is no Nation under the Sun, that is more fit for Commerce and Traffick, and understand them better: One can hardly believe how far their Tricks and Craftiness proceeds when they are to insinuate into Mens Af∣fections, manage a fair Opportunity, or improve the Overtures that are offered: The desire of getting torments them continually, and makes them disco∣ver a thousand ways of gaining, that would not na∣turally come into their Head: Every thing serves their turn, every thing is precious to the Chinese, be∣cause there is nothing but they know how to im∣prove. They undertake the most difficult Voyages, for the least hopes of gain, and that's the reason why all things are in motion; in the Streets, upon the Roads, upon the Rivers, and all along the Coasts
of Maritime Towns, you shall see a world of Tra∣vellers: The infinite Trade and Commerce that is carried on every where, is the Soul of the People, and the primum mobile of all their Actions. If they would accompany Labour and natural In∣dustry with a little more honesty, especially in re∣spect of Strangers, nothing could be wanting to them that might contribute to the making of able, com∣pleat Merchants; but their essential quality is to de∣ceive and cousin, when it lyes in their power; some of them do not conceal it, but boast of it: I have heard of some so brazen fac'd, that when they have been taken in the Fact, to excuse themselves by their Simplicity, say, You see that I do not understand cun∣ningness; you know more of it than I; but perhaps I shall be more lucky, or more subtle another time. They falsifie almost every thing they vend, when things are in a condition to be falsified. They say particularly, that they counterfeit Gammons of Bacon so artificially, that many times a Man is mistaken in them; and when they have boil'd them a long time, they find nothing, when they come to eat them, but a huge piece of Wood under an Hogs-skin. It is certain a Stranger will be always cheated, if he buy alone, let him take what care he will; he should employ a trusty Chinese, who is acquainted with the Country, who knows all the Tricks; and indeed you will be very happy, if he that buys, and he that sells, do not collogue together to your Cost, and go snips in the profit. When one lends them any thing, he must have Sureties; for as for their word, those who know them cannot rely upon it. Some of them have been observed to borrow a very small Sum, promising to restore the Principal with vast Interest, which they punctually performed upon the day appointed, to gain themselves the Reputation of down-right honest
Men. After that they demanded a greater Sum, which they repay also without failing. At length, they continued this Commerce whole years together, till such time as engaging to Credit them, and lend them considerable Sums, they carried their Money far enough off, and disappeared for ever. When they would obtain a Favour, they do not discover themselves all on the sudden; there are some who prepare for it whole years before-hand. They make presents to the Master, and to all those of the Houshold; they seem so much the more disinteressed, and to have no design, as they mistrust Peoples good will; but when one has accepted their Toys, which they thought they might do without fearing any bad Consequence, then they begin to shew their design; and they have already so well play'd their Game, that they seldom receive a Repulse for what they de∣mand. This Subtilty of Deceiving is still more extraordi∣nary in Thieves and Robbers: They break through the thickest Walls, burn Gates, and make great holes in them by the help of a certain Engine which fires the Wood without any flame. They penitrate into the most private Recesses, without ever being per∣ceiv'd; and when People awake in the Morning, they are amazed to find their Bed without Curtains and Coverlets, their Chamber unfurnisht, Tables, Cabinets, Coffers, Plate, all is marcht off, without so much sometimes as perceiving any foot-steps of the Thieves, but the Hole in the Wall at which they went out with all the Moveables of the House. When they are apprehended, if they be armed, they suffer death; but now if they be not in a con∣dition to wound, or kill any body, they inflict some other Corporal Punishment, according to the quali∣ty of the Goods so stoll'n; for if they have taken no∣thing, the Judges are satisfied to punish them with
thirty or forty blows with a Cudgel. They say these Felons have a certain Drug, the Fume of which ex∣treamly stupifies, and casts into a deep sleep, which affords them time and opportunity to do their Job; and they are so perswaded of that Truth, that Tra∣vellers cause a Basin of cold Water to be brought in to their Chamber in the Inn, which is a sure Reme∣dy to frustrate the power or charm of the Fume. Not but that after all one may meet with honesy and disinterest amongst the Chineses; for, (not to speak of Christians, in whom Religion hath re∣formed the evil Inclinations of Nature) I do remem∣ber that at my first arrival into China with my Com∣panions, Strangers, unknown, exposed to the Ava∣rice of the Mandarins, not one of them did us the least wrong; and what appeared yet more extraor∣dinary was, That offering a Present to a Commissi∣oner of the Custom-house, People that are usually greedy, and attentive to the improvement of such sort of occasions, he protested, notwithstanding all our earnest Intreaties, that he would never take any thing of any Body so long as he was in his Office; but if one day he should chance to be in another Condition, he would with all his heart receive from us some European Curiosity. After all, these are rare Examples, and the same is not the Character of the Natives. As the Chineses have a Genius for Com∣merce, so have they likewise for Affairs of State; their Wit has been a long time adapted to Politicks, and negotiating Affairs, not with Foreigners, whom they look upon as Barbarians, and their Subects, whom the ancient haughtiness of the Empire forbids to correspond with, but amongst themselves, according as they are bound by Interest, or, as their Fortune ingages them therein. There is Policy amongst Princes, and other Grandees of the Realm, as much as in any
Court of Europe; They continually apply themselves to know the Gusto, Inclinations, Humours, and De∣signs one of another; and they study it so much the more, as they are more reserved, and dissembling themselves, they keep a fair Correspondence with e∣very Body, nay, and even observe a Decorum with their Enemies. As the way of Challenging a Duel is not allowed in the State, all their Revenge is reasonable and se∣cret; one cannot imagine by how many Shifts and Contrivances they endeavour to destroy one another, without making any shew of having any such thing in their head. They are not only Dissemblers, but patient, even to insensibleness, in expecting a fa∣vourable Moment to declare themselves, and to strike home. But as they observe all sorts of measures with their Enemies, the better to lull them asleep, so they sometimes huff their best Friends, for fear least a too strict Bond of Friendship should involve them in some unlucky business. So far are they from that barba∣rous Friendship that inclines us in Europe to engage those in our private Quarrels that are most devoted to us, and to expose, without any advantage, a Life that we should defend even by the loss of our own. The Lords of the Court, the Vice-Roys of Pro∣vinces, and Generals of Armies, are in perpetual motion, to preserve or acquire the principal Places of the State; they carry on their business by Money, Favour, and by intrigue: And since the Laws give nothing, either to Solicitation, Riches, or Ambition of private Persons, but solely to Merit, the most subtle seem always most moderate, whilst in the mean time, by an hundred hidden Springs, they endeavour to obtain the choice and esteem of the Emperor. In short, if some Neighbours, more potent, and bet∣ter
Head-pieces than the Tartars could have been able to have accustom'd them to make Treaties, as the dif∣ferent People of Europe do amongst themselves, I am perswaded that Policy and Negotiations would have proved more powerful to defend them from their E∣nemies, then that prodigious Wall, of which they endeavoured to make a Bulwark, and all those nume∣rous Armies, wherewith they have hitherto, but all in vain, opposed them. After all that I have said, I leave you to judge, My Lord, of the Character of these People, and of the value that ought to be put upon them; when a Man hath a gust as good as yours, he does not think of things nicely, but also judges of them solidly, and with the greatest exactness; so that I suppose no body will take it ill that I submit the Chinese to your Cen∣sure. They only would find some difficulty to subscribe to it, if they understood the defect of their Wit and Genius, as much as we understand the delicateness of yours; but as they believe themselves the most witty Nation in the World, I am sure they will be glad to be given over to the Judgment of a Person, whom all France begins to admire, and what is more, whom Lewis the Great honours particularly with his esteem. You will observe, My Lord, in China some Faults which one cannot excuse; all the favour I beg of you for them, is to reflect, That formerly they have been wiser, more sincere and honest, less cor∣rupted than they are at present. Vertue, which they cultivated with so much care, which contributed in∣finitely to model their Reason, made them at that time the wisest People of the Universe; and being their Manners were more regular, so I doubt not but they were then more spiritual, and more rational. However, in the very Condition wherein they are at present, you will perhaps esteem them not∣withstanding, and find withal, that though they have
not Ingenuity enough to be compared with our Learned and Knowing Men in Europe, yet do they not give place to us in Arts; that they equal us in Politeness, and that perhaps they may surpass us in Politicks and in Government. I am with the most profound Respect, My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient Servant L. J.
THE Present State OF CHINA. PART II. To the Cardinal D' Estrees. Of the Policy and Government of the Chinese. WHEN I had the honour to give your Eminence an account of the present State of China, I did a long time doubt whether or no I should venture to describe to you their Form of Government. To handle so nice a Subject requires the abilities of the most exact Politician, and a knowledg of State-Affairs
exquisite as yours; a Subject not to be managed by any without pains and trouble, but which lies too deep for those of my Character whose knowledg in the Affairs of this World is slight and superficial. But yet it would be the greatest of injuries to the Chinese, to pass that over in silence, which they look upon▪ as the thing to which they owe all their good qualities, and which they esteem as a Masterpiece of the most exact Policy: Thus therefore, my Lord, tho' I should own it a piece of imprudence in me to meddle with these mysterious Arcana of Govern∣ment, and to search never so little into the depths of worldly Wisdom; I could be content to be blamed for it in Europe, if China, to whom I own I bear a kindness, and respect, approve of it in me, and get any Credit thereby. Amongst the several Models and Plans of Go∣vernment which the Antients framed, we shall per∣haps meet with none so perfect and exact as is that of the Chinese Monarchy. The antient Lawgivers of this Potent Empire, formed it in their days very little different from what it is in ours. Other States, ac∣cording to the common fate of the things of this World, are sensible of the weakness of Infancy; are born mishapen and imperfect; and like Men▪ they owe their perfection and maturity to time. China seems more exempted from the common Laws of Nature; and as though God himself had founded their Empire, the Plan of their Government was not a whit less perfect in its Cradle, than it is now after the experience and tryal of four thousand years. During all which time the Chinese had never so much as heard of the Name of Republick; and when lately, on the Hollanders arrival, they heard of it, it seemed so strange to them that they have scarcely yet done admiring at it. Nothing could make them un∣derstand
how a State could regularly be governed without a King, they looked upon a Republick to be a Monster with many Heads, formed by the ambition, headiness, and corrupt inclination of Men in times of publick disorder and confusion. As they bear an aversion to Republican Govern∣ment, so are they yet more set against Tyranny and Oppression; which they say proceeds not from the absoluteness of the Princes power, for they cannot be too much their Subjects Masters; but from the Princes own wildness, which neither the Voice of Nature, nor the Laws of God can ever countenance. The Chinese are of Opinion that the Obligation which is laid on their Kings not to abuse their Power, is rather a means to confirm and establish them, than to occasion their ruin; and that this useful constraint which they themselves lay on their Passions does no more diminish their Power or Authority here on Earth, than the like constraint derogates from the Majesty and Power of the Almighty, who is not the less powerful because he cannot do evil. An unbounded Authority which the Laws give the Emperor, and a Necessity which the same Laws lay upon him to use that Authority with moderation and discretion, are the two Props which have for so many Ages supported this grea abrick of the Chinese Monarchy. The first Principle thereof that is in∣stilled into the People, is to respect their Prince with so high a Veneration as almost to adore him. They Stile him the Son of Heaven, and the only Master of the World. His Commands are indisputable, his words carry no less Authority with them than if they were Oracles: in short every thing that comes from him is Sacred. He is seldom seen, and never spoken to but on the knees. The Grandees of the Court, the Princes of the Blood, nay his own Brothers bow to the ground, not only when he is present, but
even before his Throne; and there are set days every week or month, in which the Nobility assemble, who meet in one of the Courts in the Palace, to acknowledg the Authority of their Prince by their most submissive Adorations, tho' he perhaps be not there in Person. When he is ill, especially if dangerously, the Pa∣lace is full of Mandarins of every Order, who spend night and day, in a large Court, in Habits proper for the occasion, to express their own grief, and to ask of Heaven their Princes Cure. Rain, Snow, Cold, or any other inconveniences excuse them not from the performance of this Duty; and as long as the Emperor is in pain, or in danger, any one that saw the People would think that they fear nothing but the loss of him. Besides, Interest is no small occasion of the great respect which is shown him by his Subjects; for as soon as he is proclaimed Emperor, the whole Autho∣rity of the Empire is in his hand, and the good or ill Fortune of his Subjects is owing wholly to him. First, All Places in the Empire are in his disposal, he bestows them on whom he thinks fit; and besides, he is to be looked upon as the disposer of them the more, because none of them are ever sold. Merit, that is Honesty, Learning, long Experience, and especially a grave and sober behaviour, is the only thing considered in the Candidates, and no other considerations can lay any claim to favour. Nei∣ther is this all, that he hath the choice of all Officers of State; but if he dislikes their management when chosen, he dismisses or changes them without more ado. A Peccadillo has heretofore been thought e∣nough to render a Mandarin incapable of continuing in his Place▪ and I am told that a Governour of one of their Cities was turned out, because on a day of Au∣dience his Cloaths were thought too gay to become
the gravity of his Office; the Emperor thinking a a Person of that humour not fit to fill such a Place, or to act as a Magistrate who represents his Prince. I my self saw at Pekin an Example of this So∣vereign Power, at which I was the more surprised because it was brought about with so little distur∣bance. It was discovered that three Colaos (who are Mandarins as honourable for their Places amongst the Chinese, as our Ministers of State are amongst us) had taken mony underhand for some services done by them in the Execution of their Office. The Em∣peror, who was informed of it, took away their Sa∣laries immediately, and ordered them without far∣ther trouble to retire. What became of the two first, or how they were used, I cannot tell; but the other, who had a great while been a Magistrate, and was as much esteemed for his Understanding as he was re∣spected for his Age, was Condemned to look after one of the Palace Gates amongst other common Soldiers, in whose company he was Listed. I saw him my self one day in this mean conditi∣on: he was upon Duty as a common Sentinel; when I passed by him I bowed to him, as indeed e∣very one else did; for the Chinese still respected in him the slender remains of that honour which he had just before possessed. I must confess I soon left wondering at so severe a punishment inflicted on so great a Man; when I saw after what manner even the Princes of the Blood themselves were used. One of them was a mighty lover of sports, especially of Cock-fighting (which is a usual Diversion in the East, and the obstinacy of those Creatures, which armed with Gavelocks, fight 'till they dye with an incredible Skill and Courage, is very surprising.) The Emperor did not think it a∣miss that this Prince should spend a few hours in such sort of Diversions. He knew that Great Men have
spare time as well as others; and that it does not de∣rogate from any Man's Character to throw away an hour or two sometimes in those Diversions which are more suitable to young People, and that it is not at all improper for Men of Understanding and Gra∣vity to condescend to mean and ordinary Sports, in order to give some relaxation and ease to their weary Spirits. Nevertheless, he could not bear to see him spend his whole time in things so much below his Quality, and so unbecoming his Years, he therefore told him of it; but finding that this admonition did not work with him, the Emperor resolved to make an Example of him, and did therefore declare that he had forfieted his Title and Honour of Prince, he was besides deprived of his Retinue, his Salary, and his Quality, until he should by some great and ex∣traordinary Action make it appear to the whole King∣dom that he was not unworthy of the Blood from whence he sprang. The Emperor went yet a step farther, for per∣ceiving that the number of the Princes of the Blood was very great, and that the ill Conduct of many of them might in time bring their Quality into con∣tempt: he published an Order that none should here∣after bear that Character without his express leave, which he gave to none but those who by their Ver∣tue, Understanding, and Diligence in their Offices, did very well deserve it. Such Administrations in Europe would cause Heart-burnings and Factions in the States; but in China they are brought about without any the least distur∣bance, these Changes create no manner of trouble if they are done for the Publick Good, and not from a personal Hatred or violent Passion; however if the Emperor should be so far transported as to act thus to satisfie his own Passion, yet if his Government be generally equitable and just, such particular ill Ad∣ministrations
raise no Faction in his Subjects against him. You will have a plain proof of the absoluteness of the Emperors Power from a passage which hap∣pened in a late war with one of the Kings of Tar∣tary. The Emperor sent a mighty Army under his Brothers Command, to punish the Vanity and Rash∣ness of that puny King, who had dared to make in∣roads into the Countries of several of the Allies of the Empire. The Tartar, whose warlike Troops sought only an opportunity of signalizing themselves, advanced to engage the Imperial Army, and set upon them with so much violence and vigour, that at last, notwithstanding he was so much inferior to them in number, he beat them from their ground, and forced them to retreat in disorder. The Emperors Father in Law, an old Tartar, well versed in the Trade of War, commanded the Artil∣lery, and plaid his part so well that he was killed at the head of a few, yet brave Soldiers, whom he encou∣raged as well by his Example as by his Words; but the General was accused for flying first, and draw∣ing by his flight the rest of the Army after him. The Emperor who is himself a Man of Courage, and an admirer of Glory, was less troubled at the loss of the Battle than he was at that of his Brothers Honour. He sent for him immediately to Court, to be tryed before a Council of the Blood, whom he assembled in his Palace. The Prince, who was on all other accounts a Per∣son of singular Merit, surrendered himself with the same humility and submission, as he could have done had he been the meanest Officer in the Army, and without staying till Sentence was pronunced he con∣demned himself, and owned that he deserved death. You deserve it, said the Emperor, but you ought, to re∣cover your lost Honour, to seek your death in the midst
of the Enemies Troops, and not ere among us in the midst of Pekin where it can only encrease your disgrace. At last the Emperor was inclineable to Pardon him; but the Princes, who thought themselves in some measure disgraced by this Action, earnestly begged of the Emperor to use the utmost of his Power to punish him: and his Uncle who assisted at the Coun∣cil treated him with so much scorn and contempt, that amongst us such usage would afflict any Gen∣tleman so sensibly as to go near to break his Heart. The Emperor, who has power over the lives of the Princes of the Blood, can certainly dispose of his other Subiects: the Laws make him so far Ma∣ster of their lives, that neither Viceroy, nor Parlia∣ments, nor any other Sovereign Court throughout the whole Empire can Execute any Criminal with∣out express order from Court. They are Arraigned and Tryed up and down in the several Provinces, but the Sentence is always presented to the Emperor, who either confirms or rejects it as he pleases, most an end he agrees to it, but he very often cuts off part of the Sentence, and makes it less rigorous. Secondly, although every one be perfect Master of his Estate, and enjoys his Lands free from disturbance and molestation: the Emperor, can nevertheless lay what Taxes he thinks fit upon his Subects to sup∣ply the pressing wants, and relieve the necessities of the State. This power indeed he rarely makes use of, whether it be that the standing Revenue, and or∣dinary Taxes are sufficient to maintain a War abroad; or whether it be that in a Civil-War they are unwil∣ling to run the hazard of provoking their Subects too much by laying too great a load on them. They have likewise a Custom of exempting every year one or two Provinces from bearing their proportion in the Tax, especially if any of them have suffered thro' the sickness of the People, or if the Lands
thro' unseasonable weather have not yielded so good an encrease as usual. It is true that the Subsidies which the Laws grant are so considerable, that were the Chinese less indu∣strious, or their Lands less fruitful, this Empire, like the rest of the Indian Kingdoms, would be only a Society of poor and miserable Wretches. It is this prodigious Income that makes the Prince so power∣ful, and that enables him at an hours warning to raise a Potent and a numerous Army to keep his People in Obedience. It is very difficult to reckon what the Revenue of this Empire amounts to; because, beside the mo∣ny that is raised in Specie, vast sums are paid in in Goods. After the best examination which I could get both from the Officers and from their Books, I believe the Treasury receives in mony about twenty two thousand Crowns of China, which the Portuguese call taëls, each of which in our mony comes to about six shillings. But the Rice, Corn, Salt, Silks, Cloaths, Varnish, and a hundred other Commodities which they pay in, together with the Customs and forseited Estates amount to more than fifty millions of the Chinese Crowns. So that after having allowed for the Goods received into the Treasury their value in Silver, and having made the nearest and most exact Calculation possible, I find the ordinary Revenues of the Emperor to amount in our mony to one and twenty millions six hundred thousand pounds at least. Thirdly, The right of making Peace and War is the Emperors, he may make Treaties on what conditi∣ons he pleases, provided they be not such as are dishonourable to the Kingdom. As for the Judg∣ments which he himself passes they are irrevocable, and to have them put in Execution he need only send them to his Sovereign Courts or Vice-Roys, who dare not in the least delay Registring and Publishing them.
When on the other hand the Sentences pronounced by their Parliaments or other Magistrates, are no ways obligatory 'till approved and confirmed by the Emperor. Fourthly, Another instance of his Supreme Au∣thority is this, that he has the liberty of making choice of his Successor, which he may not only chuse from the Royal Family, but from amongst his other Sub∣ects. This antient right hath been heretofore put in practise with so much Impartiality and Wisdom, as would be admirable even in a Prince who to his o∣ther Titles hath that of Most Christian. For some of these Emperors, finding none of their Family, tho' numerous, able to support the weight of a Crown, chuse for their Successors persons mean as to their Birth and Fortunes, but eminent for their Virtue, and admirable for their Understanding; saying that they acted thus not only from a desire of their Kingdoms good, but also out of respect to the Honour and Cre∣dit of their own Children, for whom it would be more glorious to live privately, than to sit upon a Throne exposed to the Censure, and oftentimes to the Curses of all their People. If, said they, a Lofy Title could create Merit in those who had it not before, we should in∣deed injure our Children in excluding them from the Crown. But since it serves only to publish and spread their de∣fects more abroad, we think our slves obliged, by the Kindness and Tenderness which we bear to them, to keep them from that shame and disgrace which a Crown would necessarily expose them to. However, Examples of this Nature have been ve∣ry seldom known, for the Emperors for many Ages have bounded their choice within the Compass of their own Families; yet they do not always chuse the oldest. He who now Reigns with so much Wisdom, was a younger Brother; and sees his elder Brother as dutiful, and free from Ambition as the meanest
of his Subjects. The great number of Princes of the Blood is with us in Europe as great an occasion of Fears and Jealousies, but in China it is quite other∣wise, for at the death of the last Emperor of China, there were above ten thousand Princes up and down the several Provinces, yet was there no confusion or disorder in the least; which could certainly proceed from nothing but the excessive Authority of this Em∣peror, who finds as little trouble in China in Governing a multitude of Princes, as other Princes do in Go∣verning the Common People. Furthermore, The Emperor after he has made Choice of, and publickly owned who shall be his Successor, may afterwards exclude him, and renew his Choice; but not unless he have very good reason for doing so, nor unless the Sovereign Courts of Pekin do in a manner give their consent to it; for if he act thus without observing these methods, it would not only raise the Peoples Tongues, but perhaps their Hands against him. Fifthly. The Grave itself cannot put an end to his Power over his Subjects, which is exercised even over the Dead, whom he either Disgraces or Honours (as much as if they were alive) when he hath a mind either to Reward or Punish themselves or their Fami∣lies. He makes some after their decease Dukes, others Counts, and conferring upon them several other Titles which our Language knows no name for. He may Canonise them as Saints, or as they speak, may make them naked Spirits. Sometimes he builds them Temples, and if their Ministry hath been very bene∣ficial, or their Virtues very eminent, he commands the People to honour them as Gods. Paganism hath for many Ages authorised and countenanced this a∣buse of Religion; yet this reparation Religion has from the Empire of China for the foremention'd in∣jury, that ever since the Foundation of this Empire,
the Emperor has been been always looked upon as the Chief Priest and Principal Servant of Religion; for there are some Ceremonies, and Publick Sacri∣fices, which he alone is thought worthy to offer up to to the great Creator of Heaven. Sixthly, There is another Instance, which tho' of less importance than the preceeding, yet may serve as well as them to shew how unlimited the Au∣thority of this Emperor is. It is this, the Emperor hath power to change the Figure and Character of their Letters, to abolish any Characters already re∣ceived, or to form any new one. He may likewise change the names of Provinces, of Cities, of Fa∣milies: he may likewise forbid the using of any ex∣pression or manner of speaking, he may forbid the use of some expressions which are generally received, and may bring into use and practise those ways of speaking which have been looked upon as obsolete and uncouth, and this either in common Discourse or in Writing. So that Custom which exercises so unalterable an Authority over the signification of Words, that the Greek and Roman Powers were too little to subdue it, and which for that reason hath by some been called a fantastical and an unjust Tyrant, equally commanding both Princes and common Peo∣ple; this Custom, I say, of which even in Europe we complain so much, is submissive and humble in China, and is content to alter and give way when the Emperor commands. One would imagine that this unlimited power should often occasion very unfortunate Events in the Government, and indeed it sometimes hath, as no∣thing in this World is without its Alloy of inconve∣nience. Yet so many are the Provisions, and so wise the Precautions which the Laws have prescribed to prevent them, that a Prince must be wholly insen∣sible of his own Reputation, and even Interest, as
well as of the Publick Good, who continues long in the abuse of his Authority. For if he hath any regard for his Reputation, there are three things which will prevail with him to Go∣vern by Justice and not Passion. First, the old Law∣givers have from the first Foundation of the Govern∣ment made this a standing Maxim, that Kings are properly the Fathers of their People, and not Ma∣sters placed in the Throne only to be served by Slaves. Wherefore it is that in all Ages their Emperor is called Grand-Father, and of all his Titles of Honour, their is none which he likes to be called by so well as this Ta-fou.. This Idea of their Prince is so deeply imprinted in the minds of his People, and of his Mandarins, that when they make any Panegyrick in the praise of their Emperor, it is upon the Topick of his Affection to his People. Their Teachers and their Philosophers constantly set forth in their Books that the State is but a large Fa∣mily, and that he who knows how to Govern the one, is the best capable of Ruling the other. So that if the Prince neglects never so little the practice of this Maxim, he may be a good Warriour, an able Politician, a learned Prince, and yet meet with little or no esteem from his People. They do not form their Character of their Prince from these or such like qualities, his Reputation encreases or diminishes with them, in proportion as he is or is not a Father to them. Secondly, Every Mandarin may tell the Emperor of his faults, provided it be in such a submissive man∣ner as is agreeable to that veneration and profound re∣spect which is due to him; this the manner they usually take to bring it about. The Mandarin who perceives any thing in the Emperors management disagreeable to their Constitution or Laws, draws up a request, in which, after having set forth the re∣spect
which he bears towards his Imperial Majesty, he most humbly prays his Prince that he will please to reflect upon the Antient Laws and good Example of those holy Princes his Predecessors: afterwards he takes notice wherein he apprehends that his Prince hath deviated from them. This Request lies upon a Table among many o∣ther Petitions which are daily presented, and which the Emperor is obliged to Read: if he does not here∣upon change his Conduct, he is put in mind of it again, as often as the Mandarin hath Zeal and Courage to do it, for they had need of a great deal of both who dare venture thus to expose themselves to their Princes indignation. A little before I arrived at Pekin, one who had an Office in that Court, which is appointed for the inspection into the Mathematicks, had the Courage to advise the Emperor in the aforesaid manner, con∣cerning the Education of the Prince his Son, setting forth that instead of breeding him up to Learning and Knowledg, his Tutors made it their whole care and endeavour to make him expert in the business of War, to shoot with the Bow, and to manage his Arms. Another let the Emperor know that he went too often from his Palace, and that contrary to the Customs of the Antient Kings he made too long stays in Tartary. This Prince who was one of the most haughty, as well as the most Politick Go∣vernours that ever sat in the Throne, seemed to pay some deference and respect to their Advice. Never∣theless, since these his Journeys into Tartary con∣tributed much to the preserving his Health, the Princes of his Houshold begged of him to regard that more than the idle whimsies of particular Men. As for the Mathematician who had troubled him∣self with what did not belong to him, the Educati∣on of the Prince, he was turned out of his Office,
and the rest of his Fellow▪ Officers, tho' they had no hand in the business, were deprived of a years Salary. This method hath been practised for a long time in China, and their Histories take notice that no means has been found so powerful as this to oblige their Emperors, when they act amiss, to return to their Duty, altho' this means proves often dangerous to those particular persons who make use of it. Thirdly, If their Princes have any regard for their Reputation, the manner in which their Histories are wrote, is alone sufficient to keep them within bounds. A certain number of Men who for their Learning and Impartiality are purposely chosen for this Af∣fair, remark with all the exactness possible not only all their Princes Actions but also his Words; each of these persons by himself, and without Communica∣tion with the others, as things fall out sets them down in a loose Paper, and puts these Papers thro' a Chink into an Office set a part for this purpose. In these Papers both the Emperors Vertues and Faults are set down with the same liberty and impartiality. Such a day, say they, the Princes behaviour was unseasonable and intemperate, e spoke after a manner which did not become his Dignity. The punishment which he inflicted on such an Officer was rather the effect of his Passion, than the result of his Iustice. In such an affair he stop'd the Sword of Iustice, and partially abrogated the Sen∣tence passed by the Magistrates. Or else, He enter'd Courageously into a War for the defence of his People, and for the maintnance of the honour of his Kingdom. At such a time he made an honourable Peace. He gave such and such marks of his love to his People. Notwithstanding the commendations given him by his Flattrers, he was not pussed up, but behaved himself modestly, his words were tempered with all the sweet∣ness and humility possible; which made him more loved and admired by his Court than ever. And in this
manner they set down every thing that occurs in his Administration. But that neither fear on the one side, nor hope on the other, may byass these Men to a partiality in the account they give of their Prince: this Office is ne∣ver opened during that Princes life, or while any of his Family sit in the Throne. When the Crown goes in another Line, which often happens, all these loose Memoirs are gathered together, and after they have compared them, to come to the more certain know∣ledg of the Truth, they from them Compose the History of that Emperor, to propose him as an Ex∣ample to Posterity, if he have acted wisely, or to expose him to the common Censure and Odium of the People, if he have been negligent of his own Duty and his Peoples good. When a Prince loves Honour and Glory, and sees that it is not in the power of Flattery and Imposture to persuade the People to give it him, he will then be circumspect and cautious how he behaves himselfe during the whole Reign. Interest, which has a far greater command over some tempers than the love of Reputation, is as great a motive to the Emperor to be guided by the an∣tient Customs, and to adhere to the Laws. They are so wholly made for his advantage, that he cannot violate them without doing some prejudice to his own Authority; nor can he make new and unusual Laws, without exposing his Kingdom to the danger of Change and Confusion. Not that the Grandees of his Court, or his Parliaments, how zealously soever they may seem to assert their Antient Customs, are easily provoked to a revlt, or to make use of their Princes Government, as an occasion to dimi∣nish his Authority. Altho' there are some Examples of this in History, yet they seldom occur, and when∣ever they do, it is under such Circumstances as seem to go a great way toward their justification.
But such is the temper of the Chinese, that when their Emperor is full of Violence and Passion, or very negligent of his Charge, the same Spirit of Perverse∣ness possesses also his Subjects. Every Mandarin thinks himself the Sovereign of his Province or City, when he does not perceive it taken care of by a Superior Power. The chief Ministers sell Places to those who are unfit to fill them. The Vice∣Roys become so many little Tyrants. The Go∣vernours observe no more the Rules of Justice. The People by these means oppressed and trampled under foot▪ and by Consequence miserable, are easily stirred up to Sedition. Rogues multiply and commit Inso∣lencies in Companies; and in a Country where the People are almost innumerable, numerous Armies do in an instant gettogether, who wait nothing but an opportunity, under specious pretences, to disturb the Publick Peace and Quiet. Such beginnings as these have occasioned fatal Consequences, and have oftentimes put China under the command of new Masters. So that the best and surest way for an Emperor to establish himself in his Throne, is to give an exact regard and an intire obe∣dience to those Laws, whose goodness have been confirmed by the experience of more than four thousand years. This is the ordinary Form of Government which the Laws prescribe. The Emperor hath two So∣vereign Councils; the one is called the Extraordi∣nary Council, and is Composed of Princes of the Blood only; the other, called the Council in Ordinary, has besides the Princes several Ministers of State named Claos admitted into it. These are they who examine all the Affairs of State, and make their re∣port to the Emperor, from whom they have their final determination. Beside these there is at Pekin six Sovereign Courts, whose Authority extends over
all the Provinces of China, each of these Courts have their dierent Matters assigned to them, of which they are to take Cogniance: the Names of them, and what is committed to their judgment, are as follows. The Court called Liipou, presides over all the Man∣darins, and does give them, and take away from them their Offices. That called Houpo looks after the Treasury, and takes care of raising the Taxes. That called Lipou is to look after the Antient Cu∣stoms; to this Court is also committed the care of Religion, of Sciences and Arts, and of Foreign Af∣fairs. That called Pimpou has charge over the Soldiery and its Officers▪ That called Himpou takes Cognisance of all Criminals. That called Compou looks after all Publick Buildings, and all the Emperors Houses and Palaces. Each of these Courts are divided in several Offices, some of them into fifteen; the Principal of which Offices is managed by the President and two Assistants, who have the final inspection into those things which come under the notice of that Court; the rest are Under Offices, and consist of a Presi∣dent and several Councellors, all of which are sub∣ject to the President of the Principal Office, from whom there is no Appeal. But because it is the Emperors Interest to keep such considerable Bodies as these so far under, as that it may not lie in their power to weaken the Emperors Authority, or to enterprise any thing against the State; care is taken that tho' each of these six Courts have their particular Charges of which they are con∣stituted sole Judges, yet no considerable thing can be brought to perfection and maturity without the joynt help and mutual concurrence of all these Courts; I explain my self by the instance of War: the number of the Troops, the quality of their Officers, the march of the Armies, are provided or by the fourth
Court, but the mony to pay them must be had from the second. So that scarce any one thing of Con∣sequence to the State can be promoted without the inspection of many, and otimes of all the Man∣darins. The second means used by the Emperor, for this purpose, is to place an Officer in each of these Courts, who has an Eye to all their proceedings. He is not, it's true, of the Council, yet he is present at all their Assemblies, and informed of all their Pro∣ceedings; we may call this Officer an Inspector. He either privately advertises the Court, or else openly accuses the Mandarins of the faults which they com∣mit in their private capacities as well as of those which they commit in the Execution of their Office. He observes their Actions, their Behaviour, and even their Words, so that nothing escapes his notice. I am told that he who once undertakes this Employ can never quit it for any other, that so the hopes of a better Preferment may never tempt him to be Partial to any one, nor the fear of loosing his Place frighten him from accusing those who misbehave themselves. Of these Officers whom they call Colis even the Princes of the Blood stand in awe; and I remember that one of the greatest of the Nobility having built a House somewhat higher than the Custom of China suffers, did of himself pull it down in a few days, when he had heard that one of these Inspectors talked of ac∣cusing him. As for the Provinces they are under the immediate inspection of two sorts of Vice-Roys. One sort has the Government of one Province only. Thus there is one Vice-Roy at Pekin, at Canton, or at Nankim, or in any other Town but a little distant from the chief City of the Province. Besides this, these Provinces are under the Government of other Vice-Roys, who are called Tsounto, and have under their Jurisdicti∣on
two, or three, nay sometimes four Provinces. There is no Prince in Europe whose Dominions are of so large extent as is the Jurisdiction of these Ge∣neral Officers; yet how great soever their Authority may seem to be, they do in no wise diminish that of the particular Vice-Roys; and each of these two Vice-Roys have their particular Right so well settled and adjusted, that they never clash or contend with each other in their Administrations. These have all of them in their several Lordships many Courts, of the same nature with those at Pekin already described, but are subordinate to them, so that from these they Appeal to them: there are beside these several other inferior Offices for the preparing business, or for finishing it according to the extent of their Commissions. There are three sorts of Towns, each of which have their particular Governour, and a great number of Mandarins who Administer Ju∣stice; amongst which Cities there is this difference, that those of the third sort or rank are subordinate to those of the second, as those of the second are to them of the first; these of the first Rank are sub∣ject to the Jurisdiction of the General Officers of the Capital Cities, according as the nature of things re∣quire, and all the Judges, be their quality what it will in the Civil Government, have their dependance on the Vice-Roy, in whom resides the Imperial Au∣thority. He from time to time convenes the Princi∣pal Mandarins of his Province, to take Cognisance of the good or bad Qualities of the Governours, Lieutenants, and even inferior Officers: he sends private Dispatches to Court to inform the Emperor who misbehave themselves, who are either there∣fore deprived of their Offices, or else cited to ap∣pear and offer what they have to say in their ju∣stification.
On the other hand the Vice-Roy's power is coun∣terpoised by that of the great Mandarins who are a∣bout him, and who may accuse him when they are satisfied that it is necessary for the Publick Good. But that which principally keeps him upon his Guard is that the People, when evil intreated or oppressed by him, may Petition the Emperor in person for his removal, and that another may be ordered them. The least Insurrection or Disturbance is laid at his door, which if it continues three days he must an∣swer for it at his peril. It is his fault, says the Laws, if Disturbances spring up in his Family, that is in the Province over which he has the Charge. He ought to regulate the Conduct of the Mandarins under him, that so the People may not suffer by their ill management. When People like their Masters they do not desire to change them; and when the Yoak is easie it is a pleasure to bear it. But because private persons cannot easily come at the Court, and because the ust Complaints of his People, cannot always reach the Ears of their Prince, (especially in China where the Governours easily cor∣rupt with Bribes the General Officers, and they the Supreme Courts;) the Emperor disperses up and down secret Spies, persons of known Wisdom and Repu∣tation; these in every Province by their cunning man∣agement, inform themselves from the Countrymen, Tradesmen or others, after what manner the Manda∣rins behave themselves in the Execution of their Offices. When from their private but certain informations, or rather when by the Publick Voice, which seldom imposes on us, they are acquainted with any disor∣der. Then they publickly own their Commission from the Emperor▪ they take up those Criminal Mandarins, and manage the Cause against them. This heretofore kept all the Judges to their Duty▪ but since the Tartars have been Masters of China, these
Officers have been laid aside; in as much as some of them abused their Commission, enriching themselves by taking money of the Guilty to conceal their Faults, and of the Innocent, whom they threatned to accuse as Criminal. Nevertheless, that so useful a means of keeping the Magistrates to their Duty may not be wholly lost: the Emperor himself, who has a ender love for his Subjects, hath thought it his Duty to visit in person each Province, and to hear himself the Complaints of his People; which he performs with such a diligence as makes him the terror of his Mandarins, and the delight of his People. Amongst the great variety of Accidents which have happened to him during those his Progresses, they report that being once separated from his Attendants, he saw an old Man weeping bitterly, of whom he enquired what was the occasion of his Tears. Sir, Said the old Man who did not know to whom he spoke, I have but one Son who was the comfort of my life, and on whom lay the whole care of my Family, a Mandarin of Tartary has deprived me of him; which hath made me helpless at present, and will make me so as long as I liv; for how can I, who am so poor and friendless, oblige so great a Man as he to make me Restitution? That's not so difficult as you imagine, said the Emperor; get up behind me and direct me to his House who has done you this wrong. The good Man complied without any Ceremony, and in two hours time they both got to the Mandarins House, who little expected so extraordinary a Visit. In the interim the Guards, and a great company of Lords, after a great deal of search made came thither, some of which attended without, others entered with the Emperor, not knowing what the business was which brought him there. Where the Emperor having Convicted the Mandarin of the Violence of which he was accused, condemn'd him on the spot to death;
afterward turning round to the afflicted Father who had lost his Son: To make you a good recompence for your loss, says he, after a grave and serious man∣ner, I give you the Office of the Criminal who is just now dead; but take care to Execute it with E∣quity, and let his Punishment, as well as his Crime, prove for your Advantage, for fear lest you in your turn are made an Example to others. They have still a farther means to oblige the Vice-Roys and other Governours to a strict care of their Charge, which Expedient I do not believe any Go∣vernment or Kingdom, tho' never so severe, did e∣ver yet make use of. It is this, every Governour is obliged from time to time with all humility and sin∣cerity to own and acknowledg the secret or publick Faults committed by himself in his Administration, and to send the account in writing up to Court. This is a more troublesome business to comply with than one readily imagins, for on one side it is an uneasie thing to accuse our selves of those things which we know will be punished by the Emperor, tho' mildly. On the other side it is more dangerous to dissemble them; for if by chance they are accused of them in the Inspector's Advertisement, the least Fault which the Mandarin shall have concealed will be big enough to turn him out of his Ministry. So that the best way is to make a sincere confession of ones Faults, and to purchase a Pardon for them by mony, which in China has the vertue of blotting out all Crimes, which re∣medy notwithstanding is no small punishment for a Chinese; the fear of such a punishment makes him oftimes exceeding Circumspect and careful, and sometimes even Virtuous against his own inclina∣tions. After these Provisions which the Laws make, as I have said, they give the following directions how to proceed in the business of punishing Criminals.
There is no need of having a Warrant to carry them before the Magistrate, nor that the Magistrate should sit in a Court of Justice to hear the Accusation and Plea of the Criminal. Such Formalities as these are not insisted on there. Wherever the Magistrate sees a Fault, there he has power to punish it on the spot, be it in the Street, in the Highway, or in a private House, it is all one; he may take up a Gamester, a Rook, or a Debauché, and without more Formalities he orders some of his Attendants to give him twenty or thirty Stripes: after which, as tho' nothing extra∣ordinary had happened he goes on his Journey with∣out any concernment. Notwithstanding this punish∣the person damaged may accuse the same Criminal again in a Superior Court, where he is tryed, the result of which is usually a farther punishment. Farther, the Plaintiff may in common Cases bring his Action in any Higher Magistrates Court, even be∣fore it has been pleaded in an Inferior Court. I mean, an Inhabitant of a Town of the third Rank may forthwith apply himself to the Governour of the Ca∣pital City of the Province, or even to the Vice Roy, without having it examined before the Governour of his own Town; and when it once comes before a Superior Judge, the Inferior ones may not take Cog∣nizance of it, unless it be deputed to them by those Superior Judges, as it often is. When the Cause is of great Consequence, there lies an Appeal from the Vice-Roy to one of the Supreme Courts at Pekin, according to the nature of the Affair, where the Cause is examined in one of the under Offices, who make their report to the President of the Supreme Of∣fice, who gives Sentence after he has advised with his Assistants, and Communicated his Opinion to the Colaos who carry it to the Emperor. Sometimes the Emperor desires better information, sometimes gives Sentence on the spot, and in his name the Supreme
Court makes a brief of the Sentence, and sends it to the Vice-Roys for them to put it in Execution. A Sentence pronounced in this manner is irrevocable, they call it the holy Commandment; that is to say the Commandment, which is without defect or par∣tiality. You will think it doubtless an inconceivable thing, that a Prince should have time to examin himself the Affairs of so vast an Empire as is that of China. But besides that Wars and Foreign Negotiations never spend his time, which in Europe is almost the sole bu∣siness of the Councils, besides this, I say, their Af∣fairs are so well digested and ordered, that he can with half an Eye see to which Party he ought to in∣cline in his Sentence, and this because their Laws are so plain that they leave no room for intricacy or dis∣pute. So that two hours a day is time enough for that Prince to Govern himself an Empire of that extent, that were there other Laws might find Employment for thirty Kings. So true is it that the Laws of China, are wise, plain, well understood, and exactly ade∣quate to the particular Genius and Temper of that Nation. To give your Eminence a general Notion of this, I shall think it sufficient to remark to You three things, which are exceeding conducive to the Publick Peace, and are as it were the very Soul of the Government. The first is the Moral Principles which are instilled into the People. The second is the Political Rules which are set up in every Thing. The third is the Maxims of good Policy which are, or ought to be eve∣ry where observed. The first Moral Principle respects private Families, and injoyns Children such a Love, Obedience, and Respect for their Parents, that neither the severity of their treatment, the impertinency of their old Age, or the meanness of their Rank, when the Children
have met with Preferment, can ever efface. One can't imagin to what a degree of Perfection this first Principle of Nature is improved. There is no Sub∣mission, no point of Obedience which the Parents can't command, or which the Children can refuse. Thse Children are obliged to comfort them when a∣live, and continually to bewail them when dead. They Prostrate themselves a thousand times before their dead Bodies, offer them Provisions, as tho' they were yet alive, to signifie that all their Goods belong to them, and that from the bottom of their Heart they wish them in a Capacity to enjoy them. They bury them with a Pomp and Expence which to us would seem extravagant, they pay constantly at their Tombs a Tribute of Tears, which Ceremonies they often perform even to their Pictures, which they keep in their Houses with all imaginable care, which they honour with Offerings, and with as due a re∣spect as they would their Parents were they yet alive. Their Kings themselves are not excused this piece of Duty, and the present Emperor has been observant of it, not only to his Predecessors of his own Fami∣ly, but even to those who were not. For one day when in Hunting he perceived a far off the magnifi∣cent Monument which his Father had erected for Toutcin, the last Chinese Emperor, who lost his Life and Crown in a Rebellion, he ran to the place, and sell on his Knees before the Tomb, and even wept, and in a great concern for his misfortune: O Prince! says he, O Emperor worthy of a better fate! you know that your destruction is no ways owing to us; your death lies not at our door, your Subjects brought it upon you. It was them that betrayed you. It is upon them, and not on my Ancestors, that Heaven must send down vengeance for this act. Afterward he ordered Flambeaus to be lit, and Incense to be offered. During all which time he fixed his Countenance on
the ground, and arose not till all these Ceremonies were over. The ordinary term of Mourning is three years, during which time the Mourner can exercise no Pub∣lick Office. So that a Mandarin is obliged to for∣sake his Employ, and a Minister of State his Office, to spend all that time in grief. If a Father be honoured after his death as a God, to be sure he is obeyed in his Family like a Prince, over whom he exer∣cises a Despotick Power; as absolute Master not only of his Estate which he distributes to whom he pleases, but also of his Concubines and Children, of whom he disposes with that liberty and power that he may sell them to Strangers when their behaviour displeases him. If a Father accuses his Son of any Crime be∣fore a Mandarin, there needs no proof of it; its sup∣posed to be true that the Son is in the Fault if the Fa∣ther be displeased. This Paternal power is of that extent, that there is no Father but may take his Sons life away, if he will stick to his Accusation. When we seemed amazed at this proceedure, we were an∣swered: who understands the merit of the Son better than the Father, who has brought him up, Educated him, and such a long time observed all his Actions? And again, can any person have a greater Love, or a more sincere Affection for him? If therefore he who knows his Case exactly, and loves him tenderly, Condemns him, how can we pronounce him guiltless and innocent? And when we objected that some per∣sons have an inbred dislike of others, and that Fa∣thers who were Men, as well as Fathers, were ca∣pable of such antipathies against some of their Children; they answered, that Men were not more unnatural than Savage Beasts, the cruellest of which never destroyed their young ones for a Frolick; but supposing there be such Monsters among Men, their Children by their modesty and sweetness of temper
must tame and soften them. But after all, say they, the love of their Children is so deeply imprinted in the Hearts of Parents, that antipathy, or dislike, unless provoked and inflamed by the undutiful stubborness and disordely behaviour of their Children, can ne∣ver erase. If it should happen that a Son should be so insolent as to mock his Parents, or arrive to that hight of fury and madness as to lay violent hands on them; it is the whole Empires concern, and the Province where this horrible Violence is committed is allarmed. The Emperor himself judges the Criminal. All the Man∣darins near the place are turned out, especially those of that Town, who have been so negligent in their Instructions. The Neighbours are all reprimanded for neglecting, by former Punishments, to stop the iniquity of this Criminal before it came to this hight, for they suppose that such a Diabolical temper as this must needs have shewed it self on other Occasions, since its hardly possible to attain to such a pitch of iniquity at once. As for the Criminal there is no Punishment which they think too severe. They cut him into a thousand pieces, burn him, destroy his House to the ground, and even those Houses which stand near it, and set up Monuments and Memorials of this so horrible an insolence. Even the Emperors themselves can't reject the Au∣thority of their Parents without running the risque of suffering for it; and History tells us a Story which will always make the Affection which the Chinese have to this Duty appear admirable. One of the Emperors had a Mother who managed a private In∣treague with one of the Lords of the Court; the no∣tice which was publickly taken of it, obliged the Em∣peror to shew his resentment of it, both for his own honour and that of the Empire: so that he banished her into a far distant Province; and because he knew
that this Action would not be very acceptable to his Princes and Mandarins, he forbad them all, under pain of death, giving him advice therein. They were all silent for some time, hoping that of himself he would condemn his own Conduct in that Affair; but seeing that he did not, they resolved to appear in it, rather than suffer so pernicious a Precedent. The first who had the Courage to put up a request to the Emperor in this matter was put to death on the spot. His death put not a stop to the Mandarins proceedings; for a day or two after another made his appearance, and to shew all the World that he was willing to Sacrifice his life for the Publick, he ordered his Hearse to stand at the Palace Gate. The Em∣peror minded not this generous Action, but was the rather more provoked at it. He not only sentenced him to death, but to terrifie all others from follow∣ing his Example, he ordered him to be put to the Torture. One would not think it Prudence to hold out longer. The Chinese were of another mind, for they resolved to fall one after another rather than basely to pass over in silence so base an Action. There was therefore a third who devoted him∣self. He, like the second, ordered his Coffin to be set at the Palace Gate, and protested to the Emperor that he was not able any longer to see him still guilty of his Crime. What shall we lose by our death, says he, nothing but the sight of a Prince, upon whom we can't look without amazement and horror. Since you will not hear us, we will go and seek out yours and the Em∣press your Mothers Ancestors. They will hear our com∣plaints, and perhaps in the dark and silence of the night you will bear ours and their Ghosts reproach you with your Injustice. The Emperor being more enraged than ever at this Insolence, as he called it, of his Subjects, inflicted on this last the severest Torments he could devise.
Many others encouraged by these Examples, exposed themselves to Torment, and did in effect dye the Martyrs of Filial Duty, which they stood up for with the last drop of their blood. At last this Heroic Con∣stancy wearied out the Emperor's Cruelty; and whether he was afraid of more dangerous Con∣sequences, or was himself convinced of his own Fault; he Repented, as he was the Father of his People, that he had so unworthily put to death his Children; and as a Son of the Empress he was troubled that he had so long misused his Mother. He recalled her therefore, restored her to her former Dignity, and after that the more he honoured her, the more was he himself honoured of his Subjects. The second Moral Principle which obtains among them, is to honour their Mandarins as they would the Emperor himself, whose Person the Mandarins re∣present. To retain this Credit the Mandarins never appear in Publick without a Retinue, and Face of Grandeur that commands Respect. They are al∣ways carried in a magnificent Chair open, before them go all the Officers of their Courts, and round them are carried all the marks and badges of their Dignity. The People, wherever they come, open to the right and left to let them pass thro'. When they Administer Justice in their Palaces, no body speaks to them but on their Knees, be they of what Quality they will, and since they can at any time command any perons to be whipped, no one comes near them without trembling. Heretofore when any Mandarin took a Journey, all the Inhabitants of the Towns thro' which he passed ran in a croud to meet him, and profer their Services, conducting him with all Solemnity thro' their Territory: now when he leaves his Office which he has Administred to the satisfaction of all Men, they give him such marks of honour, as would
engage the most stupid to the love of Virtue and Justice. When he is taking his leave in order to lay down his Office, almost all the Inhabitants go in the Highways, and place themselves some here, some there for almost fourteen or fifteen Miles together. So that every where in the Road one sees Tables handsomly painted, with Satin Table-Cloaths, co∣vered with Sweet-meats, Tea and other Liquors. Every one almost constrains him to stay, to sit down and eat or drink something. When he leaves one, another stops him, and thus he spends the whole day among the Applauses and Acclamations of his People. And, which is an odd thing, every one de∣sires to have something which comes from off him. Some take his Boots, others his Cap, some his great Coat; but they who take any thing, give him ano∣ther of the same sort, and before he is quit of this multitude, it sometimes happens that he has had thirty different pairs of Boots on. Then he hears himself called publick Benefactor, the preserver and Father of his People. They be∣wail the loss of him with wet Eyes; and a Manda∣rin must be very insensible indeed, if he does not in his turn shed a Tear or two, when he sees such ten∣der marks of Affection. For the Inhabitants are not obliged to shew him this Respect, and when they do not like the Administration of a Governor, they shew themselves as indifferent at his departure, as they do affectionate and sorry at the loss of a good one. The extraordinary respect which Children pay to their Parents, and People to their Governors, is the greatest means of preserving quietness in their Fami∣lies, and Peace in their Towns; I am persuaded that all the good Order, in which we see so mighty a People, flows from these two Springs.
The third Principle of Morality established among them is this, that it is very necessary that all People should observe toward each other the strictest Rules of Modesty and Civility, that they should behave themselves so obligingly and complaisantly, that all their Actions may have a mixture of sweetness and courtesie in them. This, say they, is that which makes the distinction between Man and Beast, or between the Chinese and other Men: they pretend also that the disturbance of several Kingdoms is owing to the rough and unpolished Temper of their Subjects. For those Tempers which fly out into Rudeness and Pas∣sion, perpetually embroiled in Quarrels, which use neither respect nor Complaisance toward any, are fitted to be Incendiaries and Disturbers of the Pub∣lick Peace. On the contrary, People who Honour and Respect each other, who can suffer an Injury, and dissemble or stisle it; who religiously observe that difference which either Age, Quality, or Me∣rit have made; a People of this stamp are naturally lovers of Order, and when they do amiss it is not without Violence to their own Inclinations. The Chinese are so far from neglecting the Practice of this Maxim, that in several Instances they carry it on too far. No sort of Men are excused from it; Tradesmen, Servants, nay even Countrymen have their ways of expressing Kindness and Civility to one another; I have often been amased to see Footmen take their leave of each other on their Knees, and Farmers in their Entertainments use more Comple∣ments and Ceremonies than we do at our publick Treats. Even the Seamen, who from their man∣ner of living, and from the Air they breath, draw in naturally Roughness, do yet bear to each other a love like that of Brothers, and pay that de∣ference to one another, that one would think them united by the straitest bands of friendship.
The State, which has always, in Policy, accounted this as most conducive to the quiet of the Empire, has appointed forms of Salutation, of Visiting, of making Entertainments, and of writing Letters. The usual way of Salutation is to lay your Hands cross your Breast, and bow your Head a little. Where you would still show a greater Respect, you must joyn your Hands together, and carry them almost to the ground, bow∣ing your whole Body; if you pass by a Person of E∣minent Quality, or receive such an one into your House, you must bend one Knee, and remain in that Posture 'till he whom you thus Salute takes you up, which he always does immediately. But when a Man∣darin appears in publick, it would be a Criminal sau∣ciness to Salute him in any sort of Fashion, unless you have occasion to speak to him: you must step aside a little, and holding your Eyes on the ground, and your Arms cross your Sides, stay till he be gone past you. Altho' very familiar Acquaintance make Visits without any Ceremony, yet for those Friends who are not so, Custom has prescribed a set form of Vi∣siting. The Visiter sends his Servant before with a piece of red Paper, on which is wrote his own name, and a great many marks of Respect to the Person he Visits, according as his Dignity or Quality is. When this message is received, the Visitor comes in, and meets with a reception answerable to his Merit. The Person visited sometimes stays for the Visitor in the Hall, without going out to meet him, or if he be of a much Superior Quality without rising from his Seat: sometimes he meets the Visitor at his Door; some∣times he goes out into the Court-yard, and some∣times even into the Street to bring him in. When they come into view, they both run and make a low Bow. They say but little, their Complements are in form, one knows what he must say, and the other
how he must answer; they never beat their Brains, like us, to find out new Complements, and fine Phrases. At every Gate they make a halt where the Ceremonies begin afresh, and the Bows are renewed to make each go first; they use but two ways of speak∣ing on this Occasion, which are Tsin; that is, pray be pleased to ente, and Ponkan, it must not be. Each of them repeats his word four or five times, and then the Stranger suffers himself to be persuaded, and goes on to the next Door, where the same thing begins anew. When they come to the Room where they are to stay, they stand near the Door in a row, and every one bows almost to the ground; then follow the Ce∣remonies of kneeling, and going on this or that side to give the right Hand, then the Chairs are saluted (for they have their Complements paid them as well as the Men, they rub them to take all Dust away; and bow in a respective manner to them) then follow the Contentions about the first Place; yet all this makes no Confusion. Use has made it natural to the Chinese, they know before what themselves, and what others are to do, every one stays till the others have done in their order what is expected, so that there happens no Confusion or Disturbance. It must be owned that this is a great piece of Fa∣tigue, and after so many Motions and different Po∣stures in which they spend a quarter of an hour be∣fore they are to sit down; it must be own'd they have need enough of rest. The Chairs are set so that every Body sits opposite to one another; when you are sate, you must sit straight, not lean back, your Eyes must look downward, your Hands must be stretched on your Knees, your Feet even, not across, with a grave and composed behaviour, not be over∣forward to speak. The Chinese think that a Visit con∣sists not in mutual Converse so much as in outward
Complement and Ceremony, and in China the Visi∣tor may truly and properly say he comes to pay his Respects, for oftimes there is more honours paid than words spoken. A Missionary did aver to me that a Mandarin made him a Visit, in which he spoke never a word to him. This is always certain that they never overheat them∣selves with discoursing, for one may generally say of them that they are Statues or Figures placed in a Theatre for Ornament, they have so little of Discourse and so much of Gravity. Their Speech is mighty submissive and humble, you will never hear them say, for Example, I am obliged to you for the favour you have done me, but thus, The favour which my Lord, which my Instructer has granted to me, who am little in his Eyes; or who am his Dis∣ciple, has extremely obliged me. Again, they dont say, I make bold to present you with a few Curiosities of my Country; but The Servant takes the liberty to offer to his Lord a few Curiosities which came from his mean and vile Country. Again, not Whatsoever comes from your Kingdom or Province is well worked; but Whatsoever comes from the precious Kingdom, the noble Province of the Lord is extraordinary fine, and exceeding well wrought, In like manner in all other Cases, they never say I or You in the first or second Person? but me your Servant, me your Disciple, me your Subject. And in∣stead of saying You, they say the Doctor said, the Lord did, the Emperor appointed. It would be a great piece of Clownishness to say otherwise, unless to our Ser∣vants. During the Visit the Tea goes round two or three times, where you must use a Ceremony when you take the Dish, when you carry it to your Mouth, or when you return it to the Servant. When you de∣part it is with the same Ceremonies with which you came in, and you conclude the Comedy with the same
Expence you began it. Strangers are very uncouth at playing their parts herein, and make great blunders. The reasonable part of the Chinese smile at them and excuse them; others take exceptions at it, and desire them to learn and practice before they venture in pub∣lick For this reason they allow Ambassadors forty days to prepare for their Audience of the Emperor; and for fear they should miss any Ceremony, they send them, during the time allowed, Masters of the Ceremonies, who teach them, and make them pra∣ctice. Their Feasts are ceremonious even beyond what you can imagin, you would think they are not in∣vited to eat, but to make Grimaces. Not a mouth∣ful of Meat is eat, or a drop of Wine drank but it costs an hundred Faces. They have, like our Con∣sorts of Musick, an Officer who beats time, that the Guests may all together in Concord take their Meat on their Plates, and put it into their Mouths, and list up their little Instruments of Wood, which serve in∣stead of a Fork, or put them again in their places in Order. Every Guest has a peculiar Table, with∣out Table-Cloath, Napkin, Knife or Spoon; for e∣very thing is ready cut to their Hands, and they ne∣ver touch any thing but with two little wooden In∣struments tipped with Silver, which the Chinese handle very dexterously, and which serve them for an Uni∣versal Instrument. They begin their Feasts with drinking Wine, which is given to every Guest at one and the same time in a small Cup of China or Silver, which Cup all the Guests take hold of with both Hands: every one lifts his Vessel as high as his Head, presenting their Ser∣vice thereby to one another without speaking, and inviting each other to drink first. It is enough if you hold the Cup to your Mouth only without drinking during the time while the rest drink; for if the out∣ward
Ceremonies are observed and kept, it is all one to them whether you drink or not. After the first Cup, they set upon every Table a great Vessel of hash'd Meat, or Ragoo. Then every one observes the motions of the Master of the Feast, who directs the Actions of his Guests. According as he gives the sign, they take their two little In∣struments, brandish them in the Air, and as it were Present them, and after Exercising them after twenty Fashions which I can't express, they strike them into the Dish, from whence they cleaverly bring up a piece of Meat, which must be eat neither too hastily nor too slowly, since it would be a rudeness either to eat before others or to make them stay for you. Then again they exercise their little Instruments, which at length they place on the Table in that posture wherein they were at the first. In all this you must observe time, that all may begin and end at once. A little after comes the Wine again, which is drank with all the Ceremonies aforesaid. Then comes a second▪ Mess, which they dip into as into the first, and thus the Feast is continued until the end, drinking between every mouthful, 'till there have been twenty or four and twenty different Plates of Meat at every Table, which makes them drink off as many Cups of Wine; but we must observe that, besides that I have said that they drink as much or as little as they will at a time, their Wine Cups are very little, and their Wine is small. When all the Dishes are served, which are done with all imaginable Order, no more Wine is brought, and the Guests may be a little more free with their Meat, taking indifferently out of any of these Dishes before them, which yet must be done when the rest of the Guests take out of some of their Dishes, for Uniformity and Order is always Sacred. At this
time they bring Rice and Bread, for as yet nothing but Meat has been brought; they bring likewise fine Broths made of Flesh or Fish, in which the Guests, if they think fit, may mingle their Rice. They sit at Table serious, grave, and silent, for three or four hours together. When the Master of the House sees they have all done eating, he gives the sign to rise, and they go aside for a quarter of an hour into the Hall or Garden to entertain and divert themselves. Then they come again to Table, which they find set out with all sorts of sweetmeats, and dryed Fruits, which they keep to drink with their Tea. These Customs so strictly enjoyned, and so ex∣tremely troublesome, which must be performed from one end to the other of the Feast, keeps all the Guests from eating, who do not find themselves Hungry 'till they arise from the Table. Then they have a great mind to go and Dine at Home; but a Company of Strolers come and play over a Comedy, which is so tedious that it wearies one as much as that before at the Table did. Nor is tediousness the only fault, for they are commonly very dull and very noisie, no Rules are observed, sometimes they Sing, sometimes bawl, and sometimes howl, for the Chinese have lit∣tle skill in making Declamations. Yet you must not laugh at this folly, but all the while admire at the Politeness of China, at its Ceremonies, Instituted, as they say, by the Discretion of the Antients, and still kept up by the Wisdom of the Moderns. The Letters which are wrote from one to ano∣ther, are as remarkable for their Civilities and Ce∣remonies, which are as many and as mysterious as the others. They dont write in the same manner as they speak; the bigness of the Characters, the di∣stances between the Lines, the innumerable Titles of Honour given to the several Qualities of Persons,
the shape of the Paper, the number of red, white or blew Covers for the Letter, according to the Persons condition, and an hundred other Formalities puzzle sometimes the Brain of the most understanding men amongst them, for there is scarce any one who is Se∣cretary enough to write and send one of their Letters as it ought to be. There are a thousand other Rules practised by the better sort in ordinary Conversation, which you must observe, unless you would be accounted a Clown; and tho' in a ousand Instances these things savour more of a ridicuus affectation than of real politeness, no one can deny nevertheless but that these Customs, which People observe so exactly, do inspire into them a sweetness of Temper, and a love of Order. These three Moral Principles, that is, The Respect which Children pay their Parents, The Veneration which all pay the Emperor and his Officers, and The mutual Humility and Courtesie of all People, work their effect the better, because supported by a wise and well understood Policy. The Principle Maxims of which are, my Lord, as follow. The first is, never to give any one an Office in his own Province, and that for two Reasons: because, first, a Mandarin of ordinary Parentage is usually despised by those who know his Family. Secondly, because being brought into favour and repute, by the great number of his kindred and Friends, he might be enabled either to make, or at least to support a Re∣bellion, or at least it would be very difficult for him to execute Justice with an Universal impartiality. The second Maxim, is to retain at Court the Children of the Mandarins imployed in the most con∣siderable Offices in the Province, under pretence in∣deed of educating them well, but in reality keeping them as Hostages, least their Fathers should fall from that Duty which they owe the Emperor.
The third Maxim, is that when one goes to Law, such a Commissary is made use of as the Emperor pleases to name, unless the Office or Quality of the Criminal gives him the liberty to refuse him. If the Emperor dislikes the first Sentence, he may Commis∣sion new Judges to re-examine it until the Sentence be agreeable to his mind. For otherwise it would be in the power of Mony, or of Artifice to save a Man whose life would be noxious to the good of the State. On the other side, say they, we need not fear the Princes Passion, who if he have a mind to take off a good Man may find ways enough to do it without going so openly about it. But it is but sitting that there should be a means efficacious enough to rid the Empire of an ill Man. The fourth Maxim of Policy is never to sell any Place, but to bestow it always upon Merit; that is to those of good life, and who by a diligent Study have acquainted themselves with the Laws and Customs of their Country. To this end Informations are ex∣hibited of the life and manners of the Candidate, e∣specially when a Mandarin is removed from an Infe∣rior to a Superior Office; as for their Understanding the Laws, they undergo so many Examinations and Tryals of it, that it is impossible for an ignoramus to be thought understanding, so severe are the measures which they take. When they resolve to set a Child apart to Learning, they put him to a Master, for the Towns of China are full of Schools, where Reading and Writing are taught, which to learn well will take up some years. When the Youth has made a pretty good progress in this, he is presented to a Mandarin of the lower Order to be examined. If he writes a good Hand, and makes their Characters handsomly, he is admit∣ted among those who apply themselves to the know∣ledge of Books, and endeavour to obtain a degree.
Of which there are three sorts which answer to our Bachelour, Master of Arts, and Doctor. As the fortunes of the Chinese do wholly depend upon their Capacity and Understanding, so they spend their whole life in Study. They say by Heart all their Staple Books with a wonderful alacrity, they make Comments on their Laws: Composition, Eloquence, Imitation and Knowledge of their antient Doctors, and the delicacy and politeness of the modern ones, from six to sixty are their constant employ. In some the quickness and readiness of Wit saves them a great deal of Labour, for some have been Doctors at an Age when others can write but indifferently; but these are Hero's amongst the Chinese, of which one in an Age is enough. The Examinations are strict, Masters of Arts are created by the Principal Mandarins of the Province; Bachelours by those Mandarins assisted by a Com∣missary from Court; as for Doctors they Commence only at Pekin: but because some who deserve this De∣gree, have not wherewith to defray so expensive a Journy, what is necessary for it, is bestowed on them gratis, that so poverty may not deprive the State of the Service of those Men who may prove useful and beneficial to it. Every ones Character is taken from his ability to Invent or Compose. For this purpose the Candi∣dates are shut up in a close Room, without Books, without any other Paper than what is necessary for them to write on. All the while they are forbidden all manner of Correspondents, at the Doors are placed by the Mandarins Guards, whose fidelity no Bribes can Corrupt; the second examination is yet more strict, for least the Commissary sent hy the Court should himself be byassed thro' favour or the hopes of gain, he is not suffered to see or speak with any Person 'till the Examination is over.
In Creating the Doctors, the Emperor often en∣gages himself; the present Emperor is more fear'd by the Candidates than any of the other Posers, not only for his nice Exactness and rigorous Justice, but for his extraordinary Abilities in judging of any thing of this Nature. When the Doctors are named, they are presented to him; to three Principal of which he gives Garlands of Flowers, or any other mark of Honour, to distinguish them from the rest; some of them likewise he chuses for Members of his Royal Academy, from whence they never remove, unless into Posts of the greatest Consideration and Credit in the Kingdom. The great number of Presents which they receive from their Kindred and Friends keeps the Doctors from being poor. Every one hopes to make some advantage from his friendship; but lest high Pro∣motion should make them negligent, and sit loose to their Studies; they still undergo several Examina∣tions, where if they appear to have been negligent, they certainly meet with severity and reproof; whereas if they have still continued to forward and improve their Studies, they meet with a suitable en∣couragement and reward. No small share of the Publick Good is owing to this Principle of Policy. The Youths, whom idle∣ness and sloth never fail to Corrupt, are by this con∣stant Employment diverted from ill Courses, they have scarce time enough to follow their loose Incli∣nations? Secondly, Study forms and polishes their Wits. People who never engage in Arts and Sci∣ences, are always blockish and stupid. Thirdly, all Of∣fices are filled by able Men, and if they cant prevent that injustice which proceeds from the Covetousness and Corrupt Affections of Officers, at least they will take care to hinder that which arises from Ignorance and Immorality. Fourthly, since the Places are given,
the Emperor may with greater Justice turn out those Officers whom he shall find undeserving. We ought indeed to punish every Offender; yet it would be na∣tural to bear with a Mandarin who is negligent of his Office for want of Understanding or Application, who is too mild or over severe, if taking away his Place would ruin his Family whose whole Fortune it may be was laid out in the purchase of it, when as if a Place be disposed only by Donation, the Prince who gave it may easily without any distur∣bance take it from one, and gratifie another with it. Lastly, no Fees are paid for the Administration of Justice. The Judge whose Office cost him nothing, and who has his Salary stated, can require nothing of the parties at Law; which impowers every poor Man to prosecute his own Rights, and frees him from being oppressed by the opulence of his Adversary, who can't be brought to do justly and reasonably be∣cause the other has not mony. The Chinese have established this as a fifth Maxim of Policy never to suffer Strangers to have any share in their Administration. The small esteem they bear them, makes the Chinese use them so coursly. They fancy that a mixture of Natives and Foreigners would bring them to contempt, and occasion nought but Corruption and Disorder. From thence also would spring particular Grudges, making Parties, and at last Rebellions. For difference of People necessarily supposes difference of Customs, Languages, Humour and Religion. This makes them no longer Children of the same Family, bred up to the same Opinions, and tempered with the same Notions; and be there all imaginable care used in instructing and forming Strangers, they are at most but adopted Sons, who never have that implicit Obedience and tender Af∣fection, which Children by Nature bear to their own Parents. So that should Foreigners be better quali∣fied
than Natives, which you can never make the Chinese believe, they would fancy it for the good of their Country to prefer Natives to them: and it is little less than a Miracle in favour of Christianity, that a few Missionaries have been suffered to settle there. This last piece of Policy is extremely good when those of a false Religion are kept out, which teaches Rebellion and Disturbance; itself being the Product of Caballing and Riot, but the Case is otherwise in Christianity, whose Humility, Sweetness and Obe∣dience to Authority, produces nought but Peace, Unity, and Charity among all People. This is what the Chinese begin to be convinced of, having had tryal of it for an whole Age together. Happy were it if they would embrace it as a Constitution equally ne∣cessary for the Salvation of their Souls, as conducive to the Peace and Good of their State. Their sixth Maxim is that Nobility is never Here∣ditary, neither is there any distinction between the Qualities of People; saving what the Offices which they Execute makes, so that excepting the Family of Confucius the whole Kingdom is divided into Magi∣stacy and Commonalty. There are no Lands but what are held by Socage-Tenure, not even those Lands which are destined for the Bonzes, or which belong to the Temples of the Idols. So that their Gods, as well as Men, are subjected to the State, and are obliged by Taxes and Contributions to acknow∣ledge the Emperors Supremacy. When a Vice Roy or Governour of a Province is dead, his Children, as well as others, have their Fortunes to make; and if they inherit not their Fathers Virtue and Ingenuity, his name which they bear, be it never so famous, gives them no quality at all.
The Advantages which the State makes of this Maxim are first, Trading is in a more flourishing con∣dition, which the laziness of the Nobility is the like∣liest means to ruin. Secondly, the Emperors Re∣venues are encreased by it because no Estates are Tax-free. In Towns which pay Poll-Mony no Per∣son is exempt. Thirdly, by this means Families are hindred from ingratiating themselves with the Popu∣lace, and so kept from establishing themselves so far in the Peoples favour, that it would be a difficulty to the Prince himself to keep them within bounds. Lastly, its areceived Opinion among the Chinese, that if an Emperor would be obeyed he must lay his commands upon Subjects, and not upon so many little Kings. Their seventh Principle of Policy is to keep up in Peace, as well as War, great Armies, as well to maintain a Credit and Respect from the Neighbours, as to stifle or rather prevent any Disturbance or in∣surrection which may happen at Home. Heretofore a million of Soldiers were set to Guard their great Wall. A less number also than that to Garrison their Frontiers and great Towns would have been too little. Now they think it enough to keep Garrisons in their most important Towns. Besides these standing Forces, there are fifteen or twenty thousand Men in each Province, under the command of private Officers; they have also Soldi∣ers to keep their Islands, especially Haynan and For∣mosa. The Horse Guards of Pekin are above an hun∣dred and sixty thousand. So that, I believe, in the great∣est and securest Peace the Emperor has in Pay and at Muster no less than fifty hundred thousand effective Men, all armed according to the Custom of the Country with Scimeters and Darts. They have but a very small Infantry, and of those which they have there are no Pikemen, and very few Musketeers.
Their Soldiers are very graceful, and pretty well Disciplined, for the Tartars have almost degenerated into Chinese, and the Chinese continue as they always were, Soft, Effeminate Enemies of Labour, better at making an handsome Figure at Muster or in a March, than at behaving themselves gallantly in an Action. The Tartars begin with heat and briskness, and if they can make their Enemies give ground in the beginning, then they can make their advantage of it; otherwise they are unable to continue an At∣tack a good while, or to bear up long against one, especially if made in order and with vigour. The Emperor, whom I have had the honour to speak with, who says nothing but what is proper, as he does no∣thing but what is great, gave this short Character of them, they are good Soldiers when opposed to bad ones, but bad when opposed to good ones. The eighth Maxim is concerning their Rewards and Punishments. Great Men who have faithfully served their Country never lose their Reward; and because be a Prince never so Opulent, he can never have enough to reward all his Subjects, this defect is made up by Marks and Titles of Honour, which are very acceptable to the Subjects, and no charge to the Prince. These Titles of Honour are what they call the se∣veral Orders of Mandarins. They say such an one is a Mandarin of the first Rank, or the Emperor has placed such an one in the first Class of the Mandarins of the second Rank, and in like manner of others. This Dignity, which is merely honorary, makes them take place in Assemblies, Visits, and Councels, but is no profit to them. To make these Rewards of greater extent, which the People chuse much sooner than Pensions, they are sometimes bestowed even upon the dead, who are oftimes made Mandarins af∣ter their Funerals, who therefore fill sometimes the
greatest Places of Honour amongst the Nobility when the Emperor can't bestow upon them the meanest Place among the living. They have oftentimes at the Publick or the Princes Charge lofty Monuments raised for them, and that Court which looks after the Pub∣lick Expences judges what recompense shall be paid to their desert. These Rewards are oftimes accom∣panied with Elogies in their praise made by the Em∣peror himself, which makes them and their Family famous to all Posterity. But the highest Honour is to make them Saints, to build them Temples, and offer them Sacrifices as to the Gods of the Country. By this means Paganism has been mightily supported by the Emperors, adoring themselves the Work of their own Hands, and paying Worship and Honour to them, who when alive would have been glad to be Prostrate at their now Worshippers feet. They Reward also in private Men those vertuous Actions which bring no publick Advantage to the State. We read in History that Temples have been raised to the memory of some Maids who all their lives kept their Chastity inviolable. And I my self have seen in several of their Towns Trophies with honor∣able Inscriptions raised up for Inhabitants of mean rank and degree, to publish to all the World their Virtue and Merit. If the Chinese are very liberal in their Rewards, they are as severe in their Punishments even of the slightest Faults; their Punishments are adequate to their demerits. The usual Punishments is the Bastinado on the Back. When they receive but forty or fifty blows they call this a Fatherly Correction. To which as well Mandarins as others are subject; this Punishment is not accounted very scandalous, and after it is ex∣ecuted, the Criminal must fall on his Knees before the Judge, and if able bow three times down to the ground, and give him humble thanks for taking this care of his Education.
Yet this Punishment is of that Violence that one stroke is enough to fell one that is of a tender Con∣stitution; and oftimes persons die of it; it is true there are ways of softening this Punishment when the Execution of it is in Court. The easiest is to Bribe the Executioners, for there are many of them; because lest the Executioners weariness should lessen the Punishment, after five or six strokes another succeeds, and so till the whole be performed. But when the Criminal has by mony made them his Friends, they understand their business so well, that notwithstand∣ing all the care which the Mandarins present can use, the Punishment becomes light and almost no∣thing. Beside this in the Courts there are persons to be hired, who keep a good understanding with the Offi∣cers. Who, upon a signal given, take the place of the Criminal, who escapes among the croud, and re∣ceives his Punishment. For mony there are every where these sort of Vicarious Persons to be met with. For it is a Trade at China, where several Persons are maintained by the blows of the Cudgel. By such a trick as this Yam-quam sien, a famous Persecutor of Christianity escaped the just Sentence of the Judges. He engaged a paltry Fellow for a large sum of mony to take upon him his name, and go to the Court of Justice in his stead. He told him that let it come to the worst it was but a good Cudgel∣ling, and if after that he was imprisoned, there should be found out a way to redeem him thence. The poor Fellow went according to agreement, and when the Cryer called out aloud Yam quam sien, the Fellow answered as loud, Here; his Sentence was passed, and the Mandarin condemned him to death. The Offi∣cers, who had been bribed, seized on him immediate∣ly, and according to Custom gagged him; for after Sentence the Criminal is not suffered to speak. Af∣terward
he was brought to the place of Execution, where the poor Wretch suffered a miserable death. The second sot of Punishment is the Carcan, which differs from the former only in the place where the Bastinadoes are given: in this they are given the Criminal at one of the City Gates or in the High∣way; the Punishment here is not so sharp but the In∣famy is greater, and he who has once undergone this Punishment can never more recover his Repu∣tation. They have several different ways of inflicting death. Mean and ignoble Persons have their Heads cut off, for in China the separation of the Head from the Body is disgraceful. On the contrary Persons of Quality are Strangled, which among them is a death of more Credit; if the Crime be very notorious they are Punished like mean Persons, and sometimes their Heads are cut off and hanged on a Tree in the High∣ways. Rebels and Traytors are punished with the utmost severity; that is to speak as they do, they cut them into ten thousand pieces. For, after that the Execu∣tioner hath tyed them to a Post, he cuts of the Skin all round their Forehead, which he tears by force till it hangs over their Eyes, that they may not see the Torments they are to endure. Afterwards he cuts their Bodies in what places he thinks fit, and when he is tyred with this barbarous Employment, he leaves them to the tyranny of their Enemies, and the insults of the Mob. Often Criminals are cruelly whipped till they ex¦pire. Lastly, the Torture which is the cruellest of all Deaths is here used; and generally the Hands and Fingers suffer most in it. Ninthly, They think it good Policy to forbid Wo∣men from all Trade and Commerce, which they can only benefit by letting it alone; all their business lies
within Doors, where they find continual Employ∣ment in the careful Education of their Children. They neither Buy nor Sell; and one sees Women so seldom in the Streets, that one would imagine them to be all Religiouses confined to a Cloyster. Princesses never Succeed to the Crown, nor ever have the Re∣gency during the young Princes minority; and tho' the Emperor may in private consult them, it is reckoned mean and ignoble to do it. In which thing the Chinese seem in my Opinion less reasonable than in others. For wit and foresight is equally the Por∣tion of the one as of the other Sex; and a Prince is never so understanding as when he knows how to find out all his Treasures wheresoever Nature has placed them, nor ever so Prudent as when he makes use of them. Lastly, Their tenth Maxim is to encourage Trade as much as possible thro' the whole Empire. All the other Policy is conducive to the plenty or conveni∣ence of their Country; but this is concern'd for the very lives of the People, who would be soon re∣duced to the last extremity if Trade should once fail. It is not the Peoples care only, but the Man∣darins also, who put out their mony to trusty Traders to make the best advantage of it. By this private way Ousanguey, the little King of Chensi, who brought the Tartars into China, made himself so rich and powerful, that he was able himself to support for a long time the War against the Emperor. To encrease Commerce Foreigners have been per∣mitted to come into the Ports of China, a thing till lately never known. On the other side the Chinese spread themselves over all the Indies, where they carry Silk, 'China, Physical Drugs, Sugar, Japanned Works, Wine, and Potters Ware. They go to Batavia, Si∣am, to Achim, Malacca and especially to Iappon and Manilla; from which they are distant but a few days
Sail. From all these places they bring Silver, all of which that is brought from Mexico to the Phi∣lippine Islands by the Pacifick Ocean, is carried from thence to Canton, whence it is spread thro' the whole Empire. But the greatest part of their Trading lies within themselves, from one Province to another, which like so many Kingdoms Communicate to each other their Riches. That of Houquam sends Rice, that of Canton Sugar, from Chequiam comes good Silk, from Nankin neat and handsome pieces of Workmanship; Chensi and Chansi are rich in Iron, Horses, Mules, Cammels and Furs. Tokiem yields Tea. Leautom Drugs, and so the rest. This mutual Commerce unites the People, and fills their Towns with plenty. These, my Lord, are not all the Chinese Maxims, there are a World of others; but I have wrote down these as the most known and most essential ones for the Publick Good. Good order in the Inferior Governments is as use∣ful a part of Policy to the State as any whatever, by these Inferior Governments I mean those of the Ci∣ties, and of the several Camps. All these are settled in China; for from the Foundation of that Empire the State has thought it worth while to look after even the most inconsiderable things. Among Persons of Quality there never happens any Dispute about taking place, because every one knows exactly what is due to his own, and to others Quality; and it was a great surprise to every body to see about six or seven years ago a Prince of the Blood, and a Colao engaged in such a sort of Dispute. The occasion of it was this; the Laws Ordain that when a Colao is about to speak to a Prince of the Blood he must bend the Knee, but Custom has laid as strong an Obligation on the Prince to take him up im∣mediately.
The Prince thought that an obliging Custom tho' constantly practised by the Royal Family on several occasions ought not to prejudice his right by Law. He did therefore give Audience to a Colao on his Knees and never made any motion to him to rise. The Minister of State in a great Confusion to see himself kept so long in so humble a Posture com∣plained of it to the Emperor, who assembled his Council forthwith. They looked into the Cere∣monial to observe what they could find that would contribute to the deciding this Novel Case, but when they could find nothing therein serviceable to that end they were more perplex'd than ever. Finally the Council who were against Innovati∣ons, judged that the Practise ought to be continued as before; and not freeing the Colao from their obli∣gation of speaking to the Princes of the Blood on their Knees, they thought it requisite also that the Princes should use that Civility towards them as not to keep them in that posture long. You can't, said they to the Colao, honour the Princes too much, and you do not do well to omit any occasion where you can shew the respect you bear them. Princes, added the Emperor to him who had occasioned this Dispute, are by their own Rank set high enough above the rest of mankind, as not  need proudly to seek to debase them lower. They can want nothing to make them honourable, but Temper and Modesty. When you are denied the Respect due to you, all the World knows you have not what you ought to have; but when you insist upon every little Mark of Respect, it will make the World begin to inquire whether you deserve it. Thus both of them were reprimanded, and that no new Laws might be made they let Custom be their Rule. Every thing that belongs to the Princes or Manda∣rins, is punctually stated; their Pensions, their Houses, the number of their Servants, the shape and
bigness of their Sedans, and the Badges of Honour by which they are distinguished. So that when they come into Publick their Quality is presently known, and the respect which is due to them with as little trouble paid. When the Chinese governed the Em∣pire, even private Men wore their marks of distincti∣on; and there was no learned Man but his Degree and Rank might be known by the Fashion or Colour of his Garb. The Towns have their determinate Figure; they ought all to be square as far as the Ground they are built upon will suffer it; in such sort that the Gates may be so built as to answer the four principal Quar∣ters of the World, that is the North, South, East, and West. The Houses have thorough Lights, and are esteemed ill built if their Doors do not e exactly parallel to one of the sides of the Town. Towns of the several Orders have different big∣ness, the chief Towns are nine or twelve Miles round, those of the first Rank are but six, those of the second or third Orders are less in proportion. This Rule nevertheless is not so universal as to ad∣mit of no Exception. The Streets▪ are strait, gener∣ally laid out by the Line, large, well paved, yet very inconvenient; because every Person of any account goes up and down them either on Horseback or in a Chair. The Houses are low, of an equal height. The jealousie of the Husbands would not suffer that their Neighbours Houses should be higher than their own, lest thereby their Windows should over∣look their Court-Yards and Gardens. The whole Town is divided into four parts, and those again into several smaller Divisions, each of which contain ten Houses, over every one of which subdivisions an Officer presides, who takes notice of every thing which passes in his little Ward, tells the Mandarin what Contentions happen, what extraor∣dinary
things, what Strangers come thither or go thence. The Neighbourhood is obliged to give mu∣tual assistance, and in case of an allarm to lend one another an helping hand, for if any Theft or Rob∣bery be committed in the Night, the Neighborhood must contribute toward repairing the loss. Lastly, in every Family the Father is responsible for the disor∣ders and irregularities committed either by his Chil∣dren or Servants. The Gates of the Cities are well looked after, and even in time of Peace are shut up at the approach of night. In the day-time there are Guards to exa∣mine all who come in; if he be a Stranger, if he comes from another Province, or from a Neighbour∣ing Town, they know him by his Tone, by his Mien, or his Habit, which in every place are somewhat dif∣ferent. When they observe any thing extraordinary or suspicious, they take the Person up, or inform the Mandarin of it. So that European Missionaries, whose Aspect is infinitely different from that of the Chinese, are known as soon as seen, and those who have not the Emperors approbation find it very diffi∣cult to make a long Journey. In certain places, as at Pekin, as soon as night comes on they tie Chains cross the Streets; the Guards go the Patrole up and down the chief Streets, and Guards and Sentinels are placed here and there: The Horse go the Rounds upon the Fortifications; and wo be to him who is found then from Home. Meetings, Masquerades and Balls, and such like Night-works are good, say the Chinese, for none but Theives and the Mob. Orderly People ought at that time either to sit up providing for their Family, or else take their rest, that they may be refreshed, and better able the next day to manage the business of the Family. Gaming is forbidden both to the Commonalty and
Gentry. Which nevertheless hinders not the Chinese from playing, sometimes even so long as till they have lost all their Estate, their Houses, their Chil∣dren and their Wives, which they sometimes hazard upon a Card; for there is no degree of Extravagance to which the desire of Lucre and Riches will not carry a Chinese. But besides that it is a disorder which the Tartars, since they became Masters of China, have introduced amongst them, they take great heed to conceal their gaming; and by consequence the Law which forbids it always flourishes, and is able to suppress great disorders. What I have said concerning Wives, that their Husbands may sell them, or lose them at Play; puts me in mind to give some account of the Rules which their Civil Constitution rather than their Religion have ordained concerning Marriages; those who have a mind to Marry do not, as among us, follow their own fancies in their choice of a Wife. They never see the Woman they are about to have, but take her Parents word in the case, or else they have their information from several old Women who are as it were inspectors, but who are nevertheless in fee with the Womans Friends to set her out more than she deserves, so that it is very seldom that they make a true Description, or give a just Character of her whom they go to view. The Womans Parents give mony generally to these Emissaries to oblige them to give a favourable Character. For it is for the Parents advantage that their Daughter should be reputed handsom, witty, and genteel; because the Chinese buy their Wives, and, as in other Merchandises, they give more or less according to the good or bad properties of them. When the Parties are agreed about the price the Contract is made, and the mony paid down. Then preparation is made on both sides for the Nuptial
Solemnites, when the day of Marriage is come they carry the Bride in a sumptuous Chair before which go Hautboys, Drums and Fifes, and after it follow her Parents and other particular Friends of her Fa∣mily. All the Portion which she brings is her mar∣riage Garments, some Cloaths, and houshold Goods which her Father presents her with. The Bride∣groom stands at his door richly attired waiting for her: he himself opens the Sedan which was closely shut, and having conducted her into a Chamber, delivers her to several Women invited thither for that purpose, who spend there the day together in feasting and sporting, while the Husband in ano∣ther Room entertains his Friends and Acquaintance. This being the first time that the Bride and Bride∣groom see each other, and both or one very often not liking their Bargain, its very often a day of rejoycing for their Guests, but of sorrow for themselves. The Women must submit tho' they don't like, because their Parents have sold them, but the Husbands sometimes are not so complaisant, for there have been some who when they first opened the Sedan to receive the Bride, repulsed by her Shape and Aspect have shut the Chair again, and sent her and her Parents and Friends back again, willing rather to lose their Mony than enter upon so bad a Purchase. When the Tartars in the late War took Nankin, there happened a passage which made the Chinese merry notwithstanding all their misfortunes. Among all the disorders which the Victors committed in that Province, they endeavoured to seize upon all the Women they could to make mony of them. When they took the chief City of that Province, they carry'd all the Women thither, and shut them up higgly piggly together in the Magazines with other Goods. But because there were some of all ages and degrees of Beauty, they resolved to put them into
Sacks and carry them to Market, and so sell them to any one at a venture ugly or handsome. There was the same price set upon every one, and for six∣teen or eighteen shillings take which Sack you will without opening it. After this manner the Soldiers, who were ever insolent in Prosperity, abused their Victory, and approved themselves more barbarous in the most Polite and Civil City in the World, than they had been in the Deserts of Tartary. At the day of Sale there came Buyers enough. Some came to recover if haply they could their Wives or Children who were among those Women, others were led thither thro' hopes that good fortune and a lucky chance would put a Fortune into their Hands. In short the novelty of the thing brought a great Con∣course from the adjacent places. An ordinary Fellow who had but twelve shillings in the World, gave it and chose a Sack as did the rest, and carryed it off; when he was got out of the crowd, whether thro' curiosity or a desire to relieve the person in the Sack who com∣plained, he could not forbear opening it. In it he found an old Woman, whom age, grief, and ill treatment had made deformed to the highest degree; he was so confoundedly mad at it, that to gratifie his Passion and Rage he was going to throw the old Woman and Sack both together into the River, that the gratification of his Passion might be some com∣fort to him for the loss of his mony. Then the good old Gentlewoman said to him. Son, your lot is not so bad as you imagine; be of good chear, you have made your Fortune: take care only of my life, I will make yours happier than ever it has been yet. These words somewhat pacified him. Wherefore he carried her into a House hardby, where she told him her Quality and her Estate. She be∣longed to a Mandarin of note in the Neighbourhood, to whom she wrote immediately. He sent her an
Equipage agreeable to her Quality, and she carried her deliverer along with her, and afterwards was so good a friend to him, that he never had reason to complain that he had lost the two Crowns which he lay'd out in purchasing her. But to return to the Chinese Marriages, I must far∣ther tell you, that a Husband may not Divorce his Wife, excepting for Adultery, and a few other occa∣sions which seldom or never fall out; in those cases they sell them to whosoever will buy them, and buy another. Persons of Quality never do thus, but common People do frequently. If a Man has the boldness to sell his Wife without just reason, both the Buyer and Seller are severely punished, yet the Hus∣band is not obliged to take her again. Although a Man be allowed but one Wife, he may have as many Concubines as he will; all the Chil∣dren have an equal claim to the Estate, because they are reckon'd as the Wives Children tho' they be some of the Concubines; they all call the Wife Mother, who is indeed sole Mistress of the House; the Concubines serve and honour her, and have no manner of authority or power but what they derive from her. The Chinese think it a strange thing that the Eu∣ropeans are not thus allowed the use of Women, yet they confess it is a commendable sign of moderati∣on in them. But when we observed to them the troubles, quarrels, contentions, and jealousies which many Women must needs raise in a Family, they say nothing is without some inconvenience and disorder; but that perhaps there are more crosses in having but one, than in having many Women. The best way they own is to have none at all. Altho' the Chinese are extremely jealous to that de∣gree that they suffer not their Wives to speak in pri∣vate even to their own Brothren, much less give them
liberty to enjoy all that freedom and publick Diver∣sion which in Europe is esteemed only Gallantry and Curiosity: nevertheless there are Husbands so very complaisant to their Wives as to let them freely com∣mit Adultery, which permission some Women make the condition of their Marriage: Those who according to such agreement follow these courses (as there is a certain sort of People who do) have no manner of power to hinder Debauchées from frequenting their Houses, and from making ill use of the easiness or unruly Passions of such Women. But such Families as these are abhorred by the Chinese, who think so ill of them, that their Children tho' never so deserving or intelligent can never obtain any degree, or be em∣ployed in any honourable Office. Of all their Civil Institutions there is no one which costs the Chinese so much trouble as does the ordering of their time, and their Holydays. There are in the Emperors service above an hundred persons, on pur∣pose to regulate the Kalendar, which they make a∣new every year, and with a great deal of Ceremony send it up and down to the Vice Roys of each Pro∣vince. They regulate the number of Months, which is sometimes twelve, sometimes thirteen, which are Lunar months, and ought to agree with the Suns course. In these Almanacks the Equinoxes, Solstices, and the Suns entry into each Sign is set down: The Eclipses of the Sun or Moon are there, and the time when visible at Pekin or any of the Principal Cities. The Planets courses, their places in the Ecliptick, their Oppositions, Conjunctions, and Propinquity to any Stars are described, and indeed every thing else is well calculated, which Astronomy has that is curious or excellent. They mix with this divers points of judicial Astrology, which Ignorance or Superstiti∣on have invented, concerning happy or unhappy days, times proper for Marriage, Building, or undertaking
Journies. These prejudices generally guide the Peo∣ple; but the Emperor, and all other Men of Sence are wiser than to mind such trifles. Altho' there be no publick Clocks as in Europe, the day is nevertheless divided into four and twenty parts which have all their particular Names, and be∣gin from midnight. They tell me that antiently they divided their day into twelve parts, each of which were subdivided into eight; which made the natural day consist of fourscore and sixteen, which were exactly distinguished in their Calculations. But their Sundials (and they have very antient ones) were divided into four general divisions, each of which contained four and twenty little subdivisions, which added to the four great divisions divided the whole Circle into an hundred parts. This sort of Dialling seems very irregular, nor can I see for what use it was intended. Since they have received the new Kalendar from the Missionaries, they have regulated their Dials by hours, and reckon their time almost as we do; only we must take no∣tice that instead of two hours they reckon but one, so that their natural day consists of but twelve hours, the names of which diversly combined with ten o∣ther terms which they have invented, make a Revo∣lution of sixty, which serves them instead of a Cycle to mark their different years. I dare not trouble you, My Lord, with particular enumerations which would be tedious, and are in foregoing Relations suf∣ficiently explained. As for the People, they are not very nice herein; they content themselves with knowing the time of the Suns rising and setting, and Noon. In the night they make use of Bells and Drums which are very often sounded, and serve to distinguish the night into five Watches.
The Current Coin is very odd. They have round Copper pieces with a hole in the middle, that they may be strung, they are full of Characters; the metal is neither pure nor well hammered; and altho' they are thick, one may break them with ones Fingers if one strive; ten of these make a peny, ten of which are the tenth part of the Chinese Crown, called by the Portuguese, in the Indies, Taël, and by themselves Leam, which Crown amounts to six shillings two pence halfpeny, and 2/7 3/3 of a farthing. This Crown piece is not coined with any stamp or image on it as our mony in Europe is; the Chinese Sil∣ver mony is not made in any determinate regular form, they take for mony any irregular pieces or bits of Silver by weight, which if they do not believe to be good Silver they may cut asunder. This they pra∣ctice to prevent false and counterfeit mony, and they are so expert in guessing at the goodness and value of any piece of Silver by looking on it only, that they are seldom mistaken, especially if it be melted after the manner practised there. They know the goodness of it three ways; by the colour, by several little holes which are made in it by the melting pot, and by divers small Circles which the Air makes on the surface of the metal when it cools after melting. If the colour be white, the holes small and deep, if the Circles be many, and those close, and very fine, especially toward the center of the piece, then the Silver is pure: but the more it differs from these three qualities so much the more Alloy it has. To explain my self better, I must tell you, they divide their Silver with respect to its purity into a hundred sorts, as we do Gold into four and twenty, called Carats; The Silver which is current in Trade is all the sorts between the fourscorth and the hun∣dreth sort or degree of purity. If it be of a baser
Alloy they will not take it, but punish those who of∣fer it. They take our mony as Silver of the four∣score and fifteenth sort, tho' those who understand Silver well, judge it to be but of the fourscore and third sort at most. So that in an hundred Ounces of our Silver there are seven of Alloy, or, which is all one, an hundred Ounces of it is worth but ninety three of fine Silver. As for Gold, it never passes in China for mony no more than Jewels do; they buy it as they do other Goods or Merchandise, and the Europeans make a good Market of it; because in China a pound of Gold bears but the same proportion to a pound of Silver as one does to ten, whereas among us it is as one to fifteen, so that the Merchant gets by it ge∣nerally a third part. Since almost every thing is there sold by weight, amongst several sort of Scales, they make use of a small portable Balance, kept in a small varnished case which is very light and useful; they are something like the Roman balance, consisting of a small dish, an arm, and a weight that slides up and down that arm, which is made of Ivory or Ebony, in bigness, length, and shape like a Pen; it is divided into three small parts on three different surfaces, it hangs by silken threads at one of the ends in three different points, that it may the better weigh weights of eve∣ry sort. They weigh very nicely and exactly; for in those whose arm is of any considerable length, the thousandth part of a Crown will sensibly turn the Scale. There are two sorts of those Scales, one more a∣greeable to the antient Balances, which are used in Courts of Justice; the beam of this is so divided as exactly to agree with the weight of the French mony, since it hath been encreased by a sixth part in weight, so that every division of the beam weighs the weight
of a Sou or Peny; so that seventy two Chinese Sous or Penys weigh exactly a French Crown, or an ounce English. But the common Balance, which is most used in China, is somewhat different from this; for a French Crown will weigh seventy three divisions of this beam; this I thought my self obliged to take notice of, that we may the better understand what the Relations hitherto have so much differed about. The Chinese divide their pound weight as we do into sixteen ounces, each ounce into ten parts called Tçien; each of these again into ten peny weights, and each of these again into ten grains. There are a great many other divisions, which decrease in the same proportion that 1 has to 10, which divisions our Language has no names for. Altho' these smaller divisions come almost to nothing when single in the Scale, yet in great Traffick they reckon them, where the multiplication of them arises to a considerable sum. In short if we suppose that our Crown should weigh three drachms, or one and twenty peny weight and eight grains, then the Chinese pound will contain 19 ounces, 3 drachms, 2 peny weights, 13 grains 6/7 7/3. And on the contrary our pound will contain 13 ounces Chinese, 1 Tçien, and 4 peny weights, understanding these two last weights as they are explained above. As to the common measures in use in this Empire, they have by diverse persons been represented in different manners; because of those who have wrote upon this Subject, some have had recourse to the mea∣sures of one Province, others to those of another. I have examined all of them carefully, and do think that Father Verbiests Measures, which they use in the Mathematical Court, are the exactest. The Chinese Foot is very little different from ours. Not but that ours is somewhat longer almost 1/100; but this difference is nothing wih the Chinese, who do not stand so nicely
and strictly to their measure as we do, which the People have to measure with, and not to contend and quarrel by. The Civil Government of the Chinese does not on∣ly preside over the Towns, but extends also over the Highways, which they make handsome and easily passable. The passages for their Water are in several places fenced in with Stone Walls for the convenience of travelling, over which there are a great number of Bridges, which unite the Towns and the Fields together. Canals are also cut for the water to pass thro' all the Towns of the Southern Provinces, to make their Ditches more secure, and the Towns more pleasant. In low and marshy grounds, they throw up prodigious long Banks which keep their Roads in those parts good; to perform which they stick at no cost, cutting a passage even thro' Moun∣tains when they stand in their way. The Road from Signanfou to Hamtchoum is one of the strangest pieces of work in the world. They say, for I my self have never yet seen it, that upon the side of some Mountains which are perpendicular and have no shelving they have fixed large beams in∣to them, upon the which beams they have made a sort of Balcony without rails, which reaches thro' several Mountains in that fashion; those who are not used to these sort of Galeries, travel over them in a great deal of pain, afraid of some ill accident or other. But the People of the place are very hazardous; they have Mules used to these sort of Roads, which travel with as little fear or concern over these steep and hideous precipices as they could do in the best or plainest Heath. I have in other places exposed my self very much by following too rashly my Guides. One can't imagin what care they take to make the common Roads convenient for passage. They are fourscore foot broad or very near it; the Soil of
them is light and soon dry when it has left off raining. In some Provinces there are on the right and left hand Causeways for the foot Passengers, which are on both sides supported by long rows of Trees, and oftimes tarrassed with a Wall of eight or ten foot high on each side, to keep Passengers out of the fields. Nevertheless these Walls have breaks, where Roads cross one the other, and they all terminate at some great Town. There are several wooden Machines made like Triumphal Arches set up in the Roads about a Mile and a half distant from each other, about thirty foot high, which have three doors, over which is wrote upon a large Frize in Characters so large as may be read at almost half a quarter of a Mile distance, how far it is from the Town you left, and how far to the Town you are going to. So that you have no need of Guides here, for you may by these directions see what place the Road leads to, and from whence you came, how far you have already gone, and how far you have yet to go. The great care which they have taken to lay out all these distances by the Line, makes the account which these inscriptions give to be pretty sure; yet they are not equal, because the Miles in some Pro∣vinces are longer than in others. It has happened likewise that some of these Arches being ruined and consumed by decay and time, have not been set up exactly in the same place; but generally speaking they serve for a good measure of the Highways, be∣sides that in several places they are no small Orna∣ment. On one side of these Ways about the same distance are fixt little Towers made of earth cast up, on which they set up the Emperors Standard; near it is a Lodge for Soldiers or Country Militia. These are made use of in time of Rebellion, or indeed at any other
time, to carry any Express if occasion be, or to hand Letters from one to another; but especially they take care to stop Highway men and Robbers. Every Man who goes by armed is obliged to give an account whence he came, whither he is going, and upon what business, and must shew his Pass. Be∣side these Guards upon case of an allarm give a help∣ing hand to Travellers, and stop all those who are suspected or accused of Robbery. Among the mighty number of Inhabitants which are in China a great part of which scarce know how to get a Subsistance, a body would imagine that abundance must needs turn Thieves; yet one may travel there with as great safety as here. I have travelled there six thousand Miles up and down thro' almost all the Provinces, and was never but once in Danger of being robbed. Four strange Horsemen followed me for a whole day together, but the Roads were so full of Travellers up and down that they could never get the coast clear for a quarter of an hour together, and so fell short of their aim. Their Posts are as well regulated as ours in Europe are; at the Emperors sole charge, who for that End maintains a great number of Horse. The Couriers go from Pekin for the Capital Cities; the Vice-Roys of which as soon as they have received the Dispatches from Court, send them forthwith by other Couriers to the Towns of the first Rank: from whence they are by these Governours conveyed to those of the second Rank under their Jurisdiction; and from thence they are transmitted to the Towns of the third Rank. It is true these Posts were not established for the conveyance of private Letters, yet the Postma∣sters for a little mony undertake to carry Letters for private Men, as they always do for the Missionaries, who find it as sure a way as that used in Europe, and much less chargeable.
As it is a matter of importance that the Emperors order be quickly transmitted, so it is a great part of the Mandarins Care to see that the Roads be good; and the Emperor to keep them the more strictly to this, spreads a report that he intends shortly to Visit this or that Province. The Governours of those Provinces spare no charge or pains to repair those Roads, because it not only concerns their Fortunes, but sometimes their Life, if this care be omitted. As I once passed just by a Village of the third Rank, in the Province of Chensi, they told me that the Governour had just hanged himself thro' despair lest he should not have time enough to repair a Road thro' which the Emperor was to pass to the Capital Town. The Emperor nevertheless never went the Journey, so that the Mandarin might have saved his life by a little patience. But yet all the care which the Chinese can use, will never prevent a mighty in∣convenience which happens to those who travel in their Roads. The Soil of China is mighty light, and very much beaten by the vast multitudes who travel, some on foot, some on Camels, others in Litters, and again others in Charriots, so that the Roads are perfectly ground into very fine powder; when this is raised by Travellers, and carried about by the winds, it is enough to blind all Passengers if they have not Masks or Veils on them. Thro' these clouds you must con∣tinually make your way, and suck them in instead of Air, during whole Journeys together. When the weather is hot, and the wind in ones Face, scarce any one except a Native can withstand it, I have sometimes been forced to desist from my Journey and come back again. But of all their wholesome Institutions there is no∣thing which contributes so much to the keeping up Peace and Order, as does their method of Levying
the Emperors Revenue. They are not troubled in China with such swarms of Officers and Commissio∣ners as we are. All the Estates there are measured, and all the Families Registred; and whatsoever the Emperor is to have by Excise on Goods, or Tax up∣on Persons, is publickly known, every body brings in what is due from him, to the Mandarins or Go∣vernors of the Towns of the third Rank, for there is no particular Receiver appointed. Those who neglect to bring in their Dues, do not lose their Estates by Confiscation, which would be to punish the Innocent of that Family with the Guilty; but the Persons so offending suffer imprisonment, and undergo the Bastinadoe 'till they have made satisfa∣ction. These Mandarins of the lower Rank, give in an account of what they receive to a general Officer of the Province, who accounts with the Court of Peki which looks after the publick Exchequer. A great part of the Revenue is disbursed up and down the Pro∣vinces in Pensions, Salaries, Soldiers Pay, publick buildings: what is over is carried to Pekin, to main∣tain the Emperors Court, and other expenses in that Town, where the Emperor keeps in pay above an hundred and sixty thousand regular Troops, to whom as well as to the Mandarins, is given out every day Meat, Fish, Rice, Pease, and Straw, according to every ones Rank, besides their constant Pay, which they regularly receive. That which comes from the Southern Provinces, is alone sufficient to answer this expence, this they bring by water in the Emperors Vessels: yet they are so jealous least the Revenue should at any time fall short of the disbursements, that in Pekin there are Magazines of Rice before hand sufficient for three years. Which will keep a great while if it be well fanned and mixed, and altho' it looks not so well,
nor tasts so pleasantly as new Rice, yet it is much more wholesome and nourishing. This numerous Army about the Emperor, well looked after, duely payed, and exactly disciplined, one would think should awe all Asia, yet their idle∣ness, and the small use they ever have occasion to make of their Weapons, does contribute to weaken them as much as their natural Effeminacy. The Western Tartars do not value their numbers a straw, and frequently say in derision of them, that the neigh∣ing of a Tartary Horse is enough to rout all the Chi∣nese Cavalry. Yet they take all possible care to have good Sol∣diers, for they take no Officers into the Guards, 'till they have made trial of their stoutness, skill, and dexterity in Military Affairs. They are regularly ex∣amined, so that as learned Men have their Doctors to examine them, so these have also their Professors. These Officers do regularly Exercise their Com∣panies, they form them into Squadrons, march them, teach them to divide their Files to march thro' nar∣row passages, shew them to give the onset, to rally at the sound of the Cornet or Trumpet; besides they are very dexterous in managing their Bow, or hand∣ling their Scymitar: yet soon broke, and by the least thing in the world put into disorder. The occasion of this I apprehend to be, because in the Education of their Youth they never instil into them Principles of Honour and Bravery, as we do as soon as ever they are big enough to know what Weapons are. The Chinese are always talking to their Children of Gra∣vity, Policy, Law, and Government; they always set Books and Letters in their view, but never a Sword into their Hands. So that having spent their youth∣ful days behind the Counter, or at the Bar, they know no other courage but that of defending ob∣stinately an ill Cause, and are listed into the Soldiery
on no other consideration but that they hope there will be no occasion for fighting. The Chinese Policy hinders hereby a great many Domestick Feuds and Disturbances; but in the same time it does expose its Subjects hereby to the Insults of Foreigners, which is ten times worse. Thus, my Lord, I have set before you a general Scheme of the Government of China, of which People have spoke such wonders, and which is in∣deed admirable for its antiquity, for the wisdom of its Maxims, for the plainness and uniformity of its Laws, for that exemplary Virtue which it has produced in a long Succession of Emperors, for that regularity and order which it has kept the People in, in despight of Civil or Foreign Wars; which notwithstanding, like the rest of the things of this world, is subject to a great many inconveniences; to Rebellions which have depopulated whole Provinces, to the injustice of some Princes who have abused their power, to the Avarice of Mandarins who have often oppressed the People, to Invasions from abroad, and Treachery from home, to such a number of Changes, as would have unhinged the very Government and Laws, if a more Politick People than are the Tartars, were near enough the Empire to introduce their own method of Government. It would, my Lord, be a piece of flattery to my self, to imagine that I have by this tedious account added any thing to that immense store of Knowledge which you have drawn from the best Springs of An∣tiquity, from the Conversation of the most ingenious of the Moderns, from the management of the most momentous Affairs, or (which is a greater Fountain of Understanding) from your own natural Wit and Ingenuity, which has made you (if I may use the Expression) a Native of all Countries, and a Philo∣sopher of all Ages.
But I am sure you will be glad to see that the truest Maxims of good Policy are not altogether strangers in the East; and that if China do not form so great Ministers as you are, it forms great enough to un∣derstand Your worth, and to follow your steps, and improve themselves from the Copy you set them, if they could but know you. I am in the most pro∣found manner, My Lord, Your Eminence's most obedient and most humble Servant L. J.
To my Lord Cardinal de Bouïllon. Concerning the Antient and Modern Religion of China. My Lord, I Do not at all wonder that your Highness is pleased to hear Relations of China. It belongs only to great Princes to be thoroughly ac∣quainted with all that concerns the several Kingdoms of the World, and to make a true judg∣ment of the Power and Grandeur of Empires. God who has sent such Men into the World to Govern it, has given them a more than ordinary ability and knowledge to perform it. So that, my Lord, if I take upon me the liberty to acquaint your Lordship with what repeated Voyages for the space of several years have given me oportunity to know in this affair, it is not so much to instruct you in it, as to beg your Highnesses judgment of it. I may say this still with more truth when I have the honour to write to you of Religion. This is more particularly your concern; and I may say that if your Quality, your Ingenuity, and your incom∣parable Learning have made you above all Men our Judge; your Eminent Dignity in the Church obliges us, in Sacred concerns to hear and consult your High∣ness as our Oracle.
'Tis on this prospect, my Lord, that I now pre∣sent to you these Memoirs with some Reflections which the Customs of the Chinese, and the reading of their Books have suggested to me concerning their Religion, being of this mind, that after so many dif∣ferent Opinions and long Disputes which have for a whole Age divided the most learned Missionaries, there is no better way of coming to decision, than to obtain your Highnesses judgment therein. Religion has always had a great share in establish∣ing the greatest Kingdoms, which could never sup∣port themselves, were not the Peoples Minds and Hearts tied together by the outward woship of some Deity; for People are naturally Superstitious, and rather follow the guidance of Faith than Reason. It was therefore for this reason that the antient Law∣givers, always made use of the knowledge of the true God, or of the false Maxims of Idolatry, to bring the barbarous Nations under the Yoak of their Go∣vernment. China, happier in its Foundation than any other Nation under the Sun, drew in the chief of the holy Maxims of their antient Religion from the Fountain Head. The Children of Noah, who were scattered all over the Eastern parts of Asia, and in all proba∣bility founded this Empire, being themselves in the time of the Deluge witnesses of the Omnipotence of their Creator, transmitted the Knowledge of him, and instilled the fear of him into all their descen∣dants; the footsteps which we find in their Histories, will not let us doubt the truth of this. Fobi, the first Emperor of China, carefully bred up seven sorts of Creatures, which he used to Sacri∣fice to the Supreme Spirit of Heaven and Earth. For this reason some called him Paobi, that is oblation; a name which the greatest Saints of the Old or New Testament would have been proud to have, and
which was reserved for him alone, who made him∣self an Oblation both for Saints and Sinners. Hoamti, the third Emperor, built a Temple to the Sovereign Lord of Heaven; and altho' Iudea had the honour of Consecrating to him one more rich and magnificent, hallowed even by the presence of our Creator, and the prayers of our Redeemer; it is no small glory to China, to have sacrificed to their Creator in the most antient Temple of the World. Tçouen hio, the fifth Emperor, thought afterwards that one place was too narrow to contain the Services paid to the Lord of the Universe. He therefore in∣stituted Priests or Ecclesiastical Mandarins in several Provinces to preside over the Sacrifices. He gave them strict command to observe that Divine Service was performed with all humility and respect, and that all the Religious Ceremonies were strictly observed. Tiho, his Successor, took as much care of Religi∣on as he had done. Histories relate that the Em∣press his Wife, being barren, begged Children of God during theSacrifice with such fervour and earnest∣ness, that she conceived in few days, and sometime after was brought to bed of a Son who was famous, for that forty Emperors successively reigned of his Family. Yao and Chan, the two Princes who succeeded him, are so famous for their Piety, and for the Wis∣dom of their Governments, that it is very likely that Religion was still more flourishing during their Reigns. It is also very probable that the three succeeding Families did preserve the knowledge of God, for a∣bout two thousand years, during the Reign of four∣score Emperors; since the learnedest among the Chinese maintain that before the Superstitions intro∣duced with the God To into China, there were no Idols or Statues seen there. This is certain that during
all that space of time, the observation of the Emperor Yao's Maximes was recommended to the Princes, of which the most essential and principal was con∣cerning the Worship of the Sovereign Lord of the World; and altho' some Emperors have been so wicked as to reject them so far as even to threaten Heaven itself, and foolishly challenge it to fight, they have been nevertheless looked upon as Monsters; and other Emperors about that time have discovered by their actions a good sense of Religion. Vou-vam, the first of the third Line, did himself according to antient Custom offer Sacrifices, and his Brother who bore him a passionate love, and thought his life still necessary for the good of the Kingdom, seeing him one day in danger of dying, prostrated himself before the Divine Majesty to beg his reco∣very. It is you, O Lord, said he, who have given him to his People; he is our Father, he is our Master. If we fall into any disorder, who can set us to rights again so well as he? And if we follow exactly what thou hast inspired him to teach us, why punishest thou us by taking him? As for me, O Lord, continued the good Prince, I can be but little serviceable in this World; if you de∣sire the death of a Prince, I offer up my Life with all my heart for a Sacrifice, if you will be pleased to spare my Master, my King, and my Brother. The History says his Prayer was heard, for he dyed as soon as he had put up this Petition. An example which de∣monstrates that not only the tenour of Religion was preserved among those People, but farther that they followed the dictates of the purest Charity, which is the very quintessence and perfection of Religion. But Tchim-vam, his Son and Successor, gave such bright marks of his Piety, toward the end of his life, that it leaves us no room to doubt of the truth of what I have advanced. You shall hear what the an∣tient
Chinese Books say of him. This Prince, say they, who had always regulated his behaviour, ac∣cording the Ordinances of the Supreme Governour of Heaven, fell dangerously ill in the fiftieth year of his Age, and thirty seventh of his Reign. When he knew the danger he was in, he called together the principal Officers of his Court, with a design to no∣minate his Successor, and that he might omit no∣thing which was usually performed on such occasions, he arose from his Throne where he had ordered his Servants to set him: He made them wash his Hands and Face, Cloath him with his Imperial Habits, and put his Crown on his Head; and then leaning on a Table of precious stone, he spake to the Company in this manner. My sickness is every day worse and worse, for thus has Heaven ordained, I fear Death will seize upon me: and therefore thought my self obliged to acquaint you with my last Will. You know how great the Reputation of my Father and Grandfather was, and how bright the Examples of Virtue, which they set the Empire, did appear. I was very un∣worthy to fill the place in which these great Men sate; notwithstanding I did succeed them; I do ne∣vertheless acknowledge my ignorance and unfit∣ness. It is for this reason perhaps that Heaven has shorten'd the days of my Reign. I ought in this as well as in all other things to acquiesce; for you have all seen that I have hitherto received its Orders with an humble fear, and a profound respect. I have endeavoured to follow them, without ever de∣viating from them the least in the World, I have also all my life time had in my Heart my Ancestors instructions touching my Duty to Heaven, and to my People. On these two Heads I cannot accuse my self of any fault, and if my life has had any
Reputation, it is all owing to that teachableness, which has brought down upon me the blessings of the Sovereign Master of the World. It is on your account that I speak this (addressing himself to his eldest Son) it is on your account, O my Son, be you the Inheritor of your Ancestors Virtue, rather than of my Power and Crown. I make you a King, 'tis all that you can have of me; be a wise, vertuous and unblameable Prince, this I command you, and the whole Empire expects from you. Under the Reigns of this Prince and his Son cam-vam. it was that Peace, Honesty, and Justice reigned in China, so that they oftimes sent their Prisoners to dig or plough the Grounds, or get in the Corn, without thinking that the fear of punishment would make them run a∣way. After Harvest they came again to receive that punishment of their faults, which the Mandarins had appointed. Lastly, If we examine well the History of China, we shall still find that for three hundred years after, that is to say down to the times of the Emperor Yeou-vam, who reigned eight hundred years before Christ, Idolatry had not corrupted this People. So that they have preserved the knowledge of the true God for near two thousand years, and did honour their Maker in such a manner as may serve both for an Example and Instruction to Christians them∣selves. They had all along a strict care to breed up Beasts for Sacrifices, and to maintain Priests to offer them up; besides that the internal Worship of the mind was prescribed, they did oblige themselves to a nice observation of even the smallest Ceremonies which might in any ways be serviceable to the Peoples Edi∣fication; The Empresses did themselves breed up
Silkworms, and with their own Hands worked co∣verings for the Altars, and Habits for the Priests. The Emperors have oftimes Tilled the Ground which produced the Corn or Wine destined for Sacred uses. Again, the Priests never dared to offer Sacrifices be∣fore the People, unless prepared for it by an absti∣stinence of three or seven days from Conjugal enjoy∣ments. They have had their solemn Fastdays, and days of Prayer in Publick, especially when the Em∣pire laboured under any publick Calamity, either by Barrenness, by Floods, by Earth quakes, or Wars from abroad. With this outward Worship it is that the Emperors prepare themselves for Wars; for taking upon them∣selves the Government, or resisting the Provinces; and that Heaven may favour their Enterprises with success, they inquire of their Subjects of their own Faults that they may amend them, beliving that all publick Calamities are occasioned thro' their ill Go∣vernment. We meet with a signal instance of this in History, which I cannot forbear reciting. An universal barrenness having continued over all the Provinces for seven years together, (which time seems not far distant from the seven years of barren∣ness of which the Scripture speaks, and perhaps this thing a little looked into may serve to amend or con∣firm our Chronology This Emperor dyed 1753 years be∣fore the birth of Iesus Christ, and the seven years of scarcity, according to the Scripture, hap∣pen'd 1743 years be∣fore the same birth.) the People were reduced to extreme want; and when Prayers, Fasts, and o∣ther acts of Humiliation were used without success, the Emperor not knowing any means proper to be used to gain relief from this publick misfortune, after having offered to God several Sacrifices to appease his indignation, he resolved at last to offer up him∣self for a Sacrifice;
For this purpose he called together the chief Per∣sons of his Kingdom, in the presence of them all dismantled himself of his Royal Apparel, and cloathed himself meanly. In this Habit, with his Head and Feet bare, in the same fashion that a Ci∣minal appears before a Judge, he marched attended by his whole Court, to a Mountain a good distance from the Town. When, prostrating himself before the Divine Majesty, to whom he paid his Adorations nine times, he spake in these words: O Lord, you know the miseries to which we are reduced. It is my sins which have brought them upon my People, I come bi∣ther to own and acknowledge it in the presence of Heaven and Earth. That I may the better amend my faults, give me leave, O Lord of all the World, to ask what Action of mine has more particularly given you offence. Is it the splendor of my Palace? I will take care to re∣trench what is superfluous? Perhaps the profuseness of my Table or the delicacy and Voluptuousness of it have brought this scarcity: hereafter nothing shall be seen there but thristiness and temperance. The Laws permit to me the use of Concubines; but perhaps you dislike that I have too many. I am ready to lessen the number. And if all this be not sufficint to appease your just indignation, and you must have an Oblation; behold one, O Lord, I am heartily willing to dye, if thou wilt spare this good People: Let Rain come from Heaven on their Fields to relieve their necessities, and thunder on my Head to satisfie your Iustice. The Princes Piety pierced the Clouds, for the Air was presently overcast, and an universal Rain imme∣diately fell, which did in due season bring forth a fruitful Harvest. When Idolaters seem scandalised at the Death of IESUS CHRIST, we use the Example of this Prince to justifie our Faith. You not only approve of this Action, say we to them, in which one of your Emperors disrobed himself of all that was
magnificent, and offered himself as a Sacrifice for his Subjects; but you admire it, and recommend it to Posterity as a fit Pattern for all the Princes of the World: how then can you dislike that the excessive love and kindness, which made IESUS CHRIST offer himself an Oblation and Sacrifice for all Men; and despoil himself of the brightness of his Majesty to invest us one day with his Glory and Divinity? These footsteps of the true Religion which we find in China for so many Ages together, carry us natural∣ly to make a reflection which will justifie the Provi∣dence of the Almighty in the Government of the World▪ People are sometimes amazed that China and the Indies have been overshadowed by the clouds and darkness of Idolatry, almost ever since the birth of our Saviour, while Greece a great part of Africk, and almost all Europe have enjoyed the clear light of Faith; but they never consider that China for two thousand years had the knowledge of the true God, and have practised the most pure Morality, while Europe and almost all the World wallowed in Error and Corruption. God, in the distribution of his gifts, is not an un∣just respecter of Persons; yet he has laid out his times, to let his Grace shine forth in due season, which like the Sun rises and sets in different parts of the World, according as People make a good or bad use of it. I do not know whither I may make bold to add, that as the Sn, which by its constant motion hides itself to some to shew itself to others, has notwith∣standing at the years end distributed to every Coun∣try its equal Portion of light and warmth; so God by the secret and hidden course of his Grace and Spirit which have been communicated to the World, hath equally divided them to all People in the World, tho' in different manners and at different times. How∣ever
it be that God has made his wise distribution of Grace, I am sure of all Nations China has the least reason to complain, since no one has received a larger Portion than she. The knowledge of the true God, which lasted many Ages after the Reign of Cam vam, and in all probability along while after the time of Confucius, was not always supported in the same purity. Their minds were possessed by Idolatry, and their manners be∣came so corrupt, that the true Faith being but the occasion of greater ill, was by little and little taken away from them by the just judgment of God. A∣mong all the Superstitions which followed hereupon there were two sorts which were principally esta∣blished, and do between them at this present com∣prehend almost all the Empire. Li-Laokun gave rise to the first of these. He was a Philosopher who lived before Confucius; his birth was prodigious if you believe what his Followers say of it; for his Mother carried him more than fouscore years in her Flanks, from whence a little before her death he sprang out of her right side which opened itself. This Monster, to the sorrow of his Country, survived his Mother, and by his pernicious Doctrine in a short time grew famous: nevertheless he wrote several useful Books; of Virtue, of the good of a∣voiding Honour, of the contempt of Riches, of that incomparable retiredness of mind, which sepa∣rates us from the World the better to know our∣selves. He often repeated the following Sentence, which he said was the foundation of true Wis∣dom. Eternal reason produced one, one produced two, two produced three, and three produced all things: which seems to shew as if he had some knowledge of the Trinity.
But he taught that God was Corporeal, and that he governed other Deities as a King governs his Sub∣jects. He applied himself mightily to Chymistry, of which some pretend he was the inventor. He beat his Brains likewise about the Philosophers Stone, and did at length fancy, that by a certain sort of Drink, one might be immortal. To obtain which his Fol∣lowers practice Magick, which Diabolical Art in a short time was the only thing studied by the Gentry. Every body studied it in hopes to avoid death; and the Women thro' natural Curiosity, as well as desire to prolong their life applied themselves to it, where∣in they exercise all sorts of Extravagancies, and give themselves up to all sorts of Impieties. Those who have made this their professed business, are called Tien se, that is, Heavenly Doctors; they have Houses given them to live together in Socie∣ty, they erect in divers parts Temples to Laokun their Master; King and People honour him with Divine Worship; and altho' they have Examples e∣nough to have undeceived them from these errors, yet they vehemently pursue immortality, by his Pre∣cepts who could never gain it himself. Time, which strengthens and confirms what is ill, did at length gain these false Doctors such a Reputa∣tion as made them almost innumerable. The Co∣venants which they make with the Devil, the Lots which they cast, their Magical wonders whither true or only seeming, make them dreaded and admired of the common Herd; and whencesoever it comes to pass, there is no body who does not give some credit to their Maxims, or does not hope to avoid Death by their means. One of these Doctors Cham▪y. got himself so great a Reputation that the Emperor gave him the name Cham▪ti; which is the name by which they call God himself, and signi∣fies
Supreme Emperor. This piece of Impiety gave the killing blow to the antient Religion; for 'till then the Chinese as much Idolaters as they were did always make a distinction between the Cham ti, and the other Gods. But by a just judgment from God the Family of that Prince was extinct, and the Empire which had hitherto observed its own Rules of Govern∣ment, was the first time forced to submit to those of the Western Tartars. This a famous Colao Kiou-Kiou∣Chan. who printed a Book could not but acknowledge. In this time, says he, the Emperor Hoei▪tçoum did against all manner of reason give the attributes of the Supreme God to a Man. This most powerful and adorable God above all the Spirits in Heaven, was sensible of the wrong done him; for he punished severely the wicked∣ness of this Prince, and utterly rooted out his Family. The second Sect which is prevalent in China, and is more dangerous and more universally spread than the former, adore an Idol which they call Fo or Foë as the only God of the World. This Idol was brought from the Indies two and thirty years after the Death of IESUS CHRIST. This Poyson be∣gan at Court, but spread its infection thro' all the Provinces, and corrupted every Town: so that this great body of Men already spoiled by Magick and Impiety, was immediately infected with Idolatry, and became a monstrous receptacle for all sorts of Errors. Fables, Superstitions, Transmigration of Souls, Idolatry and Atheism divided them, and got so strong a Mastery over them, that even at this pre∣sent, there is no so great impediment to the progress of Christianity as is th  ridiculous and impious Doctrine No body can well tell where this Idol Fo, of whom I speak, was born; (I call him an Idol and not a Man, because some think it was an Apparition from Hell) those who with more likelihood say he was a
Man, make him horn above a thousand years be∣fore JESUS CHRIST, in a Kingdom of the Indies near the Line, perhaps a little above Bengala. They say he was a Kings Son. He was at first cal∣led Che-Kia; but at thirty years of Age he took the name of Fo. His Mother who brought him into the World thro' her right side, died in Childbirth: she had a fancy in her Dream that she swallowed an Elephant, and for this reason it is that the Indian Kings pay such honour to white Elephants: for the loss of which, or gaining some others they often make bitter Wars. When this Monster was first born he had strength enough to stand alone, and he made seven steps, and pointed with one Hand to Heaven, and the other to the Earth. He did also speak, but in such a manner as shewed what Spirit he was possess'd withal. In Heaven or on the Earth, says he, I am the only person who deserve to be honoured. At seventeen he mar∣ried, and had a Son, which he forsook as he did all the rest of the World, to retire into a Solitude with three or four Indian Philosophers, whom he took a∣long with him to teach. But at thirty he was on a suddain possessed, and as it were sulfilled with the Di∣vinity, who gave him an universal knowledge of all things. From that time he became a God, and began by a vast number of seeming Miracles, to gain the Peoples admiration. The number of his Disciples is very great, and it is by their means that all the Indies have been poysoned with his per∣nicious Doctrine. Those of Siam call them Tala∣poins, the Tartars call them Lamas or Lama-sem, the Iaponers Bonzes, and the Chinese Hocham. But this Chimerical God found at last that he ws a Man as well as others. He died at 79 yeas of Age; and to give the finishing stroke to his Impiety, he en∣devoued to persuade his Followers to Atheism at his
Death, as he had persuaded them to Idolatry in hs Life time. Then he declared to his Followers that all which he had hither told them was enigmatical; and that they would be mistaken, if they thought there was any other first Principle of things beside nothing; It was, said he, from this nothing that all things sprang, and it is into this nothing that all things must return. This is the Abyss where all our hopes must end. Since this Impostor confessed that he had abused the World in his life, it is but reasonable that he should not be believed at his death. Yet as Impiety has al∣ways more Champions than Virtue, there were a∣mong the Bonzes a particular Sect of Atheists, form∣ed from the last words of their Master. The rest who found it troublesome to part with their former prejudices, kept close to their first Errors. A third sort endeavoured to reconcile these Parties together, by compiling a body of Doctrine, in which there is a twofold Law, an interior and an exterior. One ought to prepare the mind for the reception of the other. It is, say they, the mould which supports the materials 'till the Arch be made, and is then taken away as useless. Thus the Devil making use of Mens Folly and Malice for their destruction, endeavours to erase out of the minds of some those excellent ideas of God which are so deeply ingraved there, and o imprint in the minds of others the Worship of false Gods under the shapes of a multitude of different Crea∣tures, for they did not stop at the Worship of this Idol. The Ape, the Elephant, the Dragon have been wor∣shipped in several places, under pretence perhaps that the God Fo had successively been transmigrated into these Creatures. China the most superstitious of all Nations, increased the Number of her Idols, and one may now see all sorts of them in the Temples, which serve to abuse the folly of this People.
It is true they sometimes do not pay to these Gods all that respect which seems due to their Quality. For it often happens that if the People after worshipping them a great while do not obtain what they desire, they turn them off, and look upon them as impotent Gods; others use them in the most reproachful man∣ner: some load them with hard names, others with hard blows. How now, Dog of a Spirit, say they to them sometimes, we give you a lodging in a magni∣ficent Temple, we guild you handsomely, feed you well, and often offer Incense to you, and after all this care which we take of you, you are so ungrate∣ful as to refuse what we ask of you. Then they tye him with Cords, pluck him down, and drag him along the Streets thro' all the Mud and Dunghils, to punish him for the expence of Perfume which they have offered up to him for nothing. If in the mean time it happens that they obtain what they did desire, then they take the Idol and with a great deal of Ceremony carry him back and place him in his Nich again, after they have washed and cleansed him: They fall down to him, and make ex∣cuses for what they have done. In truth, say they, we was a little too hasty, as well as you was some∣what too long in your grant; why should you bring this beating on your self? Were it not better to have granted our Petition of your own free will, rather than be forced to do it? But what is done can't be now undone, let us not therefore think of it any more, if you will forget what is passed we will guild you over again. A few years ago there happened a passage at Nan∣kin, which does very well discover what an Opinion the Chinese have of their Gods. A Man whose only Dughter was very ill, tryed all the Physicians but without effect, he thought it therefore his best way to betake himself to the assistance of his Gods. Prayers,
Offerings, Alms, Sacrifices, and all other means were used to obtain relief. The Bonzes who were greased in the Fist promised that an Idol whose power they mightily boased should grant her recovery. For all this the Woman dyed, the Father out of measure grieved resolved to revenge himself, and to bring a formal accusation against the Idol. He put in his complaint therefore to the Judge of the place, in which after he had livelily shewed forth the deceitfulness of this unjust God, he said that he deserved an exemplary punishment for having broke his word. If this Spirit, said he, could cure my Daughter, it is palpable cheating to take my mony, and yet let her dye. If he could not do it, what does he signifie? And how came he by his quality of God∣ship? Do we Worship him, and the whole Province offer him Sacrifice for nothing at all? So that he con∣cluded it to be either from the Malice or Weakness of the Idol that the cure was not performed, where∣fore his Temple he judged ought to be pulled down, his Priests shamefully dismissed, and the Idol punished in his own private Person. The Business seemed of Consequence to the Judge, wherefore he sent it to the Governour, who desiring to have nothing to do with those of the other World, desired the Vice-Roy to examine into it. After he had heard the Bonzes, who were extremely concerned at it, took their part, and advised him not to persist in the Cause any longer: for, said he to him, you are not wise, to concern your self with these sort of Spirits. They are naturally ill tempered, and I am afraid will play some ill trick. Believe me you had better come to an agreement. The Bonzes assure me that the Idol shall do what is reasonable on his part, provided you on your part do not carry things too high.
But the Man who was almost mad for the death of his Daughter, did constantly protest that he would sooner perish than relinquish his just rights. The Sentence is given for me, said he, the Idol fancied that he might commit any sort of injustice with∣out punishment, because he thought no body would be bold enough to take him to task; but he is not so safe as he thinks, and a little time will shew which of us is the most wicked, and the most a Devil of the two. The Vice-Roy could not now go back, and was fain therefore to grant a Tryal, he sent the case to the Sovereign Council at Pekin, who remitted the Tryal to him again, he therefore Subpoena'd the par∣ties. The Devil, who has but too many friends a∣mong all sorts of Men, had also his share among the Lawyers and Proctors, those of them to whom the Bonzes gave largely, found their Cause good, and spoke with so much concern and vehemence that the Idol itself could not have pleaded better its own Cause. Yet they had to deal with a subtil Adversa∣ry, who had been before hand with them, and had cleared the Judges understanding by a large Bribe, being thoroughly persuaded that the Devil must be very cunning indeed, to withstand so clear an Ar∣gument as this last was to the Judges. In short, after a great many hearings, the Man carried his point. The Idol was condemned to a per∣petual banishment, as useless to the Kingdom, and his Temple was to be plucked down; and the Bonzes who represented him were severely chastised; they might notwithstanding apply themselves to the ser∣vice of other Spirits to make themselves amends for the damage they had received for loving this. Can any one who has not lost his senses adore Gods of this Character, weak, fearful, and whom one may affront safely? But, alas! We may flatter our
selves that we are never so wise, yet how much is our Wisdom distant from Reason, when it is distant from the true Faith. Instead of coming hereby to a knowledge of the weakness of their Gods, the People grow more and more blind every day. The Bonzes are above all obliged to keep up their Credit and Reputation, be∣cause of the advantage they make thereby. To bring this about the better, they make use of the following Maxims of Morality, which they take great care to propagate. We must not think, say they, that good and evil are as confused in the other World as they are in this; there are there rewards for the good, and punishments for the bad; which has occasioned disterent places to be set apart for the souls of Men, according to every ones Merit. The God Fo was the Saviour of the World, he was born to teach the way of Salva∣tion, and to make Expiation for all our sins. He has lest us ten Commandments. The first forbids the killing of any living Creature of what sort soever; the second commands not to take ano∣ther Mans Goods; the third not to give up ones self to Impurity; the fourth not to Lie; and the fifth to drink no Wine. Besides these they recommend to the Peoples pra∣ctise several Works of Mercy. Entertain and nourish up, say they, the Bonzes; build them Monasteries and Temples, that their Prayers and voluntary Pe∣nances may obtain for you exemption from that pu∣nishment which your sins have deserved. Burn Paper gilt and washed with Silver, Habits made of Stuff and Silk. All these in the other World shall be turned into real Gold and Silver, and into true and substantial Garments, which shall be given to your Fathers faithfully, who will make use of them as they have occasion. If you do not regard these Com∣mands,
you shall be after your death cruelly tor∣mented, and exposed to several Metempsycoses or transmigrations. That is to say you shall be born in the shape of Rats, Horses, Mules, and all other Creatures. This last point makes a great impression upon their minds. I remember that being in the Province of Chansi, I was sent for to Christen a sick person. It was an old Man of threescore and ten, who lived upon a small Pension, which the Emperor had given him. When I came into his Chamber, O my good Father, says he, how much am I obliged to you, who are go∣ing to deliver me from a great deal of torment. Baptism, answered I, does not only deliver from the tor∣ment of Hell, but entitles us to the enjoyment of a place in Paradise: O how happy will it be for you to go to Heaven eternally to live in the presence of God! I do not, said the sick Man, understand what you mean, nor perhaps have I explained my meaning clearly to you, you know, Father, I have lived a long time upon the Emperors bounty. The Bonzes, who are perfectly well acquainted with all the transacti∣ons of the other World, assure me that I shall be obliged after my death, by way of recompense for my Pension to serve him, and that my soul will in∣fallibly go into one of his Post Horses, to carry Dispatches from Court thro' all the Province. They have therefore been advising me to mind my duty in that new state; not to stumble, nor kick, nor bite, nor otherwise hurt any one: Run well, and eat little, and be patient, say they, and you may move the Gods to compassion, who often of a good Beast make at length a person of Quality, or a consider∣able Mandarin. I protest, Father, the very thoughts of it makes me quake, it never comes into my mind but I tremble; yet I dream of it every night, and sometimes methinks in my sleep I am already in the
Harness, ready to run at the first jerk of the Postili∣on. Then I wake in a great sweat, and half mad, scarcely knowing whither I am a Man or a Horse. But alass! What will be my sorrow when this will be no more a dream but a reality. This therefore, Father, is the course I took. They tell me that those of your Religion are not subject to those changes; that Men are always Men, and are in the other World of the same kind as they are here. I beg of you therefore to receive me among you. I know your Religion is hard to observe; yet if it had ten times more difficulties, I am ready to embrace it; and whatsoever trouble it put me to I had rather be a Christian than be turned into a Beast. This dis∣course and the condition the Man was in, wrought me into compassion; and afterwards considering with my self, that God makes use of Ignorance and Folly to bring Men to the knowledge of the Truth, I took an occasion from thence to unde∣ceive him of his mistakes, and to lead him into the way of Salvation. I instructed him a great while: at last he believed: and I had the comfort to see him dye not only with a clearer and better understanding of things, but farther with all the marks of a good Christian. In process of time, the Superstitions of the People grew so numberless, that I do not believe any Nati∣on under the Sun is so full of whimsies as China. The Mandarins aro obliged to condemn all these Sects as Hereticks, as indeed they do in their Books; but yet springing themselves mostly from idolatrous Families, and having been instructed by the Bonzes, they in their practise follow the example of the com∣mon People. Two of these Bonzes seeing one day in a rich Far∣mers Yard, two or three large Ducks, fell on their Faces before the Door, and sigh'd and wept grievously.
The good woman seeing them out of her Chamber window, came down to see what was the occasion of their Tears. We know, said they, that the souls of our Fathers are transmigrated into those Creatures, and the fear we are in lest you should kill them, will without doubt go near to kill us: It is true, said the Woman, we did intend to sell them, but since they are your Fathers, I promise you we will keep them. This answer was not for the Bonzes purpose. But, continued they, perhaps your Husband will not be so charitable, and then if any accident should happen to them, you may be sure it will kill us. At last after a long discourse, the good Woman was so far moved with their pretended grief, that she gave them the Ducks to look after for some time to comfort them. They took them with a great deal of respect, pro∣strating themselves twenty times to them; but that very evening they made an Entertainment of them for some of their company, and fattened themselves with them. A Prince of the Blood lost a young Man for whom he had a particular love; a few years after he spoke of it with a great deal of warmth and concern to the Bonzes, who said, to him: My Lord, do not trouble your self any more, your loss may be repair'd; he whom you grieve for is in Tartary, and his soul is pas∣sed into a young Man's body; but there must be a great deal of mony to find where he is, and you must give good Presents to the Priests of that Country. This news pleased the Prince mightily so that he gave them what they desired, and a few months after they got a Boy any where, and gave him to the Prince instead of the Boy who was dead. Thus it is that the whole Country from the Peasant to the Prince are bubbled by these Ministers of Iniquity.
If they can't thus trick People out of their mony, they try to get it out of them by doing acts of Pen∣nance publickly, which the People esteem them mightily for, and shew them a great deal of pity and compassion. I have seen them dragging after them a long Chain of Iron as thick as ones Arm, about thirty foot long, fastened to the Neck or Legs. Thus it is, say they, at every Door as they pass, that we expiate your Faults, sure this deserves some small Alms. Others in publick places knock their Pates with all their force with large Bricks, till they are al∣most cover'd with blood. They have several other penitntial Actions; but what I was most surprised at was this. One day I met in the middle of a Town a young Bonze of a good Mien, a genteel and modest look, such as might easily move any ones Compassion and Charity. He stood upright in a sort of a Sedan very close shut, the inside of which was like a Harrow full of Nails very thick, with their points sticking out towards the Man in the Chair, so that he could not bend either one way or t'other without wound∣ing himself. Two Fellows were hired to carry him from House to House where he beg'd the People to have compassion on him. He told them he was shut up in that Chair for the good of their Souls, and was resolved never to go out from thence till they had bought all the Nails (of which there were above two thousand) at the rate of six pence apiece, of which Nails the very smallest he said would derive incomparable blessings on them and their Families. If you buy any of them, you will do an action of Heroick vertue, and your Alms are not bestowed on the Bonzes, to whom you may take other opportunities of bestowing your Charity, but to the God Fo, in whose honour we are going to build a Temple.
In the mean while I happened to pass thro' the Street, the Bonze seeing me, came and told me the same tale. I told him that he was very unhappy to torment himself thus in this World for no good, and did councel him therefore to come out of his Prison, to go to the Temple of the true God to be instructed in heavenly truths, and submit to Penances less se∣vere, but more wholesome. He was so far from be∣ing in a passion with me, that he answer'd me calmly and courteously that he was much obliged to me for my good advice, and would be more obliged to me still, if I would buy a dozen of his Nails, which would certainly make me have a good Journey. Here hold your hand, says he, turning on one side, take these, upon the Faith of a Bonze they are the very best in all my Sedan, for they prick me the most, yet you shall have them at the same rate at which I sell the others. He spoke these words in such a manner as would have made me on any other occa∣sion have laugh'd; but at that time his blindness rais∣ed my compassion, and I was strangely concerned to see that bond man of the Devil suffer more to work out his own destruction, than a Christian need do to gain his Salvation. Yet all the Bonzes are not Penitents. While some abuse the credulous by their hypocritical pretences, others get mony out of them by magical Arts, secret Thefts, horrible Murders, and a thousand detestable abominations, which modesty wont let me mention here. People who are only outwardly religious, spare nothing to gratifie their Passions, and if they can but escape the justice of Men, which in this place spares none who are caught wronging their Neighbour, they care not what they do in the Eyes of that God whom they will scarcely own.
Although the generality of the People are preju∣diced in favour of them, yet the wiser sort are al∣ways upon their guard against these Wretches; and the Magistrates always take great notice of what they do in their Monasteries. It happened a few years ago that a Governour of a Town passing with his Train in the Highway, saw a great company of People got together, and had the curiosity to send to know what was the occasion of their meeting there. The Bonzes were solemnizing an extraordinary fe∣stival, they had set a Machine upon a Stage, at the top of which a young Man put out his Head over a little Rail which went all round the Machine. The Rail hid his Arms and all his Body; one could see nothing at liberty but his Eyes, which he rowled about as if he was distracted. Below this Machine an old Bonze appeared upon the Stage, who told the People that the young Man which they saw was going to Sacrifice himself according to Custom in this manner. There ran by the Road side a deep River into which he would presently throw himself headlong. He cant die, added the Bonze, if he would, because at the bottom of the River he will be received by Chari∣table Spirits, who will give him as good a welcome as he can desire. And indeed it is the greatest happiness that can possibly befal him: an hundred Persons have desired to Sacrifice themselves instead of him; but we chose him before the rest, because of his Zeal and other Virtues. When the Mandarin had heard this speech, he said that the young Man indeed had a great deal of Courage; but he wonder'd much that he did not himself tell the People of this his resolution: let him come down a little, said he, that we may talk with him. The Bonze, who was confounded at this or∣der, did all he could to hinder it, and did protest that the whole Sacrifice would be ineffectual if he
spake a word, nay if he did but open his mouth, and for his part he could not answer for the mischief such a thing would bring upon the Province. For the mis∣chief you talk of, replied the Mandarin, I'le be re∣sponsible. And then he commanded the young Man to come down; he gave no other answer to these com∣mands but hideous and frightful looks, and various distorsions of his Eyes which almost started out of his Head. You may from hence, said the Bonze, judge what violence you offer him in commanding him down. He is already almost distracted, and if you continue your commands you will make him die with grief. This did not make the Mandarin change his resolution, but he ordered some of his Retinue to go up and bring him down. They found him tied and bound down on every side, with a gag in his mouth; and as soon as they had untied him, and taken away the gag from the poor Fellows mouth; he cried out as loud as he could bawl; Ah! my Lord, revenge me against those Assassins, who were going to drown me, I am a Bachelor of Arts, and was going to the Court at Pekin, to assist at the Examinations there: yesterday a company of Bonzes seized upon me vio∣lently, and this morning very early they bound me to this Machine, taking from me all power of crying out or complaining, and intending to drown me this evening, being resolved to accomplish their ac∣cursed Ceremonies at the expence of my Life. When he began to speak the Bonzes were marching off, but the Officers of justice, who always attend the Governours, stopped several of them. The chief of them who had pretended just before that the young Man could not be drowned, was himself immediately thrown into the River and drowned, the others were carried to Prison, and did after receive that punish∣ment which they deserved.
Since the Tartars have been Emperors of China, the Lamas, another sort of Bonzes have been esta∣blished there. Their Habit is different from those of China both in shape and colour; but their Religion is the same with the Chinese, and they worship the God Fo, they differ from the Chinese only in a few particu∣lar superstitious practises. These Lamas are Chap∣lains to the Tartar Nobility who live at Pekin; but in Tartary they themselves are the Gods which the People worship. There it is that the God Fo has his most famous seat, where he appears under a sensible figure, and as they say never dies. He is kept in a Temple; and an infinite number of these Lamas serve him with an ineffable veneration, which they strive as much as they can to imprint upon the minds of all others whatsoever. When he dies, for he is but a Man placed there, they put in his room a Lamas of the same Stature, and as near as they can of the same Features, that the People may be the better deceived by it. Thus the People of this Country, and especially all Strangers are eternally bubbled by these Impostors. Among the different Religions exercised in China, I do not think it worth while to mention to your High∣ness a few Mabometans, who have lived for this six hundred years, in several Provinces, and are never disturbed, because they never disturb any one else upon the score of Religion, being content to enjoy it themselves, or to propagate it there among their Kin∣dred by Marriages. However it may be of use to tell you of a third Sect which is the Religion, or Philoso∣phy, or Policy of some of the learned, for one can∣not tell by what name to call this Doctrine, which is so obsure that the very Professors of it scarce under∣stand what they teach. They call it in their Language Ikiao, and it is a Sect of learned Men.
That you may understand what I am going to tell you, you must know that Civil Wars, Magick, and Idolatry having put the Empire into confusion for many Ages, love of learning was quite cashlered, and there were found few Doctors who could by their Writings awaken the minds of Men out of that Lethargy into which ignorance and the corruption of Manners had lulled them. Only a∣bout 1070.After our, Saviour. Some creditable Expoun∣ders were found, and in 1200. one Do∣ctor did distinguish himself from all o∣thers for his extraordinary understanding. By his example they began by degrees to take some pleasure in reading antient Books which they had before thrown aside. Lastly in the year 1400. the Emperor being wil∣ling to stir up in his Subjects a love of Learning, made choice of fourscore and two of the most ingenious Doctors, whom he commanded to compile a System agreeable to the Sentiments of the Antient Writers, which might serve as a direction for the learned here∣after. The Mandarins who had the Commission, set themselves diligently to work; but being prejudiced with those Opinions which Idolatry had diffused all over China, instead of following the true sense of the Antients, they tryed by false Glosses and Interpreta∣tions to distort the words and sayings of the Anti∣ents to their prejudicate Opinions. They spake of God as nothing different from Na∣ture itself; that is from that power, energy, or na∣tural Virtue which did produce, and put in order all the parts of the World, and which does still keep them in that order. He is, say they, a most pure and most perfect Principle; he is the Source of all things, and the Essence of all beings, and that which Con∣stitutes the formal difference of every thing. They made use of those magnificent expressions of the An∣tients,
that they might seem to keep to their Do∣ctrine; but indeed they raised new Opinions, because they understand hereby I cant tell what sort of insen∣sible soul of the World, wich they imagine spread thro' Matter, upon which it produces the several mu∣tations we see. This is not that Supreme Emperor of▪ Heaven all just and all powerful, the chief of all Creatures: in their Works nothing is found, but a better sor of Atheism, and a licentious freedom from the Worship of God. But, whether it was because they were unwilling to express themselves plainly, or did accidentally make use of expressions of a larger signification than their meaning, yet they talk of Heaven as did the Anti∣ents, and ascribe to Nature almost all those perfecti∣ons which we attribute to God. They tolerate wil∣lingly the Mahometans, because like them they adore the Master and King of Heaven. They Persecute all other Sects with great violence, which at Court they took up a resolution utterly to abolish throughout the whole Empire. Yet many reasons persuaded them from putting this resolution in practice, the chief of which were these, even several among the learned were Dissen∣ters from this new established Doctrine, for they could not shake off the prejudices they had sucked in▪ besides all the People were wholly byass'd in fa∣vour of Idols, so that their Temples could never be pulled down, but Insurrections and Disturbances must necessarily ensue. They were therefore con∣tented to adjudge at Pekin all the other Sects Here∣ticks (which they still do every year) without setting themselves effectually to stop the practise of them. These new Books composed by their most learned Men, and honoured by the Emperors own approba∣tion, were greedily received by every body. Some liked them because they destroy'd all sorts of Reli∣gion,
and these make up the greatest number of this Sect. Others approved of them, because the Reli∣gion which they contained was so very little, that it cost them no pains nor trouble to practise it. And thus was the Sect of the learned formed, of whom one may justly say, they honour God with their Mouth and with their Lips, for they often say that we must adore and obey Heaven; but their Hearts are distant from him, seeing they explain those words in such a sort as destroys the very being of God, and stifles all sence of Religion. Thus this People so wise heretofore, so full of Knowledge, and, (if I may use the expression) of the Spirit of God, are now in these last days miserably fallen into Superstition, Magick, Paganism, and lastly into Atheism itself, falling by degrees Story by Story till they come to the very bottom of the Build∣ing; becoming thereby enemies to that reason which they had so constantly followed, and abominable to that very Nature to which they now give▪ such high Encomiums. This is, my Lord, an account of the present State of China, with respect to the several Religions there in use. For as for the political Honours which they pay to Confucius, they are not Divine Worship, and the Palaces which are called by his name are not Temples, but Houses for learned Men to assemble in. I was unwilling to particularize their Ceremonies, their Opinions and their Morals. Besides that it would be tedious and endless, it is very difficult to give a certain account of them: because the Bonzes do every day invent new whimsies, and if they can but live at other Peoples charge by abusing them, they do not value whether they exactly follow the Doctrine of their Predecessors, which is in effect neither better nor freer from absurdities than their own.
Nothing now remains but that I give your Emi∣nence an account to which of these Sects, which di∣vide the Kingdom, the Emperor is most inclinable. This Prince, who is naturally wise and politick, has always kept in with the People. As he is upon a Throne which the least blast may shake, he endea∣vours as much as he can to strengthen it by his Peoples love: he is so far from provoking them, that he makes himself very popular, yet not to such a degree, as his Father did, lest he should bring upon himself the Mandarins hatred; yet much more than did the antient Emperors, to the end that he may as much as possible sweeten that Yoak, which a new Government has put on their Shoulders. He does therefore permit or rather tolerate Super∣stion: he pays a great deal of respect to several Bon∣zes of the first Rank, who have behaved themselves well in any of the Provinces or at Court; nay he does his own Temper that violence as to let some of them live in his Palace, those whom the Princess his Mother had before brought and established there. But tho' he thus favours their Persons, he is no slave to their Opinions. He perfectly understands the fol∣ly of them, and does upon several occasions laugh at those things which they enjoyn for Principles of Religion, as Extravagancies and Fables. He often sends those who speak to him of them to the Missio∣naries: Hear, says he, those Fathers who reason so well, I am sure they will not be of your mind. One day he said to Father Verbiest his Mathematician. Why do not you speak of God as we do? People would be less set against your Religion. You call him Tien-tçhu Tien-tchu sig∣nifies Lord of Hea∣ven: Cham-ti So∣vereign Emperor. and we call him Cham-ti. Is it not the same thing? Will you leave the use of a good word because People give false Interpretati∣ons of it? My Lord, said the Father, I know that your
Majesty does follow the old Doctrine of China; which several Doctors have forsaken: and if we should use their words, they would fancy we believe as they believe. But if your Majesty will by a Proclamation publickly declare that the word Cham-ti signifies the same in ef∣fect, that the Christians mean by Tien-tçhu, we are ready to make use of any one of them as soon as the other. He liked the Fathers answer, but reasons of State hindred him from following his advice. When the Queen Mother was dead, those who had the care of the Funeral committed to them, in∣formed the Prince that it was necessary, according to antient Custom, to pull down part of the Palace wall, that the body might be carried thro' the breach; because that the Royal Family would be exposed to a great many misfortunes if the body was carried thro' the ordinary passages. You do not talk rationally, said the Emperor to them, your heads are full of whimsies! What folly is it to think my good or bad fortune depends upon the way by which my Mother goes to her Tomb! It was my unhappiness to lose her, and to fear any mis∣fortune after so great a loss, would be to dishonour her after her death, by superstitious Rites and ridiculous Cere∣monies. Some time after several Maids of Honour to the Empress, came and fell at the Emperors feet, and begged with Tears that he would suffer them, who had served the Empress here, to follow her into the other World, where their services might be needful to her. He said to them. I have taken care of that already, you need not therefore put your selves to farther trouble about it. And for fear lest a cruel zeal might prompt them to lay violent hands on themselves, he commanded their Hair to be immediately cut off, and that they should be confined. When they are shaved, they fancy themselves useless, and unfit to serve Per∣sons of Quality in the other World.
These Examples are enough to let us see that the Emperor is very far from giving himself up to all these popular extravagancies. He honours Confucius as the first and wisest Philosopher in the World; in several things he follows Custom, when he judges it much for his interest; at certain times of the year he offers Sacrifices in the Temples, according to an∣tient practice, yet he says it is only in honour of the Cham ti, and that he adores no other but the Supreme Lord of the Universe. Thus far the instruction of the Missionaries have worked upon him. He believes in one God, but State Reasons and the gratification of his Passions which are opposite to the Spirit of JESUS CHRIST, have never suffered him to open his Eyes to the truth of the Gospel. The rigidness and severity of Morals which this requires, oftimes stops the most resolute, and we see every day per∣sons in this World, who have a greatness of soul e∣nough to deserve the name of Hero's, who do yet want courage when they ought to behave themselves as those who bear that of Christians. Nevertheless this Prince would not have any one think that he rejects our Religion for want of courage. He told his mind to Father Verbiest one day in these words: Your Law is hard, yet whatever difficulty was to be undergone, I should not stick one minute to be of it, were I convinced of the truth of it. If I was once a Christian, I am pretty well satisfied that in three or four years the whole Empire would be so too. For I am their Master. We might have some hopes from these Sen∣timents of the Prince, if we were not on the other side persuaded that the love of pleasure, and the fear of giving occasion to some Revolution in the Em∣pire were not almost invincible hindrances to his Conversion. But who can find out the Almighty's designs? And who has hitherto penetrated into the mysteries of his
eternal Councils? Are not the Hearts of the greatest Princes as well as of the meanest People in his keep∣ing? It is from that Almighty hand that all our hopes are, which has already confounded an infinite number of Idols, and overthrown many of their Temples; it has made Vice-Roys, Ministers of State, Princes, and one Empress submit to the Yoak of Christianity. The more the Conversion of the Em∣peror requires Miracles, the more worthy is it of the great power and infinite goodness of God, who is called Great for no other reason than for the great and mighty things which he hath done. Thus, my Lord, if Europe continues to send into China fervent and devout Missionaries, we may hope that God will vouchsafe to make use of their Zeal for the accomplishment of his great Work. I am in the most profound manner. My Lord, Your Eminence's most obedient and most humble Servant. L. J.
To Monsieur Rouillié, Counsellor of State in Ordinary. Of the Establishment and Progress of the Christian Religion in China. Sir, THE Ardent Zeal which you have always shewed towards establishing and pro∣moting the Christian Religion in China, makes me hope that you will be pleased with the Letter, which I now take the boldness to write to you. You will not only read therein those things which I have already had the honour to dis∣course with you about so often, but also many other useful remarks, which I hope may be worthy your curiosity and attention. It will without doubt bring you a great deal of comfort, by shewing you that your Care, your Prayers, and your Bounty have been seconded by Heaven; and that in contributing so much as you have done to the Conversion of so many Souls, you will at the end of the World be accounted a Father of many faithful. But if in spight of all that I can say, you will not be made sensible of the great good you do there, for it is with the greatest difficulty that you are brought to
believe you do good: you will at least see that the fervent Missionaries, who for more than an Age have laboured in the large field of the Gospel, are not al∣together unworthy their Employment, and that the Fruits which they gather there, should be an en∣couragement to all Europe, to perfect this great Work which by them has been so happily began. Among other things which the Emperor objected against us when discoursing of the Christian Religion, this was none of the weakest. If the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, says he, sometimes is necessary for Salvation; and if God desires the Salvation of all Men; why has he so long kept us in ignorance and error? It is now above sixteen Ages since your Re∣ligion, the only way Men have to obtain Salvation, has been established in the World; we knew nothing of it here. Is China so inconsiderable as not to deserve to be thought of, while so many barbarous Nations have been enlightned? The Missionaries have very solidly answered this objection, and that with so good a Face of Reason, as did give ample satifaction to the Emperor. I do not here tell you, Sir, their answer; you do your self know all that could be possibly said thereto. But perhaps it will not be tedious to you to let you know that China has not been so much neglected as it thinks. We cannot inform our selves of all that has passed in this New World, since the death of our Sa∣viour; for the Chinese Histories seldom speak of any thing but what concerns Political Government. Yet the Divine Providence would be sufficiently justified in this point, if it had acted for the Salvation of China no more than has come to our knowledge. There is no doubt but St. Thomas preached the true Faith in the Indies, and it is as certain that the Indians had then great dealings with the Chinese, to whom al∣most all India was tributary. It is therefore very pro∣bable
that this Apostle, to whom the care of this New World was committed, did not neglect the best part of it, which was then as much distinguished a∣bove the rest of the Eastern parts, as Italy was above the Western in the most flourishing condition of the Roman Empire. So that perhaps he himself travail∣led there, or at least sent some of his Followers. This Conjecture, which carries its own Evidence with it, does still receive confirmation, from what the Chinese Histories relate concerning those times. Their History says that a Man came into China and preached Heavenly Doctrine. He was not an ordi∣nary Man, adds the History, his Life, his Miracles, and his Vertues made him admired by all the World. Furthermore one may read in an antient Breviary of the Church of Malabar, wrote in Chaldee these words, which are in the Office for St. Thomas his day. It was by St. Thomas's means that the Chinese and Aethiopi∣ans were Converted and came to the knowledge of the Truth. And in another place. It was by St. Thomas, that is to say, by the preaching of St. Thomas that the Kingdom of Heaven went into the Empire of China. And in an Anthem we read these words which fol∣low: The Indies, China, Persia, &c. offer up, in memo∣ry of St. Thomas, the worship due to thy holy Name. We can't tell what Conversions he wrought there, nor how long Religion flourished; but this is cer∣tain that if Religion hath not been' kept up in China till now, the Chinese may thank themselves, who by a criminal neglect and voluntary stubbornness, did so easily part with the gift of God. Neither is this the only time wherein our Lord hath visited them. A great while after, that is in the seventh Century, a Catholick Patriarch of the Indies sent Missionaries thither, who preached the true Religion with good success. Altho' their History hath men∣tioned something of this, yet it is done in so few
words, and in so careless and obscure a manner, that we should never have had the happiness of being throughly acquainted with this Mission, were it not for an Accident which happened a few Years ago, which it pleased God to bring about, for the stronger establishing the Faith in this great Empire. In the Year 1625, some Masons digging near Sig∣nanfou, the Capital of the Province of Chensi, found a long Table of Marble, which had been heretofore erected as a Monument in the manner they build them in China, and which time had buried in the ruins of some Building, or had hid in the Ground, so that no remains of it were visible. This Stone which was ten foot long and six foot broad, was very nicely examined, the more for this reason, because on the top of it there was a large Cross handsomly graved, below which was a long discourse in Chinese Cha∣racters, and other Letters which the Chinese did not understand; they were Syriack Characters. The Emperour had notice of it, and had a Copy of it sent him, and did command that the Monument should be carefully kept in a Pagode An Idols Temple., where it now is, about a mile from Signanfou. The substance of the Inscription on the Table is as follows. There is a first principle of all things, of a spiritu∣al and intelligent Nature, who created all things out of Nothing, and who subsists in three Persons. At Man's Creation he endued him with original Justice, made him King of the Universe, and master of his own Passions; but the Devil drawing him into Temptation, corrupted his mind, and disturbed the inward peace and innocence of his heart. Hence sprang all those Misfortunes which overwhelm hu∣man kind, and all those different Factions into which we are crumbled.
Mankind, who since that fatal Fall did always walk in Darkness, would never have found out the path of Truth, if one of these three Persons of the Divinity, had not taken upon him the Nature of Man, which Man we call the Messia. An Angel proclaimed his coming, and some time after he was born of a Virgin in Iudea. This miraculous Birth was set forth by a new Star in the Heavens. Some Kings who observed the Star, came and offered Pre∣sents to the Divine Infant, that so the Law and Pre∣dictions of the twenty four Prophets might be ac∣complished. He governed the World by instituting a very plain, Spiritual and Heavenly Law. He established eight Beatitudes. He endeavoured to disswade men from setting their hearts on the good things of this World, in order to fix in them a love of those good things which will never fail. He set forth the beautiful∣ness of the three principal Vertues. He set open the gates of Heaven to the Just, to which place he him∣self ascended at mid-day, leaving on Earth seven and twenty Books of his Doctrine, proper for the Con∣version of the World. He instituted Baptism for the washing away Sin, and lay'd down his Life on the Cross for all men without exception. His Ministers cut not off their Beards, but have their Heads shaved excepting a circle of Hair which they leave on. They have no Servants, for they make themselves Superior to none whether in the height of Prosperity or in the depth of Affliction. Instead of heaping up Riches they willingly impart their little all to those who are in want. They Fast both for mortification of them∣selves, and in observance of the Laws. They re∣verence their Superiours and honour all good men. They pray seven times a day for the Dead and the Living. They offer Sacrifice every Week, to purge
them from their Sins, and to purifie their Hearts. Even Kings who follow not this Law, whatsoe∣ver they do, can never make themselves truly esti∣mable among men. In the Reign of Tui▪tçoum a most wise and honoured Prince, Olopoüen coming from Iudea, after a long course of dangers by Sea and by Land, at last arrived at China in the Year of our Lord 636. The Emperour having notice of it, sent a Colao to meet him in the Suburbs of the Im∣perial City; with Orders to conduct him to the Pa∣lace. When he came there his Law was examined, and the truth of it acknowledged; so that the Emperour in favour of him made the following Edict. No particular Name comprehends the true Law, neither are the Saints fixed to one place; they are scattered thro' the whole World, that they may be universally useful. A Man of Iudea, of exempla∣ry Vertue is arrived at our Court: We have exami∣ned his Doctrine, and found it admirable, with no mixture of Pride, and built upon those Principles which suppose the World had a beginning. This Law teaches the way of Salvation, and cannot but be extreamly useful to all our Subjects. I therefore judge it necessary that it be taught them. After∣ward he commanded that a Church should be built, and nominated one and twenty Persons to serve that Cure. Kao the Son of Tai-çoum, succeeded him in the Year 651, and endeavoured to make that Religion flourish which his Father had received. He highly honoured the Bishop Olopoüen, and built in all the Provinces Churches for the true God. So that the Bonzes some Years after being alarm'd at the progress which Christianity had made, used all means to stop the course of it.
The Persecution was great, and the number of the faithful grew small, when our Lord raised up two persons of extraordinary Zeal, who defended the Faith with so much vigour, that in a little time it recovered its former lustre. The Emperor on his part strove to confirm it more and more; even so far as to command five Kings to go to Church, and pro∣strate themselves, before the Altar, and to erect o∣ther Churches in several Towns to the Honour of the God of the Christians. Thus the Foundation, hook by the struggle which the Bonzes made, be∣came more solid and better fixed than ever. In the mean while the Prince himself continued to give great signs of his Piety; he made the Pi∣ctures of his Predecessors be carried to Church; he offered himself an hundred pieces of Silk upon the Altars; payed mighty respect to Ki-ho, a Missio∣nary newly arrived out of Iudea, and all his life time omitted nothing that was necessary for the propagating the Gospel in his Dominions. Ven∣min who succeeded him in the year 757. inherited his Vertue as well as Crown. He built five Churches. He was famous for his other great Qualities as well as for his care of Religion. The following Emperors confirmed Christianity by their Edicts and Examples. We can pray for them without fearing that our Prayers will not be heard, for they were humble and peaceable; they bore with the faults of their Neighbours; and did good to all sorts of Men. Which is the true Character of Chri∣stianity, and is the true way to make Peace and Plenty flow into the greatest Kingdoms. Others of them were exercised in the Works of the brightest Charity. The Emperor So-tçoum of∣fered at the Altar, and built Churches; besides he assembled together the Priests of four Churches, and for forty days served them himself with great re∣spect;
he fed the Poor, cloathed the Naked, healed the Sick, and buried the Dead. It is to keep up the memory of these great Actions, and to let Posterity know the present State of the Christian Religion here, that we have erected this Monument in the year 782. This, Sir, is a faithful Epitomy of what is remark∣able in this famous remain of Chinese Antiquity. The Bonzes who keep it in one of their Temples near Sig∣nanfou, have erected over against it, a long Table of Marble every way like it, with Encomiums upon the Gods of the Country, to diminish as much as they can the glory which the Christian Religion receives from thence. The Chronicle of China confirms by the Order and Succession of the Emperors what the Monument says of it; but I am apt to think that the Vertues of those Emperors mentioned therein are ex∣alted too much some of whom in History are said to have done as much for Paganism, as this says they did for Christianity. However that be it is a plain testimony that the Faith was preached there and re∣ceived by a great many persons. It flourished there at least an hundred fourscore and six years, and per∣haps much longer for we' have no account of its failure, for the very memory of it was lost; and when the new Missionaries of our Society came thither, they found no sign or footstep of it. It was in the year 1552. that Saint Xavier went thither in hopes to add this new Conquest to the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST. It seemed that that great Man had made but an Essay in the Indies, and if I may use the expression, had but served an Apprentice∣ship to that Zeal, which he would be perfect Master of in China. And surely Moses never had a more ar∣dent desire to enter into the Holy Land, to gather with his People the Temporal Riches of that Coun∣try, than this Apostle longed to carry into this new World the Treasures of the Gospel. Both one and
t'other dyed by the Providence of God, in a time when their long Voyages and infinite Labours seemed answered by a great probability of success. The Scripture tells us Moses's death was a punish∣ment to him for his lack of Faith; Saint Xavier's seems to be a reward for the abundance of his. God had a mind to reward his Zeal, his Labours, and his Cha∣rity; and was willing to defer for a time that torrent of Mercy which he designed for the Empire of China, that he might reward his Servant with that Glory, which he had procured for so many Nations. He dyed in the Isle of San-cham, or as we speak it San∣ciam, under the Jurisdiction of the Province of Can∣ton; it is well known that he lay in the ground several months, all which time God preserved him from the usual Corruption, from hence he was carried to Goa, where from that time he hath been honoured as the Protector of that place, and the Apostle of the East. The touch of his body Consecrated the place of his burial. That Island became not only a famous place, but also an holy Land. Even the Heathens honoured it, and fled thither as to a City of Refuge. In the mean time Pirats haunted those Coasts, that no Vessels dared to go thereabouts, so that the place where this Sacred Tomb lay, was quite unknown to the Europeans; and it is but a little while ago that they discovered it by a particular accident. In the year 1688. a Portuguese Vessel which com∣ing from Goa, had on Board the Governour of Macao, was seized by a sudden gust of Wind, and forced to let the Ship drive towards these Islands do what they could. They cast Anchor between the Isles of San∣ciam and Lampacao, which were so near one another as to make a kind of Haven. Contrary Winds con∣tinuing eight' days, gave Father Caroccio a Jesuite, who was on Board, an opportunity of satisfying his de∣vout
resolutions. He went on shoar, and was re∣solved in spight of Danger to go in search of the Saints Tomb. The Pilot and most part of the Sailors followed him, they searched the whole Island but to no purpose. At at last a Chinese, an Inhabitant of the place, imagining with himself what it was which they so ardently sought after, undertook to guide them, and led them to a place which all the Inhabitants reve∣renced, and where he himself began to perform Acti∣ons and Gestures of Piety. The Father who could not understand him, began to search about for some sign or mark of the Sepulchre, and found at last a Stone five Cubits long, and three broad, upon which was cut these words in Latin, Portuguese, Chinese, and Iapon∣nese, Here Xavier a Man truly Apostolical was buried. a. the Isle of Sanciam, b Lampacao c the Port d the Lomb of Saint Xavier.
Then they all fell on their Knees, and did with De∣votion kiss that Earth, which the Tears and the last Groans of that Apostle had sanctified. The Inhabi∣tants of the place came in and followed the Example of the Portuguese: even the English, for one of their Vessels came to an Anchor in the same place, came thither to honour the Saint, and prayed a great while at his Tomb. Father Caroccio some time after said Mass in his Pontificalibus, while the two Vessels, the English and Portuguese, did several times discharge their Artillery, and gave marks of their common joy. Lastly, to preserve the memory of that holy place, they resolved to build a good square Wall all round the Tomb, and to dig a Ditch to secure it from all inun∣dations. In the midst between these Walls they raised the Stone which they found overturned, and built an Altar, as a Memorial of the august Sacrifice of the Eucharist which had been offered up there, which might also serve to Celebrate it upon again, if either Accident or Devotion should carry the Ministers of JESUS CHRIST thither any more. The People of the place did themselves assist toward the carry∣ing on this little work, and showed as much Zeal for the honour of the Saint as the Christians did. This place is of itself very pleasant. You see there a small Plain extended from the bottom of a Hill, on one side of which is a Wood, on the other are Gar∣dens Cultivated; a Rivulet which turns and twines a∣bout, renders the Island very Fertile. It is not unin∣habited, as some have wrote, there are seventeen Vil∣lages in it. The Land is manured, even the very Mountains, and the Inhabitants are so far from want∣ing the necessaries of Life, that the growth of their Island is enough to carry on such Commerce as yields them a moderate plenty.
You will easily pardon me, Sir, for this short di∣gression concerning St. Francis Xavier. A Missio∣nary can't speak of him without being naturally in∣clined to enlarge about every thing that concerns this great Man. It was he who settled upon a solid Foundation all the Missions into the Indies, and who, in the last Years of his Life, encouraged his Brethren to enterprize the great Design of the Conversion of China. His Zeal passed into their minds and hearts; and tho' every body but Xavier thought it impossible that the Design should take effect, the Fathers Roger, Pasio, and Ricci, all three Italians, did resolve to spend all their pains, and if it were necessary, all their blood in this great Work. The Difficulties which the Devil raised, did not discourage them. They entred one after the other into the Southern Provinces. The Novelty of their Doctrine brought them Auditors, and the Sanctity of their Lifes made those Auditors have a favourable opinion of them. At first they heard them with Pleasure, and afterwards with Admi∣ration. Father Ricci above all distinguished him∣self by his Zeal and Understanding. For he was thoroughly instructed in the Customs, the Religion, Laws, and Ceremonies of the County, all which he had studied a long time before at Macao. He spoke their Language fluently, and understood their Wri∣tings perfectly; this was joyned to a sweet, easie, complaisant temper, and a certain insinuating beha∣viour, which none but himself had, which it was hard to resist; but above all, an ardour which the Holy Ghost instils into the Workmen of the Lords Harvest; all this, I say, got him the repute of a great Man and an Apostle. Not but that he met with a great many rubs in the work of God. The Devil overthrew his Designs more than once. He had the Superstition of the Peo∣ple,
the Jealousie of the Bonzes, and the ill humour of the Mandarins to deal with; all which violently opposed what he was about to establish. Yet he ne∣ver gave over, and God gave him Perseverance, a Vertue very necessary in the beginning such Enter∣prises as these, which always meet with opposition, and which men of the best intentions in the World sometimes let fall, discouraged for want of present success to fortifie them in the prosecution of their Design. Father Ricci, after many Years fruitless labour, had at last the comfort of seeing the Gospel flourish. He made many and mighty Conversions in the Pro∣vinces. The Mandarins themselves opened their eyes to the light of our holy Faith, which our Missionary carried even almost as far as to the Court. The Em∣peror Vanli then reigning, received him with great marks of Respect and Kindness: and among divers European Curiosities which the Father presented to him, he was so taken with some Pictures of our Sa∣viour and the Virgin Mary, that he ordered them to be set up in an high place in his Palace, as things to which he would have a respect fhewn. This kind Welcome from the Emperour, gained him the Good will of all the Lords at Court; and in spight of the opposition of some Magistrates, who according to their custom, could never deal hand∣somly by a Stranger, he bought an House at Pekin, and gained such a Foundation and Establishment there, as hath been since the support of all the Mis∣sions into this Empire. Religion was by this means known (and without it it would have been impossible to have supported it) thus it came into esteem, and was preached by the new Missionaries, who made great advantage of Fa∣ther Ricci's first Labours. The Court and all the
Provinces resounded every where with that adorable Name Iehovah., which the Jews heretofore, thro' the respect they bore to it, never so much as pronounced to their Proselites, and which the new-converted Chinese named to their Country-men with a respect yet greater. For the European Workmen being but few, gave an oppor∣tunity to several Mandarins to preach the Gospel, and there were some of them who by their Zeal and Un∣derstanding promoted the Affairs of Religion as much as the most fervent Missionaries. It is true that these Successes were sometime after interrupted; for it is the Character of Truth, that it makes it self Enemies, and the lot of the Christi∣an Religion always to be persecuted. Providence being desirous to try the Fidelity of these new Chri∣stians, and to re-inflame the Zeal of their Ministers, permitted the Idol Priests to oppose the preaching of the Gospel. So that it very near came to pass, that a Cabal of some Bonzes, supported by several Man∣darins, had by the destruction of Father Ricci over∣thrown in one minute the Work of several Years. Bt the greatest danger to this Holy Man and his Mission came from his own Brethren, I mean the European Christians. Some Portuguese of Macao in∣censed against the Jesuits, resolved to destroy them in China, altho' with them they destroyed the Chri∣stian Religion there. They could not but know what the Holy Intentions of those Fathers were in going thither, yet they accused them as Spies, who under pretence of preaching the Gospel, secretly managed a Conspiracy, and had a design to seize up∣on China by the force and assistance of the Iaponnese, Hollanders, and Christians of that Country. It must needs be a great amazement to any one, who observes the rage and bitterness of these false Brethren, who altho' engaged by their Religion to
propagate the work of God even with the loss of their Lives, were yet resolved to destroy it by such vile and false Aspersions. This Ridiculous Story which was set forth with Heat and Violence, and built upon some Circum∣stances which carried some shew of Truth, easily found Credit among the Chinese, naturally excessive∣ly Suspicious, and very well satisfied by a long expe∣rience that the least Commotions or Rebellion might bring the most powerful Empires to ruin. The Persecution was very sharp, the weak Chri∣stians were scandalized, and did Apostatize from the Faith. Father Martinez was taken up, impri∣soned, and bastinado'd, till at length he died thro' his Torments: and if this Accusation of the Chri∣stians had ever came to the knowledge of the Court, it is very probable it would have been the utter over∣throw of Christianity here. But our Lord stop'd the growing Evil in its bud, and by the means of a Mandarin a particular Friend of Father Ricci gave Peace to the Mission and Liberty to the Evangelical Workmen. After having surmounted a great many Obstacles of this nature, and preached the Gospel to an infi∣nite number of People, this fervent Missionary died. The Heathens judged him the wisest and most un∣derstanding Man of his Age, the Christians lovd him as their Father, and the preachers of the Gospel made him a Model whereby to form themselves. He had the satisfaction of dying in the midst of a plen∣tiful Harvest; but was disturbed that there were so few Workmen to get it in. So that he recommended nothing more earnestly to his Brethren who assisted him in his last Sickness, than to receive with all ima∣ginable joy and comfort all those who should come to partake of their Labours. If they find, says he to them, when they arrive here Crosses from the Ene∣mies
of Christianity, do you sweeten the bitterness of them, by demonstrations of the most tender Friendship, and most inflamed Charity. The Churches of China, of which he was the main support, were shaken by his Fall; for altho' the Em∣perour for some Years afterward shewed himself somewhat favourable to the Christian Religion, yet in 1615, there arose against it the cruellest Tem∣pest that it had ever yet suffered. It was occasioned by one of the principal Mandarins of Nankin.Chinkio.. They chiefly set upon the Pa∣stors, thereby the easier to disperse the Flock. Some were cruelly beaten, others banished, almost all imprisoned and carried afterwards to Macao, after having the honour of suffering a thou∣sand injuries and reproaches for the love of IESUS CHRIST. The Tempest lasted near six Years; but at last the Persecutor being himself accused, was by Gods Judg∣ment deprived both of his Offices and also of his Life. His death gave the Christians some respite, who after that multiplied more than ever, thro' the labours of a great many Missionaries. It was about this time 1631. that the Right Reve∣rend Fathers of the Order of St. Dominick joined with us; many of whom do at this time labour in China with a great deal of Zeal and Success. About this time Father Adam Schaal a German ap∣peared at Courts, and added a new Luste to Christianity which had but newly sprang up again. He was per∣fectly skilled in Mathematicks, and made use of his knowledge therein to obtain the Emperors kindness; he was in a little time so highly in the Emperours favour, that he thought he should be able by his own Interest alone to Establish the Christian Religion solidly. He began to make use of his Interest with good success, when an Insurrection overturned the
whole Government, and with it all his promising hopes. This great State whose Power seemed to be enough to secure it from the most violent Shock whatever, was made sensible then that there is nothing constant in this World. Some Robbers being met together, by the access of multitudes of Male-contents who joined them formed vast Armies: they burned Towns and plundered whole Provinces. China presently changed its Aspect, and from the most flourishing Empire became the Stage for the most bloody War. Never were there seen so many Murthers and Bar∣barities. The Emperour being surprised at Pekin, strangled himself for fear of falling into the hands of the Victors. The Usurper was soon drove out of the Throne by the Tartars, who seiz'd upon it. The Princes of the Blood who in different places were proclaimed Emperours, were vanquished or killed. Then all the Mandarins rose, some declaring for Tar∣tary, others for Liberty: others only carried on the Fighting Trade, in hopes to make their private For∣tunes from the publick Ruin. Some of those last were rather Monsters than Men, who giving themselves to all that Licentiousness which the most inhumane Cruelty and Barbarity could prompt them to, made whole Provinces desolate, and shed more blood to satisfie their Brutality, than the most ambitious Prince in the World would for the Conquest of an Empire. Religion, which groaned amidst those Troubles, had the comfort nevertheless of seeing many great Persons Converted; one Empress with her Son were Baptised; scarce either of them lived after their re∣ception of the Faith, the fruits of which they could not enjoy but in the other World. Lastly, the Tar∣tars by their Valour, and by a Conduct equal to the Policy of ancient Rome, made themselves Masters of
China, and in a few Years obliged all the Provinces to submit to a foreign Yoak. Then we thought Religions Case desperate; but God, who needs not the assistance of Men when he hath a mind to support his own Work, inspired on a sudden this new Prince with a greater affection for the Christian Religion, than we dared hope for from the Chinese Emperours. He not only took away the Government of the Mathematicks from the Ma∣bometans, which they had possessed for 300 Years, and gave it to Father Adam; but by a special Pri∣vilege he suffered that Father to apply himself to him immediately in all things which concerned the Missi∣onaries, without first passing thro' the Formalities of the Courts of Justice, who are very severe to Stran∣gers. This signal Favour, joined with many others, raised up the Courage of the Christians, and gave the Heathens greater liberty to close with the true Religion. Many Persons of the best Quality at Pekin desired Baptism; the Provinces follow'd the Example of the Court, and the Harvest became so plentiful, that the Workmen were too few to gather it in. Those who were employed therein, laboured with such an hearty Zeal, that we do at this present feel the effects of it. There were found Persons of emi∣nent Vertue, Prudence, and Understanding, whom God had formed during the Troubles and Civil Wars, and which the Spirit of the Almighty drew out of the Chaos, like so many Stars, to shed forth the Light of the Gospel, unto the most hidden parts of this vast Empire, accompanying their Preaching with Signs and Wonders. Among those extraordinary Men Father Father, a Frenchman, distinguished himself above the rest. I had the happiness to tarry some time in that Pro∣vince which was allotted to his care; and I have, after so many Years, found the precious remains
there, which are the necessary consequences of Holi∣ness. Those who were witnesses of his Actions, tell to their Children the Miracles which he wrought to confirm them in their Faith, and altho' one need not believe all which they relate of him, we cannot ne∣vertheless deny that God did in many occasions give an extraordinary concurrence in several great things which he enterprised for his Glory. It is worth knowing after what manner he founded the Mission of Ham-tçoum, a Town of the first Rank in Chensi, two days Journey distant from the Capital. He was invited thither by a Mandarin, and the small number of Christians which he found there, made him the more laborious to encrease their Number. God put into his hands a means of doing this which he never expected. One of the great Boroughs, which in China are as big as the Towns, was then over∣run by a prodigious multitude of Locusts, which eat up all the Leaves of the Trees, and gnawed the Grass to the very Roots. The Inhabitants after having used all imaginable means, thought fit to apply themselves to Father Fa∣ber, whose repute was every where talked of. The Father took from thence an occasion to explain the principal Mysteries of our Faith, and added that if they would submit themselves thereto, they should not only be delivered from the Present Plague, but that also they should obtain innumerable Blessings, and Eternal Happiness. They embraced it willingly, and the Father to keep his word with them, marched in Ceremony into the Highways in his Stole and his Surplice; and sprinkled up and down holy water, accompanying his Action with the Prayers of the Church, but especially with a lively Faith. God heard the Voice of his Servant, and the next day all the Insects disappeared.
But the People, whose minds were wholly bent upon the things of this World, as soon as they saw themselves delivered, neglected the Counsel which the Missionary had given them. They were there∣fore immediately punished, and the Plague grew worse than it was before. Then they accused one the other of their want of Faith; they ran in Crouds to the Father's House, and casting themselves at his Feet: we will not rise up Father, said they, till you have pardoned us. We confess our fault, and pro∣test that if you will a second time deliver us from this Affliction with which Heaven threatens us, the whole Borough will immediately acknowledge your God, who alone can work such great Miracles. The Father, to increase their Faith, made them beg a great while. At last inspired as before, he sent up his Prayer, and sprinkled his holy water, and by the next day there was not an Insect to be found in the Fields. Then the whole Borough being brought o∣ver to the Truth, followed the guidance of God's Holy Spirit; they were all instructed and formed in∣to a Church, which, tho' it was abandoned for some years, is still reckoned one of the devoutest Missions in China. They say also of this Father that he has been car∣ried over Rivers thro' the Air, that they have seen him in an extasie, that he foretold his own Death, and did several other such Wonders; but the greatest Miracle of all was his life, which he spent in the con∣tinual exercise of all the Apostolical Virtues, in a profound Humility, in a severe Mortification, in a settled Patience, proof against all sorts of Injuries, in a flaming Charity, and a tender Devotion to the Mother of God, all which he practised to his death; to the Edification, and I may say the Admiration even of the Idolaters
While Christianity spread its Root deep through∣out the Provinces, it flourished every day more and more at Pekin; the Emperor did not seem far from it. He came often to our Church, and did there a∣dore the Divine Majesty in such an humble man∣ner as would have been commendable in a Christi∣an. There are still Writings from his own hand, wherein he acknowledges the beauty and the purity of our holy Law; but a Heart set upon sensual pla∣sures can never follow the directions of the Spirit; When Father Adam has been pressing upon him. You are, said he, in the right, but how can you expect that any one should be able to practise all these Laws? Take away two or three of the difficultest, and after that per∣haps we may agree to the rest. Thus this young Prince di∣vided between the Voice of human Nature and Grace, thought that we might favour Nature at the expence of Religion; but the Father gave him to understand, that we were only the Publishers, not the Authors of the Gospel. Nevertheless, my Lord, says the Fa∣ther to him one day, tho' we propose to the corrupt World a body of Morals which surpass their forces to comply with, and Mysteries which are above their Reason to comprehend, we do not from thence de∣spair to have our Doctrine received; because we do it by his order who can enlighten the most darkned Understanding, and strengthen the most weak Na∣ture. These difficulties which the Emperor looks upon as insuperable did not take any thing from that kindness and respect which he bore to Father Adam. He al∣ways called him his Father, placed always his confi∣dence in him: he made him twenty visits in two years; and gave him leave to build two Churches in Pekin; and order'd those which in the Persecution had been demolished in the Provinces to be rebuilt: nay granted him whatever could any ways contribute
toward the solid establishment of the Faith, which without doubt would have made an infinite progress, had not a violent Passion changed the temper of that Prince, and took him away from us at a time when we had the most need of his Protection: we may justly say that his death was owing to an extraordina∣ry grief for the loss of a Concubine. This Woman, whom he had taken from her Husband, inclined him to the worship of false Gods, to that excess that he was wholly altered from what he was before as to his Opinions of Religion. And that time it was that he fll sick, his mind being full of Notions from the Bonzes, who swarmed in his Palace, and being vehe∣mently tormented by his Passion, so that he could not get a Moments rest. In the mean while as he loved the Father extremely, so was he desirous to see him once more before he dyed. At this last meeting the good Missionary's Bowels yearn'd upon him. He was kneeling at the Prince's Beds-feet, whom he had Educated as his own Son, in hopes one day to make him Head of the true Religi∣on. He saw him there under the load of a violent Distemper, disturbed with the impure desires of un∣lawful Love, given up to Idols and their Priests, just upon the brink of death, and that death an Eternal one. The Emperor, who saw him in this concern, would not let him speak upon his Knees; but raised him up, and heard his last advice with somewhat less prejudice against it than usual; ordered him after∣ward a present of Tea, and dismissed him with such marks of tenderness as touched him to the bottom of his Soul, of which he was the more sensible, because he never could bring it about, to work in him a true Conversion. His death was equally fatal to the Bonzes, who were thereupon driven from the Palace, and to the true Religion which was thereby brought within a
nails breadth of destruction. Many Churches built upon the Coasts of the Maritime Provinces were de∣stroyed, by an Edict which commanded that every body on the Coasts should retire ten or eleven Miles within Land, and destroy all Habitations within that compass all round the Coasts, because a famous Pi∣rate made use of them in carrying on a War against the Emperor. They were also just going to ruin Ma∣cao, and order was given to drive the Portuguese thence, when Father Adam used his utmost effort to save it. At this time all his Credit and Interest, which he had employed so much to the advantage of Reli∣gion, ended. For in a little time he became the ob∣ject of the most bloody Persecution that ever the Church sustered. The four Mandarins who had the Regency during the Emperors minority, moved upon different▪ To∣picks, and especially animated against the Christians, to whom this Father was the main support, put him and three of his Companions into Prison. Other Preachers of the Gospel were summoned to Pekin, who met with the same treatment, and were loaded each with nine Chains. They burned their Books, their Beads, and Medals, and whatever else carried the Face of Religion; nevertheless they spared the Churches; as for the Christian Flock they met with a more mild usage. Those famous Confessors had the honour to be dragged before all the Seats of Judgment. There it was that their Enemies did admire their Courage. But they were above all moved by the miserable con∣dition of Father Adam. That Venerable old Man, who but a day or two before was the Oracle of the Court, and the Favourite of a great Emperor, now appeared in the form of a Slave, loaded with Chains, and oppressed with Infirmities, dejected by the weight and burthen of Age, but much more by that of ca∣lumny
which labour'd to blemish his Innocence. He had a sort of Catarrhe which hindred him from making his defence; but Father Verbiest forsook him not, and answered for him, to his Enemies, in so sensible a manner, that the Judges could not enough admire the Constancy of the Peson ac∣cused, nor the heroical Charity of the Person who defended him. However as innocent as he was, he was condemned to be strangled, which is in China an honourable kind of Death; but afterwards, as tho' they repented that they had not been unjust enough, they repealed the Sentence, and gave another, where∣in the Father was condemned to be publickly exposed in the Market place, and be hacked alive into ten thousand pieces. The Supreme Court sent the Sentence to the Re∣gency, and to the Princes of the Blood to have it confirmed; but God who had till then seemed to have relinquished his Servant, began to speak in fa∣vour of his Cause by a terrible Earthquake. The whole Land were confounded at this Prodigy. Every body exclaimed that Heaven itself would punish the inju∣stice of the Magistrates: who therefore to appease the People opened all the Prisons in the Town, and made an Act of Oblivion for all Criminals, ex∣cepting the Confessors of JESUS CHRIST who were still kept in Chains, as tho' they had been the only Victims for whom Heaven had no concern. But because there arrived divers Prodigies, and in particular fire consumed great part of the Court of Justice, at last fear obtained that from these unrighte∣ous Judges, which innocence could not. They set Father Adam at liberty, and permitted him to go home to his House, till the Emperor should other∣wise dispose of him. This great Man blemished, in∣deed to outward appearance, by an ignominious Sen∣tence which was never repealed; but in truth full
of glory, for having defended the honour of Religion by exposing his own life, dyed a little while after, worn away by the toil of an Apostolical life, but more by the hardships and inconveniences of a trou∣blesome Prison. His death was too precious in the Eyes of God, to be unaccompany'd with some signal blessing upon the sorrowful remains of persecuted Christianity. It is true that the Missionaries of the Provinces were banished to Canton, among which three were Dominicans, one a Franciscan, (and another of the same Order dyed in Prison) and one and twenty Jesuits; yet four were kept at the Court, whom the Providence of God made use of afterwards to settle Christianity again in its pristine splendor. God himself revenged the innocence of his Servants. Sony the first Mandarin in the Regency, the most dangerous Enemy the Fathers had, dyed a month or two after. The second, named Soucama, was after∣wards indicted and condemned to a cruel death, his Goods Confiscated, his Children, in number seven, had their Heads cut off, excepting the third, who was cut to pieces alive, the punishment which that wicked Judge had design'd for Father Adam, and with which God chastised his Crimes in the Persons of his Chil∣dren. Yam-quam-sien, who had been the chief In∣strument in the Persecution, fared no better than them. After the death of Father Adam he was made President of the Mathematicks, and had the charge of the Kalendar of the Empire committed to him. Father Verbiest accused him, and plainly made ap∣pear the ignorance of this pitiful Mathematician. This was a bold stroke, because the Presidents Party was very strong, and the flames which had caused the Persecution were not yet quenched. But many things concurred to give good success to this Enterprise. The understanding of the Father, the
kindness which the new Emperor had for the Euro∣peans, but especially the particular Providence of God which did secretly manage this important Affair. For it is certain that in the several tryals whereby they proved the goodness of our Mathematicks, the Heavens did so exactly agree with what our Fathers had foretold, even above the certainty which our Tables and Calculations could promise us, that it seemed as tho' God had guided the Stars, in such a course as was necessary to justifie our Missionaries ac∣count of them. The President of the Mathematicks used his best endeavours to defend himself; and because he could not hide his Ignorance in Astronomy, he endeavoured to put upon the Judges, and persuade them that the Christian Religion contained much greater errors than those he was guilty of. In the midst of some meet∣ings where the Emperor was present, he behaved him∣self in such manner as the Emperor could scarcely bear with him. He layed his Hands across, and cryed out as loud as he could: See here, do but observe what these Fellows adore, and what they would have  worship too, a Man who was hanged, a person who was crucified, let any one judge hereby of their understanding and good sense. But all these Excursions served only to diminish his own Credit. This wicked person, more blameable for his Crimes than for his Ignorance, lost his charge and was condemned to death. Notwithstanding the Emperor suspended the Execution of the Sentence by reason of his extraordinary old Age; but God himself executed his Sentence of Vengeance. He smote him with an horrible Ulcer, and by his sorrow∣ful death, delivered Religion from this Monster of Iniquity.
Then the care of the Mathematicks was committed to Father Verbiest, the antient Missionaries were re∣called to their old Churches, but forbid to go about to build new ones, or to labour in the Conversion of the Chinese. Lastly, to magnifie our happiness, the memory of Father Adam was mightily respected even at Court. He was publickly justified and cleared, his Charges and Titles of honour were remanded him, and his Ancestors made Nobility. The Emperor him∣self appointed considerable sums of mony to build him a stately Mausoleum, which at this present is to be seen, in room of a Sepulchre, adorned with Sta∣tues and several Marble Figures according to the Cu∣stom of the Country. Thus it is that God by a continual Vicissitude, proves the constancy of the Faithful by Persecution, and en∣courages them again by punishing their Persecutors. This happy Peace which the Church gained thro' Father Verbiests means, encouraged the Missionaries to repair that damage which Hell had done. Besides the Jesuits, there were several Fathers of the Orders of St. Francis, and St. Augustin, who entered into the Lords Vineyard. New establishments were gained every where, and notwithstanding any Prohibition a great number of Heathens were Converted to the Faith, being more afraid of eternal punishment, than of that with which the Laws of Man seemed to threaten them. So ardent and so hasty a Zeal will perhaps make you amazed; but besides that Charity is always ha∣zardous, many things contributed to confirm those who might else be afraid of fatal consequences. The first of these is the great Authority which the Missio∣naries have acquired at Court in a small time. Espe∣cially the Emperor is satisfied that they despise Ho∣nours, and that at home they lead an Austere life.
The Prince is inform'd of this such ways that it is im∣possible he should be deceived. He had information from Spies, of all that passed in their Houses; even so nicely as to know their Mortifications and corporeal Penances. He sends also to the Fathers Houses a young Tar∣tar, of good parts, under pretence to learn Philoso∣phy, but in reality to discover the most secret things in their Families, and to be himself, I think, an oc∣casion of offence. He stays there a year, without knowing what the Princes intentions are, who having sent for him into his presence commands him to tell him all the private disorders of these Fathers, and e∣specially how they have behaved themselves towards him. And when these young Men constantly bear Te∣stimony of the Fathers innocence: I see very well, says the Emperor, they have stop'd your Mouth with Presents, but I know a way to open it again. Then he makes him be severely slashed at several times, yet is not the pain enough to make the young Tartar speak against his Conscience. Which pleases the Prince mightily, who would be disturbed to find him∣self deceived in the Idea which he has formed to him∣self of these fervent Missionaries. This obliges him afterward to take their part in an Assembly of the Mandarins, some of which do not esteem the Missionaries because their outward car∣riage seems so good. As for that Matter, says the Emperor to them, neither you nor I can find fault with them. After all that I can do to get information, I am persuaded that these People teach us nothing but what themselves practice, and they are indeed as modest as they appear outwardly to be. The second reason which engaged the Emperor to favour the Missionaries, was the great understanding of Father Verbiest, who in a small time was reckoned the
learnedst Man in the Empire in all Faculties. His Re∣putation is every where spread abroad, and upon ma∣ny occasions his Opinion has the repute of an Oracle. Some Mandarins one day speaking of the Trinity, and using it as a Fable, one of them said, I do not know what the Christians mean, and am as much puzled as you; but Father Verbiest is of that opinion: what say you to that? Can a Man of his sence and understanding mistake? They all held their Tongues, and seemed to yield to this reason. So true is it that the use of humane Learning is so far from being (as some think) opposite to the Spirit of the Gospel, that it some∣times serves to establish it, and to render the most ob∣scure mysteries therein credible. The third Reason, is that hearty love which the Emperor believes the Missionaries have for him. It is true the Missionaries omit nothing which they think will please him; and as they are the most inflexible and resolute against doing any thing contrary to their Religion, so are they the most complaisant and ready to comply with all the reasonable requests of the Em∣peror. A Rebellion which happened at this time, put it into Father Verbiests power to do the Crown a con∣siderable piece of Service. Ousangei, that famous Chinese General, who had brought the Tartars into the Empire, thought he had then a good opportunity to drive them out again. He was naturally courageous, and in Chensi commanded the best of the Chinese Soldiery, and had got together a vast deal of mony. This made him set up to be Emperor, and made him believe he could easily com∣pass his design. And indeed he so ordered his mat∣ters that he made himself presently Master of the three great Provinces Yunnam, Soutçhouen, and Gueit çheou, afterwards a great part of the Province of Houquam acknowledged him. So that these posses∣sions and Chensi, which he had in possession a good
while before made him Master of almost a third of China. These Conquests seemed to be the more secure to him, because at the same time, the Vice-Roys of Quantoum and Fokien followed his example, and gave the Emperor on that side a mighty diversion, and beside a powerful Pirate with a great Fleet attacked and in few days took the Island Formosa at the same time. Less than this would have ruined the Tartars, if they had all concerted their business together; but jealousie which does oft overthrow the firmest Leagues, ruined their Projects. The King of Fokien fell out with that of Formosa, and to preserve himself from being damaged by his Fleet, made his Peace with the Emperor, who gave him such assistance as that he made his party good. The King of Quantoum being unwilling to be any ways under the direction or command of Ousanguei, left him, and put himself under the Protection of the Tartars, who turned all their Forces against this last Rebel, more formidable than all the rest together; for he was Master of all the Western Provinces, and the success which his Troops had hitherto met with, gave them Heart and Courage enough to undertake any thing. After the Emperor had tryed many several ways to no purpose, he saw plainly that it was impossible to force them from the places where they had entrench∣ed without using his great Artillery: but the Cannon which he had were Iron, and so heavy that they dared not carry them over such steep Rocks, as they must do to come to him. He thought Father Verbiest might be assistant to him in this matter; he commanded the Father therefore to give directions for casting some Cannon after the European manner. The Father presently excused himself, saying that he had lived his whole life far from the noise of War, that he was
therefore little instructed in those affairs. He added also that being a Religious, and wholly employed in the concerns of another World, he would pray for his Majesty's good success; but that he humbly begged that his Majesty would be pleased to give him leave not to concern himself with the warfare of this World. The Fathers Enemies (for a Missionary is never without some) thought that now they had an oppor∣tunity to undermine him. They persuaded the Em∣peror that what he commanded the Father to do, was no ways opposite to the will or intention of the Go∣spel: and that it was no more inconvenient to him to cast Cannon than to cast Machines and Mathe∣matical Instruments, especially when the good and safety of the Empire were concerned: that therefore without doubt the reason of the Fathers refusal was because he kept Correspondence with the Enemy, or at least because he had no respect for the Em∣peror. So that at last the Emperor gave the Father to understand, that he expected obedience to his last Order, not only upon pain of losing his own life, but also of having his Religion utterly rooted out. This was to touch him in the most sensible part, and he was indeed too wise to stand out for a nicety or a scruple at the hazard of losing all that was va∣luable. I have already assured your Majesty that I have very little understanding in casting Cannon, said he to the Emperor; but since you command me I will endeavour to make your Workmen understand what our Books direct in this affair. He took there∣fore upon himself the care of this Work, and the Cannon was proved before the Emperor, and found to be extraordinary good. The Emperor was so well pleased with the Work, that he pulled off his Mantle, and in the presence of the whole Court gave it to Father Verbiest for a token of his Affection.
All the Pieces of Cannon were made very light and small, but strengthned with a stock of Wood from the mouth to the breech, and girt with several bands of Iron; so that the Cannons were strong e∣nough to bear the force of the Powder, and light enough to be carried thro' any, even the worst Roads. This new Artillery did every way answer what they proposed from it. The Enemy were obliged to leave their Intrenchments in disorder, and soon after to Ca∣pitulate; for they did not think it possible to hold out against those any longer, who could destroy them without coming themselves into reach. Ousanguei was himself dead: his Son Hom-boa, who carried on the War, strangled himself thro' despair and the rest of them were in a small time utterly routed. So that the Emperor then began to Reign in Peace, and continued more and more to shew marks of Favour and Affection to the Missionaries. So that Father Verbiest has often sighing said, that the Lord's Vineyard was now open, that the Heathens them∣selves gave liberty to enter upon the Harvest, but that yet there were scarce any Workmen to bring it in. They send to him for Pastors from every place, Tartary, the Kingdom of Corea, the Provinces of China, which have been left destitute by the death of their antient Pastors, invite or rather press him to succour them. Neither does this scarcity come from the Europeans want of Zeal, but from the differences which have arose between the sacred Congregation, who send Vicars Apostolical into the East, and the King of Portugal, who pretends to a right to nomi∣nate all the Bishops there, exclusively to any supe∣riour Ecclesiastical Power. This Dispute cools the ardour of those fervent Mis∣sionaries, who dare not engage themselves where they must incur either the indignation of their Holy Fa∣ther,
or of a mighty Prince, both which things are very formidable. And thus the Work of God stood still, and those precious minutes were lost, which the favour of a great Emperour and the diligence of a zealous Missionary, might have made so useful to the firm establishing our Holy Faith. But this is one of the Arna of Providence, which, after it hath confounded all the opposition of the enemies of the Gospel, even at the expence of working Mi∣racles, does sometimes suffer that the Zeal of Catho∣licks should do more harm to Religion, than the Ha∣tred and Jealousie of Idolaters. Sometime after my Lord Bishop of Heliopolis was sent by the sacred Congregation with some French Ecclesiasticks, full of ardour to reform and encrease the new Christianity. This courageous Prelate had once already missed his Voyage: For contrary Winds having obliged him sometime before to put in at Manilla, a considerable Island under the Spanish Go∣vernment, he was taken up upon suspicion there, and obliged to return back into Europe by the way of Mexico. This accident which had broken his first measures, served only to fill his mind with new and those greater ones. He came to Paris, where his good intentions were well known. Rome heard him with pleasure, and followed his Projects in all that re∣spected the Eastern Missions. So that he came ho∣noured with a Power from the Holy See, and laded with the Alms of the Faithful, who expected nothing less from his Zeal than the Conversion of the New World. He therefore once more passed over the Seas, and happily arrived at China, where he began to scatter abroad that Flame which should warm all the Missi∣onaries. The Jesuits and other Religious not only acknowledged his Authority, but also took the new Oath which the sacred Congregation had appointed,
altho' the King of Portugal had absolutely forbad it. For they thought that that Prince, in whom the love of Religion had always prevailed before his private interest, would not take it ill when he should know that their refusal of it might have occasioned the de∣struction of Christianity in China, and perhaps of the Missions in all the other parts of the East. This was matter of great joy to the Bishop, who after this happy beginning, made ready, according to his former notions, to new Till this Vineyard of the Lord, whether he thought himself sent like the Prophet heretofore Ier. 1.10.. Ecce constitui te super gentes, ut destruas, & disperdas, & dissipes, &c. But God Almighty was sa∣tisfied with his good Intentions, and took him to him∣self a few months after his arrival. His death great∣ly surprised all the Faithful, it did especially afflict the fervent Ecclesiasticks who were the Companions of his Voyage; the other Missionaries submitted with resignation to the Will of God, being perswa∣ded that whatsoever Providence appoints, is always for his Glory, and for the good of the Elect, if they make a right use of it. This was sweetned by the arrival of two other Bi∣shops, who a little while after supplied his place un∣der the Title of Vicars Apostolical. The first was Monsieur d' Argolis, an Italian of the Order of St. Francis, noted among those of his Order for his ex∣cellent Vertues, and extraordinary Knowledge. He had been employed in the chiefest business there, and our Holy Father thought he could not make choice of a wiser Man than he to place at the Helm of so flourishing a Mission. As he went by Siam, Mon∣sieur Constance understanding his worth presented him to the King, who would fain have kept him in his Kingdom; but because the Orders of the Holy See obliged him to go farther, he resolved at least to shew
him some marks of his esteem and affection toward him, in ordering him, and two of his Companions of the same Order, a considerable Pension. So that had it not been for the Revolutions which a little while after happened in his Kingdom, this Prince worthy of a better Fortune, would have had his Missi∣onaries in China, as well as the most zealous Princes in Europe. Since this wise Prelate hath been in China, the na∣tural sweetness of his Temper hath very much con∣tributed to the comfort of the Faithful, and conver∣sion of the Heathen. He hath visited all the Pro∣vinces which the Holy See committed to his care, consecrating Priests, teaching and exhorting them, administring the Sacrament of Confirmation, uniting all their affections as much as possibly he could, whose different interests seems to have cooled their mutual Charity to one another in JESUS CHRIST. And tho' one would think that the Portuguese could never have a respect for him, because their pretensi∣ons are wholly opposite to this institution of Vicars Apostolical, yet he has behaved himself with so much Prudence, that all Nations here think themselves par∣ticularly obliged to him. The second Bishop whom the Holy See has digni∣fied with the Title of Vicar Apostolical, is Monsieur de Basilee a Chinese, educated by the Fathers of Saint Francis's Order, afterwards taking upon himself the Order of St. Dominick. When he was only a Missionary, he had a flaming zeal for the Conversion of his dear Country, and during the Persecution of Father Adam, he was the main support of Religion in all the Pro∣vinces which he travelled through, and strengthned in the Faith. When he was consecrated Bishop, he performed all his Duties perfectly well, and the Holy See did so far approve of his Conduct as to lt him nominate his Successor. He nominated his Vicar-General
the Reverend Father de Leonissa, an Italian of St. Francis's Order, who in his private Life might have been a Pattern to the most strict Religious, and in the important Employment of Vicar Apostolical, has shewn that he has all that Zeal, all that Prudence, and all that Constancy, which the Government of a great Church requires. My Lord Bishop of Basilée after he had thus cho∣sen this worthy successor of his Apostleship, fell sick at Nankin, and died full of those happy Visions which God gives even in this World to his Saints. At his Death that Faith shined brightly, which had animated him in his Life-time; and his last minutes, wherein he appeared to be fulfilled with the most sensible touches of Christian hope, seemed to give him an antepast of the Joys of Paradise. All his trouble was for the Missionaries by whom he was affe∣ctionately beloved, and for the Christians who lost in him the first Priest, the first Religious, and the first Bishop that ever China had yet given to Christi∣anity. And as his blessed Memory was every where spread abroad, they have set up his Picture in several places; which the Reverend Father de Leonissa sent to the sacred Congregation, to preserve the Memory of a Prelate whose own Merit, as well as our parti∣cular Obligations to him, ought to make eternally respected. Besides this the Pope honoured Mr. Maigrot and Mr. Pin with the Title of Vicars Apostolical, both of them Doctors of the Sorbon, diligent, zealous, and set upon following the Intentions of the Holy See, and in a word Companions of Mr. Heliopolis, and In∣heritors of a double portion of his Spirit. If the number of Missionaries had been answer∣able to that of the Pastors, the Churches in China had now been perfectly filled; but, as I have said, the over care which every one has taken to provide
for it exclusively of others, has rendered People less desirous of going. Good men, nay even those who have occasioned these disorders, have mourned for them in secret. Some zealous Persons have endea∣voured to remedy this. My Lord Bishop of Mun∣ster and Paderborn, whom the care of his own Diocese did not hinder from extending his care even as far as the East, gave a settlement for six Missionaries for ever to China; but dying a little while after, his last Will was never executed. Others in France, in Spain, in Italy, took a great deal of pains to help this forsaken Mission, but they could never compass their designs. Lewis the Great, who is himself as zealous for e∣stablishing the Gospel, as all the other Princes put together, among the great Designs which he has been intent upon to make Religion flourish in Europe, thought that he ought not to neglect that good which he might do in Asia. He was very sensible of the Necessities of China, which Father Verbiest had repre∣sented to him in one of his Letters, in the most sen∣sible manner in the World; and although he very well knew, that he could not make Missionaries (a quality which no body can give us but the Vicar of JESUS CHRIST) he doubted not but that Reli∣giouses who were exactly skilled in Mathematicks, in attaining, according to his Orders, an exact know∣ledge in Astronomy, might at the same time with good success, labour according to the design of their Institution, in the Conversion of Infidels. He was very well satisfied, that of all the means which hu∣man prudence could advantageously make use of in the most holy Actions, there were none which pro∣moted the concerns of Religion in China more than the Mathematicks. Being therefore willing at once to satisfie his zeal for the advancement of the Gospel, and the desire
which he had of bringing the Sciences to perfection, he made choice of six Jesuits whom he thought capable of giving good satisfaction to the Learned, and Instru∣ction to intelligent Persons. Those who were thus appointed, could have wished they had all the abilities necessary for this Employment: They did neverthe∣less set out with a good Will, being ready to sacrifice their Lives and all their small Talents to the greater Glory of God, and by consequence to the pious De∣signs of the greatest Prince in the World. When we came into China, we found it in the Condition I have been relating, the Harvest was plentiful every where, but it was almost destitute of Workmen; or (to make use of Father Intorcetta's words, one of the most noted Missionaries) drowned in those Tears, which the sorrow of seeing her self abandoned forced continually from her: Benedictus Deus qui fecit nobiscum Misericordiam suam, liberavit vos à naufragio, ut prope naufragam nostram missionem ab aquis lacrimarum, summique moeroris eriperet, vos omnes in corde servo, & tanquam veros Societatis filio virosque Apostolicos intimis animi praecordiis amplector, &c. Thus he spake to us in his first Letter, to encourage us to assist in the glorious Labours of his Mission. Providence put it into our power in a little time to employ our selves usefully there; and if we had done no other good than was the drawing after us by our Example several other Missionaries who fol∣lowed us, and who now are full of their holy Labours in the Work of God; it would be a great comfort to us, and a very great advantage to China. But that which is much more comfortable is, that we have hereby contributed very much toward removing those lets and hindrances to the propagating the Gospel of which I spake before. For at the Remonstrance of Father Tachard, supported also by that of the Re∣verend Father General, Innocent XI. suspended the
Oath. And after Clement VIII. granted to the King of Portugal to nominate three Bishops, one of Pekin, the other of Nankin, and the third of Macao. And at this present our Holy Father, who in his own self hath all the Zeal, all the Piety, and all the Wisdom of his Predecessors, animated by the same Spirit, and moved (if I might do my self the honour of saying so) with what I have had the honour to represent unto him of the present State of these Missions, is about to regulate all the particulars therein by the prudent Councel and Advice of the sacred Congre∣gation. To the end that hereafter nothing may be so much laid to heart as the Interest of Religion, and that all Kingdoms of Europe being united in the Love of JESUS CHRIST, may with one con∣sent labour to bring about and perfect this great Work. Thus, Sir, I have given you a general View of the Establishment and Progress of Christianity in the Empire of China, from the Preaching of the Apostles till these last Times. This Church heretofore very Famous, but after that wholly overturned by Super∣stition, hath at last been re-established one Age ago by one of the greatest Men of our Society, and aug∣mented by the Labours of a great many Missionaries, governed by wise Prelates, honoured by the Pro∣tection of many Emperours, supported by the Bounty of all the Princes of Europe; and, which is more for its Glory, persecuted by all the enemies of Truth, and made precious in the Eyes of God by the Chains, the banishment and blood of the Confessors. I am with all imaginable respect, SIR, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, L. J.
To the most Reverend Father De la Chaize, Confessor to the King. Concerning the Manner how each Mis∣sionary preaches the Gospel in China, and of the Fervency of the New Christians. Most Reverend Father, ALtho' the important Affairs of China, which detain me at present at Rome, require all my Application, and seem to be my Ex∣cuse if I am wanting in performing any Parts of my other Duties so exactly as I could desire; I cannot nevertheless in the least forget both the Obli∣gations which I my self have to you in particular, as well as the Missions in the East in general. It was you, most Reverend Father, who formerly drew out the Platform of them, who just then made Choice of their Ministers, whom your Testimonials, together with the Esteem of one of the greatest Prin∣ces upon Earth, have rendred in Process of Time more Renowned than all their particular Qualifications. This Royal Protection, under which we have un∣dauntedly affronted Dangers; those Letters written on our behalf to Sovereigns and their Officers; those magnificent Presents, those regularly settled Pension those extraordinary Helps, (and what we value muc
more) those so grave Counsels, savouring so much of the Spirit of God, wherewith you have in a manner hallowed our First Voyages, and which we still look upon as the safest Rule of our Behaviour and Conduct, are Benefits either received from your self, or procured by your means. 'Tis but just, most Reverend Father, that in what part of the World soever we be, we should testifie our Acknowledgments. For my part, I am perswaded that one cannot give you more solid Demonstrations of them, than by maintaining by our great Zeal, what you have performed to our Advan∣tage. I supposed you would be satisfied, and that at least I should perform my Duty, by acquainting you with the Success wherewith it hath pleased God to crown our Labour; and what Benefits we may hope to reap from the Missionaries which you your self will form, or at least who shall come to us out of your hands. In a Word, the Time I shall employ in writing to you upon this Subject, is so far from any ways dimi∣nishing that due Care, and constant Endeavour to promote the welfare of our Missions, that without all doubt, it will much contribute to their future Esta∣blishment; for I hope that your Protection becoming thereby more effectual and solid, will more advance our Affairs, than all the Pains and Care which I can possibly take for their Success. Pursuant to the First Project that we laid, we were all of us to stay at Pekin, in the Palace, and Service of the Emperor; but Providence otherwise order'd it, and they at last gave way to our Inclination, which moved us to disperse our selves all over the Provinces, for the propagating of Religion. They were content to detain Father Gerbillon and Father Bouvet at Court, where they immediately applied themselves to the stu∣dy of Languages with such Success, that they were quickly in a Condition to assist the Christians, yea,
and to be employed by the Emperor in several impor∣tant Affairs. The most considerable, was the Peace between the Moseovites and Chinese; the Treaty of which, was then afoot 300 Leagues from Pekin, whi∣ther Father Gerbillon was sent with Prince Sosan who was nominated Plenipotentiary for the Empire. Nipchou was the place where the Ministers of the Two Nations assembled; each of them having a Body of Souldiers attending, to terminate if Occasion ser∣ved, what the Negotiation could not decide: the Haughtiness of both, did oftentimes make them fly out into extremes, which would have proved fatal to both Parties, if Father Gerbillon by his Discretion had not moderated Animosities. He continually passed from Camp to Camp, made Speeches, propos'd Expedi∣ents, pacified their Minds, and he dissembled what∣ever might be apt mutually to exasperate them in the Conclusion: He so dexterously managed the com∣mon Interests, that the Peace was concluded to the Satisfaction both of Chinese and Moscovites. Prince So∣san was so well pleased with the Zeal and Wisdom of this Father, that he declared publickly, that if it had not been for him, all had been in a desperate Condi∣tion; he exprest himself about the matter, to the Em∣peror to the same effect, insomuch that this Prince had the Curiosity to be acquainted with him. He found him to be a very sensible Person, capable, sin∣cere, forward to execute, and even to anticipate his Orders. This Character wonderfully pleased the Emperor; he had a mind to have him near his Person, at the Palace, in the Campaign, and in his Progress into Tartary, where he bestowed upon him so many signal marks of Esteem, that the Grandees of his Court, might have perhaps conceived some Jealousie from them, had not the Father's Modesty won him the Affection of every Body. These First Favours were followed by an extraor∣dinary
one that was much better relished by this Mis∣sionary: He pitch't upon him for his Tutor in Ma∣thematicks and Philosophy conjointly with Father Bovet, whose merit he likewise much esteem'd▪ The Passion this Prince hath for Sciences, makes him very intent upon Studies every day in a manner Two or Three Hours together, which he spares from his Plea∣sure: It is more than probable, that by the inquiry into natural Truth, Providence will conduct him by degrees to the eternal Fountain of Truth, without which, all others serve not so much to perfect the Mind, as to puff it up with Pride in the eyes of Men, and render it inexcusable before God. Father Verbiest had already begun to explain these Sciences to him; but, besides his making use of the Chinese Tongue in his Lectures, which is not proper, by reason of its often repeated Equivocals, to illustrate Notions otherwise obscure enough of themselves: Be∣sides that, I say Father Verbiest died. These Fathers supposed the Tartarian Tongue would be better liked by this Prince, and that it might serve their turn the better to make their Notions intelligible. It happen∣ed according to their Expectation, and the Emperor became in a short time so capable, that he composed a Book of Geometry. He afterwards gave it to the Princes his Sons, and undertook to be their Master in it; he call'd them together every day, explain'd to them the most difficult Propositions of Euclid; yea, and this Prince having upon his Shoulders the Govern∣ment of one of the most potent Empires of the World, did not disdain, with his Rule and Compass in his Hand, to spend his Time in the Family in Specula∣tions, which Interest alone scarce makes delightful to private Persons. Whilst these Two Fathers by their Credit made themselves fit to be in a short time the main Support of Religion, Father Fontaney, Father Visdelou, and my
self did endeavour not to be unserviceable in the Pro∣vinces. Father Fontaney went to Nankin, Father Vis∣delou took Care of the Churches of Chansi, where I al∣so remained some time with him, from whence after∣wards I removed to Chensi, the ancient Place of Fa∣ther Faber's Mission, the Christians of which Place, notwithstanding their having been eserted this many Years, do nevertheless preserve their fist Fervency, and are still look'd upon as the Mould of that great Flock, and Model of other Believers. We understood at that Time by our own proper Experience, what was often told us, that the Harvest truly was great, and that happy is that Labourer whom the Master of the Harvest doth please to make use of to gather it in. Every thing is matter of Consolation in this glorious Employ∣ment; the Faith of the new Converts, the Innocence of the Ancient, the Aptness of the Children, the De∣votion and Modesty of Women; but yet one is more especially affected by some eminent and exemplary Conversions, to perceive the Work of Grace now and then wrought in the hearts of Idolaters. The Truth is, these are in respect of us convin∣cing Proofs of that Truth which we preach and de∣clare: For indeed, by what secret Charm could we be able to animate dead Minds, and raise them, (if I may presume so to say) to Reason, to God, to all the Maxims of the most pure and refined Morality; Minds that have been buried, and immersed from their very Infancy in Flesh and Blood? What Force and Power, what Blandishment could be able in an instant, to bring into Captivity rebellious Minds under the Yoak of a Religion so severe as ous is, if Jesus Christ himself did not work Miracles, and if the holy Spirit, by the inward and invisible Operation of Grace, did not sup∣ply the Defect of his Ministers? This is that, most reverend Father, which we expe∣rience every day, with astonishing Comfort, which
doth establish, strengthen and settle us unmovable in the same Faith which God produceth in Idolaters. I would to God I were able to relate to you particularly all that passes in China on this Subject, where in spight of all the Stratagems of Devils, God is so constantly and resolutely Glorified. Yet not being able upon my departure, to pick up the particular Memorial of each Church, I shall only content my self to tell you in Part what I my self have observed in my Mission, and af∣ter what manner I have made it my Business to adorn it, according to the Ideas and Practice of the most grave and ancient primitive Missionaries. All my Business was reduced to Three principal Points; the First was to cherish, and keep up the Piety of old Believers by the preaching of the Word of God, and above all, by particular Exhortations, which is a∣bundantly more profitable and edifying than any thing that is spoken in Publick, where the Discourse is often not understood, either because of the People's Stupidi∣ty, or else by reason of the Preacher's ill Utterance, and Pronunciation. These poor Souls whom Simpli∣city and Fervency make teachable, do oftentimes hear that, with Tears in their Eyes, which they do not comprehend but by halves; but yet they always im∣prove and edify, by what they understand perfectly. They are especially most taken with Comparisons, Parables, and Histories, and albeit they are not ac∣quainted nor accustomed to that vehement, and some∣times passionate Action of our Preachers, yet for all that, they are moved and wrought upon, when they speak to them with Earnestness, and Concern. I no sooner came to a private House to confess sick Persons, or about other Business, but presently you should have all the Family, nay, and the Christians too of the Neighbourhood flock together about me, and intreat me to speak to them concerning God. I had made but an indifferent Progress in understand∣ing
and pronouncing their Tongue, especially when I first began to preach, which nevertheless gave them no manner of Offence, so far from it, that if they could but never so little apprehend what I meant, they never were cloy'd with hearing me. I have moreover taken notice that they had always rather I should preach my self, how barbarous soever my Language might appear, than that I should get them instructed; as I sometimes did by the help of a Chinese Catechist, that had been formed some time before to Exercises of this Nature. But my Visits not being so frequent as I could have wished, I endeavou∣red to make them up by godly Books, with which by God's Blessing, China is very well stored, there having been some Missionaries sufficiently zealous, and able to compose Books, and that very politely, upon all the Points of Religion. They have very curious and complete Catechisms, wherein the intire and complete Body of the Doctrine of Christianity, the Life, Miracles, and Death of our blessed Lord, the Commandments of God and the Church, are clearly explained. There are likewise to be found particular Expositions upon the Gospels, Treatises upon Moral and Christian Duties, some so∣lid Controversies adapted to every Body's Capacity, Practices of Piety for the different Conditions of Life, Prayers and Instructions for the Use of the Sacra∣ments, a Body of Divinity for the Leanned, for they have translated some part of Tbo. Aquinas, and last of all, St. Ignatius's Exercises for those that mind heavenly things. Insomuch, that this spiritual Seed of the evan∣gelical Word is scattered all over, and multiplied an Hundred-fold. I could have wished there might have been a Tran∣slation of the Missal, upon the account of saying Mass in Chinese, together with an exact Version of the holy Scriptures Conformable to the Permission obtained
for that purpose the Missal was finished, and Fa∣ther Couplet presented it some Years ago to the Pope: However after having duly examined the Matter, it was not thought convenient to make use of it, but they continued to say Mass in the Latine Tongue, as in other Places. As for the complete Version of the Bible, there are such weighty Reasons why it should not forthwith be published, that it would seem a rash piece of Impudence to do it; and so much the more, because there is already expounded in divers Books, what is contained in the Gospel; yea, and even what∣soever is most Instructive in the rest of the holy Scri∣ptures. The Second Method to increase the fervent Zeal of Christians, was Prayer: Besides the time appointed for Mass, I assembled them Twice a day to make pub∣lick Prayers. They sung in Two Choirs with such marvellous Devotion, that it made me wish that the European Christians might have been witnesses of their Piety; for their rude, and sometimes scanda∣lous Deportment before our altars, will certainly be condemned at the great Tribunal, by the Modesty of those later Christians. They do not understand either singing by Notes or Musick as we do, yet have they Tunes of their own composure no ways unpleasant, which seems to me abundance more tolerable, than what are used in se∣veral Societies of Europe: They had likewise several sorts of Instruments; Consorts they seem to admire, and our Villages in France would serve their turn well enough in that point. The Chinese are of that Temper, that they had need of something sensible to heighten their Devotion; sumptuous and magnificent Ornaments, Singing, pompous Processions, the Noise of Bells, and Instru∣ments, and the Ceremonies of the Church are very taking with them, and allure them to divine Service.
I took extraordinary care in that matter to procure for them all that the Church out of her most wise Conduct, hath permitted to the servants of God; yet always distinguishing that which Superstition, if one have not a care of it, is wont, in process of time, to put into the common Peoples head. I applyed my self more especially to inspire them with respect to our Msteries, they made their Con∣fession usually every Fortnight. Their Confession was not only attended with Tears, (for the Chinese are more subject to Weeping than we) but also with severe Penance in the Evening in the Vesty. The lively Faith they had for the adorable Sacra∣ment, made them constant attenders on the Altar; and when I permitted them to receive it, they com∣municated with affections of veneration capable of inflaming not only such who are but Lukewarm, but almost Christians. You might see them prostrate at se∣veral times with their Face on the ground lamenting, and commonly shedding abundance of tears. Such like postures, more frequent and ordinary amonst Asiati∣ques than Europeans, yet evermore edifying and sub∣missive, do exceedingly contribute to excite Devo∣tion in the Soul, and to impress upon the Mind that profound Veneration which the Majesty of our My∣steries deserve at our hands. This respect extended it self also to the Images, Reliques, to the Medals, Holy Water, and in general to whatsoever bears the Character of our Religion. They bore more than that,  particular veneration for the Virgin Mary, which perhaps had gone too far, if care had not been used to regulate it. They call her the Holy Mother (Chin-Mou) and do invoke her in all their Straits and Exigencies. The experi∣ence they have had of her Protection, hath confir∣med them in this warm Devotion, and the benefits they receive daily from her, persuade them she is acceptable to God.
The Women are yet more animated with these Sentiments than the Men. All their Churches are dedicated to her under the Title of Chin-mou tam, that is to say, the Temple of the blessed Mother. There they meet together, for they never enter in∣to the Church of the Men, as the Men dare not pre∣sume to set foot into theirs. But the passionate love that the Christians have for Jesus Christ, make them really Devout, and walk worthy of the Profession they have embraced. They continually repeat these following words, Iesus the Master of Heaven, who shed his blood for us: Iesus who died to save us. Be∣ing it is the Mystery wherein we most carefully in∣struct them, so it is that they most stedfastly believe. Every one shall have their Crucifixes in their Cham∣bers; and notwitstanding the nakedness of our Images did at first give some offence, yet have they in pro∣cess of time accustomed themselves to them. We distribute them to the People with some precaution, for fear they may chance to fall into the hands of Idolaters, who might either through ignorance or malice, be apt to profane them. And this was the reason why after Mass was said, I commonly removed from the Altar a large graven Crucifix, the Pagans do oftentimes come out of cu∣riosity to see our Churches; now they might have stole it away, or spoken of it irreverently and blas∣phemously; which nevertheless was not brought to pass by the Paints of Christ's Passion which I left with them. Now as for Christians, we are far from conceal∣ing from them this sacred Mystery of our Redemp∣tion, or from dissembling in the least circumstance of the same. What certain Hereticks have writ con∣cerning it is a foul Calumny, which all the Chinese Books and Cuts therein engraven, have long ago diproved and confuted.
The Cross is carried publickly in the Streets in Proceson, planted on the tops of Churches, painted over the Doors of the Christians Houses. I have no where observed the Ceremony of the Adoring of the Crof, performed every Good Friday publickly, practised with more Adoration than in China; nay, I sincerely protest, that I never assisted thereat with∣out being forced to mingle my Tears with those of the Believers, who outdo themselves in Devotion and publick Penance on that day especially. Those who have accused their Faith in this point, would them∣selves be ashamed at the insensibleness of Europeans, had they assisted at our Ceremonies. For our part, we are overjoyed to see the Opprobrium of the Cross to Triumph, as far as the utmost limits of the Uni∣verse, over the most proud and haughty Nation in the World. The particular Instruction of the Chinese Women is much more troublesome than that of Men; they are never Visited but in the time of their Sickness, neither do they ever come to visit the Missionaries; but they may be spoken with in their Churches, or else one may cause them to meet every Fortnight to say Mass, and administer the Sacrament to them; they dare not come ofner for fear of Scandal, the Laws of the County doth not so much as allow them that, because the disorders that happens every time the Pagan Women visit the Temples of the Bonzes, causeth our Assemblies to be suspected, and affords a specious pretence to the Gentiles to cry down Religion. Notwithstanding a man cannot imagine what Fruit may be reap'd by it. I came to this Church up∣on Friday Evening to hear Confessions. 'Tis always in a place exposed to every ones view; for in this case one cannot act with too much caution. On Saturday morning I finished the Confessions of those
that were not able to get a place the day foregoing. Almost every one of them Confess, and would be glad so to do every day if they had liberty granted. Whether it be tenderness of Conscience, or esteem for the Sacrament, or some other reason best known to themselves▪ I know not, but they think they can never set time enough apart to discover their Faults. There is required, abundance of patience to hear them; and being naturally of a mild disposition, they would▪ take it very ill to be handled roughly; yet have they one good quality, that they are seldom Testy and Froward. They receive the Instructions from their Director in all humility; they▪ blindly pin their Faith upon his Sleeve: we never inflict great Penance on them, nay tho' it be a difficult matter to reduce them from their ordinary peccadilloes, yet do not they find it so hard to bewail and lament for them. As for notorious Sins they very rarely commit them, because their Condition exempts them from the most dangerous opportunities; and if they could be brought to keep Peace in their domestic Affairs, their Life would be otherwise wonderful innocent. I have observed in many of them a certain Devotion that wanted but little of Holiness. They always ap∣ply themselves to Business or to Prayer, seeking all op∣portunities for the Education of their Children, or for their own improvement: Very scrupulous and nice in the observation of the Practice of every Christian Du∣ty; Charitable, frequent in Mortification; in a parti∣cular manner zealous for the Conversion of Idolaters; attentive to all Occasions that present themselves to do Acts of Charity: Insomuch that I have heard the ancientest Missionaries say, That if China once turn'd Christian, almost all the Women would be saved. This is not an affected Encomium of the Chinese Women; I do faithfully and honestly relate what I
have seen, and I judge of other Churches by this whereof I have the Care and Conduct. The Instruction of the Youth of riper years gave me as much trouble. I was perswaded that this Age above all other, requir'd cultivating, especially in China, where many things concur to make them have an aversion for the service of God: their easie soft Temper, the Complaisance of all about them; their Relations that dote upon them, and seldom carry a strict hand over them, but let them have their Wills. The company of Heathen Children always corrupted and vicious very soon; their de∣pendance, their complaisance with School masters, who many times have such influence on them as to inspire them with an aversion for Religion. All these are Obstacles to their Instruction, very hard to surmount, what care soever we take. Yet was I willing to discharge my Duty by seve∣ral ways and means. That which appeared to me the most effectual, was to take a Christian School-master into my House, who was an able zealous Man. The Children came thither to learn, and I took the opportunity to instil Devotion into them▪ to expound to them the principal Articles of Religi∣on, to train them up and discipline them against the Assaults of the Gentiles, to accustom them to the Ceremonies of the Church where they assisted at Mass every day. This Practice did also produce another good effect. The Children of Idolaters who came to Study under the Tuition of the same Master, whether by reason of cheapness, or because of the nearness of the place, heard, whether they would or no, what was taught to their School-fellows: These Instructions form'd and season'd them by little and little to Christianity, and replenished their Mind with abundance of good Notions and Ideas, which, as so many Seeds, in process of time did produce
Evangelical Fruit, that is to say real Conversions. It were to be wish'd there were a good number of Christian School masters that might teach gratis in Cities, that would be the best means to propagate Religion, and to preserve good Manners, and keep up decorum in Families▪ but the Missionaries are so far from being in a condition to maintain them, that they are hard put to it to subsist themselves; for they do not lead such a Life as some ill informed, or rather ill-affected Authors would have made the World be∣lieve they did. Nay, and I speak even of those who are at Court, who seem by their outside to live in the affluence of all Accomodations. It is true in∣deed they go in their Silks, (according to the mode of the Country) when they go to visit Persons of Quality, yea and they are sometimes carried in a Sedan, or else on Horseback, attended by Servants. All which is necessary to keep up their Credit, and preserve the protection of the Mandarins, for want of which the Christians would be often opprest. But yet that ma kes the Missionaries to lead an hard Life; for these expences consuming their whole Revenue, or Pension, which never amounts to an hundred Crowns per Annum, the small portion that remains is scarce sufficient to live on. The Missionary is very decently (not to say very poorly habited) in his House; his Lodging is very inconvenient, he lies upon the hard Ground, or upon a very thin Quilt without Sheets. As for his Table, it is so frugal, that there is never a Monk in Europe to whom the Canon prescribes such a vigorous Abstinence; some of them pass whole Years together with only Rice, legumin∣ous Vegitables, and Water; for the Thee that is usu∣ally drank, is neither pleasant to the Palat of a Chinese nor a Foreigner. However, I speak only of the time that they are in their House; for as soon as ever they come abroad
to travel about the Provinces, and to seek the lost Sheep in the Villages, Mountains, and the most re∣mote places, one is not able to express the continu∣al fatigues of their Mission; (I speak chiefly of those that perform in the Western Provinces; for the Channels that water almost all the Provinces of the South, make these Perambulations less tedious.) Then it is that they labour Night and Day, lie in Barns, eat with the poor Country Men, and are exposed to the scorching Sun, and the most vehement Cold, often∣times covered all over with Snow, and wet to the Skin with Rain. And then we meet with nothing to comfort us at our arrival but fervent Christians, that quite weary us out by the exercise of our Mi∣nistry that they expect from us. The Province of Chensi, that fell to my care, is one of the vastest in all China. I had some Chri∣stians and Churches established an hundred Leagues of one another, whether I must go by Roads so toilsom, that even Horses are of no use. They have Mules bred in the Mountains, and managed for these sort of Journeys, that is to say, for the easiest Ways; as for the other Ways you are fain to foot it, whe∣ther you creep on all four up the Rocks, or descend into the Precipices. You cross over the Valley in Water and Dirt, exposed to Tygres, but yet more to Robbers, whose retreat the Country does favour. They are not like those fine Ways and delight∣ful pleasant Champain Provinces of the South, which Art and Nature have seem'd rather to have made for the delight of the Inhabitants, than for the con∣venience of Travellers. The Valleys of the Alp and Pyrenees are much more passable; and one may properly say of China, that where it is fine nothing in the World is finer; and when it ceases to be so, nothing is more horrid and frightful. Nevertheless since the death of Father Fbr, one takes delight to
travel along these tedious Roads that he watered formerly with the sweat of his Brows, where he hath shed abroad that sweet savour of Holiness, that still upholds the Faith of Christians, and animates the Zeal of the Missionaries. The other Churches of this Province are more easily come at. I spent a great part of the Year in travelling from Village to Village, Catechizing, Preaching, administring the Sacraments to Believers that assembled upon my passage in all the places that I appointed. I divided my Time between them and the Idolaters, whose Conversion always proves more frequent in these solitary remote places than in great Cities, or in the Metropolis of a Province. Some of them there were, who being already convinced of the Truth by reading, or by their commerce with Christians, came of their own accord to receive Baptism: Others shaken, and rouzed either by their Relations or Friends, came to hear Disputations, and at last surrendred themselves to the Grace of JESUS CHRIST: Many allured by novelty, or by the in∣treaty of their Neighbours, heard attentively, and al∣ways disputed with a great deal of heat; amongst whom some there were that withdrew from the Di∣sputation more hardened than ever; yet others more faithful▪ to the drawings of the Spirit, gave Glory to God, and humbly acknowledged their Errors. All my trouble in these sorts of Controversies, was, that I could not deliver my self as I would. The diffi∣culty of explaining my self in a foreign Language deprived the Truth of its Weight and Power. I thought if I could but have spoken my native Tongue, there should not have been one Idolater in my Au∣ditory, that should not have opened his eyes to Truth first, and then to Faith. But besides that, Men com∣monly speak enough of it to make every Man in∣excusable, as St. Paul saith; yet I made moreover
this Reflection, That he that Plants, and he that Waters, what pains soever he may take, and how expert soever he may be in Planting and Watering well, yet does but very little by that. A Man ought to refer this great Work of converting Souls to God; 'tis he alone that causes these Plants to encrease, that nourishes them, that raises them up to himself, ac∣cording to the order of his infinite Mercy and eter∣nal Purposes. And at these set Times fixed and or∣dained in the eternal Counsels of Divine Prdestina∣tion, how many times have I seen a few ill words pronounced sensibly to triumph over Error, because the Holy Spirit, that Master within the Elect, doth unfold the sense of them; whereas prolix Discourses have had none other effect, but only to harden the heart; when, by a just Judgment, God was not pleased to accompany them with an extraordinary evidence and demonstration of the Spirit. You will, without doubt, most Reverend Father, be exceeding glad to understand the nature of the main difficulties we meet withal in the Conversion of the Gentiles. I have observed three sorts of them, that seem peculiar to the Chinese. Persons of Qua∣lity, and those who would be thought wise, objected chiefly against the Mysteries: Their hearts rose chiefly against the Trinity and Incarnation; a God that was penetrable, a God that could die, was no less in respect of them, than of the Jews a stumbling block and a piece of folly. The Existence of God, Eter∣nal, Supreme, infinitely Just, infinitely Powerful, went easily down with them, and the convincing proofs of it that I urged to them, made them sometimes forbear entering into the Lists with me thereupon. To proceed in order, and to follow the roads which Prudence and Holy Fathers have chalked out for us on these occasions, I divided our Religion in∣to two parts. In the first I proposed to them what∣soever
Reason exempt from Passion dictates to us. That there is a God; that this God being infinitely Holy, enjoyns us to love Vertue, and shun Vice, to obey Princes, to respect our Relations, to do no wrong to ones Neighbour; that good Men that are often∣times miserable in this World, enjoy a certain reward in the next: That on the contrary wicked Men, who spend their life in inordinate Pleasures, are ri∣gorously punished after death: That this same Hope and Fear, that are the beginning of Wisdom, are likewise the first rule of our Demeanour; but yet that the enflamed Love that every Man ought to have for this supreme Arbitrator of Life and Death, is capable alone to render us perfect. After I had convinced them by these Maxims, I bid them practise with this Spirit of Love and Fear, these Divine Lessons; prostrate your selves every day before the infinite Majesty of this God that you ac∣knowledge; in this posture, with tears in your Eyes, and an Heart broken, and contrite with grief for knowing him so late, beg of him from the bottom of your heart, that he would please to raise you to these sublime Truths, which Reason doth not disco∣ver to you, but which it hath pleased him to reveal to the World by his beloved Son, which at present make up the particular Character of the Christian Faith. It was not always such an easie matter to obtain what I demanded; the most part of the Gentiles accustomed blindly to pursue their Passions, found more difficulty to embrace this Novel-kind of Life, than to believe the most abstruse Mysteries. Yet I can assure you, Reverend Father, that of all those that submitted thereto in earnest, I see not any that was not a few days after disposed to believe the most difficult things which the New Testament teacheth u▪ So true it is, that Faith is the gift of God, that
cannot be acquired by all the force of Reasoning; and those only obtain, who follow our Saviour's Counsel: Seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you. God indeed, to accomplish this pro∣mise, did concur pretty often to the Conversion in a most miraculous manner, and I observed in several new Converts so many enlightnings, just up∣on their resolving to live well, and be constant in Prayer, that the Holy Spirit must needs have illu∣minated them. A Gentleman whom reading and disputing had made to waver in his Opinion, could not yet resolve to believe; yet he determined notwithstanding to practice the Morality of JESUS CHRIST, supposing that a good Life would much conduce to dispel these Mists. At the first his Doubts got ground of him instead of being vanquished: The more he looked upon the Cross, the more did his Spirit revolt. He compared the Fables of his own Religion with the ignominious death of a God-man, that lays the Foun∣dation of ours. They both seem'd to him equally ridiculous; and take what care he could to search, nothing could he find that confirm'd him more in Christianity, than in Idolatry. His Relations and divers of his Friends and Acquaintance, used their utmost endeavour to win him over to JESUS CHRIST, but all to no purpose, and he was just upon the point of taking up his old course again, when our blessed Lord stopt him upon the very brink of the Precipice One Night (as I had it from his own mouth) he saw in his Dream Heaven open; JESUS CHRIST appear'd to him full of Majesty, sitting at the right hand of the Father, and surrounded with an infinie company of blessed Spirits: on one hand he shewed him those eternal Rewards that are promised to Chri∣stians; on the other he discovered to him profound
Abysses, which the Torments and Shreiks of a great many Idolaters made gastly and frightful. That is thy portion, saith he, with a threatning countenance, if thou dost not follow me. Oh! Son, continued he with a more mild countenance, Must my Cross dis∣courage you? And must a death which is the source of my glory, make you ashamed? This Vision frighted him, and he awakened quite another Man; he did not look upon it as a Dream, he did not busie himself to find out what extraordinary thing, chance, and an over-heated imagination were capable oftentimes to produce during sleep: the poor Man being persuaded that God had spoken to him, demanded to be baptised with a great deal of importu∣nity: nay, and he was so far from having any trouble to submit to the belief of our Mysteries, that he pro∣tested he would willingly part with his life to defend the Truth of them. Another less knowing, yet much more obstinate, did not only not forsake his Errors, but did even scoff at, and deride our most holy Mysteries, and was pre∣sent at my instructions, only to jeer them: yet had he permitted his Wife to turn Christian, because he was not willing, by crossing her desire, to breed a disturbance in his Family. But said he would have a great care of following her example; for fear the World should be apt to believe that all his Family was run mad. Being naturally of a more spritely temper, and brisker than your Chinese usually are, I endeavoured to win by fair means, more than by Disputation; at length, perceiving neither of them prove effectual, I went one evening to his House to see him, and taking him aside; I depart to morrow, Sir, said I, and am come to take my leave of you. I must needs confess it is not without some sorrow, not only be∣cause I leave you, but more especily because I leave
you in your Errors. At least, before my departure, do me one small kindness, your Wife is a Christian, she hath an Image of the God-man, whose Religion I Preach, do so much as Prostrate your self some∣times before this same Image, and beseech him whom it represents to illuminate your mind, if it be true that he hath power so to do, and if he be capable of hearing you. He promised me he would do it, and presently after my back was turned he performed his promise. His Wife, ignorant of what had past, seeing him upon his Knees adoring JESUS CHRIST by often bowing his Head before this Image, supposed he was Converted, and sent one of her Relations into an House adjoyning where I was, to acquaint me with it: I ran thither, and found him still so taken up in this Action, and in Prayer, that I had not a mind to interrupt him. As soon as he rose from his Knees, I told him I could not sufficiently signifie my joy to him, occa∣sioned by the wonderful change God had lately wrought in him. How! saith he, all amazed, did you see at such a distance what past in my mind, or hath God re∣vealed it to you? JESUS CHRIST himself, reply'd I, lets me understand so much, for he acquaints us that those who ask any thing of his Father in his name shall be heard! Oh! Father, cryed he, it is true, I am no longer the same Man, I perceive my∣self a Christian without yet knowing what Christia∣nity means; but pray instruct me, I am ready to submit, and to receive Baptism this very moment if you please. I told him I baptized no body before I had first in∣structed them, that being obliged to depart, I would nominate a Christian to whom he might have re∣course in my absence. He consented to every thing
and we prostrated our selves before this miraculous Image, to return thanks to the Divine Majesty, who can, when he sees good, from the hardest Stones raise up Children unto Abraham. Amongst several other effects of that Grace, where∣with it hath pleased God to bless my Mission, the Conversion of an old Officer in the Army seems worth the relating to you. From a private Sentinel, he was got up to be the King's Lieutenant in one of the Cities of the third Order, notwithstanding he was very rich, yet had he never a Concubine; his Wife being a Christian, obliged him to live in a more re∣gular manner than other Mandarins. But nothing could determine him to turn Christian; not that he was bigotted to Paganism, his desire of advancing himself in the World took up all his thoughts, and had till that time never owned any Dety but his For∣tune. This indifferency for all sorts of Religion, is of all conditions the most dangerous; and I have found by Experience that a Man is never at a greater di∣stance from the true God than when he acknowledges none at all. Yet had he a great value for Christians, because he edified by their innocent life. When I chanced to go to his City he always made me a Visit; and because he thought it pleased me, he went sometimes into the Church to lie Prostrate before the Altars. I thereupon took occasion to lay the business of his Salvation home to him, but he heard the most serious things, that I spoke to him thereupon, with a smile. One day speaking to him of Hell in a more terri∣fying manner than usual; you must not be surprized at my undauntedness, says he, it would be a great shame for an old Officer, as I am, to be afraid. E∣ver since I turned Soldier I took up the resolution to fear nothing: but after all, saith he, what reason can I have to fear, I do no body wrog; I serve my
Friends, and am faithful to the Emperor, and if here∣tofore I have been subject to the usual disorders of Youth, I am at present temperate enough in my Pleasures. That is as much as to say, replyed I, that you strive to gratifie the World, but you are no wise solicitous to render to God what you owe to him; could you imagine you should be a good Officer, in discharging the particular duty of your Calling, if you refused at the same time to obey and acknowledge the Emperor. 'Tis not enough to be regular in all the Actions of a private life; the principal duty of a Subject is to sub∣mit to his Sovereign, and the whole duty of a Man is to own and fear God. You are in the right, saith he, I do seriously think it. You think so in vain, replyed I, if that God, which I speak to you of, does not give good thoughts. Beg of him this Evening to enlighten your Understanding, he will hear your Voice; but do you remember also to listen to his, and follow it. Altho' I could hope no more from this Discourse, then from several other preceeding ones, yet I ob∣served he was wrought upon: I mention'd some such thing to his Wife, who took an occasion thereupon to speak home to him, and one of his Officers being very Zealous, and well instructed, desired him at least to assist at Evening-Prayer to be performed in his House. His presence stirred up the fervency of his Domesticks, and they all beg'd of JESUS CHRIST that he might be Converted, with Cries and Tears, which the infinite goodness of the Almighty can scarce ever withstand. From this very moment he began to waver, and the various thoughts he revolved in his mind a great part of the night concerning the danger wherein he was, made him take up a resolution to go through with Religion. But our Lord instructed him con∣cerning
it immediately; for he seriously protested, that being a little sleepy, he had such horrible repre∣sentations of Hell, that he was no longer in suspense whether or no he should resolve: upon his awakening he found himself a Christian, or at least he took up a firm resolution so to be as soon as possible he could. He forthwith repaired to the Church where I said Mass; when it was finished, I was surprised to see him at my Feet begging Baptism of me, with his Eyes bathed in Tears. Weeping, I say, for scarce could he utter his mind, so much did his Sighs and Tears interrupt his Discourse: he spoke likewise with a much more confident Air, and there was observed in his Action I know not what sort of fear, that had seised him, of which he was not Master. Whether it was that his imagination was still smitten with the representa∣tion of Hell, or whether God by this change was pleased to make us, as well as him, apprehensive that all the bravery and haughtiness that War is capable of inspiring, is not proof against that saving horror which he darts (when it pleases him) into the most undaunted Hearts. I had a great mind, according to my custom, to take some time to examine and instruct him, but he protested that he would not go out of the Church till he was baptised. Perhaps I shall dye this very night, said he to me, and you will be grieved to know me eternally damn'd. His resolution not to forsake me, the intreaty of Chri∣stians, that went down to the ground to me to ob∣tain this favour, and I know not what internal mo∣tion prevailed upon me. I examined him about eve∣ry point of Religion: he understood one part of it, and learnt the rest with so much easiness, that two hours after I thought I could initiate him into our Mysteries. His Conversion made a great noise in the City, several Idolaters followed his example; and since in Heaven itself there is rejoycing at the repen∣tance
of one sinner; there is no question but the Saints and Angels were joyful of the Conversion of this very Man. This submission of our spirit to the obscurest My∣steries, how difficult soever it may seem, yet is it not the thing that troubles the Gentiles most; several o∣ther considerations are greater rubs in their way. The first is the restitution of ill gotten Goods, which in reference to the Merchants and Mandarins is an al∣most unsurmountable obstacle. Injustice and Cozenage are so common in China, in these two conditions, that few of them there are who have enriched themselves any other way. A Merchant always puts off his Wares at the dearest rate he can possibly, and never utters his good Mer∣chandise but when he cannot get rid of his bad. Cun∣ning and Craft, so peculiar to this Nation, seem to intitle it to the right of Sophisticating all things. But the sanctity of our Religion doth not permit what human Laws tolerate: a Man when he is become Rich by unjust dealing, must come and make up his Accounts with God, when he does in earnest think he is come to the knowledge of him. I must confess that I never insisted upon this point but it made me tremble. This is for the most part a Rock of offence to a Chinese. They do not boggle at the Mysteries, nor ever call them in question, and the reason is because they seem not cut out for speculative Sciences. But as to the business of Morality they have a certain penetrating aptness, and think themselves little inferiour to us. It is very true, says a Merchant to me one day, a Man is not allowed to defraud or do wrong to his Neighbour; but it is not I that Cheat when I sell too dear, or when I put off my bad Stuffs, the Buyer a∣buses himself. As he for his part desires to have them for nothing, or as little as he can, if I agree to
it. So I likewise am in the right to exact large rates from him, and to receive them, if he be so simple as to give them me; this is the fruit of our Industry, and this profit is no violence, but the effect of my Calling, that teaches me to improve my Trade. Moreover, adds he, altho' it should be true that I should possess another Man's Goods, and that I should have committed a fault by enriching my self at his cost; how can I have the Conscience at pre∣sent to strip my Children naked, and reduce them to beggery? Believe me, Father, those from whom I have extorted what they had, have I'll warrant you done as much to others, who again have enriched themselves after the same manner. Here it is the Custom to deal thus, and every one in particular, (if they have any reason) ought mutually to par∣don one another for these small faults; otherwise we must undo and overthrow whole Families, and introduce a disorder worse than the mischief that one hath committed. As for my part I freely pardon those who have choused me, provided no body will molest me about the pretended wrong I have done him. This is the Language of the Children of darkness, of whom JESUS CHRIST saith, that it is easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Let a Man represent to them what he pleases; yet will they always have their own way, being more obdurate than blind; for they seldom fail of admiring Justice, and an unbyassed humour in others. See here an example of what I say, whereof I have been witness my self. A young Man travelling in the Province of Chensi, where I chanced to be, found a Purse upon the Road of about ten or twelve Crowns; he had the honesty to inquire after the person to whom it belonged, that
he might restore it. This was look'd upon as an he∣roical Action by the Chinese; now the Mandarin of the place would not let him do it without a recom∣pence, he made an Encomium of it himself in a Dis∣course that was printed in a large Character, and af∣fix'd upon the Palace-Gate. But God Almighty, to whom even natural Vertues are acceptable, was infinitely more gracious to this young Man. For proceeding on his Journey, a person unknown to him accosted him, and said how came it to pass that you restored the mony so generously? Do not you know that it is none but the Christians duty to do such things as these, and know, that in the state wherein you are, all your moral Actions will not hinder you from being damned: believe me you will do well to go to the Father of the Christians, and embrace their Religion, without which all your up∣rightness and natural equity will stand you in no stead after death. He immediately obeyed, and returned back to find me out, he related to me with abundance of modest simplicity what had happened to him, and ever and anon he would be saying; what is it to be a Christi∣an, and what would you have me do? I instructed him with so much the more easiness, because he took nothing amiss: in a word, he was indued with so much innocence and candor, that I was much taken with him; so that when I found him well disposed, I proceeded to the baptising of him, and put him in a way to sanctifie his good inclinations for the future. The Devil, who understands the blind side of the Chinese, as to matter of Interest, hath inspired the Ido∣laters with a Maxim that always retains them in their Errors. The People fancy that one is Christian e∣nough if one be poor, and that Christianity was the Religion of beggerly Fellows. So that if there hap∣pen any misfortune in a Family; if there chance to
be a Christian in it, all others presently lay the blame upon him, and load him with their imprecations. One cannot without a strong Faith resist this Perse∣cution, and when one proposes to an Idolater, pre∣possessed with this false idea, to embrace the Christian Religion; inward Grace must be exceeding strong to oblige him to Sacrifice his Fortune, and to for∣sake, as he imagines, all his temporal Interests. This very reason sways almost with all the Manda∣rins, who venture all as soon as they think of be∣coming Christians. Father Adam's fall, that drew along with it so many illustrious Families in the late Persecution, makes their Hair still stand an end. They know that the Religion of the Europeans is not approved of by the Laws, and withal that they may deprive all such as embrace it of their Lives and For∣tunes. What Protection soever the Emperor may grant to the Missionaries, he may hereafter revoke it, he may die. And the Parliament watch all opor∣tunities imaginable to root out Christianity; so that the fear of losing the deceitful riches of this World, deprive a multitude of People of eternal Blessings, which they cannot sufficiently value, nor know the worth of. But now if a Mandarin, who has any work of Grace upon his Heart, wave all these considerati∣ons, yet upon his Conversion, he meets with another notable obstacle to his perseverance, still more diffi∣cult to surmount than the former. Since the Pensions of the Officers are not capable to supply the usual Expences of their Family, they have no other fund for to maintain it besides injustice. The Ministers of State, and chief Presidents of Sovereign Courts of Judicature of Pekin, do under∣hand exact considerable sums from the Vice-Roys. And these latter, to make it good, have recourse to the principal Mandarins of the Province; who again
lay a Tax upon the Subaltern Officers. None dare presume to dispense with it, without running into the danger of being quite undone, insomuch that every one of them, that he may maintain his Post, gapes after getting mony by hook or by crook. This Ministry of injustice, which the ambition of the Grandees, and Avarice of some of inferior Rank, have introduced into the Empire since the last Revo∣lution, gives a mortal blow to the establishment of our most holy Faith upon a solid Foundation, because a Christian Mandarin, ceases to be a good Christian, if he fleeces and robs, or else he ceases to be a Man∣darin if he do not cheat. However, we meet with a great many of them, whom Providence preserves, who have not bowed the Knee to Baal. We have seen in China, as in the Primitive Church, some examples of this Christian generosity, that count the Goods of this World at nothing, in hopes that the Kingdom of Heaven will one day be their Inheritance. During the time of the Persecution there past an hundred things of this nature, that might afford matter of Edification; but being I set down nothing but what I have seen, I shall content my self to relate a more recent example which likewise much affected me. A fervent Christian of the Province of Chensi, after he had inriched himself in divers honourable em∣ploys, did at last retire from the World, resolving to lay out one part of his Estate in the service of God, and to dispose of the other in leading a peaceable and innocent life with his Family. He had built a Church in the Country, whither I sometimes went to Administer the Sacraments, and Baptise the Cha∣techists, whom he took special care to train up him∣self. But his House standing in a place that was a great thorow-fair, the Troops that are continually going, and coming in China, laid all his Grounds
waste, not daring to do the least Damage to those of his neighbour Idolaters; and this is the Reason that induced them to deal with him at this rate. The Chinese are wont publickly to belch out Curses against those that do them wrong, especially, if they cannot be revenged of them other ways. If a man hath been rob'd in his House, and one cannot disco∣ver the Robber, every Morning and Evening for seve∣ral days together, the Family's Business is to curse him; the Father, Mother, Children, and the Ser∣vants, take it by turns, and relieve one another in this Exercise, and wish him all mischief imaginable; they have, (if I may so express it) Formula's of foul Language, and dire Expressions, which they repeat an Hundred Times, bawling as loud as possibly they are able, at the Gate, or upon the House-top; and they imagine that the Robber will come to some harm by them, wherever he be, 'till such time as he hath made amends for the Wrong. Notwithstanding, there is not one of an Hundred of these Robbers, that give any heed to this tedious Noise, yet, some there be that are frighted at it; and this Fear prevents abundance of Violences. Christians who love their Enemies, and wish well to those that do ill by them, are far from cursing them; so that the Soldiers that I told you of, fearing the Curses of the Gntiles, spared their Goods, and fearing nothing from the Wrath of this zealous Christian, they plundred his House, stole his Fruit, cut down his Corn, and pluck't up his Trees: So you see his extraordinary Patience, drew upon him all the Damage which otherwise would have equally fal'n upon others. His Friends more concern'd at his Losses than him∣self, often laugh'd at his insensibleness, and reproach'd him much what in the same manner as Iob's Friends did▪ him on such a like Occasion, telling him, that all his Blessing of God, would not secure him from lo∣sing
his Estate, and probably not from starving: Be∣nedic Deo, & morere, bless God and die. They were always telling him, that it was a strange Thing, that for the bare Observance of his Religion, he would see himself reduc'd to the utmost Extremity. If so be, say they, you are afraid your self to utter Cur∣ses against those Rogues, send one of your Servants to do it for you, or else let out your Estate to Gentiles, who will not be troubled with these ridiculous Scru∣ples. This good Man abounding in a lively Faith, and that godly Simplicity so conformable to the Gospel, made Answer, that all he had, was at God's disposal, that he would preserve it, and that upon the whole, he had rather receive Hurt, than to do any. He told me one day; my Children take it very ill, that I leave my House, and Goods, at Sixes and Sevens, to be plun∣dred at this rate: You know, I have my particular Reasons to do thus, but they have none at all to com∣plain, since the Goods do not belong to them; they have wherewithal to live, without being beholding to any Body, upon what I have reserved for my self; but altho' they should be in want, yet, I had rather, when I come to die, leave Examples of Vertue for their Portion, that contribute to the saving of their Souls, than Riches, that may make them lose them. These Sentiments, most reverend Father, were such matter of Joy, that I am not able to express it to you. I said sometimes to my self in the Excess of my Joy, Is there more Faith than that in Israel? No, O Lord, I have lost nothing by leaving France, since I find some Saints here; thy Spirit hath indeed filled all the Earth, and that profound Science of Salvation, that we in Europe have enjoy'd for so many Ages, be∣gins at length to be spread abroad to the Extremities of the World, by the stupendous Efficacy of thy holy Word.
Nevertheless, because his Children were very ur∣gent with me, to find out some Way or other to reme∣dy this Disorder, and that indeed it was convenient to prevent the Gentiles Malice from prevailing over the Christians Patience; I permitted them on such Occasions as these, to make use of Threatnings in∣stead of Cursings; and to tell them, I wish you no Harm, yea, and I forgive that you have done me; but God who pleads my Cause, knows how to punish, tho' I do not pretend to do it: the Time will come, when you shall be smitten with all the Anathema's that your unjust Violence deserves, and that Curse he sends on you at present, will be to you the Source of all the Miseries which his Law forbids me to wish to you. This Expedient took Effect, and the Christi∣ans growing eloquent for their own Interest, did so lively represent the Judgment of God, that the Idola∣ters durst no longer blame them. The Second Obstacle in my Way in converting the Chinese, proceeded from the multitude of Wives which the Laws of that Country permit them; that is, in respect of the Persons of Quality only, who, besides their own Wives, take as many Concubines as they are able to maintain; for as to the ordinary Sort, they have not Wealth enough to allow this Expence. The Mandarins are by their condition debar'd from all ordinary Divertisements, they are permitted only to eat now and then with their Friends, and give them a Play: Gaming, taking the Air, Hunting, private Visits, publick Assemblies would be lookt upon in them, as Crimes of State; so that they seek no further than their House to find wherewithal to supply the want of those Pleasures which the Laws abridge them of. Here and there one of them applies himself to stu∣dy, as the surest means to advance him; but the great∣est part of the Mandarins compose a kind of Seraglio,
wherein they spend all the time that they can steal from their Affairs. One may judge by that, how lit∣tle they are inclined to deprive themselves of Delights, to be satisfied with one Wife, whose Age, nay, and many times Antipathy, have but already too much disgusted them. It is true, those who are converted, are permitted to take one of their Concubines to Wife, in case the lawful Spouse hath not a mind to turn Christian; but the Laws prohibit them to do so: And in China, one cannot divorce his Wife, except in some very few par∣ticular Cases authorised by Custom: Moreover, the Relations of her, whom her husband should have thus repudiated, would certainly be revenged on him, nay, and would force him by Law to take her again. So that when we propose to the Mandarins the other Difficulties of our Religion, they dispute, they consi∣der how to conquer them; they do not despair to do Violence upon their Inclinations; but this last Point discourages them at first Dash, and deprives them of all thoughts of being converted. I will give you a no∣table Example of what I say. I was going one day from one Village to another, in pretty bad Weather, and making haste to get there in time, I heard an horse-man behind, who gallop't up to me; he was a man of betwixt Fifty and Three∣score, well mounted, and attended by some Servants: As soon as he had overtaken me, he told me, that the great Esteem he had for the Christian Religion, gave him some thoughts of getting himself fully instructed therein, and that nothing could ever be able to divert him from this Resolution, because he perceived in his mind, a wonderful desire to embrace it. This Ar∣dency, saith I, Sir, without all doubt comes from God, Flesh and Blood do not inspire such like Sentiments into you; for my part, I am ready to assist you; I hope on your part, you will be perswaded to follow
the Voice that calls you: We were afoot in the middle of a great High-way, and taking him aside a little, I be∣gan to instruct him: every thing appeared Rational to him; and after having run over all the mysteries that are most difficult, I advised him to follow me into the Church, whither it was my Duty to go, when I call'd to mind that I had forgot the material Point; I suppose Sir, added I, that you have no Concubines, or at least, you are resolved to send them packing; for without doubt, you are not ignorant, that it is not allowed Christians to marry several Wives. The Religion which I preach, and Jesus Christ taught, applies itself principally to wean our Hearts from sensual pleasures, nay, and doth even sometimes exhort us, to deprive our selves of those which Reason permits. How, saith he, startl'd at this, am I oblig'd (if I have any thoughts of being a Christian) to turn off my Concubines; ah! what hurt is there in keeping them? what will People say of me in the World? what will become of my Children? and what will become of my self? But, is that same really an Article which cannot be dispensed with? I endeavoured to pacific him, and make him apprehend, that he laboured un∣der a mistake: If to overcome the Difficulties of his Conversion, he relied wholly upon his own natural Strength, and present Inclination; God, said I, who knows our corrupt Nature, hath secret Methods where∣by to assist us, that we do not at First so much as dream of; endeavour only to keep alive that good Will he hath granted you, he will accomplish the rest, you will find your self changed in respect of this, as of all other things. He listened to me a good while without speaking a Word, but at length taking his leave of me on the suddain, and making a low Bow, he mounts briskly on horse-back, puts Spurs to his Horse, and rides full Speed towards the Place from whence he came; I quickly
lost sight of him, but methought I still see him, so lively was his Countenance for some time imprinted upon my Spirit; and I am still quite disconsolate, for losing a Soul in an instant, which the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ had been so long a preparing for me. But now in respect of Womens Conversion, it is much more difficult. A Concubine, for Example, ac∣knowledged the Verity of Religion, and the Misera∣bleness of her State and Condition; she had a great Desire to come out of it, and receive Baptism, it was told her, that the first Step that Faith acquired of her, was to live separately from her pretended Husband, and to farsake her sins; so far she consents, nay, she desires it with all her Heart; but observe what she re∣presents to her self, I belong to a Mandarin who bought me, if I go out of his Doors, he hath right to claim me, and take me again, and inflict Punishment upon me as his Slave. If by good Fortune I avoid his Pursuit, whither can I retire to be in more Security? my Kindred who sold me dare not harbour me, and I shall infallibly fall into the hands of another Person who will engage me in the State that I seek to avoid; I must therefore remain in the House where I am, but how shall I be able to resist a brutish Fellow, who on∣ly consults his Passion, justified by the Laws, and Ex∣ample of the whole Empire: it is to no purpose to lay before him the holiness of Christianity that I desire to embrace; my Intreaties, Tears, yea, my Resistance, and all the Efforts that I, poor I can make, are not able to hinder him; nevertheless, I am resolved to run away whatever it costs me: Order me to do some∣thing, but pray do not refuse me baptism. It so falls out sometimes, that an Idolater taking distaste at some extravagant Caprichio of his Christian Wife, does wrongfully accuse her, and obtains leave, by the force of Money to sell her to another; yea, some times without any legal Process of Justice, he sells her
and retires into another Province; this Woman gets into the hands of another Man: How can she avoid Sin, receive the Sacraments, and persevere in the Faith? in truth the Missionaries are at their Wit's end, ha∣ving at that time no other Course to take, but to go to Prayer, that God, who sincerely desires the Salvation of all men, would please to make use of those secret means, that his Almighty Power is wont to produce, when his ordinary Providence, and the Efforts of our good Desires, prove ineffectual We have, most reverend Father, so much the more Reason to hope for these distinguishing Favours from God in such like Occasions, because he often grants them, even then when we do not judge them abso∣lutely necessary. It is true, Miracles are not so com∣mon in China, as the State of that Empire would seem to require: The Emperor to whom they have rela∣ted those which God hath been pleased to work in other Nations, does sometimes reprove us for it. Are we, saith he, in a worse Condition than the Barbari∣ans, that have so frequently seen their Sick healed, and their Dead raised to Life? What have we done to God that he renders our Conversion so difficult? You come from the utmost ends of the Earth, to preach up a new Law to us, contrary to Nature, elevated a∣bove Reason: Is it Just, that we should take your Word for it? Do some Miracles that may warrant the Truth of your Religion, and I'll pass my Word for the sincerity of our Faith. We have frequently told him, that God was the Master and Giver of these Gifts, and that he distri∣buted them, according to the Decrees of his eternal Wisdom; that it is out of our Sphere to fathom their Depth; that sometimes he did not work these Prodi∣gies in Kings Courts, because he foresaw the ill use they were likely to make of them; sometimes because giving them better Parts and Abilities, and more Pene∣tration
than to others, these ordinary Graces were sufficient for them; whereas the simple, vulgar, and the rude, unciviliz'd Nations, stood in need of the sensi∣ble Marks of his Almightiness, for the more easy dis∣covering of the Truth; yea, and it is more than pro∣bable also, that carnal Prudence which is at such en∣mity with the Spirit of the Blessed Jesus, the Softness, Ambition, and Luxury of great Persons, draw upon them this terrible Chastisement, and that God in his just Judgment refuseth Miracles to Persons, who do themselves refuse to submit to the most plain, and ordinary Laws of Nature. But, my Lord, (have some replied) the Charity of that great Number of Missionaries, who joyfully forsake Europe, where their Quality, Estates, and their Science, ought naturally to detain them; who traverse a Thousand Dangers, to come hither to sacrifice them∣selves to the Happiness of your People; and with so unbiassed and constant Zeal Sir. Is not there some∣thing of a Prodigy in it? and should it not be as pow∣erful to perswade you as Miracles? If they be such Knowing, Learned Men as your Majesty allows them to be, how do they abuse themselves? and if they be Wise, as you seem to think them; why do they aban∣don all the Pleasures of this World, to come so far to deceive others, and all to no purpose? After all the Reflections they have made this Hundred Years upon the different Religions of China, there is not one of them, who hath not judg'd them all wholly contrary to Reason; but during so many Ages that we have exa∣mined the Christian Religion, we have not observed amongst us one wise Man, and of good Morals, that hath suspected it of Falshood. These Answers do usu∣ally put him to a stand, and force him to make certain Reflections that do not a little disturb him. In short, most Reverend Father, if Miracles be wanting at Pekin, the Business is otherwise in the Pro∣vinces,
several are there wrought, and those of Father Faber are so generally known, that it is somewhat dif∣ficult not to believe them; not that I go about to justi∣fie all that is related of those, nor of a great many more Prodigies, which they relate on small grounds; but, you'll give me leave not to doubt of those whereof I my self have been Witness; and peradventure, most Reverend Father, you rely so much upon my Since∣rity, as to be inclined to believe them likewise upon my Testimony. In a Village in the Province of Chensi, near the City of San-uyen, there lived an Idolater, devout in his way, and extreamly addicted to these Superstitions: At the time of Full Moon, he burnt commonly in honour of his Gods, Gilded, or Silver'd Papers, wrapt up in different Figures, according to the Custom of the Coun∣try. One day preparing to Offer this kind of Sacri∣fice before his Gate, there arose a Storm that forc'd him to retire into his House, where he lighted the said Papers in the middle of a Hall, without taking any far∣ther Care; but the Wind blowing open the Gate, drove them up and down every where, and they had not time to prevent one part from flying into a Stack of Straw, which set fire on the House. People came running, but the conflagration became so furious, in a moment that it was impossible to extin∣guish it. The House on one side adjoyning to the Ido∣later's, belonged to a Christian, and by this time seem'd (half encompassed with the Flames driven furiously by the Wind) to be in Danger of being quickly quite consu∣med; this poor Man, attended with divers others, got upon the House-top, and did his Endeavour, but all in Vain, to defend himself from the Conflagration; when his brother very confidently came as near the Fire as he durst possibly, and fell on his Knees upon the Tiles, and looking up to heaven, said, O Lord, for∣sake not those that put their Trust in thee; all that thou
hast bestowed upon us is here; if we lose it, the whole Fa∣mily is reduced to the utmost Extremity: Preserve it, O my God, and I promise before thee, that I will assemble all the Christians in the Neighbourhood, and we will go to Church together, to demonstrate my acknowledgment of the same. Thereupon, he loosed a small Relique from his Chaplet, threw it into the middle of the Flames that by this time cover'd part of the House. This Action, perform'd with such a sprightly Air, did equally attract the Attention of Christians and Idolaters, who mightily astonished at their Compa∣nions Confidence, expected the event of the Busi∣ness; when Heaven all on the suddain, declar'd it self in a most miraculous manner; The Wind blowing violently, forthwith slacken'd, and a contrary Wind stronger than that arising at the same time, drove the violent Streams of the Flames to the opposite side, up∣on the House of a wicked falsehearted Christian, that had lately abjured. It was consumed in a Moment, becoming an Example of divine Vengeance, as the House that Heaven preserved, was an evident Token of his Protection. I was at that time Six Miles from the Village. 'Tis true, my urgent Business hindred me from being my self upon the Spot; but I sent very credible Persons thither, to be inform'd about it. The Pagans first of all, bore Witness to the Truth; and some while after, the Christians thereabouts, conducted by him who was lately heard in his Prayer, appear'd in my Church to fulfil his Vow; where with one accord, they eccho'd forth the Praises of the Great God, who alone is able to cause his Voice to be heard by the most insensible Creatures, to the Confusion of false Gods, that are not themselves capable to hear the Voice of rational Creatures. Some Months after, there happened a thing no less surprising, the Consequences whereof, were very be∣neficial
to Religion: An Idolater of an indifferent Fortune, felt himself assaulted with an unknown Distemper; it was so catching, that his Mother and Wife shar'd in it likewise: Two or three times a Week he fell into fainting Fits, which at the beginning, look'd like Swooning, and then turned again into cru∣el Head-aches, Pains in the Stomach and Bowels, sometimes they found themselves extreamly agitated, as if they had had a Fever; they lost the use of their Reason, their Eyes rolled in their Heads, and men judged by several other unusual Postures, that the De∣vil had a hand in the matter. They were the more perswaded to it, because they often found their House all put out of Order, the Chairs, Tables, and earthen Vessels overthrown, not knowing on whom to lay the Fault. The Physicians whose Interest it was to pass Judgment, that Nature on the one hand, and the Malice of the People of the Family on the other, were the Cause of these several Actions, made use of all their Medicines to Cure them. The Bonzes on the contrary assured them, that the Devil was the Author of the Mischief, and de∣manded unreasonable Alms to stop it's Course. So that the good People abused on every hand, had thrown away all their Estate in Four Years time upon the Covetousness of these Impostors, without finding any Benefit: However, seeing the Distemper afforded them some Intervals, they sought up and down in the Cities thereabouts for new Remedies for their Griefs. One Day, this Idolater going for this purpose to the chief City, he found a Christian upon the Road, to whom he told his Condition, and how miserably he was handled; no Question, saith the Christian, but it's the Devil that torments you; but you well deserve it; Why do you serve so bad a Master? we fear no such thing, because we acknowledge one God, whom the Devils adore; yea, they tremble before his Image;
and the Cross only that we wear about us, hin∣ders him from coming near us. If you will accept of a Picture of JESUS CHRIST, and you and all your Family will Honour it, it will not be long be∣fore you see the Effects of it: However, it is soon tried, it shall cost you nothing, and you may judge by that, that I have no other aim but your Benefit. The Idolater consented to it, and hanging the ho∣ly Image in the most honorable Place of the House, he prostrated himself before it with profound Respect, and begged every day Morning and Evening of our Saviour, that he would vouchsafe to heal his Body, and enlighten his Mind. His Mother and Daughter fol∣lowed his Example, and from that very Moment the Demons abandoned the Place, of which JESUS CHRIST had taken possession. These good People growing stronger and stronger in Faith, as the evil Spirit gave ground, began at last to think of being Converted in good earnest. They came to enquire for me at Signanfou the usual Place of my Residence, and demanded Baptism of me; they had already got themselves Instructed; they had more∣over got all the Prayers by heart that we teach the late Catechumens: But their Distemper making a great Noise in the Country, I was willing every Body should be Witnesses of this Conversion, and so went to the Village my self, hoping this Miracle might settle Chri∣stianity therein, upon a solid Basis. Just upon my appearing, all the Inhabitants follow∣ed me to the Place where the Image was still hanging; then I begun to tell them, that they were not to que∣stion the Verity of our Religion; God, having him∣self spoken by a manifest Miracle; but that I had caused them to assemble, to Instruct and Baptize them: For, in a Word, what do you desire more to be con∣vinced of the Weakness of your Gods, and the Power of our God? the Demon laughs at you so long as you
oppose him with nothing but Idols; but he is not able to hold it out against the Image only of the Christi∣an's God. Do you imagin to escape this God after Death, whose Power Hell owns, and whose Justice it experiences every Moment. The multitude interrupted me by a Thousand ridi∣culous Objections, which I easily answered; at last some body told me, that the Devil had no hand in the Malady in Question; that how extraordinary soever it appeared, might proceed from several natural Cau∣ses: that is, said I, the most rational Thing you can say; but yet does no way extenuate the greatness of the Miracles. Let the Malady come from the Devil, or from Nature, I will not examin that; but it is cer∣tain at least, that the Cure comes from God, whose Image this man hath worshipped; and there is no less Power requisite to cure natural Distempers, than to drive out evil Spirits. This Reason should have made an equal Impression on all Minds, but Grace that acted differently in the hearts, gave place in some to volun∣tary Obdurateness, whilst it triumph'd over the Obsti∣nacy of others. Twenty five Persons at last gave Glo∣ry to God, who alone worketh great Marvels: Qui facit Mirabilia magna solus; and were shortly after Bapti∣zed. These Hauntings, and Infestations of Demons, are very ordinary in China amongst the Idolaters; and it looks as if God permitted it so to be, to oblige them to have Recourse to him. Sometime after this Acci∣dent that I but just now Related, a Maid, just upon her Marriage, was attacked with a Complication of several Diseases, which the Physicians knew not what to say to, and which the Chinese are wont to ascribe to the Demons. Her Mother persuaded her to turn Chri∣stian, and he that was to marry her, promised to build a Church to the God of the Christians, in case Baptism gave her any Relief: As soon as ever this Maid had
taken this Course, she found herself not only Relieved, but perfectly Cured. But her Husband was so far from following her Ex∣ample, that he misused her several times for having obliged him to renounce his Faith; for the Bonzes perswaded him, that this Sickness was but a piece of Artifice in his Mother in Law; and this Fancy alone, put him into such a fit of Melancholy, that he was insupportable to the whole Family, but especially to his Wife, who from that very instant, became an object of his Aversion. It was in vain to represent to him his own Mistake, and the Malice of the Bonzes, for he always protested, that if she would not take up her old Religion again, he would lead her an ill Life all her Days. God, to undeceive him, suffered the Demon to tor∣ment his Wife as before; so she relapst into her for∣mer Convulsions: She was more especially scared at the sight of a great Company of Specters, that let her not have an hours rest. Thus tost up and down, aban∣doned to her Husband's Inhumanity, that beat her Cruelly, she in all appearance led a very uncomfor∣table Life: Yet remaining unmovable in her Faith, God always upheld her, and temper'd and allay'd by the inward sweetness of his Grace, the bitterness of these Afflictions; he comforted her likewise by sensi∣ble Visitations, by his Word, and by the unspeakable Cogitations, that he from time to time infused into her Soul. Insomuch, that this Condition that gain'd her the Compassion of all that knew her, was to her a fore-taste of Paradise. She exprest her self much▪ what to this purpose to her Mother in Law, who re∣lated it to me with Tears in her Eyes; for her Hus∣band could not endure that I should see her. At first, I gave little Credit to this Discourse, yet at length, I was apt to believe there was something Supernatural in it; for one Day, coming to a City
distant from the chief City where I sojourn'd, about Threescore Miles; there I found this good Woman with a great Company of Christians of the Neighbour-Towns, which she had taken Care to get together, being confident, that I would come at the very Mi∣nute that she had fixt in her Mind, and it fell out ac∣cordingly. It much surprised me to see her there, for I had no design to come thither, and it was only by Chance that some body had, about Five or Six hours before, made me resolve to come thither, so that no body could give her Notice of this my Resolution. I took her in Private, to learn of her how she came to know this, she told me that her Daughter, after a vio∣lent assault of a Demon, had been visited by our Bles∣sed LORD, that when this Extasie was over, she advised her to acquaint the Christians, and bring them to this Village; for without all peradventure I would come thither on such a day: In fine, added she, not being able to come thither my self, and seeing my Sins render me unworthy to partake of those sacred Mysteries, pray desire the Father to offer up the holy Sacrifice of the Mass for me, and the Conversion of my Husband. This poor Mother relating to me this Accident, wept bitterly for the present State of her Daughter, Nevertheless, the accomplishment of this Prophecy, comforted, and built her up in her most holy Faith. I cannot tell what happened since that time, for the necessity of my Affairs, obliged me to leave that Province. The extraordinary Things that I have seen, the Zeal of the Christians, and the Inclination of Idola∣ters to be converted, inspired me with an affectionate Zeal for their Salvation; and I heartily wisht to be∣stow the remainder of my Life, upon the Cultivating this precious Portion of our Lord's Inheritance: But some superior Reasons which I am bound to obey, snatcht me from it sore against my Will: At this Se∣paration,
I was more sensible than ever of my Loss. These good People so affectionate to their Pastors, were almost ready to offer Violence to me; but un∣derstanding that they could not detain me without op∣posing the Will of God, they abandon'd themselves to sorrow, and gave such abundant Marks of their Affection, that I my self never shed more real and bit∣ter Tears: They waited for me upon the High way in Crowds, where they had spread Tables from Space to Space, covered with all sorts of Fruits, and Confe∣ctionaries. It was sometimes necessary to make a stop, not to eat, but to hear their Complaints, and to comfort them, for leaving them as Sheep without a Shepherd. They made me promise them to return as soon as possible, or to send them some Body in my Place. Thus I took my leave of these fervent Chri∣stians, melted with their Tears, but much more edified with their Faith and the innocence of their Lives. God, who knows the Violence I committed upon my self, comforted me by an eminent Conversion he vouchsafed to work at the farthest Limits and last Vil∣lage of this Province. There is something in it so Sig∣nal that I cannot forbear relating it. I departed from Signanfou the Metropolis of this Province upon the Eve of a considerable Festival of our Lady's, which I was naturally engaged to spend in that Church, where the Multitude, and Devotion of Believers invited me to say Mass that Day, and to administer the Sacraments to them, being the last Time I was likely to do it; yea, and the publick Edification did even seem to require it of me, every one in ge∣neral desired I would; and I don't know how con∣trary to Reason; I was very Obstinate and Reso∣lute not to delay my Journey a Minute; but the Truth is, I felt inwardly I know not what internal Motion that would not give me leave to stay any lon∣ger; nay, more than that, in Spight of the Supersti∣tion
of the Chinese, who observe lucky and unlucky Days to begin Journeys; I made my Idolater Guides to depart on a Day mark'd in the Kalendar for an Un∣fortunate one. They were surprised at this Precipi∣tation; yea, and I my self reflecting afterwards upon it, could not choose but condemn it, not understand∣ing then by what Spirit I was influenced, and impulst, but God let me presently understand it, on the Fourth Day after my Departure, I continu'd my Journey, and I was just upon my Arrival in the very farthest City of the Province of Chensi, when a man that rid Post, passing just by me, fell to the Ground, and by his Fall was like to have turned me over on the other side: This Accident stopt me a little, and afforded time to the Traveller who was got up again, to take a View of me. Notwithstanding the multitude of Passengers was great, yet my long Beard, and European Mein made me presently known to be a Missionary: I am very Fortunate, says the Man immediately, to meet with you; that Accident that happened to me, spares me the Labour of a long Journey, and will engage you to a good Deed. My Master, who lives not above Half a League from hence, ordered me to ride Post to Signanfou, to engage you to come to him; he hath been indisposed these several Months, and we are apt to believe that he seriously thinks of being Converted. I quickly left the High-way, to follow him, and we reach'd the house at one a Clock in the Afternoon. He was a Doctor, in high Renown by his Extraction and Understanding, living formerly at Pekin; but Ba∣nished some Years before into Chensi, for I know not what bad Business; the time of his Banishment expi∣red, and he was resolved to return to Court, as soon as his Health should permit him to take his Journey; for he did not look upon his Distemper to be dange∣rous: The Feaver had left him, and besides a Cough
that troubled him now and then, and made him still keep his Bed, he perceived no considerable Inconve∣nience. His Servant being but just departed, when he see me come into his House, he was seized with Astonish∣ment, as if God had transported me into his House in a Moment; Is it possible, cries he all in Tears, that Heaven should work Wonders for such a wretch as I am? God hath solicited me these many Years to go to him, without receiving any thing from my hard∣ness of heart; 'tis but a Moment since I begg'd of him to come to me in the Person of one of his Mini∣sters, he not only hears me, but does even anticipate my Desires. This is somewhat beyond the Power of Nature, and this Favour does the business of my Change. You know by that, Father, that this Great God is concerned in my Salvation, and that it is his Pleasure that you should contribute something to sur∣ther it. Then proceeding, you see saith he, my Wife, Children, and Daughter, they have been all Chri∣stians along time ago: and I can say that God hath made use of me as an Instrument, to undeceive them of their errors. I have given them your Books, I have explained the Maxims and Morality of it to them, the Sanctity which your Religion inspires, persuaded me I should have a well ordered Family, as soon as it should be a Christian Family I was not mis∣taken, and my Conscience would not have given me the lie, had I followed their Example; but I have a long time laboured to procure their Welfare, and could never find in my heart to consult mine own: Now it is high time to follow that Way I have showed to others. The Court whither I am going, is not a proper Place for Conversion; and I thought that it was my Duty, whilst it is called to day, to seek God, for fear the Hurry of the World, wherein I am going to engage, should hinder me from finding him hereafter.
All his Family which came about us upon this, wept for joy; but that which affected me most, was that Fervency I saw expanded in the Eyes, Counte∣nance, and in all the motions of the sick Person. I had taken no refreshment, and it was near Two a Clock, and I was desirous to defer his Baptism till after Dinner, but I found it impossible to obtain any delay. I therefore began to examine him, and he was ready to answer to all the Articles of Religion, that I yielded at length to all his urgent Intreaties. I baptized him, and he accompanied the whole action with such ardent and lively meditations of Love, Hu∣mility, Faith and Hope, that nothing in all my Life did ever so much demonstrate to me what the Holy Spirit is able to do in an Heart, when it alone plea∣ses to take it to task, without the assistance of its Ministers. Some while after I left him alone full of Consolation, and retired to a Chamber to take a lit∣tle repose, of which I had extream need. But scarce had I been there half an hour, but I heard great Cries in all the Family. They called for me every where; and running upon the noise to the sick Man's Chamber, I found him expiring in the Embraces of his Wife and Children. I endeavoured to put him in mind of the last thoughts of Baptism: He still repeated with a languishing note the names of Iesus and Mary; but yet he received the Extream Unction in a manner insensible, after which he calmly gave up the Ghost. All those that were present cried, O it was a Miracle! And recollecting what had hap∣pened at my departure, upon the Road, and in the House, they did no longer question but that all that had been managed by an over-ruling Providence, that had made use of all these secret methods, for to procure him a blessed exit. At that time the Spirit of the Lord seized upon all hearts, no body wept; the spiritual Joy was so uni∣versal,
that nothing was heard any where but Bles∣sings, Praises and Thanksgivings, to that gracious God, that had but now wrought such stupendious Miracles in his Servant. What is to be most admi∣red is, that there was not observed in him that de∣formity that Death commonly leaves behind it; but on the contrary, I know not what ayre of sweet∣ness and devotion seemed display'd over his counte∣nance, and did sufficiently intimate the blessed state of his Soul. He was laid in State, according to the custom of that Country, where I found him the next day twenty hours after just as he was; his Hands and Arms besides were as flexible as if he had been but in a slumber. Thus God by one of those many profound secrets of his Predestination, vouchsafes to enlighten a Soul sometimes in the midst of the darkness of Idolatry, and snatch it from the Jaws of Hell by a continual series of Miracles; whilst millions of others, educa∣ted in the bosom of the Church, are, by his just Judgment, given over to a reprobate mind. Those are, most Reverend Father, the most ex∣traordinary things that have happened to me during the small time that I have had the care of the Mission of Chensi: If I mention not what past in the other Provinces of China, it is because God doth not work such like Miracles therein; but by reason I have no exact Memorial of them, I was afraid lest relating upon hear-say, I should be deficient in some consi∣derable Circumstances; and I had rather let them be set down in writing hereafter, by those who are better informed than my self. This I can add over and above, to give you a more exact account of what good there hath been done in the Empire. There are above two hundred Churches or private Chappels, dedicated to the true God, and governed by certain Ecclesiastical Supe∣periors;
Pekin, Nankin, and Macao, have each its particular Bishop, by the nomination of the most Serene King of Portugal, who by his Zeal and Li∣beralities, continues to uphold Christianity through-out all the East, which all his Predecessors have there Establish'd with so much Glory. The other Provinces when I departed, were un∣der the Jurisdiction of three Apo∣stolick Vicars, The Reverend Father de Lionissa. one whereof is an Italian of the Order of St. Francis, Mos. Maigrot and Monsieur Pin. the two others are Ecclesiasticks, Frenchmen by Nation, Doctors of the Sorbonne of singular worth: the Missionaries that labour under their Order are likewise of different Nations. There are four Ecclesiasticks of the Semi∣nary of foreign Missions of Paris, amongst whom the Abbot of Lionne is very eminent for his Zeal, and application to the study of Languages, they reckon much about the same number of Fathers of St. Dominic, twelve or fifteen Franciscans, and three or four of the Order of St. Augustin: All these Monks are Spaniards, and come into China by Manille. The Jesuits who Founded this Mission, and who by the extraordinary favours of his Majesty the King of Portugal, as well as of the Emperor of China, have been in a capacity to make considerable settlements, do maintain a great number of Missionaries there; there was about forty of them at the time of my departure. Since that time the Fa∣thers Grimaldi and Spinola Father Spinola died by the way. brought several others thither. But what signifies forty or threescore Labou∣rers in such a vast Field? May it please the Master of the Harvest to hear the Voice of those that labour therein, who groaning under the burthen and heat of the day, beg relief: Or at least, may he please to shed abroad abundantly upon us that first Spirit
of the Gospel, which, in one Apostle alone, was sufficient heretosore to Convert the greatest Empires. Not but that the present State of the Church doth afford matter of Consolation to those who are con∣cern'd for the Glory of JESUS CHRIST. They labour with no small success; nay there are but few Missionaries that do not Baptize every Year three or four hundred Persons; insomuch that in five or six Years they reckon above fifty thousand Ido∣laters Converted. Besides that, they Baptize every Year four or five thousand Children in the Streets of Pekin, which they go to look for every morning from door to door, where we find them half perish'd with cold and hunger, nay sometimes half eaten up by Dogs. If they should do no more good but this, the Missi∣onaries' would think themselves well enough reward∣ed for all the pains they take. But that which ought to animate us to cultivate this Mission better than all others, is the hope one day to Convert the Emperor; the change of whose Religion would infallibly be followed by the intire Conversion of the whole Nation; so that although we should wait for this happy moment three or four Ages, without any other profit than what we hope for, in time to come, we should be too happy in preparing by our patience the way of the Lord in this New World, which perhaps will make better improvement of the Faith, that our Successors shall bring to it, than Europe does at present of that our Forefathers intrusted it withal. In short, altho' amongst the Christians that are in China, we can reckon no more Princes and Mi∣nisters of State since the last Persecution of Father Adam, yet for all that we Baptise every Year Man∣darins, Doctors and other Persons of Quality; yet it is true that the common People make up the great∣est number: Non multi potentes, non multi nobiles.
And it is no news to own that the Poor have always been the elect Portion and precious Inheritance of JESUS CHRIST in the Church. The main body of Christians is in the Province of Nankin, and more especially in the Territory Cham∣Hai; but the Faith is more lively in the Provinces of Chanton, Pechely, Chensi, and Chansi. There are in proportion as many Tartarians as Chinese Christi∣ans; these are more docil, and much easier to be Converted; yet in time of Temptation they have not half so much Courage. The Tartars on the contrary being naturally of a brisk temper, do not easily stoop under the Yoak of the Gospel; but those over whom Grace hath once triumphed, are enduod with a Vertue that is proof against the sorest Per∣secutions. As for Women, which we see more rare∣ly, altho' they be less instructed than the Men; yet their Innocence, their constant attendance at Prayer, their blind submission to the Precepts of Faith, and the most harsh and severe Practices of Christian Piety, does in some measure supply their defect of Know∣ledge as to the particulars of our Mysteries. It were to be wish'd that the Beauty and Ornament of our Churches might answer the devout Fervour of Christians: But, besides that, the Chinese are no great Architects; this novel Christianity, so frequent∣ly shaken by Persecutions, composed for the most of the poorer sort of People, only tolerated by the by, and always fain to observe a great many puncti∣lio's and keep within bounds, hath not yet been in a condition to rear magnificent Temples. Neverthe∣less it is matter of astonishment that the Missionaries with such a pitiful Fund as theirs is, should be able on this score to do so much. The Church of Pekin is very well built; the Fron∣ispiece, the Stones of which were laid by the Missio∣naries themselves, is very proportionable and pleasing.
Those in Kiam cheou, Cham-bai, and Fou-tçheou, that which the Fathers have at Canton, and divers others, are as fine as our ordinary Churches of Europe; but the Church of Cham-tçheou was so very pretty and neat, that one could not enough admire it: You could see nothing but Gildings, Paintings, and curious Pictures, it was all over adorn'd with them; yea and there was a great deal of Symetry and Order in the whole. That delicate red and black Vernish which the Chineses are so expert at, to which they give a particular relief or embossment, by the Flowers of Gold and other Figures wherewith they enrich it, did produce the finest Effect in the World to com∣pleat the whole. But this goodly Church, the product of Christians Devotion, and of Father Intorcetta's Zeal, is lately reduc'd to ashes by a dreadful Conflagration that consum'd one quarter of the City; and in all pro∣bability we shall not be in a capacity a long time to perform any thing like it. Nevertheless it will be our comfort to support us after this loss, if it shall please our blessed Lord to destroy at the same that pack of Idols which have overflow'd the whole Em∣pire; and that he will vouchsafe to raise himself Li∣ving Temples in the hearts of the new Believers, where he may be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; wherein, for want of ours, they may offer to him the sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving. I shall not entertain you, most Reverend Father, concerning the Transactions of the Indies, where the Revolution of a huge Kingdom, the Jealousies some Europeans, together with the continual  of Hereticks, have broken all the measures  Christian prudence obliged us to take for the  of Religion; so that the most part of the French Missionaries have been hitherto more conspicuous their Sufferings, than by their Conversion of Ido∣laters.
Some of them, after having lingerd out several Years in the most darksom Prisons, scarce begin to see the Light, and are not yet in a condition even to exercise their Functions with any freedom. O∣thers droven from their settlements, wander up and down upon the most tempestuous Oceans, carrying a∣long with them the miserable remainders of their ruin'd Missions; and that they may return to the remotest parts of the World, they commit themselves a fourth time to the mercy of the Waves and their Enemies. Several buried in Shipwracks, or worn out with Toils, have gloriously finished their course; and tho' their Companions live still, it is only to consume by little and little the sacrifice of their Lives, by the ill habit of body they have contracted by their first labours. You see, most Reverend Father, what sort of Per∣sons they be I speak of, you know their names, you understand their worth, and since they were chosen from amongst a great many other Candidates for the East-Indies, you have been pleased always to honour them with a most particular affection: and may I be bold to add, that you were not satisfied with only send∣ing of them, you followed your self in some respect, and became the Fellow, or rather the Head of their Apo∣stleship, sharing, like one of the most zealous Mis∣sionaries in the success of their holy undertakings, zealously lending an helping hand to their Labours, delivering them from their Chains by a powerful pro∣tection, or at least lightning the weight by conso∣tory Letters, full of that lively hope that makes a Man take delight in the most rigid Persecutions. This Courage, most Reverend Father, which you  inspired into us does not only alleviate our Suf∣ferings, but also assures us that the ruins of this grand ifice, that we have laid the first Stone of to the  of God, will one day serve for a Basis to ano∣ther
Work, yet more considerable and solid than the first. So that neither the Shipwreck of Barnaby, Theon∣vil, Nivart. three of our Brethren buried in Sea, nor the loss of Ro∣chette, le Blanc Serlu, Daudy. three more who Sacrificed their lives a board the Vessel in relieving the Sick, nor yet the death of a great many more whom the Fa∣tigues of the Mission have snatch'd from us in the Indies, nor the Prisons of Pegu, Siam, Moluccas, Ba∣tavia, Roterdam nor Middleburg, where Pagans and Hereticks have tried our Patience by turns: all that, I say, does not blunt the edge of our Courage, being fully persuaded that JESUS CHRIST hath made use of the Cross to Propagate and Establish Religion: so the Missionaries Cross is always to be the Founda∣tion of their Churches, and as it were the Seed of New Christians. In the mean time these first Labours have not been altogether in vain; we baptised at Boudychery above four hundred Idolatrous Children: the People of Coromandel have been relieved, as were those of Ceylon, Pegu and Bengala. They labour'd with no small success in divers Provinces of the Empire of the Great Mogul, and above all in the Missions of Madu∣ra. Such Missions, as in them we see in our days the Ages of the Primitive Church revived; wherein Be∣lievers, wretchedly poor and deprived of all the com∣forts of life, seem to live only by their Faith, Hope and Charity, wherein the Missionaries, to comply with the Customs of the Country, and obtain the Peoples favour, spend their lives in Forests and De∣serts, half naked, scorched by the Sun beams, walk for the most part upon scalding hot Sands; where up on the Ways full of Briers and Thorns, they take no other sustenance but a little Rice, with some insipid Plants, and no other Beverege but yellow muddy wa∣ter from the Ditches and Marshes.
There it is where a great number of our Brethren have suffered, and do still daily suffer Imprisonments, Chains, Scourgings, and all the torments that Hell is wont to suggest to the Enemies of our most holy Faith. There Father Brito, illustrious by his Birth, as also by the particular esteem wherewith his Maje∣sty of Portugal honoured him, but yet more, much more by his rare Vertues, had the honour to part with his life in the Cause of JESUS CHRIST, where his Brethren, after his example, labour by their ser∣vency to obtain the same favour from Heaven. Perhaps, most Reverend Father, this Portraiture will not please the Men of this World, not being ready to bestow upon Sufferings the just value they deserve, and to savour the things that are of God, yet I know that will not abate the Zeal of our Fathers living in France, who have so many years aspired to toilsome tedious Employments. The Missions in respect of them have so many more allurements, as they appear to others more hi∣deous and frightful: If they expected to find in the Indies only common crosses, whereunto Providence makes every Kingdom subject, but wherewith JESUS CHRIST hath in special manner enrich'd Christi∣anity, they would have been contented with their Recluse Religious way of living, and with the emi∣nent Vertues practised therein; they would never per∣haps have had the least thought of leaving their Friends, Relations, and Country. But they seek else∣where, what we here want of the Passion of JESUS CHRIST, according to the Apostles Counsel, and they are willing to fill up the whole extent, the breadth, and depth of this Divine Law, which car∣ries them out with St. Paul, to become Victims of the most pure Charity, even so far as to be Anathemised that their Brethren may be saved.
Yet these are those Apostles, most Reverend Fa∣ther, whom Envy sometimes in France, paints out to us in such black Colours, whom Heresie, ever more opposite to true Zeal, so often accuseth of Ambition, Avarice, Impiety and Idolatry, they are too happy in being the Butt that all the Shots of Calumny level at, provided they have none for their Enemies but the Enemies of the Church and Truth; and without doubt the War that such Adversaries declare against them, with so much heat and animosity here in Eu∣rope, does no less justisie them than that which they themselves declare against Paganism in the In∣dies. Nevertheless, what Justice soever wise Men may do them in this point, yet it is most true that that does not suffice to justisie them before God, before whom the very Angels are impure; after all the efforts of our Zeal, we must not only acknowledge in all hu∣mility that we are unprofitable Servants, but confess likewise with thoughts full of horrour, that it is in vain to win over all the Nations upon Earth to JESUS CHRIST; if in the mean time we be so sluggish as to neglect our own Salvation, and unfor∣tunately lose our selves. I am with a profound respect, Most Reverend Father, Your most humble and most obedient Servant. L. J.
To my Lord Cardinal de Janson. The Christian Religion newly approved of by a Publick Edict, through∣out the whole Empire of China. My Lord, IT seems as if Heaven, sensible of the Labours of our Missionaries, who for these several years have with the sweat of their Brows watered China, had a mind at length to establish this New Church upon a solid Foundation. Hitherto it hath been subject to abundance of Revolutions, flourish∣ing under the Reign of some Emperors, persecuted in the time of their minority, and in a manner to∣tally ruin'd during the Intestine Commotions; but always in a tottering condition, by reason of the rigour of the Laws, that have permitted a right to destroy it, even to those that have the most defended it. For the Sovereign Courts of China, declared Ene∣mies to all Foreign Worship, rather out of a Spirit of Policy, than any sincere affection to the Religion of the Country, have frequently condemned the Chri∣stian Doctrine, and punished those who had the Courage to embrace it. Several of them for all that hearkned to the Voice of God, rather than to the voice of Man; but the greatest part apprehending danger as to their Fortu were so far from pursue∣ing the known Truth,  durst not so much as get themselves instructed
It is a matter of an hundred years that we have la∣bour'd to remove this almost invincible obstacle to the Conversion of Great Persons. The hour of the Lord was not yet come, he was pleased to exercise the patience of his Christians, to try the constancy of the Missionaries and thereby inhance the worth of them both. But now at last the happy Day begins to dawn, and the Emperor hath granted an intire Li∣berty of Conscience to his Subjects by allowing in a publick Edict the Christian Faith throughout the whole extent of his Empire. Psal. cxix. Thou hast, O Lord, broken the Chains that held thy holy Religion Captive, now can we offer sacrifices, and call publickly upon thy name; we present to thee our Vows, not in secret as formerly, but in presence of all the People, in the Temples they suffer us to rear to thy glory, who are about to change the Old Babilon into the New Jerusalem. Here I do present you, my Lord, with the occasion, and the whole continued series of this happy event. Father Alcala a Spanish Dominican, one of the most Zealous Missionaries in China, had purchased an House at Lanki, a little Village of the Province of Chekiam, notwithstanding this settlement was expresly against the Edict of 1669. the Mandarin of the place, who at first did not oppose it, being afterwards netled at some indiscreet words that escaped unawares from some of this Fathers menial Servants, was resolved not to dissemble the matter any longer, but to proceed according to the course of Law against him. He therefore asked the Missionary how he durst presume to settle in the City? Why he preached up a Foreign Doctrine? And moreover by what right he pretended to remain in the Empire? This Father foresaw the storm gather, and had prepared himself beforehand. I wonder,  Lord, says he in an∣swer to the Mandarin,  you reckon that Cri∣minal
in me at present that you did not disapprove at the beginning. You know that for some years the Emperor hath kept and preserved in the Empire five of my European Brethren (he meant us) that he hath not only sent for them to Court, but also hath by a publick Edict granted them power to settle in whatsoever place of the Kingdom they shall think fit: it is for one of them that I have bought this House, and I Lodge in it till such time as he come himself to take Possession of it. Moreover, you cannot be ignorant that the Mis∣sionaries had liberty granted them to come again in∣to their Churches, when the Emperor did them the favour to recal them from their Banishment. Con∣sult, I pray, consult your Registers upon the busi∣ness, and there you will find my name. Some months after another Mandarin solicited by him of Lanki, or at least urged to it by his Example, was resolved to put a stop to the progress of our holy Doctrine, he prohibited the Exercise thereof through the whole extent of his Government, by an order which he caused to be affixed in divers places. They treated Religion in such despightful manner, that Fa∣ther Intorcetta of our Society, and Missionary in the Metropolis of this Province, thought himself obliged not to dissemble the Affront without betraying his Ministerial Function. He supposed likewise that he had right on his side formally to accuse this sworn Enemy of the Gospel, whose behaviour was so excentrical from the Em∣perors intentions; for this Prince had blotted out with his own hand a great many Lines of a Book that ranked the Christian Doctrine in the number of dangerous and popular Heresies: this Book was of moment, not only by reason of its Author, eminent for his quality and desert, but much more for that it was Composed for the Peoples Instruction, by whom
it was to be Read, according to the Custom, several times a year. Father Intorcetta did therefore judge it a piece of boldness that made the Mandarin liable to the lash, to condemn, by his private Autority, that which the Emperor seemed to allow of, and approve, so that the Father writ a very smart pithy Letter to the Governour of the Capital City, in which he desired him to cause this Subaltern Officer to retract his words, and so get this injurious Writing to be torn in pieces: he likewise added, that to repair this fault, he could wish that the Mandarin might affix other Pa∣pers in the place of the others, more favourable to the Religion, and more conformable to the Em∣perors intentions. The Governour dispatched this Letter to the Man∣darin, and as ill luck would have it, it was delivered to him upon a day that he heard Causes, in sight of all the People, at the very time that he was busie in passing Judgement. He so much resented this affront, that contrary to the Custom of the Chinese, and maurge his natural Phlegm; he started from the Bench transported with Choler, complained of the Impudence of the Missionary, and protested openly that he would be revenged. That he might carry on the business more succes∣fully, he associated himself with the Mandarin of Lanki, and combined with him, if possible, utterly to destroy the Christian Religion. Their first at∣tempt was to assault the Dominican Frier, on whom they thought more easily to accomplish their design, for they could not imagin that he was of the number of the Antient Missionaries. To be rightly informed of the matter, they caused to be produced certain Authentick Copies of every procedure during the whole course of the Persecution against Father Fii, (for so was he called) with a design to confront him with himself.
It is a peculiar trick, pretty common in China, with the Mandarins, to question the Criminals not only about matters of Fact, but also concerning abun∣dance of insignificant Circumstances, causing all they answer carefully to be taken in Writing. Then when they have talked a pretty while of a matter quite foreign to the Subject in hand, to distract their mind, all on a sudden they return to the thing in question; they begin over and over the Declaration, they change the order of the Interrogatives, and cun∣ningly interpose Answers contrary to those the guilty Person made, on purpose to make him contradict himself, the more easily to sist out the Truth. Father Alcala, without all doubt, would have been put to his Trumps if he had not, by a particular Pro∣vidence, preserved a Copy of these antient pro∣ceedings. Wherefore knowing the intent and de∣sign of his Judges, he so well informed himself of all that had heretofore past to this purpose, and delivered himself so pertinently, and conformably to the first Interrogatory, that his Enemies were never able to prevail over him as to his answers. So that all the Storm fell upon Father Intorcetta a∣gain, against whom they were much more animated and incensed; but forasmuch as this Father did not live within their Jurisdiction, they Suborned many considerable Mandarins, and the Vice-Roy in parti∣cular, who added to his absolute power in the Pro∣vince, a greater aversion for the Christian Religion. They all unanimously resolved to beat down Chri∣stianity, and after having caused all the proceedings formerly made against Missionaries, to be faught out in the Archives of the Intendant of the City Govern∣ment: they found at last the Decree of 169. that strictly prohibited them to build any Churches; to Teach in publick or in private the European's Law, to Administer Baptism to the Chinese, to distribute
Medals, Chaplets, Crucifixes, or other such like tokens of Religion, to Christians. The Missionaries were not ignorant of these Pro∣hibitions, but their particular Zeal, and the example of Pekin, where the Gospel was preached under the Emperors very Nose, no body pretending to say any thing against it; put them upon waving the usual Rules of human Prudence. These very considera∣tions made most part of the Mandarins to connive, and whenever any one of them took upon him to impede the progress of the Faith, they endeavoured to pacifie him by Presents, and Letters of Recom∣mendation procured for us by the Fathers of Pekin▪ or else, if need required, we made use of the Em∣peror's Authority against him. The Christians of Ham-tcheou under the Cure of Father Intorcetta, were none of the least Zealous▪ Their Courage had appeared under the Government of divers Mandarins, great Sticklers against our most holy Faith; but their Courage was never more ap∣parent than in the present occasion, for the Vice∣Roy supposing that he was impowered to undertake any thing by Vertue of the Decree aforementioned, caused to be affix'd to the Gate of our House, in all the publick places of the Capital City, and after∣wards in above seventy Cities of his Government, a new Sentence, by which he forbid under grievous Penalties to exercise the Christian Religion, charging all those that embraced it to for∣sake it This happened about the middle of August, An. 1691.. Moreover, being informed that Father Intorcetta was formerly in the Province of Kiansi, and that he had not obtained leave from the Court to settle in that of Che-Kiam, he sent to ask him by what Authority he durst pre∣sume to stay there; yea, and he commanded him forthwith to avoid the Country; the Officer, that
brought this Order, added, I command you withal, in the name of the Vice-Roy, to burn all the Books of your Religion, together with the Tables of Print∣ing that you have in your House. They are thin Boards upon which they have Engraven all the Leaves, from which they may take Copies according as occasion serves. The Father, not at all surprised, answered that he was in the City by the Authority of him who granted the privilege to the Vice-Roy himself to remain there. Have you forgot, added he, that the Em∣peror passing this way three years ago, ent two Grandees of his Court to my Church to offer Pre∣sents, in his name, to the true God, with express order to lie Prostate before the Altars. I went to render him my most humble thanks for his gracious favour, annd that I might give him further demon∣strations of my acknowledgement, I was willing to ac∣company him upon the Canal at his departure, where he was with his whole Court. This grand Prince, who had formerly honoured me with more than ordinary demonstrations of his benevolence, taking notice of my Barge amongst a great number of others, caused it to approach his own, and spoke to me such obliging things; that after all that I could not suspect I should be exposed to any straits, or insults from any one of his Officers. But since this example hath made no impression upon the spirit of the Vice-Roy; Go tell him, that the Emperor, not being willing I should accompa∣ny him any farther, sent me back with these his last words to me, which are too advantageous to me to presume to alter, add, or diminish any thing in them. Your years, says he to me, do not permit you to attend me any longer, you are no ways in a condition to indure the fatigues of a Journey, I order you to return to your Church; and there to
spend the remainder of your days. But, now, if the Vice Roy does not only disturb this tranquility by Ordinances injurious to the God whom I Adore, but forces me shamefully to quit his Province, I leave him to judge whether of us two does more openly, and peremptorily contradict the Emperors will and pleasure. As to what relates to the Table, on which they have engraven the Law and Maxims of JESUS CHRIST. God forbid I should be so wicked as to commit them to the Flames. However the Vice-Roy is the Master, since I cannot resist his Violence, but tell him from me, that before he resolve upon that, he must begin with the burning of my self. The Vice-Roy surprised at the undauntedness of the Missionary, durst attempt nothing upon his Per∣son, but he referred the business to certain Subaltern Mandarins, who received order to summons this Father before their Tribunals, and to perplex and trouble him upon all accounts, without allowing him a moments respite. Father Intoretta, who just then fell Sick, might have been dispenst with from appearing; but he was afraid to lose these precious junctures of time that Providence had put into his hand, openly to confess the name JESUS CHRIST; and being resolved not to recoil, or give ground during the Combat he got himself carried before Judges; much opprest by reason of the Malady he laboured under, and much more at the sight of his desolate Church: but besides, he was so animated by the Holy Spirit, wherewith Martyrs are corroborated, that of all the Mandarins that Interrogated him, not one of them but admired the greatness of his Courage. So that in despight of the vigorous Orders of the Vice-Roys, every one of them almost treated him with abundance of deference; even to that degree, that one of them caused an Officer of Justice to be
soundly bastinadoed in open Court, for having been wanting in his respect to the Father. Adding, with∣al, that Indictments do not render a Man guilty, and that he must have been Convicted to deserve to be treated as a Malefactor. Father Intorcetta presently foreseeing that the Perse∣cution would be violent, had written to the Missio∣naries at Court, to the end that they might remedy it. The Emperor was then in Tartary, where he divertised himself in Hunting. Father Gerbillon a French Man by Nation, and one of those the King sent to China, accompanied this Prince thither, by whom he was particularly beloved, retaining him almost always near his Person; so that the Letters were directed to him. This Father did not judge it convenient to speak of it to the Emperor, but contented himself to de∣sire a Letter of Recommendation from Prince Sosan, one of the most powerful Ministers of the Empire, and his particular Friend, who immediately writ to the Vice-Roy in a most effectual manner. He re∣presented to him, that such a procedure as his was smelled somewhat of Violence, and was inconsi∣stent with his wonted Moderation and Prudence. We live in a time, saith he, that requires much gen∣tleness and discretion. The Emperor seeks all occa∣sions to favour the Doctors of the Christian Law, how can you possibly think to please him in Perse∣cuting that? Believe me, Sir, the example of a Prince ought to make greater impression upon our Spirits than all the Decrees of Courts of Judicature, and the antient Edicts, that the Court itself can no longer follow, ought not at present to be the rule of its Con∣duct. If you favour the Missionaries, reckon th the Emperor will take it kindly from you, and if  may be permitted to subjoin any thing to this last motive, be assured also that I shall resent all the good
Offices you render them upon my Recommendation. Prince Sosan is so Considerable through the whole Empire, (whether it be by the Honour he hath to be a near Relation to the Emperor, or whether by his Place of Grand Master of the Palace, or whether by his Credit and Capacity) that upon any other Occa∣sion, the Vice-roy of Chequin would have look'd upon it as a great Favour, to receive one of his Letters, and would not have balanced one Moment to stisfie him; but Passion had blinded him, and the Vexation to perceive himself less powerful at Court than a Stran∣ger, inclined him to let the Missionary understand, that he was at least the Master in his own Province. Wherefore he began to seize upon several Church∣es, which he bestowed on the Priests of the Pagan Gods, after he had violently taken away the sacred Monuments of our Religion. He issued out Proclamations much more rigorous than the former, he threatned the Father with his In∣dignation, if he did not abandon his Flock, and he caused several Christians, that had but too openly de∣clared themselves, to be apprehended; some of them were haled to Prison, they severely punished others, and then the Persecution became bloody by the Tor∣ments, that these generous Confessors suffered for the Name of IESUS. Amongst those who signalised themselves, a Physi∣cian more eminently made his Faith appear; he was much grieved to see the Altars of the true God viola∣ted and despoiled, Crosses broken in pieces, the holy Images exposed to the Scorn, Laughter, and Impiety of Idolaters: To repair this Loss, and that Believers might not be left destitute of the ordinary Marks of their Religion, he distributed to each of them Images and Crucifixes. He went from door to door with the precious Pledges of our Salvation; animating the Weak, confirming the more Couragious in their Faith;
do not fear, said he to them, im who can only exercise his weak Power upon the Body; but fear that Great God, who as he has deprived you of Life, can also punish your Soul with an eternal Death, and rather suffer all sorts of Torments, than for sake his holy Law. The Mandarin offended at the Boldness of the Phy∣sician, commanded him to be loaden with Chains, and having caused him to be dragged before his Tri∣bunal, they prepared all things for his being cruelly Bastionado'd, when his Godson, who came running thither with other Christians, threw himself on his Knees at the Judge's Feet, and begged of him with Tears in his Eyes, that he would permit him to receive the Chastisement for his Godfather. This zealous Physician, who aspired to nothing more than Martyrdom, was so far from giving his Place to another, that he constantly, and stedfastly forbid it; and at that time there arose such a Scuffle between them, that the Angels admired and that made the Christian Religion to be respected by the very Idolaters. The Judge stood amazed at it; and turn∣ing towards those eminent Confestors of Jesus Christ, go your way, saes he to them, this forwardness to suffer the Punishment of your Faults, deserves some Indulgence; I par∣don you, but henceforward, think of pleasing the Vice-roy, and be more careful to obey the Emperor's Orders. When the Spirit of God hath once seized on the Heart, Men's Words are not capable to touch them. This Zealous Physician, whom the sight of Execution had made more couragious, continu'd his Acts of Cha∣tity as before, and his Zeal made such a Noise up and down, that the Mandarin durst no longer mince the Matter, he seemed much concerned at the Contempt he used of his Threatnings: Insomuch that he gave Order to his Officers to bring him out, to make a se∣vere Example of him.
In effect, he caused him to be beat so cruelly in his Presence, that those who were present, were equally surprised at the Severity of the Judge, and Patience of this good Christian. This bloody Execution once over, some of his Relations who came running at thi doleful Spectacle, were thinking to carry him to his House; but he positively desired to be carried to Church, and what endeavours so ever they used to di∣vert him from it, yet he had Strength enough left to crawl thither himself, born up by the Arms of several Christians. He came thither all bathed in his Gore; and kneeling down at the Foot of the Altars, O Lord, saith he, thou seest this Day, that I prefer thy holy Law to all the Sweetness of Life: I come not to demand Iustice of thee for all t Blood ty Enemies have spilt; I come to offer thee that which remains of mine own; I do not deserve to die for such a good Cause; but thou, O my God, deservest the in∣tire Sacrifice of my Life: and then turning towards Fa∣ther, Intorcetta, who began to comfort him: Ah! Fa∣ther, answer'd he, I shall be now at the height of my Ioy, if it were not my Sins, but my Zeal that had brought this light Chastisment upon me. This Example and many others, that I forbear to relate, made such Impressions upon the Idolaters hearts, that a great many of them resolved to embrace the Christian Faith, being persuaded that Sentimen so opposite to corrupt Nature, could not possibly pro∣ceed eithe from Passion or Error. Among them whom the holy Spirit did effectually touch, were Three who appeared full of that very Faith, that made in former time almost as many Mar∣tyrs in the primitive Church as Believers; they were Young, handsome, of Quality, and what is more, en∣gaged by their Condition blindly to comply with the Vice-roy's Inclinations Nevertheless, counting their temporal Estate as nothing, they demanded publick Baptism.
The Father to bring the Faith of these Neophite to the Test, hid nothing from them that might anywise stagger them; but it was all in vain to represent to them the rigour of the Edicts, the Vice-roy's Indigna∣tion, the Desolation they were like to cast their Fa∣milies into, the Danger of losing their Estates, Ho∣nour, Life, and all these Considerations served only to animate them the more, so that after a pretty long Tryal, they were initiated into our sacred Mysteries, and took part as others did, in the Cross of Christ. Their Conversion fortified the Feeble-minded, and comforted Father Intorcett for all the Evils that the Persecution had made his Church to suffer. But the Vice▪roy was so much the more provoked, because he had not the Liberty at that time to shew his Resentment: for just then, they delivered him Two Letters from Prince Sosan, one of them was for Father Intortta, the other that was directed to him∣self, was full fraught with Reproaches, for that he seemed to make no account of the Prince's recommen∣dation. I could never have believed, saith he to him, that to please a Company of ill affected People, who have exasperated your Spirit at the Christians, you would have deviated from the Counsels I gave you. It is as a Friend that I endeavoured to inspire you with better Sentiments; think upon it once more, and reflect seriously with your self that it i I that speak to you. I expect three Things from your Friendship, First, that you deliver the Letter your self to Father Intorcetta, according to the Superscription The Second, that you do so well satisfie the Father, that he may have Occasion to bless himself for the kind Offices you render him, and that he himself may testifie the same to me▪ And the Third is, that henceforward you do not any longer disturb ether Missionaries, or Christas: in short, I am extreamly sorry, for being obliged to write to you so often about this Subject. If you for the Future mend your Man∣ners, I shall write to you a third Time to thank you, but if
your Passion continues, this is the last Letter you shall ever receive from me. Then did the Vice-roy repent him of his former Proceedings; yet was he so far engaged, that he thought he could not handsomely go back with any Honour. He found it especially very hard to sue to a Missionary for his Friendship, whom he but just now treated, and that publickly, with the utmost Dsdain; but yet dreading Prince Sosan's resentment, who was the most Powerful, and in most Credit, of all the Ministers of the Empire: On one hand, he resolved to stand to what he had done already against the Christians, without driving matters any further, and on the other hand, to dispatch one of his Officers to Pekin, to purge, and clear himself to the Prince. In this interim, Father Intorcetta having a secret Iem of the Letter that the Vice-roy had received, in∣tmated to the Father at Court, the small Effect they had produced; insomuch that those Fathers resol∣ved to signifie the same to the Emperor, in case Prince Sosan should think it advisable. Wherefore they re∣laed to him what had passed at Hain-cheou, the Ob∣stinacy of the Vice-roy, the Affliction of Father Intor∣cetta, the Dnger wherein his Church was, the Ruin whereof would infallibly involve in it, the utter Ruin of all the Missions in the Empire. Since all your En∣deavours, My Lord, added they, seem Ineffectual; there appears nothing that can put a Stop to the Violence of this obstinate Mandarin, but the Emperor's Authority; but we should be wanting to our true Interests, (and what swaies the more with us) to the Acknowledgment that we are bound to give for your Favours; If we were ruled by any other Considerations than yours. The Prince already provoked by the Vice-roy's be∣haviour, was not sorry at this Overture, and believed he had now found a fair Opportunity to revenge him∣sef: So that these Fathers having recommended the
Importance of their Affairs to God Almighty, where∣in the solid Establishment, or utter Ruin of Religion was concerned; came to the Palace on the 21st of December 1691, and demanded Audience. The Emperor sent some Eunuchs his Confidents to know what their Business was: The Father pre∣sently declared to them, the heinous Excess of the Vice▪roy of Ham▪cheou, as well in respect of the Mis∣sionaries, as in respect of the Christians under  Go∣vernment; they added moreover, that they had suf∣fered a long time without Complaining, in expecta∣tion, that their Patience would pacifie his Spirit; but since the Mischief became every day greater and greater, without all hopes of Remedy, they came to prostrate themselves at the Emperor's feet, as to the usual Asylum of oppressed Innocence, most humbly to beseech him, to grant to their Brethren in the Provin∣ces that happy Peace, they themselves enjoyed at Pe∣kin, in the very Sight, and under the Protection of his Majesty. The Emperor, to whom they reported this Dis∣course, had a mind to try the Fathers Constancy, and so return'd them no favourable Answer; but they ne∣ver ceasing to represent the Unhappiness, this Indiffe∣rence of the Prince was shortly like to bring them under. He sent new Eunuchs to acquaint them, that he was amazed to see them so infatuated with the Christian Religion; is it possible, he bid them tell them, that you are always busied about a World whither you are not yet come, and count that wherein you are at present, as nothing? believe me, Sirs, there is a time for all things; make better Improvement of what Heaven instructs you with, and deser all those Cares till you cease to live; Cares that are profita∣ble to none but the Dead: For my part, said he, in a drolling way, I do not concern my self self▪ in the Bu∣siness of the other World, and I do not take upon
me to determin upon the Cause of these invisible Spirits. Then the Fathers, opprest with grief, shedding a torrent of tears, prostrated themselves to the very ground; they conjured the Eunuchs to report to the Emperor the sad Condition whereunto they were re∣duc'd: This would he the first time, said they, that this great Prince abandon'd innocent Persons, and appear'd in∣sens of our Lamentation: Is it because we are unpro∣fitable Strangers that he deals thus with us? At least, Gentlemen, pray tell him, that the great God of Heaven and Earth, whose Cause we maintain, for whom we fight, nay, and to whom he himself is beholden for all his Grandeur, well deserves, that he should exert all his Power to make him known, and his Iustice in punishing those who do him an injury in the person of his Ministers. In fine, after all these Tryals, this gracious Prince, moved with compassion, could no longer dissemble his real Sentiments, he therefore sent to the Fathers (that were still prostrate before his Palace Gate) an Officer of his Bed Chamber, to acquaint them, That he did not allow of the Vice▪Roy of Ham cheou's Proceedings, and that he was willing for their sake, to put an end to his unjust Persecution; and that in a word, there was two ways to accomplish it: The first, to send to the Vice Roy a secret Order immediately, to give satisfaction for Mischiefs past, that this way, tho' not so Exemplary, was the most easie and sure. The second, to present a Petition, and obtain from the Tribunals a favourable Decree for all the Missionaries, which would decide all Diffe∣rences. That they should consult amongst them∣selves what would be most convenient in the present conjuncture; and when they had weighed the Rea∣sons on both sides, that they should come back the next day to declare to him their positive Resolu∣tion.
The Fathers signified their most humble acknow∣ledgments to the Emperor by customary prosterna∣tions, and returned full with great hopes of happy success, yet very uncertain what course to steer. They consider'd on one hand the danger that there was to put their Cause into the hands of the Lipou, who always declared against the Christian Religion; that in all probability there needed no more to revive all the ancient Accusations, which Time seem'd to have consopiated: That the Missionaries settled in the Provinces, whom they had concealed from the Court till that time, would be obliged to quit China, or else forsake all their Missions: That at least, the Pro∣ceeding of those who had built new Churches, and Converted a great number of Idolaters against the express prohibitions of Parliaments, was sufficient to warrant the Vice-Roy of am-cheou: That in fine, things may be brought to that pass by the subtil De∣vices of our Enemies, and secret Undertakings of the Bonzes, that they might be so far from quenching the Flame of a particular Persecution, as we suppose, that we should kindle a general Conflagration in the Empire, that would not terminate but in the total de∣solation of Christianity. These Reasons, altho' very substantial and solid in themselves, were nevertheless balanced by the fol∣lowing Reflections. What Protection soever the Em∣perors might have given till that time to the Missio∣naries, yet they experienced, that it was not sufficient to oblige all the Mandarins of Provinces to counte∣nance the Christians, and that there was a great number of them who (prejudiced against us either by that universal Contempt which the Education of China did usually create in them for Foreigners, or by the Calumnies of the Bonzes, or else by a false Zeal of the publick good) thought it was a piece of good service to destroy us, and spoil in a few days that which had been the work of several Years.
These particular Persecutions were so much the more feared, as they administered occasion to our secret E∣nemies, to declare themselves openly against us, and to compose a strong and great Party, which was commonly upheld by the Courts appointed for the ordering Rites and Ceremonies, who always waited for occasions to stop the course of new Foreigners in∣to the State. So that if in these critical conjunctures the Emperors, by a particular Providence, should not have honoured us with their benovolence, Christi∣anity would have long since been destroy'd in China, and it may be the memory of it would have been total∣ly obliterated. We should therefore consider, that the Court per∣haps would not be always so favourable to us, that there needed no more but one moment alone to lose the Emperors gracious favour; or, what was still more dangerous, to intail his▪Indignation upon us, and those of our Religion, that in this fickle State wherein Religion was, the least opposition from the Manda∣rins would suffice to set the Peoples hearts against it, that the Great ones themselves durst never declare, or be Converted, for fear of being one day respon∣sible to the Parliaments for their Conversion, which probably in time might be made an heinous Crime. On the contrary, if so be the Christian Faith were once approved of by publick Edict, nothing after∣ward could disturb its Establishment, since it would be less odious to the Idolatrous People, because the Christians would make a publick profession of it, and at last the new Missionaries would enter without in∣terruption into the vast Field of the Gospel, and would there sow, without any contradiction, that sa∣cred Word, which would then produce an hundred fold. The only hope of such a great Benefit, determined the Fathers to try this last means; and so much the
rather, because they belieyed they could not in fu∣ture time meet with any occasion more favourable to accomplish it. The remembrance of signal Services Father Verbiest had rendered to the State, was still very recent; the Emperor had declared how sensible he was of the resolution that Father Grimaldi an Ita∣lian, had taken to cross the Seas again for his sake, and to undertake a most tedious Journey. Father Thomas a Flemming, was wholly taken up in Mathe∣maticks, wheren he acquired the reputation of a Learned Knowing Man, and most Pious Missionary. Father Pereira a Portuguese, for his part, took a great deal of pains a long time in certain Instruments, and several Engines, that the Prince took great de∣light in: But that which did our business in getting his heart, was the Peace which Father Gerbillon had but just then concluded three hundred Leagues from Pekin, between the Chinese and Muscovite. Prince Sosan, nearly related to the Emperor, and Plenipotentiary, stood amazed at his Zeal, and publickly declared, that but for him this Negotiation would never have terminated to the advantage of the Empire. He spoke of it to the Emperor to that purpose; and at that very time he inspired him with sentiments of Esteem and Affection for this Father, which have continued ever since beyond whatsoever we were able to expect or hope for. Besides, this same Father, together with Father Bovet, both French, and of the number of those whom the King sent into China in 1685, apply'd themselves for many Years to teach Geometry and Philosophy to the Emperor, with such success, that he could never be weary in discoursing with them upon these Matters. But because these zealous Missionaries were fully perswaded, that when Religion is concerned, human Assistances are very insignificant, if God Almighty do not secretly direct and order the whole Work.
They began to implore the assistance of him whom nothing is able to resist: They spread open their Wants before him, and discovered their hearts in his presence, and told him with the same confidence that once animated Iudith: Make bare, make bare, O Lord, thy arm on our behalf, as thou didst heretofore, and bring to nought the obstacle our Enemies oppose a∣gainst us: Let those who have boasted that they could de∣stroy the Temple, who have already prophaned thy Altar, and trodden under foot the Tabernacle of thy holy Name; let them at present be sensible, that before thee all their force is nothing but vanity and weakness: Put into our mouths, Lord, that holy word, and replenish our hearts with those wise Counsels that make Truth always to triumph; to the end thy House that hath been so many years in a totter∣ing condition, may at this day be immovably settled and confirmed; and that all Nations may in the end confess, that thou only art the true God, and that besides thee, we ought to seek for none otherIudith chap. 9.. After this fervent Prayer they secretly presented their Petition to the Emperor, that they were after∣wards to offer to him in publick. He read it, but not finding therein what was the most capable to make impression upon the Spirit of the Chineses, (for they insisted upon what principally related to the Sanctity and Truth of Christian Religion) he drew up ano∣ther himself in the Tartarian Language, which he sent back to the Fathers, yet leaving them to their liberty to retrench, or add thereto, as they shall judge most convenient. Indeed, if one do but never so little reflect upon the particular Character of the Emperors of China, one cannot sufficiently admire, that this present Em∣peror should vouchsafe to descend from the loftiest degree of Grandeur, which he observes every where else, nay eyen in respect of the greatest Princes, to
make himself familiar with pitiful Missionaries: For a Man to consider after what manner he takes a particular Account of all their Affairs; how he speaks to them, how he puts them in a way, would he not conclude that it is a private Man that manages the Concerns of his Friend? Yet nevertheless it is one of the greatest Kings in the World, that is pleased thus to stickle to please a company of Strangers, even at the peril of the fundamental Laws of the Nation. But after all, it is no wonder that a God, who to establish his Religion humbled himself so far, as to make himself like to Men, does oblige sometimes the greatest Princes of the World to divest themselves of their Majesty and innate Pride, to co-operate and con∣cur in this grand Work. For certainly, what care so∣ever we may have taken to make this Prince favoura∣able to us; yet must we needs herein principally ac∣knowledge the Efficacy of Divine Grace. It is the Almighty voice of the Lord that alone can, to speak in the Scripture expression, bruise the Cedars and shake the Mountains of the Wilderness; that is to say, abase the Great ones of the World, and give to their heart what motion he pleases. Whilst all these things were translated at Pekin, the Vice-Roy of Ham-cheou, that had now leisure to make some reflections upon his Behaviour, was not peaceable in his Province. The Credit of Prince Sosan did grievously perplex him; and above all he dreaded his just resentment: For to pacifie him, he thought it the wisest course to send one of his Offi∣cers to him, under pretence to justifie himself to him, but in effect, to exasperate the principal Mandarins of Lipou against the Missionaries, in case he should find any overture to do it. At that time this Officer arrived at Court, but Prince Sosan would not so much as hear him; and packing him away, briskly told him, that he much
wondered that his Master made such little account of Persons whom the Emperor honoured with his affection, and employed and trusted in his service. As to what relates to their business, I am no more concerned in it, than the Emperor would himself. These Fathers have implored his Protection, and he well under∣stands how to do them Iustice without my intermedling. Besides, when I writ on their behalf, it was not so much to do them a kindness, as thereby to exhibit a token of Friend∣ship to the Vice-Roy, in plucking him from the Precipice whither he had so indiscreetly thrown himself▪ This Answer did so startle this Officer, that with∣out ever dreaming of making any other progress, he returned to his Master at Ham-cheou to render an ac∣count of the ill success of his Commission. The Fa∣thers who had notice of it, understood by that, that they were to lose no time, and that they were spee∣dily to improve the good disposition of Prince Sosan. So that upon Candlemas day they went to the Palace, and offer'd to the Emperor with the usual Ceremonies, the Petition that he himself had composed, of which see here the Translation. May it please your Majesty, WE expose to you, with the most perfect submission, and most profound respect that we are capable of, the beginning, end, inducements and motives of our most humble Request, being confident that you will vouchsafe to ear it with the same prudence that attends all your Actions, and with that Benevolence wherewith you have been graciously pleas'd to honour us. On the ninth Month of the Moon, Father Intorcetta, one of your Majesty's Subjects, whose abode is in the City of Ham-cheou, did acquaint us that the Vice-Roy had strictly charged the Mandarins of his Province to pull down all the Temples of the Christians, to burn the Prin∣ting Tables, upon which is engraven all the Books of our
Religion. Moreover, he hath publickly declared, that our Doctrine is false and dangerous, and consequently not to be tolerated in the Empire, and hath added several other things most disadvantageous to us. Upon this News, Sir, seized with horror, and pene∣trated with grief, we thought our selves obliged to have recourse to your Majesty, as the common Father of the afflicted, to lay before you the deplorable Condition where∣unto we are reduced; for except you grant us your Pro∣tection, it is altogether impossible to avoid the Stratagems of our Enemies, and to ward the Blow wherewith they threaten us. That which administers comfort to us, Sir, when we appear at your Majesty's Feet, is to see with what Wis∣dom you influence and move all the parts of your Em∣pire, as if it were the Body, of which you are the Soul; and with what unconcernment and impartiality you re∣gulate the Interest of each private Man, without accep∣tation of Persons. Insomuch that you could not be at rest if you knew but one single Subject opprest by Injustice, or but even deprived of that rank and recompence be de∣serves. You surpass, Great Sir, the Mightiest Kings amongst your Predecessors, who have in their time permitted false Religions in China; for you do intirely love Truth, and do not approve of Falshood. For this reason it is, that in taking your Progress to view your Provinces, you have given a thousand testimonies of your Royal affection to the European Missionaries that were in your Road; as if you meant thereby to testifie, that you value their Do∣ctrine; and that you would be very glad that they would settle in your States. What we deliver here is publick, and generally known to the whole Empire. Therefore when we behold the Vice-Roy of Ham∣cheou to stile the Christian Religion, the false and dan∣gerous Religion, when we are informed that be uses all his endeavours to destroy it; how are we able to stifle our
just sorrow, and forbear to declare to your Majesty what we suffer? This is not the first time, Sir, that they have per∣secuted us without any reason; therefore Father Adam Schaal your Subject, on whom your Predecessors heap'd many extraordinary favours, made it known to all the Court, that the Rules of the Celestial Motions established by the antient Astronomers of China, were all false, be proposed others, that did perfectly agree with the Con∣stellations, they were approved, and made use of with no small success; so that this Change brought Order again into the Empire. Your Majesty is not ignorant of what past at that time in Pekin, we may, I hope, have leave to remember how Matters stood there, since they are so many singular favours we there received: Yet upon the account of exploding and abolishing of these Errors, how much did the Father afterwards suffer by Calumnies of his Enemies? Yam-quam-sien and those of his Faction, falsly accused him of several Crimes, under pretence of Novelty, as if this new Astronomy had not agreed with Heaven, he died, not being able at that time to justifie himself; but your Majesty put Father Verbiest in his place, and heaped on him so many favours, that the life of this Father was too short, and his words too faint to demonstrate to all the World the greatness of his acknow∣ledgments. Yet did be deeply resent all these benefits, and it was on purpose not to be ingrateful; that he was busied for above twenty years in composing all sorts of Books for the publick benefit, both in Astronomy, Arith∣metick, Musick, and Philosophy, that are still extant in the Palace, together with divers others which he has not time to compleat and finish. But since your Majesty is perfectly instructed in all these particulars, we dare not presume to tire out your patience by a longer discourse. We do only humbly beseech your Majesty to consider, that all this is not sufficient to entitle us to the Peoples affection for us, and confidence in us.
If, as they accuse us, the Law that we preach be false and dangerous, how can we, Si▪ justifie the Conduct of Princes, who have honoured us with their esteem? Nevertheless not to mention any thing of your Prede∣cessors, your Majesty your self hath made so sure of our Loyalty, that you order'd Father Verbiest to found some Cannon of a new Model, to put an end to a dangerous War: You made Father Grimaldi cross the vast Ocean to go into Muscovy with the Letters and Seals of the High Court of the Militia; you sent the Fathers Ger∣billon and Pereira, upon very important Affairs, to the very furthest parts of Tartary. Nevertheless your Ma∣jesty well knows, that those who are governed by the Principles of a false Religion, never use to serve their Prince faithfully; they almost ever abandon themselves to their own Passions, and never aim at any thing but their own particular interest. If therefore we do exactly discharge our duty, and if to this very day we have always sought the publick good, it is most manifest this Zeal proceeds from an heart well affected, full of esteem, and veneration, and (if we may be bold to say so) of a singular affection for the Person of your Majesty: On the contrary, if this heart once cease to submit to you, it would be from that very time, contrary to right Reason, good Sense, and all sentiments of Hu∣manity. This being supposed, Sir, we humbly beseech you to consider, that after the fatigues of a tedious Voyage, we are at length arrived in your Empire, exempt from that Spirit of Ambition and Covetousness, that commonly bring other Men thither, but with an ardent desire to preach to your People the only true Religion. And truly when we appeared here the first time, we were entertain'd with abundance of marks of distinction; as we have often said already, and which we cannot re∣peat too often. In the tenth Year of Chun-chi they pre∣fr'd us to the sole direction of the Mathematicks. In
the fourteenth Year of the same Reign they gave us leave to build a Church at Pein, and the Emperor himself was willing to grant us a particular place for the burial of our Dead. In the twenty seventh Year of your Majesty's glorious Reign, your Majesty honoured the Memory of Fa∣ther Verbiest not only by new Titles, but also by the care ou took to cause the last Offices to be perform'd to him, with an almost Royal Pomp and Magnificence. Some while after you appointed an Apartment and Masters to the new French Missionaries, to facilitate their learning of the Tartarian Tongue. In a word, you seem'd so well satisfied with their deportment, that you caused the Ser∣vices they had rendered to the State by their Voyages in∣to Tartary, and Negotiation with the Muscovites to be in∣serted in the Records of the Nation: What a happiness, Sir, and a glory is it for us to be judged capable of ser∣ving so great a Prince! Since therefore your Majesty, who does so wisely govern this grand Monarchy, vouchsaseth to employ us, and put such confidence in us, how is it possible there should be one single Mandarin so irrational to refuse one of our Brethren permission to live in his Province? Verily, Sir, one cannot sufficiently deplore the hard Fate of that good old Man, who in a little corner of the Earth, humbly requires so much space as is necessary peaceably to spend the remain∣der of his daies, which yet be cannot obtain. It is for this reason, Sir, that all of us, your Majesty's most humble Subjects, who are here like forsaken Or∣phans, that would injure no body, nay, who endeavour to avoid Law-Suits, Quarrels, Wranglings, and the least Contestations; It is for this reason (we say) that we be∣seech you to take our Cause in hand, with those sentiments of Equity that are so essential to you; have some Com∣passion, Sir, upon Persons who have committed no Fault; and if your Majesty, after being fully informed of our Carriage, does really find that we are Innocent, we beseech you to let all the Empire understand by a publick Edict,
the judgment you entertain of our Morals and Doctrine. It is for the obtaining this Favour, that we assume the liberty of presenting to you this Request. In the mean time all, and every your Subjects the Missionaries, will expect with fear, and intire submission, what you shall be pleased to appoint touching the Premises. In the thir∣tieth Year of the Reign of Chamhi, the 16th. day of the 12th. Month of the Moon. The Emperor graciously received this Petition, and sent the 18th. of the same Month to the Court of Rites, with an Order to examine it, and with the first opportunity to make report of it to him; but be∣cause there is vacation in all the Courts of Judicature in China much about the same time, until the 15th. of the first Month of the Year following, the Lip could not Answer till the 18th. of the said Month: Upon the whole, their Judgment was much contrary to the Emperors Intentions, and Interest of the Missionaries. For the Mandarins having reported at large the antient Edicts enacted against the Christi∣an Religion, concluded that this business required no farther discussion, and that they were to stick close to the first Orders of Parliaments, and of the Court, which prohibited upon grievous Penalties, the natural born Subjects to entertain the new Doctrine of the Europeans; that, notwithstanding they deem'd it con∣venient to preserve the Church in the City of Ham∣cheou, and to give order to the Mandarins of that Pro∣vince, not to confound the Christian Religion with the seditious Sects of China. The Emperor was in a manner as much concer∣ned as the Missionaries at this new Decree: when they presented it to him, he discovered some trouble at it, and left it for several days in his Closet, with∣out declaring himself, to the end that the Mandarins of Lipo having notice of it, might have time to come
back; but when he saw their Obstinacy, he was not willing to make turbulent Spirits to Rebel, and re∣solved at last, tho' sore against his Will, to Sign it. This News threw the Fathers into a great Conster∣nation; and one Chao a Gentleman of the Bed-Cham∣ber, whom the Emperor sent to comfort them, found them in a condition worthy of compassion. He was troubled at it himself (for he loves us dearly, and hath done us upon several occasions most signal Services.) This Officer endeavour'd, as he had order, to moderate their Affliction; but whether it was that these Fathers were not Masters of themselves, or that they had quite given over all thoughts of keeping any further correspondence with a Prince that had deserted them, they utter'd upon this occasion whatsoever the most sensible grief is able to inspire into afflicted Persons. What signifie, my Lord, say they, all the Favours it hath hitherto pleased the Emperor to do us, since at this conjuncture himself makes them unprofitable? Was it to tumble us down in a more illustrious man∣ner, that he apply'd himself so long time to exalt us? What delight will he take hereafter to see us, covered with shame and confusion, to serve for a laughing-stock to our Enemies, and be a Spectacle to the whole Empire? Will that Prince who loved us so dearly, will he be able hereafter, without being moved at it, to hear that the Rabble insult over us? That his petty Officers make us to be beaten in open Courts? That Vice-Roys banish us from their Provinces, that they exile us shamefully from his Empire? We lay out our selves for him, our Cares, Studies, and all our Watchings are given to him. One part of our Brethren are already dead by their Labours, o∣thers have impair'd their Health by the same; and we▪ who are still alive, enforced by the same desire of pleasing him, willingly and freely sacrifice all the precious moments of our Life to him.
We hoped to merit by this Zeal, that he would at length approve of the Religion which we preach to his People, (for why should we dissemble the matter to you, to you who have so long known the real senti∣ments of our hearts) that was, you know, the only motive of all our Undertakings: How Powerful, how Magnificent soever this Prince may be, we should ne∣ver have had the least thoughts of coming so far to serve him, if the Interest of our most Holy Faith had not engaged us therein. Nevertheless he proscribes it at this day, and Signs with his own Hand the shameful Decree of our Condemnation. There you see, my Lord, what all our hopes come to; there is the fruit of all our Labours: with how much greater calmness would we have received the sentence of Death, than an Edict of this nature? For, do not imagin that we are able to survive the loss of Christianity. This Discourse, attended with a great deal of trouble, and a torrent of Tears, made great impres∣sion upon the Officers spirit; he went immediately to report it to the Emperor, and described to him the Fathers sorrow in such lively colours, that this good Prince gave way to some emotion. I have always, said he, sought out all occasions to do them a kindness, but the Chinese have traversed all my good designs, I could at this time forbear following the stream; but in short, however the case stands, they may make account that I love them, and that I shall not forsake them. In effect, he began more than ever to employ them in his Service; but yet, he no longer found the same eagerness in the execution of his Orders, nor the same sereneness and alacrity upon their countenances. The always appeared before him dejected, mournful, and as if their Heads had been out of order by the shrewd blow they lately received. However, he was so far from being disheartened, that he proposed to them to send for a Doctor of Physick to Court, who was
newly arrived at Macao, who that he might be the more serviceable to the Missions had turned Priest of our Company. The Fathers made answer that this Doctor had wish'd, and that two with a great deal of Passion, to employ his Skill, and all the Arcana of his Art to preserve such a precious Health, as that of his Ma∣jesty, but being amazed at the Decree tha had past against the Christians, he was quite off from any design to come into China, and that he was preparing to return into Europe: that, nevertheless, since his Majesty ordered it should be so they would write with all expedition to Macao to have him come. Whilst the Missionaries were over Head and Ears in their melancholly, the Vice-Roy of Ham-cheou triumphed at his first success, and cast about how to take new mea∣sures to finish his Work. He set all the Commissio∣ners of the Offices at work for several days, to draw out Copies of the new Decree, to have them disperst throughout all the Provinces; at last he issued out more severe Orders against the Christians than the former. In fine, not longer doubting of the Victory, he sent to the Emperor an ample request against the Missionaries to accomplish their undoing; but this request came a little too late: and when it was pre∣sented the Face of Affairs was already altered. For Prince Sosan not being able to withstand the Solicitations of the Fathers, and especially of Father Gerbillon, whose particular Friend he was, resolved to Solicite afresh on our behalf, wherefore he went and found the Emperor, and represented to him what∣soever the most Zealous Christian could possibly have spoken on the like occasion: He set before him again, the Zeal and Devotion of the Fathers in whatsoever respected his Person, the Services they had rendered the State during the Wars, their being intent to perfect the Sciences, and
to rectifie the Kalendar. In a word, Sir, said he, they are a sort of People that make no account of their lives, when serving or pleasing you is in question. 'Tis true, all this could not deserve that your Majesty should approve of their Faith, if it be otherwise dangerous; but was there ever a more wholsome Doctrine than theirs, or more beneficial to the Government of a People? The Emperor who joyfully heard this Discourse, yet for all that persisted in his former determination, It is done now, said he to him, I should have done my self a Kindness to have favoured these honest Missiona∣ries; but the outragious carriage of the Mandarins against them, did not permit to follow mine own inclination. 'How, Sir, replied the Prince, are not you the Ma∣ster? And when the business was to do Iustice to Sub∣jects, so eminent as these are, could not you interpose your Authority? I will go my self, if your Majesty thinks fit, to these Gentlemen, and I am not without hopes of bring∣ing them to terms. At last the Emperor, not being any longer able to hold it out against so pressing soli∣citations; causes a Letter immediately to be dispatched to the Calaos, their Assessors, and to all the Tarta∣rian Mandarins of Lipo; and this is the purport of the Letter. The thirty first year of the Reign of Cham-hi, the second day of the second month of the Moon. Yi-sam-ho, Minister of State, declares to you the Will and Pleasure of the Emperor in these terms. The Europeans in my Court have for a long time been Directors of the Mathematicks. During the Civil-Wars they have rendered me most effectual service, by means of some Cannon that they got cast: their Prudence and singular Address, accompanied with much Zeal, and in∣defatigable Toil, obliges me once more to consider them. And besides that, their Law is not Seditious, and does not induce People to Revolt, so that it seems good to us to per∣mit it, to the end that all those who are willing to em∣brace
it may freely go into the Churches, and make pub∣lick Profession of the Worship there performed to the Su∣preme Lord of Heaven. Our Will and Pleasure therefore is, that all and several the Edicts that hitherto have been published against it, by and with the Advice and Counsel of our Tribunals, be at present torn and burnt. You Ministers of State, and you Tartarian Mandarins of the Sovereign Court of Rites, assemble together, examine the matter, and give me your Advice upon the whole with all speed. Prince Sosan himself was present at this Assembly ac∣cording as he and the Emperor had agreed; and albeit he was no Christian, yet did he speak after such a pathe∣tical and taking manner in favour of us, that he seem∣ed rather to defend his own, or the States Cause, than the concerns of a Foreign Religion, these are his own words, without adding one Syllable, as they are found in the Original, which I faithfully translate. You know, Gentlemen, with what Application, what Zeal, and Loyalty these European busie them∣selves in the Service of his Majesty. The greatest Men amongst us, tho' concerned to preserve and maintain our Conquests, have rather devoted them∣selves to Glory, Riches, and making their own For∣tunes, than to the settling the State upon a sound bottom; very few of them do purely aim at the Publick good. These Strangers, on the other hand, exempt from all Passion, love the Empire more than we do our selves, and do frankly Sacrifice their own repose to the tranquility of our Provinces. We have experienced the same during the whole course of our Civil-Wars, and in the late bickerings we had with the Moscovite, for to whom do you sup∣pose us obliged for the happy success of that Nego∣ation? It would without all question be consistent with my Interest, to ascribe all the glory of it to my self. I who have been the Plempotentiary for
the Peace; but if I were so unjust as to do my self that honour, to the prejudice of these Fathers, the Chieftains of the Enemies Troops, all mine own Officers, my own Army would say I told an untruth. It is, Gentlemen, these Fathers who by their Prudence, and insight into Affairs, and the just temper and moderation that they brought, put an end to that important affair. Without their Coun∣sel, we should have been forced to exact at the ex∣pense of our blood, the Rights which the injustice of our Enemies did so obstinately refuse to the Em∣peror; or perhaps you would have had the trouble to see us wholly divested of them, or at least I should have been no longer in a condition to de∣fend them. What have we done, Gentlemen, in return for such eminent Service? Nay, what can we do for a company of Men who demand neither Riches, nor Places of Trust, nor Honours? Who esteem and respect us, without so much as caring whether we do so by them? Certainly we ought to be con∣cerned, if it were not in our power some way or other to oblige Strangers, who do so generously Sa∣crifice themselves for us; and I am inclin'd to be∣lieve, Gentlemen, that when you have made refle∣ction thereon, you will give me thanks for having discovered to you the only way whereby they can become sensible of our acknowledgement. They have a Law, which is to them instead of all the riches in the World. They Adore a Deity, who alone makes up all their Comfort and Happiness. Suffer them only freely to enjoy the benefit they pos∣sess, and permit them to Communicate it to our People; altho' in that very thing they rather do us a kindness, than we do them: yet they will be grate∣ful to us, and accept it from our hands as the recom∣pence of all their Services.
The Lamas of Tartary, and the Bonzes of China are not troubled in the Exercise of their Religion. Nay the very Mabumetans have rear'd a Mosque at Ham-cheou, that Domineers over all our Publick Edi∣fices. They oppose no Banks to these Torrents that threaten inundation to all China, Men Connive, they approve in some measure all these unprofitable and dangerous Sects; and now when the Europeans sue to us for liberty to Preach up a Doctrine, that contains no other than Maxims of the most refined Vertue, we do not only repulse them with disdain, but think we do good Service to Condemn them: just as if the Laws that obliges us to shut up the En∣trance into our Empire against Superstition, and lying Vanities, had likewise proscribed naked Truth. The Prince expatiating much upon this Point, was interrupted by the Heads of the Assembly, who re∣monstrated to him; that, say what he could, there was still some danger lest this new Sect might occa∣sion some disorder in process of time. And that it was the part of good Policy to stifle these little Mon∣sters of Rebellion and Discord, in their very Birth. That, in short, they were Foreigners, whose Spiit and secret Designs were capable of administring some suspicion. What Suspicion, reply'd the Prince? I have been Colao this ten years, and I never heard any Com∣plaint against the Christians. Believe me, Gentle∣men, it were to be wish'd that the whole Empire would embrace their Religion. For, is it not that Religion that Commands Children to honor and obey their Parents? Subjects to be faithful to their Superiors, Servants exactly to perform the Will of their Masters. That forbids to Kill, to Steal, and to Cozen; not to Covet any thing that is your Neighbours. That abhors Perjury and Calumny. That dislikes Lying and Falshood. That inspires
Modesty, Simplicity, Uprightness and Temperance. Examin, Gentlemen, and sound, if possible, the Heart of Man; if there you find one single Vice which the Christian Law does not forbid, or one Ver∣tue that it does not enjoyn, and counsel; I leave you to your liberty to declare against it. But now, if all things in it be Holy and Consonant to Reason, why do you still boggle to approve of it? After that the Prince seeing their minds to be wa∣vering, proposed the Ten Commandments of our Religion, and explained them with so much Elo∣quence, that the Mandarins looking one upon ano∣ther, finding nothing to offer against it, did ingeni∣ously confess that one might Conform to this New Doctrine without any danger. The Emperor in∣formed of what was debated; was pleased (for to render the Action more famous) to have also all the Ministers of State to be convoked together, with the Mandarins of Lipou, who were Chinese, to whom they made known beforehand the Resolution of the Tar∣tarian Mandarins. In this general Assembly they repeated all that was spoken in the private Assembly, and after Prince So∣san had left no stone unturned to recover the Chinese from their old prejudice, they came at length to this result, that a Law should be enacted favourable to the Christians, which was drawn up in form of a Petiti∣on, to be presented to the Emperor to obtain his con∣firmation of it, it was to this effect. Heoupataï, Subject to your Majesty, President of the Sovereign Tribunal of Rites, and chief of several other Orders, presents to you this most humble Petition with all the submission, and respect which he and all his Assessors ought to have for all your Commands, especially when you do us the honour to require our Advice about the im∣portant Affairs of State.
We have seriously examined what any way relates to the Europeans, who attracted from the extremities of the World by the fame of your singular Prudence, and other your eminent qualities, have past that vast extent of Seas which separates us from Europe. Since they have lived amongst us they have merited our esteem and acknowledg∣ment, by the signal Services they have rendered us in the Civil and Foreign Wars; by their continual application to Composing of Books very curious and profitable; for their uprightness and sincere affection for the Commonweal. Besides which, these same Europeans are very peaceable they do not excite any Commotions, r foment Differences in these our Provinces, they do wrong to no Man, they commit no notorious Facts; moreover their Doctrine hath no Affinity with the false and dangerous Sects that infest the Empire▪ neither do their Maxims incline turbulent spirits to Sedition. Since therefore we do neither hinder the Lamas of Tar∣tary, nor Bonzes of China from having Temples, nor from offering Incense therein to their Pagodes; much less can we with any reason restrain the Europeans, (who neither act nor teach any thing contrary to the wholsome Laws) from having likewise their respective Churches, there to Preach their Religion in publick. Certainly these two things would be point blank contrary to one another, and we should manifestly seem to contradict our selves. We therefore judge it meet and expedient that all the Temples Dedicated to the Lord of Heaven in what place soever they may be, ought to be preserved, and that we may safely permit all those who would honour this God, to enter into his Temples, to offer Incense to him, and to pay that Worship to him that hath hitherto been practised by the Christians according to their ancient Custom; so that none may for the time to come presume to oppose the same. In the mean time we shall expect your Majesty's Orders thereupon, to the end we may Communicate them to the Governours and Vice-Roys, as well at Pekin as at othe Cies of the Provinces. Done in the thirty first year of
the Reign of Cham-hi, the third day of the second month of the Moon. Signed, the President of the Sovereign Tribunal of Rites, with his Assessors; and underneath the four Ministers of State, called Colaos, with their general Of∣ficers and Mandarins of the first Order. The Emperor received this Decree with unexpressi∣ble joy, he ratified it forthwith, and dispatch'd a Copy of it to the Fathers sealed with the Seal of the Empire, to be, says he, perpetually preserved in the Archives of their House. Some time after he caused it to be pub∣lished throughout the whole Empire: and the Supreme Tribunal of Rites, sending it to the Principal Officers, added these insuing words. Wherefore, you Vice-Roys of Provinces be sure you receive this Imperial Edict with a most profound respect; and as soon as it comes to your hands read it attentively, value it, and see you fail not to execute it punctually, conformable to the example that we have given you our selves. Moreover, cause Copies of it to be taken, to be dispersed into all the places of our Government, and acquaint us of what you shall do in this Point. So soon as Father Intorcetta had notice of what had past at Pekin, he departed for Court, and went to throw himself at the Emperors Feet, to render him most humble thanks in his own, and in the name of all the Missionaries of China. This good Prince when he had bestowed on him many demonstrations of Af∣fection, caused him to be conducted back again into his Province by Father Thomas Mandarin of the Ma∣thematicks. He made his entrance into his City of Ham-cheou in Triumph, surrounded by Christians, and received by their Acclamation, who look'd upon him as an Angel of Peace. Nevertheless, as God mixes always some Bitterness with our Comforts, the joy this good Father had con∣ceived, was soon overcast, and allay'd by the utter ruin of his Church, involved sometime before in a
publick Conflagration, wherewith the best part of the City was consumed. This Accident gave occasion to Father Thomas to desire the Vice-Roy to build a new Church for the Father, and he himself gave him to understand that the Emperor expected it from him. This Mandarin was intolerably vex'd at the ill success of his Enter∣prise, which the late arrival of the Father increas'd; but he was quite besides himself, to think he must be forced to lodge a Stranger honourably in his Capital City, whom he would with all his Heart have banish'd some days before from his Province; yet he dissembled the matter like a wise Man, and to comply with the time, he afforded the Missionary one of the finest Houses in the City, till such time, as at his own charges, he should have rebuilt the antient College. It was not at Ham-cheou alone, that the Christian Religion seem'd to Triumph; all the Churches of the Empire, which the new Edict, in some respect, drew out of Captivity, by granting to the People liberty of Conscience, gave great demonstrations of joy; but the City of Macao, that served for a Cradle to the In∣fant Christianity, made its joy to appear by a solemn Holy-day, which was accompanied with all the tokens of publick mirth and chearfulness, which the Peoples Devotion rendred much more solemn. Those who shall consider the Constitution of the Government of China, the almost insurmountable difficulties that Strangers have met with in screwing themselves into it; the aversion of Mens minds from novelty in Matters of Religion; and on the other hand the small company of Missionaries Europe hath supply'd us with. The Civil Wars, and Revolutions that have so often discomposed the State in this latter Age, will seriously confess, that this Occurrence, one of the most memorable that probably hath happened since the Infancy of the Church, cannot be the pro∣duct
of human wisdom. Psal. 73. Deus autem Rex noster ante saecula operatus est salutem i medio terrae; Tu confirmâsti in virtute tua mare — Tu confregisti capita draconis — tuus est dies & tua est nox. It is our God, 'tis our everlasting King who hath wrought Salvation in this vast Kingdom, which they call the middle of the Earth. He it is who hath for ever brought a Calm upon this Sea, so much agitated, and infamous hitherto for so many Shipwrecks. Thou hast, O Lord, bruised the head of that proud The Dragon i the Emperors Arms, and is adored in China. Dragon whose Name was so dreadful. It is now then that the Day and the Night, that is to say, the East and the West be∣long to thee; forasmuch as both Worlds have at last submitted to thy Empire. At such time as I had the honour to present to the most holy Father, that Idolatry in the East, attacked on all sides by the Ministers of Gospel, was just up∣on the Point of falling; and that if once China could be drawn in to declare itself in favour of us, all the People adjacent, lead by their example, would quick∣ly break their Idols in pieces, and would not be long before they submitted to the Yoak of the Christian Faith; this thought alone transported this holy Pontif with joy, and revived that sincere Piety, and fervent Zeal in his Heart, that he shews upon all occasions for the Salvation of Souls; but he told me that such a great change as that was no ordinary Miracle. What Sentiments will he have, my Lord, when he understands that, what (as things then stood) he scarce durst hope for, are now at last accomplish'd for the glory of his Pontificate, and universal benefit of Chri∣stendom. We know moreover, that since this fa∣mous Edict, the Chinese run in crowds to be baptised: that the Mandarins, still Idolaters, build Churches to the only True God. That a Prince of the Blood hath ab∣jured
his Errors, and embraced the Faith and Cross of JESUS CHRIST▪ That the Emperor himself causeth a Church to be erected in his Palace, and lodges the Ministers of the Gospel near his own Person. These happy preparations will, without all questi∣on, oblige the holy Father to employ all his cares to the entire compleating of so great a Work; to that effect we demand of him Pastors formed by his own Hand, and replenished with his Spirit: Missionaries altogether unbyassed, learned, self denying, that joyn Prudence with Evangelical Simplicity; who may seek the glory of Christ, and that of the Nation, ra∣ther than their own. Last of all, we heartily wish that all Christian Kingdoms, out of Emulation one of another, may strive (under the Popes Authority) who shall still send most Ministers into these vast Countries, to share with us in our Labours, and extend our Conquests. Nay, tho' the most populous Universities, and most fa∣mous Seminaries should be transplanted thither, it would yet be but few. Yea, and with all these assi∣stances, we should notwithstanding, to speak in Scri∣pture Language, groan under the burthen, and heat of the day. What would become of us if we leave this new born World to a small number of Labourers, whom the Piety of some do there maintain? It is to beg this favour, that I assume the boldness, my Lord, to intrust you at this time with the concerns of the Missions. I am well assured that you never un∣dertook any business of Consequence for the good of Christendom, but you accomplish'd it. Now, altho' this that I propose to you were ten times more diffi∣cult than it is indeed, I am, in a manner, sure of suc∣cess, as soon as ever you shall please to take it upon you.
Yet notwithstanding, my Lord, to succeed happily in this business; it is not necessary to exert, and put in practice all those qualities of mind, that make you almost ever superior to great Enterprises. That con∣summate Wisdom, that conducts you through the most sure Roads. That continual intention of mind, which the hardest Labour cannot interrupt. That dextrous insinuating Conduct, so impenetrable to the quickest Eye. In a Word, that Art, so peculiar to you, of persuading, and obtaining what you please. All this is not requisite to the business in hand, you need do no more here but abandon your self to your own Zeal, and use that lively, and natural Eloquence that animates your Discourses, every time you are pleased, in the Sacred College, to stand up for the Interest of Religion, or when you represent to Christ's Vicar the Urgent necessities of the Church. Your Care, your Piety, my Lord, will be seconded with as many Apostles as you shall procure Missiona∣ries for us: then, will, the Idolaters newly Converted, and Believers establish'd and settled in Faith, be e∣qually sensible of the great benefits that you shall pro∣cure them, and the People enlightned by these Di∣vine Lights, which the Holy See shall disperse as far as the extremity of the Earth, will all their lives long bless the Paternal Charity of the Vicar of Christ, and ardent Zeal of his Ministers. I am in the most pro∣found respect My Lord, Your Eminence's most humble and most obedient Servant. L. J.
A Letter to Monsieur, the Abbot Bignon. A General Idea of the Observations we have made in the Indies, and in China. SIR, ALtho, you should not be at the Head of the most Ingenious Learned Men in Europe, by the Rank you hold in the Academy Royal, yet the Passion I have always had, to give you some Marks of my Esteem, and to improve by your Knowledge, would engage me to communicate to you, what we have performed in the Indies, as to the per∣fection of Sciences. It is, Sir, for the Credit of this Illustrious Acade∣my (with which, we have such a strict Friendship, and Correspondence) that a Person of your Merit, should seem to have any Esteem for the Persons it employs in it's Function; and I suppose, the Protecti∣on you are pleased to afford us in the World, will b taken kindly by them; but it is yet more our parti∣cular Interest, that you would severely, and strictly examin our Works, and that when you have implo∣red the Esteem of the Publick on our behalf, you would by an impartial, and learned Criticizing, take some Pains to perfect us, and make us one Day wor∣thy of its Approbation, and your own. It is not, Sir, that I have a mind in this Place, to explain to you in particular, all that we have per∣formed,
to acquire a more exact Knowledg for the Future, of the Motion of the Stars, or to deliver Me∣moires to those who design to penetrate farther into the secret Mysteries of Nature. This Work, which is of too large an Extent, to be comprised within the Compass of a single Letter, will serve for the Subject of an intire Volume, which we hope shortly to have the honour to present to you. My Design at present, is only to give you a general Idea of it, to the end, that understanding before hand the Road we have hitherto kept, you may the better judge what is needful to be added, to make us Exact, or to be altered, as to our Method. When we departed from Paris, with the Instructi∣ons of the King, of his Ministers of State, and of the Academy Royal, we proposed to our selves, nothing less than the perfection of natural Sciences; but this Project containing in it a great diversity of Matters, we supposed it convenient for every one to take his Part, not only because each of us had not leisure enough to plie so many different Studies all at once, but also, because the Spirit of a Man hath its Limits, and it is very rare, to find in one and the same Person, a Genius equally proper for all Things. So that we agreed that some of us should addict them∣selves to Astronomical Observations, Geometry, and to the Examination of Mechanical Arts; whilst others should chiefly be taken up in the Study of what re∣lates to Anatomy, Knowledge of Simples, History of Animals, and other parts of Natural Philosophy, which every one should choose, according as his Fan∣cy led him; yet so, that even those who should keep themselves within the Compass of any subject Mat∣ter, should, nevertheless, not neglect the rest, when Time, Place, or Persons, should afford them Occa∣sions to make any new Discovery therein: we agreed likewise that we should mutually communicate our
Notions one to another, to the end, that each one might benefit by the common Reflections, and with∣al, that nothing, if possible, should escape our attention. But let us take what Care we could to succeed in this Undertaking, we easily perceived, that Six Per∣sons busied besides in the Study of Languages, and in preaching the Gospel, could never be able to go through with such a vast Design; It therefore came into our Mind, first of all, to engage the Europeans that were at that Time in the Indies, but above all, the Missionaries; to the end that every one of us might concur in carrying on a Design, equally Beneficial and Glorious to all Nations. Secondly, to establish in divers Places, some particular Houses, where our Mathematicians, and Philosophers should labour af∣ter the Example, and under the Conduct of the A∣cademians of Paris; who from thence, as from the Center of Sciences, might communicate their Thoughts, their Method, and their Discoveries, and receive, (if I may be so bold as to say so) as by Re∣flexion, our weak Lights. But these Two Expedients, so proper in themselves for the promoting of our Project, and withal capable to render France Famous to Posterity, have hitherto proved ineffectual; on the one hand, we have found very little Disposition in other Nations to second us: on the other hand, the Revolutions of Siam, have overthrown our fist Observatory, which the King's Liberality, and the Zeal of his Minister of State, had in a manner quite finished. These Accidents, tho' fatal ones, did not yet dis∣courage us; we had Thoughts of laying the Founda∣tion of a Second Observatory in China, still more Magnificent, than that of Siam. It would have been no such difficult Matter, to have built several others afteward at Hispaan in Persia, at Agria in the Mogul's Country, in the Isle of Borneo under the Line, in Tar∣tary,
and in several other Places whose Situation might facilitate the Execution of our Design; when that uni∣versal War, that has set all Europe on Fire so many Years, made us sensible of it in the Indies, and in one Moment, broke all our Measures. Perhaps, Sir, Peace may put us into the same Road again, that the Tempest hath forced us to forsake, and that all in good time, we shall enjoy a Calm equally advantageous to Religion, to the People's Happiness, and to the Perfection of Sciences. In the mean time, as contrary Winds do not hinder skilful Pilots to go forward a little, notwithstanding they do much re∣tard their sailing, so have we endeavoured, maugre all these Tempests, to pursue our former Design, and continue a Work, the Essay of which, as you may shortly see, will not perhaps be altogether unpro∣fitable. The difficulty that Men have found from all Anti∣quity, to regulate the Motions of the Stars, was never to be overcome, either by the Lucubrations of anci∣ent Astronomers, or even by all the Penetration of the Neoterics, what Endeavours soever our Imagi∣nation may have used to dive into these Mysteries of the Omnipotent Creator, yet have we made but a sorry Progress; and we must needs confess, that Heaven is at a much greater distance from our Thoughts, and Conception, than it is elevated above our Heads. Nothing can bring us nearer to it, than a continued Series of Observations, and an exact En∣quiry into every thing that Occurs in the Stars, be∣cause that this continual Attention to their Motions, (making us perceive the gross, and as it were palpable Errors of ancient Systems) gives Occasion to Astro∣nomers to reform them by little and little, and make them more conformable to Observation; to this pur∣pose, in these latter days, men have so carefully ap∣plied themselves to the perfecting of Instruments,
Pendulums, Telescopes, and of whatsoever may any ways bring the Heavens nearer to our Eyes. In France, England, and Denmark, and in divers other Places in the World, they have elevated huge Machines, built magnificent Towers, as it were to serve instead of Stairs to those who would proceed in this new Road; and the Progress that many Obser∣vators have already made, is so considerable, that one may hope for great Matters in future Ages; pro∣vided Princes do continue by their Liberality, to up∣hold such a toilsome Piece of Work. This is, Sir, in general, what we have contributed towards it for our Part. First of all, we have been most conversant in Ob∣serving the Eclipses, and because those of the Sun, have more than all others, occasioned peoples Ad∣miration; we have been very Diligent to improve all Occasions that might seem favourable to us. Amongst those that offered themselves, there chanced to be Two somewhat odd, and particular, and will afford some delight to the Curious. The First, was the Eclipse that happened about the end of April, 1688. We knew that it was to be Total in some Parts of China, altho' at Pekin where we so∣journed some time before, it was to be but indifferent Great; for you know, Sir, there is a great difference between the Eclipses of the Sun, and those of the Moon; The Moon that hath only a precarious Light, is co∣vered with real Darkness, when ever the Earth robs her of the Sun beams, and doth not appear eclipsed to some certain People, but that she at the same time hides her face from the Eyes of others in like manner. The Sun on the contrary, that is a Body of its own Nature, always Splendid, always Luminous, or rather, is light it self, can never be Obsuscated or Darkened, and when the Moon by covering it, seems to deprive it of all its Lustre; it is not the Sun that is Eclipsed, it
is the Earth, it is we indeed that do find our selves at that time all in Darkness. So that Astronomers would speak more proper, if instead of naming it an Eclipse of the Sun, they would name it an Eclipse of the Earth. Thence it comes to pass, that this Eclipse is at the same time very different, according to the different Regions where one is, insomuch, that if several Ob∣servators at a distance one from another, were pla∣ced upon the same Line drawn from East to West, it might so happen, that the first would see the whole Body of the Sun, as it is commonly seen, whilst the second would discover but one Part of it. There, it would appear half covered, here, it would be no more than an Ark of Light; and still farther off, it might perchance totally disappear. It is likewise for the same Reason, that an Obser∣vator placed at the Center of the Earth, would not behold the Sun Eclipsed, as we do here; now this Difference, which they term the Paralax, would in∣crease, or decrease, according as this Luminary should be more or less elevated above the Horizon; this is what the Chinese were hitherto ignorant of, and of which, to this day, they have but a very superfici∣al Knowledge. As for the Indians, much less capa∣ble of being Polished, and Refined than the Chinese, they are always admiring such wonderful Effects; Insomuch, that the King of Siam demanded one day, if the Sun in Europe, was the same with theirs in the Indies, being it appeared at the same time so different in these Two Places. Wherefore we departed on purpose from Pekin, to get to Kiam-cheou, a considerable City in the Province of Chansi; where, according to our Calculation, the Sun was to be totally Eclipsed: Yet, it was not so, because the Longitude of the Country was not yet perfectly known to us. The Heavens were that day
extreme Serene, the Place very Convenient, our In∣strument fitly Placed, and being Three Observators, nothing was wanting that might render the Observa∣tion Exact. Amongst the different Methods, that may be made use of for these sorts of Operations, we made Choice of Two, that seemed to us the most Plain and Easie; The one was to look upon the Sun, with a Telescope of Three Foot long, in which they had placed at the focus objectivi, Reticula or little Net, composed of Twelve little Threads of raw Silk, very small, and equally distant one from another, yet so, that they might precisely take up all the Space of the Sun, whose Diameter appeared after this manner to the Eye, di∣vided into Twelve equal Parts. The Second consisted in receiving the representa∣tion of the Sun (by a Telescope of Twelve Foot) that was painted upon a piece of Pastboard opposite to the Optic-Glass, at a proportional Distance; we had drawn upon the said Pastboard Twelve little Concen∣trical Circles, the biggest whereof, was equal to the apparent Discus of the Sun. So that it was easy for us to determin not only the Beginning, Duration, and End of the Eclipse, which require no more but a sin∣gle Optic glass, and a well regulated Pendulum; but also its Bigness, or (as they commonly call it) its Quantity, and the Time that the Shadow, or rather the Moon spends in covering or uncovering each Part of the Sun: for notwithstanding all these Parts are equal amongst themselves, yet it doth not there∣fore follow, that there is requisite an equal Number of Minutes to go over them, because the continual Change of the Paralax, retards, or puts forward the apparent Motion of the Moon. There wanted but the 24th Part to the total cover∣ing of the Sun, and we determined it to be an Eclipse of Eight Digits and an half, (for so Astronomers term
it) for to make their Calculation Just, they are wont to divide the apparent Diameter of the Planets into Twelve Digits, and every Digit into Sixty Minutes. In the mean time we observed first of all, that when Three Quarters of the Sun were eclipsed, the Day ap∣peared in a manner not at all changed by it; nay, and we could hardly have perceived it, if we had not had otherwise Notice of it: so that an ordinary Cloud was almost capable of producing the very same Effect. Secondly, tho' we did not at the height of the Eclipse, see more than a little Ark of Light, yet might a Man read very easily in the Court, the smal∣lest Character. I have seen some Storms that obscu∣red the Heavens as much as they were at that Time. Thirdly, we could by no means discover any Star, tho' we endeavoured it all we could. We only per∣ceived Venus, which doth not denote any great Obscu∣rity, since this Planet appears often times, even at such time as the Sun is wholly risen above the Horizon. The Chinese notwithstanding, were terribly allarm∣ed, imagining that the Earth was going suddenly to invelloped in thick Darkness. They made an hide∣ous Noise all abroad, to oblige the Dragon to be gone. It is to this Animal that they attribute all the disap∣pearances of the Stars, which come to pass, say they, because the Celestial Dragon being hunger bit, holds at that time the Sun or Moon fast between his Teeth, with a Design to devour them. At length the Light returned by Degrees, and eased the Chinese of their Trouble; but we continued our Operation, comparing by different Calculations, the Greatness, Continuance, and Ending of this Eclipse, with the different Tables of ancient and modern A∣stronomes. There was also made at Pekin, Ham∣cheou, and in several other Cities of Chia, the very same Observations, which might have served to de∣termin
the Longitude of all these different Places, if we had not had more sure, and easier Methods to know it by. Upon the whole; this Observation afforded an Oc∣casion to make some Reflections upon several other Eclipses, whereof Authors speak diversly. Herodotus Lib. 1. relates that upon the very Day that the King of the Medes, and the King of the Lydians fought a a bloody Battel, the Sun appeared totally eclipsed. The Combat, saith he, lasted a long Time with equal Advantage on both sides; till all on a suddain, thick Darkness covered the Earth, and for a while suspen∣ded the Fury of the Soldiers. Father Petau hath pla∣ced this Eclipse in the Year 597, before the Birth of our Saviour, on the 9th of Iuly, altho' according to his Calculation, it ought to be but of 9 Digits 22 Mi∣nutes; imagining, without doubt, that this Portion of the Sun eclipsed, was considerable enough to verifie such thick Darkness which the Historians mention: Nevertheless, that is so far from sufficing, that our last Observation ought to convince us, that such an in∣different Eclipse as that was, could not so much as be seen by the Combatants: So that it is much more probable, that this famous Battel was fought in the Year 585 on the 28th day of May, a Day whereon there chanced o be a total Eclipse of the Sun. Father Petau cannot disagree with us about this last Eclipse, but if we reckon it according to his Ta∣bles, we shall find that it is but of 11 Digits 20 Mi∣nutes, that is to say, not quite so big as ours; and for that Reason, we may suppose his Tables to be defe∣ctive, because the 24th Part of the Sun sufficeth (as we have observed) to make the Day pretty Clear; notwithstanding the History would make us believe that it was obscure, yea, and even resembling the darkest Night.
In the Year 310, before the Birth of our Sa∣viour, Agabocles King of Sicily, sailing into Africa with his Fleet, bound for Cartbage, the Sun totally disappeared, the Stars were seen every where, as if it had been Mid-night; whereupon divers Astrono∣mers, and particularly Ricciolu, are of Opinion, that the Tables that allow to this Eclipse a Greatness, that comes pretty near that of the Total, do sufficiently make out the History: Nevertheless, it is manifest by what we have Observed, that the Stars would never have been perceived, especially in that brightness, and after that manner that Diodorus and Iustin say they did, if so be there had been any sensible Part of the Sun discovered, except this same Part not being eclip∣sed, had not been near the Horizon, as it happened in the Year 237, in the beginning of the Reign of Gordianus Iunior; for at that Time the Heavens were so darkened, that it was impossible to know one ano∣ther without Wax tapers, at least if we give credit to Iulius Capitolinus. The Second Eclipse we observed, still more consi∣derable than the former, was seen by Father Tachard, in his Voyage into the Indies, he was at Sea on board an Holland Vessel; and if the Place would have given him leave to make use of Instruments, we should ne∣ver have seen any thing more ingenious on this Subject. The Eclipse appeared Central, that is to say, the Center of the Moon, was quite opposite to the Cen∣ter of the Sun; but because the apparent Discus of the Sun, was at that time bigger than that of the Moon, there was seen in the Heavens, a bright Ring, or a great Circle of Light, and what is most to be wondred at on this Occasion is, that Father Tachard assures us, that this Circle was at least a Fingers-breadth, which would not agree, neither with the Tables of ancient Astronomers, nor of the Moderns:
but it is no  easy Matter, to make a just Estimate of the bigness of Luminous Bodies, when one judges only upon View; because the Light that sparkles, and reflects, causeth them evermore to appear much bigger than they really are. However, these sort of Eclipses which are called, Annulary Eclipses are very rare; yea, and some Ma∣thematicians are of Opinion, that there cannot be any at all, because they suppose as a thing granted by all hands, that the Diameter of the Moon, even in it's Apogaeum, that is, at it's greatest Distance from the Earth, was always either equal to that of the Sun, or even sensibly greater. So likewise Kepler writing to Clavius, upon th Account of an Annulary Eclipse that they had obser∣ved at Rome on the 9th of April, in the Year 1567 pretends that this Luminary Border was nothing else, but a little Crown of condensed Air, enflamed, or enlightned by the Sun-beams, broken, or refracted in the Atmosphere of the Moon. This last Obser∣vation may be capable of undeceiving those who may have persisted obstinately to follow the like Opinion, as well as to disabuse Gassendus his Disciples, who ima∣gin that the Sun cannot flow over the Moon above Four Minutes at most, that is to say, by it's 180th Part. Besides these Two Eclipses, we have also seen some others of lesser Consequence, which I shall for∣bear to mention, because they contain nothing ex∣taordinary. Those of the Moon have most employ∣ed our time, not only because they are in a greater Number, but because there is greater difficult to ob∣serve them well, The brighter the Sun is, the more sensible is its desect, and the body of the Moon, very obscure and opake of it self, depriving us of the sight of it, doth not permit us to doubt so much as one moment of the
beginning or ending of its Eclipse; but it is not so with the Moon, that does not lose its Light but by degrees, and by an almost insensible Diminution. As the Experience we have of it, makes us better per∣ceive all these difficulties, than the most profound Speculations. Will you please, Sir, to let me acquaint you in few Words, what perplexes us the most, as to this Point. The Earth in its different Aspects it bears to the Sun, hath always one half of its Globe enlightned; whilst its other Hemisphere must needs be in Dark∣ness, like a Bowl that is enlightened by a Wax candle by Night, so that on one side there is a projection, as it were a long Tail of Shadow, in fashion of a Cone, the point whereof is very far extended, and loseth it∣self at length in the vast extent of Air. When therefore the Moon by its particular Motion, passes through this tenebous Space, she loseth her Light, and becomes obscure herself; but now if we could mark the very Moment wherein she enters into it, and comes out again, we should know exactly, the beginning and ending of the Eclipse, but several Ac∣cidents that happen at that time, do not suffer us to observe it with so great niceness. First of all, a long time before the Moon touches the Shadow, I but just now mentioned, its oriental Border is enlightened only by a small Portion of the Sun, which the Earth deprives her of by little and little, and by piece-meal: so that at that time, there is to be seen a kind of Smoak that spreads abroad insen∣sibly upon the Body of the Moon, which often pre∣cedes the real Shadow a Quarter of an Hour; being this Smoak always increases, according as the Eclipse approaches, it is so confounded and mixed with the beginning of the Shadow, that it is almost impossible to distinguish it from it. So that neither Experience, nor Application, nor yet the best Telescopes, ca
hinder an able Observator from mistaking sometimes One Minute, nay, and sometimes Two. Secondly, when I say, that the Eclipse is caused by the interposition of the Terrestrial Globe, it is not that the Moon is then plunged into its Shadow, which never reaches farther than Fifty Thousand Leagues, supposing the Earth's Diameter to be 1146 Sea-Leagues, whereas the Moon, even in her Perigaeum, is above 57000 Leagues from the Earth: But the Globe of the Earth being encompassed with a thick and gross Air, which we call its Atmosphere, which the Rays cannot quite penetrate; there is caused by the interposition of those Vapours a new Shadow, whose Diameter, and Length, do far surpass the true Shadow of the Earth. Now these Vapors are so much the more Transparent, as they are the more Remote from us; whence it comes to pass, that they also make a more faint Shadow at the beginning and end of the Eclipse, and consequently, they do not afford that Liberty to Observators, to determin them with any exactness. You may understand by that, Sir, why we often discover the Moon, yea, at the very height of the E∣clipse so far as to distinguish her smallest Spots; why she paints herself at that time in so various Co∣lors, for she appears Red, Ash colored, Iron-gray, Bluish or somewhat inclining to Yellow, insomuch, that she seems to be herself sensible of her failings, and shews certain signs of her different Passions. You see on the contrary, why in some certain Eclipses, she totally disappears, and steals quite out of our sight. All this doth no question happen from the Nature of this Atmosphere, which changes perpetually, and thereby produces these different effects. In the Third Place, when the Moon begins to grow dark near the Horizon, it is yet more difficult to ob∣serve well the beginning of it; and a Man must take
special Notice, that the Time of this apparent begin∣ning, compared with the Time of its ending, doth not give you the middle of the Eclipse exactly, because the Vapors are much more gross at the Horizon, than they are at Thirty or Forty Degrees of elevation. Fourthly, altho the direct Rays of the Sun do not pass through the Atmosphere of the Earth, yet are there a great many of them, that turning aside, or as they speak by being broken by refraction, may enlighten the Border of the Moon, and consequently hinder the Shadow from being exactly Terminated. Fifthly, it sometimes cometh to pass, that the Sha∣dow begins to touch the Oriental Edge of the Moon, at the place where the Spots are more obscure than those of the Occidental Border, which makes, that a Man cannot judge equally of the End and the Begin∣ning; we owe, Sir, all this Refining of Astronomy, to the modern Observators: The Ancients went more roundly to work in this matter, and Tyco Brahe him∣self, did not yet hit of it with all his Subtilty. But the Moderns have been more ingenious to find out these Difficulties, than to find out an Expedi∣ent to surmount them; and we have more than once experienced in our Observations, that it is not with∣out extreme Trouble, that one arrives at that exact∣ness, which is required by the Learned of our Age; yet have we this Advantage, that we are a great ma∣ny Observators together, and that we are able by com∣municating our Notions and Doubts one to another, to come neare the Truth. Besides the Heavens have supplied us with a great many Eclipses of the Moon; and there hath but few Years past, but we might have observed One or Two. But amongst this great Number, that which hap∣pened on the Eleventh of December 1685. was the most favourable to us; we were at that time at Siam: The King to whom we had predicted it, and who de∣sired
to try the goodness of our Tables, was so surpri∣sed by conferring what he did behold, with our Pre∣diction, that from that very time, he had some thoughts of detaining us near his Person; or at least to send some Body to find out some French Astrono∣mer in Europe for him. He offered of his own accord to build a magnificent Observatory for us at Louveau, to render Astronomy, if possible, as famous in India, as it was become in Europe, since the Establishment of the Royal Observatory in Paris. And certainly, if ever the Stars were the Presage of future Events, all the Heavens seemed then to promise us an happy Success in this new Undertaking; but it is not the sensible Course of the Planets, that rule our Desti∣nies here below; they proceed from an higher over∣ruling Power, and all their Consequences are writ∣ten in that mysterious Book of Divine Providence, which before all ages hath determined the different events of this World. This Project of the King of Siam, so favourable to France, to natural Sciences, and to Religion, was quickly put in execution; but the Death of that good Prince overthrew it almost in an Instant, and chan∣ged the Face of all Things. The Troubles that then arose, forced our Mathematician Missionaries to ab∣sent themselves, and thereby caused, if I may so say, a kind of an Eclipse, which hath so long deprived those People of the European Sciences, and Light of the Gospel: Yet these Clouds begin to be dispelled. They are very earnest to have us come back again: but we have learnt by woful Experience, not to rely too much upon the good Will of Man, but to place all our Confidence in him, who alone can when it seems good to him, bring Light out of Darkness. This last Essay, for all that, hath been of some Use to Astronomy, and we can assure you, that the Lu∣nar Eclipses observed at Siam, Louveau, Pontichery,
Pekin, Nankin, Kiam-chau, and at Canton, with seve∣ral other Places of the East, will not only contri∣bute to the regulating the Celestial Motions, but likewise to the perfecting of Geography. Altho the Science of Comets be not of so grand a Consequence, yet is it not less admirable; nay, me∣thinks the Curiosity of the Learned, should be so much the more spur'd on to attempt something this way, as it is more difficult to satisfie it as to this Point, for it is more than probable, that the wit of Man will not be able in a long time, to dive into the bottom of these marvellous Phoenomena. Comets are so Rare, of so short Continuance, and so different amongst themselves, that if they be new Bodies, that are formed and destroyed in the Hea∣vens; it is very hard, and in a manner impossible to lay down general Rules of their Motions, or to prog∣nosticate their Appearance, and Continuance, if they be real Planets. We have had the oportunity to observe Two of them, the first was seen in a Province in the King∣dom of Siam, on the confines of Camboje towards the Sea-Coast. It was in the Month of August 1686. It cut the Equator, passing from North to South, in the 111th Degree of right Ascension; and its own particular Motion that brought it still near the Sun, quite absorpt it, at lest, into the Sun-beams. The Second appeared at Pontichery, Molucca, and Pekin, in the Month of December, 1689. Its Motion was contrary to that of the former, it removed from the Sun, and came nearer the Southern Pole, run∣ning over the Constellations, Lupus and Ceutaurus, where it disappeared in the beginning of Ianuary to the ensuing Year. If we have but a smattering in the Science of Co∣mets, yet in recompence we are sufficiently instruct∣ed in what relates to Planets; and what our Astro∣nomers
have discovered at Paris, since the Establish∣ment of the Observatory, is already matter of Com∣fort to us, for the Negligence or Ignorance of the Ancients. Amongst the different ways of going to work how to determin their place in the Heavens, the most plain, and withal the most exact, is, to take notice of their Conjunction with the fixt Stars. It is near a Thou∣sand Years ago, that Saturn the highest of all the Planets appeared close by the Equator, and near a Star of the Third Magnitude, situate in the Southern Shoulder of Virgo. Tycho in his time observed it in the same Sign; and we also have seen it near Spica Virginis, but with this Advantage, that the Tele∣scopes we made use of, makes our Observation in∣comparably more exact, than those of the Ancients; who, for that purpose, made only use of their naked Eye, always defective, at such a great Distance, espe∣cially in respect of the Stars, whose apparent Dia∣meter is augmented by the Light, and by a kind of Coma of sparkling Rays, according to the Language of Astronomers, that reflect from their whole body, which makes it many times appear where indeed it is not. Whereas a good Telescope makes them less glitter∣ing, rounds them, gives them their true Bigness, and so approaches them to the Eyes, that one does like∣wise distinguish them one from another, even when they touch one another at the Edges, or Borders, and when they are just upon uniting together. Thus we determined the place of Mars, by the ap∣proaching of two Stars of the Scorpion's-Head, that of the Moon, by her Conjunction with the Antares, or Heart of the Scorpion, and that of Venus, that passed near a Star of the Third Magnitude belonging to the same Sign.
This Conjunction of Iupiter and Mars that hap∣pened about the end of February, 1687, did also take up several days. We were at that time at Louveau, where the King of Siam, who took a pride in Astro∣nomy, did observe it in Person with an earnestness and uneasiness, that shewed more of Superstition, than Natural Curiosity. He had a fancy that this Conjunction would be fatal to him, and that it was an assured prognosti∣cation of his Death. We endeavoured, but all in vain, to undeceive him, by M. Constance his principal Minister of State, whom we made apprehensive, that the Events of this lower World have no Com∣munication with the particular Motion of the Pla∣nets; and, that altho' our Destiny should depend thereon, yet the King was no more concern'd in it, than the most abject of his Subjects, for whom the Sun and the Stars do as well turn round, as for the greatest Potentate upon Earth. Nevertheless these Reasons, nor abundance of o∣thers, could set him to rights: He still maintain'd that his Reign was not to last long, and that he should be a dead Man within a few days. In effect he died the next Year; but it was in vain for him to seek for the cause of his death in the Heavens, which he car∣ried about him for several Years: an habitual Di∣stemper did extreamly trouble him at that very time, and that, without doubt, was the true ground of his Fear and Prediction. I do not know, Sir, whether or no these Observa∣tions will appear singular and odd to you; yet, me∣thinks, this at least which I am going to have the ho∣nour of relating to you, does a little deserve your at∣tention. You know that Mercury hitherto hath been the least known, and (if I may so say) the least tractable of all the Planets: Always absorpt in the rays of the Sun,
or in the vapours of the Horizon, he continually flies it seems, all the courtings and caresses of Astrono∣mers, who are put to as much trouble to fix him in the Heavens, as Chymists are to fix their Mercury upon Earth. We read in the Life of Charlemagne, that the Ma∣thematicans of his times, despairing of ever being able to observe him well, when he was the farthest remote from the Sun, endeavoured to find him in the Sun it self, under which they suspected he might some∣times pass. They supposed they had there sound him in the Month of April 807. or rather 808. except the Historian counted the beginning of the Year at that time from Easter: In effect, a black Spot appeared in the Sun eight days, tho' his going in and coming out were hindered by a Cloud. I wonder this Observation could have been able to make them judge that this was Mercury, who is so far from spending eight days in running over such a little space, that he must, according to his natural course, finish it in a very few hours; besides that, it is ut∣terly impossible for a Man to perceive him in the Sun, without the help of a Telescope, and that too a very good one. What therefore they then saw, or suppo∣sed to see, was, without doubt, a Spot, not unlike those that have so often appeared since, but bigger than ordinary, and conspicuous enough to be discovered by the bare sight. Gassendus was more fortunate, Anno 1631. on the seventh of November. The Observation he made of it hath rendered him so famous, that some Authors to do him Honour, have dedicated their Books to him, as a Person to whom Astronomy was infinitely obli∣ged: Some others also have signaliz'd themselves by this curious disquisition; we are the last that have had occasion to imitate them, but our Observation perad∣venture may not deserve the meanest esteem of all those which have been made.
We were at Canton, a Maritim Town of China, and pretty well known by the Earopeans Traffick. We apply'd our selves to the particular studying of the Motion of this Planet, and that made us judge, that it would not be altogether impossible to discover it in the Sun, on the tenth day of November, 1690. to that end we prepared two excellent Tellescopes, the one of 5 foot, that bore a reticula equal to the diameter, divided into twelve equal parts, and the other of twelve foot, with its reticula, composed of four Threads, one whereof represented a Parallel, and the other the Meridian, the two others cut them at the Angle of forty five degrees; we also rectified our Pendulums: Besides all this, the Heavens were exceeding clear and serene; and bating the Wind, which was a little vio∣lent, we could wish for nothing to the exactness of our Observation. Mercury appeared to us like a black point or speck, which entring into the body of the Sun, run over it; in three hours and a half, or thereabouts, we exactly observed its time, entrance, departure, its distance from the Ecliptic, its apparent swistness, longitude and diameter. We understood likewise by that, with the greatest certainty in the World, that this Planet hath no proper light of its own; that its Body is O∣pake, and that it is at least, sometimes less distant from us than the Sun, the which could not formerly be determined but only by conjecture. We owe, Sir, these fine Discoveries to the Inventi∣on of Optick Glasses and Telescopes, as we do a great many other things, which in these latter Ages are the Subject of the New Astronomy. So that as by means of Microscopes, we multiply the most simple Bodies, and magnifie the most minute, and almost insensible ones; so likewise by help of these Telescopes, we ap∣proach to our eyes the most distant Objects, and do abridge those infinite spaces that separate the Firma∣ment
from the Earth; Art having in a manner forced Nature to suffer Men to have free commerce with Heaven for time to come, and let Mathematicians enter more easily into a kind of Society with the Stars. We find at present Mountains and Precipices in the Moon, we discern its least Shadows, that increase or decrease, according to the different posture of the Sun; we measure the maculae of Planets, we have a shrewd guess of their Colours, Latitudes, of their cir∣cular Motion about their Center. It is by that, that Men have perceived that prodigious Ring that ap∣peared in the Air, suspended about Saturn in form of a Vault, or like a Bridge, that would encompass the whole Earth without Arches, without Piles, without any other support, beside the uniform weight and perfect continuity of its parts. Gallileo and many other Astronomers, have in vain put their Brains on the rack to explain this Mystery; they look'd upon this Planet as another Proteus, always changing, always differing from it self; to day round, then oval, by and by Armed with two Ansas or Handles, that opened or shut according to the time of the Revolution: Or else accompanied with two little Stars, that vaulted up and down without ever forsaking it: Lastly, cut in the middle with a broad Fascia or Swaithing-band, whose extremities were ex∣tended far beyond its Sphere. We have a long time examined this wonderful Work of the Omnipotence of our Creator; and not∣withstanding we cannot but admire M. Hugens his Ingenuity, who hath reduced to such a plain and fa∣cile System, all these seeming irregularities, yet for all that, we must confess that we are ignorant of much more of it, than that Learned Astronomer was able to discover to us.
It is less difficult to explain the different Figures of Mars, Mercury, and Venus, which appeared to us sometimes round, sometimes gibbose, sometimes di∣cotomised, and ever and anon in fashion of a Bow, or Sickle; and the truth is, when Venus approaches the Sun, and when she is besides in her Perigaeon, she appears in the Telescope so little different from the New Moon, that it is very easie for one to com∣mit a mistake. I do remember, that causing a Chinese to observe it in this posture, who had but little skill in Astrono∣mical Secrets, he did no longer doubt, but presently gave his assent, and making him at the same take notice of the Moon at a place in the Heavens not far remote: He cried out for joy, and told me then, that he now comprehended that which had always perplext him. I did not know, says he seriously, how the Moon could change Faces so often, and appear some∣times in the wax, and sometimes in the wane, but now I perceive it is a Redy composed of several parts, which sometimes is taken in pieces, and then join'd together a∣gain after some certain times; for to day at least, I see one half of it on one side, and one half on the other. The Knowledge also that we have acquired by Telescopes, concerning the number of the Stars, is likewise more curious. That large Fascia that em∣braces almost the whole Heaven, which they com∣monly call for whiteness the Milky-way, is a conge∣ries of an infinite number of Minute Stars, each one of which in particular, hath not strength enough to affect our eyes; no more can the Nebulosae, whose dim and confused Light is like to a little Cloud, or head of a Comet, yet it is a compound of several Stars; so they reckon thirty six of them in that of Praesepe cancri, twenty one in that of Orion, forty in the Pleiades, twelve in the single Star, that makes the middle of the Sword of Orion, five hundred in
the extent of two degrees of the same Constellation, and two thousand five hundred in the whole Sign; which hath given occasion to some to imagin, that the number of them is infinite. At least it is true that the prodigeous bigness of each Star, which according to some, differ but little from the Sun; that is to say, whose Globe is perhaps a thou∣sand times bigger than that of the Earth, which ne∣vertheless appears but as a Point in the Heavens, ought to convince us of the vast extent of this Uni∣verse, and of the infinite Power of its Author. I cannot, Sir, finish this Discourse, before I have spoken of some Observations we have made of the Satellites. These are so many little Planets that be∣long to the train of bigger ones, which were detect∣ed in our Age, they continually turn about Saturn, Iupiter, and Mars, &c. some nearer, and some farther off from the center of their motion; they sculk some∣times behind their Body, sometimes again they are plunged into their Shadow, from whence they come out more splendid; nay, it even happens, that when they are between the Sun and their Planet, they E∣clipse one part of it. I have sometimes beheld with a great deal of delight, a black Point, that run upon the discus of Iupiter, which one would have taken for a blemish, yet in effect was nothing else but the sha∣dow of one of these Satellites, that caused an Eclipse upon its Globe, as the Moon does upon the Earth, when by her Interposition she deprives it of the Sun's light. We do not know for what particular use Na∣ture hath designed these Satellites in the Heavens, but that which we Astronomers make use of them, is very useful for the perfection of Geography; and since M. Cassini hath communicated his Tables to the Observators, one may easily and in a very small time, determine the Longitude of the principal Cities of the World. Insomuch that if the irregular Motion of Shps
would permit us to make use of the Telescopes at Sea, the Science of Navigation would be perfect enough to make long Voyages with a great deal of safety. We have observed the immersions and emersions of the Satellites Iovis at Siam, Louveau, Pontichery, at the Cape of Good Hope and in several Cities of China; but the observations made at Nimpo and Chambay, that are the most Eastern Cities, have reduc'd the great Continent to its true limits, by cutting off above five hundred Leagues from the Country, that never subsi∣sted but in the imagination of the antient Geogra∣phers. Since, Sir, I speak of what respects the perfection of Geography, I shall tell you moreover that we have taken some pains to determine the Latitude of Coasts Ports, and the most considerable Cities of the East, by two other methods. First, By a great number of Observations about Meridian Altitudes of the Sun and Stars. Secondly, By divers Maps, and Sea Charts, that our Voyages have given us occasion to invent or perfect. I have a Ruttiér, or Directory, for finding out the Course of a Vessel from Nimpo to Pekin, and from Pekin to Ham-cheou; where we have omitted nothing that may any way contribute to the perfect knowing of the Country, so that the particula∣rities of it is in my Opinion too large: nay, and even too troublesome to those, who in these sorts of Relati∣ons, do rather seek after delight than profit. I have also by me the Course of the Rivers that lead from Nankin to Canton, it is the Work of two or three months, and a tedious one too I'll assure you, when one would do things to purpose: the Map is eighteen Foot long, and each minute takes up above four Lines or the third part of Inch; so that all the By ways, the breadth of the River, the smallest Islands, and least Cities are there exactly and acu∣rately set down. We had always the Sea▪Compass in
our hand, and we always took care to observe ever and anon upon the Road, the Meridian Altitude of every particular Star, to correct our estimate, and de∣termine more exactly the Latitude of the principal Cities of the Country. Whereupon, Sir, I cannot forbear making some reflections in this place, which may one day be useful perhaps for the resolving a material Problem in Phy∣sicks. Men are not yet sure whether all Seas in the World be upon the level one with another. The generous Principles of sound Phylosophy, will have it that all Liquor of the same Kind, that Communi∣cate own with another, do spread uniformly, whe∣ther by their own weight, or by the pression of the Air; and at last take the same Surface. Most of the Experiments are in this Point pretty congruous to Reason; yet some later Reflections have started a doubt whether or no the Sea had not really some in∣clination, and were not more elevated in some certain places than in others. What I have remarked touch∣ing this last Map I but now mentioned, seems to back this last Opinion. For in the Provinces of Canton, and Kiansi, is to be seen a Mountain out of which issues two Rivers, the one flows towards the South; and after it has watered fifty Leagues of the Country, it disimbogues into the Sea near the City of Quamtcheou, the other flows con∣trary, viz. to the North, crosses several Provinces for the space of two hundred Leagues, and turns aside insensibly, and enters into the East Sea, or Sea of Ia∣pan, insomuch that the emboucheurs, or mouths of the two Rivers are not distant one from another (if you do but even follow the Coasts that separate them) a∣bove three hundred Leagues or thereabouts. Nevertheless, the Northern River seems more ra∣pid in its whole Course, than those of the South, and being besides four times longer, it must needs be that
the Seas, where both of them meet, have a different elevation, or which is the same thing, are not upon the self same level. I shall not speak, Sir, of several other Maps, where∣in we have reform'd part of the Coasts of Coromandel, of Pescberie, Molucca, Mergui, and of Camboje, be∣cause they have not yet attained to that Perfection, that we hope we may be able to give them hereafter. But yet I have two of them that at present may ven∣ter to come abroad: the one represents the entrance into the Port of Nimpo, the most dangerous in all the World, by reason of the multitude of Isles, and Rocks that cover it on all sides; and put the skilfullest Pi∣lots to a stand. We have subjoined thereto the Course from Siam to China, with a prospect of the chief Coasts, or Isles that are not met with by the way. The other is still more curious, and indeed the only one in its Kind, the little occasion the Europeans have hitherto had to Sail into the great Tartan, obliged Geo∣graphers to make use, in their Descriptions of it, of I know not what memorandums, so little consistant with truth; that, as far as I see, they have purposely set themselves to deprive us of the knowledge of it. But the War breaking out, some years ago, between the Emperor of China and the Duke of Moscovy, they have on all sides diligently examined the limits of Realms, the bigness of Provinces, the fertility of Lands, Rivers, Mountains, Deserts, and whatsoever could any way be advantageous to these two Provinces, and might conduce in time to come, to conclude a solid lasting Peace between them. Besides these Memoires, that fell into Father Ger∣billon's hands, the Father hath also taken several Jour∣nies of three or four hundred Leagues into the very Heart of the Country; going sometimes toward the West, sometimes to the South, observing as much as possibly could be, the Longitude, and Latitude of the
most remarkable Places. So that the Map that he hath drawn out, begins at present to supply us with a right Idea of the disposition, and situation of this vast Country. Amongst the things that are most singular in that Country, one may observe a ridge of Mountains, that are extended so far into the Sea between the East and North, that it hath been, to this day, almost im∣possible for Mariners to know or to double its Cape; which makes some suspect that this part of Asia may peradventure be at this place contiguous to the firm Land of America. We have besides all this, made several Observations concerning the variation of the Needle upon Tides, upon the length of a single Pen∣dulum, which may however contribute something to the Perfection of Arts and Sciences. Yet these general Observations have not so much taken up our time but that we have spared some to examine what there is in the East most curious, in the way of Natural Philosophy, Anatomy, and Botany. Our Sojourning at Siam afforded us an opportunity, to view several particular Animals, which we seldom or never-see in Europe; as for example the Elephant, the Nature of which we have described, as also its Docibleness, Strength, Courage, Dexterity, the in∣terior, and exterior Contexture of all its Parts; to∣gether with divers other Properties, that the very People of that Country, that are accustomed to them, cannot chuse but admire. There have we seen Tygres, much different from those that are sometimes to be seen in France, and other Countries; whether you look upon the colour, which is redish fallow, interlaced with large black streaks, or whether you respect the bigness, which sometimes is equal to the bigness of Horses; they call them Royal Tygres: those they call Water Tygres do exactly resemble a Cat. They live upon Fish, but
do commonly live in Woods, or upon the Banks of Rivers. There is likewise to be seen your Rhinoceros's, one of the oddest Animals in the World, in my Opinion, it hath some resemblance with a wild Boar, only it is a little bigger, the Feet of it somewhat thicker, and the Body more clouterly shaped; its Hide is covered all over with thick large Scales, of a blackish colour, of an extraordinary hardness; they are divided into little squares, or buttons, rising about a quarter of an inch above the Skin, in a manner like those of the Crocodile; its Legs seem to be engaged in a kind of Boot, and its Head wrap'd about behind with a flat Capuche, or Monks Hood; which made the Portu∣guese to call him the Indian Monk: its Head is thick and gross; its Mouth not wide; its Muzzle thrust out, and armed with a long thick Horn, that makes him terrible to the very Tygres, Bufalo's and Elephants. But that which seems the most admirable in this Animal, is its Tongue, which Nature hath covered with such a rough Membrane, that it differs but little from a File, so that it flees off the Skin of all that it licks. In a word, as we see some Animals here that make a good Ragoust of Thistles, whose little pricks tickle the Fibres, or the extremities of the Nerves of the Tongue: so likewise your Rhinoceros, takes delight in eating Branches of Trees, armed on all sides with stiff Thorns, I have often given it some of them, whose prickles were very hard and long, and I admired how cunningly and greedily it bended them immediatly, and champ'd them in its Mouth without doing itself any harm. 'Tis true indeed, they some∣times drew blood of him; but that very thing made them more pleasant to the Tast; and these little slight Wounds, made probably no other impression upon its Tongue, than Salt and Pepper does upon ours.
What is to be seen in the Isle of Borneo, is yet more remarkable, and surpasseth all that ever the History of Animals hath hitherto related to be most admirable, the People of the Country assure us, as a thing no∣toriously known to be true: that they find in the Woods a sort of Beast, called the Savageman; whose Shape, Stature, Countenance, Arms, Legs, and o∣ther Members of the Body, are so like ours, that ex∣cepting the Voice only, one should have much ado not to reckon them equally Men with certain Bar∣barians in Africa, who do not much differ from Beasts. This wild or Savage Man, of whom I speak, is in∣dued with extraordinary strength, and notwithstand∣ing he walks but upon two Legs; yet is he so swift of Foot, that they have much ado to out run him. Peo∣ple of Quality Course him, as we do Stags here, and this sort of Hunting is the Kings usual Divertise∣ment. His Skin is all hairy, his Eyes sunk in his Head, a stern Countenance, tanned Face; but all his Lineaments are pretty proportionable, altho' harsh, and thickned by the Sun. I learn'd all these particulars from one of our chief French Merchants, who hath remained sometime upon the Island. Nevertheless, I do not believe a Man ought to give much Credit to such sort of Relations, neither must we altogether reject them as fabulous; but wait till the unanimous Testimonies of several Travellers may more particu∣larly acquaint us with the truth of it. Passing upon a time from China to the Coast Cora∣mandel, I did my self see in the Straits of Molucca a kind of Ape, that might make pretty credible that which I just now related concerning the Savage man. It marches naturally upon its two hind Feet, which it bends a little, like a Dogs that hath been taught to dance, it makes use of its two Arms as we do; its Visage is in a manner as well favoured as their's of the Cape of Good Hope; but the Body is all over co∣vered
with a white, black, or grey Wooll: as to the rest, it cries exactly like a Child; the whole outward Action is so human, and the Passions so lively and significant, that dumb Men can scarce express better their Conceptions and Appetites. They do especi∣ally appear to be of very kind Nature; and to shew their Affections to Persons they know and love, they embrace them, and kiss them with transports that sur∣prise a Man. They have also a certain motion, that we meet not with in any Beast, very proper to Chil∣dren, that is to make a noise with their Feet, for joy or spight, when one gives, or refuses them what they passionately long for. Altho' they be very big, (for that I saw was at least four Foot high) their nimbleness and slight is incre∣dible; it is pleasure beyond expression to see them run up the tackling of a Ship, where they sometimes play as if they had a particular knack of vaulting to them∣selves, or as if they had been paid, like our Rope Dan∣cers, to divert the Company. Sometimes suspended by one Arm, they poise themselves for sometime negligently to try them∣selves, and then turn, all on the sudden, round about a Rope with as much quickness as a Wheel, or a sling that is once put in motion; sometimes holding the Rope successively with their long Fingers, and letting their whole Body fall into the Air, they run full speed from one to the other, and come back a∣gain with the same swiftness. There is no Posture but they imitate, nor motion but they perform; bend∣ing themselves like a Bow, rowling like a Bowl, hanging by the Hands, Feet, and Teeth, according to the different fancies which their whimsical imagi∣nation supplies them with, which they act in the most diverting manner imaginable; but their Agility to fling themselves from one Rope to another, at thirty and fifty Foot distance, is yet more surprising.
So likewise, that we might the oftner have this pas∣time, we caused five or six of our Powder-Monkies, or Cabin Boys trained up to this way of climbing up the Cords to follow them; then our Apes, cut such prodigious Capers, and slide with so much cunning∣ness along the Masts, Sail yards, and Tackling of the Ship, that they seemed rather to fly than run, so much did their Agility surpass all that ever we have ob∣served in other Animals. Crocodiles being little known in Europe, and so common in the Indies, it has been our care to examine their Property, and whole Structure. Peradventure, Sir, our former dissections will be of some use hereafter, for the Project they laid, and carried on pretty far in the Academy, for the perfecting of Anatomy. We have added thereto some Anatomical remarks ac∣companied with Figures about the Tockaies, so named because they pronounce very frequently, and distinctly this Word. They are huge Lizards or small Croco∣diles, found all over the Woods in Siam, as also in the Fields, and in Houses. The Cameleon is likewise another sort of Lizard of between eight and ten inches in length, which served for a subject to our Observations, there are of them to be seen upon the Coast of Coromandel, and we breed of them at our House in Pontichery, for they do not live upon Air alone, as some naturalists have written, for they eat, and that very greedily. 'Tis true indeed, that being of a very cold and moist tem∣per, they can pass several daies without Aliment, but at the long run, if you give them none at all, you shall see them dwindle away by degrees, and at last die for Hunger. Upon the whole, every thing is very odd in the Cameleon, its Eyes, Head, Belly, are exceeding big; and although it hath four parts, as a Lizard, yet is it so very slow in all its motions, that it crawls rather
than goes; and if so be Navr had not bestowed up∣on it a Tongue of a particular Contexture, it could never catch the Animals, in which doe consist  Nourishment. This Tongue is round, tick, and at least a Foot in length, it darts this Tonue seven or eight inches out of it Mouth with a marelous flight. Now the substnce of it is so Viscous, that it dms Fes, Grshoppers, and other such like Insecs, if  touch them but never so lightly with its Tip. Its Body is cover'd all over with a very fine Skin, but  a chnble Colour, according to the va∣rious Passions that gitate it: In Joy, it is of an Eme∣rald green mix with orange, etched with little grey and black Stokes; Choler makes it dusky and liid; Fear pale, and of a faded yellow: by times, all these Colours and many more are confounded together and at times there is composed such a pretty medly of Shade and light, that Nature does not afford a fi∣ner variety of shadowing, nor our finest Picture more lively, sweet, and proportional Drawing. They let me see likewise at Pontichery two other Kinds of Animals little known in Europe; the one is called Chien-marron, that takes after the Dog, Wolf and Fox almost equally. It is of an indifferent Big∣ness, the Hair is grey and reddish, it hath short a∣per'd Eas, the Snout sharp, the Leg high, a long Tail, a Body slender and well shaped; it does not bark like Dogs, but cries just as Infants do: in a word, it is naturally voracious, and when Hunger pinches it, it enters into Houses in the night, and falls upon People. The second sort is the Mangoure, which, as to its exterior Shape, comes very near the Weezel, excep only that its Body is onger and bigger, the Legs shor∣ter, the Sno slenderer, the Eye quicker, and some-what less wild.
This Animal really is very familiar, and there is no Dog that plays and fawns more prettily with a Man than this Creature; nevertheless it is angry, and not to be trusted when it eats, always snarling at that time, and falls furiously upon those who will be troubling it. It loves Hens Eggs more than any thing; but be∣cause its Chaps are not wide enough to seize on them, it strives to break them by throwing them aloft, or by rowling them an hundred ways upon the ground: but if there chance to be a Stone in its way, it pre∣sently lies upon it with its face downward, and stri∣ding with its hinder Legs, it takes the Egg in its fore Legs, and thrusts it with all its Might under its Belly till it be broken against the Stone. It does not only hunt Rats and Mice, but Serpents, of whom it is a mortal Enemy, which it takes by the Head so cunningly, that it receives no hurt by it. It is at no less enmity with Cameleons, which at the ve∣ry sight of it are seized with so mortal a fear, that they become immediately as flat as a Flounder, and fall down half dead; whereas at the Approach of a Cat, or Dog, or some other more terrible Animal, they swell, are enraged, and betake themselves either to their own Defence, or to assault them. India being a very hot Country, and withal moist, produces a great number of other Animals; there is there especially abundance of Serpents of all sizes, and so pretty in respect of the Variety of Colours, that if it were not for the natural Antipathy that we have for this kind of Beast, I scarce know any thing that the Eye could take greater Delight in. The Peo∣ple of Siam are not so nice as we in this respect; they catch a prodigious number of them in the Woods, and expose them to sale in the Markets like Eles.
Yet there is a particular kind of them that they do not eat, they are present Poison, and that with∣out Relief; they call them Cobra capela: some others are short, and of a triangular form, so that they al∣ways creep upon one of their three Faces; others al∣so are still more odd, have no Tail, their Extremities are terminated by two Heads exactly alike in ap∣pearance, but very different in effect, in as much as the one hath not, as the other, the common Use of its Organs; for in these latter the Lips are join'd, the Ears stopt, the Eye-lids quite cover the Eyes, whilst the other eats, sees, hears, and guides all the rest of the Body. Yet an English-man at Madras, who kept one in his House for Curiosity sake, assured me that every six Months the Organs of this second Head disclosed by little and little, and that on the contrary, those of the opposite Head, by closing themselves, ceased to perform their ordinary Functions; that, at the end of the like number of Months, they were both resto∣red to their pristine state, and divided in that manner between them, each in its turn, the Care and Go∣vernment of the Machine. But God being no less wonderful in the least things than he is in the greatest, there are a prodigious num∣ber of Insects that might deserve the most serious Re∣flections. There you may see certain Flies that Na∣ture hath painted of such a lively yellow, so polish'd and shining, that the most curious gilding does not come near it. Some others are but points of Light, that always glow and emit Rays all night long; all the Air appears as if set on fire with it when they fly; and when they light upon Leaves or Branches▪ the Trees resemble, afar off, those Fire works they make in the Indies for solemn Illuminations.
Their white Pismires, every where to be sound what Care soever Men take to destroy them, are ve∣ry famous by reason of the great Inconveniencies they produce, and for their natural Properties. They are exceeding small, of a soft Substance, white, and sometimes a little russetty; they are multiplied ad in∣finitum; and whensoever they have once got into an House or Apartment, nothing but the black Pismires can drive them out; they have such sharp Teeth, and so penetrating, that they not only pierce through in one night the greatest Bails, Cloth, Wool, Silk, and all other Stuffs, but even Cabinets and Cupboards the Wood of which becomes in a few days all worm-eaten; they even spoil Wood, Copper, and Silver, upon which you may sometimes discern the signs and marks of their little Teeth: Notwithstanding all this, there is great Probability that this Effect proceeds more from the particular Quality of their Saliva, which is a kind of dissolving Menstruum and acts at that time much after the same manner as Aqua fortis does here upon our Metals. Even the very Grashoppers are extraordinary; there are some of them in Siam that breed upon the Boughs of Trees, and are, if I may venture to say so, their Fruit in a manner, for the Leaves, preserving their natural Figure and Colour, grow somewhat thicker, their sides throw out on each hand a kind of green Filaments, in fashion of long Legs, one of the Ex∣tremities of the Leaf extends like a Tail, and the other waxes round like a Head, all which, in process, is animated, and metamorphosed into a Grashopper. This is what the People of the Country report, who pluck them from the Branches themselves; we have seen great store of them, and it is true that the Leaf appears entire with its Fibres, or at least nothing does more resemble a Leaf than the Body of this Animal. If this be true, this Tree is no less to be wondered
at than that whose Leaves dropping into the Sea, in a short time turns to Soland Geese, as some Natura∣lists would make us believe. It would here be a fit place to speak to you concer∣ning the strange Trees we have met with in the East, but if I am not mistaken, I have had formerly the Honour to discourse with you about them at large, especially of those that produce Vernish, Tea, Cot∣ton, Tallow, Pepper, and many others, all of them singular in their kind, and very profitable for Com∣merce. I have had also the Honour, Sir, to present you with about four hundred China Plants, drawn out in their natural Colours, and copied after those that are kept in the Closet of the Emperor of China: this is it that does chiefly compose the Herbal of Chi∣na, and which, doubtless, will enrich ours, especi∣ally when we shall have the Translation of the Book where the Vertues and Use of all these Simples are incomparably well explained. Neither shall I enlarge more upon our Observati∣ons that relate to the Beauty, Bigness, and Diversity of Indian Birds; for altho' that may be the finest part of the History of Animals, yet there has been so much said of it already in the foregoing Relations, that it would be to no purpose to speak to you of it more at large. But I cannot forbear now in the Conclusion to relate to you the greatest Curiosities which the Sea hath furnished us with. There are Fish whose Blood is as hot as that of a Man, others respire in the Air like other terrestrial Animals: We see some of them fly like Birds, that croak at the bottom of Waters like Toads, and bark like Dogs: some have Heads pretty like ours; they call them in Siam, Mermaids: in some certain ones the Flesh is so firm, that it nourisheth as much as Meat; in others it is so soft,
that it may not be so properly called Fish, as an in∣digestedness of slimy, gross, and transparent Matter, wherein no Organ is to be discerned, yet is it quick, it moves, and even swims methodically. In a word, Altho' the most part of them be good to eat, yet I have seen some that are poysonous, which infallibly lame the Fishermen when they can strike their Fins into them. I forbear all the other Wonders of the Sea, that no ways come short of those in the Heavens and in the Earth, that I may speak moe particularly of what we have learn'd of the Birth, Nature, and Fishing of Pearl. You may assure your self, that these are of that kind of Description upon which the Publick may rely; for we derive them from the Fountain head. This is what Father Bouchet, the Missionary of Madura, sent by the King into the Indies, left me his own self in Writing. Men know well enough, that Pearls are engen∣dered in a sort of Oyster found in the Indies, between Cape Comarin and the Chanel de la Croux, which oc∣casioned the giving the Name de la Pescherie, or the Fishery, to the whole Coast: This fishing is exceed∣ing chargeable, whether it be that it continues three whole months without any Intermission, or whether it be that they are sometimes fain to employ above an hundred and fifty Men therein all at once. So that before they engage in it for good and all, they be∣gin upon tryal, from whence they can tell, more or less, what Profit they may possibly hope for. Now if the Pearls of the first Oyster be fair, big, and in great number, then the whole body of Fishers are in a readiness against the 15th of March, the time when the Paravs (People of that Coast) do always begin that precious fishing. In the last there were but eight hundred Barks, yet sometimes there are to be seen to the number of three thousand. At that time
the Hollanders arm two Pataches, to convoy the Fleet and defend them from Pirates. The Crew of each Bark consists of fifty or sixty Mariners, amongst whom there are twenty Divers, each of which hath his two Assistants, which for that Reason they call the Fisher Assistants: in fine, the Gain is distributed after the following manner; each Diver is bound to pay six Crowns to the Hollanders, which hath sometimes amounted to a Million: every eight days they fish one whole day for the profit of the Skipper of the Bark; the first Throw of the Nets is for him; they give the third part of what remains to the Assistants, the Surplus belongs to the Divers. But yet the Hollanders do not always give them leave to dispose of it as they please. So that these poor Wretches do often complain of their hard Fate, and bewail their Loss, when they think of the time they lived under the Dominion of the Portuguese. When fishing time is come, this is the manner of the Paravas's preparing themselves for it: The whole Fleet puts out to Sea as far as seven, eight, ten fathom Water, off of certain huge Mountains, which they discover far up in the Country; they have learn'd by experience, that this is the most commodious Latitude of the Coast, and the place where there is the most copious fishing. Soon after casting Anchor, every Diver fastens un∣der his Belly a good big Stone six inches diameter, a foot long, cut archwise on that side that is applied to his skin; they make use of it as Ballast, that they may not be carried away by the motion of the Water, and to go more firmly through the Waves: besides that, they tie a second heavy one to one of their feet, that presently sinks them to the bottom of the Sea, from whence they quickly draw it into the Bark by help of a small Cord: but because the Oysters are of∣ten fixed to the Rocks, they surround their fingers
with Copper Plates for fear of hurting them in pul∣ling the Oysters with Violence: some others also use Iron Forks for the same purpose. Lastly, every Diver carries a great Net, in fashion of a Sack, hung about his Neck by a long Rope, the End of which is fastned to the side of the Barks; that Sack is designed to receive the Oysters they pick up during the fishing, and the Rope to draw up the Fishers when they have fill'd their Sack. In this Equipage they precipitate themselves, and go down into the Sea above sixty foot deep. Since they must lose no time, so soon as they touch the bottom they run to and fro upon the Sand, upon a slimy Earth, and amongst the craggy Rocks, snatching hastily the Oisters they meet with in their way. At what depth so ever they be, the light is so great that they discern what happens in the Sea, as easily as tho' they were upon Land. They sometimes see monstrous Fish, from which the Christians defend themselves by crossing themselves; which hitherto hath preserved them from all Accidents. For as for who are Mahumitans, or Pagans, what shift soever they make by troubling the Water, or flying away, to avoid them, many have been devoured by them: and of all the dangers in Fishing, this is without all doubt the most ordinary and greatest. In fine, the expert Divers remain commonly un∣der Water half an hour, others are no less than a good quarter of an hour. They do no more but hold their breath, without using for that purpose, either Oil; or any other Liquor. Custom and Nature having indued them with that power, which all the Art of Philosophers hath not been able to this day to commu∣nicate to us. When they perceive they can hold no longer, they pull the Rope to which their Sack is fastened, and tie themselves very fast to it by their hands. Then
the two Assistants that are in the  hoist them a∣loft into the Air, and unload them of what they have got, which is sometimes five hundred Oysters, some∣times fifty, or an hundred only, according to their good, or bad luck. Amongst the Divers some rest a little to refresh themselves in the Air▪ others do not require it, and incontinently plunge again into the Water, cotinuing in that manner this violent Exer∣cise without respit, for they feed but twice a day, once in the Morning, before they put to Sea, and in the Evening when Night forces them to make to Shoar. It is upon this Shoar where they unload all the Barks, and the Oysters are carried into a great many little pits digged in the Sand, about five or six Foot Square. The heaps they throw in rises sometimes to the height of a Man, and look like a company of little Huts, that one would take at a distance for an Army ranged in Batalia. They leave the Oysters in this manner till such time as the Rain, Wind, or Sun forces them to open of themselves; which soon kills them, the meat cor∣rupts and grows dry, and they pull out the Pearls ve∣ry easily, so that they all fall into the Pit. According as they pull out the Mother of Pearl, so they call the Shells, on the outside like those of your common Oy∣sters; but within more like Silver, and more glitter∣ing: the largest are near as big as your Hand; the meat is very delicate, and if the Perls there found be according to the Opinion of some Physicians, cer∣tain Stones that are bred by the ill Constitution of the Oysters Body, as it happens in Men, and in the Be∣zoar. This Distemper does not sensibly alter the humours thereof, at least the Paravas that eat of them find not any difference between those that have Pearls, and those that have none.
When they have cleansed the Ditch of its most gross filth, they sift the same over and over again, to separate the Pearls from it. Nevertheless, what care soever they take, abundance of them are lost, and altho' they return often thither, yet they still find them in a pretty considerable number, some years af∣ter the fishing. And this is all, Sir, that respects the Place, and ordering of this rich Fishing. I shall add some other particulars, that will serve more fully to inform you of the Nature and Quality of Pearls. They are found scattered here and there in the whole substance of the Oyster, in the Vail that co∣vers it, in the circular Muscles that terminate there in the Ventricle, and in general in all the Carnous and Musculous parts. So that it is not probable that they be in the Oyster, what the Eggs are in the Hen, and spawn in Fish. For besides, that Nature hath not de∣termined them any particular place for to be formed in. Anatomists who have carefully examined this matter, can discover nothing that hath any analogy with that which happens in respect of other Ani∣mals. One may nevertheless, say that whereas there are in a Pullet, an infinite number of Eggs in form of Seed, one of which grow and augment, whilst the others remain in a manner in the same State. So likewise in each Oyster, may be commonly observed one Pearl bigger, better formed, which sooner comes to perfection than all the rest. But this Pearl hath no fixed place, and it is sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another. Yea, and it sometimes so falls out that this Pearl becomes so big, that it hin∣ders the Mother of Pearl to close, and then the Oyster dies and corrupts.
The Number of the Pearls is no less indefinite, of∣tentimes all the meat of the Oyster is set thick with them, but it is a rare thing to find more than Two of them of any tolerable bigness. They are all naturally White, more or less accord∣ing to the Quality of the Mother. The Yellow and the Black are extraordinary Rare and of small Value; yet Tavernier reports, that he had Six of them given him in the Indies that were perfectly Black, resem∣bling Jet, and much esteemed in the Country. If this Author doth not intend to impose upon us in this Point, as he doth in many others, perhaps he was de∣ceived himself: however it is most certain, that all a∣long the Coast of La Vescherie, they make no account of them, and the Fishermen themselves throw them away as good for nothing. This variety of Colours is without doubt caused in the Pearls, by the different parts of the Oyster where they are formed; so that when Chance or Nature hath directed the Seed into the Misentery and Liver, or rather into the parts that are instead of them. (For there hath been observed in an Oyster a Cavity large enough, where are discovered two Overtures, that terminate at two small Membranes, where the Chyle is chiefly purified, and discharges it self of all its gross Particles; the Intestines of this Animal not being ac∣companied with Lacteal and Mesariac Veins.) When, I say, the part is inclosed in these Cavities, the Bile and impurities of the Blood may very well alter the natural whiteness, and make them either yellow or black, so likewise one may observe that these Pearls are not transparent, but sullied, and loaden with a gross substance. As to what relates to their exteriour Form, it is sufficiently known, seeing they are as common in Europe as in the Indies. Their different Figure gives them different names; so we say, a Pearl in Point, or
in Pear; Oval Pearl, Round Pearl, Barroque Pearl, that is, flat on one side and round on the other; one may add Irregular Pearl, for some of them are found with a many little Angles, gibbous, flat, and generally in all sorts of Figures. Upon the whole, if it be a difficult thing to give an account how Pearls grow in Oysters, it is no less difficult to understand the manner how Oysters are generated in the Sea. Some say it fares with this sort of Fish as with all others, that produce Eggs, the exteriour substance whereof, soft at first, and viscous, grows hard at last by degrees, and turns to a Shell. What the Paravas have observed, and which I will inform you deserves to be carefully minded. At the times when Rain falls, the Brooks of the adjacent Lands, that empty themselves all along the West, flow near two Leagues upon the surfae of the Sea without mixing with it: This Water does thus swim above some time, keeping its natural colour, but it clots afterwards by the heat of the Sun, which reduceth it into a kind of light transparent Cream. Soon after it is divided into an infinite number of parts, every one of which seems animated, and moves up and down like so many little Insects. The Fish sometimes catch some of them as they float, but as soon as they taste of them they quickly leave them. Of what Nature soever these Minute Animals may be, certain it is, that they Engender upon the sur∣face of the Water; their Skin grows thick, hard, and becomes last of all so ponderous, that they descend by their own proper weight to the bottom of the Sea. The Paravas do moreover assure us, that they assume at last the form of an Oyster. This is a System whereof the Vertuoso's did pro∣bably never dream, which Experience hath discover∣ed to the Barbarians; and in effect, it is in these
places only that Pearl is found, and the rainiest Years proveth likewise the best for Fishing. I shall add moreover, to undeceive those who are wedded to that Opinion of the Ancients, that Oysters remain always at the bottom of the Sea. Formerly it was believed they rose every morning up to the surface of the Water, and that they open'd their Nacre or Shell to receive in the Dew of Heaven, which like a melted Pearl insinuated it self into the Meat of the Oyster; was fix'd by means of its Salts, and there at last assumed the colour, figure, and hard∣ness of Pearls; not much unlike some certain Liquors that are transmuted into Crystals in the Earth, or as some Flowers are transformed into Honey and Wax in the Bee Hives. All this is Ingenious and pret∣ty: but the worst of it is, 'tis all false; for these Oys∣ters are strongly fastened to the rock, and never did any Fisher see one to float upon the Superficies of the Water. Notwithstanding, Pearls are found in several Pla∣ces, yet those of La Pescherie are the most valued, for they never lose their Lustre; others turn Yellow, or of a Pale decayed White. As to the true Value, it is very hard to determin any thing for certain; the biggest of all that was found in the last Fishing, was sold but at Six Hundred Crowns. I have sometimes asked the Divers, if they did not now and then find Coral at the bottom of the Sea; they answered, that they being for the most part bu∣sied in what concerns seeking for Pearl, took no great notice of any thing besides, that nevertheless, they found from time to time, Branches of Black Coral; there is some of it, added they, which al∣tho' it be pretty hard at the bottom of the Water, yet becomes much more so, when it hath been some time exposed to the Air. But the greatest part of it hath acquired, even in the Sea, all its natural Hard∣ness.
It sticks fast to the Rocks, and when we cast Anchor in Foggy weather, it often happens that our Anchor matches hold on some Branches of Black Coral, and brings along with it whole Trees; but it is very rare to find any Red Coral all along the Coast of La Pescherie. I shall here make a Reflection that not many have made; viz. that the Coral-Tree hath no Root. Some of it was shown in Rome, in Father Kercher's Musaeum that sprung out of several Stones; some of them have been after that pull'd away, and the Coral had not only no Root, but was not so much as tied by any Fibre, or any the least Filament whatsoever. There also was seen several Branches of Coral issuing from a Nacre of Pearl; and in Cardinal Barbarin's Closet, there is still to be seen a Shrub of Coral, whose Foot is Black, the Trunk White, and the very Top of all Red. Thus doth Nature,ir, disport her self in the great Abyss, as well as in the other parts of the Universe, by the Production of prodigious Numbers of Things equally Profitable, and Precious, which she bestows not to excite and irritate Mens Concupiscence, or to foment their sottish Pride; but to serve them for Ornaments, as Reason, and the Decency of every State requires, or permits. Nay, perhaps, Sir, these Beauties of the Universe were created, not so much to adorn the Body, as to exercise the Mind: Reliquit Mundum disputationi eo∣rum. For of all natural Pleasures, the most innocent, and substantial, without all doubt is the study of Na∣ture, and the Consideration of the Marvels it con∣tains in its Womb. When one hath once run over the Ground work of Divine Wisdom, and penetra∣ted into the Mysteries of it; this general View of so many Beauties, hath more powerful Charms, and be∣gets in our Spirit, a more taking and affecting Image
and Representation, than all that the Senses and Pas∣sions are ever able to present to us. You know it, Sir, better than any Body; you I say, who by your particular Study, and your continual Correspondence with the Learned have required in so short Time, so many Notions in all the different kinds of Erudition; and certainly, that constant Ap∣plication that you every Day afford, in reference to the perfection of Arts and Sciences, sufficiently de∣clares that nothing can more profitably and pleasant∣ly take up the Time of a Gentleman and honest Man. But what is still more singular, you sanctifie all this Knowledge, by the good Improvement you make of it. You bring it, I may so say, to the Sanctuary; you make use of it in the Pulpit of Truth, to make our Mysteries more intelligible, and not satisfied with the ordinary Phylosophy and Eloquence, you do thereby become a Christian Philosopher, and an Evangelic Orator. I am with all respect. SIR, Your most humble and most obedient Servant. L. J. FINIS.
Books Printed for Benj. Tooke, at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet. FAbles of Aesop and other eminent Mythologists; with Morals and Reflections. By Sir Roger L' Estrange. Folio. Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle of the Kings of England, from the time of the Roman Government unto the Death of K. Iames I. whereunto is added, the Reigns of K. Charles I. and K. Charles II. The Ninth Impression, Corrected. Folio. A New Theory of the Earth, from its Original to the Consum∣mation of all Things: wherein the Creation of the World in six Days, the Universal Deluge, and the General Conflagration, as laid down in the Holy Scriptures, are shewn to be perfectly agreeable to Reason and Philosophy: With a large Introductory Disourse concerning the Genuine Stile and Extent of the Mosaick History of the Creation. By W. Whiston, M. A. Chaplain to the Right Reverend the Bishop of Norwich, and Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridge. Books newly Printed for Sam Buckley, at the Dolphin in Fleetstreet. CHristianity not Mysterious: or, A Treatise shewing, That there is nothing in the Gospel contrary to Reason, nor above it; and that no Christian Doctrine can be properly called a My∣stery. By Mr. Foland. The Second Edition enlarged, in Octavo. Price 2 . The French Perfumer, teaching the several ways of Extracting the Odours of Drugs and Flowers, and making all the Composi∣tions of Perfumes for Powder, Wash-balls, Essences, Oils, Wax, Pomatum, Paste, Queen of Hungary's Water, Rosa Solis, and other Sweet Waters: The manner of Preparing sweet Toilets, Boxes, &c. with the Preparations and Use of Perfumes of all kinds whatsoever. Also how to Colour and Scent Gloves and Fans; together with the secret of Cleansing Tobacco, and Perfuming it for all sorts of Snuff, Spanish, Roman, &c. Done into English from the Original printed at Paris. The Second Edition, correct∣ed from all the Faults that happened in the first. 12o. Price 1 s. Latitudinarius Orthodoxus. 1. In Genere, de fide in Religione Naturali, Mosaica & Christiana. 2. In particulari de Christianae Religionis Mysteriis accesserunt Vindiciae Ecclesiae Anglicanae &c D. Arthuri Bury. Twelves. Price 2 .
