M1645 99829438 33878
XII VISIONS OF Stephen Melish A GERMANE: BEING Such as Concern the Affairs now in agitation between The French King & the Pope. Translated by Albertus Otto Faber. LONDON. Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the corner∣house at the bottom of Addle-hill, in the Year, 166.
THE PREFACE. BEcause of the present differences between the French King and the Pope, I thought good to Translate these following Visions of Ste∣phen Melish of Prague, Cittizan of Lissa, who (as saith he th first Published his Visions) is a down-right honest man, Pious and dutiful to God and his Neighbour; a stranger to Worldly Policy, & State affairs; altogether ignorant of the transactions now on foot. Therefore we must conclude that his Visions were shewed him by a higher power. The most part of them being fulfilled, and others were fulfilling; some also seem to be just upon accomplishment. This was the cause that I have Translated those Visions, whose accomplishment I judged to be now beginning; so that all good people here might have some knowledge of what passes beyond-Sea of this nature. Consider of it, and Farewel. A. O. F.
XII Visions of Stephen Melish a Ger∣mane, &c. The 1st. Vision. ON Palme-sunday (April 9, 1656) I Dreamed thus: I travelled, and a man I knew not did accompany me; and we went forth together til we entred into a great Palace, the name of which I knew not: And the man drew me aside, and asked me, from whence I was? I said, of Poland. He again, Of what Religion? I, Of the Protestants. He, Sing ye also French Psalms? Yes, said I, that is my highest joy, when I rise, and go to sleep. Then he behaved himself loving∣ly towards me, and said, Stand here by me, no evil shal hap∣pen to thee, thou shalt see great things that must be done in short. If it be somewhat thou understand'st not, ask me, I shall tell thee. And soon he was changed into another shape, as a spiritual person; on whose side I standing, saw exactly what I now shall tell thee without addition. First of all, There was set in the midst of the Palace a square silver-Table; in the mean time came a great King, whose Ve∣sture was of Silver-cloth, and led the King of Sweden at his right hand. Then he sate down with his back Southwards, and his eies Northwards, and the King of Sweden sate at the Table over-against him; and at the right hand of this King the Elector of Aeydelberg, of Saxen, of Brandenbourg, having their eyes turned as it were Westwards, but their backs Eastwards.
But betwixt this King and the Elector of Saxen sate a Cardi∣nal upon a silver-stool at the corner of the, Table, holding a Bi∣shops Crofier in his hand, which was mighty thick. He was cloa∣thed with a long priests gown, (like to the Kings) in Silver cloaths, and was girded with a girdle, having upon his head a mitre of a∣strange fashion. At the left hand sate one as it were Ra-Kocy cloathed according to the Hungarian mode, beside▪ him an ambassador of Spain, and then one of the Emperors Ambassadors, and others. The Em∣bassadors of England and Holland sate next the King of Sweden. Round about those Kings were set silver stools, upon which sate along the three sides of the palace, or hall, mighty Poten∣tates. Then presently was given a great sound out of great Guns, and afterwards Psalms and songs were sung in the French tongue; inso∣much that there was a very great noise of Musick, & all kind of in∣struments: I also heard voices of men amongst this Musick singing very loud, the Melody of the Psalm I knew wel. Following, there was brought in upon two levers a small silver∣table, upon which did lie the Popes Crown. And by and by, at the Kings and Princes consent lifted up him self the Cardinall aforesaid, and struck with the crosier upon the crown, that it did flie into pieces; and others standing round a∣bout, trampled on the bursted silver with their feet▪ At that same instant there arose to be a sudden quivering noise, by shoot∣ing of pieces, and great ordnances, horrible and dreadfull. After that shooting a very great triumph was made by singers and musical instruments. Then came a Queen and sate down next the King, She was cloathed like the King: After her followed Virgins with a melo∣dious sound of Psalms and songs, bearing an exceeding precious present upon a golden lever, which they did present to the King. And then again was heard a great crack of pieces and ordnances to confirm all this. After came a very great multitude of the Gentry and Knight hood, and Lords, out of all the four corners of the World, and brought to the King a crown and a sword, which crown they set before him in the presence of all these Potentates: But the sword
they put him in his hand, even to the end that he should skirmish against the Babylonish beast; At which they also joyned their joy∣ful gratulation, which I understood not, because it was done in French: And J durst not ask the Man what they said, onely what J did see with my eyes, & could apprehend with my understanding. After this was heard again a great ratling of Guns, & singers. And there came, as it were, persons of the commonalty, and brought to the King a costly present, and did ad their gratulations, but J did not understand it. And all this was anew confirmed with shooting and musick sound, Whereas now the Gentry and Knighthood aforesaid had pre∣sented the Crown, and reached the sword into his hand, the said King profered to the King of Sweden his right hand, and the other Princes, Potentates and Kings; standing by, laid thereupon their hands, kissing one another, and sung at it the 20 Psalm; At which there was heard once more so great a shooting and musicall re∣joycing, as never before, insomuch that the very earth did ring. Then they all did arise, and went into a great temple, wherein the said King did crown the said Cardinall, and put him on a very Patriarch-Mitre, as it were a Cardinals-hat: And many Preachers sate there in white silk-cloaths about the Altar, and elsewhere, and sung French Psalms, in the congregation of many thousand people. There the King did establish him to be an intendant Administrator of the Church of God instead of Moses, Samuel, &c. Out of this temple now J came forth with the same man upon a very large field, where the King did muster his Souldiers▪ and sent his Army towards the South & West to fight couragiously, gi∣ving his order to them how they should behave themselves. Then the Cardinal began a reformation in all cities, and gave them priviledges according to the manner of the old Testament. But all what could not be easily decided was ordered should be brought before the King. It was also ordered, that nothing in what cause soever, Ecclesiastical or Secular, must be done with∣out knowledge of this King and the said Potentates. His Armies did increase of all sides round about, and his Do∣minion was to be like as it were Germany, and he a King for e∣ver;
to wit, so long as the World stands, and no alteration at all was to be expected from him, but that at the time of his govern∣ment there should be Peace, unity, and all kinde of good, like as it was in the time of Solemon. And it was clear day when I awak∣ed. The II. Vision. APril 27. had I such a dream as thus: I came at a high mountain, unto which when I had climbed up very hardly, (yet with help of others,) I was commanded to look back. Which doing, he said to me, Dost thou see that piece of land? Yes, Sir, I see it, said I. But when I looked back again, behold there was nothing more left then earth and ashes. Then I asked; Sir, how is that gone so suddenly? He▪ Even so shall be gone the whole Land, because of their great sins, which they do▪ For terror shall fall upon them, indeed upon all, as well the fighting men, as them that are defending themselves. But them that I shall preserve, I will bring thorrow into other countries, that they might be preserved for a time and season; but the hypocrite, who do op∣press my people, shall be an abomination for ever. For the Lords Season is approaching, to make manifest the works and doings of every one. The III. Vision. ON the 19, May (when I was already amongst the scattered, ones in Silesia) saw I the Sun shine towards the North, and all dark, only clear towards the bottome of it; and there arose three other Suns from the East, and West, and betwixt the West & North. But on the highest part of the Heaven stood a very great Sun, the greatest of all. And I did ask: Sir, Wherefore is the Northern Sun so dark? He answered: Because that I will not by him alone▪ (my Ambassador) perform the Work, least there creep in pride and opinions (or imaginations) as though he by his own power or wisdom did effect the work, to which I have called him. For behold, he already doth not what I will, but what he will himself: However I did not send him for his own
profit and interrest, but for my glory-sake. For I have another Workman, whom I shall send unto him, even to the end that they shall work together, and perform the work. At that same instant began the Northern Sun, being refresh∣ed from the other Suns, to arise on high, and take her course. And presently I did hear a voice coming from far: Beware now therefore thou do nothing, but what will tend unto the honor of God and his Worship, and unto the edification of his Church: And ye other Suns, proceed in your course also, and go on for it's time, do not tarrie one for another, for its high time, to perform the work of God, the time of the manifestation of his Glory is at hand. And there came from the South a very deformed wonderful beast, who had sent forth many messengers of strange fashions: And these went to the (great Lords) and the common people, exhorting them, and giving drink out of a wonder-cup; Then they did conspire, and bind themselves together with great chains, to the end, that they might stand fast together for the maintenance of their cause. But when the battle began, these were driven back to the South, and that wonder-beast was overcome and vanquished, and I praised-God for the victory given to the Suns. But a Voice came to be heard, which said; His fall is not yet, for the Suns help not truly one another, be∣cause of their great envie, that is amongst them, and some of them seek their own ends. But those that do seek shall perish; For the time of him by whom God will perform the Work, is yet not at hand: But shall not tarrie very long, because his time also approacheth. The IV. Vision. AGain I saw a bright fiery light towards the South, all as it were, burning up, and as it were an unquencheable fire. And there arose a very great out-cry, and many lamentations, with so thick and dark a smoak, that nothing was to be seen. At that instant I saw red Foxes come from the East, every one ha∣ving a great tooth. And a gold yellowish Lyon stood upon a green place, about whom the foxes were leaping. And a voyce
was heard: Trust them not, they have falshood in their mind. Therefore the Lyon did smile at them, and a while after rent them in pieces. And behold that great Sun (the brightness of which was before so great, that nothing did appear to be seen, because of his so great light▪ was changed into blood also in the same region, but only for a time. Instantly after came a fiery Man like a flame, with a black sword of Iron: And against him a bright shining Man, like the the Sun, with such a sword like a flash of Lightning. Betwixt those was such a fight, that many thousands did fall in the place, and none was left remaining but very few. Between them stood a white Eagle, and in Heaven the great Sun like to the lightning▪ because of whose great heat I could not see how it ended; only that I saw, that the bright Sun-shining Man had cut off the head of the white Eagle, and that head was given with the Crown to the North; but the body of the Eagle was given to a red Eagle, and the wings to the East. Presently a voice was heard, saying: To shee, O lamb, be praise and thanks; for thou art wor∣thy to take the book, and to open his seals. For one time is past already, and half a time, and now is half half a time. Presently there was a theater made for execution. Many of the great Lords were beheaded, and priests strangled. And fear did overcome them, and some were taken prisoners. The Popes stool also did fall with a very great fall; and thereupon was a mon∣strance, which was not broken, but lay there, and no body listed it up. And a Voice came a farr off; Hasten and tarry not, for thou shalt go further, and perform the Work for which I have called thee: For the others also do expect their redemption. The V. Vision, AGain I saw seven Stars rising from the East to joyn with the Sun that stood on the highest Heaven. After then did arise also a red horny moon, but proceeded not very far, & fell back again. But another horny moon from the west did meet him, he was very bright shining, but could-not become full, because of the clouds, flying hither & thither: Presently I heard a Cock crow very pleasantly, after he had obtained the place alone, but he
could not flie very high. But the black eagle did flie very high, that he scarce could be seen, holding as yet his place and much strength. Because the time is not yet come, that his pen-feathers shall be drawn out, as if he should bear rule till at the year of 63. In the mean time many tempests overcome many lands and cities. The VI Vision. BEtwixt East and South came four feather-footed Beasts, running on, full of blood and fire, doing hor∣rible dammage; and approached to a two-horned White Beast, as it were, to fight together, but it was onely for an appearance. For they did joyn in a league against the Kings of the West and North. But they were vanquished, be∣cause of the stedfast union of the Nations, and the great Sun in Heaven helped them. And there are manifest the Heroes against the Seven-headed Beast, to destroy it. For many of them at this very time will turn backwards; nay, there is as yet, not Ten, that intend seriously to destroy the Beast, but the time comes that the said number shall be full, and then they will go on; so that about the year 663. there shall be spread abroad a rumour of great wonders. God from Heaven shal please to give to the potentates one heart, love and unitie to perform his work. The VII Vision. OCtobris 2. I had a dream, 3 hours before day, as fol∣loweth. I stood as it were in the East, with my face Westwards, and saw before me the sun Southwards, stand¦ing about as high as at ten of the Clock. And behold, he
was grown dark, very black like a coal. And besides him Eastwards stood a red moon, but over against her a black two horn'd-moon: And round about the Sun seven Stars, bright shining, as they do shine at night. But a thick mist rising from the earth discover them all with darkness, in∣somuch that both I and many others beside me were terri∣fied, and began to flie. Immediately I saw between the West and South in the Air, a shining brightness, or light, in shape of a Man, standing and crying out, Wo, Wo, Wo unto you people, who call the black white, and the white black, that ye might arise up against the Beast, to make it stand on tip-toes, and to bring all again under it's yoke. Behold the time of his down fall cometh near, and is now here! Wo to your life, who drink out of his cup. And at the same time he poured out a great Vial, of somewhat red, like blood; And great lamentations arose over the whole earth, insomuch that I my self thought nothing else but Doomsday did surprize us, and I went to prayer, till I awakened. The VIII Vision. 1659. I Saw again a Sun in the North East, risen at the height of half South, and there standing without motion: For there came great clouds from t' other Easts. And another Black Sun arose up from the West, who was crossed over by some clouds and winds with white streaks. He went on through the black thick clouds, & passed suddenly towards the South to the other Sun, and by how much the nearer he approached, & the sw fter he run on, so much the brighter he became. But when he came near the South line, as it were, between twelve & one, there he stood stedfast like the very
natural Sun. Afterwards he burst in pieces, like smal crac∣kets, shooting here and there in the Aire, and made a very great noise and crack, and fire fell down like stars. But when I lifted up my eyes to the Heaven, I was aware of them called the Seven starrs, that they did part from one another, four of them towards the North, and the o∣ther three towards the South, and great Winds began to blow one against another, like great Armies, and great lamenting was heard. I fear that by discord in the Empire some devision may arise. Wo to that Potentate who suffers himself stil to be poysoned by the Beast; but hap∣piness to them that do look upon the Lords work, ex∣pecting their imployment at the appointed time, when the Lord shall call upon them to act his work, and to per∣form it; who so will go on before the time, and fight a∣gainst the truth, will meet with evil in the end. Ah! that all Christians were of one heart, for a great net is prepa∣ed to draw over all the true Believers, and to destroy them all, but the Lord laughs at it. Behold they have already stretched out their hands for a draught, but the Lord doth beat with hammers upon their hearts, because they have begun it. Whom the Lord shall be pleased to let live two years more, he shall see great revolutions, and the works of God. For the fifth day doth approach. The IX Vision. IN the Mid-lent I came (viz. in a dream) in a Garden situated westwards, in which did grow many very fair flowers of all kinds, besides all sorts of trees. The most part of the flowers were Lilies high, of three or four ells
under propped and born up with costly supporters. But the North-east part of the Garden stood, as it were frozen, and could not begin to sprout forth, because there did blow a cold wind. By and by there fell down a press, written upon: Inquisitio Hispanica. Observe, amongst the Roses and Lilies, thorns also and thistles were grown, un∣derneath which stood roses red and white, so that the press could not smother all the Lilies, because it could not fall down to the very earth. And there were grievous com∣plaints upon the earth, that the three Crowns, owed and wrapped thorrow with Lilies had suffered dammage. And presently J saw, that they did receive strength again from North-eastwards, and that one of the Northern-crowns was changed into blood. O that the Protestants (Evan∣gelici) would make peace amongst themselves, against the poyson of the Jesuits, that so doth overflow! Neverthe∣less they shall fall. The X. Vision. October 24. I Came into a very large field, whose width and length J cannot describe. There was a great people; old, young and children, but all of them buried in the earth unto the head, which onely they lifted up, crying together with a loud Voice: O Lord, holy and true, how long dost thou judge, and not avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? At that very instant came two riding hastily upon horses dashed all over with blood & dirt; they lighted off, and the one laid him down, the other struck him that was holding his horse with his sword, lament∣ing, that he had followed his counsel, and laid him down also. nstantly J saw a mighty multitude of people be∣yond
which J could not see. And above them as it were in the air a pulpit, upon which sate an old honest man, who did comfort them, (when they all, both themselves, and them that were lying down, did expect nothing but death) and exhort them to constancy; for the Lord would not tarrie any longer, because all must be fulfilled what is written in the Books; and said, they should have yet pati∣ence for a little season, untill the number of their Brethren that should be killed still, should be fulfilled. After ha∣ving finished his speech, he began to sing the 123, Psalm. The XI. Vision. FRiday before Easter, four hours before the rising of Sun, I saw the whole World in a dreadful manner brea∣king all in pieces, chiefly towards the North, as if all should be turned upside down. And because there was no body that would or could help it, all was very terrible beyond expression. But towards the South all was changed into smoak, insomuch that because of the fume nothing was to be seen: And westwards in blood. But from the East did arise a fair bright morning-red (Auro∣ra) underneath blood-red, and from thence a round Rain∣bow, extending it self from the East to the West, and a loud Voyce was heard, but I could not understand, what what it said. The XII. Vision. I was in a great Hall, with high and cleer Windows, wherein a multitude of People was assmbled; and be∣hold a great storm of rain came, and the clouds fell down
by pieces in the river, whence it did mightily increase, insomuch that it reached unto the Windows of the said Hall; nevertheless it run away by the sides very swiftly. Instantly there did appear a great brightness from Hea∣ven, that we could not bear it, therefore we did close the windows, fearing some tempest. But behold a great Sun, coming from the North-east, where he doth arise in the Summer, did shine so bright and burn so exccedingly, that I know not how to declare it, or to describe and ex∣press it by any similitude whatsoever. (And in it was written something in Hebrew letters) And behold, all did begin to break, & all round about us was undone at once, and brought to nothing at all, insomuch that we as it were, hung in the aire. And at the same instant was heard such a noise, ratling, over and overturning, and an alarm, that I cannot express it. In which terror I lay a while before I came again to my self, and could remember how it was with me: also because of fear and anguish, I knew not what I should pray, say, or sing. Out of a Book, that treates concerning the Conversion of the Jews; written by a Germane Lady, Anna of Medem, 1641. The IV. CHAPTER. BEing so far spent in my disease that there was no hope of life at all, they took me off from my bed, and put me upon the straw (according to the custom of that coun¦try.)
like a dying person. Then I sunk into a very deep sleep, and I was as it were truly dead. But there I saw a strange man, who had two different bodies, with all the members of men, but one onely soul, of which both the bodies had their life. The one was fair of face, but the other had an ugly countenance. This now that was of so ugly a fashion dyed, and was carried away from the remaining living body asunder into another chamber. Then the other living body came unto the dead body, and spake to them that had carried him forth thus: A! how horrid looks now my dead body, & stinks so ugly. Now I first see how ugly my countenance and form hath been when it was alive! Now as I thus considered of that strange man, and much wondered at him, saying: What is that for a man? God hath never created such a man? Then there was made an answer unto me: Thou hast well said. For in the beginning God has created man like unto his image; in sincere holiness and justice, and immortall. But by the Devils envy Death is come into the world, and through Sin it has pierced thorow into all men, because they have all sinned. And as concerning this strange vision, the signification of it is this: The man with those two bo∣dies and one soul, being partly fair, and alive; to the con∣trary, partly ugly, dying, and remaining dead, that is the regenerated man, every one in his particular person created after God: In whom are two contrary natures, called the Old man, and the New man, spirit and flesh, like as thou hast seen, that the one was very ugly and stunk: Likewise, nay more horrid is the naural man with all his bad con∣cupiscences or lusts before the eyes of God. Now as the ugly died, so must that corrupted Adamical flesh, with all his bad lusts, die in the regenerated man, and quite perish▪ For like as the dead was separated from him who remain∣ed
alive: So also must a true Christian deny all the dead works, & serve the true God alone with a clear heart. And as the living did not sooner acknowledg his ugly shapethen after the others death: So the naturall man as long as sin has dominion in his mortall body, cannot acknowledge his corrupted nature, how that from the soal of the foot, even unto the crown of the head, there is no soundness in it; but wounds, & bruises, and putrifying sores, that have not been closed neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment, Isa. 1. Yea, like an unclean child that lies yet in his blood, not being bathed, so is the regenerated man, until God have born him again, & given him grace, that through his Spirit he might kill the old Adam. At that time he can acknow∣ledg by the grace of God, how greatly he had been corrupt∣ed by hereditary sin, since he came forth from his mother. Thereupon he begins to praise the Lord God in Heaven▪ the fountain of all pureness, that he hath purified him. So still he hath a hatred against sin, denieth himself cast forth all, self-love Yea absolutly given over unto God in his will, with all he hath in the innermost of his Soul & body. Then he begins to live first of all accordingly, & the Image of God is to be renewed again. For like as in a troubled water, that is moved & agitated by wind, a Man cannot see his image; so the image of God cannot be seen in a heart, moved by the Winds of this World, the lusts of the eyes, the lusts of the flesh, the pride of Life, and the hope upon perishing things, and troubled by the dirt of riches, covetousness and ambi∣tion. This is now the declaring of the man with two bodies and one Soul. God will be pleased, to kill in us all bad lusts, and stirr us up by his grace, that we might serve the living God in holiness and righteousness, according to his will and pleasure. FINIS.
