m2385 9653468 43919
TARTUFFE: OR THE French Puritan. A COMEDY, Lately Acted at the Theatre Royal. Written in French by MOLIERE; and rendered into English with much Addition and Advantage, By M. MEDBOURNE, Servant to His Royal Highness. Invidià est odium alienae felicitatis: Respectu superiorum, quia eis non aequatur; Respectu inferi rum, nè sibi aequentur; Respectu parium, quia sibi aequantur. LONDON: Printed by H. L. and R. B for James Magnus at the Posthouse in Russel-street near the Piazza in Covent Garden. M.DC.LXX.
To the Right Honourable, HENRY Lord HOWARD. OF NORFOLK, BARON of CASTLE-RISING. MY LORD, I Here Present your Honour with the Master-Piece of MOLIERE's Productions, or rather that of all French Comedy. What considerable Additionals I have made thereto, in order to its more plausible Ap∣pearance on the English Theatre, I leave to be observ'd by those who shall give themselves the trouble of comparing the several Editi∣ons of this Comedy. How successful it has prov'd in the Action, the advantages made by the Actors, and the satisfaction received by so many Audiences have sufficiently pro∣claim'd —
All talk at once, your house is Dover-Court. Dor. If— Per. Friend you're a waiting-woman, hold your peace; Good Mystress nimble chaps; you're very sauey To be thus peremptory 'mongst your betters. Dam. But — Per. But you're a sot, take that from me in short; 'Tis I that say it who am your Grandmother, And I have told your father a hundred times, That I foresaw your wicked inclinations; And that youd prove at last his real Torment. Marian. I beleeve— Per. You are his Sister, and wou'd seem discreet, I touch'd not you, whilst that I found you silent; But now I see you verifie the Proverb, The silent waters are most dangerous, Still Sows cate all the draught, I hate your manners. Elm. Pray Mother hear — Per. Daughter be not offended; I finde your conduct in each action bad; You ought t'have been th'example to 'em all, Such as their good deceased Mother was. Come y' are a Spendthrift, your gawdy dress afflicts me, Those who intend to please their husbands only, Will finde they have no need of half those Gugaws. Cleanthes. But Madam, after all. — Pern. Good Sir, her brother, I much esteem you, love you, and respect you, spoken in derifi▪ But truly Sir, were I as my Son's wife, I would entreat you to come here no more. You preach such rules and maximes to their life, Since they are such, as honest men abhorre. Sir, I am plain with you, and speak my minde, Dam. Mr. Tar-tuffe is happy without doubt. Pern. He is an honest man, wou'd you were like him; And I can scarce contain my passion, when I hear him censur d by such fools as you. Dam. Shall such an Ignis atuus as he Domineer over us in my Father's house, So that we cannot take any diversion, But what his canting worship first approves? Dorin. If we should hear his Maximes and believe 'em, This zealous Critick would in all controul us. Pern, What he controuls I'me sure is well design'd;
'Tis the true way to Heav'n that he would lead you: Therefore you ought to reverence and observe him. Dam. All that my Father, or your self can urge, Can ne're oblige me, but to think well of him; I should bely my heart should I say otherwise: After his Mode I could behave my self, And I foresee th' event, that with this Zealot I should obtain a reverend esteem. Dorin. Yes, yes, no doubt; but yet to us 'tis scandalous, For one unknown to make himself our Patron: A beggar, who at first came without shooes, And all his Cloaths were hardly worth a groat, To contradict us and to play the Master. Per. Ah mercy; O my life, it would be better If all were govern'd by his pious rules. Dorin. He passes for a Saint in your esteem, But you will finde he is all Hypocrite. Per. Why, there's a tongue. Dorin. I would not trust my self but on good warrant, Further with him then with his servant Lawrence: And he I me sure is flesh and blood. aside. Per. I'me ignorant what heart the servant has; But I dare justifie the Master's truth: You wou'd not wish him ill, nor yet revile him, But that he tells you of your faults so plainly: 'Tis against sin his heart is so provok'd, And the interest of Heaven that prompts him to't. Dorin. But what's the cause that over-nice of late, He will not suffer any to frequent us? In what do harmless visits offend Heav'n? Shall I expound this riddle freely to you? Faith, Madam, I beleeve he's jealous of you. to Elmirat Per. Let not your tongue out-run your wit, take heed; It is not only he that blames these visits: But 'tis the train of those that haunt your house, The many Coaches planted at your Gate, The rude Rencountre of so many Lacqueys, These, these make such a noise among your Neighbours, That I beleeve at last nothing shall pass They will not talk of: thus you pawn your credit. Cleanthes. Ah Madam, would you hinder a man from talking? That would be burdensom to humane life. If we should shun those you think idle toys, We must renounce our dearest friends sometimes▪
And though we should make full resolve to do it, Think you, you could impose a general silence? There is no Bulwark, Madam, against detraction. The best way is to slight all sottish talkers; And while we strive to live in Innocence, Let Libertines their humors entertain. lmir. Our Cousin Daphne, and her little husband, Perhaps may take a liberty of speech; And 'tis too often seen, whose actions merit The most severe reproof, soonest detract: They lie upon the catch, ready to seize, And lay fast hold on every little errour, That by misprision others guilty make, And spread the news abroad with an odd joy At their miscarriage; painted with false colours, They think to put a cheat upon the world; And under the feigned mask of a resemblance To some Intrigues of vertue, start a zeal Fit to disguise that envy which has forg'd. A charge of slander 'gainst the fair repute Of some they make a fair pretence unto; Only to make 'em partners in their crimes. Pern. All this discourse is little to our business: 'Tis known Oranta leads an holy life, Her care is all for heav'n; and I have heard How much she has condemn'd the Train frequents you Dorina. Th' example's wonderful, the Lady good: But yet her life's a little too severe: Thank Heav'n for that, 'tis Age has given her soul This ardent zeal; for in her youthful days She was expert in keeping of her body. Attracting the homages of many hearts, She knew to shew her skill in several shapes; And did enjoy her fair advantages: But finding that the sparkles of her eyes. Now downward fall, she would renounce the world, Envying any should enjoy those pleasures Which Age denies 'em, through their weak performance. Per. 'Tis well: these idle stories please your ears, And that's the reason I desert your house; My son did never yet a wiser thing, Then when he entertain'd this pious man, ☞ Whom for your benefit you ought to imitate. the old woman coughs. Dor. Would you two Saints were bound to live together;
Per. 'Twould be no little comfort to our family. aside Your balls, your masks, your complemental visits, Are all th' inventions of some evil spirit, Where one can never hear a pious word; They are foolish, idle, sinful Songs and Tales, At which our Neighbour oft is scandaliz'd, As a good Brother said the other day, Truly it is the Tower of Babylon, Where giddy-brain'd phantasticks waste their time. But to the point. Flipote laughs at Pernelle. She sees Look, I beseech you, there's one snears already. Oh how my spirit boils! I say no more, For now I'me hindred to declare my thoughts. O! Impudence. laughs agen. Take that bold Gossip, and learn to mend your manners. Go on you baggage, go. Exeunt all but pushes her before her. SCEN. II. Cleanthes. Dorina. Clean. I will not follow, For fear she should begin another quarrel; Alas! good woman. Dorin. Truly 'tis great pity She does not hear the Character you give her, Such an expression to her face had pleas'd her. She thinks she's now at Age to wear that name. Cleanth. How hot she was upon us? strangely concern'd, Wrapt up to the third Region for her Tartuffe. Dorin. All this is nothing in comparison Of her dear son, he was a gallant man: And show'd his courage in his Prince's service; But e're since Tartuffe came to live among us, He is so chang'd his friends can hardly know him; He calls him brother, loves him as himself; Prefers him 'bove his Mother, Son, Wife, Daughter; The only Confident of all his secrets: Whom he does cherish and embrace 'bove measure; No man can be more tender of a Mystress: He is always plac't at th' upper end o'th' Table, Where he devours more meat then half a dozen. Cleant. Is't possible he should be thus besotted? His every sentence passes for an Oracle.
Nor do's this Fox want skill to act his part, And though we're many keeps us all in awe, Cries down our patches, visors, pendants, curle SCEN. III. Elmira, Mariana, Dami Elmir. 'Tis well you did not go along with us, To hear the strange discourse we had at door; I spi'd my husband though he saw not me; But I'le go up, and there attend his coming. Cleanth. I'le wait him here below, but not to stay him, For all my business is but a Good-morrow. Exit Elmira. Dam. My Sisters wedding does employ his thoughts, And I suspect that Tartuffe does oppose it, And that he has prevail'd another way To stop this Marriage 'gainst my Int'rest: But if my Sister's Flame equals Valere's, The Sister of my friend shall be my wife, And if— Exit Damis. Dorin. He comes. SCEN. IV. Orgon. Cleanthes. Dorina. Org. Oh Brother! a good morrow. Clean. I was just going, brother; y' are welcom home: What, looks the Countrey pleasant yet or no? Org. Dorina—[brother, set me entreat your stay: Permit me a little to take off my care, In being satisfi'd how we all do] Have all things hapned well these two days past? How have you spent your time? are you all well? Dorin. My Mystress t'other day was very sick O'th' feaver, and the head-ake; Cruel pains. Org. But how fares Tartuffe? Dorin. Tartuffe; wondrous well. He's fresh and fair, always a good stomack. Org. Alas! poor man. Dor. At night she was indispos'd,
And did not ch one bit at Supper Sir, Alas! you know the head-ake's a sad pain, Org. But how did Tartuffe? Dorin. He sup'd, Sir, by himself, And most devoutly eat up two Partridges, After a hash of half a leg of mutton. Org. Alas! poor man! Dor. But my poor Mystris, Sir, was so afflicted, She could not take a moments rest all night: The violent heat o'th' feaver kept her waking. We sat up with her till 'twas almost day. Org. And how did my poor Tartuffe then all night? Dor. As soon as he had sup'd he fell asleep, And from the Table he went strait to bed, Where without trouble on a good feather-bed, He took the pains to sleep till the next day. Org. Ah! poor man! Dor. At last, Sir, when our reasons had prevail'd, She did resolve she'd venture to be blooded, And upon that she presently found ease. Orgon. And what became of Tartuffe all this while? Dor. Alas Sir! he, like a couragious man, To fortifie his soul against all danger, And to repair the blood my Mystress lost, Drank to his breakfast four great boules of wine. Orgon. Alas! poor man! Dor: Sir, to be short they both are very well, And I am going now to tell my Mystress, The Joy that you express for his good health. Enter Laurence, meets her. Lau. One word, sweet Mystress, with you, ben't afraid; What I shall say shall be for your advantage. Dor. If you have any thing to tell me Laurence; Meet me an hour hence I'le hear your Errand. Exeunt severally. SCEN. V. Orgon. Cleanthes. Clean. Brother, she flouts you to your very teeth; And yet [without design to make you angry] I tell you freely that 'tis but justice. Is't possible this man should so inchaunt you,
That you forget every concern but him? And having in your house repair'd his Misery To come to such a height— Org. Hold brother, hold! You do not know the man you talk of throughly. Clean. Not know him? be it so, cause you will have it. Yet to be short I'le tell you what he may be — Org. Brother, you would be charm'd with his Acquaintan And your astonishments would find no end. He is a man that hates—a man—a man— Who lives like him will feel a profound peace, And as a Dung-hill estimate this world: I'me wholly chang'd my self, by's conversation: 'Tis he has taught me to disclaim my affections; To disingage my self from the world's friendship. I could see Mother, Children, Brother and Wife die, And with as little care as that comes to. Fillips Clean. But such resentments are not humane, brother. Org. Had you but seen him as I found him first, His humble posture would have won your love: Once at's devotion, he did plant himself, VVith such a pious Aspect right against me, Darting his prayers to heav'n with such a zeal, As did attract the eyes of all the Church, And lowly prostrate on the ground did kiss it: VVhat else he did was suitable to that: And at my coming forth he got before me, On purpose to present me holy-water: Inform'd by his Man who did him imitate, I found that he was much necessitated, I made him presents, still he modestly VVould make a retribution of some part, Telling me 'twas too much, too much by half! And that he did no way deserve my pity: But when I did refuse the part return'd, Before my face he gave it to the poor; A Charity prodigious in my eyes. Heav'n surely made me take him to my house, And since that time methinks all things have prosper'd, I see the diligent care he takes of me; Nay, of my wife, and therein of my honour; He gives me notice of the designes of all, And is six times more vigilant then my self, You can't imagine how his zeal aspires:
Each frivolous action he accounts a sin, And 's scandaliz'd at the least accident: As once at 's prayers he chanc'd to catch a Flea, And griev'd because his passion made him kill it. Clean. Confound him, Brother; sure you are bewitch'd That thus you mock your self in your discourse: To what will all this folly now pretend? Org. Brother, you talk just like a Libertine. I know you are ingenious enough: But I much fear the freedom that you take Will draw you into inconvenience. Clean. This still is like your ordinary discourse; You would have others be as blind as you. The good and upright men we ought to trace, Whose Zele lies not in supercilious looks. There's a vast difference, Brother; though you seem Between devotion and hypocrifie To give 'em both one character. You equal cunning with sincerity, And rank with sober truth a false appearance. Esteem a shadow as you would the substance, And prize false money as you do the good. Most part of men are very strangely made, You scarce can find them in their natural dress: The bounds of reason are too narrow for 'em. In every model they exceed their limit; And commonly they spoil the noblest things In over-doing by fond affectation. Thus, Brother, I have freely spoke my mind. Org. Sir, without doubt you are a Reverend Doctor: Your head contains the knowledge of the world; You are the onely wise and learned man; An Oracle, the Cato of our age. And all men else are Sots compar'd with you. Clean. Sir, I pretend no Doctorship nor Reverence. Nor does my head contain such heaps of knowledge. But in a word, thus much I understand, How to discover real truth from falshood. And as I prize no sort of Hero's more Than those I find are really devout; Nothing i'th' world more noble nor more fair, Than th' holy fervour of a sincere Zele. So, on the contrary, nothing is more odious, Than are the plastered out sides of a false one.
Mere Mountabanks of piety, devout in publick▪ Whose seeming holy and deceitful faces Do take the freedom boldly to abuse What amongst Mortals is most sacred held; Who sacrifice their souls to Interest, Making Religion a mere merchandise; Thinking to gain a credit and esteem By casting up seducing eyes to Heaven. Such people make their fortunes here below, By that false ardour they to Heaven show: Who in their raptures and strong counterfeits Even to the Courtiers preach retirement They can conform their Zele unto their Vice, Revengeful, faithless, full of artifice. And to disguise themselves cover their pride With the pretended Interest of Heaven; Being more dangerous in their vehement fits, Appearing in those garbs we reverence: And in their passion [to whom all submit.] Assassinate us with an holy sword. ☞ Org. Your judgment, Brother, 's biss'd by your passion. You do not love professours of the truth. Clean. We see too many bearing this false stamp. But honest hearts desire honest things. This age does offer many to our eyes, Whose glorious paterns we may safely follow. Who are no boasters of their vertuous lives. Such loathed pride in them cannot be seen: But their devotion's tractable and plain. They will not censure any others errours; Knowing that such corrections smell of folly, Leaving that verbal folly unto others. 'Tis by their actions they reprove our faults. What but resembles sin harbours not there; Their souls incline to iudge the best of others, They follow no Intrigues, hold no Caball; And their chief care is onely to live well. They never re incens'd against a sinner: 'Tis against sin that they apply their hate. They ne'r espouse Heavens quarrel with a Zele To aggravate both crime and punishment. Such merit love that thus demean themselves, And are th' examples I propose to you. To say the truth, your Man's not of their fashion:
But your strong faith does idolize his Zele. 'Tis a false light that dazles thus your eyes. Org. O Providence! how does my patience reel? Well, have you done? have you said all, or no? Clean. Yes. Org. Your servant, Sir. Offers to go. Clean. Stay, Brother; by your favour one word more. Let's lay aside this talk. You know Valere Has had your word to be your Son in law. Org. Yes. Clean. You have appointed too the Wedding day. Org. 'Tis ver true. Clean. Why do you thus defer it? Org. I do not know. Clean. Is your mind altered, Brother? Org. Perhaps it is. Clean. Will you break your word? Org. I do not tell you that. Clean. No obstacle (I hope) can so prevail To make you break your plighted promise sure. Org. According as it happens. Clean. Does one word, Sir, require so much cunning? I came from Valere, Brother, now on purpose. Org. Heaven be prais'd! Clean. What answer shall I make him? Org. E'en what you please, Sir. Clean. 'Tis very fit, Sir, he should know your mind▪ Pray speak your resolution. Org. Sir, to do What Heaven would have. Clean. But pray, Sir, speak; He has your promise, will you keep't or no▪ Org. Farewell. Exit. Clean. The love I hear him makes me fear his fate, And binds me too to tell him what I hate. Exit. ☞ Laurence and Dorina meet. Laur. I'm here within the hour she said she'd meet me. Oh! how I long t' engage — but see, she's here Sweet Mistress Dorina, and how do you? you see that How I'm from my Master; I am not so demure, But that I can lay aside my borrow'd shape, And shew my pr self.
Dorin. What's this Preamble to that you desir'd to speak With me about? Laur. What, are you so hot upon the scent that you Will not hear me out; have but a little patience, I'le be as good as my word. Dorin. I never question'd your honesty, good Laurence, I know a man of your great zeal, that serves So pious a Master, cannot tread awry. Laur. Nay, Mrs. Dorina don't flout me; I can Put on my visor again if that please you better. Dorin. No Laurence, I protest I'me serious; I take thee for an honest fellow, and believe You are true-hearted. Laur. Faith so I am; and if you'll hearken to me, I'le open all my secrets to you. Dorin. Hold me no longer in Suspence, good Lawrence; tell me what you have to say in earnest. Laur. Why this: during that most happy time wherein my Master and my self receiv'd our entertainment first In Orgon's house. I have observ'd a modesty in your looks, And such a pleasant raillery in your speech, as have Attracted all my Faculties to become your Votaries. Nor have my senses enjoy'd their usual repose; Where're I am at Church, or with my Master, Dorina still appears to all my thoughts: neither Can pennance or discipline force her from me. Dor. Nay, Laurence, if this be all your Errand, Fare you well. Dorina offers to go; Laurence stays her. Lau. Nay, sweet Dorina stay. Think you I am Not flesh and blood as well as you, since I first Knew what 'twas to write man, I had an Inclination, at Itch at— Dor. At what? Lau. Nay, you're so hasty, But to the point, as Tartuffe says. Dor. How now Laurence; what plain Tartuffe? Lau. Plain Tartuffe! why what would you have me Call him? 'tis true he is my Master, but— Dor. But what? Nay Laurence prithee speak. Lau. No, no, Mrs. Dorina, soft and faire; If I should tell you all at once you'd slight me. Dor. No, seriously I will not. Lau. How should I dare believe you in that, When upon my very first speech, you wee
So ready to flie away. Dorin. aside. Here's something more may be drawn from this Fellow then yet I am aware of, therefore I must Humour him a little. No truly, Laurence, I only made A pretence of going, led by Modesty, You being the first that e're made love to me, But since I hope you will prove real I'm content To hear you further. Lau. Now art thou far more beautiful and glorious Then are those Saints and Angels my Master so much Talks of, and thou shalt be the Load-star of all my Actions, And the Saint to whom my best of Services shall Be devoted: Now, now methinks the spirit grows Too weak: yea, and the flesh grows strong: My sweet Dorina. offers to kiss her, she puts him by. Dor. Nay fye, Laurence.He offers agen. Nay then, stand off: who would have Thought a man of your humble profession, Had been so metalsome? and seriously Unless you give me satisfaction for this affront, I'le put you to a penance you'll not like of. Within: Tartuffe, Laurence! Laurence! Laur. Pardon me, sweet Dorina.Tartuffe calls within Laurence! Laurence! Alas, my Master calls, I must go in And practice all demureness, farewel till Next we meet. Exit Laurence. Enters with Tartuffe as to Church. Enter Tartuffe, and passes over the stage in a demure posture With b oks as going to Church. Tar. Come Laurence, you neglect your prayers too much. Dorin. Thus far 'tis well: And from hence happily I may extract. Dorina smiles at them. Somewhat for my young Mystriss's advantage. Her father's grown so extravigantly fond Of this same Tartuffe, that I much fear the isse His Intentions. But by this means I'le finde out his design, And his fond humors strive t' out wit by mine. Exit.
ACT. II. SCEN. I. Orgon. Mariana. Org. MAriana. Mar. Sir. Orgon looks in the Apartment. Org. Come hither, Child, I have a secret for you. Mar. Pray what d' you look for, Sir? Org. My Child, I'm searching If any may be there that can o'r-hear us. Looks in agen. So now we're well: Mariana, I've observ'd, That from thine Infancy thou hast been meek, And an obedient child, for which I love thee; Mar. I stand indebted for your great affection. Org. 'Tis well said, Child, and more to merit it. You ought to have a care still to content me. Mar. In that I place my highest glory, Sir. Org. Well said, my Chick; what thinkst thou then of Tartuffe? Mar. Who, I Sir? Org. You? take heed. Child, how you answer. Mar. Alas, Sir! I'll say any thing you'd have me. Org. 'Tis wisely said; tell me then, my dear Child, If any signal merit in his person Has won upon thy heart; and, if it please thee, To see him by my choice preferr'd thy Husband. Mar. Ah me! She retires surpriz'd. Org. What's the matter? Mar. Please you, Sir. Org. What? Mar. Am I surpriz'd? Org. How? Mar. Who would you have me say has won my heart? What prodigy is that you'd have to please me? Whom would your choice offer me as an Husband? Org. Tartuffe. Mar. I'le swear he has no influence here. Points to her breast. Why would you have me speak such an imposture?
Org. But I will have it prove a verity; It is enough for you that he's my choice. Mar. Pray father, what— Org. Yes Daughter, I pretend To unite him to our family, by Marriage; I am resolv d that He shall be your Husband, And as I have a pow'r.— Spies Dorina at the Entry. SCEN. II. Dorina. Orgon. Mariana. What do you there? to Dorina. Your Curiosity is very strong, How durst you thus invade my privacy? Dor. I know not whether 'tis a false report, Or some conjecture, or a hit of chance, But of this Marriage I have heard some inkling, And I concluded twas but a meer fiction. Org. Then 't seems to you a thing incredible? Dor. So much incredible it seems indeed, That though you swear it Sir, I le not believe you. Org. I know the way to make you change your faith, Dor. Yes, yes, you tell us, Sir, a pleasant story. Org. I tell you justly what you'll quickly finde. Dor. You're merry Sir. Org. Daughter, I do not jest. Dor. All this is raillery, Madam, do'nt believe him. Org. I tell you— Dor. Nay Sir, you'll have enough to do. We do'nt believe you. Org. Do not provoke me hussy. Dor. The worst is yours, Sir, if it should be true, The world will say, Can a wise man that has A comely beard i'th' middle of his face Like him, be such a fool for to— Org. I prithee do not tempt me thus to anger; You've taken divers priviledges here, Which do not please me, friend, I tell you so. Dor. Let's talk without offence, Sir, I beseech you. What was your promise to Valere? a false one? Your Daughter Sir's not fit for such a Saint, He has Employments proper for his thoughts; Did Providence thus amply bless you Sir; And make you Master of such large Revenues,
To chuse a beggar for your son-in-law? Org. That does not any way concern you. Know for that cause we owe him reverence; No doubt his Misery comes not from desert, Fortune and vertue always are at odds. And that's the cause he should be priz'd bove greatness, Since that he suffer'd loss of his estate By the small care he took of temp'ral things, And strong appliance made to those eternal, But with my succour I may be a means, To settle him in his estate agen, His Titles in the Countrey are firm, And he s a Gentleman I can assure you. Dorin. Yes Sir, we know he tells you so, this boast Do's not at all become his piety, Whoe're pretends an innocent holy life, Ought not to vaunt his name, nor his Extraction, The humble process of Devotion, Can ill. digest Ambition's haughty phrase, But this discourse offends you; Could you without remorse possess this fellow, With such a precious Jewel as your Daughter? You ought Sir to consider decencies, And to prevent the sequels of this union. You run the hazard of your Daughter's virtue, The only way to keep her name from spot, Depends upon the Harmony that should Attend the freedom of united Lovers, Who only by their Parents will do wed, Think it no crime to graft their husbands head. 'Tis a great difficulty to live faithful, But especially with one of such a humour, Who gives his daughter to a man she loaths, Stands bound to Heaven for any fault she acts, Think to what perils your designs will bring you. Or. What yet no end? my patience is quite tir'd; It seems that I must come to learn of you. Dor. You will not do amiss to take my counsel. To his Daughter. Org. Do not reflect on any of these stories, I am your father, and I know your wants. I gave my word to Valere he should have you, But besides play, I'm told he is inclin'd, [And I suspect't] to be a Libertine: I have observ'd, he does not go to Church.
Dor. Would you oblige him be preeise at houres, Like such who go a purpose to be seen. Org. I need not your advice about this business. To Dorina. The other Match is pleasing too to Heaven.— To Mar. Which is true riches beyond all comparison. Hymen will here all your desires complete, Your life will be all sweetness and all pleasure; Together you will live in innocence, Like little children, or as Turtle Doves. Debate will finde no harbour, 'twixt you two, And you may do with him e'en as you please. Dor. You'll make him but an Oph, as Nature made him. Org. How now? what's this discourse? Dor. He looks like one. Dor. I speak Sir, only for your interest. Still as he speaks she interrupts. Org. You are too careful Mrs. Pert, be gone. Dor. Sir, if I did not love you.— Org. I would not have you— Dor. Sir, I will love you whether you will or no. Org. Ah— Dor. Your Honour's dear to me, I suffer in it, To see you sacrific't to every trifle, Org. I prithee peace. Dor. My Conscience wo'nt permit, That I should let you make such an Alliance. Org. Be silent Serpent, thy affrontive tongue— Dor. Let not your passion thus transport you, Sir. Org. Your idleness has so enrag'd my choller, That now I am resolv'd to silence you. Dor. Well: though I say nothing, I'le not think the less. Org. Think if thou wilt, but make it not thy business. Dorina seems to stand silently. To speak to me, when—so;Turning to Mar. like a wise man I have deliberately weigh'd every thing. Dor. What a vexation s this I must not speak? He turns to Dorina, stands upright and silent, and then turns to Mariana. Org. Though Tartuffe, Daughter, be no great Gallant, Yet he is Master of those excellent parts— Dor. A goodly picture, Sir, indeed to look on. Org. If you can harbour any sympathy For all his other Gifts. He turns before her, and looks upon her with his arms across. Dor. She's well holp up. If I were in her place, I'de shew you quickly, I'de not be forc'd to marry any body; And he should finde after the  days,
A woman always has her vengeance ready, Org. You take no notice then of what I say? To Dorina steruly. Dor. Why do you fret Sir, I say nothing to you. Org. Who do you talk to then? Dor. E'en to my self, Sir. Org. 'Tis well: now to reward her Insolence. aside. I will surprize her with a cuff. o'th' ear. He puts himself into a posture to give her a blow o'th' face. And Dorina at each glance of his eye stands demurely silent. Daughter, you ought for to approve my Intention, And to believe the Husband—I've elected— Why don't you speak? Dor. I can say nothing to you. Org. One little word. To Mariana. Dor. It does not please me, Sir. Org. I shall box you Hussy. To Dorina at a distance. Dor. A fool would take it faith.— Org. Come child, you ought to be obedient to me; Refer your self entirely to my choice. Dor. I scorn to marry such a Boobey, Sir. Runs away till he's gone off, Org. strikes at her and mis∣ses her. Org. Oh that's a plague wench that waits upon you; She urges me to passion and to sin; In rage. I cannot live with her, nor can I utter What I intended, I am so enrag'd. Her insolent discourse has fir'd my thoughts That I must take the Aire to cool my self. Exit. SCEN. III. Dorina, Mariana. Dor. Pray tell me truly, have you lost your tongue, And in this business must I act your part? That you could hear propos'd you such a project Without one word of answer or resentment. Mar. What should I do against a f ther's pow'r? Dor. What you are bound to do 'gainst such Proposals Mar. What's that? Dor. Why freely to declare your inward thoughts, As that your heart can't love by others liking: How that you marry for your self, not him, And since in this affair 'tis your concern, 'Tis you, not him, the Husband ought to please, Since Tartuffe is so charming in his eyes,
Let his own heart become his sacrifice. Mar. All this and more I justly might aver; But knowing a father's pow's so absolute, My courage fails me, I can answer nothing. Dor. Let us dispute it; Valere has made love to you; Pray tell me do you love him, I or no? Mar. Toward's my love thy injustice is too great; You should not ask that question, my Dorina! Have I not told thee one hundred times my heart? Thou know'st how strong my passion for him is. Dor. How should I know your tongue and heart agree? Or that those flames are real you pretend? Mar. You injure me Dorina, thus to doubt me; And my resentments have bin made too publick. Dor. In short, you love him then? Mar. Dorina, strangely. Dor. And in appearance he loves you so too. Mar. I do beneve he does. Dor. And both desire to be joyn'd in Marriage; ha? Mar. I think it seriously, my dear Dorina. Dor. And what do you resolve about this Union? Mar. To die Dorina, rather then be forc'd Dor. 'Tis well; I did not dream of such a course: Death is a certain way to disingage you; The remedy is wonderful! I'm ma To hear you use such paltry lly language. Mar. What spirit, my Dorina, does possess thee, That thou hast no compassion of my grief? Dor. I cannot pity those that tell sad tales, Whom I have found so meek on such occasions. Mar. What would'st thon have me do if I am timorous? Dor. Love in the heart requires constancy. Mar. Do not I keep it for my dear Valere? And ought not he t'obtain me from my father? Dor. But if your father be such a blind Buzzard, To be thus strangely taken with Tartuffe; And to break off that Union first design'd, The fault c 't be imputed to your Lover. Mar. Dost think it wou'd consist with Modesly, To own my Flames, and shew my heart's concern For my Valere? and on the contrary, T'express the real hate I have for Tartuffe? Will it not wrong the vertue of our Sex, Nor prejudice a Daughter' duty neither?
If I thought not, I'de tell it all the world. Give me thy counsel, wou'dst thou have me do this? Dor. No, no, I wou'd have nothing; I see you have An inclination to be Tartuff's wife; And I should do you injury to disswade you; 'Tis no small happiness to be his bed-fellow. He is a man famous in's Reputation, Of a good person, Noble Parentage: You'll live too happily with such a husband. Mar. Oh Heaven! Dor. What Joy will then possess your soul, To see your self the wife of such a Saint? Mar. Prithee leave off this strange discourse of thin. And open me a way t'avoid this Marriage. Speak, I am silent, ready to obey. Dor. No, no, a Daughter must obey her father, Though he shu'd chuse a Monkey for her Husband? Your Fortune's very good, why d'ye complain? You shall ride down and see his Mannor-house, Which you shall finde replete with goods and servants, And all his Kindred waiting t'entertain you; And shall be visited at your first coming, By Mrs. Mayor, and Mrs. Constable; Nay more, be-honour'd with a groaning Chair, And in the Holy-days be nobly treated With charming Bag-Pipes, and the Morris dancers; And at the Countrey-Faits with Puppet-shows; And all this while your Husband — Mar. Ah! you kill me! Give me some succour rather by thy counsel. Dor. Your servant Madam—. offers to go away. Mar. Ah Dorina! stay.!— Dor. All this must happen for your punishment. Mar. Nay, prithee Girle. Dor. No. Mar. If I declare my vows— Dor. No, Tartuffe's your man, you must be silent. Mar. You know that I have always trusted thee, Do me— Dor. No, no; you shall be Tar-tuf-fy-fi'd. Mar. Well: since my evil fortune cannot move thee, I prithee leave me now to my despair; From that my heart shall borrow its assistance; I know th'infallible Cure of misery. offers to go in haste.
Dor. Stay, stay, Madam, I'le lay aside my Anger, And spite of it will take some pity on you. Mar. Rather then to this Torture be expos'd, I'le chuse, Dorina, a most sudden death. Dor. Do not torment your self, for what we can Hinder with ease, and if I'm not mistaken, I have a plot will break the whole design— But hold, here comes Valere, your Lover Madam. SCEN. IV. Valere, Mariana, Dorina. Val. Madam, just now strange news attaqu'd my eare, Before to me unknown, and which I doubt May be too pleasing to you. Mar. Pray what is't? Val. That you must have Tartuffe to be your husband. Mar, 'Tis very true, such a design my father has in's head. Val. Your father, Madam! Mar. Yes Sir, my Father has quite chang'd his minde, And came a purpose to propose it to me. Val. But are you serious? Mar. Yes in good truth I am; And for this Marriage highly he declares. Val. And what wou'd you in this affair design? Speak Madam. Mar. I can't tell. Val. The Answer's modest, You cannot tell? Mar. No. Val. No? Mar. What wou'd you counsel me? Val. I counsel you to take him for a husband. Mar. Is that your Counsel Sir? Val. Yes. Mar. But do you mean so? Val. Yes. The Choice is noble, you ought to listen to't. Mar. 'Tis well; I shall receive your Counsel Sir. Val. 'Twill not pain you much to follow it. Mar. Not quite so much as you have felt to give it. Val. I gave't a purpose, Madam, for to please you.
Mar. And to please you I shall accept it, Sir. Dor. 'Tis pleasant to observe how they're entangl'd. Val. Madam, is this your love! oh fickle sex! Can you forget— Mar. Nay, do not speak of't, Sir, You frankly said, I ought to listen to't. And since he is presented by my father, I do declare that I pretend t' accept him, Since you have given me this wholesom Counsel. Val. Do not excuse your self with my Advice; Your resolutions were already made, You catch at every frivolous pretension, For an authority to break you word. Mar. 'Tis true, and you say well. Val. And I do think, You never had a rea I passion for me. Mar. Be't so; y' have permission Sir to think. Val. Yes, I've permission; but I'le prevent the like design. Mar. I do not doubt it; those ardours that excite True merit— Val. Mariana, do not talk on't; I have but little, and you have prov'd it now; But tis some comfort to me, Tha without shame they can repair my loss. Mar. The loss is little since by this one change, You can so easily find a reparation. Val. I will do what I can you may believe it; Our glory is engag'd to make't our business, VVhich though we cannot compass, we should feign it. Mar. Sir, this resentment's generous and noble. Val. 'Tis well, and every one ought to approve it. How between love and passion am I split? Must I then see you clos'd in others armes? Not caring for that heart you have enslav'd Mar. All my designs require the contrary, For I cou'd wish the Marriage-knot were ty'd, So to unite our pre-engaged hearts. Val. But coud you wish it? Mar. Yes. Val These your insulting trials are too much; Madam farewel. He makes a step forward, and returns. Mar. 'Tis well done, Sir. Val. At least remember Madam, that 'tis you
Constrain my heart to this extremity. Mar. Yes. Val. And that design my heart has now conceiv'd. Is but to follow your example. Mar. To my example be it. Val. Enough, From this time forward, I'm no more your servant. Offers to go. Mar. So much the better. Val. Look Madam; 'tis for ever. Comes back. Mar. In good time Sir. Val. Ah me! [Goes away, and at the door looks back and returns. Mar. Return'd so soon, pray what's the matter Sir? Val. Did you call me Madam? Mar. I call you, sure you dream. Val. Then I pursue my Journey. Farewel for ever Madam. Mar. Sir, farewel. Dor. Now do I think By this extravigance you both ha' lost your wits; I let you all this while pickeer on purpose, To see to what effect 'twou'd come at last, And here's a fair event, hold, hold, Valere. She takes him by the arms, he seems to make a great resistane. Val. VVhat wou'dst thou have, Dorina? Dor. Sir, come back. Val. No, no, despite o'rewhelms me. Pray do not hinder what she'd have me do. Dor. Stay.—I request you. Val. No: thou seest it is resolv'd. Dor. What is? Mar My fight offends him, my presence drives him hence; I should do well to leave the place to him. She goes; Dor. leaves Valere, and follows Mariana. Dor. Whither d' you run? Mar. Prithee Dorina leave me. Dor. Madam, you must come back, Mar. No, no, Dorina, in vain thou dost detain me, Val. I see my face is but a torment to her, And therfore I resolve to give her freedom. Dorina holds Mariana by the hand and runs after Valere. Dor. Agen, sure O my conscience you are Both bewitch'd. Leave off this folly, and come hither both. Draws 'em both together Val. What's thy design, Dorina? Mar. What dost thou mean to do? Dor. E'en put you both together, and make you friends. Are you both mad to be thus whimsical?
Val. Did you not hear her what she said Dorina? Dor. As sure as can be, you are both distracted. Mar. Did not you see how ill he treated me? Dor. Forbear, good Madam, Sir, her chiefest care Is to preserve you hers: I am her witness. To Valere And he love only you; upon my life, To Mariana. His envie, Madm, tends to be your Husband. Mar. Why did he give me then such wicked counsel? Val. Why did she ask it then on such a subject? Dor. More folly yet? come lend me each a hand; Nay, dally not, dispatch. Valere gives his hand. Val. Well, to what end? Dor. Come, now for yours.Mariana gives hers after some seeming un¦w llingness O fain I would but loth I am. Mar. What will all this come to? Dor. Advance, advance; come quickly, You love much better then you think for both. Val. Nay, Mariana, what you do, do chearfully. Dor. To say the truth, Lovers are full of frolicks. Mariana smiles at Valere who spies her. Val. Madam, have I not reason to complain? And not to flatter, you were much unkind In taking pleasure to afflict me thus. Mar. But are not you the most ungrateful man— Dor. No more of this at present, let's contrive And think of putting by this horrid match. Mar. Think on some project we may put in practice. Dor. Come let us cast our plots in several formes; Your father's fond resolves shall never daunt you: If you think fit to follow my advice: For you 'twere better, to's extravigance, To lend the sweet appearance of consent, In case of an Alarm; that with more ease You may propose a longer day of marriage. By time we purchase remedy for all, Somtimes you may pretend you are not well; A sudden Sickness will procure delays. Another while may apprehend bad Omens; As that you met by chance with a dead man; Threw down the Salt, or dreamt of muddy waters; But if all these together will not do, One comfort yet remains, that all the world Can ne're oblige you, if you say not yes. But above other things I think if fitting That now you part, lest you be seen together. Go, and delay not, Master, all your friends. To Valere.
To make him keep the promise that he made you: While we procure his brother to our side, And to our party joyn the Mother-in-law. So fare you well. Val. What force soever we can now prepare; In you is all my hope, for you my care. To Mariana Mar. I cannot answer for a father's will; But be assur'd I am my Valere's still. To Valere. Val. How I'm o'rewhelm'd with joy? and now I dare— Dor. Lovers are never weary of discourse: Go, get you gone, I say. Valere goes a step and returns. Val. Well, to conclude— Dor. No more of this discourse. Here part, dear friends, and banish all your fears; Go, go, divide: courage till our next meeting. Separates 'em, and pushes them off at severnl doors. Exeunt. ☞ Lord, what a coil is here! and now they're gone. Unless I play my part 'twill come to nothing. I have a crochet in my head that may, If it hit right, prevent much future trouble: Laurence, this Tartuffe's Man, pretends to me A kindness more then ordinary: I by him, Under pretence of yielding to his amours, Must dive into the secrets of his master; And if I can but find what I suspect, 'Tis not his Zealous port shall bear him out. I hug my self i'th' phansie; and see here (As if the Fates, propitious to my care T'effect my honest projects, did decree't) Laurence appears. I'le feign not to have seen him. She offers to go. SCEN. V. Enter Laurence. Laur. Nay, sweet Dorina, what makes you haste away so fast? Did my approach affright you? Dor. No indeed, Laurence; but I was seriously going About a little business, and did not see you. Laur. Have you consider'd of what I imparted to you At our last meeting? Dor. I have. Laur. And will your phansie prompt you to hearken to my suit? Dor. Laurence, I thought You had seen no difference of Sex; and this has made Me sparing in receiving your addresses: and, I confess, My jocose humour wou'd not agree with your austere Retirements. But if you will promise—
Laur. Hold, dear Dorina; if this be all you scruple at, I'le satifie you quickly: for by this light I am no More what I appear, then i — Dor. Who? prethee, Loll, tell me. Laur. My master. Dor. Why does thy master counterfeit? Laur. Nay, Dorina, too much of onething 's good for nothing. You desire too fast, that shall be the work of another time: I'le onely now give you an account of my self. Know then, Though I am Tartuff's Man, and receive wages of him, His agreement with my friends was otherwise; but since he Has got me fast, he uses me at his pleasure. I perceiving This, and to creep into his favour, pretended by his sanctity To be a Convert, and took upon me the humour you have Seen: and by this means have won so much upon him, That I am his Secretary, the Repository of his privacies, and What not? and (I must tell you) among all his acquaintance Have an Interest. Dor. But, Laurence, all this concerns me nothing; this Interest That you boast of, is the main thing I fear: the austerity Of your life, I doubt, will ne'r bear with my merry disposition. Laur. For that, Dorina, trouble not your self; I see you know me not; for if you did, You'd say that your temper and mine were both Modell'd alike; for I can be as blithe. And frolicksom as the most wanton Courtier. [Sings with A tick postures, and after dancs a Jg. SONG. Spend not thy time in vain, my Love, But answer my desires: Be bucksom, blithe, my pretty Dove, Meet me with qual fires. For if thou longer dost delay; Thy beauties soon will fade thee: In honour thou art bound to pay Those dibis which Nature made thee. Since my designs are fuir and just, How canst thou well deny me? In faithful Laurence thou mayst trust, Then come and lie down by me. This is a touch to shew you that I can—
Dor. Yea marry, this is somewhat like; I perceive there May be some hopes in the matter: but, Laurence, prethee Laurence, tell me one thing; does your master intend to marry With my mistress? Laur. 'Tis so believ'd: nay Orgon himself gives credit to it; But my master— Dor. What does thy master, sweet Laurence? Laur. Why, Faith he has a further reach then marriage, Though perhaps he may seem to drive that nail too: He finds Orgon inclin'd to him, and he's resolv'd to Work upon his good nature: besides, Elmira 's fair, And of an affable deportment: but that's not all; When next we meet I may perchance give you further Intelligence: but (good Dorina) don't betray me; let Not my good will to thee be repay'd with treachery. I Know such courteous sweetness can carry no deceit. Let Me before I go kiss thy fair hand; stich favour Will encourage me to undertake the greatest hazards. Farewell, Dorina.He goes a little away, turning back says, Once agen farewell. Exit. Dor. So he is gone, and I'le no longer stay, But with this news fly, fly, to avoid delay. Exit. ACT. III. SCEN. I. Damis, Dorina. Dam. LEt horrour and despair attend my destiny, Let me be ever branded for a Coward, If the respect or pow'r of any hinder The execution of my resolv'd design. Dor. Pray moderate the extravagance of your p ssion: Your father has but simply said, not done. Things are propos'd before they're executed: The project is a great way off the action. Dam. I must contrive to stop their base complot By whisp'ring a word i'th' Zealot's ear. Dor. No, leave't to me; Softly and fair goes far. With him and with your fther in their fits Your mother is best able to prevail. She has some influence upon Tartuffe,
And he'll accomplish what she shall request, For I have observ'd him very sweet upon her. Dam. If that be true, it falls out luckily. Dor. Make your advantage of it to her Honour. Your Interest does oblige you to entreat her, To study all she can to break this marriage: And let her understand by your resentments Th' inevitable ruine of the family, If this design of theirs be e're accomplisht. I have prepar'd already,— Dam. Wou'd I cou'd come to speak with him, his man But even now deni'd me entrance to him; Told me he was at prayers. Dor. But I saw him since you, and then I'm sure He told me was just a coming down. Pray go your ways, and I'le attend him here; But hide you in the Closet by the Parlour. Dam. Why may not I be present at your meeting? Dor. No, we must be alone; go you where I direct you. Dam. I prithee let me stay; I will say nothing. Dor. No, no; I am acquainted with your humour; And 'tis the ready way to speak our business: Pray let me prosecute my own design. Dam. I'le promise you that I will shew no passion. Dor. What yet? you're very troublesome, he comes. Exit Damis. SCEN. II. Tartuffe, Laurence, Dorina. Tartuffe perceiving Dorina. Tart. Lay up my Hair-cloth and my discipline, And always pray to Heav'n t'enlighten you: If any come to visit me, say I'm gone To dissipate my Almes among the pris'ners. Exit Laurence. Dor. What affectation and blind zeal is this? Tart. What wou'dst thou? Dor. — I come— Tart Ah! the sweet Heav'ns! I pray you Before you speak to take this handkerchief. Pulls one out of his pocket. Dor. What for? Tart. To hide that tempting breast I can't behold; By such like Objects our poor souls are wounded;
And many sinful though ts they breed in us. Dor. It seems you'r very tender to temptation; Can flesh make such impression on your senses? I'm ignorant what heat has so inflam'd you, And feel not in my self such inclinations: Sir, I dare swear that I cou'd see you naked, Yet not be tempted for the matter neither. Tart. Pray mingle your discourse with modestie; Or else you'll make me quickly flie the place. Dor. No Sir, you shall not need, I must be gone, I have but two or three words to say to you; My Lady's coming strait into this Parlour, Where she desires your vertuous conversation. Tart. Alas! most willingly. Dor. How sweet he's on't? aside. I dare be bold that all I said is true. Tart. Will she come presently? Dor. I think I hear her Sir. Yes, 'tis her self in person, I must leave you. SCEN. III. Elmira, Tartuffe. Tart. May bounteous Heav'n always contribute health Both to your soul and body, vertuous Madam. And may the humble pray'rs of pious men Prevail to pull down blessings on you here. They seat themselves. Elm. I am indebted for your holy pray'rs. Come, let's set down, that we may talk a little. Tart. And how d'ye feel your self since your late sickness? Elm. Well, I thank Heav'n since my Feaver left me. Tart. I do confess my prayers were much too weak So suddenly to get this blessing for you; But I'le assure you I did ne're omit The object of your health in my devotions. Elm. Sir, I do fear, I did disturb your zeal. Tart. I cannot set too high esteem upon you, I would have giv'n my health to have purchas'd yours. Elm. Your charity methinks extends too far; Tart. I have done much less then you have merited. Elm. I have done much less then you have merited. Elm. I have some secret business with you, Sir. And I am very glad we are alone. Tart. I'm almost ravish d, Madam, with the joy
To find my self singly alone with you, It is a blessing I have beg'd of Heav'n, Without being ever granted till this hour. Elm. Sir, in this business that I shall request, You must be open-hearted, and hide nothing. Tart. I will not, Madam since I have th'occasion To open here before you my whole soul; And I do swear that all that I have said With so much passion 'gainst your Visitors, Did not proceed from hate, but love to you: Transported by a zeal that did constrain me By a pure motion— Elm. Sir, I take it well. And know y'are careful of my future good. He presses her hand. Tart. Madam, 'tis truth my fervour too is such.— Elm. Oh Sir! you hurt my hand. She cries out. Tart. 'Tis through excess of zeal. I have no design to do you any harm, I had rather be— Puts his hand upon her knees. Elm. What does your hand do here? Draws back her Chair, and he approaches his. Tart. I feel the softness of your garment, Madam. Elm. Pray, Sir, forbear, I me very ticklish. Tart. Good Heav'ns! with how much skill this point is wrought! This Age produces miracles in Art: In ev'ry thing th're become excellent. Elm. 'Tis true, but let us speak now to our business. They say my husband, Sir, has perbroke his promise, And wou'd give you his Daughter; is it so? Tart. Such words have past, but Madam to speak truth, That's not the happiness that I sigh afer: The glorious object of my felicity, Is elsewhere plac'd, which chiefly I desire. Elm. No earthly, beauty can deserve your love. Tart. Madam, I'm humane, made of flesh and blood, My breast does not enclose a heart of stone. Elm. Sir, I believe your sighs do tend to Heav'n; And nothing here below attracts your fancy. Tart. That love we fix upon eternal Be uty Does not command us to hate temp'ral things. Our senses very easily are charm'd With those Perfections which the Heav'ns have form'd. And do you think that I who have discern'd, That Heav'n has grav d on you all those rare wonders, And in your Countenance has plac'd those beauties
Which do inflame the heart, surprize the eyes, Should see and not admire them.— Most perfect Beauty, I can't behold you longer, Without in you admiring Nature's Authour; I feel my heart touch'd with an ardent love, Of his best Image where himself is painted. But stay, I am afraid this secret flame Is but the subtile work of some black spirit; I know my heart should flie your piercing eyes, As from the obstacle of my Soul's happiness; But yet I find, oh amiable Beauty! That this my passion ma'nt be criminal; may asswage it by my wariness. Oh for this action I approve my heart, Though't be presumption, I confess, in me, Daring to make my heart your offering; I trust my Vows mixt with your goodness, Madam, May soon blot out th' effects of my infirmity; In you is all my hope, my wealth, my quiet, On you depends my Torment, or Beatitude: My fate's included in your sentence, Madam, I'm happy or unhappy as you make me. Elm. This frank discovery is very gallant: But to say truth it does surprize me much. You shou'd methinks have been prepar'd much better, With stronger Arguments on this occasion; A devout man, and every where renown'd — Tart. Ah! though devout, yet I am still but m And when I see your heavenly person by me, My heart is captiv'd, and I cannot argue. I know that this discourse looks strange from me; But Madam after all, I'm not an Angel. And if you do condemn what I have done, You ought to blame your charming beauty too. At the first glance of your admir'd splendour You won the soveraignty of my Interiours. Th'ineffable sweetness of your divine aspect Forc'd the resistance of my stubborn heart. And conquer'd all my fastings, pray'rs and tears. My eyes and sighs spoke this 100 times. And now I employ my voice t express it better. Elm. How little does my husband think of this. aside. Tart. Do but contemplate, most beauteous soul, The Tribulations of a flave unworthy;
'Tis onely you, you Madam, can support me, Or ravel me back agen to my first nothing. I shall retain for you, O sweetest wonder! Such a devotion that's unmatehable. With me you run no hazard in your honour; And on my part you need fear no disgrace. Those Courtly Gallants, whose foolish prating wives Are vain in words, and babling o' their deeds, Still in their progress betray themselves: Receive no favours which they don't divulge; And he who trusts to their tongues indiscretion, Dishonours th' altr where his heart is sacrificed. But who (like us) burn with a love discreet, With those our secrets are for ever sure. That care we take still to preserve our fame, Is a sufficient surety for our love. In us is found (the heart once being accepted) Love without scandal, pleasure without fear. Elm. Sir, I have heard you; and your Rhetorick In good strong terms has full exprest your soul: But don't you apprehend I'm of the humour To tell my husband all this Gallantry? And that the prompt advice of such a love May'nt change the amity that now be bears you? Tart. I know you are too full of goodness, Madam; And that you'l seal my pardon for this rashness: At least that you' excuse through humane frailty The violent motion of that love offends you: And when you turn your eyes upon your self, And see your own perfections, you'l consider, That men have eyes, and that they're made of flesh. Elm. Yet people wou'd expound it otherwise: But my discretion shall appear in this, I'le not disclose this business to my husband, But take my vengeance in another manner. Then hear my doom: First, without least regret, You must disclaim all right to Mariana; And next renounce your self that unjust pow'r, Which does enrich your hope with others treasure. And—
SCEN. IV. Damis, Elmira, Tartuffe. [Damis comes out of the Closet where be was retir'd. Dam. No, no, Madam, ti story must be known; I was in such a place where I eard all: Methinks by providence I was ought thither, To punish this proud Vilain that as wrong'd me. 'T has open'd me a way to be reeng'd Upon's hypociie and in oence To undeceive my father, and to shew him That Villains soul that wou'd corrupt his bed. Elm. No Damis, 'tis sufficien he's grown wiser, And will endeavour to deserve my favour, Since I have promis'd him not to i coe it. 'Tis not my humour for to make dissentions; Wise women do but augh at such like so ies; Their husbands ears they will not trouble with 'em. Dam. You have your easons for your resolution, And I have ine to use him otherwise. To pe him were too high a rai lery; The insolent pride of his pretended Zele Has t iumph'd o're my passion now too much, And m de a strange confu on  ou family. He a too long a time goven'd my father, And nded m ust flames and Valere's too: 'Ti fi m father know his treachery, And Heaen has offer'd me just means to do it, F r this  portunity I stand Greatly indeted to propitious Heaven; And shou'd deev to have it taken from me, If (av ng', in  bn) I did not use it. El. Dmis— Dm. N, M m, no; I must enlarge my joy; My soul is  high pitch of comfort, And yo r discou p etends t'obige in vain To q it te pleaue of  king venge nce. And without  words e pre ently— Here comes my father, which as all I waned.
SCEN. V. Orgon, Damis, Tartuffe, Elmira, Sir, we are ready now to entertain you With a fresh accident that will surprize you; Whereby y'are well rewarded for your kindness: This high-priz'd Saint here has acknowledg'd it: His Zele for you he has just now declared; But in my mind 'twas much to your dishonour. As I was there retired just now by chance, I did surprise him making to my mother A villainous address of lustful love; But her meek spirit joyned with high discretion, Wou'd by all means have kept this secret from you. I never yet cou'd flatter impudence, And feared my silence now mght prove offence. Elm. Yes, I still hold that with such idle stories I ought not to disturb my husbands est; Our honour don't depend on trifling questions: It satisfies when we defend our selves. These are my thoughts, and you should not have told it If Damis, I cou'd have prevail'd with you. Exit Elmira. SCEN. VI. Orgon, Damis, Tartuffe. Org. O Heaven! can this be credible I hear? Tart. Yes, brother, I am wicked, and a criminal; An unhappy sinner, full of impiety; The lewdest Villain that was ever bred: Each instant of my life is full of stains; 'Tis nothing but an heap of filth and sin. I see the Heavens by this objected crime Wou'd mortifie me for my spiritual pride. I will not vindicate my self at all, Nor say I'm free from what I am reprov'd for. Believe what's told you, and thence arm'd with anger. Drive me a guilty wretch out of your doors. I know I cannot suffer so much shame, As I am sensible I have deserv'd.
Org. O Villain, dost thou by thy slnd'rous tongue Attempt to blast his vertuous purity? To his Son. Dam. Does the feign'd meekness of this hypocrite Trapan your soul with lies? Org. Peace, cursed Rogue. Tart. O let him speak; you wrongfully accuse him, You will do better, Sir, if you believe him. Why after such a fact are you so favourable? What am I good for when I'm thus ungateful? Ah brother, you confide in my exteriour; And though they know me wicked, think me good. You let your self be cheted by false show; I'm really the same they represent me: The world believes me a very honest man, But in sincerity I'm good for nothing. Addressing himself to Dami. Speak, my good Child, say that I am perfidious, A Reprobate, a Thief, a Murderer: Heap on me names yet more detestable, I will not contradict; I deserve all. This ignominy on my knees I'le suffer He kneels, Orgon presently raises him. As a just shame due to my crimes of life. Org. Brother, this is too much: does not thy heart Tremble to — Dam. What, shall his words seduce you in this case? Org. Silence you Rogue! ah, my dear brother rise. To Tartuffe. Infamous Varlet! To Damis. Dam. He may — Org. Pece, Sirrah. Dam. Oh, I am mad! what do I pass— Org. Not a word more, Sirrah, I'le break your pate. Tat. Brother, i'th' name of Heaven be not in choler: I'de rather endure for him the greatest pain, Than he for me shou'd suffer the least harm. Org. Ingrate— Tart. Let him alone, Sir, upon my knees Kneels. I beg his pardon. Org. Fie, Brother! rise— You see his goodness, Sirrah. Dam. Then — Org. Peace Dam. What shall I — Org. Peace, I say. I know the motive makes you thus abuse him; You hate him all, and I'm convinc'd on't now.
Wife, Children, Servants, all combine against him. You impudently put all plots in practic, To rob me of this good mans couver ation. The more designs you have to put him from me, The faster I will strive to keep him here. And now I'le presently give him my daughter, For to confound the pride of all my family. Dam. Do you think t'oblige her, Sir, to take him too? Org. Yes, villain; and to night, the more to vex you. I brave you all, and I will m ke you know You ought t'obey me, and that I m Master. Come, Sir ecant; and at this instant, Rascal, Throw your se f at his feet, and beg his pardon. Dam. What? I? to such a Slave, who by's impostures— Org Ha! do you refuse you Rogue, and call him names? Lend me a stick — pray do not hinder me. Tartuffe holds him. Go, Sirah, get yo gone out of my house, And never come agen within these oors. Dam I will be you Sir. Org. Quickly be gone; Taken notice, Sirrah I disinherit you. And curse the time of thy Nativity. Exit Damis. SCEN. VII. Orgon, Tartuffe. T'offend in such a sort so holy a man. Tart. O Heaven! pardon him the wrong he did me. If you cou'd know with what displeasure, Brother, I live to find they rive to sender me Odious to you — Org. Alas, be comforted. Tart. The thought alone of this ingratitude Does wreck my soul with a str nge punishment — The horrour I conceive— ah m heart bek — I cannot utter't, I beieve 'twill kill e. o uns weeping to the door where Da∣mis went our. O g. O Rogu! now I repent I shew'd thee mercy, And that I did not kil thee on the plce! Co pose your self, dear Brother; do not grieve. Tart. Let us remove the cause of all this strife: I plainly se the troubles that I bing you, And find it, Brother requisite to leave you. Org. How do you mean?
Tart. They hate me, and I know They strive to make my faith suspicious to you. Org. No matter broher, you see how well I heed 'em, Tart They will not cease to prosecute their ends. And with the same reports you now reject; Perhaps another time you'll liten to em. Org. No brother, never. Tart. Ah but a wife dear Brother, May easily surprize a husband's mind. Org. No, no. Tart. Oh let me brother quickly by removal Take from 'em all occasion of design. Org. No, you shall live Sir here while I have life. Tart. Well then: for this I'le mortifie my self; But if you will.— Org. Ah, no! e's talk no more.— Tart. But I shall know to rule my self hereafter; Honour is tender, and friendship does engage me To stop reports of the least circumstance, Wherefore I'le shun your wife, and you shall see me.— Org. No, in despite of them you shall frequent her. My greatest pleasure is to vex the world, And I wou'd have you seen with her at all times. This is not all, for now the more to brave 'em, My 'state shall have no other Heir but you; And I will go to Counsel and Advice, By what Conveyance I may settle it. As I think fit to chuse you for my Son-in-law: I prize you 'bove my Son, or Wife, or Kindred. I hope you will accept what I propose? Ta t. The will of Heav'n be done in ev'ry thing. Org. Alas! poor mn! I'le go and get the settlement, That I may make them burst their hearts with envy. Exit Orgon. SCEN. VIII. Tartuffe, Laurence Tart. The storm is past, what now will more remain, But that I keep my vior on, untill Th' intended settlement is made: I'le ha't by Fine, And strenghen't b Recovery; then the best Among them all that dares resist my will, I'le make him bow or break under the weight.
What I have aim'd at long, now in effect Is brought to pass; we'll slave it now no more, We'll Lord it Laurence. Laur. Truly Sir, Providence is very kind To give such fair occasions to your hands, And not to use 'em were to slight them, Sir. Tart. You say the truth, but yet the plot's not ripe. I still must be subservient. Mariana Must in pretence be chief, although Elmira Be really the mark I aim at, and for that If she be stubborn, threats against her husband [Which must bring ruines to her self] shall make her stoop; But if with all I nothing can prevail. And she [as once before her son] complain, I'le turn 'em out of doors, ransack the house, And either have my will or ruine all. Laur. Yes verily Sir, this is a brave resolve; I've often heard you say that the whole Earth Was by the Saints to be possest entire; And if you take the course you here project, You will become Proprietor of part. Surely, dear Sir, for these so full blown hopes You are oblig'd to Heaven. Tart. Pish, tell not me of Heav'n or thankfulness, Those are but words of course in company; 'Tis time to arm since they begin to doubt, If I get in, let who can get me out. Exeunt. SCEN. IX. Flypote, Pernelle. Fly. Madam, 'tis real truth what I have told you. Per. O wicked Age! what dismal plots are these! Religious men are scoff'd at and abus'd; But praisd be Heav'n my son hd so much grace, To cherish Tartuffe's poor afflicted soul. How did this humble Saint behave himself? Fly. With his submissive eyes fix'd on the earth, Took on him all the filthy crimes objected; Fell on his knees, and said he did deserve The worst of punishments could be imagin'd. Per. Alas poor man! I guess his pious drift: 'Twas done to mortifie his holy pride,
And to express the suffrance of the spirit; Ah! when shall we attain to such perfection! Fly. For these foul slanders Damis is expell'd His fathers house; and disinherited; And Orgon marries Tartuffe to his daughter, On whom he settles all his whole estate. Per. This is a just reward for piety! Oh Flipote, now my heart does leap with joy; For I perceive the blessings of this life Begin to be entail'd upon our family. Never was Mother happier in a son! I have a great desire to see poor Tartuffe, But would avoid the sight of any else; Go, and enquire if he be at leisure. Fly. Yes Madam, I'le go knock at's Chamber-door. Per. Alas poor man! how I do pity thee That art constrain'd to live among such people! Who are not worthy of thy conversation: But that the Providence above preserves thee, They would not matter't much to poison thee: I partly know the malice of their hearts. FLYPOTE, Fly. Madam, he's just gone forth, and Laurance tells me The family are all in tears for Damis; He wishes you'd go and comfort 'em. Per. No, no; I m glad I came the back-way hither: Let us avoid these wicked Libertines: Were't no for Tartuffe I shou'd hate the house; Come let us home agen: if things hit right, The Brethren shall rejoyce in Hymns this night. ACT. IV. SCEN. I. Cleanthes, Tartuffe. Cleant. ALl people talk on't, and you may believe me, That their resentments tend not to your credit: And I have light upon you opportunely, To tell you in few words my judgement of it.
I won't examine the bottom of the quarrel, I'le pss that over, and begin but here: Suppose that Dami misbehav'd himself, And that he has most wrongfully accus'd you. 'Tis Christian-like to pardon his offence, And blot out of your heart all thoughts of vengeance▪ Ought you to suffer for a trivial quarrel, A son be banish'd from his father's house? I'le tell you frther, and with freedome too, That you have scandaliz'd both young and old; And if you'll take my Councel pacifie 'em; And make no farther progress in this business; 'Twere better sacrifice your wrath to Heav'n, And reconcile the Father to his son. Tart. Alas! Sir, I'de consent with all my heart; There hangs no bitterness upon my spirit: I pardon all and blame him Sir in nothing; I'm ready, Sir, to serve him with my soul: But Heav'ns interest, Sir, will not consent, And if he enters here, I must turn out. After his fact which never yet was equall'd, Commerce between us two wou'd bring a scandal; Heaven knows what presently the world wou'd think: They wou'd impute it to my policy, And every body strait conclude me guilty, Imagining out of remorse of Conscience, That I had seign'd this charitable zeal for him: And that my timorous heart now strove to gain him, That underhand I might engage his silence. Clean. Your reasons, Sir, are drawn a great way off, And your excuses too are falsely colour'd, Where you pretend the Int'rest of Heav'n. Why do you charge your self with such a care? Is it our work to punish Criminals? Fye, suffer Heav'n to revenge it self. Say what you will, 'tis Int'rest of this world Impedes the glory of so brave an action Beyond pretence: let's be what Heav n ordains, And let no other care afflict our spirits. Tart. I have already told you that I pardon'd him, And in that action done what Heav'n ordain'd; But since th' affront and scandal giv'n me to day, Heav'n has not order'd I should live with him. Clean. Did Heav'n order you to lend an ear
To what one mere Caprice counsell'd his father? Think you in quiet ever to enjoy That right belongs by nature to another? Tart. I spoke not for it, nor did ever seek it; Who throughly knows me ne'r will have a thought That this effect springs from my avarice. I don't respect the treasure of this world, Nor am I dazel'd with its glittering follies. 'Tis true, I from his father have accepted That settlement he proffered me to make; Why was it, pray? onely because I fear'd That the estate might fall in wicked hands, Who wou'd imploy it vainly, or at best Make a bad imploy of't— But I, good Sir, have totally design'd it For Heavens glory and my Neighbours edification. Clean. 'Twere fit you threw aside these curious fears Of things which may but happen; he is the heir: Permit him then, as by his birth is due, That he enjoy his own at his own peril; 'Twill not concern you if he misuse it; Or if it did, were it not better he Shou'd bear that blame, then you be thought a Cheat? I strangely wonder that without confusion You cou'd endure so foul a proposition. Pray, is there such a Maxim in Religion, That teaches you to wrong a lawful heir? If you and Damis cannot dwell together, Were it not better (like a discreet person) You took a civil Farewell of the family, Then thus to suffer (Sir) against all reason The son be driven from his fathers house? Believe me now, your wisdom's call'd in question— For I — Tart. 'Tis half an hour (Sir) past three, And certain pious duties call me up: Excuse me that I leave you (Sir) so soon. Exit Tartuffe. Clean. Then is this all you'll say? intruding Slave—
SCEN. II. Cleanthes, Dorina. ☞ Dor. By your favour, Sir, how have you sped with him? This act of yours was quite against my mind. You see in what a posture affairs stand: And Mariana's soul 's e'en dead with grief; The contract by her father newly made At every moment makes her desperate. But now I have no leisure to discourse it, Because I look to meet with Tartuffe's Man; Whose heart I'le search: i'th' interim, if you please, To find out Mariana and Elmira, We will contrive something that's fit to do Or say to Orgon when we meet him next. Clean. Dorina, thou hast jumpt with my design; I have prepar'd instructions for my Sister. Go, here comes Laurence— Mind what you are about. Exit Cleanthes. Enter Laurence. O Laurence! welcom; I doubt not but you have Heard the news, and certainly in regard Of my concerns with you it highly pleases me. Laur. What news is this? Dor. Why, that Damis is disinherited, my young Mistress Contracted to your Master by her father: And as a confirmation of that marriage, He has enfeoffed his intended Son-in-law In all his lands; and to make the same sure He has levied a Fine, and suffer'd a Recovery; And by another Deed, upon the same consideration, Has transferr'd upon him his house and goods — Laur. No more — then he's undone; for now let Him be assur'd, if after this ought be deny'd To his unbounded will, he'll use but the Greatest extremity towards this fond man that Has thus fool'd himself, and his whole fmily. He no more intends to marry your Mistress then I do; he intends, if he can [and be sure he'll Lay hold on all opportunities] to debauch Elmira:
And if she will not yield to his desires, or make it Known he tempted her agrn, whereby Orgon Shou'd come to be incens'd; then nothing Serves his turn but Utter ruine. Dor. O Heaven defend us! now I am clearly lost: I know not what to do or what to advise, Dear Laurence, counsell me. Laur. Dorina, You see I trust you with my secrets; Be thou but true to me, and I'le direct A way shall yet, I hope, produce our happiness. Dor. What is't, dear Laurence, and I will protest To give thee all in modesty thou canst ask, My love, my heart, whetever I can get I'le make thee master of, together with my self. Laur. You must procure a meeting 'twixt Elmira And my Master, to which by some means you Must make Orgon privy, that his own ears may Witness to him what from the mouth of truth He'd not believe. This must be done, though For a time it breed a strange confusion, then let Cleanthes▪ Damis, and Valere inform the King and Council Before hand of Orgons former services; lay before Them his fidelity, and pray their aid in the behalf of Damis: for they must not mention any thing further; Onely be sure they strengthen themselves with friends, That being prepossest may at all times be ready, as— Dor. O my dear Laurence! if by this thy means (As this advice is rational) we thrive, Know thy reward shall satisfie thy merit. Laur. Fear not: remember what I have said: I doubt I'hve staid too long; I wou'd not have my Master Miss me: therefore, my dear Dorina, fare you well. I'le see you suddenly agen. Adieu. Exit. Dor. O Heavens, what a toil is Orgon in! This is no time for idleness: I'le go And find the persons out I long to speak with: They come. SCEN. III. Elmira, Mariana, Cleanthes, Dorina. O Madam, here's news indeed: you must lay your hand To help us out of the mire. You must use
Some means to make your husband see this Cheat In's colours: I'le take a care to help the rest. But here comes Orgon; imagine, Madam, what you had best To do. Enter Orgon to them with a Deed, the Contract, and Transcript of the Fine and Recovery, and Lau∣rence following him. Org. O, I rejoyce to see you all together: I've that here in my hand will make you laugh; You know already the contents of 'em: Laurence, secure these papers to thy Master. Aside. Mar. Dear Sir, in Heavens name that knows my grief, Kneels. By every thing may move you to compassion, Use not that pow'r you from my birth may claim, Dispense with my obedience and my vows. Do not reduce me by this cruel act, To wish to Heaven you'd never been my father. This wretched life, alas! which you have given me, Strive not to make it thus unfortunate. If against that sweet hope I form'd my self, You do forbid me him I've dar'd to love. At least upon my knees I do implore you, Spare me that torment to be his I 'bhorre, And do not make me (Sir) grow desperate. Dor. This happens well to bring on the design. Aside. Org. Forbear, fond heart, and do not shew thy frailty. To himselfe. Dor. I think it penetrates; alas, poor man! Mar. Your tenderness to him's no pain to me: Make it more signal; let him have your wealth: If that suffice not, adde what e'r is mine; For ever I consent, and will forsake it: But do not give so far, Sir, as my person. Suffer th' austerities of a Nunnery, To pass away those hours which Heaven has lent me. Org. Yes, you are very fit to be religious, Now when you feel your amorous flames depress'd. Stand up; the more your heart denies to have him, 'Twill offer you th'occasion of more merit. Come, mortifie your senses by thi marriage, And do not vex me any more about it. Dor. What, Sir— Org. Be silent, Hussie; speak when you are spak to.
Clean. If by advice you'll suffer me to answer—. Org. Brother, your Councels are the best i'th' world, They're full of reason, and I prize them much. But you must pardon me, if I refuse 'em. Elm. Seeing what I have seen, I can say nothing, But silent stand in admiration at you. Your love has blinded you to that degree, T'affirm us liars in what you'll find too true. Org. Your servant, Madam, I perceive your drift, And know your correspondence with my son; You are afraid he should disown that plot, Which you design'd against that vertuous man. You were too patient to perswade belief; Had it been true, you wou'd have chang'd your humour, And shew'd your self mov'd in another manner. Dor. O rare! he brings it on himself! aside. Elm. Against the Prospect of an amorous Motion, Must we draw all the force our Honours have? May we not answer those who do attempt us, But with injurious mouths, eyes full of fire? For my part I but laugh at such Proposals, And do not care to make a noise about 'em. I love in mildness we should shew our wisdom; Nor did I e're esteem a savage prudence In them whose Honours, arm'd with teeth and nails, For every little word scratch people's Faces. From all such rudeness Heav'n preserve me, I do not love such divel-natur'd vertue. The discreet coolness of a chaste denial, Is far more pow'rful to rebuke a Villain. Org. In short, I'm satisfi'd; I know the truth. Elm Agen, I'm astonisht at your weakness. What will your incredulity answer me, If you should see what we have said is true. Dor. O incomparably done! aside. O g. See? what I wonder? see? Elm. Yes, so I say, see: Org. You're very pleasant. Elm. How if I finde a way To make you see all this i'th open light? Org. Castles in th' Air! Elm. Strange man! give me your answer; I don't perswade you to believe it neither; But suppose now I should finde out a place To let you clearly see, and hear each passage,
What wou'd you say then to your vertuous man; Org. I'de say in such a case — I wou'd say nothing. For it can't be. Elm. The errour holds too long; It does condemn my tongue too of imposture. Let me for pastime without stirring further To all that I have told you make you witness. Org. Be't so; I'le take your word, and see your cunnin Which way you're able to fulfill your promise. Elm. Go, fetch him hither. Dor. Madam, he's very subtil, And I believe it difficult to surprise him. Elm. No, no, we're easily caught by what we love. Bid him come down, and (pray) do you retire. SCEN. IV. Elmira, Orgon. Elm. Draw near the Table, and creep you under it, Org. How? Elm. Be sure you be not seen. Org. Why under the Table? Elm. Nay, nay, ask no questions. My design's here, and you shall judge on't presently. Go, get you under't▪ and when you're there Take heed that you be neither heard nor seen. Org. My condescension must be great in this: I long to see the project at an end. Elm. You will be puzzled strait to play your part; To him under the Table. Im going now about a ticklish business, At which you may be scandaliz'd, but I Will give no cause, although I take the freedom, By your permission, to say all I'm able, That so I may convince you, as I've promis'd. I am constrain'd against the rules of honour, To wear a mask to catch the hypocrite: And if I seem to flatter his desires, Or yield a freedom to his rash attempts, 'Tis for your sake, the better to confound him. My soul designs all this— I shall retire as soon as you appear, And things shall go no further then you'd have 'em▪ 'Tis you must stop his course, and cool the heat
Of his inflamed Zele, when you perceive Your Honour is concern'd; and then, I hope, Your eyes will disabuse that credulous humour, That made you slight both interest and friends. You shall be Master here— No more, he comes; Take heed he don't discover you. SCEN. V. Tartuffe, Elmira, Orgon. Tart. They told me, Madam, you would speak with me. Elm. Yes, I have a secret to reveal to you; But shut the door, and search about the chamber; I am unwilling we should be surpriz'd. He goes back and bolts the door. An accident like that last happen'd to us, Wou'd now be more unwelcome then before. Damis did fright me strangely for your sake; But you perceiv'd, I hope, there was no want Of will in me to change the Scene, and turn His rage 'gainst you into a quiet calm. I must confess, I was so much amazed, That I had no invention to disguise it. But, Heaven be praised! it prov'd all for the best, And things are now in more security: Your estimation has allay'd the storm, And Orgon (to out-brave the peoples vogue) Allows us freer converse at all times. Hence it proceeds, that without fear of blame I see my self lock'd up with you alone. This has emboldened me to open an heart Unable longer to resist your love. Tart. 'Tis difficult to comprehend this language; You lately, Madam, talk'd another style. Elm. If that denial, Sir, did anger you, You have small knowledge of a womans heart. Our Modesties pretend to give you battel: Even in that instant we intend surrender, With the same reasons we disown our loves. We do proclaim 'em, and that very moment Our tongues in honour do oppose our wishes: The weakness of refusal is a promise. In thee my freedom without doubt I've made, But very little use of modesty—
And since the word is out e'ne let it go. D'ye think I wou'd have stay'd with so muce mildness, To listen to the proffer of your love, Or wou'd have taken things with such a calm, If th' offer of your heart had not been pleasing? Tart. 'Tis Madam, without doubt▪ a mighty happiness To hear such language from a Mouth of love; The honey of your words drop on my senses, Such a suavity was never tasted. My chiefest study still has been to please you; And all my wishes seem to be accomplishd; But yet my heart demands the liberty, To doubt a little its beatitude If I may liberally expound my self; Such soft Proposals I can scarce mistrust: Might I but taste those favous that I sigh for It wou'd assure me much of all you say; And in my bosom plant a constant faith, Of all those charming bounties you have for me. Drashs near to Elmira. Elm. What in such haste; Nay Mr Tartuffe, Fye; She coughs to ad∣vertise her husband. These greatest favours are not gain'd at once: I almost dy'd t' unfold my thoughts to you, And yet you seem not to be satisfi'd: You have not shew'd such courage as wou'd merit Those highest favours to be granted by us. Tart. The less I merit, the less I dare to hope for; And this discourse does not confirm my wish: We are suspicious of a hasty fortune: Yet wou'd enjoy before we can believe it. I have so little merited this bounty, That I suspect the happy consequence; Ths Madam makes me slow in my belief, Til you convince me by reality. Elm. Your love does act like a fierce Tyrant, Sir; Taking a furious soveraignty o're hearts, And presses to its end with too much violence. What will you not allow me time to breathe? D'ye think this rigour does become you, Sir? To press so hard upon my feeble weakness? Tart. But since you have respect for my addresses, Why d'ye refuse to give me pledges of it? Elm. Pray how can I consent to what you'd have, Without offending Heaven? Tart. If that be all
A little thing removes that obstcle. Elm. But I do dread what is by Heaven forbid. Tart. Such fers are vain, I can remove these scruples. 'Tis true, Heaven does forbid us certin pleasures, But there remains a means for composition: We may abate the evil of our actions, By the sincerity of our intentios, I can instruct you in the esecrets, Madam; Dispose your self to me for your safe conduct: Content but my desire, and fear nothing; I'le answer all, and take the sin on me. She coughs agen. You cough extremely, Madam. Elm. Yes, I have caught cold. Aside; Transcendent Villain! this lan∣guage proves thee so▪ Tart. Please you to take some juice of Liquorish. Elm. This rheum is obstinate without, I see; That all the juice i'th' world will do no good! [She continues] Tart. 'Tis very troubesom. Elm. Ye, beyond expression. Tart In short, your scruple's easily destroyed; I will assure yu this great secret, The sin is when we make it publick, Madam; Th'offence is i lodg'd i'th' scdal of the world: We do not sin when we do act in secret. After she has done coughing Elm. Well, Sir; I see, I must resolve to yield, And find my self consenting to your will. Speaks subtilly, addressing her self to both. I ought not to pretend to less then this, That I'm content, and willing now to render; But yet it grieves me too to come thus far; And 'tis against my will I am thus free: Yet since the obstinate wo'nt now deliver me, And wo'not yet believe what I have said, But does desire more pregnant testimonies, I must resolve immediate satisfaction. If this consent of mine be an offence, The worst is theirs who force this violence. Tart. Yes, Madam, I'le discharge your care in this— Elm. Open thed or a little, I intreat you; See if my husband be'nt i'th' Gallery. Tart. What need you, Madam, take such care of him? He is a man that we can ead by th' nose. He glories, Madam, in our entertainments, And wo'nt believe it though he see it done. Elm. I wo'not trust to that, go out, I pray, Tartuffe goes out a∣while, and comes in agen. And look about exactly every where.
SCEN. VI. Orgon, Elmira. Orgon under the Table. Org. What an abominable Villain's this! I'm almost ready to sink down to hear it▪ Orgon comes out. Elm. What do you mock me, you come out so quickly? Go under agen, it is not yet full time; Stay to the end tht you see all things sure, Speaks in derision. And do not trust to simple poor conjectures. Org. Nothing so wicked ever sprung from Hell. Elm. You shou'd not be so light in your belief; Be sure you are convinc'd before you appear: Don't haste too much lest you mistake your self. Tartuffe comes in, and she puts her husband behind her. SCEN. VII. Tartuffe, Elmira, Orgon. Tart. All things conspire to make our pleasures full: I have ook'd every where in your Appartment, And find no person; Oh! my soul is ravish'd— Org. Hold; Sir; You prosecute your love too fast. Orgon steps to him. Your amorous passion is too violent. Ah, honest man! have you not prov'd it now? How does your soul resist all foul temptations? Marry my daughter, and debauch my wife? I doubted a long time this was not so; And did believe that they were base aspersions: But now these testimonies are so paipable. That I have done, and will desire no more. To Tartuffe. Elm. Against my humour I have done all this; But I was forced to't to retrive my honour. Tart. What do you think— Org. Be gone, no noise, I pray— No ceremony, but avoid your nest. Tart. My design — Org. Sir, 'tis no time to talk: You must march off, quickly depart my house. Tart. Nay then farewell dissembling; I'le not stir. Tis you must march you Sir, you that Lord it so:
I'le make you know the house belongs to me; And quickly shew you 'tis a vain attempt By such weak stratagems to evade my right: You are not where you think by this base injury; I will confound and punish your imposture, Revenge the Heavens you've wronged, and make you all Repent the motion of my going hence. Exit. Elm. What means this language? what is'c he would say? Laughs▪ Org. I am confus'd, this is no time for raillery. Elm. How? Org. I see my fault by what he now has uttered. Eunt▪ SCEN. VIII. ☞ Tartuffe, Laurence. Tart. Laurence, look you to the chamber, and be sure You're careful of the cabinet stands there. Orgon himself delivered it to me, And I will give't the King to ruine him. If any offer to intrude, be quick, And pocket up the writings with the seals; While I immediately find out the Sheriff. Exit Tartuffe. Laur. Yes, I'le look to them sure, and keep them safe From you for ever, Sir. O horrid traitor! Admitted into Orgons house on courtesie, And now would rudely turn him out of doors▪ Enter Dorina. Dor. O Laurence, Laurence, we're all undone! Orgon, I think, 's distracted: I believe You can unfold the riddle: you promised me— Laur. No more then; I'le perform, stay but here, I'le return presently. Laurence goes out, and shortly returns with cabinet and writing in his hand. Dor. This man, I see, will merit my esteem. He told me the experiment that must f Unblind fond Orgon would breed conlusion; But he would find a means to settle all. And here he comes already i'th' name of goodness: What has he there? what loaded, Laurence? Laur. You see what love will do, Dorinna; this And this I here deliver to your hands. Gives the deed and cabinet.
It is of value, I assure you Girle. Keep these till I give further notice to you Of what is to be done: these will do more Then what I promised. And if you weet with gratitude, then say, Laurence has clearly won me by fair play. Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. I. ☞Dorina, Cleanthes. At several doors. Dor. VVEll met, Cleanthes; what have you done at Court? The storm is rais'd; have you done What I advis'd you? whee's Damis and Valere? I'de have you bring home Damis instantly; His presence now will be convenient. Clean. Why, faith Dorina, I perceived 'twas time; There's need enough of all the help of friends: And sure, I think, we have don't. We have obtained A Warrant Dormant to bring Tartuffe in, To shew the Council cause why he pretends T'intrude on Damis heritage: and more, The King and Council will by Order have The father reconciled to his son; But this is all so private, no one knows Ought of it, onely those peculiar Lords That did engage, and opened Orgons merit. Dor. Well then, Cleanthes, we shall see some sport; And when it comes to th'issue 'twill appear, I have been active in another sphere. Exit. SCEN. II. Orgen in haste to Cleanthes. Clean. Whither d'ye run? Org. Alas I know not, Brother. Clean. Methinks we rather should consult together, What we had best to do in this ext eity. Org. Oh! had I but the Cabinet out of's hands,
I wou'd not fear his malice: but alas! I drives me almost to despair the thought of't. Clean. Pray what important mystery was in it? Org. I was a pawn my dear friend Argas left me Of his great love: no witness being by; And at his flight 'mongst all his friends chose me To be the faithful Guardian of his fortune; But now he has just reason to upbraid me: They're papers that contain his life and treasure. Clean. Why did you trust them then in other hands? Org. 'Twas by a motive from a Case of Conscience. I in this Traitor put my confidence, Whose Arguments did soon prevail upon me, To give the Cabinet into his Custody. That if a strict Enquiry should be made After the fugitive I might be ready, Without the prejudicing of my soul, To take my Oath against a real truth. Clean. In all appearance you're in a bad condition, What with your feoffment, fine, and other deed. If I may freely give my judgment of it, You've taken a certain way to finde out Ruine. Oh Sir! this man has strange advantages, Being possest of such strong pledges from you, It were imprudence to provoke him, Sir; You ought to search out now some milder way. Org. What! under the shadow of a fervent zeal, Shrowd such a double heart and haughty mind! I took him up a beggar, having nothing — 'Tis done; now I renounce all honest men; Henceforward I shall hate the sight of them, And be more envious to them then the devil. Clean. Fie brother! this is just your cholerick humour; Do not forsake the pleasant rode of temperance, But let fair moderation be your conduct: From one excess you'll fall into another; You see your errour, and you have acknowledg'd it, How through a feign'd pure zeal you have been cheated, What reason is there to correct this fault. That you shou'd run into a greater Trespass: What cause this Rascal's confidence has trapan'd you, With an austere pretence of pure devotion; Do you believe that every one's like him, And that one true religious can't be found?
Leave this bad consequence to Libertines, But do not hazard your esteem too much, But still preserve it in the golden mean. Org. I am raging mad to finde my self thus cheated. SCEN. III. Enter Pernelle, Mariana, Elmira, Dorina, to them. Pern. What's here to do, I'm told most terrible mysteries. Org. They'r Novelties, mine eyes have witness't Mother. You see how all my love is recompenc'd. With zeal I pluck'd this man from misery, Lodg'd him and entertain'd him like a brother, I heap'd my favours on him every day, Setled my Lands upon him with intent To marry him to my Daughter; assign'd to him My house, my goods, my Jewels with all in't; Yet the same time this base perfidious slave Made it his business to debauch my wife; And not contented with this horrid act, Dares now to menace me with my own benefits. And take advantage by 'em to my ruine. Arm'd with my foolish bounty comes against me, To drive me from my estate transfer'd to him, And so reduce me to his native beggery. Dor. Alas poor man! Pern. I can't believe this son, That he wou'd e re conceive so black an action. Org. How? not believ't? Pern. Honest people still are envi'd son. Org. What wou'd you say if you cou'd speak good Mother? Pern. I say your family is strangely govern'd; And 'tis well known the malice they all bear him. Org. What signifies all this to that I've told you? Pern. I've told you a hundred times when you were little, That vertue always suffers persecution; The envious must die, but envy never. Org. What's this discourse to that is done to day? Pern. They've forg'd a hundred foolish tales against him. Org. I told you I had seen all this my self. Pern. The malice is extreme of lying people. Org. O! you confound me! I tell you once age My eyes have seen this impudent bold crime.
Pern. Their tongues are always full of horrid venom, Theres no defence against it here on earth. Org. You talk as if you were bereft of sense, I have seen't I tell you, seen't; my own eyes see it. Whate they call seeing: I'le not bate you an ace, I'le bawle't a hundred times into your ears. Pern. O Heav'n! how often is the sight deceiv'd! You shou'd not always judge of what you see. Org. You make me mad, stark mad! O cursed folly! Pern. Nature is much inclin'd to false suspicions, And often does interpret good for evil. Org. I ought to think it charitable care For him to kiss my wife! Pern. 'Tis necessary, That you take heed how you accuse good people: You shou'd have stayd till you had seen things sure. Org. Ah Curse! the means how to be more assur'd? Wou'd you have had me stay'd t' have seen my wife.— — You'll force me to extravigant discourse. Pern. In fine, too pure a zeal had chaam'd his soul: I cannot make it enter my belief, ☞ He shou'd attempt to do these things you talk of. Dorin. Alas! poor man! Org. Go; were you not my Mother, I can't tell What I should say t'ye. I'm so much confus'd. Dor. 'Tis a just vengeance, for you heretofore Had no belief; and now none believe you. Clean. We trifle out that time in vain discourse, Shou'd be employ'd for to prevent this cheat. Elm. I cannot apprehend he dares attempt it; His base ingratitude is too manifest. Clean. Yes trust him still; think you he han't confederates, That will adde all their cunning to his force; And more then that the weight of a Cabal Will bring us into some confused Labyrinth.. Org. 'Tis true, what's my best course? this Villain's pride Makes me I cannot master my resentments. Clean. Come, chear up, brother; my self, your son Valere, With all our friends will meet this monstrous Villain, And see what we can do t'avoid this Precipice. Elm. If I had known he had bin so strongly arm'd, I never wou'd have caus'd half these alarmes. And for — Loyal peeps in. Org. VVhat wou'd that man? quickly go know his business; I'm very ill dispos'd for conversation.
SCEN. IV. To them Loyal. Loy. Pray will you inform the Gentleman of the house. I have some business with him. Dor. He is with Company. And for the present Sir, will speak with no body. Loy. I will not be importunote at this time, Though sure my coming, as I think, will please him. And 'tis about a business he'll be glad of. Dor. Your Name? Loy. Pray tell him only that I come From Mr. Tartuffe, and desire a word with him. Dor. Sir, here's a modest Gentleman that comes In the behalf of Mr. Tartuffe to you. He says about a business you'll be glad of. Clean. You had best discourse with him, and know his business. Perhaps he comes to make a Composition. Org. With what resentments shall I entertain him? Clean. I wou'd not have you, Sir, be passionate. Loy. Save you Sir, may Heav'n prosper you, And scatter all those enemies wou'd hurt you. Org. Methinks this Complement does seem to tell me, His business is for an accommodation. Loy. Your family was always dear to me; I had the honour, Sir, to serve your father. Org. Sir, I am asham'd, I humbly beg your pardon; I have forgot you, let me crave your Name. Loy. My name is Loyal, a North-Countrey man; And now, Sir, with your leave, know I am come To give you this declaration, 'tis in an Action Of ejectment, Sir, at Mr. Tartuffe's suit. Org. At Tartuffe's suit; oh Villain! Offers to strike. Loy. Sir, be not rash; Although it be to turn out you and yours; It is not presently; if you have ought to plead Against a Deed made on good Consideration, You may, else must turn out. Org. Must I turn out? Loy. Yes Sir; Unless you can prevent it, as I told you. But much I'm afraid you're in the Mire. The forme is good, it cannot be deni'd. But I'le for bear you till tomorrow Morning.
Clean. I stand amaz'd at this strange impudence. Cleanthes gives Loyal money. Loy. Sir, I have done my errand, arm your self. Org. Arm my self? what, without weapons? Loy. Sir, I can say no more, you must be quick And circumspect in your defence; farewell. Exit Loyal. Dor. Loyal d'ye call him? he has a Traitors face. Org. Well, now he's gone, what course is to be taken? Our time is short, but till tomorrow morning. Clean. Be patient, Brother, my phansie bodes you good. Org. Now look you, Mother, see if I have not reason; And you may judge the rest by this exploit. What, are his Villanies manifest to you now? Pern. I'm almost dead with my astonishment. Dor. You falsly grieve, and blame him wrongfully: This but confirms his spiritual design. His love to's neighbour does compleat his virtue; In raillery to Or∣gon. He knows that riches do corrupt the soul; And in pure charity has taken from you The chiefest hindrance of your felicity. Dorina pulls Cleanthes and goes off. Org. What must I always bid you hold your tongue? Clean. Come, let us see what we had best to do. Exit Cleanthes. Elm. Go and declare his base ungrateful soul; It may enervate this your Deed of Gift, When his disloyalty shall appear so black, And hinder that success he hopes t'obtain. Exeunt. SCEN. V. Cleanthes, Dorinae. Clean. The matter's ripe, it must no further run; I'le go and find out Damis and Valere, And give an Information 'gainst this Villain, That he may be secur'd; in th'interim you Go find out Laurence, that his zele to us At th'upshot may receive a due reward. Exit Cleanthes his folly had Dor. What would this man have done? Ruin'd the hopes and glory of his family. Laurence, thou hast deserv'd well at his hands: Thy faith to me has sav'd his whole estate.
Enter Laurence. Laur. Dorina, how go squares? I hear strange news, But 'tis so much at random, I can make Nor head nor tail on't. Dor. Stay but awhile, and you shall see th' event. Laur. No; we'll go walk awhile abroad, and then In half an hour return to know th'effect. Exeunt. SCEN. VI. ☞ Enter Valere, Cleanthes, Damis. Val. The work is done, the Villain is secur'd, And does not know it yet, but thinks he's Victor. We have the Deed and Cabinet; by these means The Traitors malice ceases, and all's safe— But we must fright Orgon. You shall, Cleanthes, Go to the Messenger, in whose custody Tartuffe remains at present, and bring with him His prisoner, as if he came to put Him in possession. I will go before, Feigning to tell the news, and make him fly; Then Damis shall apper, whom I'le present As ruin'd by his folly; and after that Laurence shall bring Dorina t'act her part. Clean. How shall we make the Messenger to serve us, And act his part? Dam. Let that alone to me; I with a little money Will buy him over to do what I please. Val. Come let's away, and put't in agitation. Exeunt. SCEN. VII. Enter Orgo, Elmira, Mariana, Pernelle. Org. I wonder that my brother comes not at me. Elm. He's like the world flies from a falling house. Mar. I think not so, I rather must believe, He's acting for your Interest what he can.
To them Valere. Val. With a regret I come t'afflict you, Sir: But I'm constrain'd to't by a pressing danger. A friend of mine, whose amity is strong, And knew the Interest I ought to have in you, Has violated out of curiosity The secresie due to th'affairs of State. And even now he sent me this advice, Which must reduce you to a sudden flight: That Slave to whom you did commit your trust, Within this hou accus'd you to the King, And has deliver'd Cabinet of importance, Which makes your friend and you both Malefactors; And by misprision of a Subjects duty, Y'have private kept the secrets of a Traitor. I'm ignorant of the title of your crime: But Order's given, Sir, to arrest your person; And for the better execution on't, Tartuffe is sent with those that are to take you. Org. He has prov'd himself a monstrous wicked Rogue. Val. the least delay may prove, Sir, fatal to you. My Coach does now attend you at your Gate; Let's lose no time to avoid this thunder clap, For these are blows onely put by, by flight. To a sure place I proffer you my conduct, And will accompany you to your journeys end. Org. What don't I owe for these obliging cares? And now, Sir, I want time to give you thanks: But I beg Heaven to be propitious to me, That I may live to pay your generous service. Farewell— pray take a care. Val. Make haste. SCEN. ULT. Enter Cleanthes running, and followed by the Messenger. Orgon runs, and the Messenger stays him. Mess. Softly, Sir, softly; do not run so fast; You have not far to go to find your lodging: Know, Sir, that you are prisoner to the King.
Enter Tartuffe with two or three Officers. Orgon spies him. Org. Judas, Thou hast kept this treachery till the last. Monster! by this vile blow thou hast undone me; And by it thou hast crown'd thy Villany. Mess. You must not give such terms they'l not avail you. Tart. I can dispense with these injurious words. For I am taught by Heaven to suffer all. Clean. I do aver thy moderation great, Impudent Rogue! that thus dares play with Heaven. Org. O Brother, where's my son? Clean. How can you ask for him you have undone? Org. Pray, Sir, hold off your hand, I will not stir. Elm. Do but reflect how good he was to you. Tart. All you can say shall have no power to move me; I dream of nothing but to do my duty. Mar. You pretend much glory from this action. Elm. And this employment too becomes you well. Mess. The employment cannot but be honourable, Deriv'd from that high power which sent me hither. Org. Hast thou forgot that charitable hand, Ingrateful man, that pluck'd thee out of misery? Tart. Sir, I am sensible of all your favours; But my Kings service is my highest duty; And the remembrance of that sacred tie Stifles the thought of any restitution. Mess. Good Mr. Tartuffe, if you please, withdraw; You know your business, Sir, is sure enough. Tart. I will retire to avoid contention, Sir; But pray dispatch and rid my house of 'em. Org. O impudence unmatchable! thy house? Mess. Come, what a noise is here? I'le stay no longer. I charge you come with me immeditely Into the prison, where you must remain. Clean. Have patience, Sir, a little; I'le engage for him. Mss. Upon your word I'le stay a little longer. Clean. Orgon, what do you mean? I am afraid You are to seek: but, pray, resolve me, this; Suppose your friends should move the King and Council In your behalf, wou'd you not run anew Into fresh errours?
Org. No, Cleanthes, never. Clean. We'll try what can be done, pray stay a while. Clean. Val. Exeunt. Mess. I wish they may prevail, but I much doubt it Unless they work it strongly. Org. I know not what to say, Heav'n speed 'em well, But see despair hath stopt his journey. Brother, what ails thee? Clean. Val. Clean. I met Dorina at the door, who stopt me, And said she had some welcom news to tell you. Org. Where is she: Clean. I left her talking to a friend, she comes. DORINA. Dor. Sir, I am sorry to see you In such affliction as you are, but patience. Enter a Servant, and Whispers Clean. Clean. Damis is without, and desires to speak with you. Org. Bid him come in. DAMIS. Dam. Alas! dear Sir. What's the matter here? Val. Your father here is seiz'd, I cannot say His cr me, but think the punishment is just For his abusing you. Dam. I've no resentment of that hard usage, Sir, But wish in this affair my power could Support my will. Org. Oh son! this pious duty in you makes me seem Odious unto my self, and therefore friend Carry me where you will. To the Mess. Clean. See brother, here's Dorina, who has oft Told you to what your follies would reduce you: But as I said, she now has other news. Org. I have enough, lay no more weights of grief Upon my heart: Heav'n send it may be good. Dor. Sir, hearing of the troubles which were fallen Upon you, thorow your own indiscretion; And knowing, in adversity a friend Is worth acceptance; I have brought one hither.
That with that Gentleman's leave; will dare to bail you, He has from me receiv'd an information, Your crime is neither Felony nor Treason: And the worst prison you deserve for this Is Bedlam: if you will accept the offer, And these Gentlemen be pleased with't, I'le call him in. Clean. Do so, with all our hearts, I speak for all. Enter Laurence with a Cabinet and Writings. Dorina with the Assignment. Dor. Sir, here's the man! Clean. What Laurence! Tartuffe's man! Val. Prithee let's see it done. Laur. Sir, how far my quondam Master has trangerst I don't examine, for I hear already He's call'd to account; I at Drna's instance, come To tender the best services I can; And though my fortune place me in the croud, But few degrees from beggery, yet I have A heart as generous as the noblest of you. See Gentlemen, I freely this bestow. Gives Orgon the Cabinet: On Orgon as a Present of my Love; And my Dorina is the sole reward. I ask for all. Dor. Sir if the love and care of this man here Had not been great to me, I had not had This opportunity to do you service; But by his means, Sir, I am able now To quiet your possession in this house. Here Sir— Delivers the Assignment. Org. O Heav'n what do I see, Cleanthes, this Is that same very deed I made to Tartuffe. Damis, Valere, Elmira, Mariana▪ See, there's your Guardian Angel; O Dorina Thou shalt no more be servile, we will all Submit to our Protectress, our Defender.— Mar. Dorina, my Dorina, thou hast master'd me. Embraces Dor. If I shou'd study all my life to serve thee, I cou'd not make a suitable return. Elm. Dearest Dorina, thou hast once more made, Embraces Dorina. Me Mystriss of this place; my self and Orgon Are bound to bless that moment brought thee hither.
Clean. My Sister is transported with her joy. Intruth Dorina thou hast surpriz'd us all, What Damis, Valere, and my self could not Imagine how to compass, thou didst do. Per. We will not ask the means, but render thanks To blessed Heav'n for this delivery: I am convinc'd and hate the Hypocrite. Dor. There stands the means— Points to Laurence. Thank him: neither my policy or strength Cou'd e're have reach'd it, it was his design. He brought the things to me; not sought or courted, But truly of himself, and when he saw All things were even beyond remedy. Val. Laurence, I here perceive we are all bound To your fidelity, for which in the behalf Enter Tartuffe with Officers. Of all I promise a reward — And now, Cleanthes, let us clear the mist. Tart. What is the reason of this long demurre? Clean. Sir, you have done your duty, and wi hou fear, May let your pris'ner [Orgon I mean] go free. Mess. Sir, you're as free as Ayre; my task is here. Goes to Tartuffe. This is indeed my pris'ner. Tart. How I your pris'ner! Mess. Yes Sir! behold my warrant. Tart. How various are the blessings of this life! Org. Where am I? in a dream; are my eyes open? Is this my house, and these in truth my friends? This is a change so unexpected that It was beyond my hopes.— Clean. Sir, here's your son. and son-in-law; to both You're equally oblig'd, though both cast off Yet left not still to intercede at Court, And so at last prevail'd [upon the hearing The former service you had done repeated] That both the King and Council did declare The acts you did invalid; To Tartuffe. And pardon'd your connivance with that Traitor, But how to unravel this was all the work— Val. Let me tell that, Cleanthes, 'twas your Genius rought it to thi perfection. He, Sir, perceiving▪ How strongly you had noos'd your self by Law, Accuses Tartuffe of prodigious crimes:
Crimes that entrencht on Royal Majesty, Which he confirm'd by noble Witnesses; Then did he get a Grant of all th' estate Tartuffe had got from you: by which secur'd The Villain cou'd not harm you; we design'd To try your patience; as you see w'have done. Dam. Sir, if any former faults I did commit; I humbly here implore your pardon for 'em. Org. Talk not of faults, this is a time of joy, Let us return our duty in our thanks To his Most Gracious Majesty, that did So nobly lend his Princely ear to you. Clean. But let not Laurence be forgotten here; And let Dorina's merits be rewarded. Org. What they desire I'll give. Laur. With your favour, my reward shall be, Dorina, if your Daughter will consent. Mar. With all my soul! Org. Are you agreed Dorina. Dor. Else had your Deed and Cabinet be gone. Org. Laurence, how deep m'engagements to you are, Though yet I know not fully to let you see Before my friends here present, that I mean To gratifie your honesty; here take Dorina.Gives Dorina to him. And with her a hundred pounds a year in portion During your lives, and the Survivor of you. Laur We both will pray for your eternal happiness. Org. And for you, Valere, whose true affection Unto the Daughter, made you the Father's Advocate, Take this as Pledge. Takes Mariana by the hand, and gives her to Valere. Valere, be happy in her. Dor. Oh Laurence! I am ravish'd with my joy. Pern. Truly, la! I am conforted agen. Elm. O most propitious stars! most blest success! Mar. Who cou'd have dar'd t'have hop't this happiness? Dam. Sister, you have a Jewel, prize him high. Val. I thank you brother; and to crown our joys I promise here to give my Sister to you, So soon as I can send for her to Town. Dam. I'm blest in such a Brother, and a friend. How happy is that Kingdom, where the Prince Himself does steer the Royal Helm of State; That rul'd by reason, gives to honest men The praise they merit, and decrees for such
As are fair vertues enemies, a pain Or punishment proportion'd to their crime. Org. What, Brother, in a rapture? Let us go And shew our grateful duty in our deeds. Clean. As for this Tartuffe, miserable wretch, Leave him to's fate, and let his sins o'rewhelm him. Tart. Ah Laurence, Laurence, thou art a wicked fellow; But Heaven, I trust, will vindicate my cause. Excunt Messenger and Tartuffe; the Officers hale him off the Stage. Laur. Forbear your canting, Sir, I know your inside. Val. Nay, Gentlemen, we must not part thus dully: 'Tis fit our hearts express our happiness; And joyning in a dance begin those sports, Which after marriage shall be more enlarg'd. Here a Dance of eight. Cleanthes Valere Damis Laurence Elmira Mariana Flypote Dorina [The Dance ended, Orgon rises and speaks▪] Org. Let's now with joy unto His Majesty, And at his Royal Feet prostrate our selves, Acknowledging his generous favours to us▪ Then in pursuance of our great devoir, Let us compleat this happy Lovers bliss. Proceeding for their Nuptials, as we are tied In gratitude to Laurence and Dorina, Whose services deserve a large requital: And by sweet Hymen's help crown in Valere A Lovers flame both generous and sincere. FINIS.
EPILOGUE. MAny have been the vain Attempts of Wit, Against the still-prevailing Hypocrite. Once (and but once) a Poet got the day, And vanquish't Busy in a Puppet-Play. But Busy rallying, Arm'd with Zeal and Rage, Possest the Pulpit and pull'd down the Stage. To laugh at English Knaves is dangerous then, Whilst English Fools will think 'em honest Men. But sure no zealous Rabby will deny us Free leave to act our Monsieur Ananias. A man may say (without being thought an Atheist) There are damn'd Regues amongst the French and Papist, That fix Salvation to short Bands and Hair, That belch and snuffle to prolong a Prayer. That use (enjoy the Creature) to express Plain Whoring, Gluttony, and Drunkenness; And in a decent way Perform 'em too, As well, nay better far alas then you: Whose fleshly failings are but Fornication, We Godly phrase it, Gospel Propagation; Just as Rebellion was call'd Reformation. Though Zeal stand, Centry at the Gate of Sin, Yet all that have the Word pass freely in; Silent and in the dark for fear of Spies We march, and take damnation by surprise: There's not a Roaring Blade about the Town Can go so far towards Hell for half a Crown, As I for sx pence; 'cause I know the way: For want of Guides men are too apt to stray. Therefore Give car to what I shall Advise, Let every married man that's Rich and Wise; Take a Tartuffe of known Ability, To Teach, and to Increase his Family, Who may to settle lasting Rformation, First Get his Son, then Give him Education, FINIS.
