M264A 99832763 37237
The Maids Chastity that is troubled in mind, Against young-Mens inconstancy, who proveth unkind: She gives warning to all Maidens that are in the Row, To take heed of false Young Men wheresoere they go. To a pleasant new Tune. YOu young maids that would live chary, And live single and not marry, Nor contract your selves to none, For the Maid is the best that lies alone. Cupid, Cupid, thou hast done me wrong, I have been thy servant now too long; My heart was never free from care, Since I was intangled in thy snare. In thy snare I have been fettered, And often have my businesse letted, In following after Venus train But the Maid is the best that lies alone. Young men they will cog and lye, Maidens they may weep & cry Truth & Conscience they use none, But the Maid is the best that lies alone. In this breast a heart I bear, Tis none of mine I wish it were Once it was mine, if I could have kept it, But now where it is, 'tis not respected. Now I hope to have my heart again, And keep it fast from Venus Chain, Lock it in this Breast of my own But the Maid is the best that lies alone. VVhen I have gain'd it safe agen Then I am free from all young men, And never like to make this moan, But live a single Maid alone. Love is a torment who can abide it, VVho better knows then them that has try'd I count her but for a mad woman still, That seeks to humor a young mans will.
YOung men they be much blinded, Only to know a maidensmind Maids do not believe them if they swear Least after they leave you in a snare. But try their hearts if that you can Before that you love any man: Love is fond & fickle still Then do not humor a young mans will. If a Lover be humored in his condition, Then he doth plead with a strong commission To get his intention if he can The maid is the best that lies alone. For in lying alone ther's no harm taken, And being of an unconstant Love forsaken, Its better then Gold or Silver store, If that she doth never see him more. A maid that lives in an honest carriage Must be careful in her marriage Young men are so deceitful grown, The Maid is the best that lies alone. True Lovers Knot may soon be ty'd, And a maid too soon may be made a Bride, That's not all in conclusion shown But the Maid is the best that lies alone. There is many things for to consider If a man & a woman go together: If Love be wanting between them twain She had better still to lye alone. VVhen they come to a maid a wooing They make no conscience of their doing But use all the deceit they can But the Maid is the best that lies alone. There are false young men in my mind Some proves cross, & some proves kind I will not condemn them all for one The Maids are best that lye alone. Therefore I advise you consider my Song I write to maids, I'le do them no wrong And still I do tell you every one The Maid is the best that lies alone. Printed for R. H. & J Williamson in Cannon street and at the Bible on London-Bridge.
