m35 99828716 33147
A DISCOVERY, OR CERTAINE OBSERVATIONS, CONCERNING The crafty and cursed Proceedings of the Conspirators, or Rebbells of ENGLAND, against their owne King, Queene, Church, Government, then established; To wit 1639. And the Liberty, Peace, Fafety, & Quiet-Beeing, of that our Nation, and other Kingdomes thereunto belonging. By whom the People of other Nations have beene also Cheated and Troubled. Observed by J. M. Whose Hart hath for many yeares together mourned in secret, for the Cala∣mity by the sayd Rebbels, brought vpon his owne, and other Nations. 1. Samuel Chap. 15. vers. 23. Rebellion is as the sinne of witchcraft. They are inclosed in their owne Fat: with their mouth they speake proudly, Psal. 17.10. They are waxen Fat: they shine, yea, they over-passe the deeds of the wicked: they judge not the cause, the cause of the Fatherlesse, yet they prosper: and the right of the needy doe they not judge. Shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord? Shall not my soule bee avenged of such a nation as this? Ierem. 5.28.29. Printed in the yeare 1657.
To the Beloved, Discreet, and under∣standing Reader. SIR, and SIRS; MAY it please you with patience to Read, and consider according to wisdome: and bee not rash to judge, con∣demne, nor censure, as sometimes the humor and custome of some is to doe: euen by my betters. As it shall please God to permit, give your selves convenient time with deliberation, to scanne and marke what you read: not only for what followes in this small pamphlet, but for what it signifies, or further aluds unto: which doth consist of matter beyond the expression of any mortall man, as of himselfe. And though I doe most humbly confesse, that I have neither the head nor the mouth of the Learned, much lesse the Tongue of the Eloquent: neither hath my bree∣ding beene such, as to make mee so capable for such a businesse, as some other men. And however my infirme and weake disposition is knowne, and seene to the world, or to many as wel as to my selfe, yet it is possible, by the gra∣tious assistance of God Almighty, that, though this little Booke comes to bee produced vnto the veuw of the world, by so weake an Instrument from whom it is not expected: yet I haue some reason to conceave a possibility, and that by the providence and power of God, that not onely the wary Rea∣der, but also the Learned may finde some thing in it, worth their notice. Though it doth not follow, that I shall bee fully understood at the first rea∣ding of it. And this I doe mention from mine owne experience, when I haue read the workes of other men. SIR, and SIRS, This may bee intended for some such as doe holde, or have held little or much with Theefes and Murtherers; who by disguising them selves, have not beene rightly knowne to bee what they are: and it would be labor in vaine for to perswade those, who are resolved to cleave vnto them, though the said Conspirators have cast away the feare of the Lord: as may bee well seene by their continuall presumption, flattering, reveylings, purgery, blasphemy, witchcraft, and what so ever possible can be worse. For their disposition is to delight in mischief as well as to flatter themselves with the ruine of others. 2. The desperate condition, the Rebbels of England have brought upon them selves, doth require them to persist, or continew in mischiefe, because it is contrary both to their nature, custome,
and safety, and all the like of them: for to sease from doeing of evill, nor will they sease from seducing of al others, that they can possible provaile withall, for to make them even like them selves, so long as they know of any righteous nation, who doth feare the Lord, and abhorre such guilt, unlesse they bee subdued: without which, not any Nation in all Europe, shall long have rest, unlesse any should bee found to bee like them selves; of whom there is litle likely hood of escaping ous of the snares of the divell: or as litle hope as for a Woolfe to become a Lambe.1. Tim. 1.26. As I have had more then ordmary Reasons, to thinke almost twenty yeares together, and that to my exceeding great sorrow, and griefe of heart. And though some times I have hoped, by the helpe of the Lord, and from the Confidence of other men: that the Rebbels should have beene forced unto obedience, or unto some thing like unto equity. But in all this time. I never expected that the Rebbels would ever willingly yeeld vnto any thing that was righteous, just, or reasonable: because I constantly have had strong Reasons to the contrary, vnlesse they were thereunto forced. These things are Remarkable. First, That they have hypocritically, contrary to their owne protestations, Ʋsurped not onely the Crowne, and Revenues of the King, but the precious Lafe of the King himselfe, and many other worthy Persons, before and since, and that by secret formes of Petitions, framed by them selves in private, and cunningly set the people a worke by some of their owne Busi-bodies, to come vnto Westmunster, from and about London, Ipswich, Buckingam-Schire, and the like factious people, who in a clamerous manner came crying Iustice! Iustice! For those very things that the Conspirators before were resolved to doe: namely, for the taking away of the Laves and Estats of such, as were more blamelesse and honourable, then themselves, by a thousand degrees. And they have Pressed, Imprisonned, Based and Murthered many thou∣sands of their Equals at home and abroad: and they have made Warre with severall forrame Nations, without and against the consent of the King; and that by the helpe of that cursed. Army of theirs, with which they com∣pelled the Country, to maintaine against them selves: and how-ever they falsely pretend, to represent the Body of the Nation, as may appeare in all their Proceedings. Seeing all their Actions have beene contrary, and against the will and minde of the Body of the Nations, as may appeare by their unlawfull choyse of members, like themselves, contrary to the Countrys choyse.
A DISCOVERY, OR Certaine Observations, concerning the crafty and cursed proceedings of the Conspirators, or Rebbels of England, against their owne King, Queene, Church and Government, &c. SIR, and SIRS; MY Reasons, why I, for almost these twenty yeares to∣gether,  haue beene exceedingly desirous to see a firme and a Righteous Peace betweene the Kings of Spaine and France: which, to my comefort, the King of Spaine hath often, and ernestly desiered. And so hath his Helynesse this present Pope: who vnder God, is unto both King∣doms, a Righteous Judge, A faithfull Stuard, A Loving, and A tender-harted Father. Who vnder God, and in the behalfe of God, his Heauenly Father, doth very much desire the comfort, Peace, and Saffety of ther both, they being two, of the most honorablest Kingdoms, of all the world: and the ancientests for Christianety. My Second Reason is, that seeing both Kings, doe as Justly possesse, each  King his owne Crowne, as any in all the world; and therfore it is needffull, and high time; that all stryffe, difference and contention, that is betweene them, may happyly cease, and that godly Loue, and a blessed, and continuall Vnion, might bee obtained betweene the two Kingdoms afore sayd. And so much the rather, because the enemies of them both, and of all vnfained Christians, doe strive with all their might, and pol∣lecy, to hinder it. Thirdly; Because it would bee matter of gladnesse, and great joy of harte,  vnto all the people of God; to Liue peaceably, and quietly in all God∣lynesse, and honesty, which is acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.1. Tim. 2.2. Forthly: Because it is good, and acceptable in the sight of God our  Saviour: Who will haue all men to bee saved; and to come vnto the knowlg of the truth. Neither can the Spirit of God,1. Tim. 2. nor the hart of the Pope,vers. 3.4. bee more greeved then when their Children Associate them selues, with evill Contentious men. Therefore greeve not the holy Spirit of God,Ephe. 4.30. by which you are sealed vnto the day of Redemption.
For God is not the God of confusion,1. Cor. 14.33. but of peace. Wherefore, SIR: my hart doth humbly pray your Majesty; to propound Reasonable Con∣ditions of peace, to your owne Vncle, the King of Spaine; and to all other Christian, and Righteous Princes: who desier to liue at peace with you. And that, for to prevent the shedding of Christian, and Innocent blood, in time to com. Thereby you shall exedingly obleage al Christian, and Righteous Princes, and People; that liue in the feare of God: but especially, your owne Cousin, the King, and his subjects of great Brittain and Ierland, who are greatly opressed by the Impudence of a ge∣neration of Rebbells, and hyppocrits. And also the Duke, and the State of Venice, whose indeavour hath allwayes beene to liue in amity, and frendshippe with the Kings, and Nation of France: who is in great danger of an enemie that is much too mighty for them. Wherefore SIR: if it may please your Majesty, by a speedy cessation, from all hostillity of both sides; by which means, you will bee the better able upon occa∣sion, to withstand your secret enemys; as also to helpe your best Friends, in time of neede: namely, your Cuzon, the King afore sayd, and his sub∣jects: whose distressed Estate, and Condition, hath beene greevous to mee, and to divers others, these many yeares. Likewise, the Duke, and the State of Venice, shall the better obtaine helpe, in their great distresse from your Majesty, or some other Christian Princes; or else, by Reason of the peace a foresaid, the said State shall obtaine the more honourable, and speedy peace, with that enemy, who otherwise will bee too mighty for them. Neither can that at all bee good, or safe for your Majesty, nor your subjects, nor any Christian Prince. Neither can I possible thinke of any other persons, who under God are more Indifferent, Just, and Impartiall Mediators, Composors, of all manner of differences, or any greevances, betweene such Christian Princes, as your Majesty, and the King of Spaine: or the like of you, then the Popes Holynesse, who is (vnder God) un∣doubtedly, for all such Princes and people, as both You, and your Sub∣jects are. And for oft I know, for all other who are unfained Christians, even as a carefull, and a naturall Father for his owne Children. And therfore an able, emenant, and righteous Judge, fit for so waighty and neces∣sary Imployment as that is. Because he is one that feareth God, and hateth covetousnesse, who, in Gods behalfe, and in the place of Meyses, will provide reasonable, and able men, as in Exodus, chap. 18. vers. 21.22. And for the removing of all suspition and scrupell, the said Pope, being of late yeares Nuntius, for the late Pope at Munster: and by his great abillities, and his Loue vnto Equity, through Gods assistance, made, and occasioned such an agreement betweene the King of Spaine, and the Lords the States Generall, of the Vnited Provences: as that neither parties doth com∣plaine,
but rather thanke him. And that because hee knows, that hee doth not Judge only for man, but for the Lord: who is whith him in Iudgement.2. Chron. 19.6. With whome there is no respect of persons, nor iniquity with the Lord our God: nor taking of gifts, for the gift doth blinde the eyes of the Wise.Deutro. 16.19. And though I humbly show my weake Judgement, in that I conceave, the King of Denmarks, and the State of Venice, to bee emenent, and indifferent Judges, which are needfull for such waighty affaires: neither of them having any more Relation to your Majesty of France, then to the King of Spaine: or to bee sure, his Majesty of Denemarcke, hath no more Relation vnto the King of Spaine, then hee hath vnto your Majesty, but rather lesse of the twoo: yet I remember, that when the late difference was betweene the Lords the States Generall, of the vnited Provences, and the Ʋsurpers of Engeland: they chose for theyr Arbitrators, the Lords of Switscherland, the Lords of Geneva, and of the Kingdom of Sweaden; and therfore I humbly present unto your Consideration, and the Advise of your most honourable Privy Counsell, together with the Advice of your most Graue, Learned, and Reverent Cleargy: whether the three Spirituall Electors of Germany, bee not nutrall, and indifferent Judges, for to giue theyr Advise and Assistance, in a buise∣nesse, which concerns all Catholicks, in so high a nature: the King of Spaine, and your Majesty, being both Catholicke Kings; neare neighbours, and neare of Kinne, he being bone of your bone, and flesh of your flesh.Iudges 9.2. Why then will your Majestye bee the Last,2. Sam. 19. vers. 12. that shall Resolve vpon a happy Peace with the King of Spains, (who is one of your best, and your nearest Frends?) Peace being a thing pleasing vnto God, and vnto all that feare him in trueth. It is no disparidgment to any King, or Prince in the world: to follow the Example of Abraham, who was very Rich in Cattell, Silver and Gould: yet for peace-sake, gave choyse to Loth,Genes. 13. vers. 2.7. his bro∣thers Son; who was the meanist and the joungest man. Either to goe to the Right hand, or to the Left: which he pleased, in the 8. and 9. verses of the same Chapter you haue it. SIR: Abraham being the Eldest man, and the mightyest, might so much the better haue clamed some kinde of prehemenence: yet the cleane contrary appeares in Abraham, who was the first that prayed Loth, that there might be no striffe betweene them, and that for these three Reasons. First; his Loue vnto peace. Secondly, because the Canaanites and the Perizzite, were in the land; which was a people whom Abraham did not much Confide in: and who he was not willing, that they should see striffe betwene them two, who weare so neare friends. And yet I doe hartely wish that you had not in you Lande for the most part, if not continually, those who are farre worsse vnto your Majesty, and your best friends and Subjects then ever eyther the Canaanites or the
Perizzites where vnto Abraham in his dayes: I meane such, as are sent or employed by Crumwell, or the like of him, and for him: for to corrupt the mindes of your people, or otherwise to worke out theyr owne ends, who will cause trouble in your Kingdome at the last, and disturbe your Majesty, and such as desire to live in peace. And Thirdly: because they were brethern, that is to say, neare of Kinn: yet not nearer of Kinn, then your Majesty is vnto the King of Spaine. Wher∣fore consider, whether it will not bee the honour, wisdome, and saffety of your Majesty, and your people, and the comfort of all good Chri∣stians vpon the face of the earth, for to Imitate so good and so holy a man as Abraham was, by adhearing to peace with your nearest and best friends, and with all Righteous Princes, States, and Cityes; that desiers to be at peace with you. SIR: It will not bee hard to prove those to bee the most eminent Kings and Princes,2. Chron. Chap. 20. vers. 7. who are most in favor with the King of Kings; neyther was any in those dayes in higher esteeme with the Lord, then Abraham, who was, and unto this day is called The friend of God; because in all things hee did that which was pleased to God:Gen. 12.7. As I. By helping the oppressed against Vsur∣pers. II. By praying for the sinfull Cities of Sedom and Gemorr.Gen. 13.4. III. By obaying the Commands of the Lord,Gen. 18.17.19.23.24.25.26.27. To the end of the 32. vers. . 4..9. in being ready to offer his only Sonne Isaac. IV. By buylding of Altars for the worship of God. V. By calling upon the name of the Lord. VI. In that hee beleeved the worde and the promise of God, which was counted vnto Abraham for righteousnesse: and therefore his earnest intreating of Leth, for the preservation and the continuation of peace betweene them, and their servaunts, was First, be∣cause the God of Peace doe delight in peace, Secondly, it seemes Abram conceaved it to bee both disgrace and danger both to himselfe, and to Loth, for to bee at strife in the eyes of the Heathen, amongst whome they then lived. Thirdly, because they were Brethren, who served one God, after one and the same manner, and so doth the King of Spaine, and your Majesty. Fourthly, they were neere neighbours, and very neer of Bloude, and yet not neerer then your Majesty, and the King of Spaine. SIR: a serious consi∣deration heerof, is most needfull, because the Lord our God is worthy to bee regarded and honoured in these our dayes, as wel as he was by Abra∣ham in his time. SIR: it hath been yeare after yeare, great admiration and griefe vnto me, that the Kingdoms of France, and Spaine, who are of one Religion, one Faith, one Hope, of one minde, and of one Judgment, in matters concerning Salvation: and the God of both Kingdoms, is the Lord of Heaven, and not the God of Rebbells. And yet notwithstanding all this, such lamentable Ruings of the people of both Kingdoms, to the destroying of so much bloude, and Trea∣sure, one of an other: And that to the extreame weakening and disabe∣ling
one of an other? Seeing, it is not vnknowne to the Lords, Clear∣gie, and many other honourable Persons in your Kingdom; that all are not friends to the King, and people of France, who speake them faire:Revel. 2. vers. 2.9. It is as well of some which pretend to bee Christians, and are not: but by their proceedings they rather seeme to bee of the Synagogue of Sathan. And it were to bee wished, that this sorte were not worse then some of those, which doe not professe them selves to bee Christians at all: and that in matter of fraud, deceat and violence, which the nations of Portugall, and of the Vnited Provences can wittnesse, as wel as the King of Spaine,Philip. 3. vers. 2. and his people: wherefore I say, Beware of dogs: beware of evill workers. For First, those who hath donne so much mischieffe vnto their owne, and severall other Nations, by pollicie, and stite of hand; besides open violence: will in the short or in the longe, sinde a tricke, to trouble you and your people: First, eyther by stirring vp some of your owne people, against your best friends. And Secondly, against your owne Person; and so cause Noble, and other Innocent bloud, to be shed in France, like as them selues, by the helpe of their wicked Army, haue done in England. And I am of the minde of the Prophet Jeremiah, who sayd,Jerem. 13.23. If a blacke More can change his skinn, or a Leopert his spots; then may they doe good, who are accustomed to doe evill. It seemes that it was falsely sayd of the Apostell St. Paull, and some others; that they sayd, Let vs doe good, that euill may come of it.Rom. 3.8. I wish that this may not bee truly sayd to bee the practise of Oliuer Crumwell, and some of his adherences. SIR: It was the folly of Nahash, to bee so vnreasonable, as to require the Right eye, of every man in Jabesh Gillead, as a Reproch, insufferable vnto Israell: which stird vp in them such a spirit, that the wholle Army of Nahash was so overthrowne and scattered, that two of his men,1. Sam. 11.2.11. could not bee seene to gether. And therefore, it will bee honourable for your Majesty, and your most faithfull Counsell, before God and the world; to incline vnto peace, vpon resonable Conditions, such as may with ho∣nour bee granted: that it may not bee sayd, that the King, & the Kingdome of France, is the cause of trouble & terror vnto all good Christians (who gladly would liue at peace). Wherefore your Majesty, & your Honourable Councell, and reverent Cleargy, may bee pleased,Numb. 16.24.25.26.27.30. speedily to separate your selues from such an evill generation, in whom is neither feare of God, love of Equity, nor of Christianity. And Saul sayd vnto the Kenites, Goe, depart, get you downe from amongst the Malakites, least I destroy you with them:1. Sam. 15.6. for you showed kindnesse to all the Children of Israëll, when they came vp out of Egypt. So the Kenites departed from amongst the Malakites: & Saul destroyed the Malakites,Vers. 7. for the cruelty which they had done long before, according to Gods owne commaund. From whence your Majesty, and all the good People, may bee gratiously pleased for to observe, that it is very dishonourable and dangerous
for a Righteous Prince, King, or Nation, to bee in Company, or Combi∣nation, or Alliance, with euill doers: who are so desperately wicked as the Rebells of Engeland,Jer. 17.9. who by theft, murther, perjury and falsehood, doe over-passe the deeds of the wicked.Jer. 5.28. They are waxen fat, they shine, yea they over passe the deeds of the wicked. They judge not the cause of the Fatherlesse: yet they prosper.Vers. 29. And the Right of the needy, doe they not judge. Shall I not visit, for these things, saith the Lord? Shall not my soule bee avenged of such a nation a, this? A wonderfull and horrible things,Vers. 30. is committed in the Land; the Prophets pro∣fesy falsely,Izra 10.3. and the Priests be are rule by their meanes, & my people loue to have it so. To wit, Crumwel and his Army, who lives vpon the ruyne of others. Izra tooke speciall notise of the Counsell of those that trembled at Gods Commandement: And the Propet Isaiah bid them, Heare the word of the Lord,Isai. 66.5. that trembled at his word. And in the 2. verse of the 60. of Isaiah, God saith; But to this man will I looke, euen to him that is poore, and of a contrite Spirit, and trembleth at my word. Which I hope your Majesty, and all your good People of France, will doe: and not like Crumwell, and his Company; who haue seduced and deluded many of the people of Eng∣land; and caused them to forsake the Lord God of their Fathers.2. Chron, 28.6. As for himselfe, and the rest of his Leadors, who are Arch-Rebells, it seemes they are the sons of Beliall,1. Sam. 2.12. or, like the sons of Ely, who know not the Lord. Wherefore I counsell your Majesty, to take heed in time, least they lay stumbling blocks in your way,Numb. 31.16. as Balaam the Sorceror was vnto Israëll. Balaam taught, Balac to cast a stumbling block before the Children of Israëll, to doe that which offended God:Revel. 2.14. for which they were punished. Therefore Remem∣ber: O King, and people of France, and all others, high, and low, at home and abroad; whose hope is in the God of trueth: and that doe tremble at his word. Remember what Balack, King of Moab, consulted; and what Balaam answeared:Micah. 6.5. that you may Remember the Righteousnesse of the Lord. Con∣sider seriously the mallitious councell of Ahiphell to Abselom, to an vn∣gratious Son, against so good and so Godly a Father, as King David was: who contrived a difference so foule; even past hope of reconcilement: purposed to make the King out of measure odious vnto all his people:2 Sam. 16.21. by defiling his Fathers Concubines, in the sight of the Son, that all might see it; with an intent to make David to abhorre Abselom; and that all Israëll might deride David beyond all possibillity, or hope of any agreement. So have the Rebbells of England sought by all meanes possible, to make the people abhorre their Gratious King and Queene; and such others as were faithfull in the Land, and more Noble, and Righteous, then any of the sayd Rebbells. How that they devised wicked devises, not only to smite with the tongue the King and the Queen; but also the Lords of Can∣terberry, Strafford, Caple, and many others: who had done no wrong to King nor people,Jerem. 18.18. but their duty onely, to which they were inioyned by the Law of the Land. Then sayd they, Com, let vssmite him with the tongue,
and let vs not give heed to any of his words. I had almost forgot the behaviour of that Generation of Separats, towards the Duke of Buckingham, and his mo∣ther; with Doctor Lambe. I am loath to foule so much paper, and trouble the Reador with so many Lyes as they devised, and devoulged for many yeares together, both within and without the Kingdom of England, purposly, to make all people to abhore them, because it pleased God to give the Duke favour in the eyes of both the late Kings of England. In so much, that I my selfe hearing daily the extreame slaunders, which was contrived and broached against them, by these foule-mouthed and shamlesse people; was almost perswaded, that It was true that was reported of them: and I I was so farre deluded, that I thought, that whosoever should destroy them, would doe God and the Country good servis. But afterwards, I came to vnderstand, that it was nothing else but the mallice of such, who had se∣duced many young, and other people, vnto divers sects, or newe and strange Religeons, by the helpe of whom Crumwell, and his Consorts, hath murthered many who were blamelesse and harmlesse of severall degrees of people, both by Sea and Land: who were without rebuke,Phil. 2.15. in the middest of a perverst generation; who did shine as lights in the Land, and after that the Duke and Lambe, were tyrannically murdered by lude fel∣lows with wicked hands, without any forme of Judgement.Act. 2.23. Next they fell vpon the Bishop of Canterberry, with intollerable back-bitings, and Revi∣leings, saying, First, That he did intend to make the Land Popish. Secondly: That he could not preach himhelse. Thirdly: That he persecuted Godly Ministers: because  it was his office to punish such as stird vp the people to rebellion. Fourthly: That the Pope had sent him a Miter from Roome: which the Conspirators (it seems)  had made them selves, & pretended they found it in a shippe, at the Custom∣house at London: so reporting it that there was an agreement betweene the Pope and him, that he should Raine as Pope in England. Fiftly: when they  caused him (without any Law or Justice) to be apprehended, in the time of the second Parlement, as they called it: that they might collor theyr owne mallicious designes against him: they pretended, that he did indea∣vour to make his eskape: vnto that end hee had a suit of Freez brought him, that thereby hee might the better eskape, without any notice being taken of him. Sixtly, that the sayd Lord Bishop of Canterberry, did accuse the Lord of Strafford; who was also a prisonner, and whom also they did in∣tend to murder, that the sayd Earle of Strafford, Lord Liftenant of Ireland, was the cause of drawing the sayd Bishoppe into his troubles. And that the sayd Earle should say, That the Bishop, was the cause of his troubles. And that one, or both of them, should curse the day that ever they knew one another; and that in reveyling tearms, they should accuse one the other, as it was reported by the Conspirators or their Adhearence. These noto∣rious slanders, they have not bene a shamed for to bring, or to let come in print; for to make those innocent persons exceeding odious to all peo∣ple;
to the end that few, or none should question the cause, or the Reason of theyr taking away theyr lives. But theyr designe was onely to murder them, because they were faithfull to God, the King and the Country; each in his severall places, whereunto they were lawfully called. Being both men of exellent Learning,Levit. 19.15. and Wisedom, courageous, not fearing the persons of the mighty. They were men, fearing God, and scorning Bribes. I observed that one of the greatest causes of the inveterate mallice of his enemies against him,Exed. 18.21.22. next vnto his, being an enemy vnto rebellion: was, that hee would not suffer the meanor soe of people to bee opprest by the mighty: and which were vnder his Governement in Ireland. First, theyr blood-thirsty, and tyranny call proceedings against the sayd EARLE, when he was tryed for his Life, doth apparently show their prepared, and abhominable designes: Namely: a fixt and a firme resolu∣tion, secretly within them selves, by force to take away the Life of the Ne Earle, without any regard vnto Justice, Law or Equity, which showes the doge-like mallice of the Rebbels, against that worthy Person, who was preferd to a place of Quallity, Trust and Power; who was both wil∣ling and able to resist the develish Rebellion, then intended by the Con∣spirators against the King and his Subjects: as appeares by one that was convinced of Pergery: that came as a witnesse against the noble Earle. Secondly, they pretended to convince this Earle of some crime: by the testimony of only one witnesse, who was knowne to bee his profest enemy. Which is contrary to the Law of God, for it is sayd, at the mouth of two or three witnesses he only shall die that is worthy of death,Deut. 17.6. but at the mouth of one witnesse no man shall die. Thirdly, after they were shamefully worsted in theyr accusing this Noble Person of hygh Treason, seeing they could prove no Treason at all against him. Fathly, after the cloase of the prosses, or his charge, given in before: they alleaged three new Artickles against him, with vnhuman Importuni∣ty, to have the Earle presently to answere vnto them: without any time to bethinke him selfe; though by Reason of the infirmety of his body, and his spirits being much spent by pleading by way of answere vnto theyr accusations against him: did earnestly desire some few dayes time, to be∣thinke him selfe: which the Lords of the Vpperhouse thought to bee but Reasonable, yet nothing would content these shamelesse fellows, but a present answer from him. Fiftly, the Ignorant people, being by false Reports, Inveteratly set a∣gainst him, by whome he was accused; that he caused a Horse to bee sto∣len, and after that, hanged the man that bought him, because he might injoy his Estate after his death: which thing proved so foull against them selves, that they did not so much as mention it at the Barre. Sixtly, they stird vp base and unruly Raskalls, not onely for to Impor∣tane,
but to compell the Lords of the house of Peares, to pas a Bill, for to take his life, without Law, and contrary to Law, and against the will of the Lords. Offering violence to theyr persons, in case they would not graunt it; notwithstanding they found nothing against him worthy of death: which the Lords fully declared. Seaventhly, when the Bill was past, it was still by the Law of the Land;  in the power and choyse of the King, to signe the Bill, or not. His Majesty having also declared; that he found in the sayd Earle nothing that toutched his Life justly; and the Conspirators supposing the King would by no meanes be prevailed with all to signe the sayd Bill: they gave out words presumptiously; that in case hee would not, they would pull downe the Tower of London, where the sayd Earle was Imprisoned, and teare him in peeces. This ruyd multitude, being set on by the slye and secret Conspirators;  came tumultuously vnto the Kings Court: and forced them selves in, whether the Porter would or not, and sayd, That they would have no Por∣ter at all there, but would speake with the King, when they pleased: the like was never knowne before. They prest so hard vpon his Majesty, neyther would they leave him,  vntill he was forced to promise them, that hee would advise with the Bishops, and then signe the sayd Bill: Nor durst the Bishops advise the King to the contrary, for feare of being murdered them selves. I thinke they were threatened too: to that purpose. I have within my selfe, more then ordinary Reason, to thinke that if  his Majesty had not signed the sayd Bill (which was contrary to the Law of God, and the Nation; and against the Kings owne conscience:) then he had beene murdered at that present time, or shortly after. Neither were they yet contented, because that they see, that what they had donne displeased the King, and the Lords of the house of Peares; to see so Noble and so Innocent a person to loose his Life; as the sayd Earle of Strafford was: contrary to Law and Conscience. Therefore this theyr impudence, brought a necessety vpon them selves; to have murdered the King: had he not departed from London when he did: and yet they blamed him because hee departed. This is the Reason, that the Precedences and Princes of King Darius, sought occasion against Daniell: because God gave him wisedome,Dan. chap. 6. vers. 4.5.6.10.12. and an excellent spirit was found in him: and therefore the King thought for to set him over the whole Kingdome; wherefore, like Balaam, his sayd enemyes conspired to make him cast off his duty to God, or to forfeyte his Life to the King, because that the Lord gave him savour in the sight of the King: who better deserved it, then the sayd Precedences or Princes. So because there was found in the Earle of Strafford so much Courage, Wisdome, and the feare of the Lord, as not to bee a Rebbell like his enemies, therfore
they, like vnto the Princes of Daryons, sought by all vnlawfull meanes their serpentlike heads could possible devise to deprive the King, and the Nation of England, of a Gentleman who was more noble, able, honest, and Righteous, then the best of them selves, only because his workes were Righteous, & the Intentions of the Rebbells was then wholly or mischiefe, just like vnto Cain,1. Ioh. 3.12. who was of that wicked one, and slew his Bro∣ther for no other Reason, but because his owne workes were evill, and his Bro∣thers good. They prepared a way to destroy Daniell, saying; wee shall finde nothing against him,Dan. 6. vers. 5. except it bee concerning the Law of his God. And because Da∣niell durst not neglect his duty, and so breake his peace with his God: when he knew of the conspiracy, contrived by his enemyes, who had prevailed with the King to signe it: he went into his house, and his windowes being open towards Jerusalem,Vers. 10. hee kneeled vpon his knees, three times a day, and prayed, and gave thankes before his God, as hee did a∣fore time. Heere vpon, Daniell was accused to the King by his sayd enemyes, for breaking the Kings Decree;Vers. 12.13.14.15.16. thinking therby to have taken his Life from him: Inciting the Law of the Meades and Persians, which might not bee changed. Whereat the King Darius was sore troubled: but it proved to the de∣struction of the conspirators them selves. From which I observe: that many times evill men, brings good men into great trouble: as appeares by the conspiracy of Hammon against the Jews; which caused Mordicay o rend his Clothes, and put on Sacke-cloath, with Ashes: and went out into the mist of the City, and cryed with a loude and a bitter cry. From whence I conceave it to bee a sad, and a dangerous thing, for good women, and good mens daughtors, to be Married unto Rebbells; or into any Rebbellious famely: Because oft times, besides Bedding with those, who are defilled with Theft, Lying, and many other crying sinnes, likewise their being knowne to be gilty of shedding of innocent bloud; to wit, those that are of such famelye, come by that means, oft times to be destroyed;Iosuah. 7.20.24. and theyr Wives and Children with them. Ioshua, as it apears by Akan and his Children: who were stoned with stones, and burned with fire. So likewise Dathan and Abiram, perished with their wives, their sons, and their little children: When the earth swallowed them up, and their houses, and all that pertained unto Kor, went downe alive into the pitt:Numb. 16.27.30.31.32.33.34. and the earth cloased upon them: and they perished, from among the congregation. So that all Israëll, round about, fled at the cry of them. And there came out a fire from the Lord, which consumed the two hun∣dred and fifty men,Vers. 35. that offered Incence. Partly, because they set them selves against Moyses and Aron; whome it had pleased the Lord to set over them:Take notice of this, O as the Rebbells have done against the King, the Bishops, and others of the Clargy of England. Therefore, it is needfull, that all good men,
seperate them selves from such wicked men,King of France, and beware in time. as the said Rebbells bee: According to the advise of God, and Moyses, his servant. And the rather, because the basor sort of their owne adhearance, doe take upon them the places of Ministers: and those that are the true servants of God, are despy∣sed, and rejected. And some slandered, imprisoned,Isa. 53.3. and some of them murdered: with the cruell hands of Rebbellious Tyrants. And therefore, they can indure nothing, but what is contrary to sound Doctrine: neyther will they indevor to know sound Doctrine, but after their owne lusts,2. Tim. 4.3. they heaped to them selves Teachers, who dispise just Dominion, speaking evill of Dignities, and of all others who are better then themselves; and of other things, which they neyther know, nor vnderstand. Woe vnto them, for they have gon in the way of Cane,Iude. 7.8.9.10.11. and ranne greedely after the error of Balaam for reward. Who also will one day perish in the like gainsaying of Core, without timely repentance, and amendment. It is not the meannesse of the persons of the Rebbels that I meane, but the basenesse of their beha∣viour towards God, their King, and Contry: nor yet of the mean quallety, of Groomes, Coachmen, Coblers, Souldiors, and the like: that I disdai∣ne at. But because they presume vpon that which belongs not vnto them: neyther are they in any measure fit for it. By reason whereof, the word, and the trueth of God, is despised, and slighted, which is preached by his owne Servants, who were thereunto lawfully called: who, like the faith∣full, and holy Prophets of the Lord, desiers to keepe a good conscience to∣wards God, in the discharge of their duty, which is contrary to the proce∣dings of the Rebbells. Therfore it is, that these conseated, and busie fel∣lows are not onely allowed, but colleaged with all, by the Conspirators; who had rather be flattered to hell, in their wickednesse, then to be justly re∣proved, by the true Messingers of God. Hence it is, that so many are persecuted and droveout of their livings, and out of their native country, and which is worsse, divers for a lively-hood, doth suffer them selus to be perswaded, to preach contrary to their owne Consciences; without which they cannot subsist, nor be quiet in the Land, as the case now standes. Besids all this, I have great reason to conceave, that some of the chieffe of the Rebbells of England, also some of Schorland, and some others else where, in which three partys, was signefied & comprehended the body and foundation of Rebbellion, before the Rebellion was knowne in the shape or likenesse of a most huge & mighty Cockatrice, having it seemes, some relation vnto the Prince of darkenesse: To wit,Mark. 9.25 some foule spirit, powerfull in strength, & wonderfully garded for his owne defence: full of subtilty,Revel. 18.2. and evill intention, and it seems had some relation to one of those great Dragons whereunto Haman was likened,Hest. 11.6. which you shall finde mention made of in the History of Heaster, or vnto the great Redde dragon, that fought against Michaell, ad his Angells. Who, for defeat, rage, mallice,Revell. 12.7.8.9. and
horrible mischiefe is in a great measure immetated by the Rebbells of England: which, to the wonder of a great part of the world, shall by Gods gratious assistance, more fully apeare here after, yet notwithstanding, the trueth of these Comparisons, whereunto I liken the Rebbells of England, yet these fellowes, like vnto proud Senecharab, who is termed the great King of Assiria, doe boaste in an impudent manner, of their wicked and curssed coun∣cell; and vsurped strength for warre:Isa 36.4. can finde also a Rabshakeh, full of bouldnesse against their Souveraine Lord, and King, and many others of their betters. Who pretend, they doe not all this violence, without the Lord:Vers. 10. that is to say, they pretend, that they Rebbell against their King, and destroy their Nation, in the behalfe of the Lord. See their Serpentlike subtilty, resembling exactly that of Rabshakeh, when as hee said, Let not Hezekiah deceave you, for hac shall not be able to deliver you. Neither are they lesse blasphemous then Rabshakeh,Isa 36. in their severall expres∣sions against God:v. 14.15. as well as presumptious and slanderers against their rightious King. Neyther doe they come short of Rabshakehs rule, and bouldnesse, in stirring vp the people to Rebbell against their King: but they exceed him in this, that they compell, by force and violence, the peo∣ple to Rebbell against their lauwfull and righteous King. Nay, the Traitors of England, doe not only abhorre, and scorne all those, who doe offer to mention, that by the helpe of God Almighty, the King of England, and a righteous government, shall be againe re∣stored: but they pretend it high treason for any man to say so, and vpon this account, they murder many of the Kings subjects, who are more Noble and Righteous, then themselves Neyther in theyr best discourses, will they bee ashamed to say; Beware, least the King deceave you, or any body for him, saying, the Lord is able, and will restore vs to our native country, and with our neyghbour nations. All whome hath beene wonderfully cheated, and abused by the hypocriticall shifts and fraud, of a generation of Jugglers. Neyther will they want brason and whorelike faces, to say to other ho∣nest men, who are not vnder theyr power or Jurisdiction; Bee not yee decea∣ved, to thinke that the Lord shall restore againe Charles Stuard, to the Crowne, and Kingdom of England: seing wee have conquered it, and wee have forced the Por∣tugall, and the Hollanders to doe what soever wee pleased;Isa. 36.18.14. and where is the Lord, that shall hinder vs? And, who are the Gods of all these Nations that have delive∣red their Lands, theyr Goods,1. Sam. 22.23. and theyr Shipps, from being taken and spoiled by vs? Or, theyr men from the edge of our sword? Wherefore consider this, O King, and Nation of France, and all other good people, both hygh and low, at home and abroad, in whome is eyther courage, councell for warrer, or the feare of the Lord; least that curse come vpon you, which came vpon Meroz by the Angell of the Lord:Judg. 5.23. not for any act that Meroz had donne, but because the inhahitants of that city, did not come forth, to the helpe of
the Lord, against the mighty. This was a double & a bitter curse, because the Righteous God, doe count him selfe to be slited, when men doe forbeare, or withould their helpe from the distressed in time of neede, when Op∣pressors are powerfully bent to mischiefe, who make no difference betweene Right and wrong. Remember what is sayd of such as steale, or joyne with theefs. Where God saith vnto the wicked, what hast thou to doe,Psal. 50. vers. 16.17 18.19. to take my name in thy mouth, seeing thou hatest Instructions, and casteth my words behind thee? when thou sawest a theef, thou consentest with him, thou givest thy mouth to evill, and thy tongue frameth deceite. From hence we may see, God will not owne those, who consent or joyne with theefes. And a worse forte of theefes cannot bee, then the Rebbells of England: because no honest man is ever the better by joyning with such, but allways the worse. Remember the Inhabitants of Seachem. And because God is silent, and seemes to take no notice,Judges 9.4.5.6.44.45 there∣fore they thinke that all is well: Supposing God to bee like them selves: who sayth: Now consider this, yethat forget God: Least I teare you in peeces,Vers. 21.22 and there bee none to deliver. So that you may see, that it is more dangerous, in regard of the Judgements of God vpon such, or as doth hange over the heads, or attend vpon such, as this evill generation is: then the Infamy of the world can bee by farre, in regarde of men. SIR: That which may the more, and the rather stirre vp the spirit of your Majesty, and your good people, against the sayd Rebbells in Eng∣land: Is this: First, Because in former time, in the like case, the Kings of England  have divers times beene helped, or Releeved with Shipping, Men,2. Chron. 36 z 2. and Mony, from France, when the Relation betweene the Kings of France and of England, was not so neare as now it is.Ezra: 1.1. Secondly, they that destroy with persecution and murder, your best friends  will also take occasion to doe the like by your Majesty: as soone as they have prepared them helpers, like vnto them selves, in your Kingdom. Thirdly, because it is sayd, that the Innocent shall stirre vp him selfe,  against the hypocrite. What credite can it bee for your Majesty,Job. 17.8. or any other that loves Equity, to have correspondence in the least, with the throne of iniquity, that frameth mischiefe by a Law?Psal. 94.10. Who gather them selves togeather, against the soules of the Righteous:Psal. 94.20.21. and condemne the In∣nocent bloud. Fourthly, that which makes my hart even tremble within mee, is, that  these Sonnes of Lucefer, have so contrived theyr villonous plots, as to cause your Majesty, & the King of England, to fight one against the other: as I greatly feare they will bring to passe, or that some one or other of his Fathers house: at the feare thereof, I am greatly troubled. I have just cause likewise to thinke, that they are also the cause of the continuation of the difference so long betweene your Majesty, and your owne Vnkle the King of Spaine, by which meanes the Godly and Just indeavours of the Pope, and others,
towards that needefull worke, are from time to time blasted, and frustra∣ted; even of the sayd Pope, and many others, who are more Just in theyr Demands, and more Innocent in theyr Actions, then the best of them: to wit, the Rebbels of England: because the feare of God is with them: but the sayd Rebbells have fully, and longe since, many ways approved them selves, to be at the least, some of those, who God is sayd to abhore, and to hate, which cannot cleare them selves, of the gilt of none of these six things, which God is said to hate in the 6. of the Proverbs of Salomon. Neyther can they ever cleare them selves of the seaventh: which is, an abomination to the Lord. To wit, proud Lookes, Lying tonges, hands that shed Innocent bloud: an hart that deviseth wicked Imaginations; feet, that bee swift in run∣ning to mischiefe, a false witnesse, that spaketh Lyes. And him that soweth, dis∣cord amongst brethren, or emnety betwixt deare friends. And who so neare like to the divell, as the Robbels of England? who hasten them selves to doe all such things.Psal. 5.6. The Lord will abhirre the bloudy and deceatfull man. David is against them that flatter with their tounges, neyther is it easy to prove, that such are better then Traittors.Psal. 35. vers. 19.20. That same Holy King spake, and prayed against such as hated him selfe without a cause: who spake not for peace; but devised deceatfull matters, against them that weare quiet in the Land. Two very good Kings were blamed;2. Sam. 19. vers. 5.6. the one, by the chiefest Generall of his owne Army; that he hated his friends, and loved his enemies Now, it is most certaine, that such as doe so, doe shame the faces, and weaken the hands, and sorely greeve the harts of all theyr best friends, and most faithfull servants as appeares by Naball,1. Sam. 25.10. the Carmollite. Naball rayled at them which had showne kindenesse to him, and his: And marke how his honest servants behaved them selves in this case,Vers. 14. who by their rela∣tion of David, and his Mens behaviour towards them in the field, who weare a wall vnto them night and day, together with the haste and wis∣dome of Abygaile, theyr Mistres: prevented the destruction of all the hous∣hould of Naball,Vers. 16.17.18. and of all that belonged vnto him. For the prevention there of, David praysed and blessed the Lord God of Israell: and blessed the advise of shee that appeased his Anger, which kept him from shed∣ding of bloud, and from avenging himselfe with his owne hand. Had not Abygaill wisely hasted to meet David, who, with terms of humillity apeased his anger,Vers. 31.33.34. there had not one beene left alive, that pissed against the wall. The second, vnto whom the Seer Jehuw, the son of Hannania said vnto that good King Jehosophat; shouldest thou helpe the vngodly: and love or joyne with them that hate the Lord?2. Chron. 19 vers. 2. Therefore is wrath vpon thee from before the Lord. O King of France! who hath bewitched you; that you should Love and joyne,NOTA. with the enemyes of God, and your Majesty? who trouble those, that gladly would live in peace; and deceave all such, as vnderstand not their evill Intentions, nor their divellish wiles? Who, like cunning Jug∣gelors,
secretly worke out theyr owne ends, by slijte of hand; and will doe by you, as the Phillistens did by Sampson,Judg. 14: 17.18. when they plowed with his heyffer. That is; the Rebbells of England, will bee exceeding vigelent, for to stir vp, or procuer such as shall advise your Majesty, and your Ho∣norable and faithfull Councell, by such means, as none but them selves, and such as are like them selves, doe vse to practise vnto such things as shall be contrary to equity, godlynesse, and honesty; because their pra∣ctise is, to bring those that are blamlesse, to bee so wicked as them selves:1. Tim. 2.2.3.4. and by that meanes, they will worke out their owne ends, or that which shall tend to their owne advantage, namely, that which shall bee contrary to the futor safty and peace of you, and your people: vnlesse you, and your honorable Councell, bee very carefull to prevent the said Conspirators in time. And this I mention from long experience of their evill example, towards our owne, and other nations: the trueth whereof the world can witnesse with me. Therefor, the advise of Ecclesiasticus, is very proper: namely,Chap. 6. vers. 6. to have many friends, and but one Councellor of a thousand. Tis needefull, that one bee wary of his secrets, as the apple of his eye. A faithfull friend in time of need, is a stronge defence; and he that hath found such a one, hath found a treasure. The whole chapter is worth the consideration of those, that desier to bee Rightly informed:Vers. 14. which the Rebbells of England doe strive to hinder all persons High and Low, from being rightly Informed, by what soever means lyeth in them; therfore they have caused many thousands of Bibles, to bee printed in Holland, and else where, within these thirty and odde yeares, leaving out all the bookes of the Apocripha, and saying, London printed, whenas they were printed in other places: before the beginning of the Rebbellion. But the Lord, who frustrateth the tokens of the lyars, who have beene imployed, or incouraged by the Rebbels of England.Isai. 44.25 Hee will also di∣rect all Righteous Princes, aright in their procedings, if they constantly cleave vnto the Lord their God, and his Servants: And take the advise onely of those, who seeke not great things for them selves. Amazia,Jerem. 45. vers. 5. being forbidden by a Man of God, to let Israëll goe with him to battell; chose rather to loose an hundred Tallents of Silver, which he had payd vnto them: because the Lord was not with them. So hee separated them,2. Chron. 35 7.9. because the Lord is able to give much more. From whence I infer,Vers. 10. that God seldom or never, will have any good worke done by evill men, ney∣ther will God himselfe imploy evill men about his worke: which quiet overthrows the doctrine of the Rebbells of England, who say, and would have all men beleeve, that all their Rebbellious wickednesse, which they have don, was and is, the worke of the Lord: as, Theft, Murther, Slander, and violence: so that there neede no Assirian Rabshakehs: So long as there is so many in England. Another Reason, why it is dangerous for
any Righteous Prince, or State, to have to doe with any such fellows, Is; because it is questionable, whether they have any soules of theyr owne, or none, to loose. Muchlesse have they any Crowne, or Crownes, to loo∣se; or any thinge else but what they possesse by fraud, false-hood, per∣jury, deceat, violence, murder, and the like: Wherefore it is of great necessity that Righteous Princes, take heed in time how they meddle with such Sophesters, who have their Spyes and Spirits, in all places, where any mischieffe is possible to bee done: who doe subsist, and stand, and still injoy what they have formerly stolen, by breeding and making Con∣tention with, and betweene all others, who are better then themselves: both of our owne, and other Nations. Wherefore my most harty desier and prayer vnto God is, that not onely your Majesty, but all other Righteous Princes, and States, with all other people, of what degree soever they may bee, that they may beware of following such an vngodly multitude of evill doers; or their evill example, in any case: but rather remember to keepe them selves farre from every false matter, and the innocent and righteous slay thou not:Exod. 23.2.7.8. for I will not justefie the wicked, and thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the Righteous, being the Lords owne words. SIR: therefore bee pleased to Consider, whether such Servants, as was Eliezer, who served Abraham, or Joseph, vnto Pharow; or Daniell, vnto Darias; or Samuell, vnto God him selfe, and vnto the Israëlits. It is worth observation, to take notice of Abrahams Servant, what care hee tooke, in the absence of his master, and how he craved the Blessing, and Assistance of the God of his master Abraham: that he might the better performe his oath vnto Abraham, and his duty vnto Isaack; and before hee had done praying,Gen. 24.13.14.15. the damsell came, which God had apoynted for his masters Son: namely, Rebeckah: see Josephs integrety, faithfulnesse, and honesty, towards Pottepher his Master, who intrusted him with all that he had, and how God blessed the Egyptians house for Josephs sake.Gen. 39.4.5.6 7.8.9.10.11.12.13. Yet as godly, as vpright, and as innocent as Joseph was: that did not excuse him, from being wrong∣fully Imprisoned: and as good a servant as hee was, yet his Masters wrath was kindled against him,Vers. 13. to the 19. by misinformation. It pleased Darius to preferre Daniell above the Precedents and Princes, because an excellent Spirit was found in him: for which they sought oc∣casion against Daniell, but they could finde no occasion, for as much as hee was faithfull:Dan. 6.3.4. neyther was there any errour or falsehood found in him. It were wel, if every one could make his Integrity, and his vprightnesse appear, as Samuell did his in the presence of the Lord, and his Annoynted. Hee called the people to witnesse, saying, Whome have I defrauded? Whome have I oppressed?1. Sam. 12.3. or, of whose hand have I receaved any Brybe to blinde myne eyes there∣with? Happy were it for all Righteous Princes, States and good People, that
all their Subjects and Servants could say so: it would shortly hereupon follow, that the Raigne of the Conspirators of England, would be of no long continuance. Now, for to know who are most Faithfull vnto God, & their Righte∣ous  or Lawfull Prince, or at least these are most likely: Who walke constantly,Act. 24.16. vprightly, and indevour to keep a good Conscience towards God, and towards Men. Secondly, such will doe wrong to no man, neither are they proud, nor  contentious, nor envious against any man, without a cause; especially they will bee sure not to abuse, or scorne any one whome they know to bee Loving and Faithfull vnto theyr Prince, or Master. But on the contra∣ry, they vvill surely Honour, Love, and bee very glad of the welfare of all such. Thirdly, they will Courteously, Wisely, and Kindly behave them sel∣ves  at all times, towards all men, of vvhom they know no hurt, not only for good example: but theyr continuall indeavour vvill bee to get theyr Prince and Master more and more Friends, to the vtmost of theyr povver: and more especyally, vvhen they know theyr Prince or Master, to bee in distresse, or stands in need of helpe. Much lesse vvill they disoblige any honest man, vvhereby they may bring a scandall or reproach vpon his Prince, Master, or Friend, or any of theyr Followers. Fourthly, They which are so qualefied, will have a continuall care to  cary them selves Soberly, Righteously and Godly, and so vvithout offence, that all enemyes, who are given to Callumniate others,Tit. 2.12. may be ashamed vvhen they speake unvvorthyly as of evill doers. For it is better,1. Pet. 3.15 16. if the vvill of God be so, that ye suffer for vvel-doeing, then for evill-doeing. It doth exceedingly concerne all Righteous Princes, to follow the Ex∣ample of David, King of Israël: both in respect of theyr ovvne vvalking vvith God, before vvhom they stand, as is specefied in the 101. Psalme,1. Kings 18.15. the three first verses. It vvould bee exceeding pleasing vnto the King of Kings,Gen. 14.19.20. vvho is the most High God. Therefore it is convenient for Kings to bee circumspect in all theyr thoughts, vvords, and actions.Ephes. 5.15. See then that you walke circum∣spectly; Redeeming the time, because the dayes are evill.Vers. 16. By this meanes God will make you able to quensh and resist all the fiery darts of the wicked.Fphes. 6.6. to the end. It is needfull, that all Righteous Princes doe often consider the Exam∣ple and Resolution of one of the best Kings that ever was in the worlde: not onely to Read, but vvarily and seriously consider how exactly David resolved concerning those, who should serve him, or not come in his sight. Psal. 101. included in the five last verses. The carefull practise of this, will cause you, and all Righteous Princes, to finde favour with God, and all good men: vvhich vvill bee a meanes to make Spyes, or men vvho have evill Intentions of them selves, or sent by others, shortly more and more to absent them selves from the pre∣sents
of all such Princes. Otherwise it vvill bee hard to vvithstand theyr odarious bouldnesse, vvho are now adayes growne more shamelesse then those were in the time of Ahashueros the King. For though Hamons Wife, and all his Friends, were so wicked as to advise him at his Complaint, tolet a Gallows be set up to hang Mordicai, fifty Cubits high: yet vvith all, they wished himselfe to speak vnto the King, for his consent: by which it seems they were not so Impudent as to send swarms of Rascallity, of theyr owne adherence: 1. To the House of Commons. 2. vnto the House of Peares, as the Rebbels of England did by threatnings, to force them to passe a Bill against the Life of the Lord Liftenant of Yreland: 3. who presently after pres∣sed into the Kings owne House, by force against his will, & by shamelesse importunity, got his Majesty to Signe the same against Lavv, Custome, or Equity, for the taking away of the Life of so Noble a Person: to wit, the Earle of Strafford, to the great griefe of the King himselfe, and against his vvill. This vvas in the yeare 1641. to the sorrow of many of the Nation. Much-lesse did Hamon,Esther. 5.14 or any of his Party, presume or intende to take away the Life of Mordica,2. Kings. 2.32. or any of the Iewes, vvithout the consent of that King, as the fayd Rebbels did after that: by the Lord Arch-Bishoppe of Can∣terberry, the Lord Caple, the Earle of Darby, SIR Charles Lucas, and many others of our Nation:2. Sam. 3.39. who were more Righteous, and better then them∣selves. Wherefore I pray, as sometimes King David did: the Lord reward the doers of such evill, according to their wickednesse, because thereby our present King is weake; (though a Righteous, & annoynted King) because the Vsurpers of England are as yet too mighty for him, meerely by Reason of the differences between other Princes procured or continued by the Contention, sowen or occasioned by Crumwell, and some of his party. As may partly apeare by that innocent bloud, which was shed in Portingall: who were the occasion that nation Revolted from the King of Spaine, as was mentioned by the Portingall Ambassador vnto them selves in England, not many yeares since: whereof I have beene credeably informed. For though the Rebbellion in England, was not then in its full strength and Rigour: yet there was a resolution thereof in many of the Conspira∣tors longe before: as by the helpe and the providence of the Lord, shall more fully hereafter appeare. Therefore, in the behalfe of God Allmighty, who some times taketh the wicked in their craftynesse.1. Cor. 3.19 For the Wisedom of this world is foolishnesse with God. For it is written, he taketh the wise in their owne craftinesse. I doe humbly In∣treat your Majesty, the Nobillety, and Godly Cleargy, and all the good people of France; as all other Righteous Princes, Republicks, States, and Citys, at home and abroad: That they would bee pleased, seariously to consider the sad condition of our present King, and of all his Fathers house.Psal. 11.3. For if the foundations bee destroyed, what can the Righteous doe? And ther∣fore
I vse parte of the words of Mordica, vnto Esther the Queene: Na∣mely:2. Pet. 2.2. If you doe the will of the Vsinpers afore said, and let them goe on in these their pernisious wayes. Thinke not with your selves, that you, or your good people,Esther 4.14 shall scape free, or speede better then those of our owne, and so many other Nations hath done already, to wit; England, Scotland, Ierland, Portingall, the Vnited Provinces of the Netherlands, and Spaine. All these can witnesse by experience, what kinde of Apostels or Saints these Conspirators of Eng∣land are. Neither doth it stand with their condition or safty, to leave off this theyr trade, as longe as they live: for feare least theyr owne doggs, or Adherance, should plucke the pray out of their teeth, and breake theyr jaws in peeces. It will bee the wisedome of all them, which are not sa∣tisfied to search out the trueth of all this, like as Jobe in the like case,Job. 29.17. vers. 16.17. saith of himselfe, Because I delivered the poore that cryed, and the Fatherlesse, and him that had none to helpe him: & the cause that I knew not, I scarced out: ther∣fore the blessing of him that was ready to perish, came vpon jobe. Such hel∣pers doth the King, & the oppressed subjects of England, now stand need of. See the Example of Daniell, and those that were with him, that brought the wickednesse of the wicked, which they malliciously intended to their neighbour vpon theyr owne head, & put them to death. Thus the Inno∣cent bloud was saved the same day, in the 62. verse of the History of Su∣sanna. And I have with deliberation observed, that it hath all wayes been the custome of the Righteous; to set them selves against oppressors; as may appeare by the example of Abraham; who, as soone as he heard that Loth, and the people amongst whom hee lyved, was taken,Gen. 14.14 15.16.17. hee presently Armed his Servants, and rescud them, without any Prophet to himselfe. Secondly, Not the Souldiers of Crumwells Army, which take vpon them to preach: but the Priests shall make an atonement for the sinnes of Igno∣rance, for the soule of the Ignorant, before the Lord. But the soul that doth ought presumtuously, the same reproacheth the Lord. And that soule shall bee cut off from among his people, and it follews:Numb. 15.28.30.31. because hee hath dispysed the word of the Lord, and hath broken his Commandement, that soule shall bee vtterly cut off. The Ephraëmyts destroyed Oreb, and Zob: who were vsurpers in Israëll.Judges. 7.25. Gideon, with his three hundred men, who desiered bread, to refresh his faint and hungery men, were obrayded by the men of Sucooth, and Penuell:Jud. 8. vers. 5.6.7.21. yet persued, and slew Zebah, and Zalmanna. And Samuell sayd vnto Agag the Amallakite.1. Sam. 15.33. As thy sword hath made women Childlesse so shall thy Mother bee Childlesse amongst women: and Samuell hewed Agag in peeces, before the Lord in Gilgall. Davids servants, whom hee sent to comfort Hannan in kindnesse:2. Sam. 10. vers 6. being reproched, and villenously intreated. For which David made them to stinke.
And David slew the men of seaven hundred Charrets, of the Assirians, and forty thousand horsmen who helped the Amonits.Vers. 13.14 18.19. By which you may see, that wicked men, and those that helpe them, are oft times distroyed to gether. Beware of false Prophets,Zachar. 13.4. which come to you in sheeps Clothing, or weare a ruffe garment to de∣ceave. I meane such, who oy crafty and suttle Arguments, seeke to make difference betwixt you, and your best friends: whose friendship you neede, and they neede yours. Therefore, they seeke to worke out their owne ends, by the ruying of you, and your friends, who therefore by Christ are called Ravening wolves. And Right well may you know them, if by the advise of your vnfained Councell, you please to looke backe vpon the fruits of them:Matth. 7.15.16. who vnto England, and many other Nations, hath proved the worst shepheards that ever the world bred. Neither are they lesse slacke, or negligent, in following theyr hurtfull designes, then the Pharisees were, who compast Sea and Land, to make Procelites for their owne vse: which Procelites being prevailed withall, and instructed by such Conspirators, they become two-fould more the Children of hell, then themselves.Matth. 23.15. These are they, who smitte with their tongues, & partly murdered the King, Queen, & others of the best of the Nation of England: as well of Low,Jer. 18.18. as of High degrees of men: by their mallitious slanders, with their tongues.1. Kings 21.9.10. These are those sons of Beliall, like those who boare false witnesse against Naboth the Ieserellite, for the taking away his Life, and his Inheritance. Such were they who by the Conspirators of England, and the false Prophets together, were incouraged against the Duke of Buckingam, and his Mother: and it seems were imployed to murder Doctor Lambe by day, in the streets of London,Acts 7.52.57.58.59.60. with stones, like Stephen the Marter. And the fore said Lords, Canterberry and Strafford, these, and many others of the most emenent, and faithfullest of all the Kings Subjects; were murdered, by the false Accusors. First, in their Honour. And Secondly, their Lives, by wicked hands: by the contrivance of their Leadors, which caused them to erre;Iesa 3.12. who distroy the way of theyr path. Neither will theyr conscience sticke, to make Marchandise of you,2. Tim. 3.3. and your people: if you take not heede in time, and make such a peace as you can, with your owne Vnckle the King of Spaine; these are the Men, that sell the Subjects of theyr owne gratious King, for handfuls of Barly, and peeces of bread, to slay the soules that should not dye, for feare least they should gather together, to call the Traitors in question for their Theft, Treason, & Murder against the King, & the Nation of England; & they save alive the soules that should not live, because in matter of trust,Ezek. 13.19. they dare not confide in any other, but who are Children of wickednesse like themselves, and have made shipwracke of a good conscience, in some measure like the Conspirators them selves. Consider this, all ye who are Lovers of Equity, & doe expect to find mer∣cy in time of need: who reverence the God of trueth, who would not bee as them that mocked the Messengers of God, and dispised his Word vntill
the wrath of God did arise, so that there was no Remedy lest.2. Chron. 36.16. For there shall bee judgement mercylesse, to them that have showne no mercy. Remember the dubble, and the bitter cursses of Meras, and the Inhabitantes thereof.2. Iames 3.13. Cursse ye Meras (saith the Angell of the Lord) Cursse ye bitterly the Inhabi∣tants thereof. Because they came not to the helpe of the Lord,Iudg. 5.23. against the mighty. And that the King, and the Kingdome of France, and all other Princes, States, and Cities, may prevent them selves, and their good Subjects, from the like cursse; it were an exceellent thing,2. Chron. 20.3. that your Ma∣jesty, your Nobillity, and your Reverent Archbishops, and the rest of your Learned Cleargy of France, would set them selves first to seeke the Lord, as Jehosophat set him selfe. And without delay, advise with others of your Subjects, Friends, and Brethrem, whom God hath been pleased to blesse with Courage, Wisedom, and Learning, the feare of the Lord, and with harts that are content, with what they Justly possesse, and that such men may bee forthwith appointed by the King, Nobillity, and Cleargy, as afore sayd, diligently to inquier, and search out the matter how, why and by whome, some of the Kingdome of France have joyned with the Oppres∣sors, and Troublors of all good Christians: and who are aproved ene∣mies vnto the King, and the best of his people, and vnto all his most vn∣fained friends: and that they would make it their businesse, to finde our where this cursed Serpent lyes hid: who hath procured all this mischiefe against those that gladly would live in peace. The Righteousnesse of Jobe cloathed him: and his judgement was as a Robe, and as a Diademe; hee was eyes to the blinde, and feet to the Lame.Iob. 29.13.14.15. But wickednesse proceedeth onely from the wicked. Why then will the King of France, any longer bee prevailed withall, to hunt, and to hinder his best friends.1. Sam. 24.13.14. The Lord will one day bee Judge betwixt you, and your friends, whom I have so often mentioned. SIR: Follow the Example of Daniell, and examine causes, that bee difficult with warinesse, as it is in the History of Susanna,Vers. 51.52. that the sworde may bee speedily called backe, and not destroy any longer: and remem∣ber that it will bee bitternesse in the latter end, as Ioab did at the motion of Abnar: though hee was both valliant, and victorious.2. Sam. 2.26.27. It were good to bee knowne, what the Pope, the Kings of England, Denmarke, the State of Ve∣nice, and the like of them, what they have don against the King, or King∣dome of France, that their Assistance nor their Advice, may neyther bee desiered nor accepted: in the composing and ending of all the differen∣ces, betweene the Crowns of Spaine and France. I dare not thinke, but that there is vnderstanding, and conscinable men to be found in all these, & some other States: who by Learning, and godly Wisedom, may be able to decide such waighty matters, without con∣suming of any more Bloud or Treasure: the continuance wherof, is the ru∣ing of your best friends, & the endagering of your Crown and your Per∣son.
And remember that your Majesty hath a Crowne, many good Subjects, a life, & your owne soule, to take care of in time: against that time to come feare & search: I doe most humbly show, that the reason wherefore I presse this so farre, & so high: is of great necessety, for how can I enduer to see the evill that is come vpon other Nations, as well as England? How shall I bee able to see or to heare the mischief, that is like to come vpon your Majesty, & your owne people, as well as vpon some of your best friends already? nei∣ther is it any light affliction, or terror vnto my heart, that the contrivers of mischiefe,Esther. 8.6. doth cause the King of England, or some of his Fathers house, to bee like to come in Arms, against your Majesty: in the defence of those, vnder whome they are compeld to shelter them selvs for protection, and Subsistance. By reason of the wickednesse of the Conspirators, in their owne Land; the like whereof was never heard before. I hope, that what I intend for good, shall not bee vnderstood nor Im∣puted vnto me as evill: Because I feare, or fore-see daungers, by way of warning, which are not so much discovered, nor feared, as they ought to bee for timely prevention. That makes mee more earnest and plaine, then otherwise I should dare to bee. Therfore First, one extremity, forceth another. Secondly, how ever some may interpreate, that so meane a Man, takes so much vpon him, it is not in the behalfe of my selfe, but in regard of the evill, that is already come vpon thousands of my betters: both of my owne, and other Nations. Thirdly, For the prevention of the like in time to come, from your Ma∣jesty, your people, and the like of you; and other Nations, who know not the crafty proceedings of the conspirators of England, so well as my selfe: who in deceat subtilty, and Cruelty exceede all others that I know in the world. Fourthly, though a meane man, should bee vnderstood to rebuke, or to seem to bee too bould;Proverb. 23.24. yet it is sayd, That such an one shall afterward with good∣men, finde more favour, then hee that flattereth with his tongue: especially when affaires and times requier it. Holy King David,Psal. 141.5. was content the Righteous should smite him, and conceaved it a kindnesse to bee reproved; and called it an exellent oyle, that would not breake his head, and he would pray for such in their Ca∣lamnityes. A Fifth Reason is, Because I have yet greater Reasons for all that I have sayd; then any I have yet given: without which I should never have adventured, to have vndertaken the like of this: seeing I have neyther the Head, the Tonge, nor the Penn of the Learned, or Elloquent man, onely the discarge of my owne conscience, betwixt God and my selfe, is the cause I dare conseale it no longer. Sixtly, This is by way of Introduction, or alluding to some thing else:
which by the providence of God Almighty, I have conceaved or vnder∣stood such things concerning the Conspirators, and some of theyr hel∣pers; about these seaventeene yeares. Which out of a timerous, and fearefull disposition, I have hytherto forborne to publish this to the world. In all which time, I have vnfainedly, and constantly longed, and hoped, for a Righteous settlement by other meanes: without my de∣claring my selfe. As by Gods Grace, I hope in time to come, for to doe, If the Lord please for to give me Life and health: and where withall to subsist by. Seaventhly, because what I have to make knowne to the world, is not ea∣sely  entertraind nor vnderstood by all men, espesially by those vnto whose shame it alueds: Neyther can I possibly Imagine, nor dare I give any other Reason why such things, as I have yet to show,1. Cor. 3.19 by the wonderfull works of the Lord: who in his owne time revealeth secrets, and taketh such as are worldly wise, in theyr owne Craftinesse. But why I should come to conceave or vnderstand such things, so longe since; more then any other meane man? I am able to give no other Reason for it; but that it seemes to mee, that God Almighty was pleased to looke vpon my tribulation: which I was in, at that time: To wit,Gen. 31.42. Anno 1636. which great anguish of soule, had laine vpon mee two yeares before: and ever since. But I vnderstood not, that it concerned the Rebbells of England: vntill the yeare 1639. And so at severall times since. The particulars wherof, and the Reasons for it, I shall by Gods Gratious Assistance more fully, and clearly show, in time to come: if it shall please God to deale with mee as afore sayd. But for some Reasons knowne to my selfe, I shall omitt them at pre∣sent. I hope that all such as have been deceaved, or drawen on by the wiles of the Rebbells, & the cunning craftynesse of them, & likewise those that are free from having any hand with them; will beware in time to come; how they give any heed to them, or to any thing they say: further then to secure, or set them selves against them. For these have beene no light things, which have moved mee, to take more then ordinary notice of theyr vngodly proceedings, as well against men of low, as of high de∣gree: of our owne, and other Nations. Therfore it will bee your Wis∣dome, to consider; that it is not a vainething; but it is your life and sa∣fety to cleave vnto those who feare the Lord,Deut. 32.29.47. and beware of Intangling your selves with such Rebbells. So shall you, by the blessing of the Lord, preserve your lives and Estates long in peace. O you that may doe good against the Oppressors; doe it quickly, and with your Might: For there is no worke, nor devise, nor knowledge, nor Wisdome,Eccles. 9.10 in the grave: whether you goe. Now consider what I say, and the Lord give you vnderstanding to doe that which is good. For what can it profit a man,2. Tim. 2.7. though he should de∣vide
the spoyle with them, or bee inriched by brybes, or gaine the whole world,Mark 8.36. and loose his owne soule? Or, what shall a man give in exchange for his soule? Let not him that is, or may bee deceaved, trust in vanity: for vanity shall bee his recompence, and the congregation of hypocrits shall bee dissolate: and fier shall consume the Tabernacles of bribery. They conceave mischiefe,Job. 15.32.34.35. and bring forth vanity, and theyr belly prepareth deceat. Wherfore I say againe, beware of doggs; beware of evill workers; be∣ware of the Conspirators of England: and so I humly take my leave, for this time. SIR, and SIRS: It is not for any thing that I have lost of my owne, in England: though I have suffered enough elsewhere: but it is chiefly to disburden my Conscience, of what I have yet to say. By this the world may observe, that the Vsurpers of England, have by violence removed such as were in power; so that no Justice can bee done by them, though they were lawfully called to the Government; neyther will the Conspirators them selves, relieve the Oppressed by Ju∣stice, though they bee earnestly sought vnto. To doe any thing that is good, they have neyther will nor courage; But theyr study is onely for evill and mischiefe, wronge, and opression and that continually: as may apeare out of what is before mentioned; namely, the complaint which I made to the Protector of the Army, and some others in England, in March last. Therefore it is of great necessity, that all men take speciall heed, of these slye, secret, and cunning deceavors, because they by misleading, and seducing the people of England, within it selfe: so by forms and showes of hollynesse, as by plausable and faire pretences, of indeavoring that Ju∣stice and Judgment may take place, just like Absolom, 2. Sam. 15.2.3.4.5.6. Who seemed to bee Religious, as they doe, vers. 7. But it was to Conspire against the King, and the Kingdome, as the Rebbels of England have done. Then of a sudden, they set them selves against such as by the providence of God, and the favour of the King, and the Law of the Land, were set over them. First, by notorious slaunders in private, against such as were farre more honest, and Emenent then any of them selves. Secondly, in a more open, and Impudent maner, they stird vp many of the meanor sort of people, to bee contentious and envious; like vnto them selves: To wit, the Absoloms, and the Achithophells, against those who it had pleased God to set over them, so that theyr very name and savour, stanke in the nostrills of all that first discovered theyr cursed plottings. Thirdly, they have most grosly sedused and beguyld all other Prote∣stants abroad in other Nations: yet to my owne knowledge, many whereof, namely, of severall other nations; are neyther Cheats. Thee∣ves, Juggelors, nor busy bodies, as the Rebbells of England and some of
Schotland are, as they for many years together have been. Yet like Rabshekahs, with bould & whorelike faces, they adresse or assotiate themselves, with all Protestants, who are Godly & harmles, at home & abroad, as if there were no difference betweene the good Protestants of other Contryes, & that Ge∣neration of Tyrants, Theeff, & Murderors in England: yet by their fauning colloging together with theyr Lies; they have mis-informed and corrup∣ted the mindes of such, as would tremble to thinke of doing such things, as the Rebbells of England have done; yet the mallice of them, have caused the other, that is to say, some Protestants abroad, for to Judge amisse, of those who are fare more Righteous, and harmlesse, then any of those: who are full of all subtilty, by whom, to the great greefe of my hart, many Protestants of other countryes, have beene mis-informed and deceaved. I dovnfainedly acknowledge my selfe to bee a Protestant, but my faith is not strong enough, to beleeve that the name of a Protestant, can Justify mee before God; if I conspire eyther against Catholickes, or Protestants: for to murder them, or to take away theyr Good Names or Estates; all which the Rebbells of England have by fraude and violence, done to both, and which is worsse, to my sorow, I finde my selfe to be past hope, ever to see any remorce, or amendement in the sayd conspirators: who accustome them selves, to contrive and delight in mischiefs; Who cause strife and debate, between frind and frind;Isai. 58.4. betwixt Parents and Children, and betwixt Man and Wife. Who fast for stri∣fe and debate; and to smite with the fist of wickednesse.Vers. 6. The fast that I have chosen, saith the Lord: is to loose the bands of wickednesse, to vndoe the heavy burden, and to let the opressed goe free, and to breake every yoake. But the Rebbells of England, by fraud and strong delusions, have Mur∣dered their betters, with their tounges and wicked hands; and taken away the Estates from the fatherlesse, and the Widdows: vnlesse some small matter, they leave to some, yet hardly so much as will keepe them alive, in regard of the quallety in which they have formerly lived, and by the helpe of their hypocritecall Army, who have beene instructed, and bred by seditious Parents, and by some other factious famelyes, as by some scismaticall Ministers; who for their bellys, and filthy lucers sake,Rom. 16.18 and by creeping, or sneaking into houses; have by faire speeches, or fanning words, deceaved the harts of the simple. Where they were not able to seduce men, they would cast in theyr poyson, where they found silly women; who by them were leade away captive,2. Tim. 3.6. such as were laden with divers lusts, and by their meanes become contentious against their hus∣bands. And these sedusors, and their followers, are they who have con∣stantly and wickedly, incouraged, and aplauded the sayd Army, who, like Doeg the Edomite, serve the Conspirators even as Spyes and Infor∣mors against the peaceable and tender harted men of England,1. Sam. 22.9.18. whose consciences serve them not to bee Rebbells, against their lawfull King
and Nation: because their soules abhorre it, and so doth mine. And by the help of the said Armye, have Crumwell, and his consorts, murde∣red the Fathers, and the Pillers of our country; vpon whom (vnder God) the peace and prosperity of England rested: And by whose Industrons care, the lives, liberties and Estates of our Nation, of all degrees; were in safety,1. Pet. 2.13 14.15. so long as God and the King, and those who were sent by him, were obayed: according to the Laws of God, & our Land. But these dog-like Edomites, have murdered the Kings subjects, by sea and land, at home and abroad, by selling them vnto Turks, or the like. And had Saull now 85. Priests of the Lord, that hee would have betrayed and murdered, though some refused it when time was; yet hee should not want such as would doe it, so long as Crumwells Army, is in armes in England: neither did Innocence deliver those in whom it was found, neither persons of High or Low degree, who perished by the hands of a company of vil∣lans and Tyrants; though Innocent, faithfull, and blamelesse. 1. Sam. 22. from the 13. to the 20. vers. These troubellors of Christendom, hath sent away many a thousand of our finest jong men, as well of sea-men as others; and jounge Chil∣dren of honest parents, as it is reported, both of late and long agoe; by spirits of the Rebbells Adherance, and by the meanes and consent of the Conspirators; some were slayne, and others never returned againe: And some were hanged, because they refused to beare armes against their King, and against their owne Consciences. Not onely by the power of the Rebbells at home, but vnder the command of foraine Princes abroad: who by the Rebbells, were sent away as captives, even as carried away by the Turkes, in time of warre. And now their Army, which consists of home-bred vermon, by whose meanes all this, and much more evill hath beene donne vnto out King and Nation; who are shamlesse busi∣bodyes,1. Tim. 14.1. as well as seducing spirits: and doe harden their faces, as it were with steele: as apeares by their bould Intrusion, and their dogg-like Lurking, not only in Germany, and all the Neatherlands, and many other places where Godly Protestants doe reside; But even in Catholicke Contries, and they have the Impudence to come into the Court of their owne King; though they have murdered his Father, and forced his Ma∣jesty out of his owne Dominions. And they pretend to bee Prophets, and say, they are sent: and I beleeve they are sent by Crumwell, or some of his prime Creaturs: they say, as Prophets, but I suppose as Spies. Wherefore I humbly, and earnestly intreat your Majesty the King of France;Zach. 13.4. and all good Christians, high and low, to beware of these false Prophets, of Crumwells Army, or others of his creatures: though they should come vnto you in a ruffe garment,4. Cor. 11.14.15. or in sheeps clothing, or how ever they may hyde their teeth, disguise, or transforme them selves, yet I am sure, it will not be easy for them, to remove their ravening, and wolfe-like harte.
Therefore it is Requisite, that you bee very circumspect how you have to doe with Crumwell; or any of his Impes: I say, remember their for∣mer fruits, and take heed in time, least when it is too late, you wish that you had taken the advise of him, who desiers the continuation of your honour, peace and safty. These fellows, doe find them selves to bee counted as dung, or as so many stinking karings; and therefore are abhored by their owne, and other nations, which makes them continually vigelent, day and night, to aply them selves, vnto the arte of subtilty: for to make parties for them selves, amongst your people, and others, by corrupting their minds; by Lyes, and other deceavings, which will prove litle to the comfort of you, and your friends, at the last. It is not for any profit or reward that I have receaved from your Cuson, the King of England; neither doth hee take any more notice of mee, then of the meanest person in all the world: neither doth hee know this day, the least of my Intentions for his Majesty, and his Fathers house. Yet I cleave vnto the Lord our God, and vnto all such who are opres∣sed by vsurpers. But I abhorre the pollicy, and the procedings of those, who are in combination with the devill. But of this, by Gods assistance, more at large hereafter: In the meane time, trust not in lying words, which cannot profit: abhorre those that steale, murder, sweare falsely, and yet stand in the house, that is called by the name of the Lord. As if it were possible, for serpents to become saints, whereas they are vndoubtedly, farre worse then a denne of Robbers.Jer. 7.8.9.10.11. But re∣member you to looke to your selfe, and your people in time; be∣cause the eyes of the Lord, doth runn to and fro, through the whole Earth: to show him selfe strong, in the behalfe of them,2. Chron. 16.9. whose harts are perfect towards him. Joab vsed strong, and as loving arguments as any friende or Subject could possible doe vnto his Prince, for to perswade the King, from what hee had conceaved amisse, or from what hee was resolved to doe, contrary to the will of God: but the King rejected the advyse of his Servant Joab, and shortly after confest it to bee his folly, and cryed out, That hee was in a great straight, God graunt your Majesty doe not so. See 2. Sam 24. verses 3.10. and likewise the 14. SIR, and SIRS, It doth highly behove you, to stirre up your selves warely and diligently to resist and prevent the power and the hel∣lish intentions of the Conspirators of England, who are Sons of Beliall,1. Kings. 24.9.10.12. & 13. verses. 1. Sam. 2.12. who know not the Lord: as were the Sons of Ely. Or like those false wit∣nesses, which accused Naboth the Iezreelite, of Blasphemy: as in other kinds the Sons of Beliall did by the King, and others in England, neither doe they seeme lesse, nor more holy, then Iesabell; for shee proclaimed a Fast, as they vse to doe vvhen they intend mischiefe.
By vvhich you may see it to bee needfull for you, to looke to theyr Water in time; otherwise know for certaine, they vvill be unto your peo∣ple, and to all others vvho are not like them selves, as snares and traps, as scurges in your sides, and thornes in your eyes. Neither vvill the Lord subdue them under you: If you give them longer opportunety to inveagle, and defile the minds of your people; with their poysonous lea∣ven, because hardly a word passeth from them, but it is infectious. Bee pleased, to marke the 23. of Joshua 13. Give no heed vnto any thing they say, or pretend; but make Peace vvith your Unkle, the King of Spain. Consider vvith your faithfull Councell and Cleargy, vvho loves Iustice, Equity and Iudgement; and so thinke of a vvay to comfort and releeve your Cuzon, the King of England, and his Fathers House. This vvill prove vnto your Majesty such a degree of Wisedome, as vvill bring Ho∣nour and Praise vnto all your good People: and get you Favor vvith God, and all good Men. By this, the eare that heareth you, vvill blesse you: and the eye that seeth you, will give witnesse vnto you: because you will thereby cause the Widdow to sing for joy. Neither can any better imploy his Monics, and his Endevours,Job. 29.11.12.13. then by exercising, and doeing those things which are commanded, and best pleasing vnto God Almighty, who is abuntdantly able and willing to reward your Majesty, and all that doe so: wherefore I pray God, that the Consideration heereof, may incourage and stirre vp the Spirits of your Majesty, and your Honourable Counsell, with your most Reverent Cleargy, and the rest of your People; to breake the yoake of these Usurpers, from off the necks of the King, and the distressed Nation of England: as Abraham did, by the enemyes of his Brother Loth. And as the Lord stirred vp the Spirit of Cyrus, King of Persia.Gen. 14.14.15. 16. Because not only they resolved to Spoyle,Ezra 1.1. Raven & Murder all such Catholikes & Prote∣stants as are more Religeous, & more Conscientionable towards men, & more zealous towards God, then any of the sayd Rebbells: as I have proved and found by long experience. For I have often observed in severall Countryes, that some Catholikes doe worship God in vprightnesse of hart, and in the beauty of holinesse: as you may read at large in the 1. Chron. chap. 16. vers. 29. And in that manner as is fully exprest Psal. 110.4. And this generation of Hypocrites and Iugglers, are a very great dispa∣ridgement to all honest-harted Protestants, both at home and abroad; who by the evill conversation of these English and Scottes Conspirators, are evill spoken off without cause. For I doe assure your Majesty, and all the world; that how ever many Protestants are deluded, by these Lur∣king Curres; yet I doe know Protestants, both of my owne, and se∣verall other Nations,Job. 1.1. Who feare God, and eshew evill, and are harmlesse and upright men,John 4.23.24. such as worship God in spirit and in trueth, God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in trueth. And how ever
these desemblors in England, doe Vsurpe the name of Protestants, to the great disgrace of many thousands of honest and Godly men, both in England and elsse where, who, to my knowledge, doe feare the Lord: and serve him in sinserity and trueth, as it is sayd by Joshua in the 24. of Joshua 14. My Judgement is, that neither Catholick nor Protestant, shall bee able to lift vp their heads without spot; so longe as they goe in the wayes of Caine, Baallam, Elemasse, Judas, Crumwell,Isa 56.11. or his adherance: yet these cunning Sophisters, who, like doggs, are greedy after the pray; and that they may the better obtaine it, they take vpon them the name of Protestants. And by giving to the Officers of his Army, and the like of his owne Creaturs, large Portions, out of the sweat of honest mens browes, and the substance of those, who takes paines for their Living: these are the Catterpillors, whose delight and Resolu∣tion is not only to destroy those that are better then them selves; but even the way, and the meanes, by which they should subsist in time to come. And these are esteemed (and found to bee, by all men that follow honest callings) like vnto those dogg-fish at Sea, which come into the Nets, and spoyle aboundance of Herrings, and the Net also; and yet they are good for nothing them selves. It seemes to me a sad thing, that men that vse great Industry, take paines, and venture their lives, and Estates, night and day; and many times, after longe patience, and losse of time, when it please God to send them a scull of Herrings; then coms the dogg-fish, and spoiles the net; and a thousand times more Herrings then would serve them to eate: and yet escapes from being taken him selfe. So the Rebbells: though they have done much mischiefe, to their betters; yet they sometimes, escape longe from punishment therfore, Let them bee put to shame,Psal. 83. and pe∣rish. When it goeth well with the Righteous, the citie rejoyceth;Vers. 10. and when the Reb∣bells perish, there shall bee joy and shouting.Gen. 6.5. Prov. 11. at the 10. vers. Because the thoughts of their harts are for wickednesse and evill continually. Neither is there any thing to bee expected from these destroying Trai∣tors; or very littele: that justly belongs vnto them selves. Yet the haste∣ning of their speedy being humbled, or distroyed, is very urgant, and of great necessety; for the prevention of their sutor evill for they are so absolutely bent to continue in their wickedres; that it seemes they have sould them-selves, and delight to doe wickedly, against their owne, and other Nations; to wit, Crumwell his Army, and others of his chiefe Associates. And therefore it is, that they devise mischiefe conti∣nually; and soweth discorde between loving, and deare friends:Prov. 6.14.15. and if they fall, they know it will bee without Remedy. In the meane time,Deut. 31.22. they wax fat; and fill them selves, and such as helpe them. And like the Sons of Ely, they make them selves fat, with such things, as are the chiefest of England, and other Nations, belonging to others, which are
their betters: abroad and at home. Whereof God him selfe takes notice as in the 1. of Sam. 2.29. Because they can frame Rayling, and Re∣viling Arguments against Papists; they suppose that to bee sufficient to justefie them in all their Treason, Theft and Murder; wherin they are not ashamed to abuse the Trueth: because their discourse and beha∣vior, is for the most part, if not all together, contrary to Trueth and Equity. By which meanes they cause many a good Protestant, to thinke, and to doe in some things; worse then ever they would have done: and so stirre vp, and continew strife for the working out of their owne ends: neyther can they any way better please the divell, their patron; for by their owne confession, they have some times set Catholicks, and made vse of them against Drotestants; who were drawne to it. By the importunety and impudency of the sayd Conspirators, at other times; with no lesse brasen faces, they have provoacked, and stirred vp Protestants, against Catholiks. So that first and last, these cursed, and dubble insinuators have beene the cause of great distresse, trouble and bloudshed, vnto both Catholicks, and Protestants. But all you, that have yet hope to finde peace vnto your soules; and that you may lift vp your face, without spot in time to come, be sure to let no wickednesse, enequity, nor presumptuous persons, dwell in your. Tabernakle: nor come neare you, nor any body for them, that you may bee steadfast, without feare: and that your Age may bee clearer then the Noone-day. So shall you shine forth, and bee as the morning; and also secure, because there is hope. Job. 11.14.15.16.17.18.19.20. It hath beene demaunded of mee, of what Religeon the Conspirators of England are; and because I know not of any they have, I have beene oftimes troubled, what or how I should make answear: not onely be∣cause they have so often changed from one to another; but because all their proceedings, is so contrary to all Religeons, that which I can most properly say, is, that if they had any Religeon that had any Relation to God, or Godlynesse; they would never have attempted, to have donne as they have donne. Therefore it seemes to mee, their Religeon must bee either dogg like, or divelish: my Reason is, because the Conspira∣tors, or many of their ad-herance, doe vse or exercise them selves, to speake Lies, in hypocrisie; having their consciences seared as it were with a hot Iron.1 Tim. 4.2. As for pure Religeon, which is vndefiled before God, even the Father,James 1.27. is this; To visit the fatherlesse and the widows, in their affli∣ction; and to keepe our selves vnspotted from the world. But the constant course of Crumwell, and his followers, have been to make Fatherlesse and Wid∣dows by pressing, banishing and murdering their best friends, and ta∣king their meanes, and turning them a begging; whereby they have caused great affliction, where there was none but Godly men, constantly
indeavor to walke circumspectly, who strive to Redeeme the time,Ephes. 5.15 1.16. and to vnderstand what the will of the Lord is. But OLIVER, with his two faces; and the Rest of his proud busy-bodyes, neyther know the Lord, nor any of his wayes; vnlesse it bee to despise him, and scorne his Word: or it may bee, the sweetnesse of the pray hath caused them wholy to forget him. But all that know, and feare the Lord; will bee constantly diligent in that which is good: That they may bee found of him in peace,2. Pet. 3.14 without spot and blamlesse. As for Crumwell, & those that Protect him; I leave them vnto the Judgement of those, who are not gilty of the like crimes that they are: But as for such, whose wayes are vpright in the sight of God, and all good men, though they may somthing differ in judgement, about Re∣ligeon, yet my beleefe and confidence in God, is, that such, who serve God, with honest and good hartes, and consider his Word,Luke. 8.15. and examine their wayes, with an inward intent to doe the will of God; shall by his gratious assistance, bee able to resist the wicked one; and all such Trai∣tors and others, who follow his evill example: or at least their Prayers,Matt. 6.4.5.6.7. Almes, and other Godly deeds, shall so come in remembrance before the Lord; as that they shall finde favor with him, in the world to come, what ever they doe in this. Neither dare I so condemne Catholicks, nor Protestants, but that if they truly feare God, and worke Righteousnesse,Act. 10.3.4.34. they shall bee accepted with him. But if any shall seeme to bee contentious, I delight in no such custome, neither doe the Churches of God,1. Cor. 11.16. because they gen∣der strifes. And the servants of the Lord must not strive, but bee gentle, vnto all. As for Crumwell, and his Disputants;2. Tim. 2.23. let them contend with whom they will, and serve whome they will; if it shall still seeme evill vnto them, to serve the Lord, and shall delay breaking of their sinns by Re∣pentance, as for my selfe, and such as I can prevaile with all,Dan. 4.27. wee will serve the Lord.Jos. 24.15. I doe vnderstand with Salomon, that it is a lamantable thing; that when the poore by intrusion and craft, coms to beare Rule over the poore; their opression is like a sweeping raine, which leaneth no food: yet such as forsake the Law, and the oath of God, they doe praise the wicked; and therefore it is, that I contend with them: and so will all men that feare God, and keepe his Law. Woe vnto the bloody Citie, it is full of Lies, and Robbery: their wound is grievous;Nah. 3.1.19. vpon whom hath not thy wicked∣nesse passed continually? Neyther have they spared to slay the Nations. Wicked men vnderstand not judgement;Hab. 1.17. but such as vnfainedly seeke the Lord, vnderstandeth all things. Hee that turneth away his eare from hea∣ring the law; even his prayers shall bee an abomination.Prov. 28. v. 3.4.5.9.6.7.9.10. Who so causeth the Righteous to goe astray, in an evill way; at last him selfe shall fall into his owne pit. It is not the bare knowing, or talking of these things, that can doe much good; but it is Requisite, that honest men stirre vp them selves,2. Tim. 1.6. by a con∣stant, and a warye indeavor to discover Spies, Traitors,Job. 17.8. and false Bre∣thren,
who hinder much good by their secret proceedings: besides the evill that they doe. Happie are those Princes, and people, who have such friends and servants in their houses, and places of trust; who can vnmaske the hypocrites, and who can plucke the Sheeps skin from of the Woolfs backe: Into which they doe sometimes transforme them selves: for to serve Conspirators. By discovering the secrets, by deceaving, and by be∣traying of others, and who can vnderstand these things, and with pa∣tience longe conseale them; seeing the calamety is exceeding great; which such men, by continuall vigelence, and by their vngodly artes, and practises, have brought vpon many others, who were better by farre, then them selves: and God, that seeth in secret, doth take notice of what is in men,Revel. 2.2. saying: I know thy workes, and thy Labour, and thy patience, and that thou canst not beare them which are evill, and thou hast tried them that say, they are Apostles, and are not, and thou hast found them to bee Liers. It concerneth all Princes, and Righteous people, narrowly to prye into these things, for the prevention of evill; for though Crumwell, and his Consorts, doe pre∣sumptuously take vpon them, by fraud, and violence, to strive for Ma∣steries, for the Crownes of Righteous Princes; and the Estates of those, which neyther doe,2. Tim. 2.5. not thinke any evill: but the Apostell St. Paull saith; that no man ought to bee crowned, exept hee strive lawfully. And therefore Crum∣well, and his Consorts, must bee likened vnto great doggs, that are mad: who are a terror to the persons and Lives of such, as are neare them, but the boulde temptations,2. Thesa. 2.11. Lies, and strong delusions of Rebbells, by their instangling, and ingaging, many others in their evills, and Rebbel∣lion, whereby they doe extreamly indaunger the soules, as well as the boyes, of many other men, besides them selves: so that, as it is greatly to bee feared; they shall hardly escape the damnation off hell. I am afrayd, to specifie the words, and doe almost tremble, to thinke of that passage, in the 23. of Matt. 33. which are Christs owne words, which the Reador may be pleased to Read. If it weare suffiscient to beare out Crum∣well, and his consorts, to be counted Souldiers of fortune, as they have beene termed by them selves, and many of their owne Creatures; who pretend that to be a sufficient lustification for the said Traitors, not with∣standing all the Spoile, Villany, and the Blood, and Treasure, by them vsurped, and destroyed: If the tittle of a Souldier of Fortune can bee apro∣ved of in the Iudgements of honest men; to Iustifie such Conspirators, in the spoiling and Robbing of their owne, & severall other Nations; I won∣der then, why the same tittle, of being Souldiers of Fortune, should not Iustifie Theeves, and rued fellows, which by night sett houses on fier, Robbe Churches, Banks of Exchanges, the houses of Marchants, and others: for which Crimes, all suth Theeves, that can be taken, are forced to suffer at the Gallows, and such as Crumwel, and his Consorts, who hath donne a thousand times more mischiefe against God, and man, then any
such Theeves; and yet they escape. And it seemes the only Reason thereof is, because, their Party, with the helpe of that Army, is so strong, that they can not bee aprehended; which the Rebbells Compell the Kindome to paye against the King, and them selves; and because the souldiers shoud not in time set them selves against the Conspirators; therefore they, at the charge of the Country, give them as good as dubble paye; ll things being considered. Also the strength of their subtilty, is of such force; as that they have, from time to time, not onely prevailed with many, to Iustefie them, the said Rebbells; But even to joyne with them against Opressed, Peaceable, and Innocent men: so that, besydes them selves, they have caused good men, to erre in helping them, in that which was evill. There∣fore I say of them, as good ould Jacob sayd by his two gracelesse Sons; They are Instruments of Cruelty. Oh; my soule! come not thou, into the se∣cret of their Assembly! bee not thou vnitted vnto such men, for in their woolfe-like anger, they have slaine the King himselfe, and many more; and that in their selfe will. Cursed bee their anger, for it was fierce for the spoile;Gen. 49.5.6.7. and their wrath, which did, and doth consist of Cruelty. Which hath caused many an honest hearted man of England and Schotland, to bee Dispised and Re∣viled by other Nations, by Sea, and Land: who had no hand at all with the Conspirators, but haue beene constantly greeued for their malicious tyrany. Yet it is not ane asie matter to make those of other Nations to vn∣derstand, who is gilty, and who is free; wherefore, such as my selfe, con∣tinues subject to bee blamed, and some times, other wayes troubled, for what the Rebbells have done; namely, for killing the Iust, and taking possession: who have also devided the spoile among the Officors of the Army, and the like of them.1. Kings. 21 19. Neither will they ever cease from condem∣ning, and killing the Iust; vntill it shall please God, to stir vp men of Courage, to subdue them. For they have killed,James. 5.6. and Condemned the Iust: and that in divers kindes; neither are those that are left,Ren. 9.18. able to re∣sist, because they have an Army of their owne breeding, who, like young Wolves, the oulder they grow, the more hard-hearted, and wicked they are: especially the Officors thereof, and some others such-like: who, like vnto Argile; some of the Leshlies, and others of Scotland, who for the greedy∣nesse, and the pride of their owne hartes, hath brought their severall Na∣tions into a condition almost as if they were solde for slaves. These things have grieved mee long, and very fore, because the Lies, and subtilty of these Murderors, should be of that strength, force, and longe Continuance, as yet still, so to blinde the mindes of some of our owne, and other Nations, that to this day, they doe not vnderstand the mannor or way, of their preparations vnto the Rebbellion in England: at the beginning: nor the Arte of the proceedings of the said Conspirators, ever since. For besides their pernicious pretences, needlesse jealosies, slander∣ings, & backbitings against those, who by God, the King, and the Staet,
were Lawfully set ever them; as of many of their hurtfull Lies, which are yet unmentioned; they have done much evill by this, which followes: to witt: The King of Spaine, being destressed, by Reason of a longe warre, with the high and mighty Lords, the Staets Generall of the Ʋnited Provences: and about twenty yeares a goe, the King of France was provoked, or moved to make warre, against the King of Spanie, on the other side of his Country, to wit, against Artoyes and West-Flanders; which were Invaided by the Armyes of the King of France, therefore the King of Spaine was greatly constrained to send a strong Fleet to the Coast of Flanders, for to Land there Men and Mony, for the preservation of those Contryes: which at that time were in danger to bee wholly lost. Which Fleet having had a long, and a sore fight, with a considerable Fleet of the Lords, the States aforesayd. When they came neare the Length of Dover, there met them 10. or 12. more lusty Men of Warre, belonging to the foresayd Vnited Provinces, and the Spanish Fleet having many hurt Men in their Shippes, and their Powder and Shot being almost spent; were there by necessitated to put into the Downes, from which the Conspirators of England, who then lay in waite to make use of all Advantages, by the suggestions, and lyes, they cau∣sed many to beleeve, that the Spanish Fleet came into the Downes, with an Intent to conquor England: and that by the Consent of our own King. And by this malicious wilde, they stird up selfe-ended Men, like them selfes, and others, who understood not the businesse against the King, and the State of England: for to make way for their cursed Rebellion, which they then intended, First, As it apeares by that their Calamerous Contention against the King and the State, for punishing of those three presumptions Firebrands: to wit: Prin, Burton, and Bastwicke: by whose pernicious Impudence, thou∣sands were stird vp to trouble, and disturbe not onely the King, Church, and State; but also the whole Nation. Secondly, As it further apeares by that those Traytors of Scotland, which were like vnto those in England, who by a wicked, and a forced Combi∣nation, some of that Nation were deceaved, and stird vp, as Traitors, to Invade England: without, and against the Consent of the King, and the State; and against the Will and Consent of many of the Nation of Scotland, who would not make Covenants, and sware falsely: as others that were Traytors,Hosea 12.5. did: Who have caused Iudgement to spring vp as Hemlocke. Wherefore, such as were vnwilling, were threatned to bee Plundered, and some of them have since beene Imprisoned and Murdered. Thirdly,As the Marqueses of Huntly, Muntros, and others. And that which should have beene first: when those distressed Subjects of the King of Spayne, their Shippes being suddenly, contrary to their expectation, suncke, and fiered, who escaped drownding, and the Sword of the Hollandors: who were then their Enemies in the yeare 1638. Being at Peace with vs, they came into the Downes to refresh, and
to fit them selves, for the Reasons afore sayd: and in that their great de∣stresse, by swimming, and other wayes, made hard shift for to get to shore, to save their lives: some of them, who were Innocent, and harmlesse men, were by some of the Conspirators, or some of their Adherance, Barbarously Murdered in time of peace, without any order, or consent of the King, or any Minister of State. Which makes mee greatly feare,2. Kings 2.5. that for that, and many other great evils, contrived by the sayd Conspira∣tors, against our owne, and severall other Nations: that yet a great judge∣ment hangeth over the Nation of England; besides what they have already brought vpon it. And how-ever the evill doers may flatter them selves in their carnall security, vainly presuming vpon their Policy, & the strength of theyr Army, which God is able to strike with terror and madnesse, as hee hath done the like of them before. Agag supposed, that the bitter∣nesse of death was past; but hee proved to bee mistaken, and as the sword of the Conspirators, hath made many women childlesse, of our owne, and other Nations, so I have Reason to thinke, that the Mothers of the Conspirators, shall be called Childlesse among Women, as it is in the first of Samuel, Chap. 15. vers. 32.33. And which is worse, the little Pigges are in danger to be beaton, for the faults committed by the Boars, and the Sowes of these times in England. For which they know them selves to bee abhorred at home and abroad. And that they may still enjoy the Estates of other men, and keepe such of our Nation out; as wel High as Low, who gladly would bee in their native Contry: therefore they take the course of Richard the Third, and follow his evill Example, who was the bloodyest Tyrant that ever was in England, before them selves: namely, in this, That such as joyne not with them in theyr Treason, have beene at severall times (by wicked men of theyr owne ad-herance, who fained them selves to bee for the King, and the Country) drawne into plots of the Rebbells owne devising: and then charged with Treason: and there∣vpon tooke away theyr Lives, and theyr Estates. And others, who have onely beene tolde of it, by notorious Rogues, sent out, and employed by some of the Rebbells; and vpon that they were taken, and hanged: al∣though they never medled at all in the businesse. As Captaine Thomas Col∣lupp, who lived in Wisbich, and many more in the County of Norfolke, and thereabouts: who were taken, and hanged. And hee who did pretend to know of a Commission from the King, & tolde them of it, who flatly Refused to have any thing to doe with the businesse, yet they were Mur∣dered, and the Rogue himselfe escaped: to wit: Gregre Gamblin, who also lived in Wisbich: and many other such bloudy plots have beene acted by these Rebbels, and theyr Ad-herance, by theyr Lucefer-like Arte, in, and about London, and elsewhere. An in this, and the like Courses, doth the sayd Bebbells intend to continue, vntill they have brought destruction as well as great dishonor vpon our Nation. Who stay alwayes at home,
to invent mischief against our friends abroad, and at home: to doe what evill they can, and to hinder what good they can. And to Cologue with the sea-men, they take away other mens Estates, which connot spare it, but need it for their Wyves and Children, them selves, and by this mea∣nes they get the sea-men to bee more willing, to goe abroad, where they know they must be massacred, for feare, least they should gather toge∣ther, and more wisely set them selves against the Conspirators at home, then here to fore: and how-ever they may Craftily pretend to doe some thing, which shall seeme pleasing vnto the severall Countries; whose ney∣bours, and frinds they have ruined, destroyed, and murdered, all Eng∣land through. Now, for their owne endes, they will insinuate with them as the Devill did with Eue.Gen. 3.1.4.5. But when the Contry shall come to be Invaided, by foraine nations, who by these Conspirators have beene abused; then will they doe a great-deale worse, then Absoloms Mule did, for though the Beast left his master,2. Sam. 18.9. when he had most need of him, yet hee tooke away none of his mony, nor Iewells, with him: But these Rebbells, will not only not leave them in their greatest distresse, but they will take all their Monys, and chiefest Treasure of the whole Kingdom with them. In the meane time, their Continuall indeavor will be, to prepare, and instruct others abroad, in their evill devises, as neare as they can; to bee like them selves; that they may the more willingly receave the sayd Rebbells, and their stolen Treasure; and protect them, when they dare stay in England no longer. And for the present, many of the people of England; are by constraint forced to cologe with the Rebbells, and giue them good words; but it is, as them poore people, in some parte of the West-Indeans, doth by the divill; namely: because they should not bee so mischevous to the Contry, as they are afraid of. And whereas the said Rebbells, and their Adherance, by false Information, haue caused many good people of our owne, & other nations; to thinke, that all who follow and adheare vnto the King; are vngodly sweators, proud, envious, and Contentious persons: as well his Majesties servants, as others: whereof my selfe haue beene obrayded, that those were such, as I justified; and that by such, and the like, of evill Conversation, the Kingdom should bee governed, if ever the King came to be Restored againe to the Kingdom. Vnto which I answere, that if any thing of it be true, I beleeue they are such, as may be secretly Imployed by the Rebbells them selves: or at least some, to make the rest worse then they would be. For my part, if there be any such, I justifie them not: but if I knew them, I should therefore abhorre them: because such can doe the Rebbels farre more service then they can doe the King, and I vnderstand them to be worsse then the Plague in the Kings Court; and for oft I know, the cause of so much swearing, and other evill behaviour, in the Kings Armie; pretended by the Rebbells,
hath beene by Reason of such, that hath beene sent to that purpose, by the Rebbells themselves. First, to commit that which may offend God, and so to make our best  friends, our enemies, Numb. 25.1.2.3.4.6.7. verses. Secondly, to vex, trouble, and oppresse the Country more then needes;  that by that meanes they might cause more Rebbells against the King, like them selves. Thirdly, because the Rebbells might thereby take advantage, to Re∣vile  and Raile at the Kings Armie, as they constantly vsed to doe, by their slanderous reportes, in their printed pamphlets, throughout all the Kingdom, and else where abroad; which caused many good people, to conceave worse of the Officers, and others of the Kings Armie, then was trueth. Though possibly they did somthing more then either the King, or the Armie, were willing to doe. By Reason of stubornnesse, and Rebbellious rysings of some, against  the King and the Country. Because the Rebbells, by deceat, forged pretences, & by violence vsur∣ped,  and made themselves Masters of the Kings Customs, and such other monys, as should have payed his Majestyes Armie. Neither did the King ever offer to Raise any Armie; vntill the presumption of the Rebbells was so extreame against his Majesties Person, and his Subjects, that it could no longer bee induered: for them selves doe know, that his Majesty was bound in conscience by his Oath, and by the Law of the Land; to de∣fend the Ministers of Church and State; and all other peaceable and obe∣dient subjects: so longe as possibly hee could. And for somuch, as concernes the Kings Councell, his Servants, and all others, that pretend to adheare vnto his Majesty; my prayers vnto God Allmighty, the desires of my hart, and the cryings of my spirit, not vnto the God of Rebbells, but vnto the Lord of Heaven, is more then any man vpon the face of the earth, doe know: as in Exod. 14.15. That every man, high and low, may aprove himselfe before God, who knowes the hartes of men: who sees, and takes notice of the actions to bee men that feare and serve God: such as love, and indeavor with all theyr might to execute Justice and Judgement for all maner of per∣sons, as well for the small, as the great, as it is in the Word of the Lord.Deut. 1.17 And the Lord graunt, that every one may bee such, as to scorne and abhorre Flattering, Bribes, and Treason. Thou shalt not wrest Judgement,Deut. 16.19. thou shall not Respect persons, neyther take a gift; for a gift doth blinde the eyes of the Wise, and pervert the words of the Righteous. That which is al-together Just,Vers. 20. shalt thou follow; that thou mayest live and inherit the Land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee. The Lord make all the Kings Subjects, milde, kinde, and curteous, one towards another, that the Rebbells may not bee able to say any thing that is evill against them: And the Lord give vs all grace, and wisdome
from the highest to the lowest; that wee may bee wary, that neither Reb∣bels, nor no man, deceave vs with vayne words: for because of these things, cometh the wrath of God, vpon the Children of disobedience. Bee not therefore partakers with such, for the fruit of the spirit, is in all Goodnesse; Righteousnesse and Trueth. See then that you walke circumspectly, Redee∣ming the time because the dayes are evill,Eph. 5.6.7.9.0.15.16. and never worse then now, and that by reason of Crumwell, and his Adherents, who make the best men weary of their lives, whom the oppressed most stand need of. By this shall all men know, that ye who pretend to bee for the King, and the Country of England; doe come out of an honest, and good Inten∣tion; if you constantly love all men, who are of Godly conversation. For the King needs no Desemblors, Cheats, Proude, Scornfull, nor Con∣tentious persons: neither can his present condition despence with such: because, if any such should bee in or about his Courte, or in his Ma∣jesties Armies;Ezec. 3 20. as in the 2. Revel. vers. 13.14 they will prove worsse then the plague or the canket in any mans body. And if men prove constantly faithfull to God, and their King; and delight to bee continually in Peace, Love, and good will, one towards another; and withall bee vigelent, and continually wachtfull, and beware of Lurcking or Sneaking Curres; which the Reb∣bells have, or will send amongst you. Therefore you, that by expe∣perience know the fidelety one of a nother, associate your selves often together; and take notice of such busie-bodies, as indeavor to make diffe∣rences, strife, and envie among men: and marke such, who falsly ac∣cuse any person, whether hee bee of High or Low degree: and those, who indeavor to discharge others, from cleaving vnto the King, and serving his Majesty in this his extremety. Neither will you finde any better way to bring the Rebbells vnto dispaire, then by the meanes afore∣sayd, and by causing them to spend their Labors, and Monies, in vaine. Finally, My Brethren, fare-well; bee Perfect and Courageous; bee of good comforte, bee of one minde, live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall bee with you. For if you should in the least give way, or any regard vnto such Spies,2. Cor. 13.11. as are imployed by the Rebbells; whose custome have allwayes beene to sowe mischeefe, contention, and discord, amongst such as hate Rebbellion. And if you, by their meanes, suffer your selves to bee stired vp, to unquiet or disturbe one another; take heed that you bee not consumed one of another. For this, would make the seducing spirits in England, who cleave vnto the Rebbells for Re∣ward, or for a share of the pray; to blaspheame the Lord of Heaven to his face in their Pulpits: and they will presumptuously pretend, the God of the oppressed, to bee the God of Rebbells. And First, by the way, remember this; That if by any of the Kings Servants, who have receaved Promotion, great benefit, Subsistance, and
the Kings favour; such Commanders and Souldiers, as have willingly vpon their owne charge, ventured their Lives, and lost their Estates; or any such, as otherwayes have constantly, and with their whole harte and might, and that by their great expence, and over-throw of their for∣tunes, and subsistance, and ever since the begining of the Rebbellion, by trueth and experimentall arguments, have allwayes stroven to defend, maintaine, and Justefie the King, and all who were faythfull in Autho∣rity vnder him; to the vndeceaving, and Rightly informing, of such as were by the Rebbells, and their Adherance, Malliciously stirred vp against the King, and such as were faithfull in Authority: who in duty, and for conscience sake, indeavored to doe God, and the Kingdome, service. As also many good men of Forraine Nations, have beene from time to time, grosly, and wonderfully deluded, and bitterly stirred vp, by the Lies of the Conspirators, against the King, and his best Subjects: whose slanderous reports, have beene constantly discovered and resisted by such as feared God, and vtterly abhorred Rebbellion, and falsehood, to the great satisfaction of many strangers, who have been mis-informed by the Conspirators, and their Adherants, concerning, or against the Justnesse of the Kings cause. And if the Conspirators can by any means prevaile with such of the Kings Officors, or Servants, which are in place; for to bring such Commandors, Souldiors, and such others, as is before mentioned; wrongfully into disgrace, by falsehoode, and Lies, first devised, and forged by the Rebbells or their Adherance, or if they can cause any such to bee scorned, slighted, or otherwayes troubled by such as are in favour with the King: this will cause the Rebbells to Insult and glory the more, though it bee their owne shame, and a great mischiefe of their owne contriving: this will prove the fainting of all honest harts, and the weakening of the hands of such as have yet hope and courage: if they can by Brybes, secreat wickednes, or other de∣vellish artes; cause the Kings best Friends, and subjects, to bee loftily, or scornfully looked vpon. And if such, who never receaved any sub∣sistance, reward, or benefit; shall for their good will, continuall paines, and expences bee Rewarded with evill for good: this will bee next vnto a deaths-wound vnto the King; and will make the hartes of all his most faithfull Friends and Subjects, farre and neare, to faint, mourne, and greeve, when they heare of such things. And the Rebbells doc knowe, that there is no such way to disharten, and dis-ingage the Kings friends, and cause them to leave him, and all his Fathers house, in his greatest need; neither is there any such way, for to stirre vp God and Man, to bee the Kings enemies; then for to render evill for good vnto them, who have vnfainedly, served him: and made them selves odious in the eyes of all the Kings profest and secraet enemies, for God, Conscience, and his Majesties sake, and the good of the Nation.
This caused King David to cry out, in the eares of Saule, his Master, in these words:1. Sam. 24.12. the Lord Judge betweene mee and thee, and the Lord avenge mee of thee. No man need to thinke, that the Rebbells will bee so foolish, as to send any knowne, or profest Rogue, for to worke out their businesse in this kinde, but they will make vse of some selfe-ended fel∣lows, who one time or other, have pretended to serve the King, and such who hath the arte to cut a mans purse, at the same time when hee laffeth in his face: or like Judas, when they seeme to bee most zelous, and have the bouldnesse, and the Impudence, to associate them selves with such, as they certainly know to bee the Kings friends: and by that mea∣nes, get what seacrets they can; not onely to betray the Kings busi∣nesse, but also their owne friend, and brother, to the presumptuous ene∣mies. And like vnto the ould proverbe; this wickednesse proceedeth from the wicked,1. Sam. 24 15. and hacht by the Conspirators in England: Though some-times acted abroad, as well as at home. The Lord therefore bee Judge,1. Chro. 12.33. and plead the cause betweene all those, who are not of a dubble harte against those, who are proud, scornfull, and false-harted towards those,The Tribe of Zeba∣lon. whose harts and Indeavors have ever been for the glory of God, the honour of the King, and for the prospe∣rity, peace, and safety, of all obedient subjects, in whose eyes, a vile person is contemned, espesially Traytors, and notoroius Rebbells: But honoureth them with his whole harte,Psal. 15.4. that feare the Lord. Wherefore, bee pleased to consider, how needfull a thing it is for all such as enjoy the Kings favour, who subsist, or get benefite by him; that they carefully take heed to resist and avoyd the stratagems of those, who secreatly endeavour to provoke them to bee a terror, and a burden vnto those, who ever-more have indeavored the honour of the King: by whom they subsist, as also longed for their happy and prosperous returne into their Native country.2. Sam. 22.28. And remember, that the eyes of the Lord are vpon the hauftie, to bring them downe; and who will save the afflicted people. My hart is not haufty, nor mine eyes lauftie; saith David in the Psal. 131. vers. 1. Bee sure, that all who are bent vpon mischiefe; will seeke to crosse others in any thing that is good: scornefull men, bring a Citie into a snare; but wise men, turne away wrath. The blood-thir∣sty, hate the vpright; but the Just seekes his soule. Forget not this ma∣ster-peece of the Rebbells pollicy, that they will vse all meanes possible to get the Rulor,Proverb. 29.8.10.12. and such as are in favour and trust, to harken to Lies: then they will declare and publish that all his servants are wicked. Such are they, who to day, will seeme to power out their soules before you, and hugge you as their bosom-friend, and to morow, will deride you, and lauffe you to scorne. Thinke it not strange, that I mention such things vnto you, seeing to my sorow, I have met with such my selfe. Now, let the wisdome of the Reador be this, to avoyde and advise his
friend to stand cleare in time, and shunne such as cause divisions & offences,Rom. 16.17. con∣trary to the doctrine that good men teach, bee sure that you follow not the evill example of those, that revyle the Gods;Exod. 22.28. and who scorne and curse the Rulor of the people. But such as know, or vnderstand the wickednesse of Rebbells, and yet faune and conceale it: that is almost as bad as the former;Act. 23.4. for if notorious Tyrants, who are knowne to the world, to be but Vsurpors at the best: shall dare to take vpon them, to murder men, for what they pre∣tend have been concealed, as intended against them, though it bee every mans duty for to bend his minde, and indeavor to discover what hee can of the Intentions & proceedings of such Opressors, as the Traitors (which now beare Rule in England) are: who are nothing a shamed, all this while, of being Gods, and their Countries, enemies. A wise man scaleth the Citie of the mighty; and casteth downe the strength of the confidence therof. Proud and haufty scornor,Prov. 21.22.24. is his name; who dealeth in proud wrath. Therefore, blessed is the man, that walketh not in the Councel of the vngodly; nor standeth in the way of sinners; nor sitteth in the seat of the scornfull: but his delight is in the Law of the Lord. The lauftie and proud lookes of men shall bee humbled; and the hauftinesse of men shall be bowed downe.Jsa. 2.11.12. And every one that is lifted vp, shall be brought low. One would thinke, that this were sufficient for every one that remem∣bers his latter end, or considers that he hath a soule to save,Deut. 32.29. that it is now high time to shunne and abhorre those, who have defiled them selves, by treason, and the blood of Innocence: and yet bouldly stands out in defiance of all those, whome they have most offended: to wit, the Lord of Heaven, the King, and Country of England, and other Nations belon∣ging there-vnto; besides Neighbour Nations, who also were our friends, even as now they are. And that the Conspirators have aproved them selves to be past shame; doth apeare by the odatious bouldnesse of John Milton, in his answer vnto the booke of the Learned Salmasius: which doth consist of presumptions scornings, Lies and revilings; and doth (as it were) declare, that hee had forgotten that there is a Righteous God in Heaven. For the sayd Milton, doth show in that booke; that there is no more feare of God left in him: in that he hath despised and controdicted the Worde of the Lord: for it is sayd, I Councell thee to keepe the Kings Com∣mandement, and that, in Regard of the oath of God. Bee not hasty to goe out of his sight, stand not in an evill thing, for hee doth what soever pleaseth him. Where the worde of a King is, there is Power;Eccles. 8.2.3. and who may say vnto him, what doest thou? vnlesse it bee such gracelesse Rebbells;Pro. 20.2. who will neither obay God, nor King, because it can not consist with hypocresie, nor with violence, by the helpe whereof, they killed the Iust, and have taken their Estates, & the Army, who must protect them, are their Gods, and their Confidence: because they give them Large paye out of other
mens Estates, by whome so many of our Nation must be murdered, at home and abroad, as the Officors of the Armye, & the like Conspirators please. Wherefore, the Lord God furnish and supply the harts of the King, and of all his Fathers House; the Lords of his most Honourable Privy Councell; his Reverent and Learned Cleargye, and all his most faithfull friends and helpers; with the spirit of Vnderstanding, Wisdome, and Courage, and especially; with the knowledge and feare of the Lord: and with the Love of Equity, Iustice, and Iudgement, where with the God of Iust men, is well pleased. And I pray God, vnite the hartes of all the Kings vnfained, well-wishing Subjects, and all his Majesties true-harted and faithfull Attendance, vnto him selfe, and to the King, whom they seeme to honour: and in a Loving, and Friendly behaviour, one vnto another; that neyther the secret, nor profest enemies, who every day seekes the Ruying of both the one and the other, that they may hence-forth bee able, to make no more breaches, nor prevaile any longer, nor bee able to stand before the King; nor before such as are faithfull vnder him. The Lord give the King favour in the eyes of God and man, that his Majesty may delight him-felfe in the Workes, and the Will of the Lord; and that hee may obtaine a deserving spirit, to discover and finde our those, who hence-forth have any Intent to betray the trust imposed in them; and all those who any wayed abuseth his Majesties favours, by proud Lookes, or taunting Termes, or other scornfull Cariadge, towards those who desires the safety & prosperity of his Majesty, and of all his Fa∣thers House, as well as any of those who have long subsisted by the Kings bounty and favour, and if such men bee discouraged, who in singlenesse of harte, and for love and good will to both King and Country; who without any benefit, one way or other, none can doe the enemye better service, then to cause such men to bee abused: because it seemes the Conspirators doe conceave them selves to bee in agreement with death and hell. Who doe not consider, that the hayle shall sweepe away the Refuge of lies. Therefore, they promise them selves, that the over-flow∣ing scorge shall passe through,Jsa 28.15.17.18. and not touch them, who have made lies their reffuge; and have hidde themselves vnder falsehood. As I have often mentioned, so I still hope & resolve by the providence and gratious assistance of God Allmighty; to declare a farre greater Rea∣son, for what I have sayd, and what I have yet to say against the Con∣spirators of England. If the Lord please to continue vnto mee health and subsistance, to the further satisfaction of your Majesty, the King of France, all your good people, and many others at home and abroad; and for the discharge of my owne Conscience,Psal. 66.18 betweene God and my selfe. For if I Re∣gard iniquity in my harte, the Lord will not heare my prayers: the Lord direct mee in that which is according to his will; and hinder mee what soeuer is con∣trary to his will.Psa. 1. last verse. For the Lord knoweth the way of the Righteous, but the way of the vngodly shall perish. And thus I humbly take my leave at Present, and Rest, till the Lord shall give mee a further opportunity.
DISCREET READOR: BEE pleased to take notice, that some things more I have to say, concerning my owne sufferings, for the space of Three and twenty yeares together: which doth consist of divers Artikles, which I presented vnto the sayd Crumwell, and vnto Mr. Walter Streckland for him; to both whom, and vnto others of theyr party, I made my greevances knowne at large in Papers, bearing date the 20. of February: and others of the third and fourth of March, in the yeare 1656. Stilo veteri, from Middelborgh and Flishing. Which Papers were delivered to Mr. Strecklands hand, the 12. of that instant March, for the sayd Crumwell, by one John Symons, a shippe-Carpenter, who, as apeares by his owne Letter, dated vnto mee from Lon∣don, the 13. of March last, wherin is signefied vnto me, the delivery of those papers aforesayd, to the said Mr. Streckland the day before: dwelleth neare Noahs Arke, close by St. Saveries Docke, not farre from the Mill stairres, over against the Armetage, at Horset-downe, in the Parish of St. Madlen, London. I having vsed all meanes possibly, for the space of one yeare and a halfe together, for the obtaining of Reparation towards my great troubles, charges, disgraces, and much other prejudices, but in Feb. and March last, to wit 1656. Stilo veteri, that seeing the power of the Kingdome of England, being in the hand of the said Crumwell, and his Army: my desire from him, and Mr. Streckland, was, that by his, or their meanes, the some of two hundred pounds starling, might bee payd mee in Bridges, within thirty dayes after the date of my sayde papers: or otherwise I would publish, or make knowne vnto the world such things, as the sayd Crumwell, and his party, would by no meanes bee willing to heare of. And that if the sayd 200. pounds were not payd mee, within the time aforesayd, I would cause the evill savor of Crumwell, and some of his party, for to come abroad into the world, more then ever it was yet: It being, according vnto equity, and rather shorte then over. Also the sayd Crumwell having done many things of greater consequence, but never any thing with more equity, in this world. And that if by his meanes, the sayd somme were payd me; I would bee allwayes ready to give an account of any thing that I had mentioned vnto any one, whom hee would appoynt in such a place where wee might bee both free to speake our mindes: and that I would make knowne vnto him whom the sayd Crumwell should appoynt what I had further to say against Crumwell and his Army, and some others of his party. And though it stands mee much in hand for to take care for my subsistance, I being in yeares: without which this Pamphlet had been published more then tenne yeares since: yet vpon condition, the sayd mony had beene payd mee, I would have communicated the businesse vnto some of his apoint∣ment.
First, in private: that they might the better have made theyr peace with God, the King, and his Subjects. But least any one, or more should thinke, that I vpon any condition at all, did thinke or ever intend, to bee wholy silent, in what I mean by this; the cleane contrary may appeare, as follows. This is parte of what I signefyed vnto him, in the same papers, wherin I exprest or specefied my greevances. I inclosed also to the sayd Crumwell, three Copyes: one, of an Attestation, vnder the hand of Mr. Hengh Pieters. Minister, dated the 17. day of Iune, 1634. For the clearing mee of a false Accusation, then layd to my charge; an other, was the Copy of an Act, vnder the hands of the Lords of Rotterdam; to show that I was a free Broker: and the third, was a Copy of an Act that I had from the Company, my Masters, to the intent, that Crumwell might vnderstand, that I desired nothing but what was as Just as the Cloathes on my back, and rather farre shorter then one or two over. I signefyed also vnto the said Crumwell, that whether the mony were payed or not, that I expected nothing, neyther would accept of any thing from him; or any of his party: but from my Masters, afore∣sayd, vnder whom I had sufferd: and to this purpose I wrote vnto him. SIR: I hope your Highnesse will grant, that though Power, and Impudence by violence,There is a longer ex∣plication of this in Folio 58. drive honest and harmlesse men from their Right, and quiet being; yet you will not deny, but that it is lawfull for men who are opprest, and spoyld, for to vse the best meanes they can, towards the obtaining of Reparation, or Restitution: as it shall please the Lord to give power, or opportunety. And I doe comfort my selfe in the Lord my God; as some times David did: who, I hope, will gra∣tiously favour my Righteous cause:1. Sam 30.6. neyther hath hee left mee wholy without hope. Though I must confesse, it sometimes pleaseth God for to suffer lyes, craft, tyranny and falshoode, to prosper and to con∣tinew longe.Da. 8.25. SIR: If I should make such a greevous complait, without Just and very extreame cause; how should I then expect the God of equity, to bee on my side? or, who can I expect shall helpe mee in time of need? I hope, the Lord will not suffer vayne thoughts, for to lodge with in mee, nor any evill thing which I blame in others. To my sorrow I know, that by violence framed, and shamelesse Arguments; as by other vnlaw∣full proceedings; oft-times a bad cause, is kept too long on foote: yet that doth not make a bad cause good; because it is contrary vnto equity, and because the God of Just men, is of purer Eyes, then to behould evill; and who can not looke vpon iniquity: vnlesse it bee in his good time, to punish such as deale treacherously,Habak. 1.13. and such as holde their tongue, when the wicked devoureth the man, that is more Righteous then hee.
SIR: seeing that my last hope I have left of ever Recovering the sayd somme of Mony; is only by the helpe of your Highnesse: my sufferinge, namely in my person, and good name, as in matter of my subsistance, have beene very great, & of three & twenty yeares continuance. Where∣fore blame mee not, though I earnestly seeke Reparation by such mea∣nes, or possibillities, as God is pleased to aforde mee. I doe most hum∣bly Confesse, that I am very large and tedious, and you shall doe well to Consider the extremety of my being necessetated herevnto. I further signefied vnto the sayd Crumwell, besides my greevances at large, compre∣hended in divers Articles; as is a foresayd; that in case hee did not cause mee to have Iustice, as aforesayd, seeing that power is in his hand; that hee might perceave that I did intend, to doe that which would bee very vnwelcom to him, and vnto many of his Party, and I also added parte of my grounds, or Reasons, wherfore I would doe it: as followeth. SIR: I doe most humbly show vnto your Highnesse;Verbatum. that for these many yeares together, I have been very much greeved, at the proceedings of your Highnesse, the Army, and others of your Party, against the Worde of God, the King, the Church, & the Lawes & Nation of our Land. And that ever since the troubles of England by the Conspiracy of you, & your Partye, as heereafter more at large first began; in which time many thousands, of the best and most peaceablest famelyes are ruened: also by the slight of men, and that long in secret my most beloved Nation hath beene in a most wonderfull manner stirred vp, and set one against ano∣ther: by such as were the enemies, & troublers of our Nation, so at home, as from abroad: by which Cursed meanes aboundance of blood have beene spilt: for which my soule hath constantly mourned in secreat.Jer. 13.12. For which Cause, and for other Reasons, that I must as yet conceale; I have spoken much against the Person, and Proceedings of your High∣nesse, and some others of your Party: which by the helpe of the most high God, shall be knowen shortly in publicke, or in private; which I have intended this many yeares, but hetherto I have kept it still private, vnlesse vpon occasion, some wordes darkely have past from mee, because I have greatly, and alwayes longed, to see or heare of a Righteous settlement in England; without discovering my selfe: and as yet onely my prayers to God Almighty, have been my best Indeavours to that purpose. And SIR, much at convenient time and place, I have to say, & with∣out any wrong or prejudice vnto any others; also it will concerne you, and many of your Party, to know the same in private, before it comes in pu∣blicke to the world, because thereby your evill savour will yet be much more knowne then ever it was, or hath been as yet. This is the Copye of a Letter from mee, to Crumwell: the Arch-Rebbell: being word for word.
The Copye of another Letter, inclosed to the sayde MR. Streckland, for the sayd Crumwell: Dated the 28. of March 1657. in Bridges, and sent by the ordinary Post by way of Dunkirke. For your Highnesse, to wit, the most vallient Oliver Crumwell; Lord Protector of the Army, and some others, in great Brittaine and Jerland. This is also verbatum. SIR; I doe humbly agayne give you notice, that I did write vnto you, from Middlebourgh and Flushing, in Zeland; by one Iohn Simmons, a Shippe-Carpentor, dwelling neare Noahs Arke, not farre from the Mill∣stayres, in Horsydowne, London. Certaine papers of Consequence, bearing date the 20. of Feb: last. But for want of a speedior passage, I dated other papers, the third and the fourth of March, old stile. Also I wrote vnto Mr. Hugh Pieters, Mr. Walter Streckland, & to Sir Henry Vaine, all whom doe know mee, or some times have knowne mee; but MR. Pieters, Mini∣ster, best of any of them. SIR: The Contents of the sayd papers, are as followeth. I having served the Company of Marchants Adventurors of England; some times Residing in Delfe and Rotterdam; since the yeare 1634. and though I hum∣bly doe, and shall ever Acknowledge many of my sayd Masters, both of the first & of the last of their Worships, some were as good Masters vnto mee, as I could wish or desier them to bee, yet others of their sayd Wor∣ships, who were towards me disaffected, from the begining of 1634. have from time to time, caused my Life and Harte to bee very full of bitter∣nesse; which hath beene vnto mee exceeding prejudiciall and greevous: and doth consist, not onely of denying mee of Iustice vpon severall ocasi∣ons, against several slanderous & abusive persons; who, by some of the sayd Company were partly, or wholy, incouraged; if not from time to time Im∣ployed, and set on against mee: as also, I have beene wonderfully bla∣med, as a mallicious fellow, for suing for Iustice: without which, I saw it to be vnpossible, ever to bee quiet. The want wherof, caused the evill-doers to bee the more Insolent, and many others afterwards, by Reason of the evill example of the first three; and I have often, by severall of my sayd Masters, most wrongfully beene accused in the like kinde, I say, by divers of themselves, though from the first to the last, never any thing at all hath beene proved against mee. Also, the Injurijs and violence hath beene so extreame, and continuall against mee, as I shall humbly show, when it shall bee Requiered of mee, that I went three severall times to the Hage, to complaine vnto Mr. Olyver Synjohns, Mr. Walter Streckland; when they were there as Ambassadors, for to Intreat them, to move the Company in my behalfe; but for feare of giving my Masters great distast thereby, and by Reason of some difference betweene Mr. Streckland and my selfe, about the Ingagement, which I refused in 1650, neither was Sterckland
content with mee; & vpon those two Considerations, I did forbeare, be∣cause I have since in sundry kindes beene greatly abused: and all other hopes of Reparation now failing, my humble desier is, that by the Indeavor, and power of your Highnesse, I may have payed mee by my sayd Ma∣sters, Resedent now in Dordricht; the full somme, or valew of 200. pounds starling: to mee, or my Assiges, in Bridges, within thirty dayes after the 10. of March 1656. ould stile, for the Reasons specefied at large in the sayd papers before mentioned, sent by the said Simmons vnto your High∣nesse, who arived at London the 11. day of this month of March. SIR, this I entreat of you; because the power of our Land is now principally in your hand, and because your Will and Word hath beene, as it were a Law in many other things, of farre greater consequence: but if you doe it not to be payd to mee within the time mentioned; I intend by the helpe, and the Devine Providence of that same God,Jsa. 1.4. which it seemes many of your party have forsaken. Or else they know him not: 1. Sam. 2.12. I shall (I say) by the speciall assistance afore sayd, shortly make such things knowne to the world, as that neyther your Highnesse, nor some of your helpers, will bee at all willing to heare of; Concerning the proceedings of you, & some of your Party in these last 20. years together, against that parte of our Nation, who most Inclined to peace, trueth, and meeknesse: and it may bee, by the helpe afore sayd, in short time, by my meanes, some of the same Creatures, who have been begotten by the troub∣lers of England, & bred vp vnder some of your owne party, may happily come to byte you, and some others. But if the sayd two hundred pounds starling, bee payd vnto mee, or my Assignes in Bridges, in Flanders, before the 10. of Aprill 1657. old style: I shall not onely deferre the same, which I otherwise by the grace of God intend, but also I shall by the helpe of the most High, indeavour to show you, or some whom you shall be plea∣sed to appoint for to heare mee, the best way and course to bee taken to∣wards your Honour, peace, and safty, to the end that yet a farre greater dissollation come not vpon my beloved Nation, by the meanes of your Highnesse, and some of your party: which I am afrayd of, and long have beene: by Reason whereof, you may conceave the more, or better safety for your selves, and yet be mistaken. SIR, I humbly referre you to my former papers, wherin I wrote you distinctly, the particulars of many of my greevances, also inclosed to you, and vnto Mr. Sterckland for you, besides Copyes of papers, presented at severall times vnto my sayd Masters; as well to such as Reside now in London, and Hamborough, as now Residing in Dordricht, wherein many par∣ticulars of my greevances were especified. And so I tooke my leave. Further: the Reador may please to consider, that Crumwell, and his Consorts, have choyce of two severall Interpretations of that which is writ∣ten in folio 52. & part of 53. by them to be vnderstood out of those words:
being proper, as also trueth both wayes: namely, vnto my long & many foulde or sundry sufferings by mine owne enemies, in 23. yeares: or as truely may the same words bee vnderstood, to bee the longe and extreame sufferings of the King, and the Nation of England, by Crumwell, and his Army, and some other Conspirators in Combination with them. Further: I did in my papers afore-sayd, alledge vnto Crumwell, and others; that I neyther would wilfully offende him, nor flatter him further then my necessety did require for the clearing of mine owne Conscience between God and my selfe; in regard of what (longe since) came to my knowledge, conserning the Conspirators in England. Secondly: I did therin reflect, vpon what I then supposed would fol∣low, betweene the sayd Conspirators and my selfe: and the onely mea∣nes of my being Righted, remayned in himselfe, to wit, Crumwel. There∣fore I could doe no lesse, then to give him some good words, by way of the Tytle, given him by the like of himselfe, & some others; who loves him not: as himselfe wel knowes. Thirdly,A woe! There is a Cursse pronounced vnto such, as call evill good, and good evill,Prov. 16.15. which is, to Iustifie the wicked, and to condemne the Iust. Fourthly, Neyther doe I beleeve, that Crumwell desiers to bee flattered; vnlesse it be by such,Jsa. 5.20. as are ingaged in Treason, as well as himselfe: with∣out which, hee will not lightly put Confidence on any man. These, and divers things, being neere to this purpose, I signefyed vnto the said Crumwell, and Streckland, & others of their Party; in March a fore∣sayd: who answered mee not a worde: which showes the hart of the sayd Crumwell, to his owne shame to be lifted vp; and it may be to his owne destruction.2. Kings. 14 10.13. Who gloryes in his owne shame, and who onely mindes earthly things. It seemes there is none in Power in England, that will doe that which is good: no,Phil. 3.19. not one: as apeares by Crumwell, and his Consorts, though they are sought vnto.Psal. 14.3. Wijse, and Righteous Reador, bee pleased to take notice of the Conclusion. These following Reasons, Reade and Consider. First: to my great disgrace and prejudice, my wrongs and sufferings in my Person, and good name; hath been in sundry kinds very extreame and of 23. yeares continuance. Secondly, This hath caused me from time to time, to be bitterly revyled and scorned by good men, as well as others, by mis-informations. Thirdly, By reasonable Reparation given me; such as have abused mee by mis-information, & not wilfully, much lesse so Mallissiously as others, then they would have vnderstood that I was much wronged. Fourthly, That those which are Impudent, will then see to their shame, that they have often wronged mee, without any cause at all in mee. Fiftly, That I may thereby live quietly, and in peace with all men, in time to come.
Sixthly: that such, and the like, might see and consider the evill of theyr  doings, and doe no more so wickedly; nor any others against mee, nor any others hereafter, by the evill example of the former, so evill shall bee put away from amongst you, and others shall heare and feare, and commit no more any such evill amongst you, see Deut. 19. from the 16. verse to the end. Seaventhly, Because my selfe, & others; have found by longe and woe∣full  experince, that because sentence or Iustice against the evill workers, hath neither in the short, nor long, been executed, much lesse speedyly; therefore the harts of the Children of men, hath been fully set in them to doe evill.Eccles. 8.11 12. Is it not a wonderfull thing, that men should so despise the Word, and cast of the feare of the Lord? like men who are so desperately wicked, as to tyrannise so much over others, as to make them halfe or wholy distracted (as them selves say) by exstreme violence, and greefe, donne by themselves and then Insult the more over them, by taunting termes, Imputing such to be mad for the great troubles, and vngodly dealings, brought vpon the opressed, by them selves. These doe aprove themselves to bee Lovers of wrong, more then of Right, neyther are they ashamed to condemne the Innocent, nor to Iustefye the vngodly.Eccles. 7.7. These men seeme to scorne Gods owne Word, seeing it is sayd, that oppression maketh a wise man mad.Jeren. 17.9 A gift de∣stroyeth the harte, and so doth feasting too: when it is done to a mischievous end. Now, because the evill smell of theyr detestable projects is come abroad  into a great part of the world, which in the short or long will make Crumwell, and his Helpers, for to spuw vp or leave the pray againe, by them vnjustly taken from theyr betters, both of our owne, and other Na∣tions. And this is the Reason that the Traytors of England first made vse of Strangers against theyr owne King and Country; I meane such as were mis-informed and deceaved by the falshood of the sayd Traytors. Secondly, the strenght of theyr delusion, and the necessity of the sayd  Rebbells for it,Proverb. 6.19. they yeare after yeare have made vse of one Catholike to destroy another Catholike: so that it seemes theyr Trade and Profession is to sowe and to make discord, strife, and devisions amongst Brethren,Rom. 16. vers. 17.18.19.20. from whence commeth desolation, ruying, and bloodshed, and they warme themselves by the coales of other mens Houses, whom the sayd Rebbels set on fyer. Thirdly, they have not onely severall times stirred vp Protestants against  Catholikes, but also Catholikes against Protestants. Witnesse the Hents of theyr owne Creators, saying: They had helpe of the Subjects of the King of Spayne, or some of them against the Lords the States Generall of the Vnited Provences, or against the peaceable Inhabitants. I confesse, if they speake trueth, it is to themselves mis-fortune,Judges 9. vers. 2.3.4.5.6. because their custome is constantly for lyes: but if it bee true, it is but like as Abimolochs boldnesse. So that, if any of the King of Spaynes Subjects were drawne thereunto,Nota 15.
it was by the shamelesse importunety, and strong delusions of the sayde Rebbells. Vpon which account they would have broken the Peace be∣tweene the King of spayne, if the sayd States (before mentioned) had proved so wicked as themselves. So that the Read or may vnderstand, that by smooth words, fayre pretences, and other vngodly shifres, there is no end of the hurtfull ploddings of mischiefe by the sayde Rebbels. For first, they will procure others to doe what is vnjust, and then will be the first to stirre vp yet others against them for it. It were greatly to bee desired that all people, especially Protestants, who have beene most deluded by the sayd Rebbells, did perfectly vnderstand how much the Conspirators have beene beholden to slaunder, fraude, and falsehood; and thereby have prevayled with severall other Nations, for to condemne, and judge wrongly of such eminent and innocent Persons at home and abroad, as were more righteous then themselves. And some∣times they joyned with Spayne against Portingall, and severall times secretly as openly they jugled with Portingall against Spayne: and after that, the like againe with Spayne against Fraunce, and now with Fraunce against Spayne. Neyther is it possible to mention halff the mischiefes that the deceavors of England hath practised in theyr wicked proceedings. But the Indifferent Reador may bee pleased to remember, that when I mention the Make∣bates, or Conspirators of England, I doe not meane the Oppressed, nor the deluded people of England; but I meane the present Traytor Crumwell, the Officors of his Army, and such others of his Right-hand Mates, as fell first from that Religion they first had, and since have changed theyr Religion from Presbiterians vnto Independants; then to Annabaptists, but what Religion now they have, I know not. But this I am sure, that so by Antionomismi Adamites, and Quakers Relligion, and others, which I can not remember; but I am sure, they are all countenanced, if not first in∣vented or devised by Crumwell, and his chiefe Helpers: and by this means they keepe the people of England, & elssewhere, in continuall conten∣tion, stryffe, and envye, one against another, least by Love and Vnity they should set themselves against the Rebbells, who have brought dis∣honour, infamy, and distresse vpon the Nation. And this is the Reason that the mindes of many people abroad are corrupted by the false Reportes of those, who have donne so much mis∣chiefe, and doe cause good people to doe much evill, by theyr bitter cen∣surings and condemning not only the King and Queene, the Bishops, and many a thousand others, who are peaceable, quyet, and faithfull in the Land; & that for some small punishment inflicted vpon 3. or 4 presump∣tious Persons, who, after severall warnings, continued to trouble the State, and disturbed the Church & the Common-wealth also by Rebellious and false Doctrine, they declared their impudence, like Rabsaketh, in their Books or Pamphlets, Sermons, Lybels, seditious Feasts, &c. against the Govern∣ment
then Established. Which by Act of Parlament, to wit, the Lawes of the Land, besides the Proclamations of the King, the Bishops were en∣joynd and expresly charged and commanded to maintaine, and to punish Offendors, and such disturbers as by Lyes, new Doctrines of theyr owne-framing, stirred vp part of the People to Rebellion against the King, the Church, and the State, to the losse of many a thousand good mens Lives, besides many of the Rebbels owne adhearance. And therefore no wonder though the guilt of the Rebbels make themselves afrayd, who have cau∣sed so much innocent blood to bee spilled by Sea and Land, besides mur∣thering of the Lords Annoynted, & others, whom vnder God, the Peace and the Welfare of the Land dependeth. And this is the cause they vsed so many devices, policyes, and continuall importunities, not onely to deceave many other Nations, especially Pro∣testants, with whom they prevaile little or much to joyn with them in theyr most abhominable Conspiracy. Neither will they ever cease to provoke so many others, as possible they can for to enter into Combination with them, because they are continually in so much feare of the Gallowes, as ever were any knowne Theefes in this world. Therefore, though they bee repulsed and rejected againe and againe, yet like the Devill, with shame∣lesse faces, will still present themselves for the procurement of theyr owne ends, as it is in the first of Iob, vers. 9.10.11. and in the second of Iob, vers. 3.4.5.6.7. And severall times in the fourth of Matheuw, verses 3.4.5.6.7.8.9. Therefore all you, High and Low, who intend to keep your peace with the Lord our God, delay no to breake off Peace with the wicked Reb∣bels; therefore I say vnto you,Numb. 16. verses 2.26.27.31.32.33.34.49. &c. as Moses sayd vnto the people of Israëll. I pray depart, and separate your selves from these wicked men, least the good Spirit of God depart from you. NOTA. You shall finde in the same Chapter, that more then three times as many thousands perished in that Rebellion, as there were hundreds of them, when they first began, like as you may reade vers. 2. and 49. in the 16. of the Booke of Numbers.1. Sam. 16.15. And though they will showe themselves as bolde and blasphemous as Rabshakeh, as it is in the second of the Kings, Chap. 18. vers. 27.28.29. but especiall compare the Rebbells of England, with Rabshakeh, in the 30. vers. of the same Chapter; and minde their impudence as was Rabshakehs, vers. 31. Wherefore say vnto them, as Christ sayd vnto the Devill, get thee hence,Mat. 4.10. Sathan, for it is written, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. Therefore you may see, though the Devill was rejected divers times by our Saviour, yet hee was so shamelesse as to renewe his temptations againe; even so is the practise of the Rebbells of England, whose temptations are of no lesse force then the Devills were: but you must answeare them as Jehu answeared Joram, namely: Wat hast thou to doe with peace,2. Kings. 9. vers. 22. so long as the whoredomes of thy Mother Jesa∣bell, and her witchcrafts, are so many? That is you must call to minde the frui∣tes,
or the evill actions committed by the sayde Conspirators, & throw them in theyr owne faces, as occasion shall bee presented by them-selves. Or you must stirre vp your selves,Gen. 15.11 and dryve them from you, as Abraham drove those devouring fowles from the carkasis of his Sacrafice. Now be pleased, O King of France, and all other Princes, States, Potentates, Majestrates and Marchants, and all others whosoever, consider, foresee, and minde your owne honour & safety in time: for you will finde many times that the Lives and Estates, as well as the Honour of good and harmlesse men,2. Kings are many times destroyed & lost, because they have to doe with evill men,Chap. 10. as you may see by the 42. men, which were slayne by Jehu, onely for that they were going to visit the childeren of Ahab.Vers. 14. Neyther was any one of them spared or left alive. And whereas the Rebbels, with whom you are (or may bee) intangled, and by them drawne into dishonourable and ungodly dissignes, and when afterward they shall see that vpon more serious consideration you begin to scorne and shake them of, then will they pretend Artikles of Agreement, which themselves, or some others for them, have by suttell policy obtay∣ned from you, by pretences which beares a doubble meaning. Vnto which I answeare against these Sophisters,Esther 3.8.9.11.12.13. verses. that though by the greedinesse, pride, & bloody mindednesse of Hamon, Ahasuerus the King was prevayld withall to give consent to destroy the Iewes, and to take all their goods: yet vpon better deliberation and information, hee did not onely revoke the Decree,Esther 7. vers. 9.10. but caused him to bee hanged for his impudence, by whom hee was drawen therevnto, and that after the writtings were signed, sealed,Ester 8. vers. 10.11 and sent away. Note heere, how th King commaunded by Letters, that for the wicked devise, devised by Haman against the Iewes, should returne vpon his owne head,Ester. 9.25. and that hee, to wit Hamon and his 10. Sonnes, should bee hanged on the gallowes. And if the Rebbells of England, who hath approved themselves farre worsse then Hamon, were served so, it would be a piece of Service accepta∣bel vnto God and Man, and right honourable vnto the Authors of it. By which the Reador, and all men, may see and take notice, that it is farre more pleasing vnto the Lord, to breake of Agreements with such, as pra∣ctise nothing but mischiefe, then it can bee to continue in a wicked League with such, as the Rebbells of England are. I pray you all, High & Low, at home and abroad,Psal. 26. vers. 4.5.6. to consider the Resolution and Example of David: I have not (sayd hee) sat with vayne persons, neyther will I goe in with dissemblers. I have hated the Congregation of evill doers; and I will not sit with the wicked. I will wasch my hands in innosency, and so will I compasse thyne Altaer, O Lord. Which no man can doe High no Lowe, Rich nor Poore, so long as his hand is with such children of wickednesse, as are the Rebbells of England. Who sayth further, gather not my soule with sinners, nor my life with bloody men, in whose hands is mischiefe,Vers. 19. and the right hand is full of Brybes.
I am afrayd of a perpetuall desolation upon England, because the pryde and impudence of the Rebbells, who hath reproached, cheated, dishou∣red, and spoyld the Nation, as well men of ordinary quality, as the more considerabell; they have also magnifyed them-selves against the Lord, and his people: and this Assembly of Sycophants now in England, doe Vsurp a rigorous Authority, and they doe insult over the meanor sorte of men, as well as over the more eminent, who cause divers to groane from out of the Citty, & the soule of the wounded cryeth out,Job. 24.12. yet God layeth not folly to them; neyther can any in all the world more presumptuously take vpon them to collumniate, censure, & condemne all Catholikes, especially the Pope and the Iesuwytes: so that, besides variotye of slaunders, the Rebbells not onely themselves, but all, or most of theyr Creatours, doe constantly pretend the Pope to bee the sonne of perdition:1. Tessal. 2.4. who (as they say) apposeth and Exalted himselfe, above all that is called God, and that the Pope showeth himselfe that Hee is God. Also Crumwell, and his Army, and others of his Creatures, are alwayes ready for to pawne all the Fayth and Throth they have: that the Pope is Antichrist,Revel. 11.7. and the Beast that ascended out of the bottomlesse Pit. But the Scripture sayth, That hee is Antichrist that denyeth the Father and the Sonne. But the Pope confesseth both the Father and the Sonne: so that by te Rule of Scripture,1. Iohn. 2. vers. 22. hee can not be Antichrist: Neyther doe I know who should bee Antichrist vnlesse the Devill, or Crum∣well, or some such cursed Creature. I confesse it can not yet bee sayd, that the Seaven Hills of Rome, are in the possession of this our Crumwell.Revel. 18.2.3. But I have some Reasons with confidence; to thinke, that Crumwell, the Sycofant, hath seaven soule Spirits about him, or that are his Associates, who are yet more wicked then any can bee about the Pope, or in Rome it selfe. Neyther doe I suppose it will bee harde for to disprove, but that the Rebbells are Lyers (like those false Apostels) who pretend to be Christians, and are not, but are rather of the Synagogue of Sathan: witnesse theyr troubling of all Nations,Zepha 2.9.13. who are good Christians, besides theyr owne Nations, so many yeares together. And marke their many alterations, and changes against Christianity in Eng∣land, and contrary vnto all Christians of all other Nations. And yet the future and evill intent of the Iugglers in England, doth apeare against Christians, in that they will neyther assist the State of venice, in theyr distresse at all themselves, nor will they cease from hindring nor from troubling of those, that gladly would helpe that State in theyr need, who are an Honourable, Ancient, and Peaceable State, to wit, The Repu∣blike of Venice: who are like to bee forced unto a very dishonourable Peace, which can not but prove very prejudiciall vnto France, & vnto other seve∣ral Christian Nations: or else the sayd State may come to be greatly distres∣sed by reason of the Rebbells of England, which will bee yet worse for other Christians; yet the sayde Rebbells continue to presse on theyr owne ends,
though they should bring all Christendom in subjection vnto those who are no Christians, and therefore they will make no Peace, but breake and hinder what Peace they can, vnlesse it bee with such as are like themselves, who will shortly bee found worse then Turkes: who by theyr dissimulations pretend to bee what they are not, and it is theyr chiefe joy to trouble the Christians, because they know it to be pleasing to such as are no Christians. And this is the Reason they continue to renew and stirre vp strife, conten∣tion, mischiefe, and bloodshedde, betweene Christians and Christians, as aforesayd. Wherefore they seeme almost to burst with envy against the Iesuwyts, who endevour to keep the people in peace and vnity, and from insurre∣ctions, tumults, and Rebellion, against theyr severall Princes or Magi∣strates, vnder whom they doe reside. Also theyr endeavour is, to save theyr people from being spoyled, schattered, or deceaved by the Woofes or Rebbells of England, by whose meanes (vnder God) the Lives, as well as the Estates of those people are preserved, because they expell and frustrate the poyson which ingenders or breeds in the hearts of Rebbelles. And I would to God, all good Protestants, and godly Ministers had taken heed in time, and had not bitten of the secreat baytes where withall the Traytors of England have catched and drawne many into Treason, and evill designes, as well as themselves. But such Protestants and Catholikes shall doe well to free and cleanse themselves in time to come, and to see that they bee not defiled with the cages of these vncleane Birds,2. Cor. 7.1. and from being companions with a Denne of Theefes.James 4.8. And take heed of the sayd seducing Spirits,Revel. 18.2. and of the habitations & of the doctrine of Devills, who speakes Lyes in hypocrisie, having their consciences seared with a hot yron. I say,Mat. 21.13. if the Lord please to cleanse your hearts and your hands from the evill fruyt and the poyson of the sayd Rebbells, which the Lord will doe, if you,1. Tim. 4.1.2. with your whole harte, desier it: so shall you bee able to remove the stumbling blockes, out of the wayes of the Lords people, and to pre∣pare for them a good way,Ier 6.16. which shall be pleasing vnto God & good Men. Because Rebbells are resolved to holde and practise the doctrine of Balaam,Esa. 37.14 who advised Balack to cast a stumbling blocke before the people of Israëll. Soo the Gardians of England makes use of such doctrines as is hatefull to God,Revel. 2.14 15.16. and hurtful to all good men. And hee that shall advise them to repent and amende theyr lives, theyr advise doth seeme odious, or as ydle tales vnto them,Gen. 1.14 at the best. Who, like Sea-hounds, that doe very much spoyle by destroying much fisch, so long as they live: which is the cause that large monye is given for theyr heads, though they bee good for nothing. But they that can obtayne the heads of such Rebbells, deserve much more mony and favour both from God and all good men: because the Rebbells neyther doe, nor will cease from destroying abundance of good and honest
men, of theyr owne, and other Nations, so by Sea as by Lande, and had Knepperdolling, and Jan van Leyden, and theyr followers, by whom it seems the Relligion and practise of Crumwell, and his Associates was first com∣posed and acted: severall whereof had for rewarde each an Yron Bas∣ket, and were naked noynted with honny, exalted to the toppe of the Stee∣ple at Munster in Westphalen, & stung to death with flyes, without eyther meat or drinke, but onely halfe a penny Loafe once for all. And I partly perceave that Crumwell the Traytor, & some of his fellows, are afrayd of some such like rewarde; for what they have donne vnto the King and the Nation of England, as well as to our friends and Neighbour-Nations, who knowes very well what became of Wat Teyller, and his Com∣panions; and this is the Reason that they keepe a great Army of Souldiors in Armes, like vnto themselves, which are payed out of other mens Estates by force, against the King, and the Country. Neyther can they devise any better shifts for to collour & hyde theyr owne Theft & Treason, then by Lyes & forged pretences against the King, and such others, as were faithfull in the Land, & more righteous then themselves. And by the con∣tinuation of theyr fashood and hypocrisy, by which they prevayle with some selfe-Ended-men, and some others, who are deceaved by the same Rebbells, or caused to beleeve, that they had just cause and reason for to rebbell against the King, and the government then established. It was lawfull for such Servants of God, as came lawfully vnto Autho∣rity, as Moses, Josua, Jehosaphat, and more such, as were Righteous.Numb. 16.32.33. But it was not lawfull for Corah, Dathan, nor Abiarm, neyther for Abimelech, nor Achitophell, nor Sheba, nor for Iudas, nor for Crumwell,Iudg. 9.18. or his Companinos, for such to conspire against them,2. Sam. 20.1. whom the Lord hath set over them. If there were any just pretence to be made for such a Rebbellion, as that of England, never any had more cause then Ioseph in Egypt,Gen. 39.19 20. who was op∣prest, though an Innocent Person. And David against Saull, for whom hee ventured his Life many times: yet Saull sought Davids life, which was to requite evill for good: yet David never offert to rebell against te King,2. Sam. 24.10.11. though his mortall enemy: & God gave him severall times into his hand: yet David spared Saull himselfe, and killed him not,vers. 17.18 19. and hee did also re∣strayne others, that would have killed him, as Saull himselfe confesseth. And David sayd vnto Abishai, Destroy him not;1. Sam. 26.9. for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Annoynted, and bee guiltlesse? Obadia, who was Servant vnto a badde King, who destroyed the Pro∣phets of the Lord, and did much evill, yet Obadia never offert to rebell against his Master; but did good to the Prophets of the Lord privately.1 King. 18. No more would Crumwell, nor his Companions,vers. 3.4.5.6.7.8. if the feare of God had been in them, as it was in Obadiah: I could name Daniell, and many others, who were opprest, & yet Innocent men, chose rather to suffer, then to stie up Rebbellion in the Kingdome.
Also much may be sayd of Symon Magus,Act. 13.8.10. Elymas, and Alexander the Copper-Smith; but Crumwell, and his Companions, exceeds them all. Therfore I say of them,2. Tim. 2. who are full of all subtilty, it seemes to mee almost like chil∣dren of the Devill,4.14.15. of whom I advise the Reador to be aware in time, for Reasons knowen to mee, which I reserve (God willing) vntill my next following. I have Reason to thinke that none but the Devill can match Crumwell, or some of his Associates, who delight in Treason, falsehood, and murther, so well as himselfe. I suppose there is a hard Game betwixt the Devill and some of them, and I beleeve for the first part they will put the Devill hard to it.Ezek. 33.11. I wish they would bethinke themselves, & presently turne from theyr evill way, lest the Devill foyle some of them at the last. I cannot forbeare but to touch once more vpon those foure shamelesse Ringleadors, to wit, Prinne, Bastwik, Burthon, and Iohn Lilborne, who, like Firebrands of Hell, as well as seducing Spirits, encouraged & stirred vp many of the People of England to Rebellion, mingled with Blasphemy, slaunder, and the spilling of much Nobel & other Innocent Blood. Who, though they were favoured long, and saved from being Hanged, which by the Law of the Land they deserved; yet the sayd Rebbels, by theyr Ad∣herants and themselves, have malitiously and continually dispersed among all such Protestants vpon whom they have beene able to fasten theyr Lyes farre and neere, within and without England: Namely, They have falsly reported that these vnworthy Fellowes, before mentioned, were honest & godly men. Also these Sophisters have filled the world with theyr clame∣rous Lyes, who pretend theyr punishment was ten times more then it was. And it is mentioned in holy Scripture, that whosoever will not doe or obey the Law of God, and the Law of the King, let judgement bee exe∣cuted speedely vpon him, whether it bee vnto death, or to bannishment, or to confiscation of goods,Mart. 9.25 26. or to inprisonment, as it is in Esra Chap. 7. vers. 26. Therefore rebuke, and drijve these Lying and foule spirits from you. And take notice of the place apointed for such,Revel. 21.8. and Chap. 19.20. & for the false Prophets: namely, the Lake that burnes with fire and brimstone. And for the Beast, and the false Prophet that wrought miracles before him, which deceaved them that hath receaved the marke of the Beast. These are apoynted for the same place: and so are all those who loveth and maketh Lyes.Revel. 22.15. Therefore that the good Spirit of God, and my hart, may bee vnited and knit vnto you; and I hope you will not blame mee for this my advise, seeing there is no wrong in my hands against any honest man.Gen. 49.6. 1. Chron. 12.17. And so I humbly take my leave of your Majesty, the Nobillity, Cleargy, & all other good people of Fraunce, and all others, at home and abrode, who in the Name of the Lord our God, stand for Love, Peace, Trueth and Equity, with all that aprove themselves resonable men. Be pleased to consider what I say, and doe accordingly. FINIS.
