N579B 16157382 104924
A New BALLAD, With the Definition of the Word TORY. To the Tune of Hey Boys up go we. THe Word Tory's of Irish Extraction, 'Tis a Legacy they have left here, They came here in their Brogues, And have acted like Rogues, In endeavouring to learn us to Swear. Those Papists, I may rather say Atheists, Was sent with a Sham to the Town, To Swear one Plot up and another Plot down. With a thick Irish Air, like the same that they Swear, Contradiction in every Line; But this I conclude, their understanding's not good, Their Reason's left in Ireland behind. Towzer. I will ite on and Sham as I have begun. Thomson. And I will Lie in Print as you have done. Church of ENGLAND. There's nothing essential that divides us two. PRESBYTER. Let us combine against the common Foe. SEE how the Tories drives their Trade, Clokes all with Fourty One, As all the Rogueries of that Age By Presbyter was done: But if you'l trace them to the place Where first they did agree, You'l find the Plot was laid at Rome To destroy the Monarchey. The Jubilies that was held there For th'destruction of this Land. A Thousand Masses was prepar'd To keep up the holy Band; A League or Covenant you may call't. Judge which will best agree, Was hatcht at Rome, transported here, To destroy our Monarchey.
The Second Part to the same Tune. At Richelius Closet had second Birth, And privatly sent hether To breed dissention in Church and State, We one might hate another. It may trouble every Protestant That these things e're should be, Their shaming Plots would cut out Throats To destroy the Monarchey. And yet they're the Sham-pretenders That balls out the Old Cause, And swears they're the great defenders And supporters of our Laws: They'l defend the King by swearing round God Dam them it shall be, And add the Cross to the Tripple-Crown To support the Monarchey. They're not asham'd of Eighty-Eight, Or the Gun-powder Plot; The Irish-Mssacre is dead, And quite with them forgot; They have forgot those Stratagems Did not with us agree, They us'd the means, but lost the ends To destroy the Monarchey. And now they act it o're again, Their sham designs, to bring These Kingdoms in a Civil War, Swear they'l preserve the King. Thinks all their former faults forgot; But he that reads may see, They Plot to Live, and Live by Plot To destroy our Monarchey. This Holy and Religious Church Directs them in this way, To swear they will defend the the King By making us there prey. The Church of England it must down As well as Presbytree, Because it doth defend the Crown Of our great Monarchey. L'Estrange, their English Bellarmine Writ on in their defence, And scandalous Thompson Prints the same, Who never yet knew sence. St. Omers Hedg-burds go to work, And make it there Decree, To preserve the King by pulling down The English Monarchey. By Dispensation from the Pope We will set up another, A King that never shall revoke The Holy Church his Mother; We'l extinguish all that Scottish Race Which favours Heresie, Set up a Roman in his place, In our great Monarchey. The Penal Statutes they shall down, Which long has bore the sway, High Mass be sung in every Church, Prosessions every way; We'l Reform the Church by dint of Sword Since the Keys they will not do, We'l make the Whigs dance a new Jigg, And to the Altar bow. But Heavens preserve our great Monarch, With the Partner of his Bed, May Britains Diadem lastingly Sit fast on Charles his Head: While that the Sun and Moon endures, In this let us agree, To Defend the King and preserve the Laws Of this great Monarchey. FINIS. LONDON: Printed for R. Lett, in the Year, MDCLXXXII.
