N887 12040142 52970
A NEW METHOD, AND Extraordinary Invention, TO DRESS HORSES, AND WORK Them according to NATƲRE: AS ALSO, To Perfect Nature by the Subtilty of Art; Which was never found out, but by THE Thrice Noble, High, and Puissant PRINCE William Cavendishe, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of Newcastle; Earl of Ogle; Vis∣count Mansfield; and Baron of Bolsover, of Ogle, of Ber∣tram, Bothal, and Hepple: Gentleman of His Majesties Bed-chamber; One of His Majesties most Honourable Privy-Councel; Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter; His Majesties Lieutenant of the County and Town of Nottingham; and Justice in Ayre Trent-North: Who had the honour to be Governour to our most Glori∣ous King, and Gracious Soveraign, in His Youth, when He was Prince of Wales; and soon after was made Captain General of all the Provinces beyond the River of Trent, and other Parts of the Kingdom of England; with Power, by a special Commission, to make Knights. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Milbourn, in the Year 1667.
To His most Sacred MAJESTY Charles the Second, By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. May it please Your Majesty, MY First Book of Horse-manship, Print∣ed in French, had the honour of Your Patronage; and I presume again, to Dedicate this Second, in English, to Your Majesty; who being not only the greatest Monarch in Christendome, but a King that loves Justice and Truth, can best judge of Books, which contain, I dare say, the perfect and only Truth of Horse-manship. My Duty, and particular Affection to Your Person, are sufficient
Motives to me, to consecrate, not Books only, but my self, and mine, and all that belongs to us, to Your Majesties service: But besides that, Your Favours to me are so many, and so great; That what I am, and have, ought justly to be sacri∣ficed to Your Will and Pleasure, as Yours; wherein I joy more, than if it was mine. Your Wisdom, Sir, Valour, and Conduct, makes all Your Neighbours confess, That Your Majesty is the most Glorious King that ever Reign'd; And that God will prosper You, in all Your great Acti∣ons, and give Your Majesty an happy and long Reign, to the joy and comfort of all Your Loyal Subjects, is both heartily Wish'd, and fervently Pray'd for, by Your Majesties most Obedient Creature, William Newcastle.
TO THE READERS. HAving past the greatest part of my long Exile at Antwerp, one of the finest Cities in the World, whose Inhabi∣tants are deservedly Famous, for their extraordinary Civilities to Strangers, of which I must acknowledge to have receiv'd a great many from them: I did, during that time, Publish, in French, a Book of Horse-manship; and having again, since my Return to my Native Country, had much leisure, in my solitary Country Life, to recollect my Thoughts, and try new Experiments about that Art; I now, for the more particular Satisfaction of my Country-men, Print this second Book, in English; which being nei∣ther a Translation of the first, nor an absolutely ne∣cessary
Addition to it, may be of use by it self, with∣out the other, as the other hath been hitherto, and is still, without this; but both together will questi∣onless do best. I cannot mention Antwerp, upon the score of my Book, but I must also take notice of the Honour I have receiv'd there, from many Noble great Persons, who did me the favour to see my Mannage; and of the things they was pleased to say, upon occasion of what they saw there; which will be in lieu of En∣comiums, in the behalf of Horses, and of Horse-manship, very proper in this place. When I had the honour to wait on Don John of Austria, at Antwerp, brought to him by my Lord of Bristol, his Highness was pleas'd to use me ex∣treme Civilly; and to ask both then, and at several other times, for my Book of Horse-manship, before it was Printed; and to receive it with great Satis∣faction, when I presented his Highness with One: But he did not see my Horses, which, in above 20. Coaches, all the Spaniards of his Court, went to my Mannage to see; with many Noble-Men of Flan∣ders, as the Duke of Ascot, and others, before
whom I Rid my self, three Horses, and my Esquier, five. Being return'd to Don John, He ask'd them, Whether my Horses was as Rare, as their Re∣putation was Great: To which they answer'd, That my Horses was such, that they wanted no∣thing of Reasonable Creatures, but Speaking. And the Marquess of Seralvo, Master of the Horse to his Highness, and Governour of the Castle of Antwerp, told his Highness, That he had ask'd me, What Horses I lik'd best: And that I had answer'd, There were Good and Bad of all Nati∣ons; but that the Barbes were the Gentlemen of Horse-kind, and Spanish-Horses the Princes. Which Answer did infinitely please the Spaniards: And it is very true, That Horses are so as I said. The Marquess of Carasena was so civilly earnest to see me Ride, that he was pleas'd to say, It would be a great Satisfaction to him, to see me on Horse-back, though the Horse should but Walk. And seeing that no Excuses would serve, (though I did use many) I was contented to satisfie his so obliging a Curiosity; and told him, I would obey his Com∣mands, though I thought I should hardly be able
to Sit in the Saddle. Two dayes after he came to my Mannage, and I Rid first a Spanish-Horse, called Le Superbe, of a Light-Bay, a beautiful Horse; and though Hard to be Rid, yet when he was Hitt Right, he was the Readiest Horse in the World: He went in Corvets forward, backward, sidewayes, on both Hands; made the Cross perfectly upon his Voltoes; and did Change upon his Voltoes so Just, without breaking Time, that no Musitian could keep Time better; and went Terra a Terra Perfectly. The second Horse I Rid, was another Spanish Horse, call'd Le Genty; and was Rightly named so, for he was the finest Shap'd Horse that ever I saw, and the neatest; A Brown-Bay, with a White-Star in his Forehead; No Horse ever went Terra a Terra like him, so just, and so easie; And for the Piroyte in his Length, so just, and so swift, that the Standers by could hardly see the Rider's Face when he went; And truly, when he had done, I was so Dizzey, that I could hard∣ly Sit in the Saddle: He went also so exactly in Corvets forwards, as no Horse can goe better, and yet he had no great Strength; whence it ap∣pears,
That a Horse of Agility, Lightness, Spirit, Well-temper'd, and of a good Disposition, is much better than a Horse that hath only Strength; And that a most mighty and great Dutch-Brewer's Horse, wanting Spirit and Agility, can never goe well in the Mannage. The third and last Horse I Rid then, was a Barbe, that went a Metz-Ayre, very High, both Forward, and upon his Voltoes, and Terra a Terra. And when I had done Riding, the Marquess of Carasena seem'd to be very well sa∣tisfied; and some Spaniards that were with him, cross'd themselves, and cried, Miraculo. Many French Gentlemen, and Persons of the greatest Quality of that Nation, did me the favour to see my Horses; and the Prince of Conde himself, with several Noble-men, and Officers, was pleased to take the pains to goe twice to my Mannage: And though the French think, That all the Horse-man∣ship in the World is in France; yet one of them, and he a very great Man in his Country, was heard say, directing his Speech to me: Par Dieu (Mon∣sieur) il est bien hardi qui monte devant vous: And another said, at another time: Il n'y a plus de Segnieur comme vous en Angleterre.
Among many great Persons, of which the vast Country of Germany affords abundance, who, for the most part, delight to travel; the Landgrave of Hesse, did not only do me the honour to Visit me, and see my Horses; but, being return'd to his Coun∣try, was pleased to shew, by a very kind Letter, That he had not forgotten me, nor the Love he had observed I have for Horses; being pleased to promise, He would send me two of his own Breed; but soon after, he was Kill'd in the Warrs the King of Swede made with the King of Poland. As poor as I was in those dayes, I made shift to buy, at several times, four Barbes, five Spanish-Horses, and many Dutch-Horses; all the most Ex∣cellent Horses that could be; and among them a Grey Leaping-Horse, the most beautiful that ever I saw; and who went exceeding High and Just in Leaps, without any Help at all; as also upon the Ground; and Terra a Terra, beyond all other Horses; and he did look as if he had been above the Rate of Horse-kind. The Duke of Guise hearing of him, Two Gentlemen, a French-Rider, and an English∣man, wrote to me, That if I would part with him, the Duke of Guise would give me 600. Pi∣stolls
for him; but he was Dead three dayes before I receiv'd their Letter; and had he Liv'd, I would not have taken any Money for him; for he was a∣bove Price: And besides, I was then too great a Beggar, to think to be made Rich by the Sale of a Horse: I have bestow'd many Thousands of Pounds in Horses, and have given many; but never was a good Horse-Courser; Selling being none of my Pro∣fessions. The KING Himself, who is an Excellent Judge, both of Men, and Business; of Things of Use, and of Recreation; of Necessity, and of Ornament; did like that Horse very well: And having had the Ho∣nour, when I was His Governour, to be the first that Sate Him on Horse-back, and did instruct Him in the Art of Horse-manship; it is a great Satisfa∣ction to me, to make mention here of the Joy I had then, to see, That His Majesty made my Horses goe better, than any Italian, or French-Riders (who had often Rid them) could do; And to hear Him say, That there are very few that Know Horses; Which was Knowingly said, and wisely judg'd of His Majesty: It being very certain, That all Men un∣dertake to Ride them, but very few Know them, or can tell what they are good for.
It would fill a Volume, to repeat all the Commen∣dations that were given to Horses, and to Horse-manship, by several worthy Gentlemen, of all Nati∣ons, High and Low-Dutch, Italians, English, French, Spaniards, Polacks, and Swedes, in my own private Riding-House, at Antwerp; which, though very large, was often so full, that my Esquier, Capt. Mazin, had hardly Room to Ride; But these few already spoken of, will serve very well instead of all: And after I have given an Account, That I have divided this whole Book in four Parts, and every Part in many Sections, and Paragraphs, where∣in I never intended to observe any exact Method; I beseech my Readers, to take in good part, That I have however set down, as clearly as I could, with∣out the Help of any other Logick, but what Nature hath taught me, all the Observations about Horses, and Horse-manship; which I have made, by a long, and chargeable, though I must needs say, very plea∣sant, and satisfactory, Experience: And so Farewell.
THE NEW METHOD, AND Extraordinary Invention TO DRESS HORSES. THE FIRST PART. Of the several Authors that have Written of Horse-manship, both Italians, French and English. THis Noble Art was first begun and Invented in Italy, and all the French and other Nations went thither to learn; the seate of Horse-manship being at Naples: The first that ever Writ of it was Frederick Grison a Neapolitan; and truly he Writ like a Horse-man, and a great Master in the Art
for those times: Henry the Eighth sent for two Itali∣ans that were his Schollars, to come to him into England; and of one of them came all our Alex∣anders; and their Schollars fill'd the Kingdom with Horse-men. Sir Philip Sidney brought an Italian Rider, one Signior Romano, to teach his Nephew William Lord Herbert, afterwards Earl of Pembrook; and the same Sir Philip Sidney brought also over an other Italian Rider, call'd Signior Prospero: The old Earle of Lei∣cester, sent for an Excellent Rider out of Italy, call'd Signior Claudio Curtio, who writ a Book of Horse-man∣ship, and is quoted by several Italian Writers; but I think, that very much of his Book is stolen out of Gri∣son. Laurentius Cussius is another Author, none of the best, with Horrible Bitts. Then there is Cesar Fieske, who hath writ a Book much out of Grison too, where he meddles with Musick. There is another Book of Horse-manship, call'd Gloria del Cavallo, with long dis∣courses, and much out of Grison. There is another Italian Book of Horse-manship, call'd Cavallo Frenato de Pietro Antonio, a Neapolitan; much stolen out of Grison: But his Book consists most of Bitts, to little
purpose; though they seem to be Great Curiosities. But the most Famous man that ever was in Italy, was at Naples, a Neapolitan, call'd Signior Pignatel; but he never Writ: Monsieur La Broue Rid under him five years: Monsieur De Pluvinel nine years: And Monsieur St. Anthoine many years. The Liberty, which is the best for Bitts, at this Day, we call A La Pignatel. These three aforementioned French-men that Rid under Signior Pignatel, fill'd France with French Horse-men; which before were fill'd with Italians. Monsieur La Broue, I believe, was the First that ever Writ of Horse-manship, in the French Language: and the first French-man that ever Writ in that Art; His Book is very Tedious, many Words for little Matter; and his first Book is absolutely all Stolen out of Grison; and his second Book from Signior Pignatell's Lessons; But La Broue, to seem wiser than he was, and to make up a Book, divides a Circle into so many parts, to bring a Horse to a whole Circle, that it con∣founds a Horse more, and is harder for him, than to Work him upon a whole Circle at first: And for La Broue's third Book of Bitts, there is no great
Matter in it. As for Pluvinel, no doubt but he was a Good Horse-man; but his Invention of the Three Pillars, of which his Book Pretends to be an ab∣solute Method, is no more than an absolute Routine; and hath spoyl'd more Horses, than ever any Thing did; for Horses are not Made to the Hand and the Heel at all with them; nor will they go from the usual place where they are Ridden, nor well there neither. But my Book is stolen out of no Book, nor any mans Practice but my own, and is as True as it is New; and if any Man do not like it, it is a great Signe he understands it not: for there is no way for Dressing Horses like it; If it be not Good, I am sure it is the Best that hath been VVrit yet; what will be VVrit here∣after I know not. I must tell you that the Italian Writers are Tedi∣ous, and write more of Marks, Colours, Tempera∣tures, Elements, Moon, Stars, Winds, and Bleed∣ings, than of the Art of Rideing; only to make up a Book, though they wanted Horse-manship. There was one Signior Hannibal a Neapolitan that came into England and serv'd the Lord Walden. Monsieur St. Anthoine a French-man, was a very
good Horse-man, and sent over by Henry the Fourth of France, to teach Prince Henry; Mon∣sieur La Coste was his Page, and Ridd excellent∣ly well, especially Leaping Horses. Monsieur Boy∣cler Ridd under him too, and was an excellent Horse-man; Monsieur Founteney, which was either his Nephew, or his Natural Son; for he gave him All when he Dyed, was also a very good Horse-man, but none of these ever Writ any thing of Horse-manship. And the Best Horse-man, that ever I knew, is one of my own Breeding, and Rides by my Method, which is Captain Mazine, now a Query to the KING. That it is a very Impertinent Error, and of great Prejudice, to think the Mannage Ʋseless. MAny say, that all things in the Mannage is nothing but Tricks, and Dancing, and Gam∣balls, and of no Use: But by their Leave, whoso∣ever sayes so, is very much Deceived; for a Horse that is well settled upon the Hand, and firm
and Obedient to the Hand and Heels, Gallops the Field, and Changes as often, and just as you will, either without the Circle, or within the Cir∣cle, Serpiger, Terra a Terra, the Piroite, or what you will; and all is this upon the Ground, and every thing and Particle of it Useful; and so Useful, that a Good Horse-man, upon such a Horse, would have too much Advantage, in Conscience, of him that Talks against it, either in a single Combat, or in the VVarrs; for A Ready-Horse will Run, Stop, Turn, go Back; and if he Rise, he knows how to come Down again, and is so well on the Hand, as you cannot pull him Over with both your Hands; and so Obedient, that I will Run him on Fire, Water, or Sword, and he shall Obey me: And all This cannot be done but by the Art of Ride∣ing, and that in the Mannage. But, What makes these Men speak against it? The first Reason, is, Because they are Ignorant, and so speak, as the Wisest men in the world must do, when they will speak of any thing they Know not, and think that Talk will carry it: But the Main Reason is this; They find they cannot Ride well;
nay, indeed not at all, A Horse of Mannage, and they would be the Finest men in the world, for All things, though they will take Pains for No∣thing; and because, forsooth, they cannot Ride by Inspiration, without taking Pains, therefore it is worth Nothing, and of no Use: But if every thing was Naught that they cannot do, there would be very few things Good in the World. The next thing, is, That they think it a Disgrace for a Gentleman to do any thing Well. What! Be a Rider. Why not? Many Kings and Princes think themselves Graced with being Good Horse-men. Our Gracious and most Excellent KING, is not only the Handsomest, and most Comely Horse-man in the World, but as Knowing and Under∣standing in the Art as any man; and no man makes a Horse go Better than I have seen some go under His MAJESTY the first time that ever He came upon their Backs, which is the Height and Quintescence of the Art; and yet I dare say the KING takes it for no Disgrace to be so Ex∣cellent a Horse-man: The Duke of YORK is also
a very Good Horse-man, and Both take it for an Honour, and no Disgrace; and think it a most useful and noble Quality for Princes. The Duke of Mommorancy, Conestable of France, and the first Gentleman of Christendom, was the Best Horse-man in the World, and to this day the best Branches for Bitts was of his Invention, called A La Conestable; and so he Devised the Best Spurrs; and never any Esquier Ridd like him, be∣ing certainly the Best Horse-man in the World, which he thought a Grace to him: The Prince of Conde, his Grand-childe by the Princess his Mo∣ther, is an Excellent Horse-man, and thinks it no Disgrace to him. Most of the Princes in France highly Esteem it, and are good Horse-men: nay, their King, at this present time, highly Esteems it, and is a Good Horse-man; nor is any Gentleman in France Esteem'd that is not a good Horse-man. The great King of Spain Deceased, did not only Love it, and Understand it, but was absolutely the Best Horse-man in all Spain. I may therefore desire These men to be more
Merciful, and to think it no Disgrace, to Them, to be Horse-men; but still the Old business will stick with them, which is, They cannot do it, and therefore it is Naught: A very good and sensless Reason! He that will take Pains for Nothing, shall never do any thing VVell; for Arts, Sciences, and good Qualities, come not by Instinct, but are got by great Labour, Study, and Practice; wherefore These Men will none (I thank you) till they be as Easily learnt, as the Seven Deadly Sins, Railing, and wearing Fine Cloaths and Feathers. But let us see now, how These Men are on Horse-back, and what their Horses do under them. This Cavalier Seats as far Back in the Sadle as he can, his Leggs stretcht as far Forward before the Shoul∣ders of the Horse, with his Toes out, that he may Spur him in the Shoulders; and Stoops in the Back, which they call a Comely Seat; not Knowing how to hold the Bridle in his Hand, nor Ghess at any Helps at all; and appears on Horse-back as if he were three quarters Foxt, so Ridiculous is that Seat: and having Sent to a Sadler, or a Bitt-maker, to Bitt his Horse, all is Well.
Being Mounted thus, as I tell you, you shall see his Ready Horse of Ʋse, and his Horse-manship: When he would Turn him on the Right Hand, the Horse doth Turn on the Left; and when he would Turn him on the Left Hand, the Horse doth Turn on the Right: When he would Stop him, the Horse runs Away: When he would Put him Forward, the Horse runs Backward: When he would Put him Back, the Horse Rises, and comes Over with him, and there the Good Horse-man Lies, and must send for a Surgion, or a Bone-Setter, if he be not Kill'd: Nay, his Horse shall neither come neer Drum, Trumpet, or Colours, Pistol, or Sword; but he fetches Forty Figaries to Endanger him and his Horse: And this is the Ex∣cellent Horse-man, and the Ready Horse of Ʋse. How is it Possible to be Otherwise, when the Horse knows not how to Obey either Hand or Heell, and the Horse-man is as Ignorant as he? Whence it followes, That there is Nothing to make a Sure Horse, but the Mannage. I would have every Horse (that wears a Bitt) Gelding, or Nagg, wrought in the Mannage, to
be firm on the Hand, both for Readiness, and Safe∣ty, were it for a B: B: Judge, or Lady: For with∣out setling of the Hand, they are very Unuseful, and Dangerous. I wonder how men are so Presumptious, to think they can Ride as Horse-men, because they can Ride forward from Barnet to London, which every body can do; and I have seen VVomen to Ride Astride as well as they: They do not think of any Art, or Trade, as they do of Horse-manship, where they are all Masters: Which doth not Prove so, when they Ride. I think I have Proved sufficiently their Errour, and Ignorance; and as fully Proved, That there is no Ʋseful Horse but those that are Made in the Mannage. The next thing, is, to tell you, That Corvets, and other Ayres, settles a Horse very well upon the Hand; makes him Leight before, and puts him upon the Hanches, which are all Useful for a Soul∣diers Horse; and makes him Stop upon the Han∣ches, which is very Useful for a man in Armes; for, did the Horse stop upon the Shoulders, he
would give his Rider (being Armed) such a Shock as would make his Bones Ake, was he never so Sound: Nay, to make a Horse go in Leaps, firms him on the Hand, which is Good for a Souldiers Horse. But, sayes a Gallant, when I should have Use of him in the Field, then he will be playing Tricks: That Gallant is Deceived; for, the Helps to make Horses go in Ayres, and to make them go upon the Ground, are Several; and Good Horse-men have much ado to make them go in Ayres, with their best Helps; so that, if you let them alone, they will not trouble you; besides, two or three dayes March will make them, that they will not go in Ayres, if you would have them; and they are much the Readier to go on the Ground: Whereby you see, that there is no Horse whatso∣ever can be a good and useful Horse, in any kind, with a Bitt, but what is Wrought in the Mannage. And therefore I advise you, for your Safety, and Use, to Ride all Horses in the Mannage, and you will find it very True, That there can be
no Horse else Safe and Useful; nor can any Horse go well in a Snaffle, except he be formerly Ridd with a Bitt. As for Pleasure and State, What Prince or Mo∣narch looks more Princely, or more Enthroned, than Upon a Beautiful Horse, with Rich Foot-clothes, or Rich Sadles, and Waving Plumes, making his Entry through Great Cities, to Amaze the People with Pleasure and Delight? Or, What more Glorious or Manly, than, at great Marriages of Princes, to Run at the Ring, or Tilt, or Course at the Field? What can be more Comely or Pleasing, than to see Horses go in all their several Ayres? and to see so Excellent a Creature, with so much Spirit, and Strength, to be so Obedient to his Rider, as if having no Will but His, they had but one Body, and one Mind, like a Centaur? But above all, What sets Off a King more, than to be on a Beautiful Horse at the Head of his Army? Thus it is Proved, That there is nothing of more Use than A Horse of Mannage; nor any thing of more State, Manliness, or Pleasure, than Ride∣ing;
and as it is the Noblest, so it is the Health∣fullest Exercise in the World. In Hunting, Hawking, Bowling, Shooting, Cocking, Cardes and Dice, and many such things, there is no Use at all, but meerly Pleasure: But in A Horse of Man∣nage, both Use and Pleasure. It is True, that if there was nothing Commendable but what is Use∣ful, strictly Examined; we must have nothing but Hollow Trees for our Houses, Figg-leaf-Breeches for our Clothes, Acorns for our Meat, and Wa∣ter for our Drink; for certainly, most things else are but Superfluities and Curiosities. I find Fault with no mans Delights, and do only Vindicate (with Truth) my own, since I have been so Prest to it with odde Discourses; but I leave every one to his own VVayes, and his own Delights, desiring they will do the like by Me, which I shall take for a great Favour: But if it Chances they will not be so Gracious, and Just to me, it will Grieve me so Extreamly, that, in my Conscience, I shall Sleep never the VVorse.
That a Good Horse-man may be Thrown-Down Off his Horse, without Disparagement to Horse-man-ship, contrary to the Vulgar Errour. MOst People are very much Deceiv'd, when, if a Horse throws Down his Rider, they not only Laugh at Him, but think to have Rea∣son so to do; Saying of the Best Horse-man in the VVorld, to whom such a Mischance should hap∣pen, That he is a Fine Horse-man indeed! For they can Swear, that they knew a Horse Threw him. But they must Learn, That a Good Horse-man may be Thrown Down sooner than Ill ones; because Good Horse-men little think of Sitting, and so may be Surprised, their Thoughts being all how to make their Horses go Well, and never doubt Throwing; whereas an Ill Horse-man thinks of nothing but Sitting, for Fear he should be Thrown, and never thinks how to make his Horse go Well; for he Knows not how to Do it: But Holds by the Main, and the Pomel, and his Head at the Horses Head, ready to Beat out his Teeth,
and his Leggs holding by the Flank; and is so Deformed on Horse Back, as if he were a Strange African Monster; and the Horse so Disordered, that to see him Sit in that Manner, is the most Nauseous Sight that can be, and the most Dis∣pleasing to the Beholders; and were much Better for the Spectators to see him Fall, and for his Re∣putation, so he received no Hurt by the Fall. Thus you see, That any Groom, or Tinker, may Sit, and yet be no Horse-man, which is a Greater Business than only Sitting; for a Jack∣anapes in Paris Garden, when he is Baited with Musled Mastiffs, the Gentleman Sits very Sure, but not very Comely, and in my Conscience is no Excellent Horse-man▪ Sitting is but One thing in Horse-manship, and there are Thousands of things in the Art. So if a Good Horse-man be Thrown by Chance, Hath he Lost all his Horse-manship, because he was once Thrown? And is an Ignorant Fellow in∣spired presently with Horse-manship, because he can Ill-favouredly Cling to the Horse, and Hold on? No, sitting Fast is the meanest thing in Horse-man∣ship,
which Comprehends many more of greater Consequence. But yet I must Tell you, I never knew in my Life, a good Horse-man Thrown, but I have known many Presumptuous ignorant Fellows get Falls; but, as, if a good Horse-man by Chance be Thrown, he doth not Lose all his Horse-manship with that Fall, if he be not Kill'd; so an Ignorant man, if he Sits, is not Presently infused with Horse-man∣ship: For it is a Mistake as Ridiculous as it is Common, to take Sitting Fast on Horse-back for the whole Art of Horse-manship. Old Grison, and his Translator Mr. Blundevile, ANATOMIZED OLd Grison, and many Italian Authors, would have a Bardel, which is a Straw Saddle, set first on a Colts Back, and nothing but a Rope Cavazon on his Nose; which is to no Purpose in the world, but Loss of Time: Then they will Trot him two or three Years up Hills, and down
Hills, to Stop him; which is to Less Purpose, and more Loss of Time. They would have a Circle; or Ring, as they call them, of an Acre of ground in Plow'd Land, to make a Horse go a Hundred Turns in it, which is worse than to Ride a Journey of Thirty miles; and I wonder what Horses they had in those Dayes; for I am sure, Those we have now, are not Able to do it. They Teach to Ride one Horse two or three Hours at a time, when one may well Ride half a Dozen at least in an Hour, and give them suffici∣ently Enough. For their Single Turns, and Double Turns, call'd Radopiare, they are Ridiculous, and so is the Repolone, which is to Gallop him Half a mile, and then Turn him Ill-favouredly and False: And their Several Mannages of Metzo Tempo, Tutto Tempo, and Contratempo, are no Better. For a Resty Horse they Raise a whole Town with Staves to Beat him, with many Curious In∣ventions, with Squirts, Fire, Whelps, Hedg-hoggs, Nailes, and I know not What. And the same they
do Before a Horse that Runs Away, as well as to the Resty Horse Behind. Then for Spurring, the Bunching Stroke, and the Clinching Stroke; and if he will not Endure the Spurs, Boots stufft with Straw, and Spurs at them, to Hang at his Sides, (which is not worth a Straw); and the Chambetta, which signifies nothing. For a Horse that is Afraid, and Starts, they appoint Whirlegiggs of several Colours, which will make him Ten times Worse. And to lay Stones in his Way, and a Hollow Ditch to Ride him in, are Lamentable businesses in Horse-manship: And they have as many Foolish Wayes for the Credensa, which shall never Cure him of that Vice. They Bid us take Heed, by any Means, Not to make the Horse too Weak-Neckt; which is a Prime Note! But Mr. Blundevile did not Know, that all Horses are a Stiff-necked Generation. Mr. Pagano would never Use his Horse to any thing but a Walk, or a Trot at the most; where∣with (I am sure) he shall never Dress a Horse per∣fectly; and yet (sayes Mr. Blundevile) it was a
Wonder to all Beholders, to see, That in Eight Dayes, he would make him Run a Carreer per∣fectly, which I will Undertake to have done the First Morning that ever he Ran. Speaking of his Capriole, he mistakes the Ayre, as well as the making of the Horse. For Corvets, Mr. Blundevil did not Understand it (nor his Master Grison belike) when he sayes, The Spaniards take Delight to make their Horses go in Corvets, which never Spaniard yet could do; but he takes Trampling, and Prauncing, for Cor∣vets, wherein he is much Deceiv'd; for Corvets is the Hardest Ayre in the World, which no Horse can go, unless he be perfectly within the Hand, and the Heels, and upon the Hanches; which is not Trampling. To Ride Short, he calls after the Turkish Fashion, wherein he is Deceived; for it is A La Genette, which is the Spanish Fashion too; and to Ride Short in Corvets is his Mistake, for I would Ride Longer in Corvets than any other Ayre. He is also Mistaken, when he sayes, He would not have above Two Horses in Her Majesties Stable to go
in Corvets; for it is of no Use (saith he) and such Delighting Toyes of Prauncing up and down they will do, when they should go upon the Ground: For first, There is nothing makes a Horse Bet∣ter upon the Hand, than Corvets, and that's Use∣ful; then, there is nothing puts a Horse so much upon the Hanches, and Firms him there, as Cor∣vets, and that is Usefull too; and Mr. Blundevil is mightily Deceived, to think, that he will go in Corvets, when he should go upon the Ground; for the Helps are several: And let a Horse be never so Apt, or Perfect in Corvets, and made upon the Ground too, (which is the First thing must be done) I dare say he shall never offer at Corvets with me, but go just upon the Ground as I would have him; because the Helps are several. He sayes, That in five or six Months he can make a Horse to Gallop the Field, (a Necessary thing for a Souldiers Horse); which is no more, as he Understands it, than in an Acre of Ground to Gallop and Change, still upon a Gallop; and that I will Undertake to make a Cart-Horse do in three Dayes.
Besides, they Dig out Rings, and Entrench themselves (which is a Horrible Folly); but I desire no more for Stopping than a Plain place, with∣out Hills, or any such Toyes; and will Dress any Horse perfectly there, by the New Method of my French Book: which I Refer you to. For Mr. Blundevils Bitts, The are very Ridi∣culous; the Eyes are Naught, the Cheeks as ill, and the Mouths Worst of all; with Catts Feet, Up-sets, Portes, and Broken Portes; Catts Feet, and Up-sets, with a Revet Nayl; and his Com∣pleat Bitts, are compleatly Abominable, with their Water-Chain and Trench, the Mouth of the Bitt too being as Bigg as my Wrist, and the Branches as Long as my Arm; and the Curb as Bigg as a Chain for a Horse Nose, with Sto∣ries flying Trench, which is a Snaffle tyed to the Bitt, and such other Tormenting ignorant Follies: The Leggs of it are  be so Loose, as if they were Broken, in the Knees, and are to Help up and down, as if they were Wind-Mill-Sayls. He would have Us to Strike a Horse with a Cudgel, or a Rod, between the Ears, and upon
the Head; which is Abominable, though he thinks it a Rare Secret. And thus much of Mr. Blunde∣vils Riding, which is Grison Translated into Eng∣lish. Mr. Blundevils Breeding, To turn the Stallion loose to the Mares, is indifferent Well, but not Right; and to put him to them again at Holland-Tide, stark Naught. To Cover in Hand is Un∣natural, and you shall not have half of them (so Covered) prove with Fole. To have a Horse-Fole, or Mare-Fole, by Ty∣ing his Right, or Left Stone; to Observe the Moon, and the Wind, to sail to Procreation, or get a Fole by the Almanack, is very Ridiculous, and to put Painted Clothes before the Mares, to make the Foles of what Colour you would have them, is no less Ridiculous. That, if the Horse, as soon as he hath Covered, come Down on the Right Side, it is a Horse Colt; and if of the Left Side, it is a Filley: And if, so many Dayes after the Mare is Mounted, her Coat look Sleek, and Shines, then she hath Con∣ceaved; if it do not Shine, she hath not Con∣ceaved,
are all Tales to Tell to Children, rather than to Men of Reason and Discretion; all Moun∣tebank-ship and Fooleries: and to make the Horse Lusty, and the Mares, there is little or nothing in it. Mr. Blundevil Reasons thus: That for as much, as all Mares do Fole Standing. Wherein cer∣tainly he took his Note out of some Learned Au∣thor, as Aristotle, or the like; for I will Assure you, That never any Mare in the World did Fole Standing: If she did, the Fole would break his Neck; For, he comes into the World with his Head first, and his two Feet on both sides of his Head. No! The Mare is in too great Pain to Fole Standing, and therefore she Lies Down, and Foles so. Mr. Blundevil sayes, There is a thing Growes in the Foles Fore-head like a Figg, which the Mare commonly Bites off, which is called Hippomenes; and if it be Taken, it doth Miraculous Things in Love-Matters, which he was Loath to Write of. Tru∣ly he was Over-careful, with all his Old Writers; and, in my Conscience, if it could be Got, it would
do Miraculous Things, not only in Love, but in every Thing else. But the Truth of this Business, is, That never any such thing did Grow upon any Foles Fore-head; and therefore could never be Bitt off by the Mare. No doubt but that Mistake is caused by the Secondine, or Clean, or Bagg, in which the Fole Lies, whereof all the Strings meets at the End, which looks like a little Knot, and that hangs Loose upon the Foles Head; but when the Fole is Foled, That, and the Bagg, goes together; for it is all one Thing. Mr. Blundevil bids us take Heed, That the Mare do not Eat that Bagg, or Secondine, Be∣cause the Country Wives Kye do so. But I have Enquired of the Country-Men, and they say, Not one Cow in a Hundred does do it: And for Mares, I will assure you, They Never do it: And if you Ask, What they do with it? I say, They let it Lie there, and trouble themselves no more with it. Mr. Blundevil condemns those that Take the Foles, to be taken Off at Martlemas; Because, according to his old Learned Authors, he would
have them Suck two Years at least: That is, he would have them Heavy, Flaby Jades, besides the Loss of the Fruitfulness of his Mares; where∣in his old Authors are very much deceived. Then he sayes, That the Foles Leggs are as Long when they are Foled, as ever afterward; where∣in he is very much Deceived: Does he think, that the Body only Grows, and the Leggs not at all? A very Ridiculous Opinion! For, look at the Foles Leggs, and the Mares, and you shall find the Mares Leggs are Longer a great deal. Can any man think, That a Gray-Hounds-Whelp, as soon as he is Whelpt, hath his Leggs as Long as when he is a Dogg? It is Ridiculous. To know, Which Fole will have the Best Spirit, by Running fore-most, and Leaping of Hedges and Rayls; is quite contrary to the Experience I had once of a Colt, that Nothing would keep in, Leaping over all things he came near; and when he came to be Ridd, the Dullest Jade that could be. To know by their Feet, and much of White, That they are not Long-Lived, is as false a Rule, as any He hath set down.
His Reckoning Horses Teeth, is beyond the Number of what ever any Horse had; and that every Horse hath two Tushes Below, and two Above, is, I assure you, True. Some Horses (say they) have no Tushes at all, and they commonly ill-na∣tured, being something of the Mare; but as there is not One in a Hundred but have Tushes, so there is not One Mare in a Hundred that have Any; and those that have, are ill-natured, parti∣cipating too much of the Horse; and both are a kind of Hermaphroditical Compositions. Thus you see, how Learned People (with their old Authors) are Deceived. To Know the Disposition of Horses, by the Elements, and their Marks. MR. Blundevil sayes, The Sorrel is of the Ele∣ment of Fire, and therefore is full of Mettle, Hot, and Fiery; but I assure you, I have Known more Sorrel Horses dull Jades than of any other Colour.
That White Horses are Flegmatick, and so par∣ticipate of the Element of Water, and therefore are Dull and Heavy Jades: But I assure you again, I have Known White Horses to be fuller of Spirit, and Livelier, than of any other Colour; and so his Elements are Wrong in Every thing: Your best Way is, To Try your Horse; which Philosophy will hold to Know him best. Mr. Blundevil speaks also of the Marks of Horses, That there are Four good, and Seven bad; such a Foot of the Far Side, and such a Foot of the Neer Side, and which Fore-foot, and which Hinder-foot; and not too much White in his Face, nor his Leggs to be very high White; and Feathers, and I know not what a kind of Conjuration: All false and ridiculous Lies. When once I hear a Man talk of Marks and Elements, I have done with him, and Know no other Philosophy but Trying; for, there are Good and Bad of all Colours, and of all Marks; but there are more Badd Horses than Good of any Co∣lour or Mark, as there are of any thing Else, even of Men in all Things: Therefore Marks and Co∣lours
are foolish and false Toyes, only to abuse simple People withal. Of the Perfect Shape of a Horse. MR. Blundevil speaks so of the Perfect Shape of a Horse, That such a Horse as he De∣scribes, was never of Gods, and Natures Making, but of his Own, or of some Foolish Authors he hath Read; for he takes several Parts of several Horses, and Puts them Together, which is a Horse of their Own making; for there was never such a Horse Foled. Every Country hath a several Shape of Horses; As the Turk, the Neapolitan, the Spanish Horse, the Barb, and the Duch Horse; All very Fine in their Kindes. In a Word, I will shew you the Ridiculous∣ness of Setting down the Perfect Shape of a Horse. For Example, Who can set down the Perfect Shape of a Dogg? A Mastiff is not a Grey-Hound; nor a Gray-Hound, a Lancashire-Hound; nor a
Lancashire-Hound a Little Beagle; and yet all very Fine Doggs in their Kinds: And so of Hor∣ses: Which shows the Impossibility to set down the Perfect Shape of a Horse. Mr. Blundevil sayes, a Spanish Horse is Pinn-Buttockt, narrow and slender Behind: I believe he would have a Spanish Horse to have a Dutch Horses Buttock; which would indeed be very Correspondent to the Rest of his Shape: Some Spanish Horses have Oval Buttocks, which is the Finest Buttocks of all. He sayes they have ill Feet: It is true, some have, and so have Horses of all Countries; Dutch the Worst, and some of the English very Bad: He sayes also, Spanish Horses are Weak; but there are more Weak Dutch Horses than Spanish. I have Had many Spanish Horses with good Buttocks, good Feet, and Strong; and if some should be Weak, yet their Spirits make them go much Better, than any other Horses that are Stronger. He sayes, They are Gentle in their Youth, and grow Vitious in their Age: But I assure you,
there is no such thing; for they are as Gentle in their Age, as they are in their Youth, and very Loving Horses: So Mr. Blundevil is very much Abused by his old Authors whom he Reverences so much. He sayes, The Gennet hath a Comely going, like the Turkish, which is neither Amble, nor Trot. I would Know of Mr. Blundevil, What strange kind of Going that is, which is neither of those Two: But I will assure him, That there is no Horse, that hath Four Legs, can go, but it must be the Action either of an Amble, or of a Trot; for Gallop∣ing, and Running, is another thing, and so are all Ayres in the Mannage. Mr. Blundevil appears by this, to be a Better Schollar, than a Horse-man: and was indeed a fine Gentleman, Well Travelled, an Excellent Schollar, a Good Translator, and puts things into an Excellent Method, but Tyed him∣self too much to Old Authors, who knew as little as he in Horse-manship; and so Authority Abused him, having no Knowledge himself in the Art, and totally wanting Experience in it. His Treaty for Dyeting of Horses, is as
Learned as any Physitian can Write; but yet is nothing as it Ought to be; for he wanted Ex∣perience. His Cures of Diseases are most Admirable; and indeed, he is the Father of all that Business, and the Rarest that hath Writ upon that Sub∣ject. Markham is but, Blundevil with other Names, and will not Acknowledge it: He hath many new Medicines, but they are worth Nothing; as his Oyle of Oats. Nor was he a Horse-man at all, but only took Notes of Medicines, and set them down Methodically. After him comes De La Gray, which is but, Blundevil, with some New Medicins that are but Indifferent: And for his Breeding of Horses, it is the most Ridiculous thing that ever was known Writ. The Best Medicins of Mr. Blundevils, are those of Martine, who was Prime Marshal to Queen Elizabeth; And, as I take it, an Alman, and an Excellent Farrier: Yet, even he, was extreamly Mistaken about the Glaunders, and Mourning of the Chine, as by my Woful Experience in Horses
I know, and will better Inform you, when I set out my Book of Marshalry, and Shooing. Mr. Blundevil sayes, That Barley makes a Horse Piss Red, like Bloud; but he did not Understand it perfectly. It is True; In Italy, Spain, and Bar∣bary, they Feed their Horses all with Barley; which is, Because they have no Oats: For, cer∣tainly Excellent Oats is the best Feeding for a Horse in the World. But you must Know, that of Barley there are Two kinds; The Common Bar∣ley, that they make Beer of, which makes a Horse Piss a little Red; and of that Barley they never Give to their Horses in Spain, but of the other Barley, which is called by the Name of Bigg, and that never makes them Piss Red, and is the best Feeding for Horses, where there Wants Oats: Rye Scoure's too Much, and Wheat is too Fatning, and Good Bread too Pursey, and Foggy. In Spain they give Barley-Straw, (as my Lord Cottington told me;) but first; they Tread it with Oxen, and then it is as Soft as Silk. And thus for our English Authors, of whom I have told you the Truth.
The Opinion of a GREAT MASTER. A Great Master, held the most Excellent Horse-man beyond the Sea, being Bred four or five Years under the Best Horse-man there, and had Practiced this Art from his Child-Hood, did me the Honour, To come to Antwerp of a Visit to me from Bruxels, and Brought with him four or five Horses: I Treated him the Best I could, and shewed him my Horses, both Led Out, and Rid. He had a Young Man with him (his Nephew) who had Ridd under him for the space of Seven Years: And though he had seen Rid, before him, the Day afore, Three of the Readiest Horses that ever I had; yet when he Ridd them, he could not Encounter them, or make them Go at all; and truly, to my Thinking, (I might say to my Know∣ledge) he had neither Hand, Heel, nor Seat, as he should have had; and so it was impossible to make them Go Right.
His Master told me, He had found a New Method for Dressing of Horses: Which was; first, Never to Trot a Horse, (that was his Maxim:) Next, Never to Use the Cavezon, nor pull the Horses Head into the Turn. This is, What he would Not have Done: And, What he would have Done, is; To put the Horse to the Single Pillar, with a Long Rope, and there Pinch him with the Spurs, which, sayes he, Puts him upon the Hand: Then to Whip him About with the Shambriere, to make him Go half Terra a Terra, and half in Corvets, and then to make him Go in Corvets; which settles him on the Hand: And this is the New Way of Dressing; Indeed, of Not Dressing Horses. To take in Pieces, and Anatomize this New Way: And first, of what he will Not have Done; which is, Never to Trot a Horse, and Stop him; which is certainly the Foundation of all Things in the Mannage, either to settle him on the Hand, or to put him on the Hanches. Next, Never to Use the Cavezon, without which no Horse can be Drest, for many Reasons. Then,
Never to Pull the Horses Head into the Turn: By which means the Horses Leggs, and Body, shall never go Right, or supple either to Hand or Heel. Now, of what he will have done to Work his Horse: First, To put him to the Single Pillar, with a Long Rope, and there Pinch him with Spurs; which will do Bravely with a Colt, that never knew the Spurs; he will surely Throw him rather than be put upon the Hand: Nay, a Horse that knows the Spurrs, will never be put upon the Hand with that Invention. Then to VVhip him about with the Sham∣briere, to make him go half Terra a Terra, and half Corvets; which is impossible, for they are two several Actions with his Leggs: Besides, this ex∣cellent Lesson is in Pluvinels Book; which he ne∣ver used, but to a Horse that was Almost Drest; and it is Naught, then: Put him in Corvets, to settle him on the Hand, sayes he, which is in La Broues Book, only for a Horse that is near Drest, and not for a Colt: Besides, some Horses will never go Corvets, do what you can: So this
Method may Spoyl Horses, but shall never Dress them, I assure you; and you may take my Word for it. He will (by his New Method) never Trot, Gallop, or Walk a Horse; but no Horse in the World can be Made without These Three, nor without a Cavezon, Stopping, and having his Head Pull'd into the Turn. A strange Conceit of a GREAT MASTER. THere was a Great Master, that would Ride his Horses Twice a Day; saying, That if he could Dress a Horse in Six Months, Once a day Riding of them, he was sure he could Dress a Horse in Three Months, Riding them Twice a Day; Wherein he is much Deceived: For a Horse being Flesh and Blood, cannot indure per∣petual Travel with little Rest; and no Exercise is more Violent for a Horse than in the Mannage. Nay, of Necessity, Riding so much One Morning, he will not Recover it of a Day or Two: And if a
Horse Oppose the Man, which all Horses will do at First, and are Vitious, one must Correct him Soundly; and, How will you Ride him in the Afternoon again? Dull him you may, and take off his Spirit, make him Hate the Mannage, and make him like a Vaulting Horse, rather than like a Live Horse. Nor can you ever Give him his Meat, VVater, or Rest, in Order; the Want of which must make him Sick, and subject to many Diseases; and Shortly after, Death will follow: and there is your Twice a day Riding him, which Makes him fit for the Hunts-Man to Dress him for his Doggs. Some say again, That they will Ride no Horse Twice a Day, but Horses that are very Vi∣tious, and of great Strength: I have seen many Horses that are Vitious, but few of such great Strength. For, if the Horse be very Vitious, you must Correct him Soundly, and Ride him so Long until he Obey you, in some small Measure; and then I am sure you have Ridd him so Violently, and so Long, as he will Hardly be to be Ridd the next Morning; and Less, to be Ridd any
more that Day: And if the Horse be so Docil as to Obey you in Every Thing, certainly the Best way is to take but a Little of him that Morning, to Encourage him to do so again; and the more to Encourage him, not to Ride him until the next Morning again: so he will be Pleasant, Lively, and in Lust, and take Pleasure in you, and the Mannage; and Learn more Thus in a Months Riding him but Once a day than he shall in three Months, Riding him Twice a day. Have not all Schollars Play-dayes? and certain Hours of Rest in their daies of Study? All Trades-Men, Holy-dayes to Rejoyce themselves in? States-Men, Divertisments from Business? And Good Preachers Preach not every Sunday? Have not Lawyers also their Terms, and Vacations; and even Carriers Horses Rest Christmas, and other Holy-dayes; and so Cart-Horses, Brewers Horses, Coach-Horses, Hackney-Horses, Running-Horses? And shall only Horses of Mannage be Galley-Slaves? There is no Reason for that. No, not Doggs can Hunt every day, or Gray-Hounds Course every day, or Spaniels Range every day; or
Hawks Fly every day; there are hundred Ex∣amples of it, but These are Sufficient to let you see the great Folly, and Ignorance, of those that will Ride their Horses of Mannage Twice a Day. Just like the Polander, being Sick, whose Phy∣sitian gave him Nine Pills to be taken, Three every Night, for Three Nights together; who very Wisely considered, That if Three Pills every Night, for Three Nights together, would Recover him; That then, taking All the Pills One Night, would Make him Well Presently. And so did, and had Almost Purged himself Out of this World. So any Horse-man that will Venture to Make a Horse as well in Three Months, with Two Lessons a Day, as another in Six Months with One Les∣son a Day, may be sure to Kill his Horse, sooner than Teach him, and to shew himself Ridiculous in his Undertaking.
How I found Out my METHOD in the MANNAGE; And that it is The only WAY to DRESS HORSES. THere is but One Truth in any thing; and that my Method is True, cannot be better De∣monstrated, than by Experience, which will clear∣ly show, That Mine never misses its End, as All Others do; and so Proves Mine True, and Theirs False. For, to say that some of them come Near the Truth, is neither Commendation, nor Excuse: A Falshood within an Inch of the Truth, being as Bad, as if it were an Hundred Miles off. I have Practised, and Studyed Horse-manship ever since I was Ten years old; Have Rid with the Best Masters of all Nations, heard them Dis∣course at Large, and Tryed their several Wayes: Have Read all their Italian, French, and English Books, and some Latine ones; and in a Word, All that hath been Writ upon that Subject, Good and Bad; And have Bestowed many Thousands
of Pounds in Horses, have Spoiled many, and have been very Long learning of this Art of Horse-manship. But all that while I thought still, All was La∣bour in Vain; and that there was something, not Found out, which They and their Books Mist: Whereupon I began to consider so Seriously, and Study so Earnestly, all the Particulars that con∣cern the Mannage; that at last I Found this Me∣thod, which is as True, as it is New, and is the Quintescence of Horse-manship: For which I have Left all Others, as I had great Reason so to do, Making with it all manner of Horses whatsoever, of all Nations, and of all Dispositions; Strong, Weak; Full of Fire, Dull and Lazy; even Mares, Geldings, and Bidets; and all that ever comes to my Hands. I follow not the Horses Disposition, as most do; but I Make the Horse follow my Wayes, and Obey me: I seldom Beat them, or Punish them with either Rod, or Spur, but when I meet with a great Resistance, and that Rarely: And yet I must tell you, that I use Force, which they Obey
willingly, for the most part; and, however, all Yeeld, and Render themselves at last, with much Satisfaction to me; which I wish others may find in following their Wayes. But sayes One, Doth your Lordship think, that both your Books would Make me a Horse-man? I Answer; That they are Written as plain∣ly, and as clearly as Possibly can be: There is in my French Book, Circles, and the Prints of Horses Shooes, to shew How his Leggs should Go; there is also exact Figures of all Postures, and of all Actions, both of Man and Horse, and more can∣not be. But whether my Books will Make you a Horse- man or no, though they do as much as Books can do, I cannot Tell; for you must have it all in your Head; and it may be you will not Ʋnderstand it. But put the Case you do, yet Wanting the Practice, you cannot Ride Well; and yet no Fault at all in my Books, but in You. There are some Nations that Think they can see Nothing, but they can do it; which must be by Inspiration, by which I never saw any Ride,
though many Pretend to Preach by it. It is a Long Study, and Diligent Practice; a Long Habit and Custom, which doth All Things in the World, and Nothing done without it: For there is Cun∣ning in Daubing. Do you think, that an Ignorant School-Boy can be as Learned as a Doctor? Or, let a Skilful Mu∣sitian Write the Rarest Book in the World, for Composing, or Singing; Can you Imagine, that as soon as you have Read his Book, you can Do what he Teacheth? No truly; and yet not the Book's Fault, but Yours, in being so Partial to your Self, as to think you can do Any Thing at the first Sight, without Practice or Study; which would be a Miracle I never saw, or any Body shall ever see. In the same Manner, if a Lutenist should Write a Rare Book, Can you Expect, that as soon as you have Read it, you can Play on the Lute; because, it may be, you can Jangle the Strings? But you say, You can Ride: Truly, just as you Jangle the Lute-Strings, and no otherwise. You
have learnt in Italy and France; that's something in∣deed: So many Crowns a Month, and the Horse did not Throw you, and that is all. Mr. Spenser, the Best Schollar in all the Aca∣demy where he Learned, and a fine Gentleman, who had been Two Years there; when he came to Ride one of my Horses, he could not make him Go: His Brother-in-Law being present, said to me; My Lord, you must Excuse him, he hath not Ridd a great while. But Mr. Spenser said (with a great Oath) Brother, you are Deceived; for I know now, I could never Ride. God knows how many Young Gallants comn newly out of Academies; English, French, Irish, and Dutch Gentlemen, that were Famed for good Horse-men, and truly no Piece of a Horse-man, and Ridd the Wofullest that could be; and so did before me some Masters of Academies: And once two French-men Riding (God knows very mean∣ly) were strangely Laught at, and that very Wor∣thily, by two other French Riders that stood by. But sayes One, I can Ride a Ready Horse;
wherein he is Deceived; for a Ready Horse is the Hardest of all to Ride, because the Least motion is an Absolute Command unto him, and an Igno∣rant gives him such Counter-times, as he puts him quite Out. Mr. Germain, a Fine Gentleman, and the Best Scholler Du Plessis had in all his Academy, knew well the Difficulty of Riding a Ready Horse: For, to Perswade him to Ride one of Mine, which he would not Do; I told him, If you will but Sit Still, I warrant you the Horse will go Well with you. But a Man (said he, with a great Oath) cannot Sit Still. Which was said Know∣ingly, and like a Horse-man; for, to Sit Still, belongs only to a Great Master. Another, because he hath Ridd a Hundred Miles in a Day, (which a Post-Boy can do) thinks Himself a Horse-man; or, Because he can Run a Match with his Groom, or Leap a Ditch, or a Hedg, in Hunting, and Hold by the Main, he thinks he is a Horse-man; but his Hunts-Boy doth as much. And my Lord Mayor when he goes to Weigh Butter, sits a Legg of either side the Horse very
Gravely; An excellent Horse-man! And I have seen many Wenches Ride Astride, and Gallop, and Run their Horses, that could, I think, hardly Ride a Horse Well in the Mannage. Are they not, in All Trades, bound Apprentices Seven and Nine Years; and Many Bunglers of them too? And, in Higher Professions, Twenty and Thirty Years is not too much, before they are Great Masters in any One of them: And though Horse-manship be the Hardest of All, yet Many a Gentleman will Ride the First Day as well as the Greatest Master; but he is Deceived, as well as those that think to Buy, with their Money, any Quality: For if Good Qualities could be Purchased with Money, every Rich Citizen would be a Fine Gentleman. Of which Opinion that French Cava∣lier was not, who told me, commending my Me∣thod; Par Dieu, Il est bien hardi qui monte devant vous, that is, He is very Bold, that dares Ride be∣fore you. And to the same Purpose, Signor del Campo, an Italian Rider at Bruxels, after he had seen my Horses, said; Il faut tirer la Planche, that is, The Bridge must be Drawn up; for no
Horse-man, so Good as You, can come After. There is no Horse-man but shall Make my Horses go, for his Use, either in a Single Combat, or in the Wars, better than he shall any bodies Horses else; and that's Sufficient: for, to make them go in Perfection in all Ayres as I can, were too much, and too great a Miracle: But let My Me∣thod be what it will, since every Man doth what he can; if any Pleases himself with his Own Opini∣ons, though he Dislikes My Way never so much, and should Censure a thing he Understands not; and say, That the Mannage is a Foolish thing: It shall not Displease me at all.
OBSERVATIONS OF HORSES. OF THE SPANISH HORSE. YOu must Know, that of All Horses in the World, of what Nation, soever they be, Spanish Horses are the Wisest; far the Wisest, and strangely Wise, beyond any Mans Imagination; but I must Tell you, they are not the Easlier Drest for that: Because they Observe too much with their Eyes, and their Memories are too Good, and so Conclude with their Judgments too soon, without the Man, Reckoning without their Host; whereas they should Follow, and Obey, his Hand and Heel; and that not by Roat neither, but by
Art, which is an Habit got by many Lessons Me∣thodically Taught. If he be Well Chosen, I assure you, He is the Noblest Horse in the World: First, There is no Horse so Curiously Shaped, all over from Head to Croup: He is the most Beautiful that can be; For he is not so Thin, and Lady-like, as the Barb; nor so Gross as the Neapolitan; but be∣tween Both. He is of great Spirit, and of great Courage, and Docil: Hath the Proudest Walk, the Proudest Trot, and Best Action in his Trot; the Loftiest Gallop, the Swiftest Careers; and is the Lovingest and Gentlest Horse, and Fittest for a KING in a Day of TRIUMPH to Shew himself to his People, or in the Head of an Army, of any Horse in the World. Therefore no Horse so fit to Breed on, as a Spa∣nish Horse; either for the Mannage, the War, Am∣bling for the Pad; Hunting, or for Running-Horses: Conquerour was of a Spanish Horse, Shotten-Herring was of a Spanish Horse, Butler was of a Spanish Horse, and Peacock was of a Spanish Mare: And These Beatt all the Horses in
their Time, so much, as No Horse ever Ran near them. I say, He is Absolutely the best Stallion in the World, for all those several things I have for∣merly Named, if you do Wisely appropriate such Mares to him, as shall be fit for such Uses as you would have your Breed; and so he is fit for all Breeds, but to Breed Cart-Horses. The King of Spain hath many Races, but his Best is at Cordoua in Andalozia, where he hath above Three Hundred Mares and Colts, as my Lord Cottington told me; and, besides those of his Majesty, there are other most Excellent Races, not only of Noblemen, but also of Private Gentle∣men. For the Prices, the Earl of Claringdon, now Lord Chancellor of England, told Me, That when he was Embassador in Spain, Sir Benjamin Wright, a Merchant there that Loves Horses, sold a Couple of Little Spanish Horses for a Great Price: And he sayes, (and many others Confirm it for a great Truth) That Three Hundred, and Four Hundred Pistols for a Horse, is a common
Price and Rate, at Madrid; And the Marquess of Seralvo told me, That a Spanish Horse, called Il Bravo, sent to the Arch-Duke Leopold, his Ma∣ster, was held Worth as much as a Manner of a Thousand Crowns a Year, and that he hath known Horses at Seven Hundred, Eight Hundred, and a Thousand Pistols. A Gentleman told me, that he knew a Cavalier in Spain, who offered another Three Hundred Pi∣stols, but to let him Ride his Horse one After∣noon; and the Owner had Reason to Refuse it: for it was to go to the Juego de Toros, where he might have been Killed: many of the Finest Hor∣ses in the World being Killed at that Sport, which is the greatst Pity that can be. You see that a Spanish Horse is Dear Ware; and then Reckon his Journey from Andalozia to Bilbo, or St. Sebastien, which is the next Port for England, and is Four Hundred Miles at least; and a Horse cannot Travel above Ten Miles a day with your Groom, and your Farrier at least, be∣sides the Casualty of Lameness, Sickness, and Death; so that if he come Safe to you, yet he will be a very
Dear Horse, I assure you: And These are great Truths of the Spanish Horse. Of the BARB. THe Barb is next to the Spanish Horse for Wisdom, but not neer so Wise, and that makes him much Easier to be Drest: Besides, he is of a Gentle Nature, Docil, Nervous, and Leight. He is as Fine a Horse as can be, but somewhat Slender, and a little Lady-like; and is so Lazy and Negligent in his Walk, as he will Stumble in a Bowling-Green; he Trots like a Cow, and Gal∣lops Low, and no Action in any of those Actions: But commonly he is Sinewy, and Nervous, and hath a clean Strength, is excellently Winded, and good at Length, to Endure great Travel; and very Apt to Learn, and Easie to be Drest, being (for the most part) of a good Disposition, excellent Apprehension, Judgment, and Memory; and when he is Searcht, and Wakened, no Horse in the
World goes Better in the Mannage, in all Ayres whatsoever, and Rarely upon the Ground in all Kinds. The Mountain-Barbs, they say, are the Best; I believe they are the Largest, but, for my part, I rather desire a Midling Horse, or a Less Horse, which are Cheap enough in Barbery, as I have been Informed, both by many Gentlemen, and many Mer∣chants; for they say, that in Barbery you may Buy a very Fine Barb for Twenty, Twenty Five, or Thirty Pounds at the most; but then your Journey is somewhat Great; not by Sea; for, from Tunis, to Marselles in France, is no great Voyage; but from Marselles to Calais by Land, you go all the Length of France, and at Calais they are Shipt for England. You must have an excellent Esquier, a Farrier, and one Groom, and Hire other Grooms as you Go; but take heed, That those Mean Rogues Run not Away with some of your Horses; and because there is no Trusting of them, your English Farrier, and your English Groom, must alwayes Lie in the Stable, and none of those Fellows;
but the Gentleman of your Horse, which ought to be a Good Horse-man, must order that Care∣fully. If you would go another Way to work, and a Shorter Voyage, then send into Languedoc, and Provence, where many Gentlemen Buy Barbs of two, three, and four Years old at Marselles, and Keep them two or three Years, and then Sell them; which Barbs you may Buy for For∣ty or Fifty Pistols a Piece, and as Fine Horses as can be: But he whom you Send, must be very Skilful to chuse Well, and to take heed that They be Right Barbs; For I have Heard, that many in those Countries, about Marselles, when many Barbs come out of Barbery, thrust in Colts of their own Breed amongst them for Barbs, and so Sell them. When I was at Paris, there came Twenty Five Barbs (as they said) nothing but Skin and Bones, and they were Sold for Twenty Five Pi∣stols a Horse: My Lord Viscount Mountague bought Nine, as I Remember; for I was with him, and helpt to Chuse some for him, and one
of them did Win Many Matches: But truly, if I had had a Million, I would not have Bought one of them, for they were very Ordinary Horses; Nor do I think they were Right Barbs, neither by their Shape, nor Price, but Bred in some Islands there-abouts; for, if a Man be at Great Charges, I would either have an Extraordinary Horse, or None. I had lately a Letter from a Horse-man at Paris, a French-Man, that gives me Intelligence of Horses, That a Merchant at Paris had two Barbs, the Finest that ever he saw, Six Years old a piece, but not Drest at all, and held them at Two Hundred Pistols a piece: By which, you may see, that Right Barbs, and Fine ones, are very Dear, as all Good Things are. The Barb is not so Fit a Horse for a Stallion for the Mannage, as for Running-Horses; for he Gets Long and Loose Horses, therefore do not Breed of him for the Mannage, except he be a Short Horse from the Head to the Croup, strong Ramase, and Racoursy, and of a Superfluity of Spi∣rit, which few Barbs have; and therefore Breed
of a Spanish Horse, with Choise English Mares; and if you have a Delicate well-chosen Dutch Mare or two, that makes an excellent Composition for the Mannage. I am of Opinion, and Believe, that there ne∣ver came out of Barbery, The best Horses that Country affords; not but that they may be had: But the Case is this; Those that bring Barbs out of Barbery, are either French Horse-Coursers that Trade in Barbery, or Merchants. To begin with the Horse-Coursers, They al∣wayes Buy those Horses that are Cheapest for their Advantage: For if they Bought of Great Prices, it would not quit Cost, and so they Buy the Worst, and Meanest, of Barbs: And as for the Merchants, They want Skill; Besides, they will Buy the Cheapest too, for their Advantage, because they know not Well, how to put off Horses of Price; and so they Buy but the Worst and Meanest of Barbs; which makes me Believe abso∣lutely, that the Best Barbs do not come Over: For, did not I see dayly at Antwerp the Horse-Coursers of Brabant and Flanders, that go into
England every Year to Buy Horses, that they bring Over the Meanest and Worst Horses and Geldings that are in the Kingdom, and meerly to Buy at Easie Rates, that they may put them Off with Advantage? For, if they should Buy in Eng∣land Horses of One Hundred, One Hundred and Fifty, and Two Hundred Pounds a Horse, which Price hath been Given both at Malten and Pank∣rich Fayres, those Great Prices would not go off there, where Money is so Scarce; and so they would be Undone; and therefore they Buy of Small Prices. Of The ENGLISH HORSE. THe English Horse is Less Wise than the Barb, Fearful and Skittish, for the most part; and Dogged and Rebellious to the Mannage, and not commonly so Apt to Learn: But those they call English Horses, are so Compounded of Horses of all Countries, that they always Participate some∣thing
of their Sires; and so, that may somewhat alter the Case. Certainly English Horses are the Best Horses in the whole World for All Uses whatsoever, from the Cart to the Mannage; and some are as Beau∣tiful Horses as can be any where, for they are Bred out of all the Horses of all Nations: But if you would Buy for the Mannage at Fayrs, you must go to Rowel Fayr, Harborow Fayr, and Melton Fayr, to Northampton and Leicester-shire; but Nor∣thampton, they say, is the Best. You must Buy such Horses as they Sell, for the Cart and Coach, which are the best for the Mannage: Do not think to Buy Delicate Shapt Horses, like the Spanish Horse, Barb, or Turk; but they are Handsomer Horses than commonly Dutch Horses are; Chuse a Short trust Horse, with Good Feet and Leggs, full of Spirit and Action, and Lively; and if he Leap of him∣self, so much the Better. If your Horse-man hath Skill to Buy you such, they cannot do Amiss for the Mannage, and will prove most Admirable Horses, both in all Ayres, and upon the Ground,
but I would not Breed of them by no Means. At Molten Fayr, for the most part, they are young Stone-Horses, and some Geldings, but fitter for the Padd, and Hunting, than for the Mannage; Rippon Fayr is but the Remnant of Molten Fayr, and commonly but Geldings and Naggs; those Fayrs are in York-shire; Lenton Fayr is in Notting∣ham-shire, and is a great Fayr of all Sorts of Horses, but especially Geldings and Naggs, Fitter for the Padd, and Galloping, than for the Mannage; you may also find some Stone-Horses there. In Stafford-shire there is a great Fayr at Pank∣ridge; but it is, for the most part, of Colts, and Young-Horses, though sometimes (by Chance) there are also Others. The other Fayrs in the Northern Parts, which are many, are not Worth naming. I am very Ignorant of the West-Country, where my Lord Pauletts Ancestors had a good Breed of Horses; and by Chance, now and then my Lord of Pembroke did Breed, but I never heard of any Rare Horses of his Race. In Worcester-shire, and in the Vale of Esam, there
is good Strong Cart-Horses; in Cornwall there is good Naggs, and in Wales excellent good Ones; but in Scotland the Gallawayes are the Best Naggs of them all. There were, afore the Warrs, many good Races in England, but they are all now Ru, and the many New Breeders of Horses comn up pre∣sently after the Warrs, are (I doubt) none of the Best; for, I believe, their Stallions were not very Pure, because the Men that did Govern in Those Dayes, were not so Curious as the Great Lords, and Great Gentry were Heretofore, neither would they be at the Cost; and besides, they have not Knowledge of Horses as in other Coun∣tries: For, though Every man Pretends to it, yet, I assure you, there are very Few that Know Horses, as I have heard the KING say: Since whose RESTAURATION, the Probability of getting Good Breeds again, is very Great. For English Mares, there are None like them in the World to Breed On; but then you must Chuse them fit for such Horses as you would Breed; As for Example, If you would Breed for
the Mannage, the Mares must have Fine Fore-hands, but not too Long Necks; Fine Heads, and well Hung On; and their Necks rightly Turn'd; Broad Brests, Good Eyes; and Great Bodies, that the Foles may have the more Room to Lay their : They must have Good Hooffs, short and bending Pastorns, and are to be Short from the Head to the Croup, and Stuffy. This Shape fits the Mannage Best; and if your Mares be thus Chosen, it makes no matter what Colour they are of, nor what Marks they have, nor what Tayles and Manes, so they be full of Strength, and of a su∣perfluity of Spirit, and not above Six or Seven Years Old. But I must Tell you, That if you had Two or Three fine Dutch Mares, Shaped as I formerly told you, it Makes a fine Composition with a Spanish Horse, for the Mannage; and a Spanish Horse with such English Mares as I have Told you Now, are not only for the Mannage, but in a manner for all Uses. If you would have Mares to Breed Running-Horses of, then they must be Shaped thus; As Leight as possible, Large and Long, but well Shaped;
a Short Back, but Long Sides, and a little Long-Legged; their Breast as Narrow as may be, for so they will Gallop the Leighter and Nimbler, and Run the Faster; for the Leighter and Thinner you Breed for Gallopping is the Better. Your Stallion, by any means, must be a Barb, and somewhat of the Shape that I have Described the Mares to be of: For a Barb that is a Jade, will Get a better Runing-Horse, than the Best Running-Horse in England: As Sir John Fennick told me, who had more Ex∣perience of Running-Horses than any Man in Eng∣land; for he had more Rare Running-Horses than all England besides; and the most part of all the Famous Running-Horses in England that Ran one Against another, were of his Race and Breed. Some Commend the Turk very much for a Stallion to Breed Running-Horses; but they are so Scarce, and Rare, that I can give no Judgment of them: And therefore I Advise you to the Barb, which, I believe, is much the Better Horse to Breed Running Horses.
Of The FRISON. THe Frison is Less Wise than the English, but no Horse goes better in the Mannage, either upon the Ground, Terra a Terra, or in all Ayres; and no Horse is of more Use, either for a Single Combat on Horse Back, or in the Warrs for the Shock. He is Hardy, can Live of any Thing, and will Endure either Heats or Colds; and on no Horse whatsoever doth a Man Appear more a Sword-Man, than on this Horse, being so Quiet, so Bold, and so Assured. He is also Manly, and Fit for Every thing but Running Away; though he will Run fast for a while, yet, I doubt, not Long; because his Wind is not like that of Barbs: Yet a Heavy man Well-Armed upon a Barb, and the same Weight upon a Dutch-Horse, the Dutch Horse's Strength is so much Above the Barb's, as, Com∣pared thus, I believe the Dutch Horse may Run
as Fast, and as Long as the Barb; for the Barb's Wind serveth to no Purpose, when his Strength is not able to Carry his Weight: And thus the Barb will want his little Light Jockey on him, with a couple of Trenchers for a Saddle, and Lute-Strings in his Mouth for a Bitt. OF THE DANEMARK and HOLLAND HORSE. THe Denmark-Horse is an Excellent Horse, in the same Kind, and commonly Apter to Learn, and Leighter: There are more Leaping-Horses of those Countries and Kinds, than of any Horses in the World. But now, to make more Profit, they Geld all in Holland, for Coaches, and to keep the Trade, sending Five Thousand every Year into France, and diverse other Places, that you can hardly get a Stone-Horse worth any thing; their Colts at
two Years old Springs their Mares, and then they Geld them; so, Avarice spoyls their Breed. A Town will Joyn, and give above Two Hun∣dred Pounds for a Stallion; but then he Covers all the Mares that belong to that Town, like a Town-Bull. OF THE ALMAIN, or GERMAN HORSE. THose that Write, That they are like Flan∣ders Horses, are much Deceived; they mean the common Country Cart-Horse: But let me Inform them; there are few Princes in Germany, but have Excellent Races, and Breeds of Horses; and their Stallions are alwayes either Coursers of Naples, Spanish Horses, Turks in Abundance, and Barbs; and Breeding of these Stallions, their Mares come to be very Fine, like their Sires, and very Pure Breeds.
I had one, no Neapolitan in the World like him, for Shape, Stature, Colour, Strength, Agility, and Good Nature; He would make Thirty two Capriols, the Highest that ever I saw, and the Just∣est, without any Help in the World; and then upon the Ground, to Gallop and Change, and go Terra a Terra, it was another Action than ever any other Horse did, being in some Manner above the Rate of Horse-Kind: This was a German Horse, but his Sire was a Courser of Naples. I had once two Horses of the Count of Olden∣burg's most Excellent Breed, as Fine Horses as ever I saw, and One was the Hopefullest that could be seen. That Prince was Pleased to Present those Horses to me, and said, If I Liked them not, he would send me Others; which was like a Prince, and most Generous. The Prince of West-Friesland did also Send me a very Fine Horse.
Of The COƲRSER of NAPLES. I Have not seen Many of them; but, La Broue, in his Book, sayes, That the Race was migh∣tily Decayed; and that was almost a Hundred Years ago: And Pluvinel, in his Book, sayes also, That we have not now such Neapolitans as we have had; for all the Races are Bastarded, and Spoyled. The Arch-Duke Leopold, when he Governed the Countries of Flanders, Brabant, &c. sent into Italy for Eight or Ten Coursers whilst I was at Antwerp, which Cost him above Three Hundred Pounds a Horse, Journey and all. They were Great vast Horses, with Huge Heads, and Thick Necks; Heavy, with no Spirit in the World, nor any Strength; Dull heavy Jades, fitter for a Brewers-Cart than the Saddle: And the Marquess De Carasene, a Spaniard, that Governs all those Countries, a little Man, but both Witty, and Wise; an Excellent Souldier, both for Conduct
and Courage, and a Good Horse-Man (which Few Spaniards are) and my very Noble Friend, told me, That the last Warrs in Naples hath Ruined the King of Spain's Race of Horses in that Kingdom; but that they Began now to Repair it, and that he Hoped within Fourteen Years it may be Established as formerly it hath been. Thus you see Things do not Stand at a Stay: for what hath been Formerly, is not so now; as in the Neapolitan, and in all the rest of the Races of Italy, which are Decayed. The Duke of Flo∣rence hath the Best Race at this Time in those Parts. OF THE TƲRKISH HORSE. I Have seen very Few of them; but, Two Mer∣chants brought Three Turkish Horses to Antwerp, very Fine Horses, but Oddly Shaped; their Heads
were very Fine, but like a Camels Head: They had Excellent Eyes, and Thin Necks, excellently Risen; somewhat great Bodies; the Croup like a Mules; Leggs not Great, but marvellous Sinewy; good Pastorns, and good Hooffs; and their Backs risen somewhat like a Camel. I had a Groom, a Heavy English Clown, whom I set Upon them, and they made no more of him, than if he had been as Leight as a Feather. They appeared not so Fit for the Mannage, as for to Run a Course, which, I believe, they would have Scoured; they Trotted very Well, and no Ambling at all. The Horses about Constantinople, Mr. Blundevil sayes, Are very ill-favoured-Jades; but he was mightily Deceived with his Old Authors: For, I have Spoken with many Gentlemen that have been There, as likewise with diverse Merchants that came from Thence; who all Agree, That there are There, the most Beautifull-Horses in the World; saying, That in Soyl-Time, there are many Hundred Teddered, and so Shift Places
when they have Eaten that Bare: Every Horse hath a Man to Look to him, and every Man a little Tent to Lie in; and they say, That it is one of the most Glorious Sights to see those Horses that can be; and the most Beautiful Horses in the World. And certainly they are Brave Horses! The Price of One of these Horses, is about a Hundred, or a Hundred and Fifty Pounds a Horse; and there is great Difficulty to get a Pass; for the Grand Signor is very Strict, in not Suf∣fering any of his Horses to Go out of his Terri∣tories. When that Difficulty is Over; there is Ano∣ther; which is, If you have not a Turk or Two, for your Convoy, they will be Taken from you by the Way: There is also the Difficulty of a Long Journey, and the Danger of Sickness, or Laming; For, you must come Thorow Germany, which is a Long Way; and you must have very Careful Men to Conduct them, a good Groom, an Expert Farrier; and by no Means, to suffer any to Shoo them but Him; for when they per∣ceive
there is a Fine Horse, they will Hire a Far∣rier to Prick him, or Spoyl him, that they may have him: Which is Practiced dayly. OF THE ARABIAN HORSE. HE is Nurst with Camels-Milk; there are the strangest Reports in the World of those Horses; for I have been Told by many Gentlemen of Credit, and by Many-many Merchants, That the Price of Right Arabians is, One Thousand, Two Thousand, and Three Thousand Pounds a Horse, (an Intollerable, and an Incredible Price) and that the Arabs are as Careful, and Diligent, in Keeping the Genealogies of their Horses, as any Princes can be in Keeping any of their own Pedigrees. They Keep the Genealogies of their Horses with Medalls; And when any of their Sons come to be Men, then their Fathers give them Two Sutes
of Armes with Two Cymeters, and one of these Horses, and Prayes to God to Bless them; That is every ones Portion, and his Horse Lyes al∣wayes in the Next Room to him, (I believe, not Above Staires). They Talk, they will Ride Fourscore Miles in a Day, and never Draw the Bridle: When I was Young, I could have Bought a Nagg for Ten Pound, that would have done as much very Easily. I never saw any but one of These Horses, which Mr. John Markham, a Merchant, brought Over, and said, He was a Right Arabian: He was a Bay, but a Little Horse, and no Rarity for Shape; for I have seen Many English Horses farr Finer. Mr. Markham Sold him to KING JAMES for Five Hundred Pounds; and being Trained up for a Course, when he came to Run, every Horse Beat him.
OF THE HƲNGARIAN HORSE. THey are not Worth speaking of; but if you will Believe those of that Nation, they will Magnifie them Extreamly; and so will all Nations whatsoever Mightily Commend their Own Horses: But I have Seen Hungarian Horses, and They are not worth Commendations, I assure You. OF THE POLANDER HORSE. WHen the King of Poland Sent an Extra∣ordinary Embassadour, with Many of his Nobility and Gentry of Poland, to Conduct the Princess Mary, Eldest Daughter to the Duke of Nevers, from Paris, to Poland to be his Queen, I was then at Paris, and Saw his Entry; which was one of the most Glorious, and Manly Sights that
Ever I saw, after the Polack Way, with very Rich Clothes, Polack Capps, and great Feathers; and all the Masters of Academies were Com∣manded to Wait on the Embassadour, with All their Schollars, and Horses, in their Rich Clothes and Saddles, all A la Mode, their Manes full of Ribbons. I Protest, in Comparison of the Polacks, they Lookt like Hobby-horses; not but that their Hor∣ses were Better; the Difference was meerly in the Manly Habit of the Polanders, who were also very Rich. But their Horses I do not like at all; for they are, for their Shape, just as the common and ordinary Horses and Geldings in England; and the Bitts they Use, are just like our Snaffles, and have only Rings for the Bridle to be Fastned to, as Ours are, wanting those little Crosses that ours have: But if you will Believe the Polanders, they will tell you, That their Horses are the Bravest Horses in the World, which I have not Faith to Be∣lieve: For, when we say, (and it hath been an Old Saying) That the Poland Horse is the Best
Horse in the World; we mean the Men to Fight on Horse-back, and not the Horses. OF THE SWEDISH HORSE. I Had the Honour to Wait on the Queen of Sweden when she was at Antwerp, and she used me very Graciously, and Civilly; and an Extraor∣dinary Lady, I assure you, she is in All things: But for the Swedish Horses she had for the Saddle, there was no Great Matter in Them; She had Eight Coach-Horses, large and noble-Shap't, of the Count of Oldenburg's Breed, which were Be∣yond any Coursers that ever yet I saw: their Co∣lours Isabels, with long White Manes, Tails and Toppings; and these she sent into Spain, for a Present to the Catholick King: And it was a Kingly Present, fit for such a Queen to Present, and for so Great a King to Receive.
OF WHAT STATURE A Horse is Best, EITHER FOR The WAR, or for a SINGLE-COMBAT, OR FOR ANY THING ELSE. THere are Great Disputes amongst Cavaliers about this Business: I will not trouble you much about their Arguments, but only Deliver unto you my Opinion. Those that are for High and Large Horses, say, They are Strong for the Shock: But they must Know, that all Large Horses are not Strong; nay, for the most part they are not only the Weakest Horses, but commonly of no Spirit or Action. Put the Case, a Great Horse were Strong, yet he is so Tall, and his Strength Diffused, and indeed so out of his Strength, that a Midling Horse
(Entre deux selles) or rather a Less Horse, being Under him, and in his Strength, would certainly Overthrow him: So that a Midling Horse, or a Less, is Best for the War, or a Single-Combat, with∣out all Doubt. Midling-Horses, and Less Horses have, for the most part, both Strength, Spirit, and Agility, and not one in an Hundred but proves Well; when of Large Horses not one in a Thousand does: Nay, the Midling, or Less Horse, is Best for All Things; for the Padd, Buck-Hunting, Hawking-Naggs, or Geldings; for Hunting-Horses, Horses for Winter-Gallopping on the High-Way many Miles; for the Coach, for the Cart, for Any Thing. And if they should Fall, a Little Horse would do the Rider Less Hurt than a Greater Horse, to Lie upon him. Geldings, and Gelt-Naggs, are fitter for Great Journeys, or Hunting, or Hawking in Summer, than Ston'd Horses; for their Heat, with the Heat of the Weather, soon Heats their Feet, and Founders them; whereas Geldings are Colder, and so Travel Better, and not Tire so soon in the Heat of Summer.
THAT THERE ARE FEW GOOD HORSES. NOw I must Tell you, That there are Good and Badd Horses of all Countries in the World; but there are more Badd than Good, as there are of Men: And though there be Mil∣lions of Painters, yet there was but one Vandike in many Ages, or, I believe, shall be: The like in Musick, in Horse-manship, in Weapons, and in Horses; for a Rare Horse in any Kind, is a Difficult business to find, I assure you: It is a Hard thing to find Fit Horses for the Mannage, either upon the Ground, or in Ayres. It is true, Art doth much, but Nature is the Ground for Art to Work on; for, without it, Art can do but Little. I dare Undertake to Make a Cow go Just in the Mannage, but when I have Done that, it is but a Cow: And so a Jade that is Drest, he is but a Jade when you have done all you Can.
I assure you, it is a very Hard thing to find a Good Padd-Nagg, or a Good Padd-Gelding, to Amble finely upon the Hanches, and from his Amble to his Gallop, or from his Amble to his Trot, and firm on the Hand: Upon the Bitt I have seen very Few worth any thing, and as few Good Buck-Hunters, or Hawking-Naggs, or Winter Hunting-Geldings, or Horses to Gallop or Run surely upon All Grounds, Plowed Lands, Moors, Parks, Forrests, and every where, with a Snaf∣fle, and a Scotch Saddle, the Rains slack in his Neck, which makes him very much the Sa∣fer for his Rider, because he Gallops upon the Hanches. Let me Tell you, That Running-Horses are the most Easily found, and of the least Use; commonly they Run upon Heaths, (a Green Car∣pet) and must there Run all-upon the Shoulders, which in Troublesome Grounds is ready to Break ones Neck, and of no Use; Though I Love the Sport of a Running-Horse very Well, and think I am as Good a Jockey as any, and have Ridden many Hundred Matches, and Seen the
Best Jockeys, and Studied it more than, I think, they have Done. You see how Difficult a thing it is to Have a Good Horse in any Kind, for Any thing: Therefore I conclude, That a Knowing Horse-man is not so Happy for Horses, as a Citizen of London, that knows Nothing, more Than to Buy a Horse in Smithfield, for Eight Pound Ten Shil∣lings, or there-abouts, to Carry him to Notting∣ham, or to Salisbury; and let him have never so many Faults, his Ignorance finds none: Wherein he is very Happy.
MORE OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING HORSES. THe Turks are the most Curious in Keeping their Horses of any Nation; and Value them, and Esteem them most: They have all the Wayes of Dressing them, and keeping them Clean, that can be Imagined. They Cloath them first with a Fine Linnen Cloth and Hood next their Skin; then with a Hair-Cloth and Hood, Lined with Felt, over their Linnen Cloth and Hood: And all these are made so Fit, as to Cover their Breasts, and to come pretty low down to their Leggs. There cannot be a Better Way than this for their Cloathing. The Spaniards are also very Curious about their
Horses in all things; and their Grooms so Di∣ligent, as they never Stay long Out of the Stable, but are Alwayes doing something about them; and especially are Curious about their Manes, Toppings, and Tayles, making them Clean divers Ways; Washing them, and Pleating them. They esteem Highly their Horses, and no Na∣tion Loves them Better. The Master is Conti∣nually in the Stable, to see the Grooms do their Duty; but, for all that, the Spaniards and the Turks are none of the Best Horse-men; they Ride Short, have Strange Spurrs, and Saddles, especially Bitts, which are most Abominable. The Italians are very Careful and Neat about their Horses; but they have of late Lost their Latine in Riding, or else they never Had it; and our Ignorance made us Think they did Rarely. Some of the French are Curious in Keeping and Dressing their Horses; but, for the most part, Not: They highly Esteem Horses, and will give great
Prices for them. But French Grooms never Rub a Horses Leggs well. The Almains, or High-Germans, Love Horses well: Some say, They are very Curious, but Me-thinks not. They Commend their Grooms Extreamly, but I think they do not Deserve it. Certainly the Best Grooms are English Grooms; but no Grooms are Good, Except the Master looks strictly after them; for, The Masters Eye makes the Horse well Drest, as according to the Proverb, The Master's Eye makes the Horse Fat. Denmark, Swede, Poland, Transylvania, Hun∣gary, and all those Countries, are much like the Almains, for Little Curiosities, in Keeping and Dressing their Horses; and all their Riding alike: No man in Germany will Ride without a Cava∣zone, though he Knows not the Use of it at all, nor what to do with it. In Flanders, Brabant, and those Parts; as also in Holland, and those Parts, they are much like the Germans.
The Emperour of Muscovy, I have Heard, hath a Stable of Horses, and a French Rider: He hath some Horses come out of Tartaria, and Turkey, but none Good in his own Country. A Rider is of no great Use there, except he could Dress, and make a Ready Bear; of which there is Plenty, and they have Noble Races of those Beasts. In the Mogul's Country there is nothing to Dress, except you would Dress Elephants; and the Best Horses they have, come out of Persia. Sir Walter Rawley told me, That in the West-Indies there were the Finest Shap't Horses, and the Finest Colours in the World, beyond all Spanish Horses and Barbs that ever he saw; and they knew there so Little the Use of Horses, that they Killed them for their Skins. In Denmark there are Excellent good Horses; and in Norway little Strong Horses, but not so Purely Shap't. I saw Six Norway Horses in a Coach, very little Horses, Isabells, with White
Manes, and White Tayls; some of their Heads are a little too Bigg; but very Fine little Horses, and Strong. For Iseland Horses, they are all Curlled like their Doggs, and so Curled, that no Curry-Comb can Dress them, nor any thing Else: And they are but Dull Jades.
WHAT STALLION Is Best for the MANNAGE, The Ordering of him before he Mounts the Mares, What Kind of Mares, When, and How, they should be put Together for GENERATION. THe Best Stallion in Our Iland, is, A Well-Shapt Spanish Horse, with a Superfluity of Spirit, and Strength, Docil, and of an Excellent Disposition, and good Nature, which is the Chief thing in a Stallion; for if he be of an ill Dis∣position, Vitious, or Melancholly, all his Off∣springs will Participate of it, and will Never be
Drest, or made Perfect Horses as they should Be. He Ought to be of a Good Colour, to give the Race a good Dye; and Well-Markt, to Agree with most Mens Opinions: Though Marks and Colours be Nothing at all to Know the Goodness of a Horse, nor Shape neither; but, the Abun∣dance of Spirits, and a Strong Chine, be the most Considerable: Yet, by any Means, I would have him Perfectly Shap't, for the Beautifying of your Race; for a Handsome Horse may be as Good as an Ill-favoured Horse; and an Ill-favoured Horse as Good, as a Handsome Horse. I would have you Feed him four or five Months before he Covers, with Good Oats, Pease, and Hull'd Beans, (and Bread if you think Good) with Sweet Hay, and good Wheat-Straw, and some Barley now and then for Variety; and Ride him out to be Watered every day Twice, and keep him Out some Little time, only to Walk him; but not too Long, for that will Weaken him too much. Why not Breed of a Neapolitan? They are too
Gross Horses; and we Breed too Bigg Horses in England, by reason of the Moysture both of Ayre and Ground. Why not Breed of a Barb? They are too Slender, and too Lady-like, for the Mannage, though themselves the Best in the World for it; but their Off-spring, are commonly Loose and Weak Horses, fitter for Running-Horses, than the Mannage; so the Spanish Horse is in the Middle, (where Vertue lyes) neither too Gross, nor too Slender, and the finest Shap't Horse in the World: And therefore, Have no other Stallion. The fittest Mares for the Mannage, must be Short from the Head to the Croup; Curious Forehands, but not too Long; Fine Heads, and well Hung on; Good Bodies, Short rather than Long; Short and good Leggs; Short Pastorns, and Bending; Good Feet, short Backs, full of Spirits, and Strength; and good Natures. No where Better Mares than in England, if they be Well Chosen. Yet, I must Tell you, I could Wish you to have a Couple of fine Shap't little Dutch Mares, which is a fine Composi∣tion,
with a Spanish Horse, for the Mannage. For their Colours; Let them be such as most Men Like; though I value not that at all. Their Age; five, six, or seven Years Old; and the Stallion not to be too Old, except necessity other∣wise force you. The time of the Year; in May, about the Middle of that Month, that the Foles may Fall in April, because else they will have no Grass. Put the Stallion to the Mares, thus: Take off his Hinder Shooes, and bring him Near where the Mares are, and there let him Cover a Mare in Hand Twice, which will make him Wise; and instantly Pull off his Bridle, and put him to the Mares: Which Mares must all be put in a Con∣venient Closse, that may Feed them Well for six Weeks at least. Put those Mares that have Newly Foled, and those that are With Fole, and those that are Bar∣ren, all to him; for there is no Danger in it. This Way is so Natural, as they are all Served in their Height of Pride; for, the Horse never Mounts them untill they Woo him to it Extreamly.
When he hath Covered them All, then he Tryes them all Over again, and those that will Take the Horse, he Covers them; and those that will Not, he lets them Alone: And when he Knows he hath Finished his Work, he Beats the Pale to be gone, which is Time for him; then you must take him Up, and you shall find him Lean enough, nothing but Skin and Bones, and his Mane and Tayl will Moot Off: If you give him too many Mares, then he will Serve you the Less time; be so Lean and Weak, that you will very hardly Recover him against the next Year, or Covering-time. Therefore ten or twelve Mares is Enough. I had Forgot to Tell you, That you must have a Little House with a Manger, to Feed him with Corn, and Bread, during the Covering-time, to Defend him from the Heat of the Sun, and Rain, which would much Infeeble him: And you must have a Man always to Attend him and the Mares; and for that Purpose he must have a Little Hutt built, to be there Day and Night; not only to Tell you how they are Served, but
that no other Horse comes to the Mares, or other Mares put to the Horse; and for many other Accidents wherewith he is to Acquaint you. And when you have taken Up the Stallion, then Remove the Mares into a good and fresh Pa∣sture. This is the True Way for Covering the Mares; for, Nature is Wiser than Art in the Act of Ge∣neration; and by this Way, I dare say, there shall not, of a Dozen Mares, Two fail. I must Tell you, That you must Never have a Stallion of your Own Breed, because they are too Far removed from the Purity, and Head, of the Fountain, which is a Pure Spanish Horse: Be∣sides, should the Stallions be of your Own Breed, in Three or Four Generations they would come to be Cart-Horses; so Gross, and ill-Favoured would they be: or at least, just such Horses as are Bred in that Country, so soon will they Dege∣nerate: Therefore, have still a fresh Spanish Horse for the Stallion. But you cannot Breed Better, than to Breed of your Own Mares that you have Bred; and let
their Fathers Cover them; for there is no Incests in Horses: And thus they are Nearer, by a De∣gree, to the Purity, since a fine Horse Got them, and the same fine Horse Covers them again. If any Man will Dispute against this Truth, (if he be not Obstinate in his Errours) let him Read my First Book of Horse-manship in French, where I Treat of Breeding; and there are Reasons that may Convert him, if he considers my Great Experience. FOR The Housing, Feeding, and Ordering of COLTS. YOu must Wean the Foles, and Take them from their Damms, when Cold Weather comes in, which is about Martlemas; and have a Convenient House to Put them in, with a Low Rack and Manger fit for them: For the first Year, put the Horse-Colts, and Fillies, all toge∣ther;
and have alwayes good and fresh Litter for them, good Sweet Hay, and Wheat-Bran, and good Oats; the Wheat-Bran makes them Drink Well, and gives them good Bodies. In a Fair Day, let them now and then go Out in some Inclosed Yard, to Play, and Rejoyce them∣selves; and then put them Up again carefully, that they be not Hurt. The next Summer, when Grass is Plentiful, put them Out in some Dry Ground, where the Grass is Short, and Sweet; for if a Colt fills his Belly, once in Twenty Four Hours, it is Suffici∣ent; and good Water they must have. The Colts must be by themselves, and the Fillies by them∣selves, Separated. The next Winter, at Martlemas, then take Up again the Colts, bring them into the Stable, and Use them, in all Kinds, like the Older Horses; doing the same Thing every Summer, and every Winter, untill the Colts be Three Years old, and Vantage; and then take them Up for altogether, and Back them. Yearings must be Abroad toge∣ther; so Two-Years-old together, and Three-Years
old together; for thus they will Agree best: as we see that Little young Boyes, and Greater old Boyes, never Agree, or Play well together. The Fillies you may Better put Together; Yearings, and Two-Years-old, and Three. But I would wish you to take Up the Filleys at Two Years old, and Vantage; then Back them, and make them Gentle, and then Cover them at Three Years old: For, being thus Gentle, they will Never spoyl Themselves, nor their Foles; and if They, or their Foles, be Sick, or Hurt, you may Easily take them Up for the Farrier to use his Skill to Recover them. But, Why this Housing every Winter? You must know, There is nothing indures Cold worse than Horse-kind. For Example; Is there any Thing in the World Looks so like a Bear, and so Ill-favouredly, as a Colt in Winter upon a Common, and stands as if he had neither Life, nor Spirit? and certainly, Warmth, and Dry Feeding, is the Quintessence, and greatest Secret in the World for Breeding. To Prove it; The Spanish Horse, that is so Fine, is Bred in Spain, a Hot Country, and
hath Dry Feeding; for there is not much Grass in many Places. Barbery is very Hot, and little Grass. Turkey is very Hot, and Dry Grounds. Naples is very Hot, Mountainous, and Dry; and in all those Countries, the Horses are Purely Shap't, with Heat, and Dry Feeding: Therefore you must Help it, as well as you Can, in Cold Countries; which is Done with Housing, and Dry Feeding. To Prove it, Take the Finest Shap't Spanish Horse you can, and let him Cover Two Mares, of Equal Beauty; and if they have Two Horse-Colts, let One run Abroad, until he be Three Years and a Half old, and let the Other be Housed every Winter; and Fed, as I have Told you. That Colt that hath gone Abroad Three Years and a Half, shall have a great Fleshy-Head, and Thick and Full Neckt; Fleshy Shoulders; Flabby and Gowty Legs; Weak Pastorns, and ill Hooffs; and shall be a Dull, Weak, Fleshy Jade, by Reason of the Humidity of our Country, both Above and Underneath: when the Colt that is Housed every Winter, that is Kept Warm, and Lies Dry, and is Dry Fed, shall have as Fine a
Forehand, as Sinewy-Leggs, as good Hooffs, Spi∣rit and Strength, and in all things will be as purely Shap't, as any Spanish Horse can be. So you see, That to have the Finest Stallion, and the Beautifullest Mares, is Nothing, if you do not Order them as I have told you. (See Dutch Horses, how Gross they are, being Bred in Cold Countries.) This is a great Secret for Breeding, beleeve me, that have Tryed all Manner of Ways; and according to my great Experience, there is No∣thing but This. FOR THE BACKING OF A COLT. IF you have used the Method of Housing your Colts every Winter; and, after the First Win∣ter, used them in the Stable, as you do any other Horse; and that they will Lead, and be as Quiet as any Horse: You need not Fear their Plunging,
and Leaping, nor a Hundred Extravagancies more; Neither need you Tyer him in a Bogg, or a Deep Plow'd-Field, to take Off his Spirit, to Break his Heart, or at least, his Wind, before you dare get Upon him. For, being Ordered as I have formerly Told you, you may Safely Back Him, and find him as Quiet as a Lamb, and never Drive him into Faint-Sweats, which will bring many Diseases upon him. You need not then a Cavezone of Cord, which Mr. Blundevil calls a Head-Strain; nor a Padd of Straw; but such a Saddle as you ordinarily Ride Horses of Mannage in, with Stirrups; and on his Nose, an ordinary Cavezone, as you Ride other Horses with; but it must be well Lined with double Leather, as the Rest are: and if you will, you may put a Watering-Bitt in his Mouth, with∣out Rains on, only the Headstal, and this but for a few Dayes; and then to put such a Bitt as I would always Ride him withal, of which we shall Speak hereafter, and so give him the Lessons, which you shall have Perfectly sett down in the Se∣cond Book.
But if you light on an Older Colt, and Un∣ruly, then put him to the Single Pillar, and Trot him, and Gallop him on both Hands, until he be very Quiet, and will Peaceably suffer you to Take his Back; which he will not Fail to do within four or five Dayes at the most, if you Use this Method: And I do not know, that the Single Pillar, the Old way, is good for any thing, but this. At first you must Ride your Colt with∣out Spurrs. And thus much for Backing of Colts. OF THE SPANISH MƲLES. I Have seen the Finest Shap't of them in the World; the Finest Shap't Heads, and the Best set On; the Finest Turned Necks, and the Thinnest, and Well Risen; Excellent Backs, good Bodies; their Leggs Clean, and Sinewy; Admi∣rable Hooffs; their Croups a little Slender: And
in a Word, No Horse in the world Finer Shap't, and only their Ears are a Little Long, which, me∣thinks, is a Grace to them. They are of all Co∣lours, as Bayes, Dapple-Grayes, and so forth. Ex∣treamly Strong, as Strong as Two Horses; very Large, some as Large as any Horse whatsoever, and of great Prices; as three, and four Hundred Pi∣stols a Mule. The King of Spain hath Beauti∣full, and Large ones in his Coach; they Use them very much for the Saddle; for they Amble most Curiously, and Easily; they seldom Stumble, but when they Do, they never Fall further than their Knees. They are very Safe and Sure to Ride on; there be some very Little ones, and Fine ones, like Gallowayes; and those Commonly great Ge∣nerals, and Commanders, Ride on in the Trenches, and about Fortifi'd Castles, to View them: The Grosser sort they Use for Sumpters, Waggons, and Carriers for many things. They also Ride Post on them; and Don John de Borge, who was Go∣vernour at Antwerp, told me, That they would Amble as fast as Any Horse could Gallop.
They Live Long, and Sound, Thirty Years at least: There are Males and Females of them, and very Hot they are in the Act of Generation, but never produce any thing, with any thing; either to Get, or Bring Forth. They say, One is never assured of them from Biting or Striking though the Groom hath kept them Twenty Years; But I perceive no such Thing in them: And I have seen a Mule go in Capriols, excellently well. They say, They have Ill Mouths; but that's because they Spoyl them with Horrible Bitts: For they use both Other Bitts, and other Saddles and Furniture to them, than to Horses; wherein they are very much Mi∣staken. To those that are for the Saddle, I would use the very same Bitts and Saddles, as for Horses, and no otherwise. 'Tis true, that for Sumpters, there be Proper things that they use for Them only, and not for Horses, which is very Comely. And in Spain, they use in their Coaches, Ropes for the Mules (and the Horses also) to Draw the Coaches withall. They are Excellent to Ride on in Sto∣ney-Wayes, none like them; they are so Sure of Foot.
The Stallions that Get these Mules, are Asses, upon very Fine Spanish Mares. Sir Benjamin Wright, being a Merchant at Ma∣drid, Writ to me once, That a Stallion Asse would Cost, at the least, Two Hundred and Fifty Pistols; but others Tell me of Greater Prices that They are at: and great Reason, since Mules are of so great Use to them in Spain. My Lord Cottington told me, That the Asses in Spain, are Greater and Larger Beasts, than ever he saw of Horses in all his Life, and almost of Any other Beast; and are so Furious, and full of Spirit, That there is Men, that Live only by the Ordering of them, and no Other Men can do it, but those men which make a Trade of it; for Others would be Kill'd by them. And These Men Hood the Asses when they Cover any Mares, that they may not See them; for otherwise they would Pull the Mares in Pieces, and Kill them. When they Bray, it is a most Lowd and Horrid Noise, beyond any Lyon in the world. Now you see, There is great Reason, why they should be of Great Prices; but one that Thinks
they should be just such Little dull Asses as are in England, of Twenty or Thirty Shillings a Piece, would Laugh to hear this Tale told; Be∣cause they think there is Nothing more in the World than they have seen: As in such a case, Sir Walter Rawley said well, That there are Stran∣ger Things in the World, than between Stains and London. The Asses in France, are just like the Asses in England; Little, Lazy, Dull, and Wo∣ful things, and of as Small Price; only in those Parts of France that are next Spain, there the Asses are Large, but nothing in Comparison of those in Spain. The Shee-Asses in Spain, are very Fair, and Large; For else, How can you Imagine such huge, large, and great Puissant Beasts should be Produc'd?
THAT TRYING Is the Only Way to KNOW HORSES. I Told you, That Marks, Colours, and Elements, are Nothing at all to Know a Horse by; for they are but Philosophical Mountebanks that Talk of such Toyes. Nay, Shape is nothing to Know the Goodness of a Horse; and therefore the best Philosophy is to Try him: And you may be De∣ceived then, if he be a Young Horse; for Colts alter extreamly, both in Spirit and Strength. What Judgment can one give of a Little Boy, what Kind of Man he will Prove? No more can one give a Judgement of a Colt, what Kind of Horse he will Prove. But still Ride him, and Try him; and that is the Best Philosophy to Know him by. Some say, If a Horse have a Great Head, a Thick Neck, and Fleshy Shoulders, that he is Hard on the Hand: You must Know, That if
he have any Imperfection in his Leggs or Feet, but especiall Before, the Horse must be Hard on the Hand; for he Leans on the Hand, to Ease the Grief of his Leggs, as a Gowty-Man doth Use his Staff. And let him be finely-Shap't, or ill-Shap't, if he have any Imperfection in his Leggs, he must be Hard on the Hand; and then the Far∣rier must Cure him, and not the Horse-man; for the Art of Riding will not make a Lame Horse Sound. Our Great Masters, and Best Authours, say, That when a Horse is Sound, if he have a Great Head, Thick Neck, and Fleshy Shoulders; that then, of Necessity, this Horse must be Hard on Hand; and give many Rare Lessons, as they Think, to make him Leight on the Hand: And they also say, That a Horse that hath a fine Thin Fore∣hand, must be Leight on the Hand, wherein they are Infinitely Deceived; for I have Known more Thick Heads, Necks, and Shoulders, Leight on the Hand, than I have Known fine Shap't, and Slender Forehands. But it is neither the One, nor the Other, that makes it, but meerly the
Strength of his Chine. For, if a Horse, that hath a Great Head, Thick Neck, and Fleshy Shoul∣ders, hath a Good Chine, he will be Leight on the Hand; and if he have a Weak Chine, he will be Hard on the Hand. And so a Fine Forehand, if he have a Weak Chine, he is Hard on the Hand; and if he have a Strong Chine, he is Leight on the Hand: So it is, not having a Gross, or a Fine Forehand, that makes him Hard or Leight, on the Hand; but all Consists in the Strength of his Chine. The Reason of that, is, Because if he hath a Strong Back, he can Suffer without Grief or Pain, to be put upon the Hanches: And no Horse is upon the Hanches, but he is Leight on the Hand; and if his Chine be Weak, the putting him upon the Hanches, doth so Pinch him, as he Presses upon his Foreparts to save the Pain on his Back; and sometimes will Run away, rather than to Suf∣fer it; and will Leap, rather than to be Pincht of his Weak Back: and yet I must Tell you, The Strongest Horses are not Fittest, or Properest, for the Mannage, nor for a Souldiers Horse; for you
must Gallop him an Hour before you can take him Off his Fury; and such Counter-times of Leaps, do In-commode the Rider, to no Purpose: And when you would make him Go, he shall not Go so Well, as a Horse of Half his Strength: and though he Leaps in such a Manner, that will Disorder an Armed-Man; yet the Best Horse-man in the World shall not make him a Leaping-Horse: Therefore the Best for the Mannage, and the War, is a Horse that hath so much Strength as to Indure a Stopp, and no more, to make him Easie for an Armed-Man. And Certainly a Weak Horse with Spirit, Docil, and of a Good Disposi∣tion, is much Better, and will go Beyond a huge Flanders Horse, of a Dutch Brewer, that hath no Spirit: And I must Tell you, That the Greatest and Largest Horses are not commonly the Strongest, but for the most part the Con∣trary; for that which makes them Draw, is their Waight, and not their Strength, nor their Spi∣rit; for they have none. I dare say, I can take a little English Cart-Horse, that shall Draw Twice as much as their Great Flanders Horses:
Commonly those they Use in Flanders are Geld∣ings. HOW TO KNOW the AGE OF A HORSE. MR. Blundevil sayes, Some seek to Know a Horses Age in this Sort: They Pull his Skin with their Hand from his Flesh, holding it so a Pretty while together, and then let it Go Again, Marking whether the Skin Returneth im∣mediately to his Place, or not, without leaving any Signe or Wrinckle where it was Toucht: And then they Judge the Horse to be Young. But if the Skin will not Fall down quickly again of its own accord, they take him to be Old, and to lack that Natural Heat, and Warm Blood, which should Nourish his Outward Parts. These are the very Words of Mr. Blundevil.
Let us see the Probability of it, and the Cer∣tainty of the Rule, in a Horse whose Mark is Out of his Mouth; for many Horses that are many Years Older, if they be Healthful, and Sound, and in good Case, Wanton, and full of Blood, their Skin will Return to the same Place again Presently, when a Younger Horse by many Years, that is Sickly, Lean, and Faint, his Skin will not Re∣turn so soon; and then your Old Observation De∣ceives you, and is a great Folly. And when he will Know a Horses Age by his Tayl, he be∣gins at the Wrong end; which is most Ridi∣culous. Mr. Blundevil sayes also, That when a Horse Waxeth Old, his Temples will wax Hollow, and the Hair of his Browes Hore and White, &c. This is, for the most part, somewhat Probable. But yet I have Known a young Fellow of Seventeen all Gray; Why may it not be so in Horses? Nay, I have Known some so. But though I Grant, That Gray Hairs shewes Age, for the most part; yet, I believe, you do not know How Old a Horse is for all that Observation, but only in general, That he is Old.
So that there is no Sure way to Know his Age, but by his Teeth; and that is a certain Rule, but Lasts no longer than Seven years Old. Captain Mazine sayes, That a Horses Years may be Known until he is Fourteen, by his Ʋpper Teeth; but, be∣cause it doth not Hold in all Horses, I forbear to Write it. There is some Difference between Horses and Mares, to Know their Age. For any Man that would have a Horse of Use in his ordinary Occasions; as for Journeys, Hawk∣ing, or Hunting; I would never Buy a Horse un∣til the Mark be Out of his Mouth; and if he be Sound of Wind, Limb, and Sight, he will last you Eight or Nine Years with good Keeping, and never Fail you; when a Young Horse will have many Diseases, as Children have, and you must leave him with your Host at Harborow, or Northampton, or some Inne, and Hire another Horse for your Occasion, and have your Host's Bill, and the Farriers, which will come to more than your Horse is Worth; and there's your Young Horse; but your Old Horse shall never Fail you. I am alwayes ready to Buy for such
Purposes, an Old Nagg of some Hunts-Man, or Falconer, that is Sound, and that's the Useful Nagg; for he Gallops on all Grounds, Leaps over Ditches, and Hedges; and this will not Fail you in your Journey, nor any where; and is the only Nagg of Ʋse, for Pleasure, or Jour∣ney, but not for a Souldiers Horse, nor the Man∣nage: For every Horse must be Appropriated in his Kind, and put to what he is Fittest.
WHAT EQUIPAGE IS PROPER for the HORSE, AND MOST COMMODIOUS for the HORSE-MAN Afore the Horse is MOƲNTED. FOr the Saddle, Bitt, Cavezone, Stirrups, and Spurrs, in my first Book of Horse-manship you shall see the Figures of all These, most Lively Represented. For the Girthes, I must Advise you to have one Girth as Broad as two, only at each End separated, as if they were Two, though it is but one Girth; and an Italian Surcingle over them; which is so excellent a thing, that if the Girths, or Straps, should Break, yet the Surcingle will not fail to Hold.
You must fit your Horse with a Bitt proper for him; that is, a Cannon, or a Scatch, A la Pignatel, and Branches A la Conestable; and the same Bitt I will alwayes Ride my Horse with I give him at first; for they are Ridiculous with their Pistol Cannons, and not to fit a Horse for two Years, and then to Bitt him up. But I will alwayes Bitt and fit my Horse at the first, with what he should alwayes Wear, or such Another when that's Broke, or is worn in Pieces. Your Horse should be Girt as Hard as you can; for the Italian sayes, He that Girds well, Rides well. But a Groom may Gird well, and yet not Ride well. But they Mean, No Man can Ride well, that doth not Gird well: For, How can he Ride well when the Saddle turns Round? Horses of Mannage force the Girths much with Violent Ayres, which an Ambling Horse doth not. But I must Tell you, That you should never Gird your Horse up Hard and Straight, but just before you Ride him; for, be∣ing Hard Girt in the Stable Long before you
Ride him, I have Known them grow very Sick. Why do they not so when they are Ridd, say you? Ile tell you why; Because the Violence of the Exercise makes them put Out their Bodies, and so Stretches the Girthes, and makes them Easier. But I will Tell you a great Truth in Horses that are used to be Girt Hard: When the Groom comes to Gird them up, the Horses will so Stretch their Bodies and Bellies Out, with holding their Breath, that the Grooms have much ado to Gird them: And this is Craftily done of them, that they may have Ease after they are Girded, and then they let their Bodies Fall again. And yet, sayes the Learned, Like to the Horse that hath no Ʋnderstanding. Another thing I am to Advertise you of; and that is, To make the Nose-Band as Straight as pos∣sible you can; because it Hinders him, as they say, to make Sheeres with his Mouth, or to Gape to Disorder the Working of the Bitt, or to Bite at the Rodd when you help him, or to Bite at your Feet. But the Nose-Band, being very Straight,
makes the Bitt lie in his due Place, and Works orderly, as it Ought, both upon the Barrs, and the Curb, and firms and settles his Head: And I assure you, there is nothing Better than this, for many things; and therefore I would have also the Cavezone as straight as you could, for many Reasons; and Remember that your Cave∣zone be never Sharp; but always Lined with double Leather at the least, for fear of Hurting him: Though the Old saying, is, A Bloody Nose makes a good Mouth; I would neither Hurt his Mouth, nor his Nose, nor any thing else about him, if I could Help it; and then I am sure he will have a Better Mouth, when his Nose is not Hurt. Sakers, Dockes, or Trouse Ques, (which is all one) is a great Grace for a Leaping-Horse; for it makes him appear Plumper, and more To∣gether, Racoursi, and makes him appear to go Higher too; therefore I would use Sakers for all Kinds of Leaping-Horses, whether for Croupa∣does, Balotadoes, or Caprioles; but then the Horses Tayles must be Tied short Up, upon the Saker.
For Horses that go the Mannage de Soldat, Terra a Terra, in Corvets, or Demy-Ayres, there is nothing Handsomer, than to see a Horse with a good Tayl Down, without any thing; no Quin∣sel, or any thing, but Naturally; and to see him Lay his Tayl on the Ground, is Graceful, and shewes that he Goes upon the Hanches; which is the Perfection of the Mannage. To Beautifie their Manes before great Princes, or Persons of Quality, there is nothing more Graceful, than to Tye their Manes with several Coloured Ribbons, or all of One Colour, in many several Wayes; either Pleating their Manes, or letting them be Loose. I never saw any Horse Go so well with Rich Saddles, as with Plain Leather Saddles, and Black Bridles: The Leather Saddles should be plain White Spanish Leather, stitcht with Silk; with Silver Nayles, and a good Black Leather Slap-Cover over it, and the Bridle Soft black Lea∣ther, and Small; by no means too Great: Two Girthes in One, to part at both Ends, like Two Girths; and a good Italian Surcingle, which is
Worth both the Girthes for sure Holding. You must be very Careful, to see that nothing that is about the Horse should Hurt him; as his Saddle, Bitt, Cavezone, or any thing else: For, I assure you, as long as any thing Hurts him, he will never go Well. No Horse goes Well in a Wind, it doth so Whisk about him, and in his Ears, and makes such a Noise, as it Diverts him from the Man∣nage; and so doth any new Help, or any new Thing that they are not Accustomed to: Horses are very Sensible, and Tickle; and no Strangers must come near them. There is one Thing that is the most Uncomly, and the Disgracefullest thing a Horse can do; and that is, To Whisk his Tayl in all the Acti∣ons that he makes. The common Remedy they Use, is, To Tie his Tayl with a Quinsel; which doth Remedy that Vice, as long as it Holds: But the Best thing in the World, is, To Cut Cross the great Nerve that is under his Tayl, and then he shall never Whisk or Shake it again; and it will do him no Hurt in the World, more
than when it is Cut. There is no Remedy like unto this. A Very True PARADOX. I Will never Put my Horses of Mannage to Soyl after they are Five Years old. I had a Barb that had a Cold, and I was Perswaded to Put him to Soyl; but when I took him from it, he was Broken-Winded. Though I never Put them, but Six or Seven dayes, to Soyl, yet I ever found them the Worst for it, both for Colds, and their Flesh being Flabby. Doth not every Body say, when you Take a Horse from Grass, That you take him Up with a Grass-Cold? And it is very True. Then these Horses of Man∣nage, which are extreamly Heated, and often must, of Necessity, Melt their Grease. If you give them Grass to Cool them, and Purge them (as they say) to bring it away, it being Hardned
like Tallow, Grass is too Gentle to do it Ef∣fectually: But I Confess it Dissolves some small part of it, which it doth not Bring away; and that which is Dissolved, runs into their Veins, and Arteries, and makes them remain Sick Hor∣ses, so that they will never Thrive. Therefore, at the time of Soyl, let them Blood once or twice, and give them Pills of Alloes Sicatrina two Oun∣ces, lapped up in Fresh Butter; and after that, give them Cooling Julips twice or thrice a Week, for a Fortnight, or Three weeks together; and let them Rest, or but Walk gently out, and no Grass at all: During the great Heats, ride Mode∣rately, by no means Violently. Horses of great Exercise must have Dry Feed∣ing; for Moist Feeding spoyls them, and fills them full of Diseases and Corruption; therefore never give them Grass, and but very little Hay. The Method thus: Before their Water, give them but a Handful of Hay, only to make them Drink; and after their Water, another Handful of Hay, to be a Barricado between their Water, and their Oats, that they should not Shoot their
Oats too soon; and then give them their Oats; and all the rest of the Day, and Night, nothing but Wheat Straw. As the Italian sayes, a Horse that is Fed with Hay, is a Horse for a Cart, he is so Foggy and Pursey; but they say, Cavallo de Palla, Cavallo de Batalla; and thus his Flesh will be as Hard as a Board, in great Lust, Wind, and Strength, and as Nervous as possible can be, and in great Health. Excellent Clean Oats is the Best Feeding in the World; somtimes you may give a few Pease, or Hul'd Beans, which is very Good; but never any Bread, for that makes them Pursey, as we know very well by Running-Horses. I never give above Two Bushels of Oats a Week to every Horse, and it is Enough; for they Look extraor∣dinary Well with it. A Horse must ever be Empty before you Ride him, and stand some three or four Hours, both Morning, and Afternoon, upon the Watering-Bitt, to turn him from the Manger, to get him a better Appetite; which is excellent Good. Wheat is Strengthning, but it makes a Horse
Fatt at the Heart, and Out of Wind; Barley they give in Italy and Spain, but it is not our Common Barley; but that which we call Bigg: which is not an ill Feeding, but not Compara∣ble to good Oats: But in Italy and Spain, they give Barley, because they have no Oats: Pease-Straw will make a Horse Piss red like Blood. If you follow this Method, you will ever have your Horse Well, and Sound. I must Tell you, It is not Much Meat, but the Ordering of the Diet, that Makes Horses in Health: Nay, to some Great and Ready Feeders (as they call it) you must give but a little Wheat-Straw; for else they will be as Pursey and Fatt, as Stall-Fed Oxen: Nay, some again will Eat their Litter, which is very Foul Feeding. And then the Jockeys use to put their Horses upon the Muzzle, which I like not by any Means; for many Horses grow very Sick upon it, because it doth almost Smoother them; therefore, in that case, I put on a Cavezone, and Tie it so Straight, as he cannot Eat, and then he hath his Nostrils clear for Breath, and is never Sick.
Be sure, That you never Dress your Horse until he be Cold; for until then, he will not Dress; though I have seen many Foolish Grooms offer at it, to Dispatch their Work: Nor Turn them to the Manger to their Meat, after their Exercise, until they be Cold; for, though you give them no Water, or but to Wash their Mouths, yet Eating, whilest they are Hott, makes Ill Di∣gestion. There is nothing Conduces more to the Health of Horses, than to Keep them three or four Hours before they be Rid, on the Watering-Bitt; and after they are Ridd, so long again on the Watering-Bitt, until they be Cool; and in the Af∣ternoon Turn'd again on the Watering-Bitt three or four Hours. For Worms, it is good to give them Brim∣stone in their Oats, and to put Bay-Salt by them, which they will Lick apace; and Fenugreek, and sometimes a Spoonful of Sweet-Sallet-Oyl mingled with their Oats. But the most Soveraign Thing that ever I knew, is Honey mingled with their Oats.
Horses of great Exercise, that have often great Heats, as Horses of Mannage have, must be Lett Blood often, and have Dry Feeding; for, Moist Feeding, and Exercise, breeds great Corruption: Cooling-Julips, and Cooling-Glisters, (which I will set down hereafter) are very Needful to Preserve their Health. TO MAKE A HORSE HAVE A FINE COAT. THere are but these Four things, viz. Feeding Well, Cloathing Warmly, Many Sweats, and Dressing Well. For Dressing, there are these Things; The Curry-Comb, which only fetches out Dust; the Dusting-Cloath, that takes away the Loose Dust; the Brush, that takes the Dust from the bottom
of the Hair; the Hard Wisp, a little moistned, that takes out More Dust yet from him; and the Felt a little moistned, that takes out More Dust from him afterwards; but the Wett Hand, which should be last, takes not only More Dust, but a great deal of Loose Hair, which is much Better than any of the Former: After this, a Linnen Cloath to Wipe them over, and then a Wollen Cloath, and so Cloath him Up. But, the Best of all is the Knife Heat, which is the Scraper; for, when he is Hot, Scraping of him gets all the Sweat, and Moysture, out of him, so that he is Dry presently after, and all that Wett would turn to Dust, so there is so much Labour saved: Besides, it gets abundance of Hair from him, which the rest doth not; so that it is the most Excellent thing I Know, both to Cool a Horse, and to Make him have a Good Coat. You must Wash his Hooffs first Clean, and then Dry them; and when they are Dry, then Anoint them; and when his Feet are Pick'd, then Stopp them with Cow-Dung.
In Summer he must be Leightly Cloathed in the Heats, and his Leggs and Feet all Wash't, and his Codds, and his Sheath, made Clean; for there will be a great deal of Dirt in those Places else; and his Yard made Clean, and either Washed with Water or White-Wine; his Temples, Eyes, No∣strils, and Mouth, Bathed with Cold Water in a Spunge, which will much Refresh him: Nay, to be Washed all Over, and Scrap't, is excel∣lent, both for his Coat and Health; and some∣times to be Wash't with Sope: His Mane to be Wash't and kept Clean; and sometimes to be Wash't with Sope will make it Grow; and if the Hair should Fall, then Wash it in Lee, but not too Strong, for that would fetch it Off: Dress his Mane Clean every day, and Pleat it up again, which will make it Grow very much: You must Wash his Tayl very Clean, up to the very Dock, Dock and all; and often Wett his Dock with a Spunge, not only to make his Hair lie Close, but to make it Grow; and also it doth Refresh him very much, and keeps him Cold handsomely. But if your Horse hath a White Tayl, wash
it never so clean, yet he will Dye it in his Dung and Ʋrine, that it will be Yellow, and therefore you must Wash it very Clean with Water and Sope; and when it is Dry, put it in a Bagg, and Tie it up, and that will keep it Clean, and White. Clip his Ears; and no more of his Mane, than for the Head-stall to Lie there; and Cut his Tayl a little above his Fetlock, and Cut it every Month to make it Grow. You may Dress him in as many Various Sorts with Ribbons, as there are Colours, which Beautifies him much. He must be well Littered with fresh Rye-Straw every Night, and to have Pasterns on his Fore-Feet keeps him from much Hurt; but one Pa∣sterne on his Hinder Foot, tyed to the Pillar be∣hind him, with a Leather Rein at such a Length as he may Lie Down, doth Avoid more Mischief than you can Imagine: The Woollen Cloath must alwayes be laid upon his Buttock under his Housing Cloath; You must alwayes have your Horses to have Hoods, and both they, and their Housing-Cloathes Lined with Cotten, or Baies, to keep them Warm.
Have good Collers, Surcingles, and Padds, and a little Rein to Tie them up to the Wall or Rack; and good Wattering-Bitts, which, as I told you afore, are very Ʋseful. And be careful, after a great Heat, that you give him no Water till Night, except only to Wash his Mouth: for it is very Dangerous, and may Spoyl him Utterly; for, a Horse will be Cool Without, when he is not Within: and the Worst is but to forbear his Meat a little, or to have a Small Body, which is much Better than to have No Horse. OF SHOOING. THe old Saying, is, Before behind, Behind before. That is; Before, the Veins lie Be∣hind: For, you see of his Fore-feet, there is a great Space on both sides, where there is no Nayls at the Heel: And Behind, before; for you see in his Hinder-feet, there is a great Space between
the Nayls at the Toe; because the Veines lie Before, at the Toe; and the Veins lie Behind, at the Heel: and this is done for fear of Pricking him. So that the Saying, Before behind, Behind before, is very True. You must Fitt the Shoo to the Foot, and not the Foot to the Shoo, as they do in Flanders, and Brabant; and Open his Heels as much as you can, Straight, and not Side-wayes; for that will Cutt away all his Heels in two or three Shooings; and the Strength of the Heels, is the Strength of the Foot. You must Cutt the Thrush handsomly too, and Pare his Foot as Hollow as you can, the Shoo may not Press at all upon his Foot: The Shoo must come Neer to the Heel, and sit a little From it, and a little Wider than the Hooff on both Sides, to enlarge the Heel; and that the Shoo may bear his Weight, more than his Foot. The Webb must be indifferent Broad; not too Thinn, least it should Beat into his Foot; nor so Thick, either to Tyre him, or with the Weight to Pull out the Nayls. When the Shoo is set On, there will be much
Hooff to be Cutt off at the Toe; for, it must be very Thick at the Toe, if you do not Pare him but as I have told you; and when you have Cutt it Off, then Smooth it with a File, or Rape, and thus your Horse will stand so Firm, as if he had a little Polonia-Heel; and his Foot so Strong, as not only to go Boldly upon Stones, but to Break them, and never to Hurt his Feet, or Feel them: For, you will easily Imagine, A Man can go much Better upon Stones with Three-Soal'd-Shoos, than with Pumps. Paring a Horses Foot so Thin as they Use, is Pumps, and makes him Go upon his Heels, as Pumps doth a Man; and my Way, as I have told you, is, Three-Soal'd-Shoos, and a little Polonia-Heel. The Nayls should be Cast in a Mould, with Round and Flatt Heads, for fear of Crossing one Legg of another to Hurt him. This for the Fore-Feet. The Hinder-Feet are to be Shod just in the same Manner as the Fore-Feet was, both for Ope∣ning the Heels, Cutting the Thrush, and Cutting off at the Toe, to leave it Thick; only the Hinder
Shooes must be made Answerable to the Form of his Hinder-Feet: The Webb somewhat Broad, but the Nayls of his Hinder-Feet should be ordi∣nary Nayls, and the Heads a little Bigger and Sharper, for Stopping, to take hold of the Earth, lest he might, with Sliding, Incord himself; the Nayls ought to be so, because a Horse of Man∣nage goes on the Hanches, which is most of his Hinder-Feet; and Wears his Hinder Shooes twice as Fast as his Fore Shooes: And this is the Right Way of Shooing a Horse of Mannage. A Travelling Horse must be Shod after the same Manner, but a little Straighter; for other∣wise, in Ill Wayes, he will Pull Off his Shooes; the Webb must be a little Narrower. A Hunting-Horse must also be Shod after the same Way, but much Narrower than the Travel∣ling-Horse, eeven with his Foot, and the Webb much Narrower, or else he will Indanger to Lame himself, upon Ill Grounds, and to In∣danger you with Falling; besides Pulling Off his Shooes. A Running-Horse's Shooes are so Narrow at
the Webb, and so Thin, as they are called Plates, rather than Shooes; it is not only for Leight∣ness, but that the Fresh Nayls, being Newly Shod, may take Better hold of the Earth, to pre∣vent Slipping: For, could the Nayls be put in without Shooes, as Eeven, and Regularly, it would do as Well; but that cannot be, and therefore you must have Plates for that end, which is the only end of Plates.
WHAT Is to be Done, when THE HAIR from the MANE and TAYL FALLS AWAY. SEarch both Mane and Tayl well with your Finger, and Anoynt the Place with this Ʋnguent. Take Quick-Silver, and Tryed Hoggs Grease; the Quick-Silver being first Mortified with Fasting-Spittle: Incorporate them very well Together, till the Hoggs Grease be of a perfect Ash Colour, and Anoynt the Sorrance therewith, every day; holding a Hott Barr of Iron neer, to cause the Oyntment to Sink in, and in three or four Dayes thus carefully Dressing him, he will be Well. This is a very good Receipt, and I have
often used it: But I would Advise you, First to Lett him Blood, a good Quantity, both in the Neck and Tayl. TO CAUSE the HAIR TO GROW AGAIN. TAke the Dung of a Goat, newly made; or∣dinary Honey, Allom, and the Blood of a Hogg; The Allom being first made into Fine Powder. Boyl all these Together, and Rubb, and Anoynt the Places therewith every day, and it will Cause the Hair to come Again apace. This is special Good. I use to Preserve my Horses Manes, making them very Clean from all Filth and Dust with the Brush; then Wash them with a little Sope: And having Wash'd out the Sope, Pleat them
Up in great Pleats, and Undo them every Day, Pleat them again; and this will make them Grow wonderfully: For, their Manes being Loose, they are apt to Break, especially when they are Ridd, by Reason of the Bridle, Cavezone Reins, and Hand, that Rubbs against them: Therefore, but upon High Dayes, let their Manes be alwayes Pleated. Their Tayls should be always kept Clean, and Wash't with Sope sometimes, but wash't Clean every day; and when they are Dry, Comb'd out carefully, for fear of Breaking the Hair: Let his Dock be Wetted with a Spunge often in a Day, which will both make it Grow, and make the Hair to lie Eeven; and his Tayl Cutt every Month, which will both make it Grow, and grow Thick. To Observe the time of the Moon, is but an old Foppery; but to Lett him Blood in the Tayl, is very Good. Now you must Understand, That what you take many times for Dust in his Mane, are little Worms, which Eat the Roots of the Hair away: This is easily Known from Dust; because, if
the Hair Falls, you may be very Sure they are Wormes. The Cure is thus: Make a prety strong Lie, and Wash his Mane with it once a Day, and he will be Cured; but you must take heed, that the Lie be not too Strong; for, if it be, That alone will Burn all the Hair of his Mane off: So the Cure will be Worse than the Disease. RARE RECEIPTS, JƲLIPS, GLISTERS, and POTIONS, For Cooling a HORSE OVER-HEATED BY VIOLENT EXERCISE: Promised Before. FOr a Horse that hath a Cold, Take Half a Pound of Honey, Half a Pound of Treakle, mix these together: Then take an Ounce of
Cumminseed, beaten into Powder; an Ounce of Liquorish Pouder, an Ounce of Bay-Berries bea∣ten into Pouder, and an Ounce of Anniseeds in Pouder: Then mix all these Powders together, and put so much of them as shall make it Thick as a Hasty-Pudding. After the Horse is Ridden, give it him with a Stick to Lick Off; and if he have a Cold, give him of it, both before, and af∣ter, he is Ridden; for, no Better Medicine there is not. When a Horse is OVER-RIDDEN, TO COMFORT HIM. TAke a Pinte of Sweet Milk, and put three Yolks of Eggs beaten into it; then make it Luke-warm, and then put in three Penny-worth of Saffron, and one Penny-worth of Sallet-oyle, which is Two or Three Spoonfulls, and give it
the Horse, in a Horn: You may give him near a Quart of Milk. This is an Excellent Drink. Honey is the most Excellent Thing in the World, both for the Lungs, a Cold, and to Open all Obstructions, putting one good Spoonful in∣to his Oats, and so to continue this Medicine for a pretty time. I have Known it Recover a very Pursey Horse. Horses of Great Exercise, or that are Over-Heated, and have great Fire in their Bodies, must be Lett Blood often; nay, twice or thrice within a few Dayes, one after another; and still Lett Blood, untill you see Good Blood comes: To Lett such a Horse Blood in the Mouth, and then Rubb his Mouth with Salt, and let him Eat his Blood, is an Excellent thing: But you must Purge him Well, that his Grease may come away; for, Horses of Great Exercise would else be al∣wayes Foundered in the Body, and then they will never Thrive until that Melted Grease be brought Away. The Best Purge, is two Ounces of Aloes Si∣catrina,
Lapt up in Butter, and made into two Pills, and so give it your Horse after he hath Rested awhile; then give him this Following and Refreshing Drink, which is the best Julip in the World: Take Mel Rosatum, or Honey of Roses. Conserves of Damask-Roses. Conserve of Burrage. Sirrup of Violets. Of each four Ounces. Burrage Water. Endive Water. Suckory Water. Bugloss Water. Plantine Water. Of each Half a Dutch Pint, which is near as much as an English Quart. Then you are to Use both these Conserves and Waters, Thus: Put all the Conserves into a Morter, and Beat them, or Pownd them together, and then Mix them by Little and Little, with the Waters, till they be well Mixt together; and then give them
all together in a Horn, to the Horse, without Straining: Do not give it Cold by any means. Hott Sirrup of Lemmons added to it, is very Good: Give it twice or thrice a Week for a Fortnight at least, and let the Horse Rest after∣wards. Feed your Horse all the time of this great Heat within him, with Wheat-Brann amongst his Oats, and Wash them in a little Beer, if he Likes it. This Brann is the Best thing in the World to get-Out his Belly, and to Moisten him, because it Dries up all Superfluous Hu∣mours which Heat him: In his Water, when you Water him, put also Wheat — Brann into it, and let him Eat of that Brann also. This is most Excellent; and will not only Cool him, and Moisten him, but also Loosen his Skin, if he be Apt to be Hide — Bound, which all Heat doth. Lettises are very good to Cool him; Suckory Roots, or Endive Roots, are all one. To boyl Suckory Roots in his Water is very Good; and Purslane, to give it him now and then to Eat, is
also very Good: To Sprinkle his Hay with Water, and to give him Radishes to make him Piss, will Cool him. And let him have no Vio∣lent Exercise, until he be Recovered, but gentle-Walking. This is the most Excellent thing in the World; beyond all the Printed Books of Re∣ceipts. TO COOL and REFRESH a HORSE. GIve him Carrots with his Oats, or upon his Watering—Bitt; Apples is Excellent, and so Muskmellons, or the Skins of them: To Wash his Oats in Small Beer, is also very Ex∣cellent.
A Receipt of the Cooling-Julip, or Diet-Drink, that Doctor Davison doth give in Feavers TAke Barley Water two Pints: Of Sirrup of Violets two Ounces: Of Sirrup of Lemmons one Ounce: Mix them together, and use this Water to Quench their Thirst. A Julip for Feavers to Bind the Body, if it be Loose. TAke one Ounce of Ivory, and one Ounce of Harts — Horn; Raspe them, and put them in three Paris — Pintes of Water, and let them Boyl together, until the Half be Consumed; then Strain it through a Cloth: And put to this Liquor, four Ounces of the best Juce of Barberies, and one Ounce and a half of Sirrup of Pomgra∣nets. This is to be Used to Cool.
These are Excellent for Feavers in Horses as well as Men: only you must give a Third, or a Fourth Part more to Horses, since they have Stronger Bodies; else the Disease is all one, and the Remedy is all one: And this Method will Cure both Man and Horse; and all other Wayes are Pernicious to them Both, which is either Physick that Purges, or Hott-Cordials; only when he is Cured, then a Purge, as I said before, to take away the Dreggs that Remain; and no more. A Cooling-Potion which is most Excellent. TAke a Quart of Whey, and four or five Ounces of Sirrup of Violets, and four or five Ounces of Cassia, and a little Manna; and this will both Cool, and Purge Gently, and is a most Excellent Remedy for Horses of Great Exercise. To take the very same at the other End, will
do much Good to Cool the Bowels; and is a very rare, and soveraign Cooling Glister. All these Cooling things are most Excellent for Horses of Great Exercise, which are Over-Heated, and Surfeited with Riding, so you give them First the Purge of Aloes, to bring Away their Grease. Here Ends the First Part.
THE SECOND PART. Of Riding, and Dressing Horses upon the GROƲND. THere is no Man can Make or Dress a Horse Perfectly, that doth not exactly Understand all the Na∣tural Paces, and Actions of a Horses Leggs, in every one of them; and all the Actions of his Leggs, made by Art. It is a General Rule, That Art must never be against Nature; but must follow Nature, and set Her in Order.
OF THE NATƲRAL PACES. FIrst. Of a Horse upon his Walk. The Action of his Leggs in that Motion, Is, Two Leggs in the Ayre, and Two Leggs upon the Ground, at the same Time moved Cross, Fore-Legg and Hinder-Legg Cross, which is the true Motion of a Slow Trott. Secondly. In a Trott. The Action of his Leggs, is, Two Leggs in the Ayre, and Two Leggs upon the Ground, at the same Time moved Cross; Fore- and Hinder Legg Cross; which is the Motion of Legg a Swifter Walk: For, in a Walk, and a Trott, the motion of the Horse's Legges are all One, which his Leggs makes Cross, Two in the Ayre Cross, and Two upon the Ground Cross, at the same time; Fore- Legg and Hinder-Legg Cross; and every Remove Changes his Leggs Cross; as those that were in the Ayre Cross, are now set Down; and those that were upon the Ground Cross, are now pull'd up in the Ayre Cross. And
this is the Just Motion of a Horse's Legges in a Trott. Thirdly. For an Amble, he Removes both his Leggs of a Side: As for Example; Take the Farr-Side, he removes his Fore-Legg, and his Hinder-Legg, of the same Side at one time, whilst the other Two Leggs of the Near-Side stand still; and when those Leggs are upon the Ground which he first Removed, at the same Time they are up∣on the Ground the other Side; which is, The Near-Side removes Fore-Legg and Hinder-Legg on that Side, and the other Leggs of the Farr-Side stand still. Thus an Amble Removes both his Leggs of a Side, and every Remove Changes Sides; Two of a Side in the Ayre, and Two upon the Ground at the same time. And this is a Perfect Amble. Fourthly. A Gallop is another Motion: For, in a Gallop he may Lead with which Fore-Legg you Please; but then the Hinder-Legg of the same Side must Follow it, I mean when he Gal∣lops Straight Forwards; and then this is a perfect Gallop.
But to Understand what is Meant by his Fore-Legg Leading, and his Hinder-Legg on the same side Following; that Fore-Legg is thus. As for Example: If the Farr-Fore-Legg Lead, by that Fore-Legg Leading, is meant, That Fore-Legg must be Before the other Fore-Legg alwayes, and the Hinder-Legg to Follow it on the same Side; which Hinder-Legg must alwayes be Before the other Hinder-Legg: And this is a True Gallop. But now to Shew you, that the Motion of a Gallop is thus: The Horse Liffts Both his Fore-Leggs Up at a Time, in that Action that I told you, which is one Legg before the other; and as his Fore-Leggs are Falling, I say before they Touch the Ground, his Hinder-Leggs in that Posture I formerly told you, Follow his Fore-Leggs, being once All in the Ayre at one Time; for as his Fore-Leggs are Falling, his Hinder-Leggs Moves at the same Time, and then he is All in the Ayre: For, How is it Possible else, that as a Horse is Running, he should spring Forward twice his Length, were not the Motion of a Gallop a Leap froward?
And this Description is most True both in the Motion and Posture of a Horses Leggs; when he Gallops: In a Soft and Slow Gallop it is hardly Perceived, though it be True; but in Running, where the Motion is more Violent, it is easily Perceived: for there it is Plain; you shall see all his Four Feet in the Ayre at one time, (Running being but a Swift Gallop;) for the Motion and Posture of his Leggs are all one. But you must Remember, that Galloping upon Circles, the Horse always ought to Lead with his Two Leggs, within the Turn; Fore-Legg, and Hinder-Legg within the Turn. And this is a True Gallop. Fifthly. When a Horse Runns, the Motion he makes, and the Action of his Leggs, are all One with a Gallop; only a Swifter Motion, which you may call a Swift Gallop; and a Gallop a Slow Running: And this is the Truth of the Motion of Running. Now I must Tell you of that which every body Speaks of, and no body Tells what it is: For, they say, A Horse may Gallop with the wrong Legg Before, which is Impossible. For,
if the Hinder-Legg of the same side Followes, it is a Right Gallop; so that rather it is the wrong Legg Behind. But that which they call the wrong Legg Before, is Thus a True Gallop, if that Legg which Leads Before, is Follow'd by the Hinder-Legg of the same Side; and as the Horse Falls with his two Fore-Leggs, his Hinder-Leggs Follow them, before his Fore-Leggs touch the Ground; so that at that very time all the Horses Four Leggs are in the Ayre, and it is a Leap for∣ward. That which they call the Wrong Legg Be∣fore, is this, When the Horse is upon the Mo∣tion, in the Swiftness of a Gallop, he Changes his Leggs Cross; which is the Action of a Trott, two Leggs in the Ayre, and two upon the Ground; and that is so Contrary to a Gallop, and is such a Cross Motion, as makes the Horse ready to Fall: and this is one Way of that which they call, The Wrong Legg Before. Another Way is this, That when the Horse is upon the Action of a Gallop; as I told you be∣fore, in the Swiftness of a Gallop, where he should keep alwayes Two Leggs of a side Forward, he
Changes Sides every time, Fore-Legg and Hinder-Legg of a Side; and Changing Sides every time, that is the Action of an Amble, which is Two Leggs of a Side in the Ayre, and Two Leggs of the other Side upon the Ground at the same Time, and Changing Sides every Time. This Action of an Amble, upon the Swiftness of a Gallop, Differs so much from the Action of a Gallop, as it makes the Horse ready to Fall: And these two, the Action of a Trott, and the Action of an Amble, upon the Swiftness of a Gallop, is that which their Ignorance calls, The Wrong Legg Be∣fore. It is True, that though a Horse do Gallop Right, which is his Hinder-Legg to Follow his Fore-Legg on the same Side; yet if he be not Ac∣customed to that Side, he will Gallop neither so Nimbly, nor so Fast, as with that Side he is Ac∣customed to Lead withal: For, it is Just as a Left-Handed, or a Right-Handed Man; Custom having a very great Power over Man and Beast: Else, when the Horse Gallops Forward, never so little a Gallop, his Hinder-Leggs go beyond the
Print of his Fore-Leggs, and that Legg that he Leads withal. For Example; If the Inward Fore-Legg Lead, the Inward Hinder-Leg Follows; so those are Prest, and his Outward Leggs at Liberty: So that in the Action he makes, his Outward Fore-Legg is set to the Ground first, and is at Liberty; that's one Time: And then his Inward Fore-Legg, which is Prest, and Leads, makes a Second time; that's Two: And then his Outward Hinder-Legg, which is at Liberty, is set Down; that's Three times: And then his Inward Hinder-Legg, which is Prest, and Leads, is set Down; and that makes a Fourth time. So that a Gallop Forward is 1, 2, 3, and 4. which is the just Action and Time of a Gallop Forward, and is a Leap forward. Now upon Circles, his Croup Out upon a Gallop, he must alwayes Lead with his Inward Leggs to the Turn, and strikes Over but sometimes; not so much, but that the Action of the Gallop is all One; which is 1, 2, 3, and 4. and a Leap for∣ward.
OF A TROT. A Trott is the Foundation of a Gallop: The Reason is, A Trott being Cross, and a Gal∣lop both Leggs of a Side; When you Trott him Fast, beyond the Power of a Trott, it forces him when his Inward Fore-Legg is Up, to set Down his Outward Hinder-Legg so suddenly, as to make his Inward Hinder-Legg to Follow his Inward Fore-Legg, which is a True Gallop. And thus a Trott is the Foundation of a Gallop. A Gallop is the Foundation of Terra a Terra, for the Actions of the Horses Leggs are all one; Leading with the Fore-Legg within the Turn; and Following that Legg with his Hinder-Legg within the Turn; only you Stay him a little more on the Hand in Terra a Terra, that he may go in Time. An Amble, being a Shuffling Action, I would have Banish't the Mannage; for the Horse Re∣moves both his Leggs of a Side, and Changes sides every Remove; which is so Contrary to the Mannage, as can be: But if you make him to
Gallop; whereas upon a Trott, you Trott him Fast to take his Gallop, you must upon the Amble Stay him upon the Hand to take his Gallop. A TRUE DESCRIPTION Of all the NATURAL & ARTIFICIAL MOTIONS a Horse can Make. FIrst, for Terra a Terra, the Horse alwayes Leads with the Leggs within the Turn, like a Gallop; his two Fore-Leggs Up, and as they are Falling, his two Hinder-Leggs Follow; and at that time, all his Four Leggs are in the Ayre; so that it is a Leap forward; the same upon Demy-Vaults; for it is all but the Action of Terra a Terra. Now when the Horses Croup is In, whether upon a little Gallop, or Terra a Terra, here his Hinder-Leggs are alwayes Short of his Fore-Legs,
because his Croup is In; but if it be Le petit Gal∣lop, his Action is still 1, 2, 3, & 4. because it is a Gallop. But in Terra a Terra, the Action is but two, a 1 & 2 pa: ta: like a Corvet, but only prest Forward: A Corvet is a Leap Upward, and Higher; and Terra a Terra a Leap Forward, and Lower; and his Inward Leggs that Lead more before his Outward Leggs, being another Action than a Corvet. Secondly, Corvets, a Demy-Ayre, a Groupado, a Balatado, or a Capriol, are all but a Leap Up∣ward; for all his Four Leggs are in the Ayre, as his Fore-parts are Falling. And there are no more ARTIFICIAL MOTIONS than These two; Terra a Terra, and these Ayres last-mentioned.
The Ordering of the CAVEZONE MY WAY, And the Operation and Use of it. TAke one of the Reins, which must be Long, and a little Ring at one End, and put the other End into that Ring, and so put it about the Pommel, and then put the rest Down by the Fore-Bolster of the Saddle under your Thigh; and the rest of the Rein put through the Ring on the same Side of the Cavezone, and so bring it Back again, either to be in your Hand, or Tie it to the Pommel Straight; and do the same with the other Rein in All things, as I told you with This. The Cavezone is to Stay, to Raise, and to make the Horse Leight; to Teach him to Turn, to Stop, to Firm his Neck, to Assure and Adjust his Head, and his Croup, without Offending his Mouth, or the place of the Curb; and also to Supple and Help his Shoulders, and his Leggs and Feet Before.
Therefore I would Use it to all Horses what∣soever; for they will go much Better with the Bitt alone, having their Mouth preserved, and made so Sensible, as they will be Attentive to all the Motions of the Hand: So that there is nothing for the Exercise of the Mannage like it, with a Canon A la Pignatel, the Branches A la Cone∣stable, and the Cavezone together: But then the Cavezone must be My Way, as I Told you; and that doth so Supple them, and is so Right, as it makes All Horses whatsoever, if you Work them upon their Trott, Gallop, Stopping, and Go∣ing Back, with Passeger, and Raising them as you Ought, and according to the Rules of Art: For this makes them Subject to the Sense of Feeling, which is the Sence we ought to Work on; to Feel the Hand, and to Feel the Heels, which is All; and not to the Sense of the Sight, which is the Routin of the Pillars, or the Sense of Noise, which is the Routin of Hearing, but only the Sense of Feeling, and only of those two Places, which is the Mouth and the Sides. Seeing is all the Art when they Teach Horses Tricks, and
Gambals, like Bankes's Horse; and though the Ig∣norant Admire them, yet those Persons shall ne∣ver Teach a Horse to Go Well in the Mannage. There are many Things in the Sense of Feeling, which are to be Done with so great Art, Witt, and Judgement, and require so great Experience of the several Dispositions of Horses, that it is not every Mans Case to be an Horse-man, as it is to make a Dogg or a Horse Dance: But I am Con∣tented to let the Ignorant Talk, and Think what they will, for I am not Concerned with their Folly. The Cavezon's inward Rein tyed short to the Pommel My Way, is Excellent to give a Horse an Apuy, and Settle him upon the Hand, and make him Firm, and his Head Steady: So it is Excellent for a Horse that is too Hard on the Hand; for the Cavezon's Rein being always within the Turn tyed very Straight to the Pommel, keeps him from Resting too much on the Bitt, which makes him Leight, and Firm on the Hand. The Inward Cavezone's Rein tied short to the Pommel, is Excellent also to Supple a Horse's
Shoulders, which is the Best thing that can be; for it gives Apuy where there is none, and where there is too much Apuy, it takes it away, and Supples his Shoulders extreamly, which is an Ex∣cellent thing; it also makes a Horse Gallop very Right, with his Leggs, as also his Leggs very Right for Terra a Terra; for it Lengthens his Leggs within the Turn, and Shortens his Leggs with∣out the Turn, which is Right as it should be. So it is Good for Working his Shoulders in all Kindes, and his Croup last, Legg and Rein of a Side, as also to Work Legg and Rein Contrary, in all Kinds of several Lessons. And this is the Ra∣rety of Tying the inward Cavezone's Rein short to the Pommel. The Cavezone (My Way) works Powerfully upon the Nose, and so hath the greater Pull to give the Horse the greater Ply and Bent, being the part the Farthest off from your Hand. And this Ply, or Bent, is from his Nose to his Withers, which is to Bend his Neck, and Works too on the Shoulders, this is to Bent into the Turn; it Pulls his Head down too, and makes him Look
into the Turn; his Head being pulled Down when he is Prest, puts him more upon the Hanches. This is done with the Inward Rein of the Cavezone pulled Hard, and Straight, and so Tied to the Pommel, which keeps it at a Stay, and is Stronger than ones Hand, and hath the same Operation as I told you Before; but when it is Tied to the Pommel, it still keeps the Right Bent of the Horse, and then I Work upon the Bitt, either with the Reins Sepa∣rated with Both my Hands, or else in my Left Hand only when he is thus Bent: When I would Passeger him, his Croup in, Large or Narrow, then I Help with the Outward Rein of the Bridle; be∣cause it is upon the Action of a Trott, and that is Cross; and therefore must have his Leggs Free without the Turn, to Lap over his Inward Leggs; and when he is thus Tied with the Inward Cave∣zones Rein, if I would have him to go Le petit Gallop, his Croup In, or Terra a Terra, then I Help with the Inward Rein of the Bridle, my Hand on the Outside of his Neck, and my Knuckles towards his Neck, to put him on the Outside of the Turn: but Le petit Gallop sometimes on the
Inside, because it is a Gallop, as the Outward Rein puts him on the Inside of the Turn; all this is with his Croup In. If to Trott or Gallop D'une piste, Large or Narrow Circles, the Inward Cavezone's Rein still Tyed to the Pommel, then I Help with the inward Rein, and inward Legg, or outward Rein to Narrow him Before: If the Piroite, with the outward Rein; if Demy-Voltoes upon Passadoes, the outward Rein; For all Leaps, the outward Rein; for Corvets and Demy-Ayres, the outward Rein; for Corvets Backward, the out∣ward Rein; for Corvets Forward, the outward Rein; for Terra a Terra, in his Length, the inward Rein: And so Passadoes, the inward Rein. So, Stop∣ping, and Going Back, the inward Rein. All these with the Inward Rein of the Cavezone Tyed straight to the Pommel, which is the Best thing in the World, and then Help with the several Reins of the Bridle, as Occasion offers you, and as I have Told you for all these several things. So that the Inward Cavezon's Rein Tyed to the Pommel, or else in your Hand, is, For All things whatsoever; Croup, In or Out; Trott, Gallop, Passager; all Ayres, Stop∣ping,
Going Back, Passadoes; or any thing in the World that is in the Mannage: For without it no Horse can be Perfectly Drest, in any Kind, to have the Ply of his Neck, and to Supple his Shoulders, to Look into the Turn, to have his Leggs go Right, as they Ought to do in all Actions; his Body rightly Bent, to be part of the Circle he goes in, and Bent that Way. So it is All in All for every Thing, every Ayre, and every Action the Horse can make. The Cavezone being upon the Nose, preserves the Horse's Mouth, and Barrs, and place of the Curb; and it is so Effectual, as it will Dress a Horse without the Bitt, which the Bitt shall ne∣ver Do without the Cavezone; for the Barrs and the Curb are too Tender: Besides, the Reins of the Bitt can never give him the Ply, nor Bend him Enough, nor Supple his Shoulders, because it is so Near you, and Works upon the Barrs and the Curb; which cannot Bend him possibly so, as that upon his Nose, because the Branches of the Bitt are so Slow, and the Barrs and the Curb so Low, that there is not Room enough to Pull as with a Cavezone, that is so much Higher; and hath so
much Room to Pull, and pulls and Plyes him, all from his Nose to his Shoulders, when the other can do little more than Pull his Musle, and his Head, and goes no further: The Cavezone's Rein within is for every Thing, the Bitt otherwise. To Supple his Shoulders, you must Help with the Outward Rein, and to Stay his Outward Shoulder with the Inward Rein; which hath not near the Force the Cavezone's Rein hath for every Thing: Therefore Use it in All things, and with all Horses, Colts, Half-Drest Horses, Ready Horses, Young, Middle-Age, Old, and every Horse, and all Horses; for there is no Dressing Horses Without it, and with it you will Dress all Horses whatsoever, and of what Disposition soever; Weak, Middle-Strength, or Strong, and Reduce all Vices with it; and when you Use the Bitt, they will go much the Better, for having been wrought Continually with the Cavezone.
Observations about the Cavezone, about the Ply, or Bending the Horse's Shoulders into the Turn; And in What Place the Cheeks of the Bitt then Are, or Where they Rest. WHen the Inward Rein of the Cavezone is Tyed Hard to the Pommel, and you Pull the Inward Rein of the Bridle, his Neck Bends so much into the Turn, whether upon Large Circles, his Croup Out, or his Croup In, as then the Cheek of the Bitt, that is next the Turn, is Be∣yond the Inside of his Neck or Shoulder, and the Outward Cheek, removed according to the distance of the Cheeks, which is much more than the midst of his Neck: and this Ply Supples his Neck and Shoul∣ders Extreamly, makes him Look into the Turn; Head, Body, Leggs, and all going most Justly, as they Ought to Do, whether his Croup In, or Out. And this is the Quintessence of the Man∣nage; and without this no Horse can be Drest Perfectly, or can Go Justly in any Kind, either
upon the Ground, or in Ayres; nor possibly do any thing Right upon the Circles, or Voltoes with∣out it. I Told you this was, with the Cavezone, the inward Rein Tyed so short to the Pommel, as Pulls in his Head and Neck so much, that it makes the inward Cheek of the Bitt very much within his Neck, on the Inside of the Turn; because the Cavezone Works on his Nose, and not on his Barrs, or Curb, at all; and that's the Reason the Inward Cheek of the Bitt comes so much beyond his Neck on the Inside of the Turn. OF THE OPERATION OF THE CAVEZONE. THe Cavezone is another Business than the Bitt; for the Bitt Works upon the Barrs, and the Curb, and hath two Cheeks where∣unto
unto the Reins are Fastned on both Sides the Horses Neck; and the Bitt is in his Mouth, and the Curb is under his Chin; and these Low, especi∣ally the Branches: But the Cavezone is upon his Nose, which is much Higher, and Works only there, without Mouth or Curb. Well then, the Cavezone being Tyed according to My Fashion, though it be to the Girths, if you Pull it Cross his Neck, with an Oblique Line, your Hand on the Outside of the Turn, your Knuckles towards his Neck, it Pulls his Head Up a little, and Works the same Effect, for the Bending his Neck, as the Bitt doth, but much more; because you have a greater Pull, the Cavezone being upon his Nose; and, being further off you than the Bitt, he is Bent the more; because you have more power to Pull. Consider, that when the Inward Rein of the Cavezone is Tyed to the Pommel, it is the same Oblique Line that the other was, when you had it in your Hand, only a little Shorter, and hath the same Operation in every Thing, and pulls up his Head a little; but now, if you have it in your Hand,
and hold it on the Inside of the Turn, and pull it Hard, and Low, then you pull Down the Horses Head, and he brings in his Outward Shoulder, which is good in Large Circles, either upon Trotting, or Galloping, or upon Passager, for the Reasons I Told you before; so that the Ca∣vezone, and the Bitt, Differ so much in their Operative Working, that when you Pull the Cavezone a little High, it puts Up the Horses Head; and when you Pull the Bitt High, and Hard, it Pulls Down his Head; and when you hold the Cavezone Low, and on the Inside of the Turn, and pull it Hard, it Pulls Down the Horses Head; and if you hold your Hand Low with the Bridle, it gives his Head Liberty, for the Reasons aforesaid. Now you see, that the Cavezone, and the Bitt, Differ in their Working very much; so great is the Difference betwixt the Nose and the Mouth. It is True, that the Inward Cavezone's Rein tyed to the Pommel, is so Rare a Thing, and so Ef∣fectual, as you may almost Work as you List, with the Bridle; the Cavezone still doing the Bu∣siness;
and when one comes to Work with the Bridle alone, one may Easily be Deceived; ex∣cept he hath all those Considerations, the Excel∣lency of the Cavezone, thus Tied, may Deceive him, when he comes to Work with the Bitt alone. There are Three several Helps with the In∣ward Cavezone's Rein in your Hand: The first Help, is, To pull In his outward Shoulder; the second Help, with it, is, To pull in his inward Shoulder; and the third Help, with it, is, To Stay his Shoulders. Curious and True Observations about the Working of the Bitt Alone, which being not Truly Con∣sidered, no Man can Work with the Bitt as he Ought to do. BUt to Work only with the Reins of the Bri∣dle, which Work upon the Bitt, is another Business; for now I consider what the Bitt is,
which is another Engine, that Works upon the Horses Barrs, and the Curb; and the two Bran∣ches are like Leavers to Work on those two Pla∣ces: as the Reins pull the Cheeks, either the in∣ward Cheek, or the outward Cheek; The Barrs, and the place of the Curb, is much Lower than his Nose, on which the Cavezone Works; and the Rings where the Reins of the Bridle are Fastned, at the Ends of the Cheeks, are much Lower than the Barrs, or the Curb; but as the Cheeks are pull'd by the Reins of the Bridle, so doth the Bitt Work upon the Barrs, or the Curb, accor∣dingly. As for Example; On the Right Hand, the Reins separated in both your Hands, if you pull the inward Rein from his Neck on the inside, then you pull the Inward Cheek into the Turn, and then the Mouth of the Bitt goes Out, and Pres∣ses the Horse on his Barrs, without the Turn; and makes the Horse Look Out of the Turn, and Presses the Curb on the Outside, and must of Ne∣cessity do so; for when the Cheeks are pulled In, the Mouth of the Bitt must go out: For of
what Side soever the Cheeks are pulled, the Mouth of the Bitt goes still contrary to the Cheeks, and must do so in all Reason; the Bitt be∣ing an Instrument that is Made so to do, and it can∣not be Otherwise. The same Operation it hath for the Left Hand: if you pull the Inward Rein from his Neck, the Mouth goes still Contrary to the Cheek; the Cheek goes Inward, and the Mouth goes Outward, and the Horses Leggs are Prest on the Inside of the Turn; therefore in Terra a Terra, the Reins Separated in both my Hands, I pull the Inward Rein beyond his Neck, my Knuckles towards his Neck, which pulls the Inward Cheek to me, and then the Mouth goes Contrary; that is, The Cheek is put from the Turn, and the Mouth bends in∣to the Turn, and the Horse Looks into the Turn as he should do, and the Horses Leggs prest on the Outside of the Turn, on the Left Hand: The Inward Rein pull'd thus, hath the same Opera∣tion; your Hand being on the Outside of his Neck, and your Knuckles towards his Neck, pulls the Inward Cheek from the Turn, and the
Mouth of the Bitt goes into the Turn, alwayes Contrary, and cannot be Otherwise; it Presses the Horse on the Inside of the Barrs, and on the Inside of the Curb, and so Looks into the Turn; and his Leggs are Prest on the Outside of the Turn, which is Proper for Terra a Terra. And thus Working with the Bitt, Produces many Ex∣cellent things, for Terra a Terra, as I have parti∣cularly set down afore. OF THE Working with the Outward Rein of the Bridle. NOw let us Consider the Working with the Outward Rein of the Bridle, What Ope∣ration that hath on the Barrs, Curb, and Cheeks; Which Cheeks Governs Barrs and Curb: As for Example; Going on the Right Hand, I turn my Hand on the Inside of his Neck, this pulls the Outward Rein; pulling the Outward Rein, pulls the Outward Cheek to me; then of Necessity it
must put the Mouth of the Bitt From me, and Presses the Horse on the Outside of the Barrs, which is on the Outside of the Turn, and so pres∣ses him on the Out-side of the Curb, and so the Horse must Look on the Outside of the Turn; and all this is, Because the Cheeks are pull'd to you on the Outside; therefore the Mouth of the Bitt must go From you; still Contrary, and never Fails, nor Cannot: For, it is impossible it should work Otherwise; but it is True, That it Supples, and brings in his Shoulders. The Reason is this, The Horses Leggs are Prest on the Inside of the Turn, and then he must needs bring in his Shoulders, though he is Prest to Look Out of the Turn. The same Thing is for the Left Hand, and the same Reasons for every Thing, working with the Outward Rein of the Bridle. Thus the Bitt and Reins are truly Anatomized, which never was be∣fore: The Outward Rein doth Well for the Piroite, and so for Demy-Voltoes upon Passadoes.
OF THE The Working the Bitt when the Horse goes Straight Forward. WHen the Horse goes straight Forward, either Trotting, Galloping, or upon Corvets, if you Hold your Hand Low, it Presses more upon the Barrs, than the Curb, because the Cheeks of the Bitt are not pull'd so much to you, or to the Neck of the Horse; and therefore the Curb is not Straightned so much, and so the Horse is at more Liberty, and his Head a little Higher: But when you Hold your Bridle-Hand a little Higher, and pull it up to you, then the Curb works more, and pulls Down the Horses Head; the Reason is plain; for when you pull the Cheeks Hard, and Up, then you pull the Mouth of the Bitt Down; and so the Horses Head, because it works hard on the Curb: For it is most True, That when the Cheeks of the Bitt are pull'd Up, the Mouth goes Down, and Straightens the Curb, the Hand being High; and when the Cheeks are
not pull'd Hard, then the Curb is Slackt, and the Horses Head at more Liberty; for the pressure of the Barrs and Curb, Depends upon the Cheeks; for when the Cheeks goe Up, the Mouth of the Bitt goes Down; and when the Cheeks of the Bitt goe Down, the Mouth of the Bitt goes Up. This is the Operation, and the Effects, of the Bitt. Of Another Operation of the Bitt. I Must tell you, That the Cheeks lie Slope to you, and the Reins more Slope, before they come to your Hand; so the Bitt cannot Press very much on the Horse, being so farr from the Perpendicular-Line: and as the Cheeks are pull'd Up, the Mouth goes Down; and as the Cheeks goe Down, the Mouth goes Up; alwayes Con∣trary. The Perpendicular-Line, is, When you Thrust
your Hand Forward just Perpendicular, to the End of the Cheeks, and so pull it up Hard, and it Works extreamly upon the Curb, which is to pull his Head Down. This I never Use; but thought fit to Tell you what it is, and the Ef∣fects of it. OF THE Operation of the two Reins Separated in both Hands. I Told you, the Inward Rein prest the Horse on the Outside of the Turn, and made him Look into the Turn. And I told you, the Out∣ward Rein prest the Horse on the Inside of the Turn, and made him Look out of the Turn; and for Passager, he must be prest on the Inside, and therefore to be Help't with the Outward Rein: But to make him Look into the Turn, I Help with the Inward Rein too; So I Help with both Reins in Passager; the Inward Rein to make him
Look into the Turn, and the Outward Rein to bring In his Outward Shoulder, and to Press him on the Inside, for many Reasons that I have al∣ready Exprest. TO Work with the Bridle in the Left Hand Only. YOur Little Finger Separating the Reins, the Left Rein lies under the Little Finger, and the Right Rein lies above the Little Finger; so that for the Left Hand, the Hand on the Con∣trary side of his Neck, the Knuckles towards his Neck, you pull the Little Finger to you, and that Straightens the Left Rein: And for the Right Rein, because that lies above the Little Finger, your Hand on the Outside, your Knuckles to∣wards his Neck: Here you must Bend your Hand Inward, and then your Little Finger Slacker; and this Works the Right Rein, as the Left Rein
the Little Finger Straightned, and the Ring-Fin∣ger Slack't; and because the Horses Body should not Rise too High, keep the Bridle-Hand Low, and that will put him upon the Hanches: And this is the Truth and Quintessence of the Bridle-Hand, for the Inward Rein of either side. OF THE Operation of the Outward Rein of the Bridle. FOr the Right Hand, you must turn up your Little Finger; and as you put it up, put it a little on the Inside of the Turn; but you must bring in your outward Shoulder at the same time: And for the Left Hand, turn up your Little Finger, and your Thumb down. as you did before; and at the same time put it on the Inside of the Turn, and bring in your outward Shoulder moderately.
THE Reins being both in your Left Hand, HOW To Work them Both at One Time for PASSAGER. FOr the Right Hand, Put your Hand on the Outside: and for the Left Hand, put your Hand without his Neck on the Inside of the Turn, and that Pulls and Works, the outward Rein. So now you see, on both Hands, How you can per∣fectly Work both Reins at one time, which is the Quintessence of Passager; the Reasons I have told you afore. OF THE Ʋse of the Two Reins of the Bridle. YOu must Help with the Outward Rein of the Bridle in the Piroite, because his Fore-parts
are Straightned, and his Hinder-parts at Li∣berty; so you must Help with the Outward Rein of the Bridle for Demy-Voltoes, and in Pas∣sadoes by a Wall; because his Fore-parts are Straightned, and his Hinder-parts at Liberty, be∣ing but Half a Piroite; so you must Help with the Outward Rein of the Bridle, in Corvets Back∣ward upon a Straight Line, his Fore-parts being Straightned; and his Hinder-parts at Liberty, be∣cause they Lead: So you must Help with the Outward Rein of the Bridle, in all Leaps, Crou∣padoes, Balotadoes, and Capriols; either Forward, or upon Voltoes; because his Fore-parts are Straight∣ned, and his Croup at Liberty, or else he could not Leap. For Terra a Terra, you must Help with the Inward Rein of the Bridle; because then his Hin∣der-parts are Straightned, and his Fore-parts In∣larged; so with the Inward Rein for Demy-Voltoes, because his Hinder-parts are Straightned, and his Fore-parts Inlarged: But in Corvets upon Vol∣toes, the Outward Rein, because his Hinder-parts are Subjected, and his Fore-parts In∣larged,
and so forward; in Corvets with the Out∣ward Rein, because there his Hinder-parts are Subjected, and his Fore-parts are Inlarged, and at Liberty to go Forward, because they Lead. Observations How to Hold the Reins of the Bridle. WHensoever you Hold your Hand Even with the Pommel, it Slackens the Curb; if in the Middle of the Pommel, it is Slacken'd more; if upon his Neck, it is Slackned most, because it is Farthest from the Perpendicular Line; and the Higher you hold your Bridle-Hand above the Pommel, the Curb is Straightned the more; be∣cause you can pull Harder, and go Neerer, by that means, to the Perpendicular Line. The Hand should never be above two or three Fingers above the Pommel, a little Forwarder, and Easie, but Firm; for there is nothing makes a Horse go more of the Hanches, than a Light Hand, and
Firm; for when he hath nothing to Rest on Be∣fore, he will Rest Behind; for, he will Rest on something; and when he Rests Behind, that's upon the Hanches: A Leight Hand is the greatest Secret we Have; but there is no Horse can be Firm of the Hand, except he Suffers the Curb, and O∣bey it. Here ends the Quintessence of Working with the Cavezone, and the Bridle. MY OPINION for SPURRS. THe Spurrs ought rather to be Long-Neckt, than Short Neckt; because with Long-Neckt Spurrs, the Rider makes less Motion, either in Correcting, or Helping his Horse, which a good Horse-man should alwayes Do; for he that is the Quietest on Horse-Back, is the Greatest Ma∣ster; for ill Horse-Men cannot sit Still on Horse-Back.
The Fashion of the Spurrs should be A la Co∣nestable, the Wansnot too Long, and Compas'd, and Black Sanguine; the Buckles and Rowels of Silver, not Burnisht; because they do not Rust as Iron, and therefore Ranckles not a Horses sides so much. The Rowels should contain Six Points, for that Hits a Horse Best; Five Points are too Few: And the Rowells should be as Sharp as possible can be; for it is much Better to let him Bleed Freely, than with Dull Spurrs to raise Knobs and Bunches on his Side, which might give him the Farsey; but Bleeding can do him no Hurt, when Dull Spurrs may: Besides, there is nothing doth a Horse so much Good, as to make him Smart, when you Correct him: There is, therefore, nothing like Sharp Spurrs, being used Discreetly, to make all Horses whatsoever Know them, Fear them, and Obey them; for until they Suffer, with Obedience, the Spurrs, they are but Half Horses, and never Drest. The Shambriere is too Dull a thing; and so are all Whips, Hand-whips, and all; Whips of Wyre fetch Blood, but not in the Right place,
as Spurrs do. A Bulls-Pisle is good for a Colt, before you wear Spurrs, but afterward it is too Dull; a Smart Rod is much Better than any of them; but the Spurrs beyond all. Of the Several CORRECTIONS, AND HELPS with the SPURRS. FIrst, the Correction of the Spurrs being a Pu∣nishment comes After a Fault is Commit∣ted, either to put In his Buttock or Croup, when he puts it Out; or else to put it Out, when he puts it too much In, when he should be Entier; this is to be done with one Spur, and sometimes with both Spurrs: He is to be Corrected with both Spurrs when he is Resty, and will not go Forward; or to Settle him on the Hand, when he Joggles his Head, then both the Spurrs will
do him Good; or when he is Apprehensive, and Ombrageux, the Spurrs may do him good; or that he offers to Bite or Strike, then the Spurrs will Divert him; or that he Rises too High, or Boltes, then give him the Spurrs; when he is falling Half-way down, then the Spurrs will Cure him; but if you give him the Spurrs, just when he is Rising, then it may bring him Over, if he will not Advance, which is to Rise before; then a good Stroke with both the Spurrs, will make him Rise; if he be a Dull Jade, then smartly to give him the Spurrs is good; or that he is Lazy, or Slack of his Mannage, then to give him the Spurrs Quickens him. And so the Spurrs are for many things as a Correction, and therefore you must give them as Strongly, and Sharply, still as you can, with all your Strength; and have very Sharp Spurrs too, that he may Feel them to the Purpose, so that Blood may follow; for otherwise it is not a Cor∣rection: You must Strike the Horse always some three or four Fingers behind the Girthes, and sometimes towards the Flancks, if it he be to put
In his Croup: And, believe it, there is nothing like the Spurrs; for, What makes him Sensible to the Heel, but the Spurrs? Therefore Use them, and Use them until he Obey you; for no Horse can be a Ready-Horse, until he Obeys the Heel. But, Remember you do not Dull him with the Spurrs; for then he will not Care for them no more than a Stone, or a Block; therefore you must give them Sharply, when you give them; but give them but Seldom, and upon Just Occasion. When he Maliciously Rebell's against What you would have him Do, leave not Spurring of him, and Soundly, until he Obey you: And when he Obeys you in the least Kind, Leight off, and send him to the Stable, and the next Morning Try him again; and if he Obey in the least Kind, Cherish him, and make Much of him; and Forgive him many Faults the next Morning, that he may see you have Mercy as well as Justice, and that you can Reward, as well as Punish.
And now you see, Corrections are Better than Helps, and of what great Efficacy the Spurrs timely and discreetly given, are for the Dressing of Horses; for there is but the Hand and the Heels, and so the Spurrs are Half the Business in Dressing Horses; only the Hand hath the Prehe∣minence: Though there be two Spurrs, and but one Bridle, because the Horse hath but one Mouth, and two Sides; yet, if the Horse be not Settled upon the Hand, you cannot make him Sub∣ject to the Heels. But the Correction of the Spurrs is so Necessary, and Effectual, as no Horse can be made a Ready-Horse without them; and there∣fore Esteem them Highly, next setling a Horse upon the Hand; which must be First. All Helps are to Prevent Faults, and to go before Faults; as Corrections come after Faults, to Punish for Offending. The Spurrs are to be used as a Help thus; When the Horse goes Terra a Terra, your outward Legg close to him when he Slacks, turn your Heel to him to Pinch him with the Spurrs; which you may easily do, even to Blood, and no Body perceive it; for that
ought to be done Neatly, and Delicately, be∣cause the Spurrs are a Neat, and most Excellent Help, and the Quintessence of all Helps in the Mannage; and if the Horse Suffer and Obey this, whilst you stay him on the Hand, you may say, He is an Excellent Horse. This Quickens him, and puts him Forward; but yet let me Tell you, Though this is an ex∣cellent Help for Terra a Terra, yet it is not so good a Help for Terra a Terra, as it is for all Ayres; either to Pinch him with both the Spurrs, or but with one: And the Reason, is, Because it makes him Croup more, and puts him Together on his Hinder-parts, than puts him Forward; and therefore more proper for all manner of Ayres, than for Terra a Terra, though very good for both. And thus much for that Excellent Help with the Spurrs, call'd Pinching. There is another Help with the Spurrs, which I call a Help, because it is not so Violent as a Correction, and is not so Pressing as Pinching; but
between Spurring and Pinching; And that is thus: When the Horse Gallops his Croup In, or Terra a Terra, if he Obeys not the Legg enough, being close to him, or very near it, then make the Mo∣tion with your Legg, as if you did Spurr him, and Hit him with your Spurr, with as gentle a Touch as can be; and no more than to let him Feel it a little; and this is the Gentlest of all things, with the Spurrs, which makes him Obey the Spurrs, and puts him Forward, and is excel∣lent for Terra a Terra, or Le petit Gallop his Croup In, and much Better than Pinching; for it puts him Forward, and makes him Obey the Spurrs at the same time; but it is not good for Ayres; for there he should Leap Upwards, and go Forward, but very Little; and therefore Pinching is Best for Ayres, because it Raises his Croup, and therefore goes not Forward; and that little Touch with the Spur, like Spurring, is good for Terra a Terra, and Le petit Gallop his Croup In, because it puts him Forward, and makes him Obey the Spur. If your Horse understands this Correction, and
the two several Helps with the Spurrs, being made Sensible to him, you may be well Assured he will Need none of them after a while, but be so Sen∣sible, as he will go Freely, and Obey you Wil∣lingly, only with the Calf of your Legg; for the Help of the Thighes is a Ridiculous conceit: for indeed, there is no Helps but the Spurrs, and the Calf of the Leggs, that the Horse can possibly Feel. OF THE SECRET HELPS OF THE CALF of the LEGG and SPƲRRS. WHen you are Stiff in the Hamms, which is putting Down your Heel, then the Calf of the Legg comes to the Horse, but the Heel is removed from him. When you Bend in the Hamms, which is to put Down your Toes, then the Calf of the Legg is removed from him, but
the Heel comes to him. These are as great Truths, as they are Secrets. There is nothing in the world makes Horses Resty and Vitious many several Wayes like the Spurrs, given out of time; and nothing in the world Dresses Horses perfectly, like the Spurrs given in time. Now you have the Perfection of the Hand and the Heels, which is the only thing to Dress Horses perfectly withal, and nothing else. OF THE ROD. THe Rod we Use seldome for a Correction, but for Helps, and that many times more for Grace, than Use; for one Rod will serve us half a Year: 'Tis the Hand and the Heels that Dresses Horses, and nothing else. The Helps with the Rod, are not so good for Soul∣diers Horses, for they should go only with the Hand
and the Heel; for the Sword must be in your Right Hand, and not the Rod: But you may Use it, to Shew it still on the contrary side on which he Goes, or hold it up with a Grace at every Change. For Terra a Terra with the Rod. On the Right Hand, hold Up your Rod High, with a Grace, and give him somtimes a Blow on the Shoulders, if there be need; and sometimes a Blow over the Shoulders upon the Croup, if he Requires it. For Terra a Terra on the Left Hand, hold the Rod up High, or put it to his Flanck, with a Grace, and hold it there during his Voltoes, or give him a Blow with it on the Flank, or on the Shoulder, if he requires it. Use the same Helps with the Rod, upon Demy-Voltoes, or Passadoes: For the Piroite, hold it on the Contrary side still.
For Corvets with the Rod. On the Right Hand in Voltoes, hold the Rod somewhat Short, and Help him cross the Neck, with a Grace, sometimes Touching him, and sometimes not; and a good Blow now and then, if he Requires it: On the Left Hand in Corvets, Help him on the Right Shoulder, with a Grace, and a just time. Another Help with the Rod in Corvets, is, To hold the Rod a little Long, and to Whisk, and Shake it Forwards and Backwards, with your Arm up, but not Straight, rather Bowing a little in the Elbow: When you go Forward, the Horse's right side to the Wall; there is no Help with the Rod more Graceful, than to Strike the Wall perpetually with the Rod.
TO Help with the Rod in all Manner of Leaps. TO Whisk the Rod Forward, and Back∣ward, is a Graceful Help, but it Forces a Horse a little too Forward, until he be Used to it. To Help the Horse with the Rod, not Over your Shoulder, but Over the Bent of your Arm, your Arm from your Body, and a little Bowed, so that the Point of the Rod falls in the middle of his Croup, is a graceful Help, but somewhat dif∣ficult to do. But the best and surest Help, though not so Graceful, is, To turn the Rod in your Hand, the Point toward the Horses Croup, and Help him so every time, and in time, one Stroke only; but if he Raises not his Croup enough, then Help him De tout temps, which is with two or three Strokes together, in Time: And this is the Surest Help.
If your Horse be very Leight Behind, which few are, then Help him only before with the Rod, and in Time. If you would make your Horse only Croup with his Hinder-parts, and not strike out, then Help him on the middle of his Croup; if you would have him strike Out, then Help him with your Rod, on the setting on of his Dock: And if you would have him put both his Hinder-Leggs under his Belly, then Strike him with the Rod a little above the Gambrels. So these three seve∣ral Helps with the Rod, makes your Horse to Croop, to Strike out, and to put his Hinder-Leggs under his Belly. But there is no Help with the Rod, like Helping him with two Rods; one to Raise him before, and the other Rod to Help him under his Belly; which puts him so much upon the Hanches, as nothing is like it, or near it, upon Corvets, when he is Tyed Short, my New Way, at the Single Pillar.
OF THE VOICE. THe Voice is Used three manner of Ways; Either as a Correction, by Threatning; or as a Help, to Incourage the Horse; or as a Courtship to him, by Flattering of him; which all Three, we seldom or never Use: For it is not the Sense of Hearing, or Sight; but the Sense of Touch, and only the Hand, and the Heels, that Dresses Horses perfectly. OF THE TONGUE. THe Help of the Tongue is an Excellent Help to Incourage, and put a Horse Together, either in Terra a Terra; but especially in all Ayres, nothing Better.
How Horses are to be REWARDED & PUNISHED: AND THAT FEAR doth Much; LOVE, Little. IT is Impossible to Dress any Horse, but first he must Know, and Acknowledge me to be his Master, by Obeying me: That is, He must Fear me, and out of that Fear, Love me, and so Obey me. For it is Fear makes every Body Obey, both Man and Beast; and therefore see that he Fears you, and then it is for his own sake he Obayes you; because else he would be Pu∣nished: And Love is not so sure a Hold, for there I Depend upon his Will; but when he Fears me, he Depends upon Mine; and that's a Ready-Horse: But if I Depend upon his Will, that's a Ready-Man. Therefore Love doth no Good, but Fear doth All: And so let them Fear you, which is the Ground of Dressing all Horses whatsoever. And this is the Counsel of a Friend.
Pluvinel, and most of the Great Masters in Horse-manship, Praise alwayes Gentleness, and Flatteries, and making much of Horses, either by Clapping, Stroking them, or speaking Flatter∣ingly unto them, or giving them some Reward to Eat: And Pluvinel sayes, One ought to be a Prodigal in Caressing, and making much of them, and a Niggard in Corrections, and careful not to Offend them; and that there is no other way to Dress Horses but this. But some Horse-men Ne∣ver make much of them, or very Rarely; neither Abroad, before they get Up, when they Ride them, nor when they Light, nor in the Stable; and yet these Horses go Well. They do not Threaten them with the Voyce, or ever Speak to them, and no doubt but they do it on Purpose to keep them in Subjection, and Fear of them: For Familiarity breeds Contempt; and Curtesie doth no Good, but makes them Presume; and makes them Diligent still to Obey. Neither do they Use the Rod at all; no more do I; for one Rod will serve me almost a Year; nor Use the Voyce, but a good Hand, and good
Heels, which only Dresses Horses; and seldom lets a Fault escape without Punishment. When they have Corrected them one Morning, it may be they will Spur them the next Morning; but otherwise never Correct them without a Fault; and if they make none, they are not Punisht; and there's their Reward. Certainly this may be good for Dressing of Horses. For my part, when they do Well, I Cherish and Reward them; and when they do ill, I Pu∣nish them; for, Hope of Reward, and Fear of Pu∣nishment, Governs this whole World; not only Men, but Horses: And thus they will Chuse the Reward, and Shun the Punishment. They are Punisht with nothing but the Spurrs; for all Whipps, even of Wyre, Chambrieres, or Bulls-Pisles, are Toyes. The Rod is more for Grace than Use; but Reward, or no Reward, is nothing at all in Comparison of the Art of Riding: For, let an Ignorant Fellow (which most are for any thing I can perceive) Flatter his Horse, and not Punish him; or Punish him, and not Flatter him; or Punish and Flatter him; yet I will not
Flatter the Rider, but will tell you, He shall Spoil your Horse, let him do what he will; be∣cause he wants Art. Opposition in Horses AGAINST the RIDER, A Signe of STRENGTH and SPIRIT. BE not Discouraged if your Horse do Oppose you, for it shews Strength, Spirit, and Sto∣mack; and a Horse having all those, cannot chuse but be made a Ready-Horse, if he be under the Discipline of an Understanding Hand, and Knowing Heels. When a Horse doth not Rebel, it shews Weakness, and faintness of Spirit, and no Courage; and where Nature is so much Wanting, it is Hard for Art to Supply it: But truly I never knew any Horse in my Life, but before he was
perfectly Drest, would Rebel, and Extreamly too, and a great while before he would go Freely; but a little still, against his will, until he be per∣fectly Drest. Certainly there is no Horse but will Strive at the first in the Dressing, to have his own will, rather than to Obey your will; nor doth any Horse love Subjection, nor any other Creature, until there is no Remedy, and then they Obey; and the Custom of Obedience makes them Ready-Horses: They will Strive all the Wayes possibly they can, to be Free, and not Subjected; but when they see it will not be, then they Yield, and not before. So they Deserve no Thanks for their Obedi∣ence. No man in the World, no, not the Wisest, if he were put in the Form of a Horse, with his Supreme Understanding, could possibly find out more subtle Wayes to Oppose a Man, than a Horse will; nay, nor near so many, I dare say: Whence I conclude, That the Horse must know you are his Master; that is, He must Fear you, and then he will Love you for his own Sake:
Fear is the sure Hold; for Fear doth All things in this World: Love, little; and therefore let your Horse Fear you. What makes a Horse go by ROTE, or ROUTINE. THat which makes a Horse go by Rote, or Routine, is absolutely his Eyes; and there∣fore I would Advise you, to have as few Marks as you can in the Mannage: That is, No Pil∣lars but in the Out-side, and there but one for My Way upon Ayres, and that will not Fix his Sight; so that then he will Attend the Hand and the Heel: Nor too near the Walls, for then his Eyes will Attend them; Nor to make him go in One Place Alwayes; for there his Eyes will make him go by Rote again: but several pla∣ces will make him Attend the Hand and the Heel. And this way, and no other, will Cure him of going by Rote.
THAT A Horse of Three Years Old is too Young for the MANNAGE. A Young Horse of Three Years Old, is but a Gristle, and easily Spoyl'd; and besides, his Understanding is not comn to him; so that Wanting Understanding, and being so Weak, you must have Patience to stay Three Years more at the Least, until he hath Both: Stops, and going Back, will Strain his Back, and Spoil him: so that I would rather have a Horse of Six, Se∣ven, or Eight Years old, so he be Sound and not Vitious, than a Horse of Three Years Old; for I can force him, and make him a Ready-Horse in three Months. But some will say Boyes learn Best, and so Coltes: I Answer, No; For if men could be Beaten to it, as Boyes are, they would Learn much Better, and Sooner: but I can Force my Horses of those Years; and having both Under∣standing, and Strength, they will and must of Necessity learn much Sooner and Better.
How a Man should SIT PERFECTLY ON HORSE-BACK. BEfore he Mounts his Horse, he must see every Thing in order about the Horse; which is done in an Instant, without Peering and Prying about every thing; as they say, Pour Faire l'en∣tendu. When he is in the Saddle, (for I suppose most Men know how to get Up) he must Sit down in the Saddle upon his Twist, and not on his Buttocks; though most think Nature made those to Sit on, but not on Horse-Back. Being Plac'd upon his Twist, in the middle of the Saddle, advancing towards the Pommel of the Saddle, as much as he can; leaving a hand∣ful of Space between his Hinder-parts and the Cantle, or l'Arson of the Saddle, his Leggs being straight Down, as if he were on Foot, his Knees and Thighes turned inwards to the Saddle; hold∣ing
both of them Fast, as if they were Glewed to the Saddle, (for a Horse-man hath nothing but those two with the Counterpoize of his Body to keep him on Horse-Back) his Feet planted firm∣ly upon the Stirrups; his Heels a little Lower than his Toes, that the end of his Toes may pass the Stirrups half an Inch, or a little more, and Stiff in the Hamms, or Jarrets, his Leggs not too far from the Horse's Sides, nor too near, that is, not to Touch them; which is of great Use for Helps, that I will Shew you hereafter. The Reins of the Bridle are to be in the Left-Hand, his little Finger separating the Reins, and grasping the rest in his Hand, with his Thumb upon the Reins, his Arm bent Close to his Body, but not constrain'd; his Bridle-Hand some three Fingers Above the Pommel, and some two Fingers Before the Pommel, that the Pommel may not hinder the Reins in their Working, and just over the Neck of the Horse. In the Right-Hand, he must have a Whistling Rod, not too Long, like an Angle-Rod; nor too Short, like a Poinson; but, if either, let it be
for there are many Graceful Helps with a Short Rod, that a Long Rod will not Admit of: you must Hold it a little off, from that End beyond your Hand; not only to make much of your Horse with it, but to Hold it the Faster. The Right Hand, where the Rod is, ought to be a little before your Bridle-Hand, and the Right Arm a little Looser, than your Left Arm; but not too Far from your Body, the point of the Rod bending a little Inwards, your Brest out. You must Look a little Gay, and Pleasantly, but not Laughing; and Look directly between the Horses Ears, when he goes Forwards: I do not mean, you should be Stiff, like a Stake, or like a Statue on Horse-Back, but much otherwise; that is, Free, and with all the Liberty in the world, as the French-Man sayes, in Dancing, A la neg∣ligence; and so I would have a Man on Horse-Back, En Cavalier, and not Formal; for that shewes a Scholler, more than a Master; and I ne∣ver saw any Formality, but me-thought it Lookt something of the Simple and Foolish. The Seat is so much, (as you shall see here∣after)
as it is the only thing that makes a Horse go Perfectly; and the very Manner of Sitting is beyond all other Helps: Therefore Despise it not, for I dare Boldly say, He that is not Bel homme de Cheval, shall never be Bon homme de Cheval. For, the Reins both of the Bridle and the Ca∣vezone, I have shewed you that which was never yet Known before: And so this is enough for the Seat of the Cavalier. THE SECRET HELPS OF THE HORSE-MANS BODY. YOu must Sit Straight upon the Twist, and always keep your Self so, what Action so∣ever the Horse makes; and to that End, you should always go to that which comes to you,
which is a Contrary Action. As for Example; The Horse Rises Before, then you must put your Body a little Forward to him; for, did you go along with the Horse, you must put it Back∣ward. If the Horse Strikes Behind, or Raises his Croup, you must put your Body Backwards, which is Contrary to the Horses Motion; for, did you Follow the Horse, you must put your Body For¦ward, and be Thrown: But the Best, is, To Sit Straight, and the Action of the Horse will keep you on your Twist. You must Understand, That the Body on Horse — Back, is Divided into three Parts, two Moveable, and one Immoveable: The Moveable is the Body to the Waste; the Immoveable, from the Waste to the Knees; and the other Moveable from the Knees to the Foot. The Bodies — Helps are to be Gentle Helps for all Horses; for, to Sit Strong on Horse-Back, A∣stonishes the Weak Horse, makes the Strong go Counter-times, and forces him too much; makes a Furious Horse Madd; makes a Resty Horse
more Resty; and a Horse Hard on the Hand, to Run away, and Displeases all sorts of Horses. You are not neither, to Sit Weak on Horse-Back, but to Sit Easie; Gentle Helps being Best: For they Fit all Horses, and Please all Horses. The New and True Method of Working at first, either Colts, Young Horses, or Old Ignorant Horses, upon Large Circles D'une piste. NOw that you are on Horse-Back, Know how to Sit, and Know all your Helpes; I will shew you How to Dress your Horse Perfectly: Which is in the Manner Following. The Cavezone, being My Way, the Reins in your Hand, the Inward Cavezone's Rein pull'd Hard, and Low, on the Inside of the Turn; Legg and Rein of a side that is within the Turn; which brings In the Horses outward Shoulder, the Bri∣dle-Hand Low, and a little on the Out-side, or In-side, as you see Occasion: This gives the
Horse a good Apuy, Working more on the Barrs than on the Curb, though it Works on both. The Horses Croup being Out, and pulling In his outward Shoulder, presses the Horse on the Inside, and fits him to Gallop large, D'une piste; as also for a Trot, to Supple his Shoulders, being prest. The Inside puts him upon the Shoulders, which gives him an Apuy, and Supples his Shoulders extreamly, which is the first thing you must Work on; for, without Suppling a Horses Shoulders extreamly, he can never do any thing; for that is the First and Principal business, and no∣thing doth it like the Cavezone (my Way.) Give him no other Lesson than this, until he be very Supple on the Shoulders upon his Trot; for that is the Foundation of all things in the Man∣nage, to Supple him, and make him Leight; and never Gallop him until he be so Leight, as he of∣fers to Gallop of himself; and this Trotting, and Galloping large, as they call it, D'une piste, though his Croup be Out, and the Horse Lean's so much on the Inside, as you would think he would Fall, he goes the Surer for it.
Stop him but seldom; and when you do, Stay him rather by Little, and Little, than with a Sudden Stop; for that Weakens a Young Horses Reins, and Back very much; and when he is on the Hand, then put your Body Back to put him up∣on the Hanches, and give him Harder Stops; but then your outward Legg is to put In his out∣ward Legg, or else he cannot Stop upon the Han∣ches, your outward Hanch being out. OF LARGE CIRCLES Upon A TROT. WHen you Work your Horse upon Large Circles D'une piste, upon a Trott, with the Cavezone (my Way) in your Hand, Legg and Reyn on the Inside, either upon Large or Nar∣row Circles, D'une piste, upon his Trott, where his Leggs in that Action are Cross, you must
know how they Ought to Go; Which is thus: His Hinder-Legg on the Inside of the Turn, and his Fore-Legg on the Out-side of the Turn, are Lifted up together at a time; and his Hinder-Legg on the Inside of the Turn, when it is set Down, is set a little beyond his outward Hinder-Legg, and a little Forwarder; and his Fore-Legg without the Turn, is set Down at the same time, a little Forwarder than his inward Fore-Legg, and both Circularly; and when he Changes his Leggs Cross, then his outward Hinder-Legg is set be∣fore his inward Hinder-Legg, and his inward Fore-Legg before his outward Fore-Legg, and beyond it, and both Circularly. His inward Hinder-Legg being set down Thus, must of necessity Bend, and Supple his Shoulders, and the Cavezone's inward Reyn being Wrought, as I told you before, the inward Legg must of ne∣cessity put Out his Croup, and Supple his Shoul∣ders; and thus he is Bent and Suppled extreamly, and can never be Entier; and his Leggs always go Right and Truly, which is the most excellent Lesson that can be.
OF GALLOPING UPON Circles D'une piste. TO Work your Horse D'une piste, upon Large, or Narrow Circles, the Cavezone's Reyn in your Hand, Legg and Reyn on the Inside, and the outward Reyn of the Bridle, if need be, to Supple his Shoulders, pulling the inward Reyn hard to bring In his outward Shoulder, upon a Gallop; I will tell you How his Leggs go, for a Gallop is another Action than a Trott; for a Trott is Cross, and a Gallop is both of a Side, always Leading with his Leggs within the Turn, and makes Four distinct Times, with his four Leggs, as I have shewed you before. Well then, his Fore-Legg within the Turn Leads Circularly, and is set Down before, and be∣yond his outward Fore-Legg, and his Hinder-Legg within the Turn follows; but is set Down a little
before his outward Hinder-Legg, and a little  beyond it, which Supples his Shoulders; and  Hinder Parts being put Out thus, makes him Gallop Right, and nothing like it. This is a most Excellent Lesson, and  Foundation of All Things in the Mannage: To Trott and Gallop thus, his Fore-Parts come  the Center, and his Hinder-Parts flies it, being prest more upon the Shoulders than the Croup: But when he is thus Prest, and Supple in the Shoulders, the Croup is easily Wrought af∣terwards. I must Tell you, in these Lessons the Horse is Prest, and Leans extreamly on the Inside of the Turn, which is Rare: To Supple his Shoulders, to Walk him thus too, and Stop him with your outward Legg, is very good.
ANOTHER EXCELLENT LESSON to Supple a HORSES SHOƲLDERS. GO as if the Horse's Head was to the Pillar, (though you have none) and on the Left Hand, and pull the Inward Cavezone's Reyn hard to you; and though he goes on the Left Hand, his Shoulders are Suppled for the Right. Then go on the Right Hand, and pull the Inward Ca∣vezone's Reyn hard to you; though the Horse goes on the Right Hand, yet his Shoulders are Suppled for the Left. This is an Admirable Lesson to Supple a Horses Shoulders; and thus he shall never be Entier.
Another Lesson for Suppling a HORSES SHOULDERS Upon LARGE CIRCLES. UPon Large Circles, his Croup Out; to all the Helps, both with the Cavezone, Bridle, Reyns, Leggs, and Body, as I told you before; on∣ly this is to be Added, for a while, till the Horse is Accustomed to it. I would have you Trott him without Stop∣ping of him upon his Trott; but from his Trott to Gallop him, Le petit Gallop Gently; and from his Gallop to his Trott again; and though of the same Hand still, yet Change him from Trott to Gallop, and from Gallop to Trott, until you think it Sufficient, and then Stop him, either upon a Trott, or Gallop, which you please: This is a most Excellent Lesson; not only to Supple his Shoulders, but to make him Attend, and Obey the Will of his Rider; having no continued
Rule to Fix his Mind on, to go by Rote, either in Trotting, or Galloping, but still to Obey the Man, as he Helps or Commands him to either; and not Knowing when it is, he must absolutely Obey both the Hand and the Heel; and so Stop∣ping sometimes upon a Trott, and sometimes up∣on a Gallop; not Knowing when he should be Stopt, nor where he should be Stopt, makes him still to Obey the Man's both Hand and Heel; and therefore a Better Lesson cannot be in the World; and therefore Use it: For, all our End, is, To make a Horse Obey the Hand and the Heels; And this Lesson doth it, as much as any Lesson can do. If the Horse Retain his Forces, then Gallop him Fast, and Quick; and then Softly again, and then Fast again, as Occasion serves: And this Softly, and Quick, upon his Gallop, (not Know∣ing when he must do Either) makes him Obey both his Riders Hand, and Heels; which is the End of our Work, and the Quintessence of the Mannage. When you have Suppled the Horse sufficiently
on the Shoulders, and find him Hard on the Hand, in not being upon the Hanches; then Trot him Large D'une piste, and Stop him Often, and good Hard Stops with your outward Legg; and pull him down, your Body back, and when he least Thinks of it; but if he would Stop of him∣self, put him Forward without Stopping of him, and Stop him when he Thinks not of it, and do the same upon a Gallop: Stop him Often, and Hard, and put him Back sometimes, and you will find him very much upon the Hanches. This is an Excellent Lesson, both to Settle him on the Hand, and to put him upon the Hanches: But when you have done that, you must not Continue this Lesson long, for it Pinches a Horse very much on the Back; besides, it makes him Fearful to go Forward, and so may make him Resty, and many Inconveniencies may come of it; there∣fore your own Judgment must Work according to Occasion, when you do Stop him (as I for∣merly have Told you:) You must Stop him upon a Walk too, as well as upon a Trott, or a Gallop.
All these Lessons are only to Supple a Horses Shoulders; and see that you Use no other Les∣sons than These, until the Horse be extreamly Supple of his Shoulders, and be Firm on the Hand: These are Rare Lessons, To settle a Horse upon the Hand, to Supple his Shoulders, to make him Look into the Turn, to Trott and Gallop Right, (as he should do) both Leggs, Head, Neck, Body, and all: And, besides these, if you Work, as I have Told you, the Horse shall never be Entier; which the Italians call the Credenza, which is the Worst Vice a Horse can have, and the most Dangerous. And these Lessons, with the Cavezone (My Way) hath these Rare Ope∣rations. You must alwayes Use these Lessons, until the Horse be extreamly Supple of his Shoulders, be∣ing the Principal Thing in Dressing Horses, and the First of our Work: Horses doth nothing but by Custom, and Habit, with often Repeti∣ons to Fortify their Memories; and by good Les∣sons, and Methodical; and so do all Men in all Things that they do, Good or Bad: There∣fore
give these Good Lessons, and Repeat them Often to your Horse, and you will find by them Benefit, and Contentment: And Remember, that I Work upon the Understanding of a Horse, more than the Labour of his Body; for I assure you, he hath Imagination, Memory, and Judge∣ment; Let the Learned say what they Please: I Work upon Those three Faculties; and that is the Cause my Horses go so Well. Here is now the End of all my Lessons, in Working a Horse to Supple his Shoulders; which if you can do, according to those Les∣sons, then I will Assure you, you have done the better Half of the work, in Dressing, and Making up a perfect Horse. The next Lessons are the other Half, and the Easier; which is, To make him Sensible to the Heels; and those shall follow, after some certain Maxims, which I will Insert here, and pray you to Mark, and Remember them. The most Certain means to Unite a Horses Forces; to Assure, and Settle his Head, and his Hanches; to make him Leight on the Hand; and
to make him Capable of all Justness and Firmness in all sorts of Ayres, and Mannages; Depends absolutely on the perfection on the Stop (as I have Told you;) but first he must be Loosen'd and Suppl'd upon the Trott. Going Back is a Remedy, to put him upon the Hanches; to Accommodate, and Adjust his Hinder-Feet; and Settle him on the Hand; and to make him Leight Before; to Stop Leightly, and in just Proportion. You must never Gallop your Horse, until he be so Leight upon his Trott, as he begins to Gal∣lop of himself: For the Exercise of the Trott, is the first, and most necessary Foundation to make him Leight; and is the Ground of every Lesson, which can make the Horse Adroit, and Obedient; and on which must be the Foundation of all sorts of Mannages. The Property of the Gallop, is, To give him a good Apuy, and to Settle his Head; and if he have too much Fougue, or Fire, Le petit Gallop will Appease him, and give him Patience; and if he Playes too much on the Back, it will take it off:
but all upon Large Circles: It Tempers his Spi∣rits, makes him Well-Winded, and takes away his Too-violent Apprehensions, and Diverts him from Evil designes of Jades Tricks; of Restiness, and Double-Heart, and Supples all his Members. EXCELLENT NOTES To make an END of the WORKING OF THE HORSES SHOƲLDERS. HAving shewed you, How you should Work, and Supple the Horses Shoulders, with the Cavezone's Reyn in your Hand, and not Tied to Pommel, which is the better Half of our Work; I will Shew you the other Half; which is, To make him Obey the Heels, and Work both Shoulders and Croup together; the Cavezone's
Reyn still in your Hand, and not Tied to the Pommel. To Work the Horses Croup and Shoulders together, is, With the Inward Reyn, and Out∣ward Legg; the inward Reyn of the Cavezone in your Hand, and pull'd on the Inside of the Turn, to bring In his Outward Shoulder, and to Press the Horse on the Inside of the Turn, that his Leggs without the Turn may be Free, and at Li∣berty, to lapp over his inward Leggs; which we call Passager, or En-Cavalier, his Croup In. This Passager, though it is the Action of a Trott with his Leggs, yet it is less Violent than a Trott, and more than a Walk; which is the best Action to Teach a Horse any thing of a Short Trott, and Together. The first Lesson therefore that you must give him, upon this Action, is, His Head to the Wall, pulling the Inward Cavezone's Reyn hard to you, on the Inside, and Helping at the same time, with your outward Legg, the Horse to go Byas, his Shoulders before his Croup; which makes him Narrow behind, and so upon the Hanches;
because he is upon the Action of a Trott, his Leggs being Cross. If he do not Obey the Heel, give him the Spurr gently on that side; when the Horse goes thus, he is then Prest on the Inside of the Turn; if this be on the Right Hand, then it is but Changing your Bridle-Hand into your Right Hand, and the Left Cavezone's Reyn in your Left Hand, and pull it Hard, on the Inside, to you, and your outward Legg; and make him do as much on the Left Hand, Legg and Reyn Contrary; and if he do not Obey the Heel, give him the Spurr with your outward Legg. Continue this Lesson until you find him Obedi∣ent to your Heels: You may make him go Byas in an open Field, the same Way, with the same Helps.
OF THE VOLTOES in PASSAGER. WHen he Obeys perfectly the Heel, upon this Lesson of Byas in Passager, then put him upon his Voltoes, or Circles, upon Passager, pulling the inward Cavezone's Reyn on the In∣side of his Neck, hard to you, to bring in his outward Shoulder; and your Contrary Legg, Legg and Reyn contrary, bending his Neck extreamly; and if he do not Obey the Heel, give him the Spurr with your outward Legg, and then do as much on the other Hand; and when you find him very Obedient, upon Passager, a little Large, his Croup In, which puts him upon the Hanches; Because his Croup is In, and because it is upon the Action of a Trott, and the Less Circle, he is alwayes the most Prest, and therefore upon the Hanches. I say, When he is perfectly Obedient to your Hand and Heels, upon his Voltoes somewhat Large, then make him go upon his Passager, in little
more than his Length; and if he be Obedient to your Hand and Heel there, on both Hands, he is Advanced very Far towards a Ready-Horse: For, if a Horse Obey my Hand and Heel upon Passager, which is a gentle Motion, and therefore proper to Learn a Horse, because it makes him Pa∣tient, and fortifies his Memory the Better. I say, if he be Obedient to me upon this Action, which is the Quintessence of Dressing Horses, then I can make him do Any thing, that his Forces will per∣mit him. When the Horse is Perfect in the aforesaid Lessons, then put him upon his Voltoes, his Croup In; upon Le petit Gallop, thus: Pull the Inward Cavezone's Reyn hard to you on the Inside of his Neck, and your outward Legg to Help him, Poysing more on the outward Stirrup, than on the Inward; and Bend his Neck extreamly, that he may be Prest on the Out-side of the Turn, which is proper for Le petit Gallop his Croup In; and Help him with your Tongue, and he will go presently very Perfectly; and giving him good Stops, he is advanced very far towards a Ready-Horse.
There is no Difference here between Le petit Gallop, and Terra a terra. When your Horse Obeys all these Lessons per∣fectly; which is, To obey your Hand, and the Heels, Teach him to Advance; which is, to Rise Before; without which no Horse can be a Ready-Horse: You may do it when you Stop him, or upon Large Circles, staying him upon the Hand, helping him with your Tongue, and your Leggs, and Rodd, if there be cause; and put him Forward still after it, and Raise him again. But if he Ri∣ses of himself, put him Forward, and let him not Rise, but when you would have him; and he will very soon Obey you. When he Rises perfectly (when you would have him) upon Large Circles, then put his Croup In upon his Voltoes, and Raise him so; and then Feel him upon the Hand, and Stay him a little when he is Up; and this will both put him upon the Hand, and upon the Hanches. Why I would not have you Raise him before now, was, Because it would Disorder his Mouth, and put him Off of the Hand, and make him Resty;
for many Horses Rises Restily, because they would not go Forward, nor Turn; for, until they Obey the Hand, and Fly the Heel, there is no Raising of them. I would have you always begin upon Large Circles his Croup Out, and then put In his Croup afterward; and so End. When the Horse is perfect in all these former Lessons, then I would have you Tie the inward Cavezone's Reyn hard to the Pommel, and Work him upon all former Lessons so, with the inward Reyn, and inward Legg; and the outward Reyn, if need be, his Croup Out. Upon Large Circles, his Croup In, the inward Cavezone's Reyn Tied to the Pommel, and Help'd with the inward Reyn of the Bridle, to press him on the outside of the Turn, for Passager: But when you Raise him in Passadoes, then the inward Reyn; when the inward Cavezone's Reyn is Tied to the Pommel, then you Work most on the Bitt; for you have nothing else in your Hand. To Help, with the Bridle alone, upon Large Circles, his Croup Out, inward Reyn, and inward
Legg; or outward Reyn and inward Legg, if his Shoulders come not In enough; but upon Passa∣ger, with the Bridle alone, the inward Reyn, and outward Legg, for the Reasons I have told you. It is an Excellent Lesson to Gallop a Horse forth Right, and to Stop him, and to Raise him only with the Bitt, and then to Turn him, help∣ing with the outward Reyn, which will prepare him for Passadoes; of which we will Talk hereafter. There is an Excellent Lesson, the inward Ca∣vazone's Reyn Tied to the Pommel, which is this: To Gallop D'une piste a Narrow Circle, and so Four of them, and still put him Forward to take the other Circle; and afterward to do the same upon every Circle, his Croup in, Le petit Gallop, or Terra a terra; and put him Forward to take the next Circle, and so as often as you think good to Repeat all the Four: And this makes him Attend the Hand and the Heel, and most Obe∣dient to both. The inward Reyn puts the Horse on the Out∣side, indeed all his Body, and Leans on his out∣ward
Hinder-Legg, and Weighs his Fore-Parts up; and therefore on the Hanches. The outward Reyn puts the Horse on the In∣side, and Weighs him down; and therefore on the Shoulders. You must have a Method to be often Repeat∣ed in all these good and Excellent Lessons; Lesson after Lesson, or else you will never Dress any Horse perfectly for Terra a Terra. Needful OBSERVATIONS. NAturally whensoever a Horse's Shoulders come In, his Croup goes out; and when his Croup is put In too much, his Shoulders go out. As for Example; Upon Large Circles his Shoulders come In, his Croup goes out; and when his Head is as to the Pillar, (Legg and Reyn of a side) his Shoul∣ders come In, and his Croup goes out: Nay, in the right Terra a terra, his Shoulders going before,
his Croup shuns the Center, which is a little out, though you think his Croup is In. But you will say, How is it then in Passager when his Croup is In? I say, that is another Action than a Gallop, or Terra a terra; because then he is upon the Action of a Trott, which is Cross, and may better admit to be Prest within the Turn, and his Leggs at Liberty without the Turn; but yet (if his Shoulders go before his Croup, and is Byas as he ought to be, in respect of his Shoulders) his Croup is a little Out. But now for Le petit Gallop, or Terra a terra; if his Croup be In, and you pull in his outward Shoulder, at the same time, it is a great Force, and Unnatural, so as the Horse goes Cross with his Leggs, and can go no otherwise, and is prest on the Inside. It is True, it puts the Horse upon the Hand, and so of necessity upon the Shoulders, and gives him an Apuy, which all the former Lessons do; so that his Croup In needs it not, and be∣sides, it is False. For Terra a terra, He should be Prest on the Outside, to have his Leggs at Liberty within to
Lead; and that they call Le petit Gallop, if his Croup be In, which is indeed Le petit Terra a terra: For being Prest on the Inside, his Croup In, it is hard to go, because he is Bound up; and it is un∣natural, both to bring In his outward Shoulder, and to put In his Croup at the same time. To Press him on the Inside, and to go on the Inside, his Croup In, is a great Pressure, and False; for indeed, he is Prest for the other side, and would Look out of the Turn, did not the In∣ward Cavezone's Reyn keep In his Head; howso∣ever he is on the Shoulders, and his Leggs go Cross; that is, his inward Fore-Legg leads, and his out∣ward Hinder-Legg follows, and continues so, and is False, and his Croup Bunches out: If his Croup goes before his Shoulders, his Leggs are Wide be∣hind, and off of the Hanches, and therefore upon the Shoulders, and False, and goes Cross with his Leggs. That is, his inward Fore-Legg leads, and his outward Hinder-Legg follows, and con∣tinues so. For the Piroite, his Croup goes a little out, though almost in a place; and therefore he ought
to be Prest within the Turn; but he goes upon the Shoulders. So upon Demi-Voltoes upon Passadoes, which is but Half a Terra a terra, he ought to be Prest without the Turn, because it is Terra a terra; but his Croup is In a little, and is upon the Hanches. To Work a HORSE upon PASSAGER, Either with His Head to the Wall, or upon Circles; either with the Cavezone in your Hand, or the Cave∣zone Tied to the Pommel; or the Bridle-Reyns separated in both your Hands, or the Bridle only in your Left Hand. UPon Passager, the Cavezone in your Hand; pull the inward Reyn of the Cavezone hard within the Turn, to pull the Horses outward Shoulder In, and to Press him on the Inside, that
his outward Leggs may be at Liberty, to Lap over his inward Leggs; and Help him with your outward Legg, (Legg and Reyn contrary) and let the Horse go Byas. Upon Passager, the Cavezone's Reyns in your Hand another Way, and that's this: Pull the in∣ward Cavezone's Reyn Cross his Neck, not too High, your Knuckles towards his Neck, and Help him, with the outward Legg, and Reyn contrary; and Bend your Body to be Concave within the Turn, which will Press him without the Turn, and give his Leggs Liberty within the Turn, to lap over his inward Leggs, but not so much, and let the Horse go Byas. By the way, this oblike Line, with the inward Cavezone's Reyn, if you press the Horse on the outside, will make him go Rarely upon Terra a Terra. Upon Passager, the inward Cavezone's Reyn Tied to the Pommel, (having nothing in your Hand but the Bridle to Work withal) you may safely work with the outward Reyn of the Bridle, because the Horse cannot Look on the outside, and that because the inward Cavezone's Reyn being
Tied to the Pommel pulls in his Head so much, and the outward Reyn will press him on the inside, which is proper for Passager, as I have told you: If you press the Horse on the outside, though the Reyn be Tied to the Pommel, he will go Terra a Terra Rarely, if he goes Byas. Upon Passager, the Bridle Reyns separated in both your Hands, you must Help with the in∣ward Reyn, to make him Look into the Turn; and Help also with the outward Reyn, to bring In his outward Shoulder, to press him within the Turn, for the Reasons I have told you: But if you press the Horse on the outside with the inward Reyn, he will go Rarely Terra a Terra. Here you have all the Ways of Working a Horse upon Passager, and I insist the more upon it, because it is the Quintessence of Working Horses in the Mannage, and the Elixer in Horse-man-ship; for if a Horse Obeys me perfectly in Passager, being Obedient to my Hand and Heels, I will make him go Terra a Terra, or in any Ayre whatsoever most perfectly, or any thing that his Forces will permit him to do; and therefore E∣steem
Passager above all things in the world for the Mannage, and for Raising the Horse in Passa∣does, his Croup In, or D'une piste, or Byas, or his Head to the Wall; and for pulling him Back, and Raising of him. For these Rare things will not Fail to make a Ready-Horse, if they be Ap∣plyed rightly. A GENERAL RULE. WHatsoever Leads, Fore-parts, or Hinder-parts; that which still Leads, tends to the Center, and the other parts of the Horse flie the Center: For it is a General Rule, and true; That whatsoever is the greater Circle, before or be∣hind, that which is the greatest Circle, is most Wrought; for it goes most Ground, and is at Liberty, whether it tends to the Center, or from it; and the Less Circle, most subjected, and prest: For, his Head to the Pillar (the Pillar on the out∣side
of his Head) his Fore-parts Lead, and there∣fore tend to the Center, and his Hinder-parts flie the Center; yet his Hinder-parts are most wrought, because it is the greater Circle, and therefore his Fore-parts more subjected, and upon them, which is upon the Shoulders; so the Horse's Croup to the Pillar, the Pillar on the Inside of his Croup, his Croup In, his Fore-parts Lead, and therefore tend to the Center, and his Croup flies the Cen∣ter; but his Fore-parts are more Wrought, be∣cause it is the Larger Circle; and his Hinder-parts more subjected and prest, because it is the Narrower Circle; and so upon the Hanches; so in his Length the same; and upon Passager, he Laps his Leggs over but every Second time, be∣cause they are Cross, and upon the Action of a Trott.
MORE OBSERVATIONS. IF a Horse goes Forward too much, pull him Back; if he goes Back, put him Forward; if if he goes Side-ways on the Right-Hand, put him Side-ways on the Left-Hand; if he goes Side-ways on the Left-Hand, put him Side-ways on the Right-Hand. If he puts Out his Croup, put it In; if he puts In his Croup, put it Out. If he goes on the Shoulders, stop him, and pull him Back; if he goes on the Hanches, continue him so; if he Rises when you would not have him, keep him Down. All this upon a Walk; for thus he must Attend both your Hand and your Heel, and follow your Will, and so of Necessity must Obey you, because thus he is put from his Will, to Yours. And this must make him a perfect Horse; It is a most Excellent Lesson. Never put a Horse upon any Ayre, nor
Press him much, until you find him very Sen∣sible, and Obedient, both to your Hand, and to your Heel; and extreamly Supple: But Young Horses must never be much Prest, nor Stopt too hard; for if you do, you will give them such a Crick, and Taint in their Back, as they will never Recover it. The Horse's Head to the Pillar, (or an Ima∣ginary Center) the Pillar without his Head; and the Horse's Croup to the Pillar, the Pillar on the Inside of his Croup. And thus the Horse shall ne∣ver be Entier. I never Work a Horse's Head to the Pillar, (Legg and Reyn contrary;) because his inward Hinder-Legg goes so much before his Shoulder, which is False; but Legg and Reyn on a side, as I shewed you before. To Work a Horse upon Quarters, is to no purpose; for, it Confounds a Horse more, than a whole Circle; but upon Demy-Voltoes, or half Turns, is very good somtimes. To put a Horse Byas on one Hand, and then put him Forward; and then put him Byas on the
other Hand, and then put him Forward; and so from Hand to Hand; and Forward, makes him Attend, and Obey both the Hand, and the Heel, and is an Excellent Lesson: But, as you put him Byas, his Fore-parts must al∣wayes go before his Hinder-parts. There is no Lesson comparable to Passager, his Croup In, to make him Obey the Hand, and the Heel; and to Raise him in Passadoes, and Passager him again, still Raising and Passager; and if you find he is not upon the Hanches, then Walk, or Trott him upon Large Circles, and Stop him Hard, and Raise him. All these Les∣sons are upon a Walk, and Passager; therefore you may see what a Rare thing Walking, and Passager is, to Make, and Dress all Horses per∣fectly. Nay, when a Horse is a perfect Drest Horse, you must not make him go above Once a Week at the most, but Work him every Day upon his Trott, Gallop, Passager, Raising of him, and Tuning of him Thus, and with the Ca∣vezone, he will go Rarely, when you would
make him go upon any Ayre, or Terra a Terra. I say, a Horse is thus to be Tuned; for, a Horse having Four Leggs, is like a Fiddle of Four Strings; and if a Fiddle be not Tuned, the Mu∣sitian can never Play Salengers Round upon it: So, if a Horse's Leggs be not rightly Tuned, he will never Dance his Round right. Again, if you alwayes Play upon a Fiddle, though Well-Tuned at the first, it will soon be out of Tune by continual Playing on it; so a Ready-Horse, if you make him go perpetually, he will be soon out of Tune; and therefore you must Tune him still, as I have told you. THE JUST & EXACT WAY FOR TERRA A TERRA. TO go upon a Square for Terra a Terra, is Good, but not the Best Way; for, it con∣strains
a Horse too much; so that he cannot go with that Freedom that he should; and is in great Danger, that his Inward Hinder-Legg will go be∣fore his Shoulder, and then it would be very False: therefore the True, Easie, and Best way is this that follows. You must Sit Straight in the Saddle, the poise on the outward Stirrup, but not to Lean down upon it too much; but only the outward Legg is to be a little Longer than the inward Legg; and the inward Legg to be a little Before it, but very little; and Sit you must all upon the Twist, and Stirrups, and as Forward to the Pommel as you can; the outward Legg close to the Horse, and the Knee turned inwards; and Stiff in the Ham, to bring the Calf of the Legg to the Horse. Then for the Bridle-Hand; on the Right-Hand put your Hand on the outside of his Neck, or turn the Knuckles towards his Neck, pulling your little Finger up straight without turning your Hand, which pulls the inward Reyn lying above your little Finger, your Arm a little from your Body oblike, your Left Shoulder coming a little
In, and your Neck behind, removed a little on the Left side, and your Buttons a little on the Right side: This makes the Horse necessarily to go Byas. But now I must tell you where you must Look, or Turn your Head; which must be on the inside of the Turn, to the Inside of the Horses Head, which keeps your Hand steady; for did you Look to your inward Shoulder, it would remove your Bridle-Hand too much within the Turn; and did you Look just between the Hor∣ses Ears, your outward Shoulder would not come In enough; and neither it, nor you, nor the Horse would be oblike; your Hand must go Cir∣cularly with the Horse, and Steadily; and but to feel him. Thus the Horse being Byas, the inward Reyn pull'd thus, inlarges the Horse before, in pulling his inward Fore-Legg, from the outward Fore-Legg; which puts his inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg, which Narrows him Be∣hind, makes him Bow in the Gambrels, especially on his outward Hinder-Legg, which he Rests on, and Thrusts his inward Hinder-Legg under his
Belly; which (with all these things) makes him very much upon the Hanches; the Horse is prest on the outside, and therefore of necessity must Look within the Turn, and his Fore-parts being In∣larged, must imbrace the Turn the better; his Hinder-Leggs being within the Lines of his Fore-Leggs, he must needs be upon the Hanches; and his Inward Fore-Legg being pull'd from his outward Fore-Legg, (being Circular) his inward Fore-Legg of necessity must be Longer than his outward Fore-Legg to Lead, which is Right, and so makes the Largest Circle; and his outward Fore-Legg the Second Circle; and his inward Hinder-Legg the Third Circle; because it is thrust so much be∣fore his outward Hinder-Legg, and under his Belley; and his outward Hinder-Legg makes the Fourth and Least Circle, because he Rests so much upon it, and Bows in the Gambrels. Thus the Horse makes Four perfect Circles, about the Pillar, or Center, as I have Told you, and given you the Reasons of it. Thus doth the Horses Fore-parts go always be∣fore his Hinder-parts; that is, half his Shoulders
within the Turn, before his half Croup within the Turn; which is his Fore-Legg within the Turn, before his Hinder-Legg within the Turn: And thus the Horse can never go False, but most exactly True, with Head, Neck, Body, Leggs, and all. For the Left-Hand, every thing must be as for the Right, and the same way, changing Hand, Body, and Legg; only for the Bridle-Hand, it is necessary, That when you go on the Left-Hand, you should put your Hand on the contrary side of his Neck; your Arm close to your Body, and the Knuckles of your Bridle-Hand turned towards his Neck, which pulls the inward Reyn for the Left-Hand; because that Reyn lies under your little Finger; and this makes you Oblike, and the Horse Oblike: And every thing for the Left Hand works as truly, in all those several things, as I told you for the Right-Hand. And thus the Horse is within your Hand, and your Heel; and so you Drive him, and make him go as you List; Slower, or Faster; Higher, or Lower: But remember, That your Hand be not
too High, but that the Horse may go Low, and Prest; for if your Hand be Low, the Horse goes Low; and if your Hand be High, the Horse goes High: For the Horse always goes according to the heighth of the Hand; and Terra a Terra should always be Low, and Prest. Now I must tell you, That the inward Reyn Presses the Horse on the outside, Weighs him up, and puts him upon the Hanches, especially on his outward Hinder-Legg, so that all his Body Leans on the outside, and he cannot bring In his outward Shoulder; for it is Bound up, and his Leggs within the Turn to Lead: You may know by his Neck, whether he Leans on the Outside or no; for if he does, his Neck will Lean all on the Outside, and your Body must be Concave on the outside, and Convex within; for being Con∣cave on the Outside, makes the Horse so, and puts In his Hanch, (being Prest on the Outside) and hath three Leggs in the Ayre, his two Fore-Leggs, and his inward Hinder-Legg, with a Leap forward Low, and Prest. And this is most Ex∣actly the truth for Terra a terra, and all the de∣licate
and subtil Helps that can be for it in the World. OF CHANGING UPON TERRA A TERRA. YOur Body is to be Oblike, your Knuckles to∣wards his Neck, and on the Outside of his Neck, on which Hand soever you go; and as he is going Terra a Terra on the Right Hand, let his Shoulders come In a little before you Change him, and then Help him with your Right Legg, and hold him Up with your Hand, and on the out∣side of his Neck, which is now Changed to the Left side. Why his Shoulders are to come In, a little before you Change him, is, To fix his Croup that it should not go out; and so the Hand on the contrary side of the Turn, for the same Rea∣son; and put him always a little forward upon every Change.
Now you are on the Left-Hand, before you Change him, let his Shoulders come In a little to Fix his Croup, and then Help him with the Left-Legg, and put him Forward a little, and then hold him Up with your Hand, and on the Outside of his Neck, on the Left side. I begin with my Legg to Change him, for the same Rea∣sons I told you: But you must Remember, to be Stiff in the Hams, and your Heels down, to bring the Calf of the Leggs to him; and the same for Demy-Voltoes. And this is Exactly the truth for Changing upon Terra a Terra. OF CHANGING UPON Demy-Voltoes, Terra a Terra. UPon Demy-Voltoes, your Hand on the out∣side, your outward Legg close to him, you Sit Oblike, the Knuckles of your Bridle-Hand
towards his Neck; and when he makes his Demi-Voltoe, let him go a little more than half a Turn, to fix his Croup before you Change him; and when you do Change him, Help him with the inward Legg first, and then hold him Up with your Hand, and a little on the outside of his Neck: This from the Wall is best, but by a Wall it cannot be; for you cannot go through the Wall, and therefore by a Wall it can be but a just Half Turn, or Demy-Voltoe, which you may either Help with the inward, or outward Reyn at your own Pleasure, so you keep his Croup to the Wall, that he may keep the Line, and not Falsify the Demy-Voltoe. This may be done with either Reyn, so it be done with Art, and Skill, like a Great Master; for otherwise nothing is Right in the Mannage.
OF GALLOPING, AND Changing En Soldat. WIth the outward Reyn, and the outward Legg, put him alwayes Forward; If his Croup goes out too much, then your Bridle on the outside of the Turn, or of his Neck, to Help with the inward Reyn, to keep In his Croup, otherwise not, but Help with the out∣ward Reyn, and outward Legg. Thus much for Changing upon Circles D'une piste, which must al∣wayes be either Half a Turn, or a Quarter of a Turn, Terra a terra.
TO PREPARE A HORSE FOR PASSADOES. FIrst Walk him Fore-right, either by a Wall, Hedge, or otherwise, and at the end Stop him, and Raise him two or three Passadoes, and then Turn him gently, Helping with the outward Reyn, and outward Legg, and see that he doth not Falsify his Demy-Voltoe, upon Passager, either in his Shoulders, or his Croup; but both to be Just, when he is Turned. Do as much on the other Hand, and then Trott him upon the Straight Line; Stop him, Advance him, and Turn him as you did before; and when he is Perfect in this, then Gallop him Le petit Gallop, upon the Straight Line; Stop him, Ad∣vance him: But now let him go a Demy-Voltoe upon his Ayre, and when he is Perfect in this, then let him make a Passado, upon Le petit Gallop,
without Stopping, or Advancing, which he will do perfectly; but you must put his Head a little from the Wall, that his Croup may be to the Wall, to keep the Line, that he may not Falsify his Demy-Voltoe; and before he Turns, to make two or three Falcadoes, to firm his Hanches the better, to Turn with the better Grace: If you would Run him A toute Bride, keep his Head a little from the Wall, to keep his Croup to it, slacking the Reyns a little, and pressing him with your Leggs, and to make two or three little Falcadoes before you Turn him, and then close him with your outward Reyn, and outward Legg, for the Demy-Voltoe; and so on the other Hand the same for the Pas∣sadoe, some Five times the Horses Length. And thus the Horse will go perfectly in Passadoes, which is the Touch-Stone of a Ready-Horse, obeying Hand and Heel in every thing. If your Horse go in Corvets, or a Demy-Ayre, then make his Demy-Voltoes upon his Passadoes, upon his Ayre, which is very Graceful. The French calls this Passadoe, Releve; which me∣thinks, is not a proper Term for it: A Demy-Voltoe
must be Helpt in all Kinds like Terra a Terra, for 'tis but a half a Turn Terra a Terra; that is, the inward Reyn, and outward Legg, and your Body, and every thing like Terra a Terra. Of the PIROYTE. THe Action of the Horse's Leggs in the Piroyte, is very Strange; your Hand on the outside of his Neck to Look into the Turn, and working Violently with the outward Reyn of the Bridle, Straightens his Fore-parts, and puts his Hinder-parts at more Liberty, helping with no Legg; so the Action of his Leggs are thus: On the Right-Hand, when he lifts up both his Fore-Leggs at the same time, he lifts up his Hinder-Legg without the Turn; so he hath three Leggs up at a time, and Rests only on the inward Hinder-Legg;
and when those three Leggs come to the Ground, his outward Shoulder coming In so Fast, his in∣ward Hinder Legg removes at the same time almost in a Place, to keep the Circle; and I say, that at the same time those three Leggs are set Down, his inward Hinder-Legg removes, to go along with the Circle; but in a manner in a Place: So that indeed the inward Hinder-Legg is the Center, though it removes in the place Round; and when the Horse is so Dizzey as he can go no Longer, (for fear of Falling) then he sets his inward Hinder-Legg forward, to Stop himself. These are Exactly the Helps, and the Motions of the Horses Leggs in the Piroyte, or else he could not go so Swiftly as he Ought: He is upon the Shoulders, because he is Prest on the Inside; so is a Passadoe, being but Half a Piroyte, because both of them is Helpt with the outward Reyn.
One of the GREATEST SECRETS IN The MANNAGE that ever I found out. THe inward Hinder-Legg to the Turn always put Out a little, Is in all things the Quintessence of the Mannage, whether his Croup Out, or In; the Knuckles of the Bridle-Hand towards his Neck, his Croup In, doth well in Terra a Terra; and always your Horse to go Byas, upon his Voltoes, or his Head to the Wall, doth it Best; for his Shoulders going before, his Hinder-parts put out his inward Hinder-Legg, which is the greatest Business in the Mannage; for so his Hinder-Leggs are near to∣gether, and so upon the Hanches. The inward Reyn of the Bridle doth it, pull'd, as I have told you, and so doth the inward Reyn of the Cavezone; for it puts out his inward Hin∣der-Legg, Narrows him behind, and Inlarges him before; because it pulls his inward Fore-Legg from
his outward Fore-Legg, and therefore Inlarges him before; and at the same time, it puts his in∣ward Hinder-Legg out, to his outward Hinder-Legg; and therefore Narrows him behind, and so must of necessity be upon the Hanches. And thus his inward Fore-Legg must always be before his inward Hinder-Legg, so that half his Shoulders goes always before half his Croup, by which means he can never go False; and his Fore parts always Imbracing the Turn the better, and the outward Hinder-Legg being kept In a little, with your outward Legg, makes his two Hinder-Leggs within the Lines of his Fore-Leggs, which makes him upon the Hanches, and his Fore-parts to Lead, as Horses always should do: For, they do not Work with their Arses first, but with their Heads, and Fore-parts. Remember, That no Horse can be upon the Hanches, but those that Bend in the Gambrels, and Bow there; and the more their Hinder-Leggs go under their Belley, the more they Bow in the Gambrels. Remember also as a certain Truth, That no Horse can be upon the Hanches, except
his Croup, or Buttock, be thrust out Backwards: As for Example; When you give a Horse a good Stop, his Hinder-Leggs go under his Belly, and his Croup, or Buttocks, are thrust out; he Bows in the Gambrels, and so is upon the Hanches: When he goes Le petit Gallop, his Croup In, his Hinder-Leggs are thrust under his Belly, then his Croup goes out; he Bows in the Gambrels, and is upon the Hanches: So in Terra a Terra, his Hinder-Leggs are thrust under his Belly, and his Croup goes out; he Bows in the Gambrels, and is upon the Hanches. When you pull a Horse Back, one of his Hinder-Leggs goes always under his Belly; he puts out his Croup, bends in the Gambrels, and is upon the Hanches: So in Passadoes his Croup is thrust out, he Bows in the Gambrels, and is upon the Hanches; but if he be Raised too High, it puts him off of the Hanches, for then he is Stiff in the Gambrels, because his Croup goes In; which puts him upon the Hand, but off of the Han∣ches: Therefore you must never Raise him too High in Passadoes; if his Croup must go out, be
Bow'd in the Gambrels, and so be upon the Hanches. My Way, at the Single Pillar in Corvets, puts out his Croup, makes him Bow in the Gambrels, and so to be upon the Hanches, because he can∣not Rise High, and therefore puts out his Croup, and is upon the Hanches; so all that puts a Horse upon the Hanches, is before, either with the Cavezone's Reyn, or Bitt, and nothing be∣hind. The inward Hinder-Legg, and inward Cave∣zone's Reyn, is the Quintessence of the Mannage, with thrusting his Croup out, which makes him Bow in the Gambrels, and so be upon the Han∣ches; which is the End of all our Work and Bu∣siness in the Mannage. I do not mean his Croup to be put out in a Circle, or put out upon a Straight Line; but be thrust out Backwards, and then he is upon the Hanches, because he Bows in in the Gambrels. I must Remember you again, that to put him on the Hanches, is all Before; so that when his Head is pull'd Down, and In, then he is upon
the Hanches; for his Croup goes out, and he Bow in the Gambrels, and therefore is upon the Hanches: That is, the Horse must be a little Higher behind than before; for then his Croup goes out, and he Bows in the Gambrels, and therefore is upon the Hanches. As for Exam∣ple; A Horse goes down a Hill, then his Croup is Higher than his Fore-parts, and his Croup goes out, and then he bows in the Gambrels, and is ex∣treamly upon the Hanches. So if he be turned in the Stable, his Croup is Higher than his Fore-parts, and puts his Croup out, bends in the Gambrels, and therefore is very much upon the Hanches. So in plain Ground, where there is no Hills, you must Supply it, with pulling his Head Down, and In, as much as you can, to make him Higher behind, than before, which puts out his Croup, makes him bow in the Gambrels, and puts him upon the Hanches; as Stopping of him, pulling Back, Passager, Le petit Gallop, and Terra a Terra: All these pulls him Down, and puts out his Croup, which puts him upon the Hanches.
If the inward Cavezone's Reyn be Tied to the Pommel, or pull'd Hard in your Hand, it puts him upon the Hanches, because it puts his inward Hinder-Legg out to his outward Hinder-Legg, that it shall not come In too much, nor at all; and that puts him upon the Hanches; so in Passa∣does, or Corvets, the inward Cavezone's Reyn tied to the Pommel, puts the inward Legg out, which puts him upon the Hanches, because it thrusts his Croup out: But when you have nothing but the Bridle, What then? Then the Inward Reyn of the Bridle doth the same in all things; but Passager his Croup In, is with the outward Reyn, because it is the Action of a Trott, which is Cross, and so it will suf∣fer it, because his Leggs are Byas; so it is right for Pas∣sager, to be Prest within the Turn, and at Liber∣ty without the Turn, or else his outward Leggs could not Lap over his inward Leggs: But if you have nothing but the Bridle, he will Look out of the Turn, if you do not Help with both Reyns; but whensoever you Raise him in Passa∣does, his Croup In, or Out, you must Help with the inward Reyn, to put out his inward Hinder-Legg,
which makes him Bow in the Gambrels, be∣cause his Hinder-Leggs are made like our Arms, and therefore must Bow in the Gambrels, if it be thrust out. But I must tell you for a great Truth, That whensoever, upon Large Circles D'une piste, the Horse's inward Hinder-Legg is put out, and bows, it puts him not upon the Hanches, but very much upon the Shoulders; for the more his Buttock doth go out, the more still he is upon the Shoulders; for that Lesson is not to put him upon the Han∣ches, but to Supple his Shoulders; for if you would put him upon the Hanches, you must put In his Croup; for the Larger Circle is wrought most, because it goes the most Ground; yet his Hinder-parts are the most prest, because in the Narrower Circle, and therefore upon the Han∣ches. Some are of Opinion, That the more you put In his Croup, the more he is on the Hanches; which I do not Think, because his inward Hinder-Legg goes before half his Shoulder, and so he is Wide behind, and off of the Hanches, and goes
Backward: But if his Croup be In, and you put out his inward Hinder-Legg, then he bows in the Gambrels, his Hinder-Leggs Narrow behind, and so upon the Hanches; and the more upon the Hanches, if the Horse goes Byas, because by that means the Horses Hinder-Leggs are nearer toge∣ther, and so Narrower, and therefore upon the Hanches; and this is most true: For if the Horses Hinder-Legg (within the Turn) goes before his in∣ward Fore-Legg, he doth not only go Backward, but his Hinder-Leggs are stiff in the Gambrels, and therefore not upon the Hanches; but when you put out his inward Hinder-Legg, then he Bows in the Gambrels, and therefore upon the Hanches, because his Hinder-Leggs are made like our Armes; only he hath a Joynt more, which is the Stifling-Joynt. You see plainly, now, What an excellent, and most Rare thing it is, to keep a Horses inward Hinder-Legg out in all manner of things that are in the Mannage; and in whatsoever you Work him, it is the absolute Quintessence of the Man∣nage; and without it is nothing Right, but most
False, because of abundance of Irreparable Errors; whereas with it all things are Right, and most True. This hath been Studied to the Purpose, and no Horse but is perfectly Made with it, and all is to put his inward Hinder-Legg out in all things; and being put out thus, he must bow in the Gam∣brels, because his Hinder-Leggs are made like our Armes. And this is that which none either Knows, or have Thought of; and therefore Mark it, Re∣member it, and Practice it if you can; and if you cannot, do not find Fault with a thing, because you cannot do it: For, certainly no Man is Born to all Professions, by Inspiration, but with great Study, Diligence, Care, Patience, and long Pra∣ctice: No Man being Born with so Supream a Witt above others, as to do (assoon as he sees it) any thing that hath been so many Years another Mans Study.
To put a Horse UPON the HANCHES: On which I insist the More, because it is the End of all our Work and Labour in the Mannage; For, Without it, no Horse can Possibly go Well. A Horse can never go Well upon the Hanches, but his Fore-parts must be Wrought; for, in that Manner, when you Stop him, you pull his Fore-parts, and that puts him upon the Hanches, because you pull his Fore-parts Down, and In: When you pull him Back, you put him upon the Hanches, because you pull his Fore-parts Down, and In; When you make him go Terra a Terra; when you Work the Inward Reyn, on which Hand soever he goes, so you Press him on the outside, and put In his outward Hanch, then you put him upon the Hanches, because you pull him Down on the outside, with the Inward Reyn of the Bridle, on either Hand.
So (My Way) with the Cavezone Tied to the Pommel, or Tied to the Girthes, if he be Prest on the outside, and his outward Hanch put In, puts him upon the Hanches, because the Cave∣zone pulls Down his Head, and In. And be∣lieve me, The Cavezone thus, puts him more on the Hanches, than any thing; but if you Press him on the Inside of the Turn, (though you do pull Down his Head) he is off of the Hanches, be∣cause his outward Hanch goes out, and therefore puts him on the Shoulders. You see then, That whatsoever pulls a Horse Head Down, and In, puts him upon the Han∣ches; or that Naturally he puts his Head Down. As for Example; a Horse that goes In Caputiato; which is, To Arm himself against the Bitt, is easily put upon the Hanches; and being upon the Hanches, he is Leight of the Hand. To Strike a Horse on the Knees with your Rodd, when he Rises before, pulls him Down, and In, and therefore puts him upon the Han∣ches. There is no Horse that holds Up his Head, but he is off of the Hanches; nor any Horse that
Rises High before, but is off of the Hanches; nor any Horse in Terra a Terra, when his Head is pull'd Down, and In, but goes on the Hanches, if he be Rid as he Ought to be. The Reason is this; No Horse can go on the Hanches, that doth not Bow in the Gambrels, or Hinder-Houghs: When∣soever a Horse Rises High before, he is Stiff in the Gambrels of necessity, and therefore off of the Han∣ches; nor doth a Horse hold Up his Head very High, but it Stiffens his Gambrels, and therefore off of the Hanches; nor can any Horse go Low before, but of necessity he must Bend in the Gam∣brels, either going Down a Hill, or Turn'd in the Stable, which makes his Hinder-parts Higher than his Fore-parts; but he must Bend in the Gambrels, and therefore must be upon the Hanches, and so his Croup In: But if his Croup be out, he is upon the Shoulders, though his Head be Down. So many a Horse (as also Hunting and Travelling Geldings) go horribly upon the Shoulders, though their Heads be Down; but indeed they are all upon the Shoulders except in the Mannage. For Example; A Horses Fore-Legs are made like our Legs, the Knees
outword; but a Horses Hinder-Leggs are made like our Arms, just contrary: So that whensoever a Horse is Raised High before, it Stiffens him in the Gambrels; and when he holds Up his Head, it Stiffens him in the Gambrels. So on the con∣trary, whensoever his Head is pull'd Down, of Necessity he must Bend in the Gambrels; for he cannot do otherwise, if he be Prest, otherwise not. I labour this Point the more, because you shall clearly see what puts him on the Hanches, and what puts him off of the Hanches; that so you may Shun the one, and Take the other, which is, to put him on the Hanches, because that is the End of all our Labour, and the Quintessence of our Art; for, without a Horse be upon the Han∣ches, he can never be a Ready-Horse, or Leight on the Hand; but there is no Rule without an Ex∣ception, and that is, you may pull Down a Horses Head, and yet not upon the Hanches; which is, when you Work his Shoulders D'une piste, Legg and Reyn on the Inside, though his Head be pull'd Down, he cannot be on the Han∣ches,
because you put it out, and Press him on the Inside: No more when his Croup is In, if he be Prest on the Inside, his Croup goes out a little, and therefore cannot be upon the Hanches, though his Head be pull'd Down, because you put his Hanch out: This is good to give him an Apuy upon the Barrs, and Supple his Shoulders; but it cannot put him on that which you put away, that were too great a Miracle, indeed an Impossibility. Pulling Down his Head, and In, puts him upon the Hanches, at a Stop; and pulling Down his Head, and In, when you make him go Back, puts him upon the Hanches; and when you pull Down his Head and In, and Raise him, it puts him upon the Hanches; and when you Press him on the outside of the Turn in Terra a Terra, it puts him upon the Hanches; when you pull Down his Head and In, either with the Cavezone, or the Bridle; and so pulling Down his Head, and In, pressing him on the outside of the Turn, puts him upon the Hanches in Terra a Terra, or upon his Walk in Passager: And this (I am sure) is sufficient to put a Horse upon the Hanches,
which is the Elixir of the Mannage, and is done when his Head is Down, and In, and Prest; that is, when you pull Down his Head, that you press him with the Heels, or Leggs, other∣wise not; for, if a Horse holds Down his Head to Drink, he is not on the Hanches, for then he Bows rather Before, than Behind, and is on the Shoulders; therefore he must be prest; so if he holds Up his Head, it Works nothing on the Hanches, but the contrary. A short Trott puts a Horse upon the Hanches, so a short Trot D'une piste, Legg and Reyn on a side, puts a Horse upon the Hanches, because his in∣ward Hinder-Legg is put out; his Head to the Wall puts him upon the Hanches; and nothing puts him more on the Hanches than a Leight Hand; for when he hath nothing to Rest on Be∣fore, then he will rest Behind, which is upon the Hanches. There are many Reasons why we Work a Horse so much, to put him upon the Hanches, which I have shewed you before; but there is one Reason more, and that is this: A Horse's Croup,
or Hanches, bears nothing but his Tayl, which is very Leight; but his Shoulders hath his Neck and Head to Bear, which is more; and therefore we put him upon the Hanches, to Poyse him, and to Relieve his Shoulders, and to make him Leight on the Hand. Thus much for Dressing all manner of Horses upon the Ground, to make them Obey Per∣fectly both Hand and Heel, and to put them upon the Hanches, which is the Ma∣ster-Piece of our Art. Here Ends the Second Part.
THE THIRD PART, For Dressing and Making of Horses in all SEVERAL AYRES, MY NEW WAY. YOu must in all Ayres follow the Strength, Spirit, and Disposition of the Horse, and do nothing against Nature; for Art is but to set Na∣ture in Order, and nothing else: But to make a Horse Gallop and Change, and to go Terra a Terra, is for the most part Forced; and in Passadoes the like: For, if a Horse be Im∣patient, he will hardly go well in Passadoes. No other Ayres are to be Forced, but every
Horse is to Chuse his own Ayre, unto which Na∣ture hath most Fitted him, which you may easily see, when he is Tied Short to the Single Pillar My Way. For Corvets, a Horse ought to have a great deal of Patience: And the Ayre of Corvets gives a Horse Patience with Discreet Riding, (as they say) but I have seldom seen that Discreet Riding; I doubt there is a Mistake in it, which is this: First the Horse hath Patience, and then that Horse goes in Corvets; but seldom Impatient Horses are made Patient by Corvets: So seeing most Horses that go well in Corvets, to have Patience, they think Corvets gives them Patience, when it is Patience that gives them Corvets. But there is no Rule without an Exception, yet I doubt I am in the Right; for, though some Young Horse may (by Chance) go in Corvets, yet I assure you, for the most part, Horses must have a great deal of time, with the Custom of often Repetitions; to be in some Years, and to have Gray-Hairs in their Beard, before they will be Settled, and Firm'd, to go cer∣tainly in Corvets, both Forwards, and upon their
Voltoes; therefore it is an Errour in those that think they can force Corvets, if the Horse's inclina∣tion be not to go in that Ayre; for I have known many Horses, that all the Force in the world would never make go in Corvets; their Dispo∣sition being against it: Corvets is an Ayre, built only of Art; for if the Horse be not perfectly in the Hand and the Heels, and upon the Hanches, he will never go in Corvets: Yet I must Tell you, This New Way of Mine will make Horses go in Corvets, which by no other Way would have been brought to it, and it seldom or never Fails me. For Leaping Horses, there are Four several Ayres, which are Croupadoes, Balotadoes, Capriols, and a Pace and a Leap; the Heighth of these may be all alike, but not the Manner; though the Horse that goes the Longest time, must needs go the Highest. Croupadoes is a Leap, where the Horse pulls up his Hinder-Leggs, as if he drew, or pull'd them up into his Body. Balotadoes is a Leap where the Horse offers
to Strike out with his Hinder-Leggs, but doth not; and makes only an Offer, or Half strokes; shewing only the Shooes of his Hinder-Leggs, but doth not Strike, only makes an Offer, and no more. Capriols is a Leap, that when the Horse is at the full Heighth of his Leap, he Yerks, or Strikes out his Hinder-Leggs, as neer, and as eeven To∣gether, and as far out as ever he can Stretch them; which the French call, Nouer l'Esquillette, which is, To tie the Point. A Pace and a Leap, is, as it were three Ayres; the Pace Terra a Terra, the Raising of him a Corvet, and then a Leap: These Ayres can never be Forc't to go Well in them, in spight of their Poynsons, but what Nature ordains them; for, they are called, Well-Disposed Horses. What belongs to Leaping Horses (according to the Old Opinion) are these things: A Horse of huge and vast Strength, an excellent Mouth, perfect good Feet; in which last they have not said Amiss, for good Feet are very Requisite, else the Horse dares never Leight on them, for fear
of Hurting them (no more than a Man that hath the Gout, dares Leap) and so will never Rise. I could wish a good Mouth, (which is a good Apuy) neither too Hard, nor too Soft, but to suffer a good Apuy upon the Barrs, and so to suffer the Curb, which is to be understood a good Mouth: yet I must tell you, the rarest Leaping Horse that ever I saw, or Rid, went not at all upon the Curb, but only upon the Barrs of his Mouth, which I do not Commend; but it is better to have him Leap so, being so rare a Horse, than to be so Over-Curious as not to have him Leap at all, because he went not upon the Curb. That they must be very Strong Horses to be Leaping Horses, is a very great Errour; for, it is not the Strongest Horses that is fittest for the Delight of the Mannage, and especially not for Leaping Horses; for I have seen many Strong Horses, that must be Galloped very long before you could Abate the strength of their Chines; and all that while they would do nothing but Yerk,
and fetch disordered Counter-times of False Leaps, and the best Horse-men in the World could never make them Leaping Horses: So it is not Strong, but Well-disposed Horses; for the best Leaping Horses that ever I Knew, were the Weakest Hor∣ses I have seen. Take one of the Guard, the Strongest Fellow that is, and I will bring a Little Fellow that shall Out-Leap him many a Foot; yet that Strong Fellow would Crush that Little Fellow to Death in his Armes: So 'tis not Strength, but Dispo∣sition fits Horses for Leaping. But some will say, That a little Man's Strength is above his Weight, and the great Man's Weight is above his Strength; but that is not so; for the great Man's Strength shall be more above his Weight, than the little Man's Strength above his, and yet the little Man shall Out-Leap him. Nay, two Little Men of Equal Strength, the one shall Leap excellently, and the other not; and more, a Weaker little man shall Out-Leap the Stronger, and sometimes a Weak slender slim Fellow will Out-Leap a Knit strong Fellow; so that it is nothing but Dispo∣sition,
which Nature gives, and not Art: Some∣times a Strong great Fellow will Out-Leap a little Man, but that is seldom, because their Spirits are more Dilated, Assunder, and Diffused, than in little men: The like I will assure you in Horses, as I have told you of men; there may be a Strong Horse disposed for Leaping, and that no doubt is an Excellent Horse; but for the most part they are but Weak Horses, that are disposed for Leap∣ing; sometimes a Horse finds himself so Pincht with Corvets upon the Hanches, being Weak, that he finds Ease in Leaping. Thus you see, that Leaping Horses are disposed by Nature, and not Art, being full of Spirit, and Leight; so that Horse-men hath nothing to do in making Leaping Horses, but only to give them the time, which is all the Art ought to be used to a Leaping Horse; and he that thinks to shew more Art in a Leaping Horse, will but shew his Igno∣rance and Folly. A Pace and a Leap is an Ayre, in which Horses commonly go when they have not a good Apuy; for the Pace puts him upon the Hand, and gives
him a Rise to Leap like one that Runs before he Leaps, and so may Leap Higher than he that goes every time a Leap. Thus I have shewed you these Ayres, Corvets, Croupadoes, Balotadoes, Capriols, and a Pace, and a Leap, which Nature must do more than Art: Two Paces, and three Paces, and a Leap, are not comely, and are indeed ra∣ther a Gallop Galliard, than can be called an Ayre. My New Way at the SINGLE PILLAR, Which is Most Effectual and Operative for the Dressing of all Horses in all Ayres whatsoever. FIrst bring the Horse Sadled, and Bridled, and put him under the Button, and then let a Groom take the inward Cavezone's Reyn for the Right-Hand, and Lap it about the Single Pillar,
and make it very short, (but where he Holds it Higher than where 'tis Tied to the Ring of the Cavezone) and let another Groom hold the Long Reyn of the Cavezone on the other side, in his Hand, with a Poinson in the other Hand, to Prick him if he should put out his Croup too much; and one behind him with a Rod, to keep him from go∣ing Backwards; and then let the Cavalarizzo Raise him De firme a firme, which is in a place: A little at first must satisfie you, for, Rome was not Built in a day. Thus Tying him short, he cannot Rise High, and therefore to find his Ease, he goes upon the Hanches; for he is forced to it: After he is Used so a little, two Rodds is the best Help, one upon the Shoulder, and the other un∣der his Belley, which puts him upon the Han∣ches. Tie him so still with the same Reyn, and when he is perfect De firme a firme, then make him go upon his Voltoes with two Rods in your Hands, Helping Before with one Rod, and the other un∣der his Belley; and be you on the outside of the Horse, and he will go upon his Voltoes perfectly.
Tie him so still with the same Reyn, and Help him with both your Rods as before, and be on the outside of him, and then go forwards, and Face the Horse, and he will go in Corvets upon his Voltoes Backwards perfectly; which I never saw but this Way. Tie him with the same Reyn still, and you may make him go Side-ways in Corvets. Now Tie the Left Reyn (as you did the Right) short, which doth the Business; and do in all things as I told you for the Right-Hand; and thus the Horse goes perfectly on both Hands, in Corvets in a Place, upon his Turns, Backward upon his Voltoes, and Side-ways, without any body on him, which was never Known or Seen before. When the Horse goes perfectly thus, then get upon him, the Reyn still Tied very short, and make him go as you did before in every thing, and you may make him go in all other Ayres the same Way.
HOW TO DRESS A HORSE PERFECTLY In Corvets without Pillar, which is the surest Way. WHen you Work a Horse upon Corvets, be∣fore you do that, you must make a Horse to Rise perfectly in Passadoes, which is High Be∣fore, and to stay upon the Hand, using the Ca∣vezone still; and this Forward, and not upon Circles at the first by any means: Then to make him go in Corvets, Tie the Cavezone's Reyn from the Wall, to keep that Hinder-Legg to his other Hinder-Legg that is next the Wall, and begin with two or three Corvets, and then Walk him again, and then Corvet him again; and if you Feel him on the Hand, and he goes forwards with it, he will Quickly be Drest; and if he goes Forwards too much, let him make his Corvets in a place, and pull him Back, and then make him go in Corvets.
When your Left Shoulder is to the Wall, you must Tie the right Cavezone's Reyn to the Pom∣mel, which doth not only keep Back his Hinder-Legg on the same side the Cavezone's right Reyn is Tied, but it also Supples his Shoulders ex∣treamly, and prepares him; nothing like it to go upon Voltoes on the right Hand. When your Right Shoulder is to the Wall, then you must Tie the Left Cavezone's Reyn to the Pommel, for the same Reasons, and work him in Corvets, as I told you before; and this will prepare him, and make him go upon his Voltoes on the Left-Hand; and no Lesson better at the First. There is another rare Lesson for Corvets, which is this; Tie the Right Cavezone's Reyn to the Pommel, and let him go on the Left-Hand, Legg and Reyn on a side, as if his Head was to the Pillar; and Raise him so in Corvets, two or three times, his Croup out; and then Walk him, and then Corvet him in the same Manner: This keeps out his Inward Hinder-Legg, and so Supples him to the Hand and Heel, that there is nothing
like it; but though he goes on the Left-Hand, he is Suppled for the Right-Hand. The Left-Hand is the same; you must Tie the Left Cavezone's Reyn to the Pommel, and go on the Right-Hand, his Croup out, and help Legg and Reyn on a side, and so do in all things else, as you did before; and thus he shall never be Entier, but most Supple both to Hand and Heel. To put him upon Corvets on his Voltoes, the inward Cavezone's Reyn must still be Tied to the Pommel, and his Croup must not be In too much; but rather D'une piste, for teaching of him, and to keep out the inward Hinder-Legg is the Business: Help a little with the outward Reyn of the Bridle, and make him go three or four Corvets, and then Walk him, and then Corvet him again; and so Di∣minish your Walk, and Augment your Corvets, until he makes a perfect Turn in Corvets; and when he is Perfect, then let the Horse go upon his Voltoes Byas in Corvets, and that's the Perfecti∣on in Voltoes: You must always (in Corvets) help with the outward Reyn, not only to keep
him up, but to give him the Ply, and to make him go Byas, and not help with your Leggs at all. If you find he Hastens too much, then Raise him High in Passadoes, and keep him upon the Hand, and Help him with the Rod upon the Shoul∣ders and Leggs, to make him bend them; which is the only Grace in all Ayres whatsoever: This, and thus Working of him upon his Voltoes, either D▪une piste, or his Croup in upon Passadoes, will make him go Rarely in Corvets. To make a Horse go Side-ways in Corvets, help only with the Bridle, and put his Head to the Wall; and on the Right-Hand, help with the outward Reyn, and let the Horse go Byas; that is, his Shoulders before his Croup; and let him go three or four Corvets Byas, and then Walk him Byas; and then Corvet him Byas again, and so Walk him, and Corvet him; and by little and little Diminish his Walking, and Augment his Corvets, until he goes all in Corvets, which he will soon do, and very perfectly. For the Left-Hand, using the outward Reyn,
and the Horse being Byas, do in every thing, as I told you before for the Right-Hand; and the Horse will very soon go Byas, and very Per∣fectly. To make the Horse go in Corvets Backward, Pull the Horse back, and then make him go three or four Corvets in a place, and then pull him back again, and then Corvet him in a place again; and thus pulling him back, and Corvetting him in a place, Diminishing the pulling Back, and Aug∣menting the Corvets, he will at last go Backward in Corvets as perfectly as can be. To go Forwards in Corvets, you must always Help with the Reyn to the Wall; to Inlarge him Before, and to Narrow him Behind; because he Leads with his Fore-parts, and his Hinder-parts follow to keep the Ground that his Fore parts hath got; his Fore-parts being at Liberty, and his Hin∣der-parts Prest. To go Backwards in Corvets, you must always Help with the Reyn to the Wall; to Narrow him Before, and Inlarge him Behind, to be there at Liberty, because he Leads with his Hinder-parts,
and his Fore-parts follow, to keep the Ground that his Hinder-parts hath got; his Hinder-parts being at Liberty, and his Fore-parts prest, your Hand is to be Low, that the Horse may not go too High, and your Body a little Forward, to give his Hinder-parts Liberty to Lead, and not Help with the Leggs at all, but with the Hand every time to pull him Back, as he Falls to the Ground. For Side-wayes in Corvets, you must Help with the outward Reyn and outward Legg; that is, you must pull that Reyn on which Hand soever he goes, and your contrary Legg; and that's right for Side-ways. Knowing how to Help him Forwards, Back∣wards, and of each Side, in Corvets, put those together, and then you may make him do the Cross when you please, without any Diffi∣culty. For the Saraban in Corvets, it must be with the outward Reyn, which is to be pull'd first on one Side, and then on the other Side, in every Corvet, from side to side, Helping only with
your Hand; your outward Shoulder following it, and not Helping with your Leggs at all. All Ayres must be quick from the Ground, and are to Stay upon the Hand; that is, to Sou∣tenir, or hold him there, but it must be Gent∣ly; a leight, and a firm Hand, Helping every time. If a Horse beats upon the Hand, it is, because he doth not Obey the Curb; and in that case, you must Raise him very High in Passadoes, and hold him there, which puts him upon the Curb; and if this will not do, then Gallop him upon a straight Line by a Wall, or otherwise; and from his Gallop stay him upon the Hand, and let him go in Cor∣vets; or let him Gallop forward Le petit Gallop, and Stop him, and then Raise him three or four Passadoes very High, and hold him on the Hand when he is Up, and this will cure him; if not, then Trot him, and Stop him good hard Stops; and pull him Back: And upon the same Circles D'une piste, Gallop him, and Stop him, and pull him Back, and this will Settle him on the Hand, I warrant you; your Stirrups being of
an equal Length, except one of your Leggs was Shorter than the other, and rather a Hole shorter than too Long; but still that you may Sit straight; not so Short as the Italians, or the Spaniards, but that you may Sit upon your Twist, and Straight upon your Stirrups. THE TRUE WAY FOR CORVETS. THe Seat is to be just as in Terra a Terra, but not so Stiff, nor so Oblique; the Bridle-Hand eeven with his Neck, the Knuckles towards his Neck on which Hand soever he goes; but the Hand still eeven with his Neck, two or three Fin∣gers above the Pommel, and a little Forward, and no Help but Soutenir, and in good time, according to the Horses time; for every Horse takes his own time.
Quick it must be from the Ground, and to stay in the Ayre upon the Hand, your Body al∣wayes Going to that which Comes to you; that is, To Bend a little to him as he Rises; but so Insensibly, that the Beholders cannot per∣ceive it. You are to Sit as Forward to the Pommel as you can, being straight, and your Thighes and Knees as close as if they were Glued to the Saddle, but your Toes down, that you may be Weak in the Hams; that is, to have your Nerves Weak from the Knees down-wards, and Strong from the Knees upwards, and not touch your Horse with the Leggs, nor Help with your Leggs at all; but to leave his Croup free to follow his Fore-parts that Leads. For when the Horse is between the Pillars, or at the Single Pillar My Way, and no body on him, yet he goes as just as can be, and yet there is no Leggs that Helps him, therefore you must not Help with your Leggs at all; for, if you Help with your outward Legg, he thinks he must go Terra a Terra; and if he doth go in
Corvets, he goes all Awry, and Leans on the outside; and if you Help with the inward Legg, then he puts out his Croup, and Leans all on the inside; and if you Help with both your Leggs, it Presses him too much, and makes him go too quick a time; therefore the Right way is not to Help with your Leggs at all. This is for a Horse that goes Perfectly; but if a Horse puts In his Croup too much, you must put it out with your inward Legg; and if he puts out his Croup too much, then you must put it In with your outward Legg: But Re∣member alwayes, that your Horse goes Byas upon his Circles, his Fore parts always to Lead, which is Oblique: And this is the Exact way for Corvets.
OF CORVETS upon VOLTOES, AND To Change upon them. SIt straight, a little Oblique; help not with the Leggs at all, until you Change; the Toes down to unbrace your Nerves, and your Hand eeven with his Crest, or Neck, and only Soutenir, and not help every time, but (in Musical time) ac∣cording to the time of the Horse, for every Horse takes his own time; though all Ayres should be quick from the Ground, and to stay upon the Hand, and help with the Rod in a just time, either Cross his Neck, or on the inside, which you please, as you find occasion: And as the Horse is thus going upon his Voltoes in Corvets on the Right-Hand, when you would Change him, put your Right-Legg gently to him, and then hold him Up with your Hand a little, on the inside of his Neck, the Knuckles alwayes to∣wards
his Neck, on which Hand soever you go; and as soon as he hath Changed, then take your Right-Legg from him, as before, and help not with the Leggs at all, only the poise is to be a little on the outside. Now you are on the Left-Hand, when you would Change again, put your Left-Legg gently to him, and your Hand to hold him up a very little on the inside of the Turn, and then take away your Left-Legg as before, and help not with the Leggs at all. The Reason why (upon his Changes) I begin with the Legg, and not the Hand, is this: If I began with the Hand, he would Stop; and if I did Turn my Hand, his Croup would go out, and be Lost, and therefore I begin with the Legg; but instantly I hold him up with my Hand, when they are so near together, that none can perceive it: If his Shoulders do not come In enough, you must Turn your Hand, to help with the outward Reyn. And this must be done so Neatly, and Gently, and with so much Art as possibly can be, which is the Quintessence of Changing upon Voltoes in Corvets: For Demy-Voltoes
in Corvets, the same way, and the same Helps; and so for a Demy-Ayre, the same Helps. A Horse that retains his Forces, and is Pare∣seus, and towards Resty, Corvets is an Ayre that will not agree well with him; and Horses of great Fire, and Fougue, that are Impatient, are very Improper for all Ayres, as Corvets, Demy-Ayres, and Leaps; but they are more proper to go upon the Ground; for, as to Furious Horses, and Im∣patient, all Ayres augment their Collers, and de∣prives them of Memory and Obedience. I would have the first Lesson in Corvets to be made leasurely, and high Before, which is Passa∣does; for that (long time before he brings his Fore-Leggs to the ground) doth give him means to as∣sure his Hanches, and to firm his Head, and to bend his Fore-Leggs, and to Divert him from Ap∣prehensions, and Unquietness, and to hinder him from Trampling, which is Trepigner.
Here I will shew you, How to Dress LEAPING HORSES. WAlk a Horse forward, and then make him make one Leap, and presently Raise him High; a Passadoe, or two; and stay him, and keep him upon the Hand, and then Augment your Leaps, and Diminish your Passadoes, and so by little and little he will Leap perfectly; and after he is perfect upon a right Line forward, then you must put him upon Voltoes, or Circles, and con∣tinue the same Method; but the Circles must be a little Large at first. You must Remember, when you Raise him to Leap, That you Help him with your Rod behind, either one Stroke, or more, as you please, so it be in time; and that is, when the Horse is Raised, then Help him, but alwayes high Passadoes after he hath Leapt. Remember to Sit Straight, your Stirrups a little shorter, a hole, or so; for too Short would throw you out of the Saddle, and to Long would
disorder your Seat, and make you lose your Stirrups; your Toes down, to slack your Nerves from the Knees downward, or else the Horse would Bolt forward too much; for a Leaping Horse should never go Forward above a Foot and a Half at the most; and when you Raise him, instantly put your Brest out, which makes your Shoulders go a little back (though insensibly) to the Beholders; for, did you not so when the Horse Rises, it would be too late when he Yerks behind, or Raises his Croup. Now I must tell you, that your Knees and Thighes must be as Close as if they were Glu'd to the Saddle; and for your Bridle-Hand, you must alwayes Help with it the outward Reyn, to bring In his outward Shoulder, to Narrow him Before, and Inlarge him Behind, to Press him on the in∣side of the Turn, and to be at Liberty without the Turn, that his Croup may go a little Out, and be Free; for else, How should he Leap, if his Croup were Subjected, or Bound up? There∣fore the outward Reyn is to be Used for all Leaps whatsoever, either Forward, or upon Circles.
Here I will Tell you a Secret for the Hand, concerning Leaping Horses; and that is this: The Bridle being a little Longer than ordinary, Raise him well, and every time put your Hand a little Forward, to Soutenir, and stay him there upon the Hand, as if he hung in the Ayre; and in every Leap help him so, and take a just time, like a Ball at the Bound. All Leaps are made upon the Hand, and no∣thing else; therefore see that the Horse be well Setled upon the Hand, before ever you make him Leap; for nothing disorders a Horse's Mouth more than Leaps: For, a Pace and a Leap, it must be done the same way. Thus ends the Method for teaching Leaping Horses.
A TRUE OBSERVATION IN RIDING. THere is no man, that hath not a Musical Head, that can be a good Horse-man, be∣cause all Horses ought to go in a just and Musical time, though the time Varies in every Horse, some Slower, and some Quicker; and besides, as no man Plays on the Lute, but the same Strings that he Stops with his Left-Hand, he always Strikes with his Right-Hand, or else it would be Ill Mu∣sick: So in Riding, whatsoever you Touch, or Help with your Left-Hand, you must Strike with your Heel, or Calf of your Legg, or else it will be Ill Musick on Horse-Back: And therefore a good Horse-man should never Fail to have Hand and Heel to go together, no more than the Musitian his two Hands together. Here Ends the Third Part.
THE FOURTH PART, Which Contains all the FAULTS & ERRORS THE HORSE Can commit; with the Vices, and Horse's Sins in the MANNAGE, And the ways How to Rectifie him, and the Medi∣cines How to Cure him. NO Horse makes a Fault, but it is either in his Shoulders, or his Croup; either Before, or Behind: That is, He doth either Disobey the Hand or the Heel. If you Work Horses, as I have told you, in the first Lessons, he can never be Entier, which is,
Not to Turn; for, Entier is to put In his Croup, and put Out his Shoulders; and those Lessons puts Out his Croup, and In his Shoulders, which is contrary to Entier: So that Suppling a Horses Shoulders thus, a Horse can never be Entier; for indeed, it is the Stifness of his Shoulders, more than his Croup; and Working as I have told you, he shall never be Entier: But, if he be very Obstinate, pull the Inward Cavezone's Reyn hard to you, and Spur him on the inside, and that will Cure him. If the Horse doth not Obey the Heel, but puts Out his Croup, then his Head to the Wall (Legg and Reyn contrary) will Cure him; if not, then upon his Circles put his Head from the Turn, and Help him with your outward Legg, and Spur him, (if there be cause) then bring In your inward Shoulder, which puts In his Croup; but his Leggs go False: If this will not do, then pull the out∣ward Cavezone's Reyn to the Turn, which In∣fallibly will put In his Croup, but Falser than the other; because now he is pull'd to Look out of the Turn, and his Croup before his Shoulders, and
his Leggs very False; but what is good for the Stomack, is ill for the Liver, and one must not Rectifie to many things at once; but when you have Cured the Vice, fall to the True Way of Riding again. When a Horse goes False upon his Terra a Terra, in bringing in his Shoulders too much, and taking too much Ground with his Fore-parts, there is no way to Remedy it, like Tying the in∣ward Cavezone's Reyn as Straight as possibly you can to the Pommel; for then he hath not so much Room to bring In his Shoulders, though it ap∣pears otherwise; but thus he takes shorter Steps, and less Ground; and then he is Cured. TO Work only with the Bridle, a Horse that hath the Vice of bringing In his outward Shoulder too much. THis Vice is Disobeying both the Hand and the Heel; but more the Hand: For, no
Horse can bring In his Shoulders too much, but he must put Out his Croup; and no Horse that bringeth In his Shoulders too much, but he comes into the Turn, and keeps not his Ground; and if he Rise too High, he hath more Liberty to bring In his outward Shoulder: Then the Busi∣ness to Recover him of that Vice is, To keep him Low, and to make him go Forward Truly, both with his Leggs and Body, you Sitting in the right Posture as you should, and with true and right Helps for Terra a Terra, as I have shewed you before. Then to Cure him is thus; sit Oblike as I have shewed you, pulling the inward Reyn, your Hand on the outside of his Neck, your Knuckles towards his Neck; and to keep him Down, that he shall not Rise too High, your Bridle-Hand as low as his Neck, and that will keep him down; and there is half his Vice Cured, that he cannot come In so much. And now to keep him from coming In at all; because his coming In is by reason of his not going Forward: Therefore to make him go Forward, you must Help with both your Leggs; and as the outward Legg keeps In his
Croup, so the inward Legg puts him Forward; so the Hand Low keeps him Down, and both Leggs puts him Forward, and then he is Cured with right Helps, and goes Truly. This I have tried, and find it to be most true; where all the other Helps may do, but they are False, both for the Man's Sitting, and the Horse's Going; therefore I set down none but this, because you should not Use them: Doing Voltoes may be good sometimes, for this Vice may fix his Croup. OBSERVATIONS. MAny Horses, though they can do nothing but Trott, yet when they are Prest in the Mannage, they will make a shuffling Amble; nay, they will perfectly Amble, which is the worst Action for the Mannage that possible can be; and therefore to hinder them of that Action, there is nothing better, than to pull in their Heads into the Turn as much as possible you can, and to put
them upon as Narrow Circles as you can; and this will hinder them from Ambling: And to give them the Spurrs soundly, when they Amble, will also put them from Ambling: Many strong Horses will Amble when they are Prest in the Mannage, but commonly Horses Amble out of Weakness, either by Nature, or that they are al∣most Tyred: As soon as Foles are Foled, we see that they all Amble at first, because they are so Weak; and after they come to a little strength, then they Trott. There are many Horses, that whensoever they are Prest, they will put up their Heads; it may be to shun the Pressure of being put upon the Hanches; for, holding up their Heads puts them off of the Hanches. To Remedy this, Tie the Ca∣vezone, My Way, to the Pommel; for, that pulls down his Head, and therefore must put him on the Hanches: But the Horse, to hinder that, will Strive still not to be upon the Hanches, by putting out his Croup; then you must Spurr him on that side until he Obeys you: It may be he casts up his Head, because he doth not Obey the Curb; then
you must Trott him, and Stopp him; and Gallop him, and Stopp him, and pull him Back; and this upon the Shoulders, and then he is Cured. Whensoever a Horse goes too much on the Back, and fetches disordered Leaps, there is no way better to Hinder him, than to Hold him well and fast on the Hand; for, a Slack hand gives him liberty to Leap, when a Stiffer hand hinders him from Leaping. When a Horse uses to go Low in Corvets, and that by much Rest, and many Holly-daies, or but little Riding, the Horse goes too much on the Back; there is nothing takes him off more, than to put In his Croup, and his outward Hanch, for that subjects his Hinder-parts so much, as he is hindred, and tied up from Crouping, or going up∣on the Back: But before you come to that, it were very good to Trott and Gallop him so long upon Large Circles, D'une piste, until you find that you have totally abated his Chine, and taken him off of his Back, and then put In his out∣ward Hanch, to subject his Croup again, that he may go on the Hanches, and not to go on the Back.
For there is nothing in the World puts a Horse more upon the Hanches, than the Cavezone My Way, tied to the Pommel, and to Press him on the outside of the Turn, that he may Lean on the outside; that is, to Lean on his outward Legg, that is, on his outward Hinder-Legg, which is done by the inward Reyn cross his Neck, or tied to the Pommel, to put him on the outside. If a Horse will not Trott right, but wrangle in his going, between a false Trott, and a false Gallop; then tie the inward Reyn of the Cavezone very straight to the Pommel, and put out his Croup very much upon Large Circles; and if he still doth gumble, and falsify his Leggs, give him the Spurr, within the Turn; or both Spurrs soundly, and good Stops; and this Infallibly will make him Trot right, and go just upon his Trott, or Gallop, as he should do.
OF A RESTY HORSE. A Resty Horse is he that will not go Forward; the Way then is, To pull him Backwards, and then he will go Forwards: It seldom Fails; but if it do Fail, then use your Spurs to the pur∣pose; and though he Rebels a great while, the Spurs will perswade him at last, being the best Argument you can use to him, if they be given Sharply, (soundly, and in time) and are continued until he doth Yeeld, which certainly he will do at last; for this Remedy never fails; all other Re∣medies are Foolish; you were as good Apply Rose Water and Sugar-Candy to him: Therefore the Spurs does the Business. For all our Old Writers were mightily deceived in it. For a Horse that is Retenu, Paresus, or Contre-Coeur, which is all but a spice of Restiness, be sure to use the Spurs. For a Horse that Falls down upon the Ground, or in the Water; Bites, or Strikes; nothing bet∣ter
than the Spurs. But I must tell you, for Vitious Horses, that indangers the Company by Biteing, and Striking, there is no better way than to Geld them; for that will Cure them, or nothing. But I assure you, that Vitious Horses are very hardly Recovered, or never; so dangerous a thing it is to have such a Jade, and the Worst, if he be Spoil'd by an Ignorant Rider: And more Horses are Spoil'd by ill Riding, and are made Vitious, than by Nature. OF A RUN-AWAY HORSE. FOr a Run-away Horse, you must have a gentle Bitt, the Curb slack, a gentle Cavezone, that nothing may Hurt his Mouth, or his Nose; for, certainly sharp Cavezones, and cruel Bitts, hard Curb'd, made Horses Run Away heretofore, making them Desperate. You must also have a Gentle Hand, offend him no way; and Walk him
first without Stopping, but staying of him by little and little; and then Trott him; and from his Trott, to his Walk; and so by little and little stay him: And always make much of him when he Obeys you. And from his Trott, you must Gently Gallop him; and from his Gallop, to a Trot; and from his Trot, to his Walk; and from his Walk, by little and little, stay him, and always with a Gentle Hand. This is to prevent him from Running away. But put the case he doth Run away, What is to be done then? It is certain, that the more you pull the Cavezone, he will Run the Faster to Oppose you; and the more you pull the Bridle, and straighten the Curb, hurting him, the more you Pull, the more he will Pull, and Run the Faster; for Pulling doth no more good, than if you pull'd a Wall: Then if you have Field-Room, when he begins to Run, give him the Spurrs continually, sharply, and soundly, and slack the Bridle, and Spurr him until he begins to slack of himself, and to be contented to stay; and as often as he begins to Run, use the same way,
and at last I dare undertake he will be Cured: For this is the best way in the World for a Run-away Horse. But if you have not Room, and are Circum∣scrib'd in a Narrow place, then let him Run Cir∣cularly, until he is Weary, with a slack Hand: But if you have not Room, the best is, To put him to the Single Pillar, with a good strong Rope; both which will hold him, and there he can Run but Circularly, and Round; and give him the Spurrs soundly, until he be weary, and contented to stay; and this at last, no doubt, will Cure him. Of a Horse that RETAINS his FORCES. WHen a Horse Retains his Forces, you must Gallop him fast, and so Terra a Terra, to put him from thinking; for it is his Resty think∣ing, that makes that Vice: And let me tell you,
that ill Riders, and Bunglers, at the first, makes (for the most part) all these Faults, and Vitious Horses, by ill Riding, correcting them out of time, or else in letting them have their wills too much. Let me tell you for a great Truth, that the worst natured Jade in the world by Nature, is much easier Drest, and reduc'd to Obedience, than a Horse that hath been Spoil'd, and made Resty by ill Riding; so much worse is an ill Custom continued, than an ill Disposition by Nature: For, a customary Drunkard is hardly Reclaimed, which is not by Nature; and if Men be so, Horses may well be so too. TO Assure Horses for the Warrs. AS when a Horse is Skittish, and apprehensive of Noise, there are many Inventions, and none of the Best. To stop the Horse's Ears with
Wool, that he should not Hear; that is, to make him Deaf, and to change the Vice for the disease of Deafness; but the Vice remains still. What if the Wool should fall out? Then you would find he was not Cured. But you may also be deceived, for it may be it is another Sense; that's Sight: And being afraid of Fire, when the Guns are Fired, Would you put Spectacles on him to make him both Deaf and Blind? They are great Follies. Therefore you must use him by little and little, to Shott, both to the Noise and Sight of the Fire; to Drums, Trumpets, and Colours; and the Custom of them will make him indure it, and go constantly upon any of them; Sword, or any thing; for Custom doth all things with Men, and so with Horses. You should teach him to Leap Hedge, Ditch, and Rail; for all these are the Useful things for a Souldiers Horse; as also to Swim well is very necessary.
OF VITIOUS HORSES. WHen a Horse Bites at his Shoulders, and at his Bitt, and at his Riders Leggs, and Rises, and turns Round, ready to come Over: The best Remedy that I know, is, To Ride him without a Cavezone, to Offend him as little as may be; and to Tie the Nose-band as straight as you can; as also to have another Nose-band be∣low, where the Bitt is tied; and to tie that as straight as possibly can be; so straight, as he cannot open his Mouth: And when the Horse finds that he cannot Bite, he will Leave those Jadish Tricks in a little time. And because the Spurrs, given him out of time, appear to be the cause of his Vitiousness, and Restiness, therefore do not give him the Spurrs of a great while, but only Trot him upon Large Circles, and Walk him Quietly, and Peaceably; and when you have gained him to this Point, upon a peaceable and little Gallop, you
may then touch him with the Spurrs, but very gently, only to make him Feel them, and no more; and this way will Cure him, or else nothing. THE Old way for Trench and Martingal. THis Way is to no purpose at all to Dress a Horse, since the end of Riding is, To go with the Bitt; for, with the Trench and Mar∣tingal, you must use both Hands, and you have not a third Hand for the Sword; but with the Bitt, your Left-Hand governs the Horse, and your Right-Hand is free for the Sword: But I will let you see, that to use the Trench and Martingal, is just so much time lost, as you Ride Horses with it, and no preparation at all for the Bitt: For first, the Trench hath no Curb, therefore they will not understand the Curb by it, because it hath none. Then Secondly, there is no Trench in the world, or Snaffle, that ever wrought upon the Bars of a
Horse, but upon his Lips, and the Weeks of his Mouth. So, what preparation is there in the Trench for the Bitt, when the Trench can neither make him understand the Curb, nor the Bars? And the Bitt Works only upon those two places, Curb, and Bars; and without those two, no Horse can be a Ready-Horse. Nay, pull down the Horses Head as much as you can with the Mar∣tingal, or the Trench, it shall never work upon his Bars; the Snaffle is the same; for the Trench is but a great Snaffle: Then for the Martingal, use it never so long, the Horse shall not be setled one jot the better when you take it off. So now you may see how unuseful a folly the Trench and Martingal is, for the Dressing of Horses; meerly so much time lost to no purpose, and la∣bour in vain, and disordering the poor Horse; so that I wonder at the Horse-men, that had no more Wit than to use it. It is the Bitt, with the Cavezone, and the true Art of Riding, that Makes, and Dresses Horses perfectly, and not the Trench and Martingal; no, nor the Martingal with the Bitt, if it be tied to
the Arches of the Bitt, for then the Curb never Works; no, nor the New-fashioned Martingal, that is tied to the Cavezone, for it hinders the operation of the Bitt. OF THE FALSE REYNS. TO work Horses with False Reyns, is very False working; for, being tied to the Arches of the Bitt, and pulling it, that slacks the Curb; and so no Horse shall be firm, and setled with it; for, that Horse that doth not suffer the Curb, shall never be a Ready-Horse; so it makes the Bitt like a Snaffle. There is no way but the Cavezone, and the Bitt, to Settle and Dress Horses withal perfectly; and when a Horse is perfectly setled upon the Hand, (then being put upon the Hanches) he will go so perfectly, and Easily, as you shall hardly feel him upon the Hand, the Bridle will be so slack, and he will go so just.
If you Work, as this Book Instructs you, you shall never have any Horse Vitious in any kind, if no body else have Rid him; and after he is Drest to that Perfection, he will hardly make you a Fault, if you Work as you should do. Of the Follies of some People, thinking they can Make Leaping-Horses. THere are many presumptuous Fellows, as Igno∣rant as they are Presumptuous, that Laugh∣ing, say, They will make any Horse a Leaping-Horse. Why? Because they will make him Leap over a Stick, like a Jack-anapes, or a Dogg; or make a Horse Leap over a Barrel, a Rail, Hedge, or Ditch. If that were all, we should have many Leaping-Horses; for, I know hardly any Horse but will do it, without any great Art: God help their Ignorance, poor Fools! For, a Horse to Leap so, is not the same Leaping, as a Horse Leaps in the Mannage.
First, for their Horses that Leaps over Hedge and Ditch, and of their fashion; they lay the Reyns in his Neck, and puts him Forward, which is a Leap of their Fashion, but not a Leap in the Mannage: And where they give him the Reyns to Leap, we hold him, and help him up with the Hand to Leap; and so with our Heels, if it need, at the same time: And thus the Horse Obeys both the Hand and the Heels, at the same time; hath an excellent Mouth, and a good Apuy, both upon the Bars, and the Curb. A Gentle-mans Hunts-Boy, though he can Leap his Masters Gelding over a Hedge, will not make him Leap upon the Bars and the Curb with his Snaffle; since his Snaffle hath no Curb, and his Snaffle never works upon the Bars, but upon the Weeks, and Lips of his Horses Mouth: Besides, our Horses will Leap so in a place, and not at Leap-Frogg, as their Horses, or at Barley-break, to Leap two or three Yards forward without feeling of his Mouth. Thus doth Ignorance Talk of things they do not Know: Nay, some Horse men hath been so foolish, as to think they could make a
Leaping-Horse, with laying Fur-bushes for him to Leap over, which is the same as a Hedge; so foolish they have been: And now you see the truth of this, truly Anatomized to you. OF A Horse that goes Incaputiato, which is, when he Armes himself against the Bitt. OUr Learned Authors are mightily mistaken about this Vice, as they call it, saying, A Horse is at no Command, and hard on the Hand, because the Branches rests upon his Neck, or Shoulders, and you cannot pull, or help him with your Hand at all; wherein they are horribly de∣ceived: For, I have had Horses that have Armed themselves against the Bitt, as much as any Horse could do, and yet were as sensible to the Hand, and as leight on the Hand, as any Horse in the World; so they are mightily mistaken: For, if the Horse goes perfectly upon the Hanches, he
must be leight on the Hand, let him Arm, or his Head be never so Low; and therefore they are De∣ceived that thinks otherwise. This should have been put in the Second Part. FOr Terra a Terra, you must Help with the In∣ward Reyn; Press him on the Outside, and your Outward Shoulder a little Down; and then his Outward Shoulder cannot come In, as it doth with the other Way before-mentioned: And thus the Horse is Prest all on the Outside of his outward Hinder-Legg, and so upon the Hanches; which in the other is upon the Shoulders, and the Horse being Prest on the Outside, his Leggs are at Liberty, to Lead on the Inside, and so he goes Eeven, and not Cross; which is the exact and right Terra a Terra.
AN EPITOMY OF HORSE-MANSHIP. In all Ayres you must Help with the Outward Reyn. FIrst for Corvets; you must Help with the outward Reyn, and if the Horse be not on the Hanches enough, you must Soutenir more, not give him a time, but hold him up more upon the Hands: And if his Croup go Out, you must put your outward Legg a little to him; and if he put his Croup In too much, you must put your inward Legg a little to him, and turn your Hand a little more, just over his Neck, and only turn it up, but not within his Neck.
You must help with the outward Reyn to bring In his outward Shoulder; for if that did not come In, he could not Turn upon Voltoes; and so his Croup is a little at Liberty, which makes him go the easier, freer, and at more Liberty to go straight for∣ward. To go Byas, on either Hand, you must still help with the outward Reyn, and Soutenir; that is, hold him up, without giving him a time: For, the Horse gives himself a time better than you can, and you must help with the outward Legg; that is, Legg and Reyn of a side, but both on the outside still. To make him go Back in Corvets, use the out∣ward Reyn; but here you must give him a time with your Hand every cadance that he makes, and your Hand closer to your Body; not to pull him Back, but to give him a time; and as he Falls, that time is to be a little Back, but not above a Straw breadth: Let your Body be a little Forward, your Leggs a little Back, and Sit not too Strong.
OF DEMY — AYRES. YOu must use the very same Helps, as in Cor∣vets, in every thing: For, when his Croup is within the Voltoe, if you Help, as I have told you, (so you put him forward) he will go easily, and just, as a Horse should always go forward, in every thing, but when you will pull him Back. OF LEAPS. USe the outward Reyn still, but you must Soutenir more; that is, to hold him up Harder, and not to give him a time, but still to hold him up, for the Horse gives himself the best time; and do not Help with your Leggs, but only Hands and Rod; and the Rod under Hand, and Help him in time, and as much upon the Dock as you can, to make him Strike Out.
Upon Voltoes use the outward Reyn; but here his Croup must be a little out, to give him Liberty, for else he could not go, if his Hanches were sub∣jected; and he must go Larger upon his Voltoes, as if he went forward with all the Liberty that may be; for this is a forcible Ayre. OF PASSADOES. STill use the outward Reyn, to bring In his outward Shoulder; and so in Demy-Voltoes. So in the Piroyte, with the outward Reyn; but not to Turn the Hand on the inside of his Neck, and keep him Low. To Gallop and Change, with the outward Reyn still.
OF TERRA A TERRA. HEre you are to use the inward Reyn, for now you must keep the outward Shoulder Back, and give his inward Shoulder Liberty, that he may look into the Turn, rest upon his outward Leggs, and his inward Leggs at Liberty, which you may know by his Neck leaning on the outside. You must know, that the outward Reyn brings In his outward Shoulder, presses him on the Inside, and gives his outward Leggs liberty, and so his Croup goes a little out. Use the outward Reyn in Passager; for, if his outward Shoulder comes not In, How shall he lap one Legg over another, which they call Incavelar in Italian, and Passager in French? Now, whatsoever makes his Croup go out upon a Trot, or Gallop large, it works his Shoul∣ders; so his Croup going out (Legg and Reyn on a side) works his Shoulders, because his inward Legg goes out as upon Large Circles, his inward Legg being wrought: This working his Shoulders
is an excellent thing for a Young Horse, or an ignorant Horse at first; for without his Shoulders be Supple, he shall never go: Besides, it keeps him from being Entier, or have the Credenza, which is, Resty in Turning, and is the worst Vice a Horse can have. TO WORK his CROƲP. LEgg and Reyn contrary, his Head to the Wall, Works his Croup, so the inward Reyn be pulled. Cross his Neck, Legg and Reyn contrary, his Croup In, works his Croup, so the inward Reyn be pull'd Cross his Neck; his Croup in, the inward Reyn pull'd hard on the outside, so that his Neck may Lean on the outside, Works his Croup. In his Length the same, and Raise him in Pas∣sadoes his Croup In, works his Croup; and all this puts him upon the Hanches to Boot, which is all our business.
Now, as you are Working his Croup, you must give him the Spur now and then, to make him Flie; for he never Obeys it, until he Flies it; it is not a Correction with the Spurr, but a little Touch; which may be given him upon Large Circles too; that is, he must Flie it, and yet be upon the Hanches: This touch gently with the Spurr, may be upon any thing; to thrust him like a Carreer, to stop him, and thrust him away presently again, makes him Obey the Heel perfectly; Stoping, and going Back, and Raise∣ing of him, puts him upon the Hanches. You must understand, that a Horse having two Hinder-Leggs, when his inward Hinder-Legg is put out, by the outward Reyn, then his out∣ward Shoulder is wrought, and his Croup out, and not upon the Hanches; is prest within, and at Liberty without. But when his outward Legg is prest by the inward Reyn, and your outward Legg; then his Croup is wrought, and he is upon the Hanches; so the outward Reyn works the Shoulders, and the inward Reyn (with the outward Legg) works the
Croup, and puts him upon the Hanches; and the more, if you Raise him in Passadoes. To work his Fore-parts, and his Hinder-parts; to press him on his Leggs, without the Turn, and at Liberty within the Turn; to Press him on his Leggs within the Turn, and at Liberty without the Turn; to Obey the Hand and Heel, and to be upon the Hanches, is all that can be done: And this that I have Written doth it perfectly. Until he be Supple on the Shoulders, and Stop perfectly upon his Trott, and is perfectly setled upon the Hand, he shall never be a Ready-Horse: The way to Supple his Shoulders best, is the Cave∣zone My Way; and to pull the inward Reyn to your Knee, which brings In his outward Shoulder; Galloping puts him upon the Apuy; but never Gallop him until he Stop perfectly upon his Trott, and that he is so Leight as he offers to Gallop of himself. The Stop upon a Trott, must be hard, and on a Sudden; the Stop upon a Gallop, with two or three little Falcadoes; and never Stop and Raise him together, but Stop first, and Raise him afterwards.
To Work his Croup, you must use the Cave∣zone's Reyn Cross his Neck; which puts him so on the Outside, that you may feel his out∣ward Hanch to go In, and his Neck to Lean on the Outside. So that pulling the Cavezone to your Knee, brings In his outward Shoulder, and Supples his Shoulders; Presses him on the Inside, and puts him at Liberty on the Outside. So pulling the in∣ward Cavezone's Reyn Cross his Neck, works his Croup; that is, his outward Hanch being put In, (Legg and Reyn contrary) he Leans all on the Outside, and makes him Obey the Heel; Pres∣ses him on the Outside, and gives him Liberty within the Turn: Never Stop him, but put your outward Legg to him; or else he cannot be upon the Hanches.
AN EFFECTUAL DISCOURSE OF HORSE-MANSHIP. CErtainly the Foundation of all Ayres in the Mannage, and the Ground of every thing, is, Trotting, and Stopping, with Looking into the Turn; a gentle Stop, not too Hard, which puts a Horse upon the Hanches, and settles him upon the Hand; because it pulls him Down before; but too Hard a Stop pulls him Up before; and there∣fore puts him off of the Hanches. To make him Look into the Turn, the Cave∣zone, My Way, and pulling the inward Reyn to your Knee, low, or beyond it, brings In his out∣ward Shoulder, and Bends him into the Turn very much; Supples his Shoulders, Presses him within the Turn, and leaves his Leggs at liberty without the Turn; and pulling him Down before,
makes him Stop well: But see still, that his out∣ward Shoulder comes In, and then he shall never be Entier; which is the greatest Vice a Horse can have. To Tie the inward Cavezone's Reyn to the Pommel, puts a Horse on the Outside, and pres∣ses him there, except your inward Legg puts Out his Croup; therefore I would have you Tie the inward Cavezone's Reyn to the Girths be∣low, which Presses him within, and gives Li∣berty to his Leggs without the Turn, and brings In his outward Shoulder: And thus Tied to the Girths, is more powerful, than if you held it in your Hand; for, many Horses may force your Hand, which they cannot do, when it is Tied to the Girths; and pulling him Down thus, makes him Stop well. Going Back sometimes, is an ex∣cellent thing to put him on the Hanches, to put him on the Hand, and to make him Leight on the Hand, and to make him Advance. For Passager, there is nothing better, than Tying the inward Cavezone's Reyn to the Girths; for it brings In his outward Shoulder, to lap
one Legg over another, and Supples his Shoulders. Passadoes is a rare thing to put a Horse upon the Hand, and prepare him for all Ayres; it puts him on the Hanches too; and especially is excel∣lent for Leaping Horses; and all this with the in∣ward Cavezone's Reyn Tied to the Girthes; upon a Trott, or Le petit Gallop, it is an excellent thing to give him a little touch with the Spur, to make him Flie it, and Obey it; but then it must not be abandoned upon the Shoulders, but upon the Hanches, when he feels the Spur. The Cavezone is the Rarest thing in the world for Dressing of Horses; not only to Preserve their Mouth, but to give them the Ply, which is to Bend them into the Turn, to make them Look in∣to the Turn, to work their outward Shoulder, to bring it into the Turn: And thus to Supple their Shoulders, either upon a Trott, or Gallop D'une piste; or Passager the Croup In, or Legg and Reyn on a side; and all this to Supple the Shoulders, which is a prinpal thing. The Cavezone again, (Legg and Reyn contrary) works a Horse's Croup; his Croup out, as if it
were to the Pillar, or his Croup In for Passager, or to the Wall; for Legg and Reyn contrary, works his Croup; for it puts him on the Hanches, because it Presses him on his outward Leggs, and makes him subject to the Heel; for he cannot get from it, so Legg and Reyn contrary works his Croup, as the former wrought his Shoulders; Prest him within, and gave him Liberty without: So this Legg and Reyn contrary Presses him without, and gives him Liberty within. But when you work Legg and Reyn contrary, I would wish you to have the Cavezone's Reyn in your Hand; for so you will Help him the better. Thus you see how Powerful the Cavezone is to Work Shoulders, or Croup, or any thing for the perfect Dressing of Horses; so that I will un∣dertake to Dress a Horse better, and more perfectly, with a Cavezone without a Bitt, than with a Bitt without a Cavezone; therefore use the Cavezone; but then it must be My Way, or else it is of little effect. Since Trotting, and Stopping upon the Trott, is the Foundation of all Ayres in the Mannage, there∣fore
highly Esteem of it, and Practice it most; that is, Never do any thing with your Horse, until he Stop perfectly upon his Trott; for, if you do, you will perfectly Spoyl him for ever. Whether upon a Large Circle D'une piste his Croup Out, upon a Trott, or his Croup In, or straight by a Wall: When you Stop, be sure you put your Body Back, and pull In your Bridle-Hand, but not too Suddenly at first; and be sure you pull the inward Reyn hard, to put him on the Outside, to rest on his outward Hinder-Legg, which puts him upon the Hanches; so that you may be sure, at the same time, to Help him with your outward Legg, which certainly will put him Effectually upon the Hanches, which is our main Business, and Work: And therefore do this per∣fectly, and it will pull Down his Head.
ANOTHER LESSON TO Put him upon the HANCHES, which is very Effectual. TO put a Horse upon the Hanches, Tie the inward Cavezone's Reyn to the Girthes, and then Walk him D'une piste, or a short Trott, your inward Legg to him, and be sure he nei∣ther puts his Croup Out, nor In; for if he doth either, this Lesson is of no Force; but if he doth not, there is nothing puts him more on the Hanches.
It is very Material, for the Dressing of Horses in the Mannage, to Know the several Operati∣ons of the Inward Cavezone's Reyn (My Way) Tied to the Girthes, or Tied to the Pommel. WHen the Inward Cavezone's Reyn is Tied to the Girthes, it Works his outward Shoulder, Presses his Leggs within the Turn, and leaves his Leggs at Liberty without the Turn. It is Excellent to Trott him Large or Nar∣row D'une piste, or Gallop him Large on Narrow D'une piste, for this Supples his Shoulders, his Croup a little Out, which brings In his outward Shoulder more. It is good also, Legg and Reyn on a side, his Croup Out, to Supple his Shoulders. It is Excellent in Passager, his Croup a little In, to Lap one Legg over another, because his outward Shoulder comes In; but if you Press his Croup too much In, it is impossible he should go;
because the Reyn, being Tied to the Girthes, Works his outward Shoulder; and putting his Buttock In too much, puts his outward Shoulder back; and two Contraries is impossible to be Wrought at once. It is Excellent for Le petit Gallop, his Croup a little In, and proper for it, because it works his Shoulders. The inward Reyn Tied to the Girthes, is pro∣per and excellent for Corvets, because it brings In the outward Shoulder, and so consequently gives a little Liberty to the Croup. In all these Lessons, if his Shoulders come not In enough, you must turn your Bridle-Hand a little, which Works the outward Reyn, and so consequently the outward Shoulder. This Working of the Shoulders, makes all Hor∣ses easie; and thus Wrought, they shall never be Entier. This Tying the inward Cavezone's Reyn to the Girthes, is an Oblike Line within the Turn, and therefore works his outward Shoulder. The inward Cavezone's Reyn, Tied to the Pom∣mel,
is an Oblike Line cross his Neck, and this Line puts Back his outward Shoulder, and puts Forward his Inward Shoulder; Presses him on the Outside, and gives his Leggs Liberty within the Turn, and is most proper for Terra a Terra, which never any found out but my self; but it is Naught for Corvets, because it subjects his Croup too much; but this Works his Croup mightily, either Legg or Reyn contrary, his Croup Out; or Passager, his Croup In; either in his Length, or a little Larger; and so to Raise him in Passadoes; and makes him Infinitely subject to the Heel. But this Oblike Line cross his Neck to the Pommel, is not so powerful, as when I have it in my Hand, and pull it to my outward Shoulder, because the Line is then longer, then when it is Tied to the Pommel. When his Head is to the Wall, (if you would Work his Shoulders) then pull the Inward Cave∣zone's Reyn to your Knee; if you would Work his Croup, then pull the inward Cavezone's Reyn to your outward Shoulder. There is no doubt, but that, though the in∣ward
Cavezone's Reyn be Tied to the Pommel, to Trott him upon Large Circles, or to Gallop him Large, it Works his Shoulders; but the Reason of that is, because his Croup is out, and then of necessity his outward Shoulder must come In. If you can Work, according to these Precepts, and Apply these Excellent Lessons to the Horse, and see perfectly where the Fault lies, either in his Shoulders, or his Croup, you will Infallibly Make all Horses that ever comes into your Hands; which I wish you may do, and not find Fault with it, because you cannot do it. For Corvets forward, you must Help with the outward Reyn; your Hand not on the Inside of his Neck; but just upon his Neck; your little Finger turn'd Up, which pulls the outward Reyn; and the Hand a little Forward, which Works upon the Curb, and to Soutenir, which is to hold him Up: Thus the Curb pinches him a little; and to give himself Ease of the Curb, he is forced to go upon the Hanches, and that is as I would have him. Which way soever the Branches of the Bitt
goes, the Mouth goes alwayes contrary; you pull the Bridle, and that pulls the Branches Up; then the Mouth goes down, which puts him upon the Hanches; for no Horse can be upon the Hanches when his Head is up. This is the Truth in Corvets; and in all Ayres whatsoever, you must still Help with the outward Reyn, and never give a time with your Hand, but only Soutenir, which is, to Hold him Up; for the Horse will give himself a better time than you can: But going Backward, you must Help him every time, and with the outward Reyn, your Body a little Forward, and your Leggs a little Back; and Sit easie upon him, and not too hard. Upon Voltoes in Corvets, use the outward Reyn, and in every thing as I told you before; only let the Horse go Forward, as if he did not Turn, which ought to be upon all Circles whatsoever, except the Piroyte; and commonly you are not to Help with your Leggs at all; but if you do, it must be the outward Legg a little to him. This is the per∣fection of all Ayres whatsoever.
THE QUINTESSENCE OF HORSE—MANSHIP. IF your Horse will not Bend his Shoulders, which is the principal thing, then Tie the Cavezone (My Way) to the Girthe, the inward Reyn as strait as you can; but then you must Work upon no∣thing but Large or Narrow Circles, his Croup out, either upon a Trott, or a Gallop; or Legg and Reyn on a side, his Croup out: And this Infallibly will Supple his Shoulders, and he shall never be Resty, nor Entier. But should you put In his Croup when he is Tied so hard, it is so much against Nature, and such a Forced thing, as it is impossible for him to go; and so, to get what Ease he can, where you think to work his outward Shoulder In, you put it Back, and work his Inward Shoulder; for the poor Horse hath no other way to Ease himself.
and thus Horse-men are deceived; work against Na∣ture, and Spoil the Horse. But if you would Work his Shoulders, and put In his Croup, then you must take the Inward Cave∣zone's Reyn in your Hand, and pull it to your Knee, and Help with the outward Legg; this is not so great a Force as the other, and therefore brings In his outward Shoulder with Ease, and gives a little Ease to his Croup, being not so much In; and therefore is proper for Le petit Gallop, his Croup In, and for Passager his Croup In; most proper for a Gallop, but not at all for Terra a Terra; for there is none for Terra a Terra but my way, which I wonder how I found out, it is so Rare and True: For there the outward Shoulder is kept Back, and the inward Shoulder Forward, and the Cavezone's Reyn to your Knee; the outward Shoulder comes In, and the inward Shoulder is kept Back. This is the true difference betwixt Le petit Gallop, and Terra a Terra, upon Circles. This you should get by Heart, for it is the Rarest thing in the world, because it is a subtile Truth.
To Know the Degrees of Tying the inward Cave∣zone's Reyn, either to the Girthes or the Pommel of the Sadle, which is the Life or Soul of the Mannage, never found out but by My Self. I Begin with Tying the inward Cavezone's Reyn to the Girthes, which works his outward Shoul∣der, presses him within the Turn, and leaves his outward Leggs at Liberty; is fit for Gallopping large, or narrow, D'une Piste; as also for Passager, either large, or in his length; and for the Pi∣royte. No Horse can go, or be made a Ready-Horse, un∣til his Shoulders be extreamly Supple; and there∣fore this is the best Lesson in the world to Supple his Shoulders: But you must take heed of put∣ting his Croup in too much, for it is impossible to put in his Croup, and put out his Croup all at one time; for the Cavezone's Reyn tyed to the Girthes, puts out his Croup, and at the same time
you will put in his Croup with your Heel, which cannot be: And when the Horse finds your Ig∣norance, working impossibilities, then he grows Im∣patient and Resty, as he hath great reason to be so. Therefore you must not Tye the Cavezone too strait; for if you do, the Horse cannot go for∣ward, but turns Round, and so grows Resty again, as he must needs do, which is your Fault, not his. You should Tye the Cavezone no straiter than to make him Look into the Turn, and no more; that is, so strait, that he cannot Look out of the Turn: And thus he may go Forward, and be pleased; which is Natural, and no Impos∣sibility. The inward Cavezone's Reyn tyed to the Pom∣mel is another Business; for, this presses the Horse on the outside of the Turn, and leaves his Leggs within the Turn at liberty; keeps back his outward Shoulder, and works his Croup, and his outward Hanch, and makes him subject to the Heel, because he cannot get from it; so he Obeys it, and Flies it. This is proper for Terra a Terra, and Demi-Voltoes upon the ground; but the in∣ward
Cavezone's Reyn must not be tyed too strait; for if it be, then the Horse cannot go for∣ward, no more than the other way, and will grow Resty: So the inward Cavezone's Reyn must be pull'd no harder, than just to make him Look into the Turn, and no more. To pull the inward Cavezone's Reyn to your Knee, or beyond it, works the Horse's outward Shoulder, presses him on the Inside, and leaves his Leggs at liberty without the Turn, supples his Shoulders, and gives a little liberty to his Croup; and the inward Cavezone's Reyn tyed to the Girthes hath the same opperation. You are to know, that the Invention of the Pillars is a meer Routine; that is, by Rote; be∣cause it works by the Eyes, and not by Feeling the Hand, and the Heels, and being obedient to them: So that this Method of the Pillars, hath spoiled more Horses than any thing in the world, working upon the Eyes, by looking at the Pillars; and never any man wrought Horses well at the Pillar, but Pluvinel, that Devised them. My Way is a Method of the Cavezone, and
there he goes not by Rote; his Eyes doe nothing here, nor the Voyce; but the Horses meerly obey the Hand and the Heel, which makes them all Perfect, of what nature or condition soever they be, and never Fails me. OF THE Bridle and Bitt without the Cavezone. YOu must know, that the Bitt is a strange Engine; for, wheresoever you pull the Cheek, the Mouth always goes contrary: When you turn up your little Finger, it pulls the out∣ward Reyn, which works his Shoulder on the outside, and gives liberty to his Croup on the Left-Hand: Your little Finger a little more turn'd up, and a little on the left side, works his outward Shoulder, and gives his Croup a little liberty, which is fit for Corvets, Trotting, and Gallopping D'une piste; so in Pasadoes, excellent for Passager, so for the Piroyte. Here the Horse is Prest within the Turn, and at liberty without the Turn.
For Corvets upon Voltoes, if his Croup be at the Center, put your outward Legge a little to him, and turn your Hand a little, and Soutenir, and he will go perfectly upon his Turns if he goes forward, which is the main business, and the Reason of that is, because he goes a little Byas; This is all with the Reynes, in your Left-Hand. And this makes him also go perfectly, Le petit Gallop. For Terra a Terra, it is another thing, the Reynes being in your Left-Hand; Here you must pull the inward Reyn, to presse him on the out-side, and leave his Legges at Liberty, within the Turn; and you must turn your Fist inward, and turn it to your Left-Shoulder, close to it, which pulls the inward Reyn, and your outward Legge close to him; Thus he is prest on the out-side, and his Leggs at liberty with∣in the Turn; But for Terra a Terra on the Left-Hand, your Bridle still in the Left-Hand, you must turn your little Finger up, and pull it close to your Right-Shoulder, helping with the outward Legge.
If the Reynes be separated in both your Hands, then you must pull the inward Reyn, and your Right-Hand close to your Left-Shoul∣der, turning up your little Finger, and your Legge gently on the out-side. But for the Left-Hand, the Reyns separated in both your Hands, you must pull the inward Reyn close to your Right-Shoulder, holding up your Left-Finger gently, helping with the outward Legg: And so you see there is a great deal of difference betwixt the Reynes separated in both your Hands, and when you have the Bridle only in your Left-Hand, (for the help is with your Hands:) This is perfectly for Terra a Terra, and Demi-Voltoes. I have told you a Bitt is a strange Engine; for, wheresoever you pull the Cheeks, the Mouth goes contrary; If you work the outward Reyn, you pull the outward Cheek to you, and the Mouth goes contrary, but in Corvets, and then it works in the middle of the Curb: For Terra a Terra, when you pull the Cheeks to you, then his Mouth goes contrary, and looks into the Turn
as he should do, and then the Curb works on the other side, contrary to the Cheek, of what Hand so ever you go: If you pull the Cheeks strait, the Mouth goes down; but when you put your Hand, as far forward as you can, to the perpen∣dicular Line, then that works hardest on the Curb. If you pull the inward Reyn to your Knee, or from your Body, Tribacato, that it layes the Cheek even to the Eye of the Bitt, then it works not at all upon the Curb, so great a difference there is betwixt the Cavezone and the Bit; For Terra a Terra, when you pull the inward Reyn to your outward Shoulder, then the Reyn is a great deal within the Pommel, which Hand soever you go on; but whensoever you help with the outward Reyn, then your Hand must be three Fingers above the Pommel, and as many Fingers before it: This is certainly the Truth of the Bitt and Bridle. When I work the outward Reyn of the Bridle, I finde his Croup is lost, although I help with the outward Legge, because it is Legg and Reyn both of a side; but Legg and Reyn con∣trary works his Croup, and keeps back his outward Shoulder.
The Cavezone being upon his Nose, is contra∣ry to the Bitt; for if you pull up the Cavezone's Reyn, you pull up his Head; and if you pull it down, you pull down his Head. As for the false Reyns, It is a very false thing; for the Reyns being tyed to the Arches of the Bitt, when you pull the Reyns it slacks the Curb, and never works on it, like a Snaffle; nay, it is so much worse than a Snaffle, for a Snaffle will go to the Weeks of his Mouth, or Lipps; and though the Curb be slack, yet it will not suffer it to go so high, and therefore gawles all his Barrs. And this is the Truth of the false Reyns.
OF THE Perfection of Dressing Horses in the Mannage, brought into so Narrow a Compass, that if it be learned by Heart, and punctually Practised, it is impossible to fail Dressing any Horse whatso∣ever. Suppling and Working a Horses Shoulders be∣ing the principal Thing of all, I therefore be∣gin with it. To Supple a Horses Shoulders upon a Trott, or Le petit Gallop. THe inward Cavezon's Reyn tyed to the Girthes, or in your Hand, pull'd to your Knee, Supples his outward Shoulder, on the Right Hand at liberty without the Turn; and
prest within the Turn, his outward Shoulder comes in, and his inward Shoulder is kept back: But how doth this Supple his inward Shoulder for Terra a Terra; for there the inward Shoul∣der is put forward, and his outward Shoulder kept Back? I will tell you Perfectly how it is: On the Right-Hand his outward Shoulder is brought In, and Suppled, and his inward Shoul∣der kept Back. Now, what was on the Right-Hand Suppled, (which was his outward Shoulder, and outward Legg for Terra a Terra) on the Left-Hand is the same Legg, and the inward Reyn there, and outward Legg puts back his outward Shoulder, and brings in his inward Shoulder and Legg. So it is the same Legg still, that was on the Right-Hand his outward Legg, and is now his inward Legg on the Left-Hand in Terra a Terra; and that's the truth of it, for thus he is Suppled. It is the very same of the other hand, and no difference at all. This I onely Write to let you see how Working his Shoulders prepares him for Terra a Terra, but we do not yet declare what Works his outward Shoulder.
You must know, that upon a Trott, or a Gal∣lop, upon large or narrow Circles Dune piste, his Croup must be a little Out, to Work his Shoul∣ders more, and the outward Reyn of the Bridle also to Work it yet more; with a short Trott, and a short Gallop, that he may not be too much upon the Shoulders; the Cavezones Reyn tyed thus, he never can go Terra a Terra, because his outward Shoulder is wrought. Trotting and Stopping is the Foundation of all things in the Mannage, for it Firmes the Horse upon the Hand, and puts him upon the Han∣ches: For Stopping, you must pull him down; that is, pull your Hand close to your Body, your Body back, and your inward Legg to him, to put his inward Legg to his outward. Going back is an excellent thing, both to Firm him on the Hand, and make him Light of the Hand; as also to put him upon the Hanches, and to make him the apter to advance before. The Petit Gallop pacifies Furious Horses, and gives them an Apuy; Stopping upon a Gallop must be at two or three Falcadoes by a Wall
strait forward, your Right-Shoulder or Left-Shoulder to the Wall, either forward or back∣ward: There it is with the inward Reyn, and inward Legg; or not to help with your Leggs, but as you see Occasion. Another excellent Lesson to make Horses Supple on the Shoulders. THere is nothing like Legg and the inward Cavezones Reyn on a side, as if his Head were to the Pillar, his Croup out; For, though he goes on the Left-Hand, he is Supple on the Right-Hand: This Lesson makes him that he can ne∣ver be Entier, which is the Worst Vice a Horse can have. Entier is to be Resty in Turning, which is very dangerous for the Man by coming Over; for to oppose Turning, he puts in his Croup with all the force he can, and so puts out his Shoulder craftily and maliciously, to hinder from Turning. So this excellent Lesson is as if
his Head were to the Pillar, Legg and Reyn on a side, he puts out his Croup, where before he put it in, and that hinders him from being En∣tier; and when he puts out his Shoulder, this brings it in, which hinders him more from being Entier; so that it cures him perfectly of that Vice: And going on the Left-Hand, Legg and Reyn on a side, it Supples him more on the Right-Hand: So going on the Right-Hand, Legg and Reyn on a side, Supples his Shoulders for the Left-Hand; and a better Lesson there is not. For all Ayres whatsoever thus upon Voltoes. FOr all Ayres, it is with the outward Reyn of the Bridle, that his outward Shoulder may come a little in, that he may turn, which gives a little liberty to his Croup, and so turn the Ea∣sier; and if the inward Cavezones Reyn be tyed to the Girthes, it will bring in his outward Shoulder the better; and your outward Shoulder being a
little in, and higher than your inward Shoulder, will bring in his outward Shoulder the better; your Hand must be in this manner, on the Right-Hand your Bridle-Hand just over his Neck, turning up your Little Finger, which pulls the outward Reyn, as it should do, and Soutenir, which is to hold him up; for that puts him on the Hanches: The reason is, that it Presses him on the Curb; and he, to give himself ease on the Curb, goes on the Hanches, and then the Curb is a little Slack. You must not put your Hand within his Neck, and bend him, for that puts him upon the Shoulders, and you must alwayes keep your Horse upon the Hanches. Now for the Left-Hand, you must do thus, the Bridle-Hand a little within the Neck, and hold up your Little-Finger, and Soutenir, and it will work the same effect as on the Right-Hand: With your Legg help not at all, and he will go perfectly well. If he puts out his Croup, put your outward Legg to him; if he puts in his Croup too much, put your inward Legg to him, and still Soutenir, to keep him on the
Hanches; and remember, there is nothing makes Horses go well but the Seat; for he that hath not a good Seat, cannot have a good Hand: And there is nothing Dresses Horses but the Hand and the Heels; and remember, the only thing in Ayres upon Voltoes, is to make your Horse go forward still, as if he did not Turn; for so he goes easily and just; for if you turn your Hand too much, his Croup would go out. And for all Ayres, your Bridle-Hand must be a little before the Pommel; and for the Piroyte, you must help with the outward Reyn, your out∣ward Shoulder being a little higher than your in∣ward Shoulder, and a little in towards his Left-Ear on the Right-Hand, and towards his Right-Ear on the Left-Hand; for the outward Reyn brings in his outward Shoulder, and so consequent∣ly puts out his Croup: For, you must under∣stand, that in Trotting, one Legg is before ano∣ther; so in Galloping, one Legg is before another; in Terra a Terra, one Legg is before another; in the Piroyte, one Legg is before another; but in Corvets, or any other Ayre, it is not so, but
much contrary, as thus: In Corvets his Leggs are even, and not one before another; and though his Hinder-Leggs seem Wider than his Fore-Leggs; yet his Hinder-Leggs are within the Lynes of his Shoulders, which makes him go up∣on the Hanches. When a Horse is perfectly Obedient to the Hand, and the Heels; then put, in Corvets, your inward Legg a little to him, and help with the outward Reyn of the Bridle, and Soutenir a little, and help gently with the inward Legg; that is, put the Calf of the Legg to him, and he will go perfectly upon his Ayre, in Voltoes: For Groupadoes you must give his Croup a little more Liberty, and not constrain it so much as in Corvets; and in Capriols not constrain'd at all, but rather Even, or a little Out; for a Horse in Capriols, if his Croup be subjected, it is im∣possible he should go; Therefore in Capriols you must give his Croup all the Liberty that can be; and when you help with the Rod, it must be when he is Falling, and not when he is Rising, for else his Croup cannot Rise.
FOR PASSEGER, or INCAVELAR, Which is To Lap one Legg over another not Every time, but every Second time. IN this Passeger, the Action is not so much as a Trott, but more than a Walk; an Action the fittest in the world to make a Horse under∣stand the Hand and the Heeles; Because it is Gentle, and puts him into no Fury: And if he Obeyes my Hand and Heeles upon Pas∣seger, I can make him do any thing that his Forces will give him leave to do. Here the inward Cavezon's Reyn must be Tyed to the Girthes, or Pulled to your Knee; for that Works his outward Shoulder, which is most proper for Pas∣seger, to make him Lapp his outward Leggs over his inward Leggs; and to make him do it the better, you must help with the outward Reyn of the Bridle: And thus ends this Excellent Lesson.
FOR PESATES. THe inward Cavezones Reyn tyed to the Girthes, or pull'd to your Knee, you must help with the outward Reyn of the Bridle; in Passeger, raise him as high as you can, and Hold him there Gently, and without Fougue, and Walk him away again, and Raise him again, and do this all along the Volto, and this is a right Pesate. This puts him upon the Hand, and prepares him for all Ayres whatsoever; for with∣out this, no Horse can go in any Ayre. There∣fore this must be your first Lesson, before you ever offer to put him upon any Ayre: There is nothing more Graceful in all Ayres, then for a Horse to bend his Fore-Leggs up to his Body; but there is more in it than that, for, what Horse soever that goes in Ayres, if his Fore-Leggs be stiff before, or that he Pawes with his Fore-Leggs, necessarily he is on the Shoulders, for that puts him upon the Shoulders; and if he
Bend his Leggs up to his Body, it puts him upon the Hanches; for it puts him Backward, as being Stiff Before puts him Forward, and so upon the Shoulders. Your Horse must alwayes go Forward except you pull him Back. You must Remember, that the inward Cave∣zones Reyn tyed to the Girthes, or pull'd to your Knee, works his outward Shoulder; with the outward Reyn of the Bridle; and all this is for Le petit Gallop, and not for Terra a Terra: And to facilitate Le petit Gallop the better, put your outward Shoulder higher than your inward Shoul∣der, which infallibly Works his outward Shoul∣der, as the outward Shoulder down infallibly sub∣jects and works his Croup. Your Leggs must be as neer to the Horse as you can without touching him, that your Helps may be the more Secret: Spurring is a Correction, but Pinching is an ex∣cellent Help, and it must be done thus: First put your Legg as close to him as you can, and then turn your Heel to him & Pinch him Delicate∣ly; if his Shoulders come not in enough, the
inward Reyn being Tyed to the Girth, then Bend his Neck with the outward Reyn of the Bridle, as much as possibly you can, as if you would Brake his Neck, and that shall Supple his Shoulders sufficiently. Here Ends these most Excellent Lessons for Sup∣pling of a Horses Shoulders, which is the Principal Businesse.
OF THE Perfection, and Exact way of making Horses to Obey the Heeles. IT is the inward Reyn absolutely that makes him Obey the Heel, and nothing else; for it puts him on the out-side, which puts in his outward Hanch, so that he cannot get from the Heel, and therefore must necessarily Obey it. The inward Reyn being to your outward Shoul∣der, or the inward Reyn of the Cavezone to your outward Shoulder, and giving the Horse a little touch with the Spur now and then, doth admit of a Corvet when you go, the inward Reyn to your outward Shoulder, the Horses Head to the Wall, because it is Side-wayes, and not upon a Circle; for the inward Reyn (as if his Head were to the Pillar in Corvets, and his Croup out) subjects his Croup: The inward Reyn in Corvets strait
by a Wall, whether your Right-Shoulder, or Left-Shoulder be to the Wall, subjects still his Croup. Nay, it is also the inward Reyn, when he goes in Corvets Backwards, whether your Right-Shoulder, or Left-Shoulder, be to the Wall. And if you go in Corvets strait by a Wall, it is still the inward Reyn; But if you make a Demy-Volto in Corvets, then it is the outward Reyn, for else he cannot turn in Corvets; and you may easily change from the inward Reyn to the outward Reyn, and not brake his time at all: But by no means his Croup In in his Ayre upon Circles, because it keeps out his outward Shoul∣der, keeping his outward Shoulder back, and then he cannot go in his Ayre upon Circles, be∣cause he cannot turn; for it is the outward Reyn in all Ayres, that brings in his outward Shoulder, that he may Turn, and his Croup a little at Liberty, that he may Turn the Ea∣sier. But the inward Reyn for Passeger, his Croup out, makes him Obey the Heeles; so the inward
Reyn for Passeger, his Croup in, makes him Obey the Heel, but not upon Circles, there it is the outward, for else he could not Turn; but in Pesates he may do it, but not upon his Ayre, and in Pesates easily; for there he Rises but once or twice, and goes in Passeger again: This is the exact way to make a Horse Obey the Heel perfectly. OF TERRA A TERRA. IN Terra a Terra you must use the inward Reyn, and the outward Legg; the inward Reyn pull'd to your outward Shoulder, presses him on the out-side on his outward Hanch, makes him lean on the out-side, and look into the Turn; presses him on the out-side, and at liberty within the Turn; his Fore-Legg within the Turn lead∣ing, and his Hinder-Legg on the same side fol∣lowing, and his outward Legg short.
Thus his inward Shoulder is put Forward, and his outward Shoulder kept Back with your Hand: You must Soutenir as you do in Ayres: But this is with the inward Reyn, and your Bridle-Hand within the Pommel, looking into the Turn, poising upon your outward Stirrup a little, your outward Shoulder down, and in, which sub∣jects his Croup: Thus you cannot put in his Croup too much; for leaning on the outside, his Croup can never go before his Shoulder; and thus he is for∣ced to Terra a Terra in spight of his Teeth, and to go a time Pa Ta, Pa Ta, which is but two times; And this was never found out but by My Self. But I must Remember you of one thing; which is, that if you tie the inward Cavezone's Reyn to the Pommel, it works his Croup, and puts him on the outward Hanch, and makes him Obey the Heel, but is not so powerful as the inward Reyn to your outward Shoulder, because the Line to the Pommel is the Shorter, and therefore not so Powerful; but if he presses too much, so that you cannot hold him, then Tye it to the Pommel, and that will hold him sufficiently.
OF PASADOES by a Wall. THe exact way of Pasadoes by a Wall, is with the inward Reyn both strait forward, and upon his Demy-Voltoes, for that subjects his Croup, and makes him go just, and look into the Turn, whether up∣on Le petit Gallop, or a Toute Bride, it is all one, being a Demy-Voltoes, and is but half my Terra a Terra, and therefore must have my helps, which is the inward Reyn, and the outward Legg. And all the other ways are False and Senceless. Remember, every Horse must take his own Ayre, and you are not to give him his Time, but to fol∣low his, and so he will go exactly; For if you offer to give him your Time, he will never go; for Na∣ture hath given him one time, and you will give him another, which shall Spoyl him for ever.
TO Give you more light to Ʋnderstand the Difference betwixt the Working of the Outward Reyn, and the Inward Reyn in Corvets. WHeresoever the Horses Croup is out, or strait by a Wall, either sideways in Corvets, or for∣ward in Corvets, or backward in Corvets, or his Head to the Pillar in Corvets, it is all with the in∣ward Reyn, to subject his Croup, to put the in∣ward Shoulder forward, and to keep the outward Shoulder back, which ncessarily subjects his Croup, and the same when his Croup is out, or strait by a Wall. But now in Corvets, when his Croup is in upon Voltoes, or Demy-Voltoes upon Circles, there you must help with the outward Reyn of the Bridle, and inward Legg, for else he could not Turn; besides, here his outward Shoulder must be brought In, and his inward Shoulder kept Back, that he may turn the Easier being narrowed before, and enlarged behind, as the other was prest behind, and enlarged before;
and with the outward Reyn, his Croup hath a little Liberty: And here's the true difference betwixt the outward Reyn, and the inward Reyn, in their several workings. But when you help with the outward Reyn, you must help with the inward Legg Gently. FOR Terra A Terra (My Way) upon Voltoes. HEre I subject his Croup, and enlarge his Fore-parts; put forward his inward Shoulder, and his outward Shoulder is kept Back; This is done with the inward Reyn, and the outward Legg, the same helps serve for Pesadoes; for a Demy-Voltoe is but half a Terra a Terra my way; and therefore the same Helps; I said upon Circles the outward Reyn, but that was in Corvets, and that is clear another acti∣on, than Terra a Terra: So I would have you under∣stand Precisely what they are; For it is the outward Reyn and inward Legg, which is the perfection of
Corvets upon Voltoes; And if you Change, put him forward one Corvet, and then help with the outward Reyn and inward Legg, which is the per∣fection of Corvets upon Voltoes. I must Remember you, that when a Horse goes in Corvets his head to the Wall, it is with the inward Reyn and your out∣ward Legg, but the Horses Fore-parts must go a lit∣tle before his Croup, for so he is more on the Hanches; for if his Croup went before his Hanches, it is False. So if he go, as if his Head were to the Pillar, it is with the inward Reyn and outward Legg, his fore-parts being a little before his Croup. But strait by a Wall whether forward or backward, it is with the inward Reyn and inward Legg: All this is in Corvets. But upon Voltoes in Corvets it is with the outward Reyn, and inward Legg; and to go for∣ward still as if he did not Turn.
OF A RARE WAY To Dresse A Horse Perfectly. IT is to make him Narrow Behind, which is to put his inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hinder—Legg: As for Example, you pull the inward Cavazon Reyn to your Knee, or tye it to the Girths; This Works his outward Shoulder, and puts his inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg, if you help him with your inward Legg, and the outward Reyn of the Bridle; and thus he is Narrowed Behind. This is upon large
or narrow Circles Dune Piste upon a Trott; and upon large or narrow Circles Dune Piste upon a Gallop, which makes him narrow Be∣hind, with the same Helps formerly spoken of. In that Excellent Lesson of Legg and Reyn on a side, as if his Head was to the Pillar, his inward Hinder-Legg is put to his outward Hin∣der-Legg, to narrow him Behind. In Paseger (which is to Lapp his outward Leggs over his inward Leggs) the inward Ca∣vezon's Reyn tyed to the Girthes, or pull'd to your Knee, doth not only Work his outward Shoulder, but puts back his inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg, to narrow him Behind; and to Narrow him more, you must Help with the outward Reyn of the Bridle, and Help with your outward Legg gently. In the Petit Gallop upon Circles the inward Cavezone Reyn tyed to the Girthes, puts his inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg, and the more, if you turn your Hand to Help with the outward Reyn of the Bridle; the Petit
Gallop is one, two, three, and four, which is a right Gallop. In Corvets upon Turns, the inward Cavezon's Reyn tyed to the Girthes; or the outward Reyn of the Bridle, with the inward Legg, puts his inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg, Narrows him Behind, and puts him on the Han∣ches: So all this is the inward Legg put to his outward Hinder-Legg, which is the Effectual business. In Stopping, the inward Cavazon's Reyn tyed to the Girthes, or pull'd to your Knee, with your in∣ward Legg, narrows him Behind, makes him bow in the Gambrel, and puts him upon the Hanches, with pulling your Hand in. As for the inward Reyn, and outward Legg, it subjects his Croup, and puts his inward Hin∣der-Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg, and Nar∣rows him Behind: So side-wayes to the Wall, the inward Reyn and outward Legg Narrows him Behind: Putting his inward Hinder-Legg Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg Narrows him Behind, and puts him on his Hanches; so his
Head to the Pillar, the inward Reyn and out∣ward Legg puts his inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg, narrows him Behind, and puts him on the Hanches; and so forward by a Wall of either side doth the same, and so Backwards; but here it is with the inward Reyn and inward Legg, both on a side, to put his inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hin∣der-Legg, whch is the All in All for Dressing of Horses.
OF A most effectual way TO DRESS HORSES, And so true and certain, that whosoever shall Read it, Mark it, and Understand it, and carefully Practice it, will infallibly Dress all manner of Horses to a great perfection. To Supple a Horses Shoulders. I Have given you many Lessons for it, but I will let you see it clearer than ever; You must pull the inward Cavezon's Reyn low,
and from your body, to bring in the Horses outward Shoulder, which is the business, and makes him bend like a hoope, and then you are right; Upon Passager his Croup must not be a∣bove a quarter in, at the most, for if it be, it pulls back his outward Shoulder, which is false; and he will look out of the Turn, pull the Reyn what you will, so pernitious is putting a Horses Croup in, when you would work a Horses outward Shoulder; but the other way makes him supple, and easie, to do any thing you would have him, with great facility, and never to be Entier, but to goe always Byas. For Terra à Terra relevé, the time, one, two, pa, ta, is done with the inward Reyn pull'd to your outward Shoulder, and with your outward Leg; so here you cannot put in his Croup too much; and thus he is straitned be∣hind, and enlarg'd before, and indeed goes up∣on a Square, his inward Shoulder being put
forward, and his outward Shoulder kept back. Terra a Terra determiné, is another business; for this is, as if a Horse did run a Careere upon a Circle, where he cannot run in his length, and therefore his Voltoe or Circle must be larger, because it is but a Gallop; running being but the action of a Gallop: Here you must help with the outward Reyn, and out∣ward Leg, to narrow him before, and Enlarge him behind, and to go Byas, and this is determiné, Bias in Corvets, as if he did not turn, and so in le petit gallop upon Circles; the outward Reyn is used for both, and so in Passager, the outward Reyn and Leg being Bias. It is a great truth in Horsemanship, that both in Terra a Terra, Demy-Voltoes, and Passadoes, as also in Passager, whensoever a Horse is strait∣ned before, he is Enlarged behind; and whensoe∣ver
he is straitned behind, he is enlarged be∣fore. The exact way to make a Horse go perfectly, is a Square, and not a Circle, which Subjects his Croup extreamly. In Corvets upon a Circle, it is impossible to help with the inward Reyn, because the Horse cannot turn; but the inward Reyn upon a Square, is excellent, with the outward Leg, so he goes a little for∣ward, every time a little: So excellent is the Square. For Terra a Terra, there is nothing like a Square, with the inward Reyn and out∣ward Leg; so upon Demy-Voltoes, in Passa∣does the same, in Passager the same still, upon a Square; His head to the Pillar it must be a Square: The Square is the quin∣tissence of the Mannage, and all this subjects his hinder parts.
The inward Reyn pull'd to your out∣ward Shoulder, with the contrary Leg, Subjects his Croup upon a Square, and makes him obey the Heele perfectly, because he cannot get from it. But when you begin to Dress a Horse in Corvets, Pesates is the ground of all Ayrs; a Pesate is to rayse Him high, and hold him there. But when you put him in Corvetts, it is with the outward Reyn, and inward Leg, to be D'une Piste; and to let him go three or four Corvets in a place, and Walk him away again, and Cor∣vet him again as before; and, in a little time he will make a Turn perfectly in Cor∣vets. But when he is Perfect, then you must help with the outward Reyn, and outward Leg, and Soutenir, and put him
forward always a little, as if he did not turn, and then he will go perfectly in Corvets. FOR THE BRIDLE-HAND; WHICH Deserves to be well Observed, being the Sole of the Manage, and the most Effectual thing that can possibly be. IN Corvets on the Right-Hand, the Knuckles of the Bridle-Hand must be from his Neck, and on the Inside of his Neck, and Soutenir.
On the Left-Hand, in Corvets, your Bridle must be on the inside of the Neck, your Knuckles from his Neck, and Sou∣tenir; for this pulls the outward Reyn. For Terra a Terra, the inward Reyn pull'd to your outward Shoulder, your Knuckles are to be towards his Neck, and Soutenir for the Right-Hand, and your outward Leg. For the Left, the inward Reyn pull'd to your outward Shoulder, your Knuckles are to be towards his Neck, and Sou∣tenir; and this pulls the inward Reyn, your outward Leg being to him. You see, that in Corvets, you work the outward Reyn, and in Terra a Terra, you work the inward Reyn, which is not to be done any other Way than as I have set down.
But in Croupadoes, Balotadoes, and Capriols, there it is with the outward Reyn, to give his Croup liberty, or else he could not Leap, and, if there be cause, help him with the in∣ward Leg a little, to give his Croup more liberty.
OF BITTS, & of the USE OF THEM. THe Writers of Books, and the Horse-men now Living, that think themselves Wise, and great Masters, by the diversity of Bitts, shew themselves full of Ignorance, and Simple People, to imagine, That a peice of Iron in a Horse's Mouth can bring him Knowledge; no more than a Book in a Boyes Hand can, at first, make him Read; or, a pair of Spurrs, planted on Ignorant Heels, can make one Ride well. There is however, a Propriety to fit every Horse, according to the Turn of his Neck; shor∣ter or longer, wider or narrower; the Mouth, the liberty, wider or narrower; the Eye longer or shorter; the Eye straight, or more bending; the Branches stronger, or weaker; the Curb equal; the Hooks according to the just measure of the
Bitt; the Curb three good round Esses, with one Ring, where 'tis Fastened; and two Rings, or Malions, where 'tis Curbed, handsomely furnish'd with Bosses, not too bigg; richer, or poorer, ac∣cording as you please: Not two Rowes of little Chains, tied to the Bitt, within his Mouth, on∣ly One at the most. And this Rule must ever be Observ'd, to have as little Iron in your Horse's Mouth as possible you can: If his Tongue be too bigg, the Liberty must be the wider; if his Tongue be too little, the Li∣berty the less; but you must take heed, that the Apuy, or Resting place of the Bitt, be never made upon the Liberty, for it will Gaul him; but the Apuy must be made in the True place, where it ought to be, which is about Ones Little Fingers breadth beyond the Liberty, on both sides of the Bitt; and the Bitt to be Ones Fingers breadth above his Tushes: The Branches are strong, when the Reyns are slackt; those Branches that comes Back to his Neck most, are Weak; those that go Forward from his Neck, are Strong; and good reason, for you have the greater Pull.
You must measure with a little String, or a piece of a Riding-Rod, from the Eye of the Bitt, strait Down; and if the Cheeks be within that Line, they are Weak; and the more they are within that Line, they are still the Weaker: If the Cheeks be without that Line, they are Strong; and the more they are without that Line, they are the Stronger. You must consider another Thing, which is, That the Cheeks are like a Lever, the Longer it is, it hath the more Force, and the Shorter it is, the less Force; for a Boy, with a long Lever, will Lift up more than the Strongest Man, with a short Lever: And so in a Bitt, the Longer the Cheeks are, they have the more Force, and the Shorter they are, the less Force: For that which is the furthest from the Center, hath the most Force for Lifting or Pulling; and that which is nearest the Center, the least Force: So very short Cheeks, make them as Strong as you will, cannot have that Force that longer Cheeks have. If a Horse hold Up his Head, and Out, then they have shorter Branches, and stronger, to Pull
him Down, and In; wherein they are half Right: So if a Horse holds his Head too Low, and brings it In too Round, so that he Armes himself against the Bitt, which is, To rest the Branches upon his Breast, so that you have no Pull, or Command of him at all; because this Vice is Contrary to holding Up his Head, and Out; for which Vice they had shorter Cheeks, and stronger, to bring it In: So Arming against the Bitt, being the Contrary Vice, they think they must have the Bitt made Contrary; they must have a Long One to put it Up; and since a strong Branch pull'd him Down, they must have a weak Branch to put Up his Head; wherein they are mightily Deceived: For when a Horse Armes himself against the Bitt, certainly Long Branches will sooner come to his Breast, than Short Ones; and it is as certain, that a Weak Branch will come sooner to his Breast, than a Strong Branch; therefore they are so much Deceived. As for a Horse that Armes himself against the Bitt, you must have a Short Branch that will not touch his Breast, and a Strong Branch to keep It
yet further from his Breast: The Hooks of the Curb ought to be made a little Longer, and so Just as not to Hurt, or to Offend the sides of his Cheeks; and if the Curb do not lye in his right Place, two little Iron Rings fastened close to the Top of the Hooks, to keep them Steady, and Fast, is the best Remedy; All other Devices in Bitts or Curbs, are Idle and Ignorant things. THE BITTS that follow are the BEST. 1. A Plain Canon, with Branches A la Con∣nestable. 2. A Plain Scatch, with Bran∣ches A la Connestable. 3. A Canon A la Pigna∣tell; which is a gentle falling and moving Up and Down, and so Low as not to hurt the Roof of the Horse's Mouth; which is the Best, certainly, for all Horses that have Tongues, which I am sure they would not have Prest; therefore I Recom∣mend
that Liberty above all Things in Bitts, and the Branches A la Connestable. To Discharge a Horses Lips, I would have Olives with the Liberty A la Pignatell; those Olives coming short a little of the Bitt, with some little Rings, gives Liberty for his Lips, and Dis∣charges them; and the Branches, A la Con∣nestable. But indeed, I would have but two sorts of Bitts, which is, 1. The Canon A la Pignatell. 2. And the Olives A la Pignatell, to Discharge his Lips, if need be; but the Branches alwayes A la Con∣nestable. Thus you have the Truth of Bitts brought into a narrow Compass; there is little in them to bring a Horse to Understanding, on which we must Work, and that is, his Reason, by the Fa∣vour of the Logitians Distinction of Reasonable and Irreasonable Creatures; for were they as good Horse-men as Schollers, they would have made another Distinction. Well then, it is not a Piece of Iron can make a Horse Knowing; if it were, a Bitt-Maker would
be the best Horse-man. No! It is the Art of ap∣propriated Lessons; fitting every Horse according to his Nature, Disposition, and Strength; Punish∣ing, and, with good Lessons, Rectifying his Vices; Rewarding him, and Preserving him in his Horse-Vertues; and not trusting to an Ignorant peice of Iron call'd a Bitt: For, I will make a perfect Horse with a Cavezone with a Bitt, better than any man shall with his Bitt without a Cavezone; so highly is the Cavezone, rightly used, to be esteemed; For I had a Barbe at Antwerp, that went Perfectly with the Cavezone without a Bitt, which was true Art, and not the Ignorance and Folly of Bitts. The famous Pignatell at Naples, never used but simple Bitts; which made the Ignorant won∣der how he could Dress Horses so Perfectly, with no more sorts of Bitts: But he told them, it was their Ignorance made them wonder at his Art. And so that great Master, in this Art, Monsieur de Plu∣vinel, did the same: For, he had always a plain Cavezone, and not too sharp; and to make it Gentler, did always Line it with double Leather
at the least; for a Horse, to Wry his Head, or suck up his Bitt, or put his Tongue over the Bitt, it never happens in my Mannage, or Method; be∣cause the Liberty A la Pignatel hinders his Tongue for going over the Bitt; and working with the Cavezone, with truly Slacking the Bitt, those things never happens, or do ever Horses put out their Tongues. OF THE IMPERFECTIONS OF A HORSE'S MOƲTH. ALL our Writers in Horse-manship, the great Masters, in that Profession, (as well Old as Modern) are mightily Troubled and Concerned, about the Vices and Imperfections of a Horse's Mouth. As for Example; The first, when a Horse pulls, and sucks up his Tongue: The se∣cond, when he puts his Tongue over the Bitt: The
third, when he doubles it about the Bitt: And the fourth, when he hangs his Tongue out of his Mouth, either Forward, or of one side of his Mouth: For all, and every one of these Vices, our great Doctors in Horse-manship, hath taken a great deal of Pains, with many curious Devices, and many Inventions, with Bitts, to Cure them; and take great Pains, and much Labour about it; so much, as their several Writings, about these particular Vices of the Mouth, would make a great Volume; when the truth is, Most of their Bitts, to Reme∣dy these Imperfections, are much greater Vices than those they would Remedy; and their Physick the greatest Disease, and brings more Inconveniencies with it, than the Vices they go about to Cure. The truth is, in short, I wish a Horse had none of those Faults; but put the case he hath, As put∣ting out his Tongue, or putting his Tongue over the Bitt, or sucking or drawing of his Tongue up, or doubling of it: All these I wish were not; but if they be, the Horse is not prejudiced at all by them, for he will have as good an Apuy with them, as without them; and will be as firm and steady of his
Head, and as sensible of the Barrs, and the Curb, as if those Vices were not; for the Bitt rests, and works still, upon his Barrs; and the Curb works in his due Place, where it ought, in spight of his Tongue, let it be where it will, or not be; for when a Horse's Tongue is Cut off, Doth that hin∣der the Bitt, for working on the Barrs, or the Curb, for working in his due Place? Not at all: Nay, I have known a Horse's Tongue quite pull'd out by the Roots, and yet he went as well as ever he did in his Life; so that is nothing; for the Bitt still works upon the Barrs, and the Curb, where it ought: And a Horse with a Tongue, and put it where he will; or a Horse without a Tongue, is no hinderance to a Horse that hath a good Apuy, or is well setled on the Hand; no hinderance in the world: So that now you see, What vain Curio∣sities, to no purpose, Our great Masters hath troubled themselves about, and pusled many of their Readers, and tormented the poor Horses to boot, to no End in the world. FINIS.
Excellent NAMES for HORSES of MANNAGE. ITALIAN and SPANISH. BElla Donna Bell in Campo Desperato Argentino Dorato Gatto Gatino Rondinello Felice Lampo Soura Speransa Capitano Lupo Mahaumilia Mala testa Melancholia Genette Corsiero Neapolitano Rubicano Signiore Delitia Nobilisimo Dolce Bona Natura Bellissimo Bonissimo Mille Fiore Almenara Nuntio Dracone Arogatillo Diamante Arrogante Il Bravo
Cavallo Imperiale Emperatore Grandissimo Illustrissimo FRENCH. FAvory Mignion Balott Galliard Bonit Perle Roussin Sans Pareil La Perfection Le Delicat Isabelle d' Espagne Monsieur Le Hober Le Petit Barbe Le Grand Barbe Le Turc Le Petit Boutton Le Superbe Le Bouffon La Mervelle Le Miracle Le Courtau Le Fripon Le Larron Le Mechant L' Emerillon L' Admirable Le Diligent Le Parangon Le Loyall Le Sensible L' Enrage Le Fougeux Le Malitieux L' Endormy Le Countre Coeur L' Amour La Maitresse
Le Roy Le Prince Le Duc L' Empereur Le Collonel Le General Le Cardinal Le Pape La Tempeste Le Compagnion Le Comarade L' Amie L' Ennemy Le Philosophe La Ʋielle Le Diable Le President Le Juge Le Capritieux Le Quereleux Le Piqueur L' Yurogne Le Fantasque Le Tenez-ferme Le Jeteur Le Rude Le Vilain Le Coquin Le Poultron Le Poure Le Courageux Le Desprise Le Hardi Galliardon La Mouche Le Troumpeur La Rencontre Le Mouton Le Janti Le Lion Le Renard L' Elefant Le Pegase Le Volant Via Lactea Le Determine La Grenouille Le Gallant
Le Cavalier Mon Roy Le Soldat Le Conquereur Le Conselier Le Terrible La Batalle La Beaute L' Estoile L' Enioue Mars Jupiter FOR DUTCH HORSES. LE Pisante Le Swiss Myn Heare Frison Younker Ʋrselino
