o176 12962038 96086
THE KINGS CORONATION: Being an Exact Account of the CAVALCADE, WITH A Description of the Triumphal Arches, and Speeches prepared by the CITY of LONDON For His late Majesty Charles the Second, In His Passage from the Tower to Whitehall. ALSO THE NARRATIVE Of his Majesties Coronation, with his magnificent proceeding, And Feast in Westminster-Hall, April the 23th. As it was Published by his Majesties Order, with the Approba∣tion and License of Sir Edward Walker, Garter Principal King at Arms. By John Ogilly Esquire. Published by William Morgan his Majesties Cosmographer. Edinburgh, Re-printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM 1685.
I have perused a brief Narrative of his Majesties Solemn Coronati∣on, Printed by Mr. Ogilby, together with his Description of his Ma∣jesties Entertainment passing through the City of London to his Co∣ronation, &c. and in Pursuance of his Majesties Order unto me di∣rected, have examined, and do approve thereof, so as the said Mr. Ogilby may freely publish the same. EDWARD WALKER Garter Principal King at Arms. From the Heralds Colledge this thirteenth of June 1662. An Advertisement. 1. THe four Triumphal Arches built by the City of London, for the en∣tertainment of our late most gracious Soveraign Charles the Second, in his passage from the Tower to Whitehall on the 22th of April, 1661. being the Day before his Coronation. 2. The Inside of Westminster Abby, Describing the places of the No∣bility and great Officers, with the manner of the Kings Coronation, on St GEORGES Day April the 23th. Done on Copper; and proper to be added to this Book, sold by Wil∣liam Morgan at his House, next the Blew-Boar in Ludgate-Street.
THE CAVALCADE; Or His Majesties passing through the City of Lon∣don to His Coronation. April the 22th. 1661. THe City of London having built four Triumphal Arches, and adorned the Streets in the best manner they could, to entertain His Majesty in his passage from the Tower to Whitehall. About ten of the Clock, being all mounted on stately Horses with very rich Trapping, the Cavalcade began in the following Order. After several led Horses followed with Kettle Drums and Trumpets, the Duke of Yorks Horse Guard, next the Messengers of the Chamber, then the Esquires to the Knights of the Bath, the Knight Harbinger, and Serjeant Porter, the Sewers of the Chamber, and Gentlemen shers, Quarter Waiters, the Clerks of the Chancery, Clerks of the Signet, Clerks of the Privy Seal, Clerks of the Council, Clerks of the Parliament, and Clerks of the Crown-Next the Chaplains having dignities, the Kings Advocate and Remembrancer, the Masters of the Chancery, the Kings Learned Council at Law, the Kings Puisne Serjeants, the Kings At∣torney and Solicitor, the Kings eldest Serjeants, the Secretarys of the French and Latine Tongues, the Gentlemen Ushers, daily Waiters, Sewers, Caryers, and Cupbearers in Ordi∣nary, Esquires of the Body, Masters of standing Offices (vizs) Tents, Revels; and Ceremo∣nies, Armory, Wardrobe and Ordinance, Masters of the Requests, Chamberlains of the Ex∣chequer, Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, Knights of the Bath sixty eight, the Knight Mar∣shal, the Master of the Jewel House, and the Treasurer of the Chamber, then Barons young∣est Sons, Vicounts youngest Sons, then the three Barons of the Exchequer, the six Justices of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench and Master of the Rolls, then Barons eldest Sons, Earls younger Sons, Vicounts eldest Sons, then a Kettle Drum, and two Sets of the Kings Trumpets, and the Serjeant Trumpeter with his Mace, then two Pursuivants at Arms before the Barons two and two, being (as all the Train was, especially the Nobility) attended by Gentlemen, Pages, and Footmen in rich habits going before those to whom they did belong, Then Marquesses younger Sons, Earls eldest Sons, and two Pursuivants at Arms before the Viscounts, then Dukes younger Sons, Marquesses eldest Sons, then two Heralds before the Earls, then the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Houshold, then Dukes eldest Sons, and two Heralds before the Marquess of Worcester, and the Marquess of Dorchester, then two Heralds before the Duke of Buckingham, and here the Attendants began to be more numerous and uncovered, then Clarenceux and Norroy the two Kings at Arms, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasur∣er, the Lord High Steward, and sour Serjeants at Arms with their Maces, before two per∣sons representing the Dukes of Normandy and Aquitain, then Garter Principal King at Arms, the Gentleman Usher with the black Rod, and the Lord Mayor of London, followed by the Gentlemen, Pages and Footmen that attended his Royal Highness the Duke of York, (our now most gracious Soveraign,) who was followed by about twenty Serjeants at Arms with their
Maces; after whom came the Earl of Lindsy, Lord great Chamberlain of England, the Earl Northumberland, Lord High Constable of England, and the Earl of Suffolk, Earl Marshal of England, then the Kings Footmen, and Pages, and the King in the midst of the Gentlemen Pensioners and Equirees, followed by the Yeomen of the Guard, then the Duke of Albemarle, Mastes of the Horse, on Horseback, leading a Horse of Estate, the Vice-Chamberlain, The Captain of the Pensioners, and Captain of the Guard, followed by the Kings Horse Guards, &c. In this Order they marched through Croutched Fryers to Algate, and so through the City to White-hall. In Croutched Fryers, on a Stage was placed a Band of eight Wats, and near Algate another Band of the like Musick entertained them from a Balcony built for that purpose. A Description of the Triumphal Arches. IN Leadenhal-Street, near Lime-Street, was erected the first Triumphal Arch after the Dorick Order: On the North side, on a Pedestal before the Arch, was a Woman personating Re∣bellion, mounted on an Hydra, in a Crimson Robe, torn Snakes crawling thereon, and be∣girt with Serpents, her Hair snaky, a Crown of Fire on her Head, a bloody Sword in one hand, a charming Rod in the other, Her Attendant, Confusion, in a deformed shape, being a Garment of severall ill matched Colours, and put on the wrong way, on her Head ruines of Castles, torn Crowns, and broken Scepters in each hand. On the South Pedestal was a Representation of Britains Monarchy, supported by Loyalty, both Women, Monarchy in a large purple-Robe, adorned with Diadems and Scepters, over which she had a loose mantle edged with blue and Silver Fringe, resembling Water, on her Mantle the Map of great Britain, on her Head London, in her right Hand Edinburgh, in her left Dublin. Loyalty was all in white with three Scepters in her right Hand, and three Crowns in her left. The first painting on the South side was a prospect of his Majesties Landing at Dover Castle, Ships at Sea, great Guns going off, one kneeling and kissing the Kings Hand, Soldiers Horse and Foot, with many people attending and gazing. The painting on the North side opposit to this was a Trophy with decollated Heads. The painting over the middle Arch represented the King mounted, in calm motion, Usurpa∣tion flying before him, being a Figure with many Ill-favoured Heads, some bigger, some lesser, and one shooting our of his shoulder like Cromwel, another Head upon his Rump or Tayl, two Harpies with a Crown, chased by an Angel into Hells mouth. Above the Arch, on two Pedestials South-ward and North ward, stood the Statues of King James and King Charles the First, in the middle and somewhat higher, (just over the Arch) the Statue of his Sacred Majesty Charles the Second. Behind the Figure of Charles the Second, in a large Table was Deciphered the Royal Oa bearing Crowns and Scepters. The upper Paintings on the East-side were ruinous, representing the Disorder the Kingdom was in, during his Majesties absence, but on the West side they were finished, to represent the Resturation of our happiness by His Majesties Arrival. The Painting on the South-West side represented the Lord Mayor delivering the Keys of the City to the King, in the Niches were four figures; the first on the South side. a Woman in pleasant colours, the emblem on her shield a Terrestial Glob, the Sun Rising, Bts and Owls flying to the shadow. The second Had on her Escutcheon, a swarm of Bees whetting their stings. The third on the North side had on her shield a mountain burning, Cities and Vine-Yards destroyed. The fourth had on her Escutcheon an Arm, as it were thrust out of the Clouds, and in the hand a naked sword.
Eight Mutes above were on pedestals, four in white, and four in Crimson. The Musick of this Fabrick is ten Drums flanking Rebellion, and twelve Trumpets flanking Monrcoy, aloft under the two Devastations twelve Trumpets and four Drums. Within the Arch, on two Balconies, six Trumpets and four Drums, while the Train passed along, the Drums beat the Marches of several Countries, and the Trumpets sound several Levers, but His Majesty drawing near, the Drums turn their March to a Battle, the Trumpets sound a Charge, and on a sudden Rebellion rowseth up her self; at which Drums and Trumpets ceas∣ing, Rebellion addresses to His Majesty the following Speech. Stand! stand! who e're you are, this stage is ours, The Names of Princes are inscrib'd on Flowers And wither with them! stand! you must we know To Kings and Monarchy a deadly foe; Me, who dare bid you, midst your triumphs stand, In the great City of your native Land. I am Hells Daughter, Satans eldest Child, When I first Cry'd the Power of Darkness smil'd, And my glad Father, thundring at my Birth, Unhing'd the Poles, and shook the sixed Earth. My dear Rebellion (that shall be thy Name Said he) thou Emperours and Kings shalt Tame, No Right so good, Succession none so long, But thou shalt vanquish by thy popular throng, Those Legions, which to enlarge our power we send Throughout the World, shalt thee (my Dear) attend, Our mighty Champions, the seven deadly Sins, By Malice, Profit, Pleasure all their Gins, Bring to our Kingdom some few spotted Souls; Thou shalt by Treason hrry them in shoals. Would you now know what interest I have here Hydra I ride, great Cities are my Sphear: I Sorc'ry use, and Hag Men in their Bed, With Common-wealths and Rota's sill their heads; Making the Vulgar Fanatique Swarms, Court Civil War, and dote on Horrid Arms. 'Twas I, who in the late unnatural Brois, Engag'd three Kingdoms and two Wealthy Isles. I hope at last to march with Flags unfurl'd, And tread down Monarchy thro' all the World. At which Words Monarchy and Loyalty unveling themselves, Rebellion starts as affrighted, but recollecting her self concludes her speech thus, Ah Britain, Ah! stand'st thou Triumphant there, Monarchick Isle, I shake with horrid fear. Are thy Wounds whole, upon thy Cheek fresh smiles? Is joy restor'd to these late mournful Isles? Ah, must he enter, and a King be Crown'd, Then, as he riseth, sink me under ground. Rebellion having ended her Speech. Monarchy entertains His Majesty with the following, Sinks. To Hell soul Fiend shrink from this glorious Light, And hide thy Head in everlasting Night. Enter in safety, Royal Sir, this Arch;
And thro' your joyful Streets In Triumph March; Enter, our Sun, our Comfort, and our Life; No more these Walls shall breed Intestine strise. Henceforth your People only shall content, In Loyalty each other to transcend, May your great Actions and immortal Name Be the whole business and delight of Fame; May you and yours in a perpetual Calm Be Crown'd with Lawrel and Triumphal Palm, And all confess, whil'st they in you are blest I Monarchy,, of Governments am best. Monarchy having ended her speech the Trumpets sound pleasant Levets, and the Drums heat a losty English March whil'st his Majesty, the Nobility, and the Rear Guard pass on. The next Entertainment was at Cornhill Condult, on the top of which stood eight Nymphs clad in white, each having an Escutcheon in one hand, and a Pedant or Banner in the other. On the Tower of the said Conduit a Noise of seven Trumpets. The second Arch. NEar the Exchange in Cornhill was erected a Naval Arch. On the East side were two Stages. On each side of the Street one. In that on the South side was a Person repre∣senting the River Thames; his Garment loose and flowing, Colour Blew and White waved like Water; a Mantle over like a Sail, his Head Crown'd with London Bridge, Flags and Osi∣ers like long hair falling over his Shouldiers, his beard long, Sea Green, and White, an Or in his right hand, the Model of a Ship in his left, an Un beside hi, out of which issued Water, four Attendants in White, representing the four fresh streams which fall into the River Thames, (viz.) Charwel, Lea, Coln, and Medway. In the Stage on the North side, made like the upper Deck of a Ship, were three Seamen, whereof one was habited like a Boat swain: The first Painting on the North side over the City Arms, represents Neptune with his Tri∣dent advanc'd. On the South side opposite was Mars, with his Spear inverced, his shield charged with a Gorgon, over the Arch the Marriage of Thames and Isis. The Painting on the North side over Neptune represents the Exchange. The Painting on the South side over Mars shews the Tower of London. The Pedestals in the upper Story were adorn'd with living Figures, representing Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, with Escutcheons and Pendents, bearing the Arms of the Companies Trading into those parts. Europe a Woman arm'd al'an∣tique, on her Shield a Woman riding on a Bull, and at her Foot a Cony. Asia, on her head a Glory, her Stole of Silk, with several forms of Wild Beasts wrought on it. Africa, a Wo∣man, in her Hand a Pomegranate, on her Head a Crown of Ivory and Ears of Wheat, at her Feet two Ships laden with Corn. America, Crown'd with Feathers of divers Colours; on her Stole a Golden R ver, and in her hand a Silver Mountain. The uppermost Table in the fore Ground represents King Charles the First, with the Prince, Charles the Second, in his hand viewing the Soveraign of the Sea, the Prince leaning on a Cannon, above over the Cornish be∣tween the two Celestial Hemispheres an Atlas bearing a Terrestial Glob, and on it a Ship un∣der Sail. The great Painting on the West side represented the Duke of York, habited al'an∣tique,
like Neptune, standing on a Shell drawn by Sea Horses, before which is a Triton sound∣ing, the Duke holding in one hand a Trident, and the Reins in the other: In the four Niches within the Arch, were living Figures, with Escutcheons and Pendents, representing Arith∣metick, Geometry, Astronomy, and Navigation. Arithmetick, a Woman habited al'antique with her Fingers, erect upon her Vestment∣liues with Musick Notes: in her Escutcheon a Book open'd, with a hand pointing to the Fi∣gures, I.V.X.L.C.D.M. Geometry, a Woman in a pleasant Green, in her Shield a Compass and a Reed. Astronomy, a Woman in an azure and loose Vestment, wrought with Stars of Gold, she look∣ing up to Heaven, in her Shield a Table where are divers Astronomical Figures. Navigation, a Woman in a Sea Green habit, in her Escutcheon an Anchor with a Cable about it. Whil'st the Nobility passed by, the three Seamen entertaln'd them with a Song. Besides the three Sea-men who sang the Song, there were in the like habit six Persons with Wind-musick. The Musick in the other Stage consisted of three Drums and six Trumpets. On two Bal∣conies within the Arch was Wind-musick consisting of twelve Persons. On the West Gallery were placed six Trumpets, and all of them performed their Duty till such time as his Majesty fronted the Figure which represented Thames, and then ceased; upon which Thames made the ensuing Speech. Ten Moons great Sir, their Silver Crescenis fill'd Since, mounted on a Billow, I beheld You on the Bridge, but louder joys there were, That barr'd my Welcomes from your Sacred Ear. Now I. above my Highest bound have Rear'd My head, to say what could not then be heard, Hall Mighty Monarch! whose Imperial Hand Qulets the Ocean and secures the Land. This City whom I serve with Neighb'ring Floods Exporting yours, Importing Foreign Goods, With anxious Grief did long your absence mourn, Now with full joy she welcom's your Return, Your Blest Return! by which she is Restor'd, To all the Wealth remotest Lands afford. At your approach I hast'ned to the Downs, To see your moving Forts, your floating Towns, Your Soveraigns big with Thunder plow the Main, And swimming Armies in their Womb contain. You are our Neptune, every Port and Bay, Your Chambers: The whole Sea is your High-way, Tho' several Nations boast these strength on Land, Yet you alone the Watry World Command. Pardon great Sir, fair Cynthia checks my stay, But to your Royal Palace twice a day I will repair, there my proud Waves shall wait, To bear our Caesar and his Conquering ate.
The River Thames having ended his Speech, the three Seamen entertained His Majesty with a Song, which being ended, the several sorts of Musick performed their Duty whil'st His Ma∣jesty passed on towards Cheap side, at the Stocks was placed on a Balcony, six Trumpets and three Drums, the Fountain there, being after the Thuscan Order, venting Wine and Water. On the Top of the great Conduit at the Entrance of Cheap side was another Fountain, out of which issued both Wine and Water. And on the eight Towers of that Conduit were Persons habited like Nymphs with Escutcheons in one hand, and Pendents or Banners in the other, and between each of them Wind Musick. And on the Standard in Cheap side was a Band of Waits. The Third Arch. THe third Triumphant Arch stood in Cheap-side near Wood-street, being an Artificial Build∣ing of two Storles; one after the Corinthian way of Architecture, the other after the Composite, representing the Temple of Concord: In the Spandrels of the Arch there were two Figures in Female habits: One representing Peace, the other Truth. That of Peace had her Shield charged with an Helmer, and Bees going in and our: Truth, on the other side, in a thin habit, on her Shield, Time bringing Truth out of a Cave; over the great Painting upon the Arch of the Cupula was represented a large Gorgon with three Heads Crown∣ed, in his three right Hands, a Lance, a Sword, and a Scepter; in his three left hands, the three Escutcheons of England, Scotland, and Ireland, before him the Kings Arms with three Imperial Crowns. On the top of the Cupula, Concord, a Woman, in her right hand holding her Mantle; in her left a Caduceus; under her feet a Serpent strugling. On the West side, a Woman standing at the Helm of a Ship; in her left hand a Cornucopia: Alost were living Figures with Pennons and Shields, representing the four Cardinal Verthes, each with an Attendant; Prudence, on her Shield, Bellerophon on a Pegesus, running his Javelin into the mouth of a Chimera: Justice, on her Shield, a Woman, holding a Sword in one hand, a Dallance in the other; Temperance, a Viol in her left hand, and a Bridle in her right. Fortitude, with a Lion, having the Arms of England in an Escutcheon. The internal part of this Triumph or Temple, was round the upper part enlightned by artificial Lights; below it was divided into teuparts, by Pillars and Pedestals: Within the Temple were twelve living Figures, three placed above the rest: The first the Goddess of the Temple in rich habit, with a Caduceus in her hand, and a Serpent at her seet: Behind the Goddess a Man in a Purple Gown, like a Citizen of London, presenting the King with an Oken Garland. Of the Nine lesser Figures: the first bear on a Shield the King of Bees flying alone: and a Swarm following at some distance. The second, on his shield a Testuo, advancing against a Wall. The third, a Shield charged with Hears. The fourth, like a spread Eagle with two Heads, one of an Eagle, the other of an Edrich; in the mouth of the Edtrich an Horse-shoe, in the Talent of the Eagle a Thunderbolt. The fifth, a bundle of Javelins. The sixth, two hands joyned athwart the Escutcheon, as from the Clouds holding a Caduceus with a Crown. The seventh, Arms d down, as Guns, Pikes, Ensigns, and Swords. The eight, a Cadu∣ceus, with a winged Hat above, and wings beneath, two Cornucopia's coming out of the middle, supported by a Garland. The ninth, a bright Star, striking a Gleam through the midst of an Escutcheon. With these Figures is intermingled a Band of twenty sour Violins. The Basis and Capitals
within this Triumph are as Brass, and the Pillars Steel. The Temple thus adorned, and the Musick playing, till His Majesty came to the middle of the Temple, Concord, Love, and Truth, who till than had not been seen, were by the drawing of a Curtain discovered, and entertain'd Hit Majesty with a Song. The Song ended, Concord addrest her self to His Majesty in these words, Welcome, great Sir, to Concord's ane Which your return built up again. You have her Fabrick Rear'd so high, That the proud Turrets kiss the Skie. Tumult by you, and Civil War, In Janus Gates imprison'd are: By you, the King of Truth and Peace, May all divisions ever cease. Your Sacred Brow, the blushing Rose, And Virgin Lilly twin'd enclose: The Caledonian Thistle down Combine with these to adorn your Crown: No discord in the Hibernian Harp, Nought in our Duty lat, or Sharp. But all couspire that you as best, May 'bove all other Kings be blesk The Speech ended, His Majesty at His going off was entertain'd with another Song. On the little Conduit, at the upper end of Cheapside, were four Nymphs, each of them hav∣ing an Escutcheon in one hand, and a Pendant in the other. In a Balcony at the Entrance of Pater Hoster Row, were placed His Majesties Drums and Fife. Between that and Ludgate there were two other Balconies erected, in one was placed a Band of six Waits, in the other six Drums: On the top of Ludgate six Trumpets: At Fleet-bridg; a Band of six Waits. On Fleet Conduit were six Nymphs clad in white, each with an Escutcheon in one hand, and a Pendant in the other, as also a Band of six Waits, and on the Canthorn of the Conduit was the Figure of Temperance mixing Water and Wine. The Fourth Arch. IN Fleet-street near White-Friers stood the fourth Triumphal Arch, representing the Garden of Plenty, being of two Stories, one of the Dorick Order, the other of the Ionick. Over the Postern on the South-side of the Entrance was Bacchus, a Youth in a Charlot drawn by Tygers, the Reins Vine-branches, his Mantle a Panthers Skin, his Crown of Grapes and Ivy, a Thyrsus in his left hand, a Cup in his right. The painting over this represents Silenus ou his Ass, with Syrs dancing in drunken and antick postures, the Prospect a Vineyard. On the North side opposite was Ceres drawn in a Chariot by winged Dragons, and crowned with Ears of Corn: In her left hand Poppey, in her right hand a blazing Torch, the painting over her being a description of Harvest.
On the West side of the Arch over the South Postern, was the Goddess Flora in a various coloured habit, in one hand Red and White Roses, in the other Lillies, on her head a Gar∣land of several flowers; the painting over this a Garden with Walls, Statues, Fountains, Flow∣ers, and Figures of Men and Women walking. Opposite to this on the North side was the Goddess Pomona crown'd with a Garland of seve∣ral Fruits, in her right hand a Prunning Hook, in her left hand the Sun, at her feet all sorts of Gssing and Gardening Tools. The great Figure on the top of all represents Plenty, crown'd, a Branch of Palm in her right hand, a Carnucopia in her left. The Msick aloft on both sides, and on the two Balconies within, were twelve Waits, six Trumpets, and three Drums. At a convenient distance before this structure were two Stages erected, divided, planted, and adorned like Gardens▪ each of them eight Yards in length, five in breadth, upon that on the North side sat a Woman representing Plenty, crowned with a Garland of divers Flowers, Clad in Green Vestment Embroidered with Gold, holding a Cornucopia, her Attendants two Virgins, at His Majesties approach the Person representing Plenty made address to him in these Words, Great Sir, the Star which at your happy Birth, Joy'd with his Beams (at Noon) the wondring Earth; Did with auspicious Lustre then presage, The glittering plenty of this Golden Age, The Clouds blown o're, which long our Joyes o'recast; And the sad Winter of your absence past: See the three smiling seasons of the year, Agree at once to bid you welcome here: Her Homage Dutious Flora comes to pay, With her Enameld Treasure strows the way, Ceres and Pales, with a bounteous hand, Diffuse their plenty over all your Land, And Bacchus is so lavish of his Store, That Wine flows now where Water ran before, Thus Seasons, Men, and Gods, their joy express, To see your Triumph and our Happiness. His Majesty having passed the four Triumphal Arches was at Temple-bar entertained with the view of a delightful Boscage full of several Beasts both Tame and Savage, as also several living Figures, and the Musick of eight Wales: But this being the Limit of the Cities Liberty must be so likewise of our Description.
THE NARRATIVE OF His Majesties Coronation, With his Magnificent Proceeding and Feast, in Westminster Hall April the 23th. 1661. UPon the 23th of April, being S. Georges day, about seven in the morning, the King took Water from the privy Stairs at Whitehall, and landed at the Parliament Stairs, from whence he went up to the Princes Lodgings; where, after he had reposed himself, he was arrayed in Royal Robes of Crimsom velvet, furr'd with Emine, by which time the Nobility, being come together, Robed them∣selves in the Lords House and painted Chamber. The Judges also with those of the long Robe, the Knigh's of the Bath (then in their Robes of purple Sarin lined with white Tassity) and Gentlemen of the privy Chamber, met in the Court of Requests, and being drawn down into Westminster Hall, where this great solemnity (ordered by the Officers at Arms) began. The Nobility, in their proper Robes carrying their Cornets in their Hands, proceeded according to their several dignities and degrees, be∣fore his Majesty up to his Throne of State, which was raised at the West end of the Hall, pla∣cing themselves upon each side thereof. The K ng being set in a rich Chair, under a glorious Cloth of State, Sir Gilbert Talbot Knight, Master of the Jewel-house, presented the Sword of State, as also the Sword called Crtan, and two other Swords, to the Lord high Constable, who took and delivered them to the Lord high Chamberlain, and he laid them upon the Table before the King, and in the like manner the Spurs. Immediatly after, the Dean and prebends of Westminster, by whom the Regalia had been brought in procession from the Abbey to Westminster Hall, being vested in rich Copes, came up from the lower end thereof in manner following. First, The Serjeant of the Vestry in a scarlet Mantle. Then the Children of the Kings Chappel in scarlet Maniles. Then the quire of Westminster in surplices. Then the Gentlemen of the Kings Chappel in scarlet Mantles Next the ursulvants, Heralds, and provincial Kings of Arms. Then the Dean carrying Saint Edwards Crown. And after him five of the Prebends of that Church, The first carrying the Scepter with the Cross. The second the Scepter with the Dove. The third the Orb with the Cross. The fourth King Edwards Staff. The fifth the Chalice and Patena.
Who passing thus through the Hall, and making their due Reverences in three places, and towards the upper end, the Quires and Officers at Arms falling off on each side, the Dean and Prehends ascended the Steps, at the top whereof, Garter Principal, King of Arms stand∣ing, conducted them to the Table placed before the Throne, where making their last Reve∣rence, the Dean first presented the Crown, which was by the Lord high Constable, and Lord at Chamberlain, set upon the Table, who likewise received from the Prebends the Regalia, which they carried, and laid them also by the Crown. Then the Lord Great Chamberlain presenting the Regalia severally to the King, His Maje∣sty disposed of them to the Noblemen which carryed them in the proceeding viz. Saint Ed∣wards Staff to the Earl of Sandwich. The Spurs to the Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery. The Scepter with the Cross to the Earl of Bedford. The poluted Sword (born on the left Hand of Cartana) to the Earl of Darby. The pointed Sword (born on the right Hand thereof) to the Earl of Shrewsbury The Sword called Curtana to the Earl of Oxford. The Sword of State to the Earl of Manchester. The Scepter with the Dove to the Duke of Albemarle. The Orb with the Cross, to the Duke of Buckingham. aint Edwards Crown to the Duke of Ormond. The Patena to the Bishop of Exeter. And lastly, The Challce to the Bishop of London, All things being thus prepared about ten a Clock, the proceeding began, from the Hall into the Palace Yard, through the Gate-house, along the great Sanctuary, to the West end of the Abby, upon blew Cloath, which was spread upon the Ground, from the Throne in Westmin∣ster hall, to the great Steps in the Church, by Sir George Carteret Knight, his Majesties Vice Chamberlain, as Almoner that day by special appointment. The Proceeding to the Corona∣tion vvas in this following Order. THe Drums four, the Trumpets sixteen in four classes. The Six Clerks of the Chancery. Ten of the Kings Chaplains having dignitler. The Aldermen of London. The Kings learned Councell at Law. The Kings Solicitour, and the Kings Attorney. The Esquires of the Body. The Masters of Request.
The Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber. The Knights of the Bath in their Purple Robes. The Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices of both Benches: The Lord chief Baron, and the Lord chief Justice of the common Pleas. The Master of the Rolls▪ and the Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench. The Serjeant Porter, and the Serjeant of the Vestry. The Children and Gentlemen of the Kings Chappel. The Prebends of Westminster. The Master of the Jewel-house. The Knights of the Privy Councell: Portcullis Pursulvant at Arms. The Barons in their Robes two and two, carrying their Caps of Crimson Velvet turned up with Minever in their hands. The Bishops two and two according to their dignities and Consecrations. Rogue Croix, blew Mantle. Pursulvants. The Viscounts two and two in their Robes with their Coronets in their hands. Soerset, Chester. Heralds. The Earls two and two in their Robes, holding their Coronets in their hands, Richmond, Windsor. Heralds. The Marquess of Dorchester. The Marquess of Worcester. In their Robes with their Cornets in their hands, Lancater, York. Heralds. Norroy, Clarecieu, Provincial Kings, carrying their Coronets in their Hands, The Lord high Treasurer, The Lord high Chancellour. St. Edwards Staff born by the Harl of Sandwich. The Spurs born by the Iarl of Pembroke and Montgomery. St. Edwards Scepter born by the Earl of Bedford.
The third Sword drawn, and born by the Earl of Derby. The Sword called Curtana, drawn, and born by the Earl of Oxfod. The Pointed Sword drawn, and born by the Earl of Shrews∣ouy. The Lord Mayor of London. Garter Principal King at Arms. The Gentleman Usher of the Back Rd. The Earl of Lindsey, Lord great Chamberlain of England. Arms The Earl of Suffolk, Earl Marshal for this present occasion. The Sword of State in the Scabbard, born by the Earl of Mache∣ster, Lord Chamber ain of the Household. The Earl of Nor∣humbeland, Lord Constable of Eng¦land for this pre∣sent occasion. Serjeants His Royal Highness the Duke of York, The KING Supported by the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and Bishop of Daresnt His Train born by the Lords Mandevile, Cavendish, Ossory, and Percy, Assisted by the Lord Mansfield Master of the Robes The arl of Landerdale One of the Gentlemen of the Bed-Chamber. Mr. Seamour, and Mr. Ashburnham Both Grooms of the Bed-chamber. The Captain of the Guard. The Captain of the Pensioners. The Yeomen of the Guard in their Coats. The Pensi∣oners with their Pole Axes. Barons of the Cinque Ports, their whole number xvi. Habited in dou blets of Crimson Satin Scarlet Hose, Scarlet Gowns, lined with Crimson Satin, black Velvet Capes, and black Velvet Shoes, carrying the Caopy. Serjeants at The Scepter  with the Dove orn by the Duke of Albe∣marle. St. Edwards Crown born by the Duke of Ormond, Lord High Steward for this present occasion. The Ord r by the Duke of Buck∣ingham. The Patena, born by the Bishop of Exeter in his Cope. The Regale or Chalice, born by the Bishop of London in his Cope at Arms Barons of the Cinque Ports, their whole number xvi. Habited in dou blets of Crimson Satin Scarlet Hose, Scarlet Gowns, lined with Crimson Satin, black Velvet Caps, and black Velvet Shoes, carrying the Canopy. The Pensi∣oners with their Pole Axes.
The proceeding pasting through the Quire went up the Stairs toward the great Theater, and as they came to the top thereof were disposed by the Heralds into two Gallerles built on either side the upper end of the Quire. On the North side the Aldermen of London, title Judges, and others of the long Robe, as also the Quire of Westminister, with the Gentlemen and Children of the Kings Chappel; and on the South side the Knight of the Bath, and Gentle∣men of the privy Chamber. Near the Pulpit stood the Master of the Jewel house, and the Lord Mayor of London. The Nobility were seated on Forms round about the inside of the Theater: On the cor∣ner whereof, nearest to the Altar, stood the Provincial Kings, Heranlds, and Pursuivants at Arms. Within the Rails, on either side of the France of the Theater from the Quire, stood the Serjeants at Arms, with their Mices, and over the Door, at the West end of the Quire, stood the Drums and Trumpets. The King, being entered the West Door of the Church, was received with an Anchem: and here his Majesty kneeled down, and after some short Ejaculations, he proceeded to the Theater, between the Quire and the Altar; on which the Throne of State was placed; on the cast side whereof was set a Chair, Footstood and Cushion, covered with Cloath of Gold, whereon for a while he reposed himself. Immediatly after, the Bishop of London (who was appointed to officiar, in part, for the Arch-bishop of Canterbury) with the Lord High Cou∣stable, the Earl Marshal, the Lord great Chamberlain, the Lord High Chancellour, and Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold, went to the South, the West, and North sides of the Theater, and acquainted the people, that he presented to them King Charles the Rightful inheritor of the Crown of this Realm; and asked them if they were willing to do their Homage, Service, and bounden Duty to him. As this was doing the King rose up, looking towards the people, to whom the Bishop spake: Who, by their shouts signified their Consent, the like question was put to the Nobility. And while an Anthem was sung by the Gentlemen of the Kings Chappel, a Carpet was spread by the Officers of the removing Ward-robe, and over that was laid, by the her of the Black Rod, assisted by the Yeamen of the Ward-robe, a Silk Carpet and Cushion, and then the Bishop of London went and placed himself on the North side of the Altar. Then the King descending from his Throne, proceeded towards the Altar, supported by the Bishops of Ds, and Bath and Wells; the four Swords, and grand Officers, and the N ble Men, and Bishops that carled the Regali, going before him. At the steps of the Altar he kneeled down, and offered a Cloath of Gold Pall, and an Ingor of Gold of a pound weight and retired to his Chair of State, on the South-side of the Altar, and the Bishop of London receiving the Regalia, and placing them on the Altar, the Bishops and Noble Men, that car∣ried them, retired to their Seats, and the King kneeled at a said stool on the right side of the Chair of State, whilst the Bishop of London said the Prayer. O God that dost visit those that are humble, &c. which ended, the Bishop of Worchester preached, on the 2 ver. of the 28. of Proverbs. On the Kings right hand stood the Bishop of esne, and beyond him, the Noble Men with the Swords naked and erect, the Duke of York sate on his left-hand, and by him stood the Bishops of Bath and Wells, and the Lord great Chamberlain. On om be∣hind the Duke, sate the Lord High Chamcellor, and Lord High Treaser, and in a Gally the Dutchess of York, where were also placed the Ambadours and Foreign Ministers. The Bishop of London sae in the Arch-Bishops Chair, on the North-side of the Altar, and the rest of the Bishops on Forms behind him, and towards St. Edwards Chappel stood Gaer prin∣ciple King at Arms, the Ordicers of the Ward-robe in Scarlet Gowns, the Serjeant of the Veste∣ry and Vergers, with some of the Grooms and Pages of the Bed, Chamber to do service, as oc∣casion required. Opposite to these on the South-side stood the Beau and Prebends of west∣minster
Between the Kings Chair of State and the Pulpit, but more to the North-side, was placed St. Edwards Chair, covered with Cloath of Go. Sermon ended, the Bishop of London came eer, and asked the King, if he would take the Oath of his Progenitors, to confirm the Laws, to the People, and Isanchises to the Clergy, granted by St. Edward the Confessor, to maintain the Gospl esablished in the Kingdom, &c. The Bishop of Rochester also reading the Bishops Petition, praying, that they and the Churches under their Government might be protected, &c. all which his Majesty promised to perform, and assisted by the Bishops of Duresos, and Bath, and wells with the Sword of State born before him, and the Lord great Chamberlain attending, went to the Altar, and took an Oath to perform what he had promised, and in like manner returned to his Chair of State, where kneeling at the Fald-stool, while the Bishop of London, and the Bishops of Peter-borough, and Gloucester, performed divine service, toward the end whereof, the Arch-Bi∣shop of Canterbury came out of St. Edwards Chappel concluding the service. Then the King arose, and assisted by the Bishops Dureson, and Bath, and wells, went to the Altar, His Royal Robes being taken off by the Lord great Chamberlain, and carried into St. Edwards Chappel, mean while the Chair was removed from the entrance of the Theater, and set on the North-side, be∣twixt the Altar and St. Edwards Chair, where the King sitting (the Dean of Westminster hold∣ing the Ampulla, and pouring out the Oyl) he was anointed by the Arch-Bishop, his Grace saying the Prayers, and the Quire singing the Anthem, appointed for that Solemn occasion. The Dukes of Buckingham and Albeinarle, with the Earls of Berks and Sandwich, holding a Cloath of Gold pall over the Kings head. The anointing being dryed up, the Dean of Westmin∣ster closed the Loops of his Shire, and the Arch-Bishop received the Colse from the Lord great Chamberlain, put it on the Kings Head. The Dean of Westminster having put on the Sur∣plice, the Tissue Hose and Sandals, and the close Pall, (being Cloath of Gold) fetcht the Spurs from the Altar, delivering them to the Lord Great Chamberlain, who having with them touched the Kings Heels, sent them back. Then the Arch-Bishop receiving the Sword of State from the Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold layed it upon the Altar, and having said the Prayers, delivered it to the King, which was girded on by the Lord great Chamberlain. Then the Dean of Westminster put on the Armil made of Cloath of Tissue, and next the Mantle or open Pall, being made of Cloath of Gold lined with red Taffaty. In this time St. Edwards Chair was set in the middle of the Isle right against the Altar, wherein the King being set, the Arch-Bishop brought St. Edwards Crown from the Altar, and put it on the Kings Head, whereupon all the People cryed, God save the King, and the Bishop said, God Crown thee with a Crown of Glory, &c. and several Prayers proper to this Great Solemulty, and an Authem being sung by the Quires; the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Viscounts put on their Coronets, the Barons their Caps, and the Kings at Arms their Coronets, Then the Master of the Jewel House delivered the Ring to the Arch-Bishop, who put it on the fourth singer of the Kings right hand, and after the Prayers, the Linnen Gloves were de∣livered to the King, by the Lord great Chamberlain, then the King went to the Altar, and offered His Sword, which being redeemed by the Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold, was by him drawn, and so carried by him all the rest of the Solemnity.—Then the Arch Bishop took the Scepter with the Cross from the Altar, and Mr. Henry Howard (Brother to Thomas Duke of Norfolk) by virtue of the tenure of his Manour of Wirksop, in the County of Norfolk, delive∣red to the King a rich Glove for his right hand, which the King having put on received the Seepter from the Arch-Bishop, and during the Prayer, the said Mr. Howard performed the service of supporting the Kings right Arm,—Next the Arch-Bishop delivered to the King, the Scepter with the Dove, who then kneeled, with both the Scepters in his hands, whilst the Arch-Bishop pronounced the blessing. Then the King arose and late in St. Edwards Chair
whilst the Arch-Bishop, and Bishops kneeled, and were kissed by him, after which the King returned to the Chair placed on the Theater behind his Throne, where he reposed himself, while Prayers were said, and Te Deum sung, which ended, the King ascended his Throne, in the midst of the Theater, the Swords, great Officers, and Bishops, standing on each side, while a Prayer was said. After which the Bishops, and Nobility did their Homage. First, the Arch-Bishop kneeling before the King, said, I William Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, shall, be faithful and true, and faith and truth bear unto you, our Soveraign Lord, and your Heirs, Kings of England, and shall do, and truly acknowledge the Service of the Land, which I claim to hold of you, in right of the Church, So help me God; after which he, and all the Bishops kissed the Kings left Cek. Then came up the Duke of York with Garter principal King at Arms before him, and his Train born by two Gentlemen, when being come to the Throne, he kneeled down, put off his Coronet, and did Homage in thse words, I James Duke of York become your Liegt man, of life and limb, and of earthly Worship: and Faith and Truth I shall bear unto you, to live and die against all manner of Folk, So help me God; At which the Drums beat, the Trumpets sounded, and the Prople shouted. The like did the Dakes of Buckingham and Albermale for themselves, and the rest of the Dukes. Then the Marquisses of Worchester and Dorchester, next the Earl of Oxford ascended by the est of the Earls, to signifie their Consents. Then Viscount Hereford for the Viscounts, and then the Drums beat, Trumpets sounded, and the People shouted. Lastly, the Baron Audly d the like Homage, being attended by the rest of the Barons, which was followed with bear∣ing of Drums, sounding of Trumpets, and the Peoples shouts, after which the Duke of York, dal the Nobility singly ascended the Throne, and touched the Kings Crown, pomlsing thereby to be alwayes ready with all their power to support it. During which Solemn Cere∣mony, the Lord High Chancellor went to the South, West, and North-sides of the Stage, and proclaimed to the People the Kings General pardon, being attended by Mr. Garter to the South side, and by a Gentleman Usher, and two Heralds to the other two sides, the Lord Cornwallis Treasurer of the Houshold, at the same time throwing amongst the people, Medals of Gold and Silver. The King being thus enthroned, the Gentlemen of the Chappel sung the Anthem, Behold  Yord our Defender, and look upon the face of thine anointed, &c. at the end whereof the Drums and Trumpets beat and sounded. After which the Bishop of London begun the Communions a drives, which being ended, the King descended from his Throne with his Crown on his I lead nd the Scepters in his Hands, (the rest of the Regalia being carried before him,) and the: proceeded into St. Edwards Chappel, where he tock off St. Edwards Crown, alid delivered it to the Bishop of London, who placed it on St. Edwards Altar, the rest of the Regalia being given to the Death of Westminster, and by him laid there also. Then he retired Into a Traverse, where he was hed of the  he was Crowned in (which were deli∣vered to the Dean of Westminster to be laid up with the rest of the Regalla) and being in∣ested with his Royal Robes of Puryle Velver, he came near to St. Edwards Altar, where the Bishop of London standling ready with the Imperial Crown in his hands set that upon his Head, after which he took the two Scepters, and proceeded to Westminster-Hall, the same way that he came, and attended after the same manner, saving that the Noble men and Bishops, that strongst the Regalia to the Abbay,  not now immediately before him as they did then, but went according to their degrees: All the Noble-men having their Coronets and Caps on their heads, and the Kings at Arm their Coroners. The proceeding being entered the Hall, the Nobility, and others, who had places assigned them, went and placed themselves, but the King, attended with the Great Officers, withdrew into the inner Court of wards, and in the mean  all the Tables in the body of the Hall were ervce.
On the Right hand were set two Tables, one beneath the other, at the upper end of the first sate the Bishops, and below them the Judges, with the rest of the long Rob. At the second Table sate the Masters of the Chancery, and the six Clerks, at which likewise the Barons of the Cinque-Ports were then necessitated to sit, (by reason of a Disturbance which some of the Kings Foot men made in offering to take the Canopy from them) although the upper end of the first Table was appointed for them. On the other side of the Hall was placed likewise along Table, which reached down near to the Common-Pleas-Court whereat the Nobility dined, and behind this close to the wall, sate the Lord Mayor, Aldmen, Recorder, and twelve chief Citizens of London. Lastly, within the Court of Common-Pleas was a Table-set for the Officers at Arms, each Table being furnished with three Comses answerable to that of the Kings, besides the Banquet. At the upper end of the Hall (where upon an Ascent of steps, a Theater was raised for His Majesties Royal Seat at this great Solemnity) a large Table being placed, the Serjeant of the Ewry, two Serjeants at Arms, with their Maces going before them, brought up the Covering, which was spread by the Gentlemen Ushers, and Serjeants of the Ewry. This being done, the Officers of the Pantry, with two Serjeants at Arms also before them, brought up the Salt of State and Caddinet. A little before the King return'd to dinner, two Esquires of the Body took their Seats upon two little Foot-stools on either side of the foot of the Kings Chair (placed opposit to the middle of the Table) and there sate until the King came into Dinner, when Rising and pe∣forming their Duty, in placing the Kings Robes for his better convenlency of sitting, they sate down again at the Kings feet, untill the King gave them leave to ise. On the right side of the Throne was erected a Gallery for the Officers at Arms, and opposite to that on the other side, another for the Musick, and below on the old Seffold, ne the Court of Common-Pleas, stood the Kings Trumpeters. The proceeding at the carrying up of the first Course to the Kings Table. THe two Clerks Comptrollers. The two Clerks of the Green Cloath. And the C of His Majesties Houshold. All in Black Velvet Gowns trimm'd with black Silk and Gold ce, with Velvet Caps raised in the head. Six Serjeanes at Arms. two and two. The Earl Marshal on the left hand. The Lord High-Steward. The Lord High Conslable on the Right. All three mounted on Horse-back in their Robes, and with their Coronets on their Head having their Horses richly trapped. Six Serjeants at Arms, two and two The Comptroller of the Houshold, The Treasurer of the Houshold, with their white The Earl of Dorsit Sewer. The Earl of Chiterfield his assistant. The Knights of the Bath carrying up the Service, two and two to a Dish, which was se upon the Table by the Earl of Lincoln Carver, assisted by the Earls Sewers. In the Bear came up the three Clerks of His Majesties Kitchin, all suted in Black Figu ain Gowns, and Velvet Caps, in fashion like those worn by the Clerks Comptrollers. Dinner being set on the Table, the King came sorth from the Inner. Court of Wards, in his ayal Robes, with the Crown on His Head, and Scepter in his hand, having the three Swords
born naked before him, and having wash'd, sate down to Dinner, the Bishop of London say∣ing Grace. On the Kings Right hand stood the Noble-n that carried the three Swords, holding them naked, and erected all the Dinner while; at his left hand stood the Lord high Chamberlain, to whom the King had given the Scepter to hold, at the Tables end, on the Kings left hand sate the Duke of York in his Robes and Coroner. Soon after Dinner was begun, the Lord Allington, by virtue of his Tenure of the Manor of dley in the County of Hertford, served the King of his first Cup, (which was of Silver Gilt) and after the King had drank, he had the Cup for his Fee. Next Thomas Leigh Esquire was brought up to the Table, with a Mess of Pottage called De∣, by reason of his Tne of the Manor of Addington in the County of Surrey. Afterwards a little before the second Course was ready, Sir Edward Dynock Knight (being the Kings Champion, as being seized of the Manor of Serivelsy in the County of Lincoln) en∣ar'd the all, on a goodly white Courser, aed at all points, and there having made a stand for some time, advanced in manner following. First two Trumpets. Then the Serjeant Trumpeter with his Mace. After him two Serjeants at Arms with the Maces. Then one Esquire carrying his Target, having his Arms depicted thereon. And another Esquire carrying the Champions Launce upright. After them York Herald at Arms. The Earl Marshal on his left hand on Horse ack. The Champion. The Lord High Constable  Right Hand on Horse-back. Being come some few steps, he made a stand, whereupon the said Herald proclaimed his Challnge, in the following words. If any person of what degree soever high or low, shall deny, or gain say our Soveraign Lord KING CHARLES the Second, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Son and next Heir to our Soveraign Lord CHARLES the first, the last King deceased, to be Right Heir to the Imperial Crown of this Realm of England, or that he ought not to enjoy the some, here is his Champion, who sayeth that he lieth, and is a false Traitor, being ready in per∣son o Combat with him, and in this quarrel will adventure his life against him, on what day soever he shall be appointed. Whereupon the Champion threw down his Gantlet, which lying some smal time, and no body taking it up, it was delivered to him again by the same Herald, then he advanced fur∣ther forward till he came to the raiddle of the Hall. And lastly to the foot of the Steps going up to the Throne of . This being done, the Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery (assisted as before) preseed, on the knee to the King, a Gilt Cup. (with a ver) full of Wine, who drank to the Champi∣on, and by the said Earl sent him the Cup, which having receiv'd, he after three reverences drank it all off, went a little backward, and so departed out of the Hall, taking the said Cup for his Fee. After which Garter principle King of Arms, with the two provincial Kings; having their Coro∣na, with the Heralds and Pursuivants at Arms, come down from the Gallery, and went o the lower and of the Tabler, where they first made their obeysance to his Majestie, then advancing up to the midst of the Hall, they did the like, and afterward at the foot of the steps to His Majesties Throne, where Garter being ascended, proclaimed his Majesties Stile in Latine, French, and English, according to  usage, crying Largess thrice, which done, they all retired into the midst of the Hall, and thereafter crying, Largess again thrice, he pro∣claimed the Kings Stile as before. And lastly, they went to the end of the Noblemens Table, and did the same again, and from thce into the Common Pleas Court to Dinner.
Immediately after this, the second Course was brought up by the Gentlemen Pensioners,  the former Solemnity, the last dish being carried up by Erasmus Smith Esquire, who then pre∣sented the King with three Maple Cups, on the behalf of Robert Barnham Esquire, in respect of his Tenure of the Manor of Nether isington, in the County of Kent. Lastly, The Lord Mayor of London then presented the King with Wine in a Golden Cup, hav∣ing a Cover, of which the King having drank, the said Lord Mayor receiv'd it for his Fee. By this time the day being far spent, the King (having water brought him by the Earl of Pembroke and his assistants) washed, and rose from Dinner before the third Course war brought in, and retiring into the Inner-Court of wards, he there disrobed himself, and from thence went privately to his Barge, which waited for him at the Parliament Stairs, and so to the Privy Stairs at White-hall, where he landed. FINIS. The Coronation Oath. ARch-Bishop, Sir, will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the people of England the Laws and Customes to them granted by the Kings of England, your lawful and Religi∣ous Predecessors, and namely the Laws, Customs, and Franchises gra∣ed to the Clergy,Vid. Rushworths Col. part. 1. Fol. 200. by the Glorious King, S. Edward your Predecossor ac∣cording to the Laws of God, the true profession of the Gospel established in this Kingdom agreeable to the prerogative of the Kings thereof; and the Antient Customs of the Realm. KING, I grant and promise to keep them. Arch-Bishop, Sir, will you keep peace and godly agreement (according to your power) both  God, the Holy Church, the Clergy, and the People. KING, I will keep i Arch-Bishop, Sir, will you to your power cause Law, Justice, and Discretion in Mercy and Truth to be executed to your judgement. KING, I will. Arch-Bishop, Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs, which the Commonalty of this your Kingdoms have, and will you defend and uphold them to the Honour of God o much as in you lyes. KING, I grant and promise so to ▪
