p1517 99832744 37218
A PERFECT RELATION Of the several Assaults and Storms MADE BY The KING of SWEDEN UPON COPENHAGHEN The chief Residence of the KING of DENMARK TOGETHER With the whole Proceedings and Particulars on both sides. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1658.
A Perfect Relation, &c. ON the 4th day of this present moneth of February, the English Resident Mr. Isaac Ewers, (who for some time since had been with the King of Sweden, and at his re∣quest, did return hither back again) was admitted in∣to this City of Coppenhaghen, and on the next day had Audi∣ence given him by his Majesty the King of Denmark, unto whom he delivered certain Letters, written unto his said Ma∣jesty by the present Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, &c. said Highness, and by his extraordinary Envoy Sr. Philip Meddows; the said Residents Propositions as well as his Letters, purporting, a proffered Mediation by his said High∣ness, towards the compassing of a particular Peace between these two Nothern Crowns. But by the hostile attempts which did immediately ensue, it evidently appeared, that the said Propositions were only set on foot by the Swedes, thereby to amuse the said King of Den∣mark, to lull him asleep; as also to surprize this good City, and con∣sequenty after the taking of the same, by force to subdue the whole Kingdom, and to attain unto the absolute Dominion, both by Sea and Land, to the great prejudice of the Associated and Neighbouring Princes. All which is most manifestly apparent by the ensu∣ing Actions and Attempts. For on the 5th day of this present moneth, the said Resident made overture of his said Propositions; though before any Answer could be thereon returned unto the said Lord Prote∣ctor, or unto any one else; and whenas his said Majesty the the King of Denmark had sent a Trumpeter with particular Letters from some persons in this City, unto their friends in the Countrey, and with Letters from the Lord Admirall Op∣dam, to have passed with them through the Swedish Camp; the King of Sweden would not permit the same, but only for that one time and no more, suffered the Lord Opdams Letter only to pass; whereby it appears, that he sought for an occasion and an opportunity, during this hard frost and these long nights, to continue his hostile acts, under a colour and pretence of a
proffered Peace, as the sequell doth sufficiently demonstrate. Seeing after the said King of Sweden, had by the advice of a Court Martiall transported the main body of his Army into Zealand, out of Schonen and Punen, whether he had brought them against their wills, out of their own Countries, being Swedes, Laplanders, Finnlanders, Irish, Scotch, English, Dutch and Poles: He did, on the 8th day of this present moneth, give a charge in writing, unto the chief Field-Officers of his Army, to assault and storm the City of Coppenhaghen, together with the Fortress of Christians Haven, on all parts, in a hostile manner; whereof the King of Denmark was timely advertised on the self same day, and some while before: Moreover the Swedes would gladly have put his said bloodthirsty design in execu∣tion (contrary to his said proffered overtures of Peace) even before, if not at the very self same time, whenas the said Resi∣dent had but newly propounded it; had he not been impeaded therein by other accidents which hapned, and whereby he was constrained to defer it; wherof we had sufficient knowledg. For after the King of Sweden, had in the preceding day∣time, made a shew of all his Forces he had in his Camp, and often drawn them forth in battell array, thereby to beget a fear in the Inhabitants of this City; and that we were for certain informed, that he would immediately make an as∣sault upon this place: He did put the same in execution a∣bout midnight, between the eighth and nineth of February last; whenas the Enemy, it being then so dark, as that a man could not see the length of a half Pistoll-shot from him; did, between twelve and one of the Clock in the night, hastily advance by Calboch over the Ice, not farre distant from the Longang, or Line of Communication, and the Magazin or Ammunition House; and made their first assault upon a Lighter, which was placed about three Msket shot from the Ammunition House: and as the said Lighter was but a small one, mounted but with six Guns, half Brass, half Iron ones, and defended but by a Captain, two Gunners, and some Mariners, whence they fired on the Enemy, yet they heed∣ded that not at all: And as the Ice was not broke quite round the same, the Enemy entred her, kil'd one of the Mariners,
and took four Prisoners; whereupon the Captain thereof, re∣tiring with the rest of his men into the City, the Enemy fired the Hurts which were in the said Lighter, which gave such a reffection upon the Ice, as that the Enemy could be discerned marching in great Bodies towards this place; amongst which our Canon incessantly playing, and (according to the rela∣tion of some Prisoners and Fugatives) a Collonel of the E∣nemies being shot a pieces, and several of their Bodies being thereby also broke and disordered, the Enemy was forced to retire in a confused manner, carrying away their dead men with them, according to their usuall Custom. But whereas the Hutts, which were in the said Lighter, did make a great flame, the other Troops; thought that a House was fired in the City, for a sign all that the Town was taken, and there∣fore in great number hastened thither; but meeting those which were to have made the assault, returning back again with bloody Pates, they soon desisted in their design to pro∣ceeed any further. About two of the Clock in the morning, our men regained the Lighter, quenched the fire, and brought the three Guns which were thrown out of her, on board a∣gain, and fired therewith on the Enemy. In the morning tyde, there was found in the Ice, which had been kept open, a strange kind of Bridge, which could be taken asunder, and put together, with it's carriage mounted on eight Wheeles, which was brought into the Court-yard; as also several Shels and Granadoes, with crooked Hookes, and other War∣like Instruments; divers Skulls and Jawes of dead men: And the same night, the King of Sweden, with his Cavalry, was gotten into the Isle of Amach, hoping that those Troops, which he had commanded over the Ice, would have forced their entrance into Christians Haven, and so have facillitated his passage with his Horse into the City: But his said attempt, was for that time, by Gods asistance, frustrated, and himself forced to retreat. However, they desisted not, but the said Enemy, did a∣gain with his whole might and power, assault the City of Coppenhaghen, and the Fortress of Christians Haven, in a ho∣stile manner, betwixt the tenth and eleventh of this present
Moneth, about one of the Clock at night. The first assault, was joyntly made at three several parts; From the Longang, or private Conveyance, which is situated be∣hind the Kingly Pallace, and the Magazin or Ammunition House, along the Ramparts, and the half Bulwark, or Bastion, by the water-conveyance, especially upon the adjacent Ravelin, and the said Line. Behind the Magazin or Amunition House, there was placed a small Danish Man of Warre, called Hoyen hal, mount∣ed with a few Guns, and defended by not above sixteen or eighteen men. In this Vessell, and in this place, the Swedes discharged their greatest fury, bringing alongst with them some flat-bottom'd Boates, and Bridges, to lay over the Ice; But the said Vessell defended her self stoutly, to the last man, and not regarding the small number she had on Board, bore off three several assaults, untill there remained but six of her company alive; insomuch as those which survived, did not only keep off the Enemy, by their continual playing upon them, but did good execution upon the several Bodies of their Troops, which advanced over the Ice from Calleboc, to∣wards the said Stations, which they were ordered to assault, and very much endamaged their main Battalion which was drawn up there. Finally, they slew one Major Smith, who was gotten on board of her, and forced the rest to quit the Vessell again. There were found eleven dead Bodies of the Enemies, upon the Decks of the said Ship, which had so wounded the Captain, besides those which were drownd. Those who assaulted the foresaid Ravelin seated by the wa∣ter-conveyances were manfully repulsed, but resolutely re∣newed their assault again; and after they had cut down some of the Palisadoes, they rushed through them suriously, and en∣deavoured to scale the Walls, with their storming Ladders, but were at push a Pike resolutely received and entertained by our men, who valiantly resisting them, beate them off a∣gain and drove them back; and finally after a hot and sharp contest, for the space of three houres, during which time the Enemy had maintained the said Ravelin, they beat them out again, many being kil'd and wounded in that Contest. In like manner, our men which were in the half Bulwork
on the adjacent Curtaine, and in the Longang or private con∣veyance by the Stables, as also on the Walls, and in the rest of the Works on that side, behaved themselves so manful∣ly and couragiously, as that they continually repulsed the E∣nemy on all sides. The King himself, together with the Senators of the King∣dome, and the Gentry, were present at, and assisted in the whole Action, as also the Officers belonging to the Kings Court, &c. some others joyntly with the rest of the Courti∣ers were placed behind the Magazin or Ammunition House, neare unto the Kings Stables, and in the Longang or Brest∣work, which they did manfully defend. By his said Majestie's presence and most Heroicall resoluti∣on, who was not at all dismayed, but continually applyed him∣self to all the places where the storme and assault was the hottest and fiercest, behaving himself most Magnanimously; encouraging his men, and destributing the necessary Orders which were requisite, each one was the better animated and prompted to the duty. And the  and conduct of the Generals, and Field-Officers which were in the place, was most apparently evi∣dent in this occasion, by their encouraging of each other; their dextrous assistance and joynt Actings, with so much fa∣cility and resolution against the Enemy, as that by Gods grace, he could not gain ground in the least upon them, but was most manfull repulst and forced to retreat. In like manner the Burgemasters, Aldermen, and the faithfull Citizens bestirr'd themselves mainly, behaved them∣selves wonderfully well, and assisted personally in this ser∣vice, being all of them well and fully resolved to venture their lives, substances, goods and blood, in the defence of their Countrey, and the mainteinance of their gracious and lawful∣ly ordained King. The chief assault therefore was made on this said station, being carryed on by Major Generall Vavasor; together with the Palsgraves, the English, and the Hestericks Brigades, as al∣so Major Generall Ferssers, and Collonell Gorgose's: who en∣deavoured to comply with their Orders, and to go through
with their taske with a great deale of resolution. The King of Sweden himself was at the head of his Reserve, not far from the assault, however out of Canon shot, our great Guns and Muskets continually thundred in amongst the Ene∣mies Troopes, who laboured in all parts to throw over his new invented flat bottom'd Boates and Bridges upon the frozen Moates, which taking effect in severall stations, they immediately made use of their storming Ladders to scale the Works, chiefly at the point of the Bulwork, or round House seated neare the Water convayance, which was very well fortified with Palezadoes, Turnpikes, and Swines feathers, but those who endeavoured to scale the said Works, were for the most part kil'd and wounded, and the Assailants, who for three severall times were relieved and came fresh on again, were so well received, as that they had no mind to make any long stay there, but were totally repulst and driven away. Some few had the good luck to get upon the Walls, but were likewise so unfortunate again, as that they forgot to pro∣ceed, and will not be well able to tell how they came on or off. Finally, The insulting Enemy was constrained by the day light (since the darkness would no longer serve his turn, to cloake and hide his enterprizes,) to retire in a great deale of confusion towards their head-quarters; having sustained a great losse, leaving behind him a great number of dead and wounded men, severall Ice-Bridges, storming Ladders, some Ensignes, Morter-pieces, and Petards; with divers new kind of Materials, Instruments, and warlike Engines; after the storme and assault, which was fierce and bloody, had lasted for the space of four hours. In like manner the Enemy did present himself before Chri∣stians Haven, advancing over the Ice towards the Hollanders station, situated between the Isle of Amach, and the Ammuni∣on-house, called the Scharport; but were thence also repulst with bloody pates, and a great loss, both of dead men, and Pri∣soners which were taken. Before the Enemy made this main assault, they gave a false Alarum at Christians Haven, beating their Drumms, and ma∣king
a shew to have fallen on there with a great shout, pur∣posely to deceive us, and to cause us to send some relief thither, and so to have weakned our stations in Coppenhaghen: They advanced as far as the frozen Moates, but found the Ice wider open then they had imagined, so that the for most of them fell in and were drowned; and when the day appeared there were Hatts, Perewiggs and Muffs found swimming on the water; also on the Ice, and up and down on the Land, several Bodies were found; the remainder of them, were by the Enemy conveyed off according to his usuall custome, every Trooper and Muskiteer being enforced to carried away his dead or wounded companion, and to cast them upon the Waggons and Sledges. About half an hour past four of the clock in the morning a third party of the Enemies, commanded by the Lieutenant Generall, the Earl Gustavus Banner, and led on by Lieutenant Collonels Lentsman, Fittinghoff, Stael and others, appeared with the dismounted Polish Horse, and other Troops, on the other side of the City of Copenhaghen, over against the Eastern gate, and the two adjacent Bulwarks, called the Mill and mid∣dle Bulwarks; in which place the Holland Souldiers and Of∣ficers had likewise their stations; who suffered the Enemy to come so nigh the Ravelin, as that they so hoamly greeted them with their Muskets (whilest they were busied in order∣ing their materials, and laying their bridges over the moat) as that severall of them will never think of returning back; and the remainder were finally enforced to retire in a great deal of confusion. As the Enemy thought to have brought on his flat bottomd Boats to that part of the works, the first of them slipt under the Ice with its fore part, and with its hinder part reared an end, so that they could make but little use thereof: however four persons who had joyntly cast their scaling Ladders over the Ice, got up upon the walls, who had quarter given them by the Hollanders: In this place the Swedes were enforced to leave divers of their new invented Ice-bridges, storming Ladders, and other Instruments behind them; running away and leaving severall of their dead and wounded Men; amongst
which divers healthy men had hid themselves, who after∣wards kneeling with lift up hands, demanded quarter, which was granted to them; insomuch as that a great number of Prisoners were brought in, at this, as well as the other stations: amongst which were divers Majors, Captaines of Horse, and other Officers, some of which died of their wounds. The Lord Admirall of the united States, the Barron of Wassender, was in person at the head of a considerable Reserve at the Eastern Gate, having severall brave and resolute Sta∣men in his company. According unto the information of the Prisoners, the King of Sweden had encouraged the Troopers (who were other∣wise unwilling to be dismounted, and to serve on foot in the assault) with his Promise, to suffer them, to have the Plun∣dering of the City for three daies space, and to deale with the Wo∣men, as they themselves should please. An exact List is a preparing, of the Names of all the Officers who commanded and fought on both sides, as also of those which were kil'd wounded and taken on the Enemies behalf; for on our part, although it be scarce credible, there is not so much as an Officer, or a Ci∣tizen missing, and not above eight or ten Souldiers kil'd, There were two or three Citizens wounded, particularly two Gentlemen named Rosecrants, and Rotstein; the first of which died on the place, and the other is dangerously hurt. Meane while on the Enemies part, these ensuing Generall Persons and Officers in chiefe were slain, forasmuch as we can be assured of as yet: The Generall of the Artilery, the Earle of Steinboch. St. William Vavasor, Major Ge∣nerall. Major Generall Aschenberg. Count Lodowick Lourven Ceupt, Lieutenant Collonell. Count Jacob Drommondt, Lieu∣tenant Collonell. Collonell Gengell. Collonell Staell. Collonell Steinhoff. Collonell Scharnestsky. Collonell Hesterich. Collonell Sparr. Collonell Becker./ Collonell Berenclaw. Collonell Adjatant Generall Lavoyette. Collonell Lentzman.
Lieut. Col. Wrangell. Lieut. Col. Kittinghoven. Major Schmidt. Capt. John Frederick, of Horse. Capt. Neewhugs, of Horse. Capt. Westerhagen, of Horse. Capt. Vandervosten, of Horse. Cap. Ugla, of Foot. In all 120. Inferiour Offi∣cers, and 60. Officers in Chief. There was found an Officer in Chief of the Swedes, drown∣ed under the Ice behinde the Danish Man of Warre, whose Name is as yet unknown; besides the slain and wounded men which they carried off upon their storming Ladders and Waggons, wherewith they brought their Materials and Ice-Bridges. Moreover the Countrey People did bury three Waggons full of dead Men, in a Pit neare unto the place of execution called the Galghenberg, which they were to have carryed to the Camp; and over and above those which were drowned, there hath already been found 566. dead Corps; although there must needs be many more, since they are not as yet all found, and that the Enemy hath carried severall away. Threescore and two Prisoners were brought into the City; not is it known how many more may have hid themselves up and down about the Works; some Troopers which came over to us out of the Swedes Camp, relate, that it is reported in the Army, that they had lost three Generals, eight Col∣lonels, twelve Lieutenant Collonels, besides severall o∣ther Officers, and at least 3000. private Souldiers, but the Swedes themselves only speak of 2000. The Swedes their Word was, God help us; and the besieg∣ed their Word was Honest: the Swedes distinction which they wore in their hats, was a green bush of Juniper tied with a straw: ours wore a white hankerchief in their hats: the greatest part of the Enemy, had white shirts over their cloathes, to the end they should not be discovered in the Snow. Our men have lighted upon good booty, as rich Cloathes, Rings, coyned Gold and Silver, Chains of gold, whole pur∣ses full of Gold, and other such like things which they found about the dead: Amongst which, is the Seal of Count Drom∣mond,
and the Seal and gold Ring with Collonel Charles Banners Coat of Arms, whereby its presumed that he is also slain. This glorious Victory is the Lords work, to whom eternall praise be given for the same: and for the which, on the 11th of Fe∣bruary, publick Thanksgivings were returned to God in all the Churches of this City; and it was very pleasing to heare the reserve of our men which were drawn up in the great place before the Kings Court, when day appeared and that the Enemy was defeated and put to flight, did sing aloud severall Psalms of Thanksgiving in way of rejoy∣cing. It is very observable, That of so many Granadoes, which the Enemy during the assault, did fling in abundance upon and towards the Walls, there was no hurt at all done; the greatest part of them rebounding back again, endammaged the Eenemy themselves; so likewise did the Danes play main∣ly upon the Enemy with small and great Granadoes; and from the Bulwork by the Water Conveyance there were 300. hand Granadoes cast forth. The winde being North East, was by Gods appointment ve∣ry favourable for the Danes, so that the greatest part of the smoake caused by the firing on both sides, as well as from the Works and Walls, was driven directly into the Enemies faces. And the Enemy, by Gods assistance, being in this manner manfully repulst on all sides, was constrained as suddenly to retreat as he at first did furiously fall on, having a good con∣duct of Shot and Haile sent after him from all parts. On the same day; to wit, the eleventh of February, in the Afternoon, a Swedish Trumpeter was sent into Copen∣haghen, desiring that the dead bodies of Major Generall Vava∣sor, and of Collonell Gangell, might be delivered unto him, which was granted; and in reference thereunto, these follow∣ing dead Corps newly found, and being decently adorned and wrapt up in burying cloathes, were delivered to the said Trumpeter, viz.
Major General Sir William Vavasor. Collonel Gangell. Lieutenant Collonel Count Drommondt. Lieutenant Collonel Kitting∣hoven. Lieutenant Collonel Leutz∣man. Lieutenant Collonel Stake. Major Schmidt. Captain Augustin of Horse. Captain Westerhagen of Horse. Captain Neewhaus of Horse. Captain Ʋgla of Foot. Three Cart-loades of Scaling Ladders, which stood be∣twixt a Chimney and the Ravelin before the Eastern Gate, were brought into the City by the Holland Souldiers, which went out for booty; besides a great quantity of Bridges, flat-bottom'd Boates, and other warlike Instruments; several of which the King hath caused to be preserved for a Remem∣brance. Moreover, there are taken six Ensignes, or Colours, twelve Drummes, two Morter-pieces, and one great Petard; where∣withall they thought to have opened the Longang, or Line of Communication, as also another Petard; several great and small Granadoes and Shels filled with Powder and Bullets, several Pikes and Sutes of Arms; as also divers new fashion∣ed and invented Musquets; made in such a manner, as that they carried a small Copper Granadoe, in which there were several reportitions, being boared through with a sharp Iron, which was hooked at the end, purposely to remain hanging in a mans cloathes, and so to hurt not only one person, but the several standers by: but these being shot over the Walls, did little or no harm at all, although the Inventer of the same, had a great reward from the King of Sweden. Finally, Some Runawayes, which came lately over from the Swedish Camp, do relate, That six hundred of the hurt and maimed men, were sent away to Rotschilt, four hundred to Roeck, and two hundred unto Elsenheur, since there was no conveniency for them in the Camp. There was found about the Lieutenant Collonel Fittinghoff, (who was slain on the place before the aforesaid Eastern Bulwork) the ensuing Order in writing, under the
King of Sweden's own Seal and Signature, as followeth. Charles Gustave, by the Grace of God, King of Sweden, Gothes and Vandalls, &c. It is his Majesties gracious Order, to both the Lieutenant Collonels Lentsman, and Tythinghoff; That they, (as soon as Lieutenant Collonel Stael, with his commanded men, shall be advanced alongst the Ravelin, on the left hand, towards the Bulwork of the Citadell) shall with their commanded Troopers, and the Materials which they have with them, (leaving the said Ravelin on their left hand, and passing on the right) assault the long face of the half Bulwork; and moreover, endeavour to apply their Materials thereunto, to master the said Bulwork, to chase the Enemy out of the same, and to keep and maintain their stands there, untill they shall receive further Orders; and in case they happen to be once or twice repuls't, they shall notwithstanding, not give over till they have mastered the same: and in the mean while, send speedy word to Generall Banner, in what a po∣sture they find the Enemy to be: Where in his Majesty rely∣ing upon the courage and good conduct of both the said Lieu∣tenant Collonels, and their inferiour Officers, doth remain confident, continuing them in his Kingly gracious and good opinion. In testimony whereof, given under his Majesties own Hand and Seal in the Camp by Bromsou, on the 8th of Febr. 1659. Subscribed thus, Carel Gustaf. With a Seal, directed thus, Order for the Lieutenant Collonels, Lentsman and Tyringhoff. Signed, Frans Ivel.
About another, who who was found dead by a certain Chimney, before the Eastern Gate, and who for certain, is known to be Major Generall Vavasor, having been shot through the back, there was likewise found another Swedish Kingly Order, of the Tennor following. Charles Gustave, by the Grace of God, King of Sweden, Goths, and Vandalls, &c. It is his Majesties gracious Order to Major General Vava∣sor; That as soon as Major Generall Ferssen, with his joynt Brigades, shall be advanced towards those parts which are ordered him: He shall likewise match on towards the Bul∣work, with the Palsgraves, the Hestericks, and the English Brigades; in such a manner, as that the Palsgraves shall apply their Materials against the Works upon the right hand, towards Amach, and the Hesterick joyntly with the English, on the left hand, on the Works towards the crooked Line, and shall use their best endeavours to assault and master the said Bulwork; and having gained the same, to take their Stations there on both sides of the same, and there to joyn; to wit on the right hand, with the Generall of the Ordnance Sternbock, and with Collonel Lavoyette, and on the left hand with Collonel Gorgos: and in case the Captain with the 50 commanded men, or Collonel Gorgos, who are ordered to master the crooked Line on their right hand, shall not have performed the same; he the said Major Generall Vavasor, shall as then open the said crooked Line on the left side, with those Petards which he hath with him, shall drive the Ene∣my out of the same, shall nayl up the Gunnes which he shall finde therein, and so joyn himself to the Brigade on the left hand; and mean while shall give notice unto his said Ma∣jesty, in what a posture he doth finde the Enemy in: which being put in execution, the said King doth remit himself to the good courage, conduct and prudence of the said Major Generall; and remains, committing him to Gods prote∣ction, continuing him in his gracious good opinion: In te∣stimony whereof, Given under his Majesties Seal and Signa∣ture
in the Camp before Bromsou, on the 8th of Febr. 165 Subscribed thus, Carel. Gustaf. Directed thus, The Order for Major Generall Vavasor. Signed, Frans. Sael. Extract out of other Letters from Coppenhaghen, bearing date the 21th Febr. 1659. Since we have had a thaw in these parts, there have been found above a Thousand dead bodies in all, with those which we afore specified, in and about the Works of this City in the Ice and Snow. As likewise we have received a Confirmation of the defeat given to Generall Wrangell, in an Assault which he made on the Isle of Langland; where he lost 500 men, besides the Earl of Waldeeck, and Collonel Putcamer, who were slain in the said attemp. FINIS.
