P3834 R219592 99831053 35515
THE Protestant GARLAND Of Joy and Delight: Compos'd of Nine pleasant New Songs Upon this late and prosperous Change. Licensed according to Order. Printed for M. C. 1689.
THE Protestant GARLAND Of Joy and Delight: Compos'd of Nine Pleasant New Songs, Upon this late and Prosperous Change. 1. The Prince of Orange's Welcome to London. 2. A late Monarchs Contemplation upon his Mis¦fortunes. 3. The Prince of Orange joyfully received by th Citizens of London. 4. Rome in Confusion, Or, The Jesuits put to their Flight. 5. The Popes Letter to the Jesuits in Newgate. 6. The Valliant Soldiers Resolution to Conquer Tyrconnel and his Irish Crew. 7. The Deserved praise of the WEST. 8. A Touch of the Jesuit Plots, from the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, to this present Year, 9. the Protestants Loyal Health. All Pleasant and Delightful both for City and Country. Licensed according to Order. Printed
THE Protestant Garland, &c. The Prince of Orange's Welcome to England. Tune is, Cannons Roar. SUbjects did rejoyce and sing, And the Peals of Bells did Ring, When the Prince, who now is King, Came to this Land and Nation With his vast Commanding Fleet, ittains Blessings to compleat, aking Romans to Retreat, Tho' much to their vexation. They no sooner came to shore, But we bid them welcome o're, Knowing they would soon restore The Church to all her Splendor; r when Brittain made her moan, is Prince came to Guard the Throne, herefore unto her alone Our Hearts we will surrender. ow this Prince of Royal Fame, hen to Exeter he came, Soul did then proclaim ir Joy for this Adventure.
There was not a drooping Soul, But would drink his flowing Bowl, Guns went off, and Bells did troul, as he the Gates did enter. Acclamations did resound, Bended Knees unto the ground, While the Noble Healths went round from Prince to each Commander, Who had Plow'd the Ocean Main, rittains freedom to regain, Rather than their Courage stain, they'd trace Great Alexander. ll the chief Nobility, ords, Dukes, Earls, and Gentry, Did with one consent agree, to stand with all their power, y this most Renowned Prince, our Lawful just Defence, or to drive the Romans hence, who would our Laws devour. rst the good Lord D—re hat Renowned Noble Peer, e came on with full Carreer, for Church and Kingdoms Glory; With a Resolution bent, hat the Romans should absent,
r else by his Sword he sent from hence to Purgatory. ow the Armed Troops came down, hinking to have gain'd Renown, ut the Fates on them did frown, for pray observe the Story; heir Noble gallant Warlike Train, Which they brought down to Salisbury-Plain, faith we sent it back again, and blasted all their Glory. When the Jesuits did hear, he Great Prince approached near, How the Rogues did quake for fear, and from the Court did scowre; oth Father Petres and the rest, Who was for taking off the Test, An some with Newgate is possest, where they remain this hour. A late Monarch's Contemplation upon his Misfortunes. Tune of, Soldiers Departure. AH! how have I fell from Honour, to the point of deep Dispair, Fortune now has took upon her, to Dethrone a Royal Pair:
How, alas! am I Descended from the top of Majesty, For to fall thus unbefriended, to the greatest Misery! I that lived in such Glory, now am from my Nation hurl'd, Earthly Crowns are Transitory, nothing stedfast in this World: Ah! could I have been contented to have Govern'd well, I vow, Then I need not have repented, But I've lost my Kingdom now. Long I might have Liv'd and Reigned, and the Royal Scepter Sway'd, Had I but the Laws maintained, but I then my Trust betray'd: Could I have from Popish Villains kept my self reservedly, I might still have Ruled Millions of the English Gentry. When I think of Father Petres, sitting at my Council-Board, And the other Romish Creatures, this fresh sorrows does afford: Seeing how I was misguided, while I for Romes Cause did stand,
from my Throne divded, ted in a Forreign Land. Royal Word extended, the coming to my Throne, t the Church should be defended rough my special Care alone: this promise I neglected, e expos'd to Villans hate, not in the least Protected, t abus'd at any rate. s blam'd in many Cases, anding for the Roman Cause, stants turn'd out of places, o' contrary to all Laws: an Catholicks I trusted ith the great Affairs of State, I now at last am worsted, his is my unhappy Fate. y, I strove to overpower earned Bishops of Renown, t them packing to the Tower, urning matters upside down: d my Promise ne're regarded, s all Men of Reason see, r this am now rewarded, with the loss of Dignity.
Farewel to my Land and Nation, and my Crown and Scepter too, For without all Disputation, I shall never trouble you: But will spend my days in pleasure, here in true Felicity, What I want in Golden Treasure, peace and quiet shall supply. The Prince of Orange Joyfully Received by th Citizens of London. To the Tune of, The Protestants Triumph. WHen as our great Prince did to London repair Abundance of loud Acclamations was ther All people were filled with Joy and Content, Since Heaven to them such a Blessing had sent; A Prince that for England▪ had ventur'd his Blood To stand for our Church and all Protestant good And Romes black Designs to Confusion did bring, For which he is justly made Englands Great King. Remember the vast Roaring Billows at Sea, As his Fleet was coming the Nation to free; Expos'd to the fury and merciless Waves, Which then might have made the main Ocean the Grave Had not the great God blest the Glorious Design, By his wise Providence, good and Divine;
Preserving them under his Heavenly Wing, ho now is our Soveraign Protestant King. nce Heaven ordain'd him the Scepter to Sway, t every Subject in Duty Obey; r he has brought Glory and Peace to the Land, hen as our true Church here did totering stand put all her Enemies quite to the flight, nd Protestants wrongs he resolved to right: nd therefore in London the Bells they did Ring, Honour of William our Protestant King. e had been expos'd to the Malice and Rage those that was truly the Scourge of this Age: hen scurrillous Rascals did daily run down he good Learned Clergy in City and Town; length came a Valliant true Protestant Prince, ho drove all the Fryars and Jesuits hence; d therefore brave Boys, let us merrily Sing, now is our Soveraign Protestant King. sooner he did to the City Arrive, all drooping Spirits began to revive; d highly transported with Raptures of Mirth, presence did give to our joys a new Birth: en every true-hearted Protestant Soul, I drink his good Health in a full flowing Bowl; ile loud Acclamations did make the Town ring d now He's Great William our Protestant King.
While Protestants they were releas'd from all fear The Jesuits sneaking hung down their Ears; Their hot eager Game being quite at an end, No power was left them their Mass to defend; So straightways they scowre into Foreign Lands, And one pair of heels was worth two pair of han While true hearted Protestants merrily Sing, As being preserv'd by a Protestant King. As long as the Romans in Brittain bore sway, Good Men was Degraded, and in Prison lay, Meerly through the Envy and Malice of Rome, But now here the great Year of Jubilee's come, And they are releas'd from their Bondage once m The Lord in his Mercy was pleas'd to restore Both them and the Nation from Romes bitter st By William our Gracious true Protestant King. Long, long let him flourish in Plenty and Peace▪ Who did both the Church and the Nation rel From those growning Dangers that threatened  L Before he took this undertaking in hand: The Storm and the Tempest is quite overblown Let Heavenly Angels Guard his Royal Throne And may his Fame through all Christendom R He being our Soveraing Protestant King.
ome in Confusion: Or, The Jesuits put to their Flight. Tune, O rare Popery. O sooner the tydings was brought to the Court That the Prince of Orange would thither sort, raightways it spoil'd all the Jesuits sport; y threw by their Masses, then looking like Asses, ey did not know whither to run. r Trinkets, with all their Cannonical Weeds, wise their long string of their delicate Beads; Crosses, as also their multiply'd Creeds, heir Popes special Pardon, all not worth a Farthing, ir Trumpery's kickt out of door. Mass-houses they were pull'd down to the ground, rought to the Fire whatever they found; put the poor Jesuits all in a sound, ing this action, and woful distraction, ir labour is utterly lost. scratching their Elbows, and tearing their hair, ing quite brought to the point of dispair; Rogues was for running, but did not know where; Plot was confounded with horror surrounded, ey cry'd, we are left in the lurch.
Some took up the Guineas, and laid down the C And crying out, here is ten pound for a Horse But those without Money was much at a loss, So they were soon taken, by Peters forsaken, Who fled away in a Disguise. In Newgate the Jesuits both fret and fume, To see their most dismal and desperate doom, A thousand times wishing they now was at Rom With their Holy Father, the which they had then trudge to the three-legged Mare. Now meerly through fear, they are ready to They tell o'er their Beads, and pray for each In tears they do make a most woful Complain That they might befriend 'em, and liberty sen For fear they should swing at the last. Alas! we was running to Dover with care, But the men of Kent streight did meet with us So we was took napping as Moss catcht his M And sent up to London, we're utterly undone, We never shall see our Friends more. In Prison we lie without succour or hope, Expecting to die in a Sanctify'd Rope; Farewel our dear Friend the Infallible Pope, We blasted our Glory, a terrible Story, We here in a Prison remain.
he Race which was set us we carefully run, nd thought by our practice the Prize to have won; ho' hang'd, lets be Sainted for what we have done, r while here we tarry'd, altho' we miscary'd, we have been true Servants indeed. The Popes Letter to the Jesuits in Newgate. Tune is, Hey Boys up go we. MY dearest Son of Holy Church that does in Newgate lye, ho' some has left you in the lurch, yet do not think that I ill leave my Children void of hopes, ho, no, you need not fear, I'll send Consecrated Ropes or you my Children dear. number there is Sixty six, ee that you use them well, e Hempen Cords of Hereticks, send some to Pluto's Cell? erefore I took this special care, those Holy Cords to make, wear by good Saint Peters Chair, I will not you forsake. not reflect on what is past, My Worthy Sons, for why; o' Tyburn be your Lot at last, ou Romish Martyrs dye;
Therefore be not at all surpriz'd, tho Death may be your doom, For you shall all be Cannoniz'd amongst the Sants at Rome. I'll keep you free from all the pain, of Purgatory too, Tho' some unworthily complain, yet still my care's for you: You know 'tis I that keep the Keys, my loving Children dear, And none goes there but whom I please, therefore you need not fear. Those that obeys my Holy Will, shall well rewarded be, Betray, nay, Poyson, Stab and Kill, 'tis all a case to me: Since it is for the Holy Cause, in Duty ne're give o're, And you shall have my loud Applause, what can you wish for more. I hear indeed you have been crost, in all you went about, But tho' your labour has been lost I know you was Devout: Therefere when Hanging is your Doom, we'll sing your lasting praise, And I your Holy Dad at Rome, will make yon Sainted Days.
The Valiant Souldier's Resolution to Conquer Tyrcon∣nel and his Irish Crew. Tune of, Lilli burlero. NOble brave hearts of Courage so bold, Let us away to Ireland now; While we do Fight for Silver and Gold, We'll make those Papist Bog-trotters Bow To Great William's Crown and Scepter, Therefore brave Boys, now let us away, Our Cannons, like Thunder, shall fill them with wonder, For Protestant Boys shall carry the day. Tis not Tyrconnel ever can stand, Should he have forty thousand and more, We'll have as many under Command, Such that shall lay them sprawling in Gore; If they dare but stand the Battle, Boys, we will shew them English Play, Our Cannons like Thunder, shall fill them with wonder, For Protestant Boys shall carry the day. Ratling Drums, and Trumpets likewise, Into the Field our Musick shall be, Where we Tyrconnel soon will surprize, When he our Armed Forces shall see
In a Noble Warlike Posture, shining in Armour gallant and gay, Our Cannons like Thunder, shall fill them with wonder, for Protestant Boys shall carry the day. Cowards we know are subject to Flinch, when he shall meet a Powerful Foe; But a true Soul won't give back an inch, till he has laid his Enemy low; We'll Charge to the highest Center, valliantly still maintaining the Fray; Our Cannons like Thunder, shall fill them with wonder, for Protestant Boys shall carry the day. Tis not Tyrconnel e're shall prevail, or in the least our Courage surprize, We'll send them Lead in showers like Hail, while our Smoak shall darken the Skies: Send them hence to Purgatory, while they unto Saint Patrick Pray; Our Cannons like Thunder, shall fill them with wonder, for Protestant Boys shall carry the day. For I protest if they will not yield, suffer they shall for Uillanous Deeds, For when our Swords have Reaped the field, of all those rank base Irish Weeds:
We'll enjoy their whole Possessions, then my true hearts let's now march away Our Cannons like Thunder, shall fill them with wonder, for Protestant Boys shall carry the day. The deserved Praise of the West. To the Tune of, Grim King of the Ghosts. THe Glory and Fame of the West, let every honest Soul sing, For when the whole Land was opprest, from thence all our Blessings did spring; Tho' once they was routed full sore, yet they have took Courage now since, Resolving to venture once more, To bring in a Protestant Prince. They vow'd they wou'd rally again, their Courage being vigorous hot; The Blood of their innocent Men, alas! was not clearly forgot; And seeing the valliant brave Dutch, come here for the Nations defence, They vow'd they wou'd have t'other touch, To bring in a Protestant Prince.
We know there was many a one, that suffered Deaths too severe; The Father remember'd the Son, the Women their Husbands so dear, Who fell a meer Sacrifice to Rome without any offence, Therefore they resolved to rse, to stand by a Protestant Prince. When M— was put to the Rout, some honest good Yeomen did bleed, And Soldiers both valliant and stout, was brought to the slaughter indeed, And by an unmerciful hand, contrary to Reason or Sence, Therefore we resolved to stand to bring in this Protestant Prince. A Person once ow'd us a grudge, who bore a great sway in the Court, Without a good Jury or Judge; he hang'd many meerly for sport; This Vllian was given to bawl, and vanter men ou of their Sence, But now let him answer for all, we having a Protestant Prince. Had Mercy been mixt with their Rage, their actions had been more Divine,
But Cruelty mounted the Stage, and Murthers was all the design, The Widdow and Fatherless too, no Friend had they in their defence, But now all their Joys will renew, under this Good Protestant Prince. No sooner this powerful Fleet, approach the Banks of our Shore, But them we run straightways to meet, and bidding them thrice welcome o're, Appointed by Heaven he came, to drive all the Jesuits hence, Let's honour the Glory and Fame, of such a True Protestant Prince. Then every Protestant Soul, expecting a speedy relief, Begin in a sweet flowing Bowl, to drown all the Relicks of Grief; A Health to His Highness they cry'd, who stands for the Nations defence, We'll Valliantly Fight by his side, for he's a brave Protestant Prince.
A Touch of the Jesuit-Plots, from the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, to this present Year. Tune is, Summer-time. WHen Protestants would live at peace, and in all true Obedience stand; Then Jesuits love to increase fresh troubles in a quiet Land. Their restless Souls are ne're at ease, their Treasons are to that degree, They'll cross the raging roaring Seas, to perpetrate each Villany. In former Ages long a-go, they Ploted both in France and Spain, Poor England's final overthrow, tho' they their Will cou'd not obtain. Our Gracious Queen Elizabeth, of ever Blessed Memory, Was often troubled here on Earth, with their ungrateful Villany. The Spanish vast Armado Fleet, came Sailing to our English Coast, Resolving never to Retreat, 'till they had took this Land by force.
But the Renowned Captain Drake, he did with this proud Spaniard meet, And presently did burn and take, the greatest part of all his Fleet. Yet notwithstanding all their Charge, was blasted by a power great; They did their Treasons still inlarge, and Plotted at another Rate. For do but view King James's Reign, and then you soon may understand; They laid a dreadful powder Train to slay the Pillars of the Land. And by a Hellish Fatal Blow, it was their wicked base intent, The House of Lords to overthrow, and Commons both in Parliament. Sprinkle the Air with Princely Blood, and mangl'd shatter'd Limbs of those, Who sate in Court for England's good, but God was pleas'd to interpose. That dreadful Treason to prevent, which might have overthrown the Land, Then bringing them to punishment, who took that Bloody Cause in Hand.
We may behold from Age to Age, their study is to bring us low: They vent theit most malicious Rage, although it proves their overthrow. When Charles the Second Reigned King, his Life they studied to betray, Yet under Gods protecting Wing, he was preserved many a day. There's Harcourt, Whitebread, and the rest, which I shall here forbear to Name; They harbour'd Treason in each Breast, and brought themselves to open shame. At length Great Charles he dy'd in peace, that price of Royal Dignity, Then Jesuits did soon encrease, who strove to bring in Popery. But Heaven did a Blessing bring, and suddenly did change the Scene, Ordaining William to be King, and Mary our Most Gracious Queen. God grant them many Years to Reign, in Peace and full Prosperity, The Church will flourish then amain, and Protestants most happy be.
The Protestants Loyal Health. Tune of, Joy to the Bridegroom. LEt e'ry Loyal hearted Soul, Now fill a pleasant smiling Bowl, And let a Health go freely round, To those by whom our joys are Crown'd, Now seated in the Royal Throne, a sweeter Health was never known. Boys drink about both brisk and airy, To Good King William and Queen Mary, Who does the Royal Scepter Sway, And Popery has purg'd away. The Land will flourish now in Peace, Let Love and Loyalty increase. And likewise fill another Glass, And freely, freely let it pass, To good Prince George, and Princess Ann, Now let us not disputing stand, But bend our Knee unto the Ground, And let these Loyal Healths go Round. FINIS.
