P3717 R222722 99833865 38343
PROPOSALS BY THE PROPRIETORS OF East-Jersey IN AMERICA, For the BUILDING of a TOVVN ON Ambo-Point, And for the Disposition of Lands in that PROVINCE. AND ALSO For Encouragement of Artificers and Labourers that shall Transport themselves thither out of England, Scotland, and Ireland. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard-street, Bookseller, MDCLXXXII.
PROPOSASLS BY THE PROPRIETORS OF East-Jersey IN AMERICA, For BUILDING of a TOWN ON Ambo-Point. FOrasmuch as Ambo-point is a Sweet, Wholsom and delightful Place, proper for Trade, by reason of its Commodious Scituation upon a safe Har∣bour; being likewise accommodated with a Navi∣gable River, and fresh Water; and hath by many Persons of the greatest Experience and best Judgment, been ap∣proved
for the goodness of the Air, Soyl, and Scitua∣tion. We the Proprietors propose, by the help of Almighty God, with all convenient speed, to build a Convenient Cown for Merchandize, Trade and Fishery on Ambo-point. And because Persons, that hath a desire to Plant there, may not be disappointed for want of Proposals, We the Proprietors offer these following: First, We intend to divide Fifteen Hundred Acres of Land upon Ambo-point into One hundred and fifty Lots, which Lots shall consist of Ten Acres the Lot. One hundred of the Lots we are willing to sell here, and fifty we reserve for such as are in America, and have long desired to setle there. Secondly, The price of each Lot will be Fifteen pounds Sterling, to such who Purchase before the 25 of December, 1682. And to such who Purchase afterwards, before the 25 of December, 1683. Twenty pounds Sterling. Thirdly, Every Lot, is to be as equally divided as the goodness of the Place doth require, and the Scituation can admit. Fourthly, The most Convenient Spot of Ground for a Town, shall be divided in One hundred and fifty Equal Shares, and Set out into Streets, according to Rules of Art; and no Person shall be preferred before another in Choice, whether Purchaser or Proprietor. Fifthly, We reserve Four Acres for a Market-place, Town-House, &c. and three Acres for Publique Whar∣fage. Sixthly, Each Purchaser is obliged to Build a Dwel∣ling-House in the Place designed for the Town, and to Clear Three Acres of Vp-land in three Years, or else the Proprietors to be Re-instated in such Lots wherein default is made, repaying the Purchase Money.
Seventhly, We the Proprietors do within a Year hope, by God's Assistance, to Build for each of us one House upon Ambo-point, which we intend shall stand in an Orderly manner, according to the best and most Convenient Model. And in pursuance of the Design of the Propo∣sitions abovesaid. Eighthly, ANd for the Encouragement of Carpenters, Joyners, Brick and Tyle-makers, Brick-layers, Masons, Sawyers, and Labourers of all sorts, who are wil∣ling to go and employ themselves and Servants in helping to Clear Ground, and Build Houses upon the General Ac∣count of and for the Proprietors. The said Proprietors will engage to find them Work, and Currant Pay for the same in Money or Clothes, and Provision, of which there is Plenty (as Beef, Pork, Corn, &c.) according to the Market-price at New-York, during the space of one Year, at least, next after the 25 of December, 1682. in which time (through God's blessing and their Industry) they may have got wherewith to buy Cows, Horses, Hoggs, and other Goods to Stock that Land which (they) in the mean time may take up according to the Concessions. Neither shall such Persons pay Rent for their said Land, so long as they are Employed in the Proprietors Work; and their Wages shall at all times be so much as other such Artificers and Labourers in the said Province usually have; nor shall they be obliged to Work for the Proprietors longer than they find encouragement so to do. Ninthly, And for the more ready and certain Employing those Work-men and Labourers, that shall Transport them∣selves to East-Iersey, This is to let all Labourers and Persons, that shall Transport themselves, Know, They must
upon their Arrival upon that Place, repair to the Register of the abovesaid Province, and Enter themselves accord∣ing to their respective Qualities and Designs; and thereupon they shall be entertained into the Service and Pay of the Proprietors. FOR DISPOSITION OF LAND IN East-Iersey. THE Governour of East-Iersey, by and with the Advice of his Council, is to direct, That all Lands to be Set and laid out for Counties, Tribes, Cities, or Parishes, according to the General Concessions of the said Province, be bounded and Set out in manner following, Viz. That all such Lands be divided into Seven equal Lots or Parts; one of which seven Parts, is to be first Set out by Lot for the use of the Proprietors; and the other Six Parts to be taken up according to the following Concessions. First, That the Planting of the said Province may be the more effectually promoted, We do hereby grant unto all Persons who shall Transport themselves, their Wives or Children, into East-Iersey, and setle there ac∣cording to the following Concessions, by the Twenty
fifth of December, 1684. Twenty five Acres of Land for each Head, whether Wife, Child or Servant shall be bound to serve the Term of three Years, at the least, within the said Province; and for every such Master of a Family fifty Acres. The said Persons so Imported are to be Registred in the Secretaries Book of Entries, to be kept for that Pur∣pose; and the Importer to pay to the Secretary for Fees of attending that Service and Entring them 12 d. each Head. And each Servant, Male or Female, who shall be so Imported and Registred by the Twenty fifth of December, 1684. shall at the expiration of their Time, have liberty to take up the quantity of Thirty Acres for their own uses. And all the aforesaid Importers, and Persons Imported, who are here∣by allowed to take up Land, shall have and enjoy the same under the Terms and Concessions following: Secondly, For as much as this Province is already consi∣derably Peopled and Improved (there being seven Towns at least already setled upon it by English People) and that no Person is constrain'd by our Concessions, to take up and pay for Land which is Barren and unprofitable; nor can it be reasonably supposed, that people should in this Province be now exposed to the like hazards and difficulties that others must look to meet with in those Plantations that are less In∣habited and more remote, and for Scituation by Sea and Land, not so commodiously placed for Trade; Therefore we think it very reasonable and moderate, that all and every Person and Persons shall have his and their respective quanti∣ties of Land, set out at Two pence an Acre yearly Rent, to be paid into our Receivers Office, either in Money Ster∣ling, or in such Commodities as the Growth or Trade of the Province offords at the Merchants price there. But who∣soever is willing to buy off his yearly Rent, and become a Free-holder, may so do, paying after the rate of Twelve years Purchase, which comes to 50 s. for a Lot of Twenty five Acres; and so paying after the same rate for a greater or lesser quantity.
Thirdly, And for as much as it will be most commodious for Planters to live together, whereby they may be a meet help to each other. It is Ordered that all the Purchasers and Takers up of Land, shall sit down by some Villiage or Township, already laid out or to be laid out hereafter in the said Province; and having chosen the Village or Township which shall be most convenient and profitable for their Bu∣siness, the Surveyor General shall set forth to the said Per∣sons such quantity of Lands, to them Granted, out of the aforesaid Six Parts which are not then taken up, they paying to the said Surveyor General, the usual rate of Surveying in the said Province. And if any Person going or sending over; is willing to have a greater Parcel of Land than 25 Acres, he may Purchase, but not more than 1000 Acres, he paying down, at the Sealing of his Grant, for the same after the rate of Ten pounds by the hundred Acres; and so more or less for a greater or lesser quantity. 4. And if any Person is willing to buy Land, and yet for the present is not disposed to Plant there, he may so do, paying down here for his Grant to the Proprietors, ac∣cording to the rate aforesaid. Provided, That all those Persons, who by these Concessions, shall take up Land be enjoyn'd to Build one Dwelling-House on some part of their Land, within the space of seven. Years next after the 25 of December, 1682. And in case of Default, one half of their Land to return back to the Proprietors. FINIS.
