P3800 15987047 104672
THE PROPOSITIONS OF THE ROMAN CATHOLICKS OF IRELAND, Presented by their Commissioners to His Sacred Majestie, in April, M. DC. XLIV. As also the Answer of the Agents for the Protestants of Ireland, made to the said Propositions; and their Petition and Propositions to His Majesty; with His Majesties answer to the Propositions of the said Roman Catholicks: And the answe of IAMES Marquesse of Or∣mond His Majesties Commissioner for the treatie and concluding of a Peace in the Kingdome of Ireland, to the said Propositions. Waterford by Thomas Bourke, Printer to the Confederate  Catholicks of Ireland, M. DC. XLIV.
TO THE READER. WHereas the Supreme Councell of the Con∣federate Catholicks of Ireland, imployed seve∣rall persons of qualitie into England, authorized by Com∣mission to supplicate his Majestie, for redresse of the grie∣vances of the said Catholicks, and to settle a firme peace in Church, and Commonwealth, who having then for some time attended His Majestie to that purpose, His Majesties good intentions to the peace of this Kingdome, was for that present diverted, by the false Informations of persons ill affected to this Nation, whose suggestions happened to be then listned unto, and answers accordingly given: So as the said Commissioners returned into this Kingdome, with hopes onely, that His Majestie might in time bee better possessed of the power, and affections of His Catholicke subjects here, and of the use to be made thereof, His Majestie being pleased notwithstanding the said in∣formations to give Commission to the Lord Marques of Ormond, Lieutenant Generall of Ireland, for the con∣tinuance, and concluding of the treatre, begun before His Majestie; In pursuance of which Commission, the said Catholicks presented their propositions, the same in sub∣stance they first presented to His Majestie in Oxford, unto which some answers were made, which being no way sa∣tisfactorie, were replied unto, and so the matter procee∣ded to a long dispute, & debate, wherein many difficulties occurring, the treatie was adjourned, and so continues till
the tenth of Ianuary next, by which time His Majesties resolution upon the whole matter represented unto him is expressed, & a firme, & lasting peace hoped for. This being the state the treatie is in at this time, it may be conceived improper to give an account of the particular passages which are but overtures, and alterable, as it is well hoped, and little to bee doubted, but that in this they will bee, yet some to breed distraction and mistrusts among the said Confederates, or blinded with private and ambitious ends, and impatient of any delay, have been so malicious, or mistaken, as to traduce the said Confederate Catho∣licks, and their Commissioners affirming they might have obtained Conditions satisfactorie to any reasonable peo∣ple, but that they rejected the same. To satisfie therefore all indifferent Iudgements that may enter into the consi∣deration of the said proceedings, and to make it manifest, that the whole scope of the said Catholicks was, and is for the freedome of the Nation in their Religion, Estates, and Liberties, with out trenching upon His Majesties rights, or other end, and that it may appeare how farre the pro∣ceedings hitherto come short of that: It was thought ne∣cessary to expose those proceedings to publicke view, by putting them to the presse, so to cast off those aspersions, that ignorant, or malicious persons endeavour to cast upon them, having yet neverthelesse assured hopes that His Majesty will in time afford remedies to these Complaints, and with a gracious eye looke upon the sufferings of this afflicted nation.
The propositions of the Roman Catholicks of Ireland humbly presented unto His Sacred Majestie, in pursueance of their Remonstrance of grie∣vances, and to bee annexed to the said Re∣monstrance. 1. THat all Acts made against the profes∣sors of the Roman Catholicke Faith whereby any restrainte, penaltie, mulct, or incapacitie may bee layed upon any Roman Catholicke within the Kingdome of Ireland, may bee repealed, and the said Catholicks to be allowed the freedome of the Roman Catho∣licke Religion. 2. That your Majestie will bee pleased to call a free Parliament in the said Kingdome, to bee held, and continued as in the said Remon∣strance is expressed and the statute of the tenth yeare of King Henry the seventh, called Poy∣nings act, and all acts explayning, or enlarging the same be suspended, during that parliament
for the speedy settlement of the present affaires, and the repeale thereof to bee there further considered of. 3. That all acts, and ordinances made and passed in the now pretended parliament in that Kingdome since the seventh day of August 1641. be cleerely annulled, and declared voyd, and taken of the file. 4. That all Indictments, Attainders, Out∣lawries, in the Kings Bench, or elsewhere since the said seventh day of August 1641. And all letters pattents. grants, leases, custodiums, bonds, recognizances, and all other records, act, or acts depending thereupon, or in preju∣dice of the said Catholicks, or any of them bee taken off the files, annulled and declared void: first by your Majesties publicke Proclamation, and after by act to be passed in the said free Par∣liament. 5. That inasmuch as under collour of such outlawries, and attainders, debts due un∣to the said Catholickes have been granted, le∣vyed, or disposed of, and of the other side, that debts due upon the said Catholicks to those of the adverse partie have been levied, and dispo∣sed to publicke use, that therefore all debts be
by act of Parliament mutually released, or, all to stand in statu Quo. notwithstanding any grant, or disposition. 6. That the late offices taken, or found upon fayned, or old titles since the yeare 1634. to intitle Your Majestie to severall Countreyes in Connaght, Thomond, and in the Counties of Tipperarie, Lymmericke, Kilkenny, and VVickloe, be vacated, & taken off the file, & the possessors setled, & secured in their ancient estates by act of Parliament. And that the like act of limitta∣tion, of your Majesties titles for the securitie of the estates of your subjects of that Kingdome be passed in the said parliament, as was enacted in the one and twenty yeare of his late Maje∣sties raigne in this Kingdome. 7. That all Marckes of incapacitie impo∣sed upon the natives of that Kingdome to pur∣chase, or acquire lands, leases, offices, or here∣ditaments be taken away by act of parliament, and the same to extend to the securing of pur∣chases, leases, or grants already made. And that for the education of youth an act be passed in the next parliament, for the erecting of one, or more Inns of Court, Vniversities free, and common schooles.
8. That the offices, and places of command honour, profit, and trust within that Kingdome be conferred upon Roman Catholicks natives in equalitie, and indifferencie with your Maje∣sties other subjects. 9. That the insupportable oppression of your subjects by reason of the Court of Wards, and respit of homage, be taken away, and a certaine revenue in lieu thereof setled upon your Ma∣jestie without diminution of your Majesties profit. 10. That no Lord not estated in that King∣dome, or estated, and not resident shall have vote in the said parliament by proxie, or other∣wise, and none admitted to the house of Com∣mons, but such as shall be estated, and resident within the Kingdome. 11. That an act be passed in the next par∣liament declaratorie that the parliament of Ire∣land is a free parliament of it selfe, independant of, and not subordinate, to the parliament of England: And that the subjects of Ireland are immediatly subject to your Majestie as in right of your Crowne: and that the members of the said parliament of Ireland, and all other the subjects of Ireland are independant, and no
way to bee ordered, or concluded by the par∣liament of England, and are onely to bee orde∣red, and governed within that Kingdome by your Majestie and such Governors as are, or shall be there appointed, and by the parliament of that Kingdome according to the lawes of the land. 12. That the assumed power, or Iurisdi∣ction in the Councell-boord of determining all manner of causes, bee limitted to matters of state, and all pattents, estates, and grants il∣legally, and extrajudicially avoyded there, or elsewhere be left in state as before, and the par∣ties grieved, their heires, or assignes, till le∣gall eviction. 13. That the statutes of the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth yeare of Queene Elizabeth con∣cerning stapple-commodities be repealed, re∣serving unto your Majestie lawfull, and just pondage, and a booke of rates to bee setled by an indifferent Committee of both houses, for all commodities. 14. That in as much as the long continu∣ance of the chiefe governor, or governors of that Kingdome in that place of so great emi∣nencie, and power, hath beene a principall oc∣casion
that much tyrannie, and oppression hath beene exercised upon the subjects of that Kingdome. That your Majestie will bee plea∣sed to continue such governors hereafter but for three yeares. And that none once imployed therein bee appointed for the same againe, un∣till the expiration of six yeares next after the end of the said three yeares: And that an act passe to disinable such governor, or governors during their government, directly, or indire∣ctly, in use, trust, or otherwise to make any manner of purchase, or acquisition of any man∣nors, lands, tenements or hereditaments within that Kingdome, other then from your Majestie, your heires or successors. 15. That an act may be passed in the next parliament for the raising & setling of trained bands within the seuerall Counties of that Kingdome, as well to prevent forraigne inva∣sions, as to render them the more serviceable and ready for your Majesties occasions, as cause shall require. 16. That an act of oblivion be passed in the next free parliament to extend to all your Majesties said Catholicke subjects, and their adherents for all manner of offences, capitall;
criminall, and personall: And the said act to extend to all goods, and chattells, customes, maine-profits, prizes, arreares of rents taken, received, or incurred since these troubles. 17. For as much as your Majesties said Catholicke subjects have been taxed with ma∣ny inhuman cruelties which they never com∣mitted, your Majesties said suppliants there∣fore, for their vindication, and to manifest to all the world their desire to have such heynous offences punished, and the offendors brought to Iustice, doe desire, that in the next Parlia∣ment, all notorious murders, breaches of quar∣ter, and inhuman cruelties, committed of ei∣ther side, may bee questioned in the said Par∣liament, if your Majestie so thinke fit, and such as shall appeare to be guiltie to be excepted out of the said act of oblivion, and punished accor∣ding their deserts. For as much DREAD SOVERAIGNE, as the wayes of our addresses unto your Maje∣stie for apt remedies unto our grievances were hitherto debarred us, but now at length through your benigne grace and favour layd open, Wee doe humbly present these in pursuance of the said Remonstrance, which granted your said
subjects are ready to contribute the ten thou∣sand men as in their remonstrance is specified towards the suppressing of the unnaturall re∣bellion now in this Kingdome: And will fur∣ther expose their lives, and fortunes to serve your Majestie, as occasions shall require.
The Answers of the Agents for the Protestants of Ireland, to the Propositions of the Roman Catho∣licks of Ireland, made in pursuance of his Sacred Majesties directions of the ninth of May 1644. requiring the same. 1, TO the first wee say that this hath beene the pretence of almost all those who have entred into Rebellion in the Kingdome of Ireland at any time since the Reformation of Religion there which was setled by act of Parliament above eighty yeares since, and hath wrought good effect ever since, for the peace and welfare both of the Church and Kingdome there, and of the Church and Kingdome of England and Protestant partie throughout all Christendome, and so hath beene found wholesome and ne∣cessarie by long experience, and the repealing of those Lawes will set Popery againe both in jurisdiction, profession, and practice, as it was before the said Reformation, and introduce amongst other inconveniences, the Supremacie of Rome, and take away, or much endanger your Majesties Supreme and just authoritie in causes Ecclesiasticall, a diminution of honour and power not to be endured. The said acts extending as∣well to seditious sectaries, as to popish Recusants. So as by the repeale thereof, every man may seeme to be left to choose his owne Religion in that Kingdome which must needs be∣get great confusion, and the abounding of the Roman Cler∣gy there, hath beene one of the greatest occasions of this late Rebellion, Besides it is humbly desired that your Maiestie will be pleased to take into your gracious Consideration a
clause in the act of Parliament past by your Majesties Royall assent in England in the seventeenth yeare of your raigne tou∣ching punishment to be inflicted upon those that shall intro∣duce the authoritie of the See of Rome in any case whatso∣ever. 2. Whereas they desire to have a free Parliament called, reflecteth by secret and cunning implication upon your Ma∣jesties present Parliament in Ireland as if it were not a free Parliament. Wee humbly beseech your Majestie to resent how dangerous it is to make such insinuation or intimation to your people of that kingdome touching that Parliament, wherein severall acts of Parliament have already passed, the validitie where of may be endangered if the Parliament should not be approved as a free Parliament, and it is a point of so high nature as we humbly conceive is not properly to be dis∣cussed but in Parliament. And your Majesties said Parliament now sitting is a free Parliament in Law, holden before a person of honour and fortune in that Kingdome composed of good loyall, and well affected subjects to your Majestie, who doubtlesse will be ready to comply in all things that shall ap∣peare to be pious and just for the good of the true Protestant Religion, and for your Majesties service, and the good of the Church, and State, That if this present Parliament should be dissolved, it would be a great terrour, and discontent to all your Majesties protestant subjects of that kingdome, and may be also a meanes to force many of your Majesties subjects to quite that Kingdome, or peradventure to adhere to some other partie there in opposition of the Romish Irish confede∣rates, rather then be lyable to their power, which effects may prove of most dangerous consequence, and we humbly offer to your Majesties consideration your owne gracious expressi∣ons mentioned in the grounds and motives inducing your Majestie to agree to a Cessation of Armes for one whole yeare with the Roman Catholickes of Ireland Printed at Oxford the ninth of October 1642. viz. And let all our good subjects be assured that as we have for these reasons, and with this cau∣tion, and deliberation consented to this preparative to peace.
And to that purpose doe continue our Parliament there, so we shall proceed in the accomplishment thereof with that care, and circumspection, that we shall not admit even peace it selfe other wise then as it may bee agreeable to conscience, honour and justice. We also humbly desire that such Lawes as your Majestie shall thinke fit to passe may bee transmitted according to Poynings Law, and other lawes of explanation thereof, or of addition therevnto now in force with great con∣tentment and securitie to your Majesties protestant subjects. But if the present Parliament be dissolved we humbly repre∣sent unto your Majestie that so many of your ablest, and best protestant subjects have beene murdered, or banished by this Rebellion, that few or no protestant Freeholders will be found in the Counties, Cities, and Burroughs to elect, and choose Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, which will be most dangerous to your Majesties rights and prerogatives and good subjects, and may beget great disputes in after times for the repealing of Poynings Act, notwithstanding their faigned ex∣pressions of their loyaltie. Yet it plainely appeares they doe not repose sucht rust inyour Majesties Iustice as it becommeth lo yall subjects to doe, and such they pretend themselves to be, for that they seeke thereby to prevent your Majestie and your Councell of England, & Ireland of so full a view, & time of mature consideration to be had of acts of Parliament of Ire∣land before they passe as in prudence is requisit, and hath been found necessarie by the experience of well neere two hun∣dred yeares, And if their intentions were so cleare as they pro∣fesse wee know not why they should avoyde the strictest view, and tryall of your Majesties, and your Councels of both Kingdomes. This they desire intending to introduce a great diminution of your Royall and necessarie power for the con∣servation of your Regall State, and protection of your good protestant subjects there and elsewhere. And what speciall use they ayme at in seeking such repeale your protestant sub∣jects as they know not the particular so can they conjecture of none unlesse the said Confederates have some designe by way of surprize to obtrude upon your Majestie in their new
desired Parliament some acts in Iustification of their ill done actions, and for condemning such of your protestant subjects as have in their severall degrees most faithfully served your Majestie there, which we the rather beleeve seeing they have proved by their oath of Association, and the Bull lately pu∣blished in Ireland since the Cessation, the destruction of the Protestants there, when they have their swords in their hands to put the same in execution. 3. Wee humbly desire that they may particularize those orders or ordinances which may prejudice your Majesties ser∣vice. For we are well assured that the Parliament now sit∣ting in Ireland on signification of your Majesties pleasure ther∣in, eyther will give your Majestie full satisfaction, or re∣peale any unjust orders, or ordinances whatsoever, which may be prejudiciall to your Majestie. And there may be some or∣ders, or ordinances which may concerne particular persons in their lives, liberties, or fortunes, that may suffer unheard by the admitting of so generall a proposition, which is meere∣ly proposed, as wee humbly conceive to put a scorne on your Majesties parliament now sitting there, and to discourage your protestant subiects who have faithfully served your Maiesty in that parliament. 4. This wee conceive to be a very bold proposition not warranted as we also conceive by any example, & tending to introduce an ill president in after times, for it was never seene that Records were taken of the file but where there was some corruption, or fraud, or some illegall, or uniust carriage used in, and concerning the procuring, or making up of such Records, and the same first well proved upon due examina∣tion, And it may not onely conceale, but in some fort seeme to iustifie their abominable Treasons, Murders, Cruelties, Massacres, and plunders acted against your Maiesties person Crowne and dignitie, upon the persons of your Maiesties most loyall protestant subiects in that Kingdome, and encou∣rage the Papists there to doe the like againe, besides the dis∣couragement it may beget in your Maiesties officers, and sub∣iects to their duties in the like insurrections which may hap∣pen
hereafter, which also may prove very preiudiciall to your Maiesties rights and revenues, if the Records to support the forfeytures wherein many of them are or may be grounded, should be taken of the file, and Cancelled. 5. We humbly conceive that in times of peace, and most setled government. When the Court of Law and Iustice is most open, & best observed, that the debts due to the Crowne and actually levied and payed in to your Maiesties use, ought not to bee restored though the Records of the forfeytures should legally be reversed, which is farre from the present case, And this proposition tendeth to crosse the just right of your Majestie, and to make the disposition by the Confede∣rate popish Rebels of debts due to protestants, and by the said rebels by fraud and force levyed, and disposed in maintenance of their rebellion, which commonly they call by the name of publicke uses, to be in equall degree with the debts owing by the rebels and by them all forfeyted, and many of them by law duely levyed, which is a most unequall and unjust thing. And the said propositions cannot, nor doth make offer to have the popish Confederats cut off from the debts due to them which they have justly forfeyted, but only for a colour of con∣sideration, to have the protestants loose such debts justly due to them, as have beene unjustly taken from them, who have done no act at all to forfeyte them. 6. We know not of any offices found on fayned Titles, nor what the Confederats may demand in respect of any gra∣ces promised by your Majesty, which we intend not, nor have any occasion to dispute, but do humbly conceive that all those who have committed treason in the late rebellion subsequent to your Majesties promise of those graces, have thereby forfey∣ted the benefit thereof together with the Lands which the said graces, might else have related, and so their whole estates are now justly fallen to your Majesty by their rebellion, which we conceive is of great importance for your Majesties service to be taken into consideration, as first with regarde of the statutes made in the present Parliament of England. Se∣condly the necessarie encrease of your revenue decayed by
the present rebellion. Thirdly the abolishing of the evill cu∣stome of the Irish, and preservation of Religion, Lawes and government there. Fourthly the satisfaction of your prote∣stants subjects losses in some measure. Fiftly the arrears of your Majesties Army, and other debts contracted for that war, & for preservation of that Kingdome to your Majestie. Sixtly the bringing in of more Brittish on the plantations. Seventh∣ly the building of some walled Townes in remote, and de∣solate places for the securitie of that kingdome, and your good subjects there. Eightly the taking of the Natives from their former dependencie on their chiefetaynes who usurped an ab∣solute power on them to the diminution of your Regall po∣wer, and to the oppression of the inferiour. 7. This we conceive concerneth some of the late plan∣tations and no other part of that Kingdome, and that the resti∣tution herein mentioned is found to bee of great use especial∣ly for the indifferencie of tryalls strength of the government, and for trade and trafficke, and we humbly conceive that if other plantations shall not proceede for the setling, and secu∣ring of that Kingdome, & that no restraint be made of papists purchasing, or buying of the protestants out of their former platations where they were prudently planted, though now cast out of their estates by the late rebellion, & unable to plant the same againe for want of meanes, and therefore probably upon easy tearmes will part with their estates to the Confede∣rates. That those plantations will be destroyed to the great prejudice of your Maiesties service, and endangering of the safety of that Kingdome. Touching bearing of offices we humbly conceive that their non-conformitie to the lawes and statutes of that Realme is the onely marke of incapacity im∣posed upon them. And wee humbly conceive that they ought not to expect to be more capable there then the English Natives are here in England in like case. For Schooles in Ire∣land there are divers setled in all parts of that Kingdome al∣ready by the Lawes and statutes of that Realme. And if any person well affected shall erect, and endow any more schools there, at their owne charges, So that the Schoole-masters and
schollers may be governed according to the lawes, custome, and orders of England, and the best of free scholes here. Wee cannot apprehend any iust exceptions thereunto, but touching Vniversities, and Innes-of-Court. We humbly conceive that this part of the proposition savoureth of some desire to become independent upon England, or to make a separation in the Re∣ligion and lawes of the kingdome, which can never be truly happy but in the good unitie of both in the true protestant re∣ligion, and in the lawes of England. For as for matter of charge such of the Natives as are desirous to breede their sonnes for learning in divinitie can be well content to send them to the Vniversities of Lovain, Doway, and other places in forayne Kingdomes, and for Civill law or Physicke to Padua, & other places which drawes a great treasure yearely out of your Ma∣jesties Dominions, but will send few, or none of them to Ox∣ford or Cambridge, where they might as cheaply be brought up and become as learned, Which course we conceive is hol∣den out of their pride and disaffection towards this King∣dome, and the true Religion here professed. And for the lawes of the land which are for the Common-lawes agree∣able to England, so for the greatest part of the statutes, the Innes of Courts in England are sufficient and the protestants come thither without grudging, And it is a meanes to civilize them after the English customes to make them familiar, and in love with the language, and Nation to preserve law in the puritie when the professors of it shall draw of one originall foun∣taine, and see the manner of the practise of it in the same great Channell where his Majesties Courts of Iustice of England doe flow cleerely. Whereas by separations of the Kingdomes in the place of their principall instruction where their founda∣tions in being are to be layd, a degenerate corruption, in Re∣ligion and Iustice may happily be introduced, and spred with much more difficultie to be corrected and restrayned after∣wards by any discipline to be used in Ireland, or punishments there to be inflicted for departing from the true grounds of things that are best preserved in unitie when they grow out of the same roote, then if such Vniversities and Innes of Court
as are proposed should be granted. All which wee humbly submit to your Majesties most pious and prudent Considera∣tion and Iudgement. 8. We humbly conceive that the Roman Catholicks Na∣tives in Ireland may have the like offices, and places as the Roman Catholickes Natives of England here have, and not otherwise. Howbeit we conceive that in the generallity they have not deserved somuch by their late rebellion. Therefore we see not why they should be endowed with any new or further capacity or priviledges then they have by the Lawes, and statutes now in force in that Kingdome. 9. Wee know no oppression by reason of the Court of Wards, and wee humbly conceive that the Court of wards is of great use for the raysing of your Majesties revenues, the preservation of your Maiesties Tennures, and chiefly the edu∣cation of the Gentry in the protestant Religion, and civilitie of learning, and good manners who otherwise would bee brought up in ignorance, & barbarisme, their estats be ruyned by their kindred, and friends, and continue their dependance on the chiefe Lords to the great preiudice of your Maiesties service and protestant subiects, and there being no colour of exception to your Maiesties iust Title to wardships, we know not why the taking away of Court concerning the same should be so pressed, unlesse it be to prevent the education of the Lords and Gentry that fall-wards in the protestant reli∣gion, For that part of this proposition which concernes respit of homage, we humbly conceive it reasonable that some way may be setled for this, if it stands with your Maiesties good pleasure, without preiudice to your Maiesty, or your prote∣stant subiects. 10. Wee humbly conceive that in the yeare 1641. by the graces which your Majestie then granted to your subjects of Ireland, the matter of this proposition was in a faire way regulated by your utter abolishing of blancke proxies, & limit∣ting Lords present, and attending in the Parliament of Ireland that no one of them should be capable of more proxies then two, and prescribing the Peeres of that Kingdome not there
resident to purchase fitting proportions of land in Ireland within five yeares from the last of Iuly 1641. or else to loose votes till they should make such purchase: which purchase by reason of the troubles happening in that Kingdome, & which have continued for two yeares, and a halfe, have not perad∣venture yet beene made. And therefore your Majestie may now bee pleased, and may take just occasion to inlarge the time, when that Kingdome may againe be setled in a happy and firme peace: And as to members of the house of Com∣mons the same is most fit as wee humbly conceive to be regu∣lated by the Lawes, and statutes of that Kingdome. 11. This proposition concernes your Majesties high Court of Parliament both of England and Ireland, and is beyond our abilities who are not acquainted with the Records, and presidents of this nature to give an answer unto, and there∣fore Wee humbly desire your Majesties pardon for not answe∣ring unto the same. 12. The Councell-Table hath alwayes exercised Iuris∣diction in some cases ever since the English government was setled in that Kingdome, and is of so long continuance in cases of some natures, as the beginning thereof appeareth not, which seemeth to bee by prescription and hath alwayes beene armed with power to examen upon oath as a Court of Iustice, or in nature of a Court of Iustice in cases of some natures, and may bee very necessary still in many Cases, especially for the present, till your Majesties Lawes may more generally be re∣ceived in that Kingdome: And wee conceive that Board is so well limitted by printed Instructions in your Maiesties Royall fathers, and by your Majesties Grace in the seven∣teenth yeare of your Raigne, that it needeth for the present little, or no further regulating at all: Howbeit they hum∣bly referre unto your Majesties great wisdome, and good∣nesse to doe therein, as to Law and Iustice shall apper∣taine. 13. The matter of this proposition is setled in a fitting and good way by your Majestie already, as wee conceive a∣mongst the Graces granted by your Majestie to your people
of Ireland in the seventeenth yeare of your Raigne, to which we humbly referre our selves. 14. Wee humbly conceive that this proposition tendeth to lay a false and scandalous aspersion upon your Majesties gracious government over Ireland: And that it trencheth ve∣ry high upon your Wisdome, Iustice and Power, & under col∣lour of supposed corruptions pretended to bee in the greatest Officer that commandeth under your Majestie there, if hee continue so long in his governement as may well enable him to find out and discover the true state of that Kingdome, and the dangerous dispositions and designes of the Popish partie there, to prevent him therein; and to turne him out from do∣ing service before, or as soone, as hee is throughly informed, and experienced how to doe the same, and then to hold him excluded so long that in all likelyhood hee shall not live to come to that place the second time, which wee humbly con∣ceive will bee a great discouragement to any person of ho∣nour and fortune to serve your Majestie in that high trust: And for the purchasing lands in that Kingdome, your Majestie may bee pleased to leave them to the Lawes, and punish them severely if they commit any offence, or exercise any oppositi∣ons under collour of purchasing of any lands or estates what∣soever. 15. The having of trained bands in Ireland for the pre∣sent cannot under favour be for your Majesties service or the safetie of that Kingdome: For that the Protestants by the sad effects of the late Rebellion are so much destroyed that the said bands must consist in effect altogether of the Confederate Catholicks, and to continue them in armes stored with am∣munition, and made ready for service by mustering, and often training, will prove under collour of advancing your Majesties service against forraigne invasion, a meere guard and power over popish forces always in readinesse to protect the Popish Confederates, and by force, and Armes according to their late oath and protestations to execute all their cruell designes for extirpation of the Protestant Religion and English Governe∣ment both which they mortally hate; Howsoever in cun∣ning
they dissemble it, and to prevent the setling an armie of good Protestants, without which your Maiesties good subiects cannot live securely there. 16. Wee humbly pray, that the Lawes of force bee taken into consideration, And doe humbly conceive that your Ma∣jestie in honour and Iustice may forbeare to discharge, or re∣lease any actions, suites, debts, or interests whereby your Ma∣iesties protestant subiects who have committed no offence against your Maiestie or your Lawes should be barred or de∣prived of any of their legall remedies or iust demands which by any of your Maiesties Lawes and statutes they may have against the popish Confederates (who are the onely delin∣quents) or any of their party for or in respect of any wrongs done unto them, or any their ancestors, or predecessors, in or concerning their Lands, goods, or estates since the contryving or breaking forth of the rebellion, The said Confederates ha∣ving without provocation shed so much innocent bloud, and acted so many cruelties as cannot be parralleled in any storie, And we conceive it to be high presumption in them upon so weake grounds to propound an act of oblivion in such gene∣rall termes, some of the Confederates having beene contry∣vers or actors of such cruell murders and other acts of in hu∣manitie as cry to God, and your Sacred Maiestie for Iustice, And they having of your Maiesties Revenues, customes, sub∣sides and other rights of your Crowne in their hands or de∣stroyed by them to the value of twenty hundred thousand pounds and more. 17. We conceive this proposition is made but for a florish, & if the Confederates be so desirous to try their innocencie as they pretend they need not stay for another Parliament in Ire∣land, but submit to that which is now in being, which is an equall and iust Parliament, as in some of your reasons touch∣ing that point is expressed, and they offering to draw it to a new Parliament, is in effect to desire that they may be their owne Iudges, for as that Kingdome is now imbroyled and wasted, the chiefe delinquents, or Confederates will be so prevalent a faction in the next Parliament, that they will
be able, and doubtlesse will cleere all the popish party how guilty soever, and condemne all the protestants how innocent soever. These answers to the high, and unexpected demands of the Confederates, we have framed in humble obedience, to your Maiesties directions, but being very sensible as of the weight and great importance of the businesse so also of our owne weakenesse and want of time, and well knowing that some of your Privy Counsellors, Iudges, and Officers of that Kingdome are now in Towne sent for over, and here atten∣ding by your Maiesties command, who by their long obser∣vation and experience of the affaires and state of Ireland, are better able to give your Maiestie more full and satisfacto∣ry answers touching the premisses then we can, And concei∣ving that the Collections in Answer to the said Confede∣rates Remonstrance, which wee humbly presented to your Maiesty the 27. of the last moneth of April, may in many things give your Maiesty more light then these our answers doe or can. Wee humbly beseech your Maiesty that the said privy Counsellors, ludges, and Officers as occasion shall re∣quire may bee called upon and heard to give your Maiesty the better satisfaction in these particulars, and that to the same purpose the Booke of the said Collections may be perused, and considered of, as your Maiestie shall finde most requisit.
The humble petition of divers of your Maiesties Protestant subiects in your Kingdome of Ireland, as well Com∣manders of your Maiesties Army here, as others whose names are subscribed in the behalfe of themselves, and other your Protestant subiects in this your Kingdome. To the Kings most Excellent Majestie. SHeweth, that this your Highnesse Kingdome, reduced with a vast expence of treasure, and much effusion of Brittish blood, to the obedience of the Imperiall Crowne of England, hath been by the Prince∣ly care of your progenitors, especially of Queene Elizabeth, and of your Royall Father of ever blessed memory, and your sacred Majesty in many parts happily planted, great summes of moneyes disbursed in building and improvements, Churches edified, and endowed, and frequented with multitudes of Protestants, and your Custome, and revenues raised to great yearely summes, by the industry of your Protestant subjects especi∣ally, and great summes of moneis by way of subsidies, and contributi∣ons cheerfully payed unto your Majestie by your said subjects, in which happinesse this your Kingdome hath flourished in a long continued peace, and under your highnesse most glorious, and happy governement, un∣till that by the present generall rebellion and conspiracy, raised out of de∣testation of your blessed Governement, and for the rooting out of the Pro∣testant Religion, and so for the dispossessing of your Majesty of this your said Kingdome, without the least occasion offered by your Majesty▪ or the Protestant subjects; And notwithstanding that your Majesty immediat∣ly before had enlarged beyond president your Royall favour and bounty to them in granting all that their and our joint Agents did desire of your Majesty, and wee continuing amongst them in all love and amity with∣out distrust your petitioners and others who laboured to oppose those
damnable designes and practices have been driven from their dwelling, estates, and fortunes, their houses, and Churches, burnt, and demo∣lished, all monuments of civillity utterly defaced your Majesties Forts and places of defence throwne downe, and the Common, and statute lawes of this your Kingdome utterly confounded, by taking on themselves the exercise of all manner of authorities, and Iurisdictions Ecclesiasti∣call and Civill, both by land and sea, proper and particular to your sa∣cred Majesty being your just prerogatives, and the Royall flowers of your Imperiall Diademe, to the disherison of your Crowne, and your royall revenues brought to nothing; And the Protestant Clergie with their Revenues, and support for the present destroyed This your King∣dome in all parts formerly inhabited by Brittish Protestants now depo∣pulated of them, and many thousands of your Protestant most barba∣rously used, stripped naked, tortured, famished, hanged, buried a∣live, drowned, and otherwise (by all barbarous cruell sorts of death) muthered, and such as yet remaine alive of them are reduced to that extremity, that very few of them have wherewithall to maintaine a being; And all of them so terrified and afflicted, with those barbarous and inhuman cruelties, the true reports whereof being now spread a∣broad into the Christian world, your suppliants conceives feares, your Majesties Brittish subjects will be discouraged from coming againe to in∣habite this Kingdome: And the remnant of the Brittish left here will bee forced to depart; All this being done by the Conspiracy of the Papists who did publickely declare the utter extirpation of the Protestant Reli∣gion and all the Brittish professors thereof out of this your Majesties Kingdome, and to the end this may the better in some measure appeare, your suppliants have made choice of Captaine M. William Ridge∣way, Sir Francis Hamilton Knight and Barronet, Captaine Michael Iones, and M. Fenton Parsons whom they have imployed and authorized as their Agents, to manifest the truth thereof, in such particulars as for the present they are furnished withall, referring the more ample manifestation thereof to the said Captaine M. William Ridgeway, Sir Francis Hamilton, Captaine Iones, and Fenton Parsons, or any three or more of them, and such other Agents as shall with all convenient speed bee sent as occasion shall require to attend your Majesty from the Protestant subjects of the severall Provinces of this your Kingdome. VVee therefore your Majesties most humble, loyall and obedient
Protestant subjects casting downe our selves at your Royall feete, and flying to you for succour and redresse in our great calamity as our most gracious Soveraigne Lord and King, and next and immediatly under Almighty God our protector and defender, most humbly beseeching your Sacred Majestie to admit into your Royall presence from time to time our said Agents, and in your great wisedome to take into your Princely care, and consideration the distressed estates and humble desires of your said subjects, for that the glory of God your Maiesties honour, and the happinesse of your good subiects the Protestant Religion may be restored through the whole Kingdome to its luster, and the losses of your Prote∣stant subiects may be repayred in such manner, and measure as your Maiestie in your Princely wisedome shall thinke fit, and that this your Kingdome may be so setled as that your said Protestant subiects may hereafter live therein under the happy government of your Maiestie and your Royall posteritie, with comfort and securitie▪ whereby your Maiestie will render your selfe throughout the whole world a most iust and glorious defender of the Protestant Religion, and draw downe a blessing on all other your Royall undertakings for which your Petitio∣ners will ever pray, &c. A list of the names of those who have underwritten their names to this petition. GEorge Kildare. Montgomerye. H. Blany. VV. Ridgeway. Ia. Montgomery. Cha. Coote. Fra. Hamilton. Arthur Forbis. Robert Han'y. Fra. Slinsby. VVilliam Colley. Arthur Blundell. Ia. Dunbar. Ed Powey. Tho. Meredith. Arthur Loftus. VVilliam Vsher. Geo. Monke. Francis VVilloughby. Robert Sterling. Io. Morris. Henry Iones. Io. Piggot. Robert Bayly. Fra. Moore. Ed Philpot. VV. Parsons Iunior. Arthur Culme. Erasmus Burrowes. Io. Edgeworth. VVilliam Dodwell. Io. Newman. VVilliam Plunket. Io Ferrar. Io. Cliffe. Peter VVybrants.
Theod. Scout. Brean Stapleton. Da. Dunbar. Tho Nill. Geo. Lawnder. Hen. Tillier. Hugh Coghan, VVilliam Gilbert. VVilliam Montgomery. Ia. Calvill. VVilliam Iohnson. Geo. Montgomery. Robert VVhfield. Io. Lobell. Hugh Montgomery. Io Rayvan. Iosaa VVheeler. Arch Hamilton. VVilliam VVhite. VVilliam Piggot. Tho. Tully. Roger Atkinson, Nich▪ Simpson, Oli VVheeler. VVilliam Alsry. Adam Meredith. Tho. Coote. Edw Piggot. Ia. Deroaile. Geo Boothe. VVilliam Knight. Robert Sanderson. Ia. Starling. An. Dopping. Radeliffe Dukinfield. VVilliam Lu. Tho. Leigh. Dan. Hester. Robert erivall. Ia. Crawford. Stephen Allen. VVilliam Anberry. Iohn Doyle. Edw. Spring. Io. Iohnson. Tho. Almer. Io. Hoy. Robert ennedy. Cooley . Robert Co. Robert Stewar. Tho. VVhite. Pat. Connemag. Dudley Colley. Nic. Pinnar. Sa Mullnax. Ia. Kennedy. Hen. Kenney. VVilliam Hamilton. VVilliam Billing. VVilliam Vmphry. Hugh Ionne. Io. Leight. Andr Brereton. Io Clerke. Roger Holland. Io. Serring. Mar. Higginson. Io. VValler. Iohauth Holt. Edw. Fisher Capt. Tho. Lewton. Tho. Mnley. Ios. Holt. Io. Cmberlege. And. Cumble. Geo. Chibaldist▪ Io. Ro. Fra Barser. Nath. Stoug. VVill. Bodingon. And. g. Edw. Barten. Io. Pinrose. VVill Richardson. Robert Masson. VVilliam Heward. Ia. VVoodcocke. And. VVatson. Robert Iones. VVilliam Tedder. And. Iones. Robert Boyer. VVilliam Medcalfe. Iona. Costie. VVilliam Sands. Natha. Poster. Io. Field. VValter Fraster.
His Majesties answer, to the propositions of the Roman Catholicks of Ireland. COncerning any thing in Religion, his Ma∣jesties answer is, That as the Lawes against those of the Romish Religion, within that his Kingdome of Ireland have never been execu∣ted with any rigour or severity: So if such his subjects shall by returning to their duty and loyalty, merit his Majesties favour and prote∣ction, they shall not for the future have cause to complaine, that lesle moderation is used to∣wards them, then hath been in the most favo∣rable of Queene Elizabeth and King Iames his times: Provided that under pretence of Con∣science, they doe not stirre up sedition but live quietly and peaceably according to their Alle∣giance. 2. Touching the calling a free Parliament (by which his Majestie supposes the proposers intend a new Parliament) his Majestie sayes he
could wish, that all the particulars might bee fully agreed on, and ratified this Parliament; his Majestie well understanding that his Prote∣stant subjects may bee in farre greater danger in a new Parliament then the proposers and their Party can bee in this, his Majestie being willing to give them any security that can bee desired against their apprehensions; however since some objections and doubts are raised of the legall continuance of this Parliament since the death of the Lord Deputy VVansford, and by the late arrivall of his Majesties Com∣mission, after the day of meeting upon the prorogation (though those doubts may bee easily solved) his Majestie is content to call a new Parliament, upon condition, that all particulars bee first agreed on, and the Acts to be passed bee first transmitted, according to custome (for his Majestie will by no meanes consent the suspension of Poynings Act) and the proposers giving his Majestie security, that there shall be no attempt in that Parliament to passe any other Act, then what is agreed on, & first transmitted; or to bring any other preju∣dice to any of his Majesties Protestant subjects there.
3. His Majestie neither can nor will de∣clare Acts in themselves lawfull to bee voyd, but is content that neither the Proposers, nor their party shall suffer any pejudice by any Acts or Ordinances passed, since the time in that proposition mentioned, by reason of this commotion: And for that end shall give his full concurrence. 4. The matters of the foure, five and six∣teenth Propositions are to bee digested into an Act of Oblivion, in which his Majestie will ad∣mit any Clauses to enlarge his mercy: but will not by declaring Indictments legally taken & regularly prosecuted to be voyd, give any coun∣tenance to, or make any excuse for the present Rebellion: which would be a great prejudice to truth, and to the future security of that King∣dome. And therefore His Majestie is content to grant a full and generall Pardon to all persons whatsoever within that his Kingdome (except for all Treasons, Rebellion, or other crimes whatsoever, growing or arising from or by reason of the said Rebellion) & will likewise give his consent to such an Act of Obli∣vion as shall be prepared & transmitted to him
by the advise of his Lord Lieutenant & Coun∣cell of Ireland, who are fittest to consider in what state debts are to bee left: and particular actions and remedies to bee waved: in which His Majestie for the peace of the Kingdome will bee content to release what concernes him∣selfe. 6. When all particulars shall bee agreed on, and faithfully executed on the parts of the Proposers, his Majestie (expecting a just ac∣knowledgement of his bountie, as well know∣ing that he parts with very much, to which hee hath a legall and undoubted title) is content to release and quit his right to all such lands in the Counties mentioned (except within the Coun∣tyes of Kilkenny and Wickloe) upon the tearmes formerly assented by his Majestie in his Answer to the grievanees in the seventeenth yeare of his Raigne, and will consent to such an Act of limitations as is desired. 7. When all other things shall bee con∣cluded, his Majestie will consent to an Act for the taking away any incapacity, as Na∣tives, either to lands or offices, if any such there bee: And will willingly consent to the
erecting an Innes of Court, Vniversity, or free-schooles, provided that they bee gover∣ned by such Statutes, and Orders, as His Majestie shall approve, and agreable to the Custome of this Kingdome. 8. Such of His Majesties subjects of the Romish Religion within that Kingdome, as shall manifest their dutie and Affection to His Majestie, shall receive such marks of His Majesties favour in offices and places of trust, as shall manifest His Majesties good accep∣tance and regard of them. 9. His Majestie will take care, that his good subjects of that Kingdome shall not be oppressed by his Court of Wards, and if op∣pressions of that kind have been, upon good and due information, His Majestie will cause Iustice to be done for the time past; and for the future will prevent the like by Instructi∣ons. But for the taking away of that Court, His Majestie can make no answer, till the particulars for his satisfaction bee set downe, and presented to him. 10. His Majestie consented as farre as is fit for him in this Point, in his answer to
the five and twentieth grievance, in the se∣venteenth yeare of his Raigne; the which he is still willing shall bee enacted, looking for∣ward still to five yeares, to begin after the peace concluded. 11. His Majestie conceives the substance of this Proposition (which concernes the fun∣damentall Rights of both Kingdomes) fit to bee referred to the free debate and expostu∣lation of the two parliaments, when it shall please God that they may freely and safely sit, His Majestie being so equally concerned in the priviledges of either, that hee will take care to the utmost of his power, that they shall both conteine themselves within their proper limitts: his Majestie being the Head, and equally interessed in the Rights of both par∣liaments. 12. This is sufficiently provided for in his Majesties Answer to the tenth grievance, which hee is content shall passe. 13. Since it appeares by long experience that these Lawes have not produced that good effect for which they were made, his Ma∣jestie was graciously pleased by his late Graces,
that those Statutes should bee repealed, save onely for woolls and woollfells: and will ob∣serve the same resolution: And a Booke of ra∣tes shall bee setled by an indifferent Commit∣tee. 14. His Majestie doth not admit that the long continuance of the Chiefe Governor of that Kingdome in that place, hath been an occasion of much tyranny and oppression, or that any tyranny, or oppression hath been exercised upon his subjects in that King∣dome: However his Maiestie will take care, that such Governors, shall not continue longer in chose places, then hee shall find for the good of his people there: and is con∣tent that they shall bee inhibited to make a∣ny purchase (other then by lease, for the pro∣vision of their Houses) during the space of their Goverment, in such manner as is de∣sired. 15. This proposition is to be explayned, and some particular wayes to bee propo∣sed to his Maiestie for the doing thereof: And then his Maiestie upon due considerati∣on of the safety and security of his Prote∣stant
Subiects, will returne his Answer. 16. Answered in the fourth and fifth. 17. Such persons who shall be excepted out of the Act of Oblivion, shall bee tryed by the knowne Lawes of the Land.
The Answer of IAMES Marques of Ormond His Majesties Commissioner, for the treaty, and concluding of a Peace in this Kingdome, for and in the name and behalfe of His Majestie to the Pro∣positions of His Roman Catholicke subjects of Ireland. VVHen all the particular demands made on the behalfe of his Maje∣stie, the Church, and his Majesties Protestant subjects, and their party shall be concluded, his Maiestie will bee graciously pleased on his part, to agree to the particulars hereafter expressed viz. 1. To the first proposition, his Majestie will bee graciously pleased, if his said Roman Catholicke subjects shall by their obedience, and loyaltie merit his Majesties favour and pro∣tection, that they shall not for the future have cause to complaine, that lesse moderation is used towards them then hath been in the most favourable of Queene Elizabeth, & King Iames his times; But his Maiestie for divers waighty
considerations will further advise, before hee consent to the repeale of any the Acts, inten∣ded by the said Proposition. 2. To the second, his Majestie will bee graciously pleased to call a new Parliament up∣on condition, that all particulars therein to bee passed by act of Parliament, be first agreed on, betweene us his Majesties Commissioner, and Donogh Lord Viscount Muskery, Alexandermac Donell, and Nicholas Plunket Esquiers, Sir Robert Talbot Baronet, Dermot O Brien, Patricke Darcy, Geffrey Browne, and Iohn Dillon Esquiers, or a∣ny five or more of them, who are deputed by his said Roman Catholicke subjects, to treate with Vs about the same: And the said Acts so agreed upon bee transmitted according to seve∣rall acts of parliament in that behalfe provi∣ded, And that there shall be no attempt by his Majesties Roman Catholicke subjects in that parliament to passe any other act, then what is agreed upon as aforesaid and first transmitted, or to bring any other prejudice to any of his Maiesties protestant subiects in this kingdome: And if any thing shall be attempted in the said parliament to the contrarie, that then his Ma∣iesties Lieutenant, or other Chiefe Governor, or Governors, before whom the said parlia∣ment
shall be holden, shall forthwith after such attempt, dissolve the said Parliament without expecting any further direction from his Ma∣jestie for the same; But his Majestie for divers waightie considerations, will bee further advi∣sed, before that he doe consent to the suspension of Poynings Act. 3. To the third, his Majestie will be gra∣ciously pleased that none of his said Roman Ca∣tholicke subjects, shall suffer any prejudice by any Acts or Ordinances passed in this present Parliament since the time in the Proposition mentioned, by reason of the present commo∣tion, but his Majestie cannot legally declare Acts or Ordinances made in Parliament which are in themselves lawfull; to be voyde, nor give warrant to take them off the file. 4. To the fourth his Majestie cannot in course of Iustice, by his Proclamation declare indictments, attaintures, out-lawries, Letters-patents, Grants, Leases, Bonds, Recognizances, or any other legall record to be voyde, or taken off the file, But his Majestie will be graciously pleased to grant a full and Generall pardon, to all persons whatsoever, excepting such as hereafter upon this treaty, shalbe thought fit to be left thereout, for all Treasons, rebellions and
other crimes whatsoever, growing and arising for or by reason of the same, And will likewise give his consent, that an act bee passed to that purpose, in which his Majestie will admit any clauses to enlarge his mercy, And his Majestie will be further graciously pleased to determine all custodiums which have beene granted since the 22. of October 1641. 5. To the fift proposition his Majesty can∣not in Iustice consent to the taking away of any debts due to his subjects, who have committed no offence which might occasion the forfey∣ture thereof, But for such debts as have accrued unto his Majestie by the attaynture or fugacie of any of his Majesties Roman Catholicke sub∣jects since the 23. of October 1641. His Maje∣stie will be graciously pleased to remit so many of them, as have not beeen payed into his Maje∣sties Exchequer or received otherwise to his Maiesties use, or by his appointment. 6. To the sixt proposition his Maiesty will be graciously pleased to release and quite his right to all such lands in the said proposition mentioned, except within the Counties of Kil∣kenny and Wickloe, upon the Termes former∣ly assented unto by his Maiestie in his answer to the grievances in the 17. yeare of his raigne, and
will consent to such an act of limitation, as is desired. 7. To the seventh his Maiesty will be gra∣ciously pleased to consent to an act, for the ta∣king away any incapacitie as Natives, eyther to lands or offices, if any such there be, and will willingly consent to the erecting of an Innes of Court, Vniversitity or free-schooles, Provided that they be governed by such statutes, rules, and orders, as his Maiesty shall approve, and be agreable to the Customes of England. 8. To the eight his Maiesty will be graci∣ously pleased that such of his Maiesties said sub∣iects within this kingdome as shall manifest their dutie and affection to his Maiesty shall receive such markes of his Maiesties favour in offices and places of trust, as shall manifest his Maiesties good acceptance, and regarde of them. 9. To the ninth proposition, his Maiestie will take care, that his good subiects of this kingdome shall not be oppressed by his Court of Wards, And if oppressions of that kinde have beene upon good and due information, his Maiesty will cause Iustice to be done for the time past, and for the future will prevent the like by instructions. But for the taking away
of that Court, his Majesty can make no answer, till the particulars for his satisfaction bee set downe and presented unto him. 10. To the tenth Proposition, his Majestie consented as farre as is fit for him in this point, in his answer to the 25 grievance, in the seven∣teenth yeare of his raigne the which hee is still willing shalbe enacted, looking forwards still to five yeares, to begin after the peace concluded. 11. To the eleventh Proposition his Maje∣sty conceives the substance of this Proposition (which concerneth the fundamentall rights of both kingdomes) fit to bee referred to the free debate, and expostulation of the two Parlia∣ments, when it shall please God, that they may freely and safely sit his Majesty being so equal∣ly concerned in the priviledges of eyther, that he will take care to the uttermost of his power, that they shall both contayne themselves with∣in their proper limits, his Majestie being the head and equally concerned in the rights of both. 12. To the twelfth his Majestie hath suffi∣ciently provided for this, in his answer to the tenth grievanee, which his Majestie is content shall passe by act of parliament. 13. To the thirteenth proposition his Maje∣sty
hath beene pleased by his late Graces that those statutes should be repealed, save onely for Wools and wool-fels, And is well pleased, that the same be done by act of parliament, and that a Booke of Rates be setled, by indifferent Com∣missioners. 14. To the foureteenth proposition his Ma∣jestie doth not admit or beleeve, that the long continuance of the chiefe Covernors of this kingdome in their places of government, hath beene an occasion of any tyrany or oppression, or that any tyrany or oppression hath beene ex∣ercised upon his subjects of this his kingdome, howsoever his Majesty will be graciously pleased to take care, that such Governors shall not con∣tinue longer in those places, then he shall finde for the good of his people here, And his Maje∣stie is content, that they shall bee inhibited to make any purchase, other then by Lease for the provision of their houses during the time of their government. 15. To the fifteenth Proposition, this pro∣position is to be explaned, and some particular way to be proposed for the doing thereof, And then consideration being had of the safety and securitie of his Majesties protestant subjects, an answer will be made therevnto.
16. To the sixteenth proposition, his Maje∣stie cannot in Iustice to the foreclosing of the subject of his legall remedy, for the recoverie of any goods, chattels, or rents, unlawfully taken or detayned from him. But for such-meane pro∣fits, Customes, prizes, and Rents, which have accrued unto his Majesty since the 23 of Octob. 1641. except the Customes received at VVater∣ford and Rosse since the 15. of September 1643. His majestie is content to remit the same, the rest of the proposition is answered in the answer to the fourth proposition. 17. To the seventeenth, his Maiesty will be pleased, that such persons as shall bee excepted out of the generall pardon shalbe tryed by the knowne Lawes of this Land. The Lord marques of Ormond now declares that albeit these answers are thus given by him in present to the said propositions, yet that hee intends not to be thereby concluded, from al∣tering the same, or adding thereunto in any parts there of, In such sort as he shall finde cause upon further debate.
Some of the reasons which moved His Maiesties most humble and loyall Subiects the Confederate Roman Catholicks of Ireland to present certaine Proposi∣tions to His Excellencie the Lord Marques of Or∣mond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, His Maiesties Commissioner. THe first Proposition that concerneth the freedome of the Catholicke Religion, and the repeale of all Lawes made against the professors of that Religion, is a de∣maund, not in favour of any innovation, but for that Reli∣gion which the Inhabitants of this Kingdome anciently, and like wise the English Colonies come at first into this Land, and their heires for many descents have professed, and doe pro∣fesse at the present, and which before the raigne of King Hen∣ry the VIII. was professed by the Kings of England, and their subiects generally. And it may be further added, and confi∣dently affirmed, that there are no subiects in the world of what other beleefe or profession soever in Religion, that held themselves so inviolably tyed to the preservation of that mo∣narchy, to whom they owe subjection, and allegeance, as the professors of the said Roman Catholicke Religion. This proposition consisteth of two branches, the first for the repeale of certaine acts, the second that the freedome of their Religion may bee allowed to the said Catholickes. For the cleering of the first branch, the said Catholickes doe not presse the totall repeale of the said statutes, their humble request be∣ing, that the great penalties, pressures, incapacities, and other unavoidable inconveniences by the said statutes imposed on
them alone, may be removed as to them by act of Parliament. By one statute found among the Records of Parliament of this kingdome in the second yeare of the raigne of the late Queene Elizabeth cap. 1. & 2. the said Catholickes are made subiect to the arbitrary power of an high Commission Court, or other Commissioners to be appointed by his Maiesty, or the Lord Deputie for the time being, & may be questioned, & punished for all offences touching Religion. Irish statutes fol. 261. like∣wise fol. 270. and 271. the Archbishops, Bishops, and Ordina∣ries of another Religion have heavily punished, and may still punish the said Catholickes for Marriages, Christenings done according to the Catholicke Religion, and every Catholicke was driven to pay nine pence every Sunday for not repayring to Church, to the great impoverishment and destruction of the said Catholickes, and no profit at all to his Maiesty. By the said statute, fol. 261. and 262. not onely the Catho∣licke Clergie, are excluded from all dignities & benefices Ec∣clesiasticall, but likewise the Catholicke Laytie of all degrees and qualities, are rendred incapable of all Civill offices, from the highest judge to the petty Cōstable, & likewise from Mar∣riall offices or imployments, even to be a common Souldier in his Maiesties army, where any fee or wages are due, without first taking the oath of supremacie; & upon refusall of the said oath all dignities, offices, or wages are forfeyted. No Catholicke can sue Livery or Ouster le maine for his estate or any part thereof out of his Maiesties hands without taking the said oath by the same statute of 2 Elizab. cap. 1 fol. 265. a. If any Catholicke of what estate, degree, or qualitie soever with∣in this kingdome doe by writing, printing, teaching, prea∣ching, expresse words, deede or act, affirme, hold, stand with, set forth, and maintayne any other authority, preheminence, power, or iurisdiction in matters Ecclesiasticall or Spirituall, then the person so offending his abbettors, ayders, promovers, and counsellers, shall for the first offence, forfeyte their goods and Leases, and suffer imprisonment for one yeare, for the se∣cond offence incurre the paines and forfeytures set downe by the statutes of Provision and Praemunire whereby the offender is
put out of the Kings protection, imprisoned during his life, and his goods and lands forfeyted: For the third offence the offender is punishable as in case of high Treason. Then by consequence if any of the Catholicke Laytie take or procure a dispensation for mariage within the eight degree, or any other licence or dispēsation from any authorised by the See of Rome, is a principall offender, and if he heares the Masse or Sermon of any deriving power from thence, and keep him in his house, he is punishable as an ayder and abbettor within the words of the statute, he knowing that whereof he cannot be ignorant by the rules of his profession. As for the second branch of the said proposition let any man iudge, whether it be reason sufficient of it selfe, that the professors of the Roman Catholicke Religion both spirituall and temporall, being to a few the Natives and residents of this kingdome should desire a freedome of their Religion, and to be freed and exempted from the penalties, and pressures afore∣said, whereby his Maiesty never received any advantage, and have beene the occasion of many inconveniences in the king∣dome. And it is evident that by this freedome all his Maiesties good subiects aswell Protestants as Catholickes will bee uni∣ted more then ever before, when their condition is equall, and neyther partie have occasion to envy or oppresse the other. It will not be unworthy of consideration, that in reason of state (the constitution of his Maiesties three kingdomes as now they stand being duely weighed) that this freedome, and exemption is most necessarie for his Maiesties service and safetie. 2. It is of the essence of Parliaments to be free, the con∣trary was practised here; The composition of this Parlia∣ment is desired to be of men estated and interested in the king∣dome, of genuyne and right members, and to bee returned from proper places, and by right ministers. The suspension of the act for this free Parliament cannot preiudice his Maiesty, for that nothing is to passe as an act be∣fore transmission, other then what shall bee agreed upon
and expresly mentioned in the Articles of peace. 3. It is conceived this pretended Parliament was deter∣mined by the death of the Lord Deputy VVandesford, most of the estated and right members thereof did not appeare in it since the 7. of August 1641. those who now appeare as mem∣bers thereof viz. of the Commons-house, are for a great part not much interessed and other wholy uninteressed there∣in, and one order therein made to exclude the said Catholicks from the house, other orders to their disadvantage were and or might have beene made in the said Commons-house. There∣fore it is desired that all the proceedings of the said pretended Parliament may be declared voyde and taken of the file. 4. When those indictments were found & outlawries pro∣mulged, the said Catholickes are informed, and hope to iustifie that those who governed in this kingdome, or some of them, did plot and practise the totall extirpation of the said Catho∣licks, & asmuch as in them lay did encrease the troubles to that end, and shute up the gates of his Maiesties mercie against the said catholickes, even against those who were undeniably in∣nocent, as may appeare by many instances; the manner of ap∣pointing of Sheriffes, who returned the Iurors, & the persons appointed, the Iurors condition & affection, the infinite num∣bers of the persons indicted & outlawed, being never called to answer, & other circumstances touching or depending of the said Records, being so generally destructive to the said Catho∣licks they cannot otherwise choose then to insist on the taking them of from the file, that no such markes of infamy may re∣mayne of Record, against them whose ancestors for the space of foure hundred yeares and upwards, faithfully served the Crowne. 5. This proposition is so just and equall in it selfe, that there needeth not any reason or proofe to be urged for it. 6. This proposition being yeelded into by the answer, except the late Plantations in the County of VVicklow and Iduogh in the county of Kilkenny, and excepting the encrease of Rents is referred to what shall bee urged upon the fixt an∣swer.
7. In all or most Letters-patents granted of Plantation Lands, and some other lands in this kingdome since the ma∣king of the said statutes, certaine clauses and conditions were inserted in them, that no land should be sold or past to any of the meere Irish or of the Irish Nation, as the cōdition is in some Patents, these clauses doe & did nourish division and distincti∣on between his Maiesties subiects, the like was never used in England, nor in any other kingdome. They extend not only to the old Irish, but likewise by construction to the old English, for he that is borne in Ireland, though his parents and all his ancestors were Aliens, nay if his parents were Indians or Turks if converted to Christianitie is an Irish-man as fully, as if his ancestors were here borne for thousands of yeares, and by the Lawes of England as capable of the liberties of a subiect, Such markes of distinction being the insteps to trouble and warre are incompatible with peace and quiet. 8. The said Roman Catholickes being rendred incapa∣ble of any command or trust by the statutes aforesaid, may be relieved herein upon removall of the impediments mentio∣ned in the reasons for the first proposition, and particular in∣stances shewed for the present, yet such were the Character, layed upon them here, and the representations made of them from hence heretofore into England, that they apprehend they suffer thereby in his Majesties opinion of them, which they conceive an impediment and stop to many graces and favours they expect and hope to merite from his Majestie. In all ages past before the said statutes their ancestors were preferred to places of eminence and trust within their Native countries, and since very seldome, three presidents since can hardly be instanced. The condition of Roman Catholickes in Ireland, where there are an hundred Catholickes to one of any other Religi∣on differs much from that of England or Scotland, where there is scarce one Catholicke to a thousand of the protestant religion. In all the Nations of Christendome the Natives of the place are advanced before others. 9. The Court of Wards was begun here a bout the foure∣teenth
yeare of King Iames, and never before: It hath not the warrant of any Law or statute; In England it was erected by act of Parliament. The subject is extreamely oppressed thereby by the multi∣tude of informations against all freeholders from the highest to the lowest without any limitation of time, the frequent Courts of Escheaters & Feodaries, the destruction of the Tenures of mesnes Lords by making many Tenures to be In Capite against Law; by the sale of the wards from hand to hand, as of Horses in a Market, by the want of Provision for portions of younger children, whereby they perish or take ill courses; debts remaine unsatisfied, and though by the statute of Merton cap. 5. Vsurie doth not runne upon Infants, yet the Collaterall security ey∣ther of men or Land mortgaged are not relieved by that sta∣tute. The King never received one shilling advantage by this Court ultra reprisas, for twenty shillings damage done thereby to his people, the vast fortunes of the officers and ministers of the said Court, how suddainely raysed on the ruynes of ma∣ny others his Majesties subjects. And let all the wards since the erection of the Court be numbred, for one that gayned civili∣tie or breeding during their minority, many will be found to have departed the said Court with ignorance, losse or impay∣ring of their estates and other great inconveniences. No diminution of his Majesties profit is desired, the perso∣nall service upon all occasions shall be performed. The extin∣ction of this Court and of the Tenures in capite or by Knights service is humbly desired to be taken away, and a course for his Majesties profit and service and preservation of Heires and Orphans, and satisfaction of Creditors shall be then humbly proposed. The respit and issues of homage being of no considerable advantage to the Crowne, and an intolerable yoke to the sub∣ject, is likewise desired to be taken off, and a way of equall benefit to his Majesty shall be proposed. 10. The great number of these Lords uninteressed in the kingdome, their ends in seeking for those honours, and the
late introduction of the example being considered; it may be easily judged how unequall or unjust it is that the votes of men of no estate and never resident in the kingdome if not for designe, should impose a charge wherein they contribute nothing, or put Lawes, by which they are not bound them∣selves. 11. The independencie of the Parliament of Ireland of the Parliament of England is so cleere and manifest by Law, Iustice, usage, and necessitie, that they humbly desire it may not bee driven into dispute, yet in as much as the Royall assent wrested from his Majestie to the acts of subscription may draw a preiudice or discountenance upon our Parlia∣ment, a declaration herein and act of Parliament is desired. 12. This proposition is in it selfe so reasonable, and the re∣straint layed on the Councell-Table from taking cognizance of matters determinable in the Kings ordinarie courts of Iu∣stice by the Common Law▪ the great Charter thirty times confirmed by Parliament, and sundry other acts of Parliament of force in this Kingdome, is so manifest and cleere, that there is no need of further reasoning or proofe for the same; there∣fore it is consonant to Law & Iustice, that the partyes aggree∣ved, should bee restored to what they lost, and left in statu quo, &c. as is desired, and that no matter determinable in the ordinarie Courts may bee determined at the Councell-table. 13. This proposition being for free trade and commerce so necessarie for advancement of his Maiesties service and pro∣fit and so indifferently inducing to the weale of his people, it is conceived, that all who are interessed in the Kingdome, ought to contribute their endeavours for the attaining of what is thereby humbly desired. 14. The place of chiefe governour of this Kingdome being of so great honour and high trust, and therfore to be conferred upon such as studie his Maiesties service, and the prosperitie of the Kingdome without regard to particular interest; this li∣mitation will keepe the chiefe governor warie from offending any subiect, or descending so low as to give occasion, even of speech, that his actions are unwarrantable, or his purchases ac∣quired
by oppression, men are to bee chosen for this place, that have no need to purchase. 15. The malice and power of the malignant partie in Eng∣land and Scotland, and of their adherents abroad, and threat∣ned danger of in vasion to bee made by them, and the invitati∣on thereunto of many in this Kingdome, who are knowne to have studied and plotted the ruine of this Kingdome, are mo∣tives sufficient for the granting of the contents of this proposi∣tion, and that the Kingdome be alwayes in posture of defence of it selfe, and all the well affected subiects thereof. 16. The passing of an act of oblivion to quiet and secure the mindes of all his Maiesties subiects in a case so generall, wherein the most of his Maiesties subiects one way or other are involved, is so necessary, and so pursuing the presidents, and examples, not onely of England and Ireland, but also of other States and Kingdomes, that without the passing thereof some Imbers of mischiefe may still remaine, which may (though God forbid) turne unto great flammes, witnesse the Barons warres, the warres of Yorke and Lancaster, these present troubles of England, and Scotland, and other examples, even in this Kingdome. And it there be any possibilitie to relieve all particulars, when the generall concernment is in question. 17. Honour, Iustice, equitie, and reason of State doe pleade for this proposition. Wee desire notwithstanding those reasons to bee admitted to shew such further and other reasons, and adde hereunto what wee shall thinke fit touching the matters, wherein the answers are short, or not satisfactorie.
As the Lord Lieutenant in his answer gave the Proposers no occasion to use any unfitting expressions, so hee may not but declare the Comparison, and some other expressions in their preamble, to bee very unnecessary, and unseasonable, and such as hee may not admit however hee now offereth. An Explanation of some of the answers given by IAMES Marques of Ormond His Majesties Commissioner, for the concluding of a Peace in this Kingdome to the Propositions of His Maiesties Ro∣man Catholicke subiects of Ireland with some further Concessions. 1. Answ. FOr the exception taken to the answer to the first Proposition, although neyther the statute of 2. Eliz. c. 1. nor any other statute of force in this kingdome doe impose any mulct or penalty for saying, singing, or hearing Masse, or keeping a Roman Catholicke priest in their houses, yet his Ma∣jesty for the further satisfaction of his said Roman Catholicke subjects, in any doubt or scruple, that may arise upon the con∣struction of any of the said statutes which may disquiet their mindes, is graciously pleased that a declaration of the law as unto that point be prepared and published. And his Majesty is likewise graciously pleased to suspend the high Commission Court: And that as the oath of supremacie hath not beene imposed upon any of them of late times upon the suing of Li∣veries, so they shall for the time to come be admitted to sue their
Liveries upon taking the oath by his Majesties directions in that case provided, which being added to the answers to the eight proposition (by which his Majesty hath declared that they shall receive such markes of his favour in offices and pla∣ces of trust as shall manifest his Majesties good acceptance and regarde of them) may for the present aboundantly satisfie his said subjects, And for the repeale of any of the acts intended by the said proposition his Majestie will further advise. 2. Answ. For the exception taken to the word new Parlia∣ment in the answer to the second proposition, Whereas a free Parliament was propounded, The said Lord Marquesse de∣clares that the said new Parliament is to bee as free, as by the lawes and statutes of this kingdome any parliament to bee held in this kingdome ought to be, yet so as no interpretation be from thence made, that there should bee any proceeding in the said parliament in any particular contrary to the agree∣ment on this Treatie. As to the exception taken to the clause in the answer, viz. that the parliament shall be dissolved upon an attempt onely of propounding any other matter then shall be agreed upon by the articles of peace, albeit the clause is not so as it is recited, Yet the Lord Marquesse for their further satis∣faction is pleased that the word attempt be left out of the clause wherein it is, and it bee expressed in manner following viz. And that nothing be concluded by both or eyther of the said houses of parliament, which may bring prejudice to any of his Majesties protestant partie or their adherents. And for their desire to have Poynings act suspended, foras∣much as it is assented unto, that no act of parliament is to passe upon the suspension of Poynings act without transmission, ac∣cording to the usuall manner, but what shall be provided for in the Articles of peace, And that it is enacted by act of par∣liament of force in this kingdome, that Poynings act cannot bee suspended, but by Bill to be first agreed upon by both houses of parliament in this kingdome, which is likewise to be trans∣mitted according to the usuall manner, which will take up asmuch time as the transmitting of the Bils which are to bee agreed on this Treaty, And seeing the benefits which shall be
held fit to be derived to the proposers may be as effectually, and with more speed done without suspending of Poynings act, as by suspending thereof; His Majestie doth not see cause why the same should be desired, But he is very apprehensive of the prejudice the suspension thereof may bring upon himselfe, and the publicke service by disquieting the mindes of his prote∣stant subjects in both kingdomes, if that he should admit such innovation at this time, there being no necessitie thereof, and therefore his Majestie aswell for that as other weighty consi∣derations, may not vary as unto that particular from his former answer. 3. Answ. If both or eyther of the houses of parliament have made any orders wherein his Majesties concurrence hath not beene, It doth rest onely in the power of the house or houses and not in his Majestie to vacate such orders, except they doe appeare in themselves to be illegall, And in such cases his Ma∣jestie will declare such to be voyde, and give directions for the vacating of them as in the particular whereof instance is made, for excluding members duely elected and returned according to the established lawes of this kingdome out of the house of Commons, who should refuse to take the oath of supremacie, which without an act of parliament to warrant it cannot bee in such case imposed, but his Majestie may not admit the pre∣sent parliament to be voyde, nor declare all that hath beene done therein since the seventh of August 1641. to bee voyde for that many orders much tending to his Majesties honour and the safetie of this kingdome, wherein both houses did joyne have beene made since that time, as the prohibiting the taking of the Covenant so destructive to Monarchy, and the Church, which hath been condemned by both the said houses, Their joynt approbation of the late Cessation, The petition wherein both houses joyned to his Majestie, and others of that kinde. 4. Touching the exception taken to that part of the an∣swer to the fourth proposition concerning the Generall par∣don, The Lord Marquesse declares that it is meant thereby that the said generall pardon shall extend to restore them, ex∣cepting
such as shall be on this Treaty agreed to be excepted, to their bloud and estate by act of parliament, whereby all Grantes, Letters-patents, Acts, Letters, Promises shall bee avoyded. But his Majestie cannot in justice publish any such Proclamation, or give any such direction to the parliament as is desired, before the persons intended to be charged be heard, and the matters suggested proved, which if they shall, his Ma∣jestie will then doe therein what shall be just. And in the meane time cannot thinke ill of his ministers of state imployed in this kingdome, nor of the proceedings of any of his Maje∣sties Courts of Iustice, And for their desire that there should be no exception in the pardon, his Majestie may not assent thereunto. 5. His Majestie will be pleased that debts doe stand in statu quo, having as unto such who shalbe agreed in this trea∣tie to be excepted out of the generall pardon, and excepting one particular summe which hath beene payed into his Maie∣sties Exchequer. 6. His Majesty may not agree to the avoyding of the Plan∣tations in the countie of VVicklow, & Territory of Idough in the countie of Kilkenny, part of the Lands in the countie of VVick∣low, viz. the Ranelagh being confirmed by act of parliament, and so much of the rest of the lands in the said county as fell to his Majestie upon the division, and the Territory of Idough be∣ing passed by Letters-patents under the great Seale upon the Commission of Grace for remedy of defective Titles, strength∣ned likewise by act of Parliament, which his Majestie may not in honour avoyde, And his Majestie doth conceive it were un∣safe for divers of his Majesties subjects, who have purchased, estates grounded upon his Majesties title, that the statute of Limitations should have such a retrospect as is desired, which in time would overthrow the estates of many of his Maje∣sties subjects, who acquired estates for valuable considerati∣ons, And therefore his Majestie may not assent thereunto, but for taking off or abating of Rents contracted or agreed for, his Majestie is pleased that the course prescribed in his answer to the twelfth additionall proposition be observed.
7. His Majestie may not admit that the governing of the Innes of Court, Vniversitie, and free-schooles by such statutes rules and orders, as his Majestie shall approve of, and be agree∣able to the customes of England will debarre Roman Catho∣lickes so long as they are of that Religion from attayning to the lawes of the Land, or any other learning within the king∣dome, for those of that Religion in England, and who goe from hence doe attayne the knowledge of both in the Vni∣versities and Innes of Court there in an eminent manner, and may doe the like here. 8. There being no offices or place excepted in the former answer, the Proposers may rest satisfied therewith, it being in his Majesties power to dispose of such places and offices by his Letters-patents as occasion shall be offered, and thereby to re∣move all impediments mentioned by the Proposers. 9. His Majestie doth not admit such abuses to have beene in his Court of wards and the ministers thereof, as are set forth in the reasons for the ninth proposition, untill proofe bee made thereof, And his Maiestie doth beleeve that exceeding great benefit may redound to the kingdome, by the continu∣ance and right ordering thereof, And therefore conceiveth his former answer to be reasonable, And it seemeth not equall which is propounded that there should bee first an extingui∣shing of the Court, and the Tenures in capite taken away, and that then a course for his Maiesties profit and service should be proposed, that being to be offered in the first place before his Maiestie part with the other, And the like is to be done for respit of homage. 10. His Maiestie may not receade from the former answer with which the Proposers may rest satisfied. 11. As his Maiestie may not vary from his former answer, so he may not foreclose the houses of parliament from making any declaration agreeable to the lawes of the land. 12. The Proposers may rest satisfied with the former answer, considering that all parties grieved may have the benefit of the lawes of the land, and that by consent of the parties interested many matters determined at Councell-board are confirmed by act of parliament.
13. His Maiestie will be pleased that indifferent persons be agreed on this treatie who shall be authorised by Commission to moderate and settle the Booke of Rates in such sorre as they shall thinke fit. 14. His Maiestie may not assent any further to this proposi∣tion then he hath already done without apparent preiudice to his service. 15. His Maiestie may not receade from his former answer. 16. His Maiestie thinkes not fit to give any further answer to this Proposition then he hath done already, untill the Pro∣posers make answer to the propositions made and delivered unto them in the behalfe of his Maiesties protestant subiects and their adherents. And then upon further debate his Maiestie will give such answer as shall be thought fit. 17. It may not be admitted that tryals by the knowne lawes of the land assented unto by the former answer should not be indifferent, And therefore his Maiestie may not receade from his former answer: The said Lord Marquesse of Ormond now declares, that al∣beit these answers are thus given by him in present to the said propositions, yet that he intends not to be thereby concluded from altering the same or adding thereunto in any parts there∣of in such sorte as he shall finde cause upon further debate.
Additionall Propositions of His Majesties most humble and loyall subjects the Confederate Roman Ca∣tholicks of Ireland, presented to His Excellen∣cie the Lord Marques of Ormond; Lord Lieu∣tenant of Ireland, His Majesties Commissioner. 1. THat an act bee passed this next Parliament, prohibi∣ting that neither the Lord Deputie, Lord Chancellor, Lord High Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor, or any of the Barrons of the Erchequer, privy councell, or Iudges of the foure Courts bee Farmers of his Majesties Customes. 2. That an act of Parliament may passe in this Kingdome against all Monopolies, such as was enacted in England, 21. Iacobi, with a further clause for repealing of all grants of monopolies in this Kingdome. 3. That the Court of Castle-chamber in this Kingdome, having been an oppression to the subject, & there being other remedies for the offences questioned in that Court by the Common Law and Statutes of the Realme, be taken away, or otherwise limitted, as both houses of Parliament shall thinke fit. 4. That two acts lately past in this Kingdome, one prohi∣biting the plowing with horses by the taile, and the other pro∣hibiting the burning of oates in straw may bee repealed. 5. That upon presenting the names of three persons of qualitie in each Countie by Vs to your Lordship, patents be passed to such of those so to bee presented respectively to be Sheriffs in each County, as to your Lordship shall seeme meet to make choice of for that purpose.
6. That one, or more Agents from this Kingdome, may bee admitted still to attend his Majestie for his better informa∣tion of the affaires of this Kingdome; And that as a testimony of his Majesties favour, some of the nobles and others of quali∣tie of this Kingdome may be imployed about his Majesties person. 7. For asmuch as divers of the Scottish Nation, and others in this Kingdome doe not obey the present cessation, and ma∣ny of them having of late taken the Covenant proposed by the members of Parliament at Westminster now in armes a∣gainst his Majestie. It is therefore humbly desired that such as disobey the said Cessation, or have taken the said Covenant, bee proclaimed traytors, and prosecuted accordingly by his Majesties authoritie, and that such Counties or Corporations as have not submitted to the now Cessation of armes in this Kingdome, according his Maiesties Commission, be not ad∣mitted to make any returne to the Parliament. 8. For asmuch as sundry persons estated in this King∣dome, have either actually raised armes in England, against his Majestie, or have otherwise adhered to the malignant partie now in armes against his Majestie, that therefore it may please his Majestie to give way to the impeachment and attain∣ders of those, and such others whose names we shall here re∣present to your Lordship by way of bill in Parliament, where∣by they may receive condigne punishment for their offences, & his Majesty take advantage of the forfeiture of their estates, and in the interim the possessions to remaine in the hands wherein they are at present. 9. For asmuch as upon application of the Agents from this Kingdome to his Majestie, in the fourth yeare of his raigne, and lately upon humble suite made to his Majestie, by a Commit∣tee of both houses of the Parliament of this Kingdome, or∣der was given by his Majestie for redresse of severall gree∣vances; It is therefore humbly desired, that for so many of those as are not expressed in the now propositions presented to your Lordship, whereof both houses in the next ensuing Parliament, shall desire the benefit of his Majesties said former
directions for redresses that the same bee afforded them. 10. That the office of  in this Kingdome bee setled dependant of none but his Majestie, whereby ma∣ritime causes may bee determined here without driving mer∣chants or others, to appeale or seeke Iustice elsewhere in those causes. 11. That a Course may be taken for all such as owe debts in this Kingdome for that by reason of the generall devastati∣on of the Kingdome, the land is not like in some yeares to come to be of any considerable value, being the onely meanes that many of the Nobilitie, Gentrie, and others of this King∣dome had to satisfie their debts, and therefore a competent time bee given by act to bee past in the next Parliament for payment thereof and the interest or use of moneyes to bee moderated. 12. That the subjects of this Kingdome may bee eased of the increase of rent lately raysed and imposed on them upon the late Commission of defective titles in the Earle of Straf∣fords time. 13. That if any of your Lordships partie during these troubles, have by fines, recoveries or otherwise disinherited those who were next to succeed them of our partie as heires, or in reversion, or remainder without reall and full conside∣ration, but for being of our partie, that all acts so done be avoi∣ded in Parliament. 14. That such of our partie whose estates are in the hands of the Scottish and Parliament partie, either in this Kingdome or in England, bee recompenced out of the estates of those ma∣lignant in this Kingdome.
The Answer of IAMES Marques of Ormond, his Majesties Com∣missioner, for the treatie and concluding of a Peace in this King∣dome, for and in the Name, and behalfe, of his Majestie, to the additionall Propositions of his Roman Catholicke subjects of Ire∣land, &c. VVhen all the particular demands made on the behalfe of his Majestie, the Church, and his Majesties Protestant subjects, and their partie, shall bee concluded his Majestie will be graciously pleased on his part, to agree to the particulars hereafter expressed, viz. 1. TO the first proposition, his Maiestie hath declared his pleasure in this point (excepting in that part which con∣cernes privie Counsellors) in his answer to the eight grievan∣ce in the seventeenth yeare of his Maiesties raigne, which his Maiestie will be graciously pleased may stand as a rule in this case, And as to that part which concernes privie Counsellors, the same shall be humbly represented to his Maiestie and his Royall pleasure therein expected. 2. To the second proposition, his Maiestie will be graci∣ously pleased to assent to this proposition yet so as first there be care taken to secure his Maiesty in the particulars proposed in the sixt, and seventh Articles of the demands in the behalfe of his Maiestie delivered by the Lord Lieutenant on this treatie to the Lord Muskery, &c. 3. To the third proposition, The particulars wherein it is desired, that the Court of Castle-chamber may be limitted, are to be proposed, and then such consideration shall bee had of this proposition as shall be fit. 4. To the fourth proposition, his Maiesty will be graciou∣sly pleased, that the two acts in this proposition mentioned be suspended for such time, as on this treaty shal be agreed on. 5. To the fift proposition, The lawes have already pro∣vided for the manner of appointing Sheriffes, from which course his Maiestie thinkes not fit to vary.
6. To the sixt proposition, After a peace shall be fully set∣led, application may be had herein to his Maiestie, who in his high wisedome best knowes how to extend his Royall favour in this particular. 7. To the seventh proposition, For the first part of this proposition, the Lord Lieutenant declareth that his Maiesties Commission to him warranting this treaty, gives him autho∣ritie to conclude a Peace, but gives him no authority for pu∣blshing such a Proclamation, or for such a prosecution, as in this proposition is proposed, and for the later part of this pro∣position the granting thereof is inconsistent with the condi∣tion of a free parliament. 8. To the eight proposition, when the Proposers shall present to the Lord Lieutenant the names of the persons in this proposition intended to be impeached and attaynted, such consideration shalbe had of this proposition as shalbe fit. 9. To the ninth proposition, the proposers setting downe the particulars of the things contayned in this proposition, such consideration shall be had thereof as shalbe fit▪ 10. To the tenth proposition, his Maiesty will be pleased to advise concerning this proposition. 11. To the eleventh proposition, this is left to further con∣sideration on debate. 12. To the twelfth proposition, this is not held fit for his Maiesty to be assented to on this treaty, yet the case of remittals or abatements we intend humbly to represent to his Maiestie, who will be graciously pleased in fit time to set downe such a course herein by Commission or otherwise, as may still fur∣ther magnify his goodnesse and indulgence to all his subiects. 13 To the thirteenth proposition, his Maiesty may not as∣sent to this, it being against the libertie of the subiect, and the lawes of the Land. 14. To the fourteenth proposition, Such of the estates in this proposition mentioned, as shall a crue to his Maiesty is to be left to his Maiesty to be disposed of as in his high wisedome he shall thinke fit.
Demands in the behalfe of His Maiestie, 1. THat present restitution bee made by the Confederate Roman Catholicke Party. of the Command, Rule and Government of the Cities of Limmericke, VVaterford, Kilkenny and Cashell, the Townes of Galway, Clonmell, VVeixford, and Rosse, and of all other Cities, Townes, Counties, and Terri∣tories of right belonging to his Majesty, and now in the posses∣sion, or under the command of the said Confederate Roman Catholicke party, & that restitution be like wise made by them of all his Maiesties Castles, Fortes, Lands, Tenements, and he∣reditaments, and of all his Maiesties Ordnance, Artillerie, Armes, and Amunition, which have beene seised on, or taken by the said Confederate Roman Catholicke party, since the 21. of October 1641. in the Cities of Limmericke, VVaterford, Galway, the Castle and Towne of Newry, Charlemount, and other places within the kingdome, And that all such power, Iurisdiction or Government as hath beene assumed by the said Confederate Roman Catholicke party over their partie, since the 22. of October 1641. be from hence forth abrogated deserted and deemed voyde, And that all his Maiesties sub∣iects aswell the Roman Catholickes as others within the kingdome shall be from henceforth ameaneable to the Lawes of force in this kingdome, and obedient to his Maiesties go∣vernment and Courts of Iustice. 2. That all the Armies raysed by the said Confederate Roman Catholicke party, with their Armes and munition, and such Fortes, Garrisons and Wardes, as are now kept by them, shall from henceforth be under the command of his Maiestie, and his Maiesties Lieutenant, or other his Maiesties chiefe go∣vernor or governors of this kingdome for the time being, and such others, as his Maiesty from time to time shall appoint.
3. Thirdly, that his Maiesty may be answered such cer∣tayne Rents, Compositions and Casuall profits and Subsidies, and all Customes, and Subsidies for Merchandize as were ac∣crued and growne due before and on the 23. of October 1641 and which shall from henceforth grow due. 4. That all the remaine of the thirty thousand eight hun∣dred pound appearing to be payable to his Maiestie by the In∣strument signed by the Lord Muskery and others, dated 16. of September 1643. which hath not yet beene payed in money or Cattle, in manner as in an Instrument signed by the said Lord Muskery and others, dated the xvj. of September one thousand six hundred forty and three, is expresled, bee payed to his Maiesties Vice-treasurer and Treasurer at Wars, or to his deputy, or to such other person or persons as the Lord Lieute∣tenant, or other chiefe governor or governors of this king∣dome for the time being shall appoint, to his Maiesties use, by the said Confederate Roman Catholicke party, at by or before the day of next 5. That the said Confederate Roman Catholicke partie doe make a true account and present payment of his Maiesties Customes and Impositions of VVaterford and Rosse, according to the Booke of Rates, for all such Commodities as have been exported out of, or imported into the said Harbours since the xv. of September 1643. 6. That the grant of the Licencing of retayling Wine and Aquavitae, and of transportation of Linnen-yarne at per packe in Ireland towards the support of the charge of this kingdome, may be setled by act of Parliament upon the Crown, according to the resolution in his Maiesties late graces in the yeare 1641. with some apt Proviso, that they may be kept and continued as a Revenue to the Crowne. 7. That on the pound of Tobacco be setled by act of parliament unto his Maiesties use, as a Custome up∣on that Commoditie, whereupon the emption of Tobacco to be free, and the Monopoly wholy taken away.
Demands in the behalfe of the Protestant Clergie. 1. THat the Archbishops, Bishops, and all other Ecclesiasti∣call persons be presently restored to their respective Churches, Iurisdictions and possessions, both spirituall and Temporall, and to the free exercise of their severall and re∣spective functions, and that they enjoy the same without any interruption to be given thereunto by the said Confederate Roman Catholicke party, in such manner as they have enjoy∣ed the same, before and on the 23. of October 1641. 2. That all Cathedrall and parish Churches, and all Arch∣bishops, and Bishops, Mansion-houses, which have beene any way demolished or defaced, by any of the said Confederate Ro∣man Catholicke party, shall be withall convenient speede by the Confederate Roman Catholicke party repayted, and put in as good condition as they were on the 23. of Octob. 1641. 3. That for the present subsistence of the protestant Cler∣gy, they may be allowed the one halfe of all the Tythe Corne belonging to their benefices respectively arysing out of this present Harvest 1644. within the quarters allotted by the ar∣ticles of Cessation to the said Confederate Roman Catholicke party, or the value thereof. Demands in the behalfe of all His Maiesties Prote∣stant subiects, and their Party. 1. THat present restitution be made unto them of all their Castles, Lordships, Mannors, and all other Heredita∣ments, and Chattles reall, of what kinde soever, whereof they were seased or possessed by themselves or their Tenants on the
22. of October 1641. and which remayne within the quarters allotted by the Articles of Cessation to the said Confederate Roman Catholicke party. 2. That where any of the goods, Evidences, or writings of the protestant subjects, and such as adhere unto them, have beene delivered in trust to any that are or have beene, of the said Confederate Roman Catholicke party, to be kept by any of them, That such goods, Evidences, and writings be restored to those that so delivered them in trust as aforesaid, or to their heires, executors, administrators or assignes. 3. That all goods which have beene pillaged and taken away by any of the said Confederate Roman Catholicke par∣ty, which may be had in specie, and the property whereof was not altered by sale in market before the 24. day of Iune 1644. (being the day of the date of his Maiesties Commission war∣ranting this Treaty) be restored, or otherwise the Proprietor may be left to his remedy at Common-law for the recoverie thereof, and that any sale in market since the said 24. of Iune, shall be no hinderance or barre thereunto. 4. That where any of that party have pillaged or taken away any goods from any of his Maiesties protestant subiects, or any adhering to them, betweene the 21. of October 1641. and the 21. of Ianuary 1641. that the party so pillaged may be left to take his remedy at law for recovery of his goods or da∣mages for the same against such who did so pillage them. 5. That all Castles and houses which were surrendred upon quarter, upon Articles under hands, wherein it was un∣dertaken, that the said Castles or houses should bee preserved from being destroyed or demolished, That the said Confe∣derates who have so articled may rebuild the said Castles or houses, in as good state as they were at the surrendring up of the same, upon Articles as aforesaid. 6. That where any Lands belonging to his Maiesties pro∣testant subjects or their tenants or adherents have beene pos∣sessed by any of the said Confederate Roman catholicke par∣ty, and corne sowen therein by any of that party since the 15. of September 1643. that the said protestant subjects or their
adherents who by themselves or their tenants were possessed of the said Lands on the 22. of October 1641. or their Heires, Executors, Administrators, or Assignes may respectively re∣ceive the fourth sheafe of all the said corne this present Har∣vest 1644. or the value thereof. These propositions thus made in present are not in exclusi∣on of any other propositions which we shall adjudge necessa∣ry to be propounded or insisted on for the glory of God, the honour of his Maiesty, the interests of his good subjects, and the safety of the kingdome, nor in exclusion of sundry other particulars which may be necessary for us to insist on, as con∣ducing to the formerly mentioned ends, and which may arise upon the present Treaty. Answers to the demands made by the Lord Lieute∣nant in the behalfe of His Maiestie. 1. TO the first Demand his Maiesties faithfull subiects the Confederate Catholickes of his kingdome of Ireland doe answer, that the Cities, and Townes in the said demand men∣tioned, are, and alwayes have beene ruled, and governed, ac∣cording to his Maiesties Lawes, and the Charters unto them respectively granted by his Maiesty, and his Royall progeni∣tors and predecessors Kings, and Queenes of England and Ire∣land, and are preserved and kept by the said Confederate Ca∣tholickes for his use, and service against the malignant partie, and their adherents. And as for his Maiesties Fortes, Castles, Territories, Hereditaments, Ordnance and Artillery, in the same demand mentioned, the same are likewise kept, and maintayned for his Maiesties use and service, and the safetie of the kingdome and his Maiesties interests therein against such as are joyned in a rebellious covenant, and are actually in armes
against his Royall person. And they know of no considera∣ble amunition taken by the said Catholickes, and such as was so taken, and much more was by them imployed in his Maie∣sties service, And as to the power and jurisdiction mentioned to be assumed by the said Confederate catholickes, they say they were necessitated to rule and governe their party to a∣voyde the extirpation of their Religion and Nation plotted, and contrived by the said malignant party, and to preserve his Maiesties rights. And their proceedings were, and are as neere and consonant to the lawes of the kingdome, as the state and condition of the times did, or can permit. And they will bee ready to relinquish the said rule, and government upon a full setlement of the affaires of the kingdome. 2. To the second they answer that the armies raised by the said Confederate Catholickes were raysed, and the said armies Fortes, Garrisons and Wardes in the demand mentioned are maintayned for the safety of the kingdome, and to preserve his Maiesties interests, and the said armies alwayes were and are in actuall service accordingly, and that upon a full setlement, the same are to be disposed of as his Maiesty will direct. 3. To the third they say that so much of the profits therein mentioned as grew dew since the seventh day of August 1641. (on which day happened that inforced and fatall adjourne∣ment of the parliament from whence all the distractions of this kingdome did spring) as was received by the said Confe∣derate Catholickes, and many an hundred times more was by them imployed and expended in his Maiesties service for the defence of the kingdome, And the said profits for the time to come after a full setlement are to be disposed by such hands, as his Maiestie shall thinke fit. 4. To the fourth they say that the free gift granted to his Maiestie by the said Confederate Catholickes is already over∣payed, as shall be made appeare upon account by the supreme Counsell of the said Confederate Catholickes, to whom that affaire is intrusted. 5. To the fifth they say that the Portes of VVaterford and Rosse, being within the quarters of the said Confederate Ca∣tholicks
by the Articles of Cessation, they have according the said articles received the profits accruing out of the customes of those portes, and imployed the same in his Maiesties ser∣vice and defence of the kingdome. 6. 7. The matters contayned in the sixt and seventh De∣mands are properly to be determined in such manner as shalbe agreed upon in the conclusion of this treatie. And what fur∣ther concernes the said demands, or the matters in them, or any of them contayned wee conceive proper for a debate & to bee determined upon conclusion of the treaty. The said Confederate Catholickes doe referre their answers to the demands made on the behalfe of the protestant Clergy to the first of the propositions presented by them, And to the debate and determination thereof. Answers to the Demands made on the behalfe of His Maiesties Protestant subjects: 1. TO the first the said Confederate Catholicks doe answer, that after a full setlement of affaires, reciprocall re∣stitution is to be made aswell to the said Confederate Catho∣lickes, and every of them, as also to his Maiesties said protestant subiects, and to every of them, other then such of the said pro∣testants as are or shalbe joyned in a rebellious covenant against his Maiesty, or adhere to the malignant party of their respe∣ctive Castles, Lordships, Mannors, hereditaments, and Chat∣tels reall, whereof they were respectively seised or possessed on the 22. of October. 1641. within the quarters allotted to ey∣ther party by the articles of Cessation, And other then the
Castles, Lordships, Mannors, and hereditaments in the county of VVicklow, and in the Territory of Idough, out of which the Natives thereof were by an high and injurious hand, or ex∣trajudiciall & arbitrary proceedings expulsed since the yeare of our Lord God 1633. 2. 3. 4. To the second, third, and fourth, they say that the said Confederate Catholickes are much more mnified therein then the said protestants. And yet in regard the same may be∣get many endlesse suites & troubles, they conceive they are fit to be seriously debated, and finally ended upon the setlement. 5. To the fifth they answer that they know of no Forte, or Castle that was demolished contrary to articles, And when the particulars shall appeare, they will give particular answers. 6. To the sixt they say that the Confederate Catholicks doe receive no profit of their estates detayned from them; where∣fore they conceive it not equall that the protestants should re∣ceive the profits of their estates, untill after setlement, and then the profits of both estates, are to be reciprocally received by all parties respectively in such manner as shalbe agreed upon. Reasons why His Majesties said Roman Catholicke subjects are not sa∣tisfied with the answers delivered them by his Excellencie the Lord Marques of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, his Majesties Commissioner, to certaine Propositions by them presented to his Lordship, on the fourth of September in the twentieth yeare of his Majesties raigne. IN asmuch as most of the reasons declaring how the said answers are not satisfactory, doe appeare eyther in the said propositions themselves, or in the reasons afterwards in the moneth aforesaid presented to your Lordship, setting forth the necessity of the said pro∣positions,
to avoyd reiteration, what is in the said propositions or rea∣sons expressed, is herein omitted. It is therfore hūbly desired that your Lordship in your consideration of the reasons now presented will di∣stinctly & apart reflect upon the said former propositions & reasons. The said Catholickes upon exact scrutiny, and search by them Reasons against the first Answer. made of their consciences and actions, finding nothing more de∣sired by the one, nor aymed at by the other (next to the homage which they owe to the King of kings) then the advancement of his Maiesties service, & the setling of a full peace & quiet in this his king∣dome of Ireland, they do therfore with heavinesse of heart apprehend some expressions in the first answer (viz. If the said Roman Catholicke subiects shall by their obedience and loyaltie merit his Maiesties favour and pro∣tection) whereas the said Roman Catholickes are as obedient & loyall subiects to his Maiesty as any other his subiects without exception, & whereas their thoughts or actions have never deserved to put them out of his Maiesties protection, yet the occasion of their said apprehen∣hensions they may not ascribe to your Excellency, who is intrusted by his Maiesty with the acting & directing part in this great affaire now in Treaty, but unto some instrumentall cause or other mistake. And as to the rest of the said first answer (viz. That when all demands made by your Lordship unto the said Catholicks in his Maiesties behalfe, or on the behalfe of the protestant Clergte, and on the behalfe of his Maiesties protestant subiects, are concluded and vpon such merit, as is before expressed, the said Catho∣lickes shall not have cause to complaine that lesse moderation is used then in the most favourable of Queene Elizabeth, or King Iames his times, and his Ma∣iestie will be further advised upon the repeale of the statutes made against the said Catholickes.) Although the said Roman Catholickes are most con∣fident of his Maiesties grace and goodnesse, yet so great is the penalty imposed by statutes of force in this kingdome extending to the goods estates, liberties, lives, and corruption of bloud of the said Catholicks that they must live in restlesse feares so long as those extreme punish∣ments hang over them, and in case his Maiesty by Letters-patents un∣der his great seale, or otherwise will declare his Royall pleasure against the execution of those statutes upon the said Catholickes, yet those feares will hardly be removed thereby, such is the malice of the ma∣lignant party, who have vowed the totall destruction of the said Ca∣tholickes, that their adherents here, though not knowne to be such, will never want will, and cannot want opportunity sufficient to indict the said Catholicks upon the said statutes; & the Iudges before whom the said indictments are found, by their oath declared by the statute of 18. Elizab. will not stop or suspend the proceedings of the Court for the great Seale, privy seale, or his Maiesties letters writs or com∣mandements.
And your Lordship may please to observe that by long experience it is manifest that since the making of those Lawes, being foure-score and odde yeares, the penalties or forfeytures in them ex∣pressed, have not beene so prevalent as to draw them the said Catho∣lickes from the Religion professed by them and their Ancestors, and no advantage did in so long a tract of time accrue to the Crowne by those statutes. And seeing his Maiesty is content that moderation should be used towards the said Catholickes, to what purpose should the said penall lawes be continued in force, whereas the continuation thereof can produce no other effect, then jealousies and feares in the mindes of the people. A free Parliament is propounded and a new Parliament is meaned Reasons against the 2. Answer. in this answer to be granted. It is true that Parliaments in their Es∣sence ought to be free, yet some examples shewing the contrary in this kingdome, and a clause in the answer, viz. That the Parliament shall be dissolved upon an attempt onely of propounding any other matter, then shall be agreed upon by the Articles of Peace, which attempt may bee purposely done by some averse to peace to dissolve a Parliament, and the ta∣king away of the said clause, attempt, doth induce the said Catholickes to supplicate the inserting of a free Parliament, And that all the acts to be concluded on by the treaty may not be transmitted into England, in regarde the substance of that which will bee passed as acts, without transmission are to be inserted in the articles of peace, which & none other act of Parliament is to passe upon the suspension of Poynings act without transmission according to the usuall manner, wherefore the said suspension can bring no manner of prejudice upon his Majestie, or the publicke service, and that by the granting thereof the peoples mindes will be much quieted The said Catholicks do therfore hum∣bly desire, that the said act be suspended as is by them propounded. If the now pretended Parliament, or eyther of the houses of Par∣liament made any Orders or Ordinances to the prejudice of the said Reasons against the 3. Answer Catholicks, the same Parliament may vacate them & take them off the file; And it is not to be presumed that any member of Parliament is so litle affected to the peace or quiet of the kingdome that he will give opposition to the third proposition, or to his Maiesties direction, or to your Lordships request in that behalfe. And the said Catholickes con∣ceive it necessary in point of honour and reputation that no Order or Ordinance to their prejudice may remayne of Record in Parlia∣ment. And if no such Order or Ordinance bee, the proposition can hardly be denied, wherefore it is humbly desired, that the answer may Reasons against the 4. Answer be more full and satisfactory. Vpon consideration of the fourth proposition & of the reasons for
the same, it is humbly desired this answer be enlarged to the greater advantage of the said Catholickes, then is expressed; and although his Majesty cannot avoyde Recordes of this nature by Proclamation, yet when his Majesty is informed that those indictments and outlawries were done of designe to extirpate a Nation, and that in the procee∣dings it will appeare, and here was practised, his Majesties proclama∣tion in a case of this generall concernment declaring his dislike of such proceedings will be of great consequence and his direction to the Parliament, to that effect will no doubt, accomplish the desire of the said Catholicks contained in this Proposition, and his Royall di∣rections to have the Procurers, Actors, and Plotters of and in the said indictments, and outlawries, and the whole proceedings questioned, and the designe and practise being discovered and proved, then the said records and all matters depending hereupon, ought in law and justice to bee vacated and taken off the file, and the pardon in the ans∣wer mentioned restores neither blood nor estate, as it is there set downe, and admitting the pardon were by Parliament, it will bee of absolute necessitie to avoid all grants, letter-patents, leases, and o∣ther acts, letters, or promises made to the prejudice of the persons attainted, and to restore them to their blood and estate, in which act a clause condemning the manner of the procuring of the said indicte∣ments and outlawries is thought necessary to bee inserted; and the exception mentioned in the said answer, is humbly desired by the said Catholicks to bee taken off; and the clause viz. (His Majesty will enlarge his mercy.) to be made more particular. This answer is humby desired to bee made equall to all parties one Reasons a∣gainst the 5. Answer way or other, as it is propounded, and that Catholicks should pay debts due upon them, and loose the debts due unto them, is concei∣ved not to bee equall. By his Majesties graces of the fourth yeare of his raigne, all the Reasons a∣gainst the 6. Answer estates in the Province of Conaght, and Countie of Clare, in pursu∣ance of the Indentures of composition made by the late Queene Eli∣zabeth, for great and valuable considerations, with the Lords and Gentrie of the said Province and Countie, and of the grants and pro∣mises of the late King Iames of happy memorie, were to bee confir∣med and made good by act of Parliament, the statute of limitation was then to bee passed, which extended to all estates in the King∣dome, therefore no greater rent ought to bee reserved upon the lands in the said Province or Countie, nor upon the lands in the Counties of Tiperarie and Lyndak, then was answeared to his Ma∣jestie in the said fourth yeare of his Majesties raigne. And the great offices intituling his Majestie unto the before men∣tioned
lands, and to many mens estates in the County of Wickloe, and to the territorie of Idough in the Countie of Kilkenny, were en∣forced by an high hand; the free-holders thereof being in possession of their repective estates then and for many ages before, without in∣terruption or question. It is therefore humbly desired, that those of∣fices bee vacated and taken off the file, by his Majesties gracious di∣rections, his highnes or his patentees being therein onely concerned as to the title found by those offices; And that the statute and limita∣tion may bee here enacted with a retrospect to the fourth yeare of his Majesties raigne, at which time it was promised by his Majesty, to have been passed as an act in this Kingdome, and if it had beene so done, the said offices had not been found. And that the case of the Countie of Wickloe, and the Countie of kilkenny meriting equall justice and favour with the rest, ought not to be distinguished from them. The clause in the said answer, concerning Innes of Court, and free-schooles, as it is expressed in the answer, will debarre Roman Ca∣tholicks Reasons a∣gainst part of the 7 Answer so long as they are of that Religion, from attaining to the knowledge of the lawes of the land, or any other learning within this Kingdome. This answer is conceived not to be satisfactorie and to generall; and particular instances of the markes of his Majesties favour towards Reasons a∣gainst the 8 Answer the aid Catholicks is humbly desired. The reasons against this answer in all the parts thereof are the same, that are urged for the ninth Proposition, and upon consideration of To the 9. Answer those reasons, the answer is humbly desired to be enlarged. His Maiesties answer made to the 25. grievance, in the 17. yeare of To the 10. Answer his Majesties raigne, gives five yeares time to the unestated Lords, to acquire estates in this Kingdome; It is therefore humbly desired, that the answer may be more satisfactory on consideration of the reasons for the tenth proposition, and the state of affaires is so altered since that time, that upon the now intended generall settlement more cir∣cumspection and warines is to be used then at any time before. The said Catholicks doe conceive and affirme in all cleerenes, that the Parliament of Ireland is independent of the Parliament of Eng∣land, To the 11. Answer without which independency, this realme could be no King∣dome, nor any Parliaments here necessary, nor any subject of this Kingdome, sure of his estate, life or liberty, other then at the will and pleasure of a Parliament, wherein neither Lords, Knights nor Bur∣gesses of this Kingdome, have place or vote, and which vowed the destruction of all or most of this nation, and unwarrantably assu∣med the power to dispose of their estates, by the Statutes of subscrip∣tion
to malignants, and Hollanders. To draw this into any debate or question might prove of most dangerous consequence to this na∣tion And yet a declaration of the Parliament here, and an act as in the proposition is set down, is humbly desired, in regarde his Maiesty was drawne to give the Royall assent to the acts of subscription. This answer is humbly desired to be enlarged according to the rea∣sons The 12. Answer for the twelfth proposition. The rates of staple commodities are humbly desired to be modera∣ted by Commissioners to be appointed by both houses of Parliament The 13. Answer The reasons for the not continuance of the chiefe governor above three yeares are the same urged for the fourteenth proposition. The 14. Answer The reasons for the erecting and continuance of trayned Bands are the same that are urged for the fifteenth proposition. The 15. Answer This answer is humbly desired to be enlarged, and the act of obli∣vion to extend to goods taken of eyther side, although the Roman Catholickes suffered much more then all others in this warre, and The 16. Answer your Lordship will consider the reasons for this proposition. It is of necessitie the tryall of the persons to be excepted be by par∣liament, The 17. Answer otherwise the tryall cannot be indifferent in this case. Wee desire notwithstanding those reasons to be admitted to shew such further and other reasons, and to adde herevnto what wee shal thinke fit touching the matter wherein the answers are short, or not satisfactory▪ FINIS.
