Q177A R220618 99832014 36482
QUAERIES Touching the Present Condition Of His MAJESTIES KINGDOM Of IRELAND. 1. WHether it be not demonstrable by search made into the Records of His Majesties Auditor General of Ireland, that had his Majesties Revenue of that Kingdome been well managed, there had been money enough to an∣swer the necessary Charge of that Kingdom? 2. Whether upon search made of His Majesties Exchequer in England, there doth not appear upwards of 200000 l. sent out of England into Ireland since the Duke of Ormonds last Government there? 3. Whether there doth not appear that there were twenty four Subsidies amounting to 360000 l. assessed by the late Parliament of Ireland? 4. Whether there was not 50000 l. advanced out of the Soldiers and Adventurers Rents? 5. Whether the aforesaid Summs thus extraordinarily raised, do not amount to above six hundred thousand pounds? 6. Whether the aforesaid extraordinary Summs would not discharge near Four Years of His Majesties Establishment
both in the Civil and Martial List, Independently of the Revenue of that Kingdom? 7. Though the aforesaid Summs extraordinarily raised would have paid near Four Years Establishment, yet whe∣ther the Martial and Civil Lists be not a Year and half in arrear? 8. Whether His Majesties Ordinary, certain and Casual Revenue, which if well managed, might have fully paid His Majesties necessary Charge, whether upon the aforesaid Principles it is not demonstrable, that the said revenue hath not discharged more then one year and a halfs Establishment in fix years time? 9. Whether it be not demonstrable then, that there hath been more then Four years and a halfs Revenue embesled in six years time: and whether the chief Governour be not more faulty in this great miscarriage then the Earle of Anglesy. Quaeries in Relation to the Lord Duke of Ormond. 1. Whether by sales of Offices, as Lord Steward and re∣ceits out of His Majesties Exchequer of England, the Lord Duke of Ormond hath not raised upwards of 30000 l? 2. Whether he did not receive by one Act of Parliament of Ireland as a gift, 30000 l? 3. Whether it doth not appear by the Records of His Majesties Treasurie  Ireland, that his Grace did receive 12000 l. before his being last Lievtenant? 4. Whether he did not receive 12000 l. per annum as Lord Lievtenant, which was a Moyetie more than any Lord Lievtenant received; and that Moyetie amounts in six years to 36000 l? 5. Whether it doth not appear that his Grace hath released
by the Act of Settlement 60000 l? due to honest men and good Subjects, upon his Estate before the Rebellion? 6. Whether his Grace hath not received 30000 l. out of Soldiers and Adventurers Lands, which he invaded and entered upon without any Title, as appears by the Records of the Court of Claymes in Ireland, which hath decreed the Lands from him? 7. Whether by the Act of Explanation he hath not got the City of Kilkenny, and six other Corporat Towns, together with their Lands and Liberties, valued by himself and his friends of the Councell but at 60000 l. though they are well worth 120000 l? 8. Whether he did not obtain by a special warrant from His Majestie 72000 l. out of the Soldiers and Adventurers half year Revenue? 9. Whether there is not confirmed to him 50000 l. more by the Explanatory Act, for waving a grant which he got by the Act of Settlement? 10. Whether he hath not got as many Gentlemens Estates, upon the pretence of a grant of enjoying all Lands that he could prove (by witnesses) to have payed him any Chiefrey, as is worth at least 150000 l. and whether also, he hath not ob∣tained that for the said Lands, no quitt Rent be paid to the King, which grant at 3d. an Acre per annum amounts to 26000 l? 11. Whether he hath not arbitrarily laied upon the In∣habitants of the City of Dublin 8000 l. per annum, amounting (for these six years past of his Government) to 48000 l? 12. Whether he hath not against the fundamental Laws and Magna Charta, inclosed divers parcells of Land belonging to the Kings good Subjects without their consent, to the value of 1500 l. per annum at the very Gates of Dublin, to the great prejudice of that City and the Country; the profit
of which Land and Park, he hath bestowed upon the Lord of Dungannon and Colonel Cook? 13. Whether it be credible, that his Grace is zealous for the English and Protestant Interest, seeing it is not possible for the Soldiers and Adventurers to be reprized according to His Majesties gracious Declaration, when his Grace hath swallowed up in gifts and grants the best part of the Stock of Reprizalls, and hath made or permitted such Embeslements of His Majesties revenue, and applyed the Royal autho∣rity, wholly to gain vast advantages to himself, and whether by preferring his own private gains and grants, before the Pub∣lique good and the Just right of the Adventurers and Soldiers, he hath not unsettled the Kingdom of Ireland, and unsatisfied the two main interests of Protestants (the Soldiers and Ad∣venturers) to such a degree, that it is to be feared, it will be a continual charge to England, to keep to the rules of the Acts of Settlement and Explanation so destroyed and desperate a people: and whether all this expence, trouble and danger, for preserving the Duke of Ormond and his Family (that is as much Irish as any can be) in other mens Inheritances, and Rights, be the interest of England or agreable to the Maxims of sound Policy or of Christian Piety? 14. Whether such of His Majesties Protestant Subjects of Ireland, as have escaped the Duke of Ormonds Proviso, have not just grounds to fear, that if the same Duke of Ormond should continue in his Government, and press, as now he doth, the payment of 100000 l. they will not be in a con∣dition to live, or to pay His Majesties quit Rents, and the necessary charges of the Kingdom? 15. Whether after the Prohibition of transporting Cattle, and so much oppression, by the Lord Lievtenant and his Creatures, it be possible for His Majesties empoverished Subjects of Ireland, to pay the 300000 l. assessed by the
Explanatory Act, whereof the First 100000 l. is for his Grace? 16. Whether his Grace had not a great regard for His Majesties service, when he lately pressed the King and Coun∣cel to call a Parliament in Ireland, for imposing new Taxes upon that miserable people, and for confirming all his own new acquisitions, whereby the Soldiers, Adventurers and Nominees are defrauded of his Majesties intended favours, and the English interest utterly destroyed? 17. Whether the Duke of Ormonds gifts and grants amount not unto 630000 l. and whether this Summe would not have satisfied all the English interest of Ireland, and have settled the Protestants and well meriting Natives of that Kingdom in peace; whereas now His Majesty and all Chri∣stendom is troubled with their clamours against the breach of Publique Faith; and all this stirr, destruction of the people, and discredit of the Government, to humour one particular man, whose merit is not so extraordinary, as his management hath been unsuccesseful? 18. Whether not only some of the Nobility of Ireland, but very many of the Nobility, Knights and Gentry of Eng∣land have not lost greater revenues, and richer moveables for being Cavaliers, then the Duke of Ormond, whose Estate was much incumbered, and his rents before the rebellion exceeding not 7000 l. per annum, and during the Warr, got more by his Government of Ireland, and giving up Dublin, then he could if he were in possession of his Estate? 19. Whether such as endeavoured to conceale these mis∣carriages and miseries of the Kingdom of Ireland from His Majesties and the Parliaments knowledge, and yet strive to have the Duke of Ormonds destructive Government con∣tinue, deserve not to be questioned by the Parliament, as
betrayers of the Publique good, and of the Lawes and Li∣berties of England? 20. Whether it be fit, that the Government of Ireland should continue so long in one person, as it hath in the Duke of Ormond, though he were not an Irish man, and all his relations were not Papists, and very great Enemies of the English and Protestant interest? FINIS.
