R1003 R26980 9602025 43775
A REMONSTRANCE Of the great Affayres and Matters of Consequence betwixt the King and both Houses of PARLIAMENT. March, 16th. 1641. Touching the present E∣state of these two Kingdomes, En∣gland and Jreland. With the Votes and Resolutions of both Houses of Parliament, Concerning the Kings last Message from Huntington, March 17. 1641. London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.
HUNTINGTON, 15. Martii, 1641. ¶ His Majesties Message to both Houses of Parliament, upon His Removall to the City of YORKE. HIs Majesty being now in his Remove to his City of Yorke, where he intends to make his Residence for some time, thinks fit to send this Message to both Houses of Par∣liament; That he doth very earnestly desire, that they will use all possible industry, in ex∣pediting the businesse of Ireland in which they shall find so cheerfull a Concurrance by his Majesty, that no inconveni∣ence shall happen to that Service by his absence, he having all that passion for the reducing of that Kingdome, which he hath expressed in his former Messages, and being unable by words to manifest more affection to it then he hath endeavoured to doe by those Messages (having likewise done all such Acts as he hath been moved unto by his Parliament) therefore, if the misfortunes and Calamities of his poore protestant Subjects there shall grow upon them (though his Majesty shall bee deeply concerned in, and sensible of their sufferings) He shall wash his hands before all the World, from the least imputa∣tion of slacknesse in that most necessary and pious Worke. And that his Majesty may leave no way unattempted, which may beget a good understanding between him and his Parlia∣ment; He thinkes it necessary to declare, That as hee hath been so tender of the Priviledges of Parliament, that he hath been ready and forward to retract any Act of his own, which
he hath been informed hath Trencht upon their Priviledges, so he expects an equall tendernesse in them of his Majesties knowne and unquestionable Priviledges (which are the Pri∣viledges of the Kingdome) amongst which he is assured it is a fundamentall One. That his Subjects cannot be Obliged to Obey any Act, Order, or Jnjunction, to which his Majesty hath not given his consent: And therefore he thinks it neces∣sary to publish, that he expects, and hereby Requires Obedi∣ence from all his loving Subjects to the Lawes established, and that they presume not upon any pretence of Order, or Or∣dinance (to which his Majesty is no party) concerning the Militia, or any other thing, to doe ot execute what is not warranted by those Lawes, his Majesty being resolved to keep the Lawes himselfe, and to require Obedience to them from all his Subjects. And his Majesty once more recommends to his Parliament the substance of his Message of the 20th. of Ian. last, that they compose and digest, with all speed, such Acts, as they shall thinke fit, for the present and future establishment of their Priviledges; The free and quiet enjoying their Estates and Fortunes; The Liberties of their Persons; The security of the true Religion now professed in the Church of England, The maintaining his Majesties Regall and just Authority, and s∣ling his Revenue; His Majesty being most desirous to take all sitting and just wayes which may beget a happy understan∣ding between him and his Parliament, in which he conceives his greatest power and riches doth consist. May it please your Majestie. YOur Majesties most humble and faithfull Subjects, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Com∣mons House of Parliament, having considered your Majesties Reply to their Answer, touching such persons as have been licenced by your Majesty to passe into Ireland, doe most humbly beseech your Majesty to believe, that they shall alwayes with thankefulnesse and Ioy receive from your Majesty any satisfactory Answer to thir just re∣quests:
And, as they hope thny shall find in your Majesty a readinesse to rectifie these things, which have beene done to their prejudice, so will they bee carefull to remove all appre∣hensions of their Actions or Speeches, which may seeme to cast any dishonour upon your Majesty. For your Majesties better satisfaction concerning the possitive affirmation, that many of the chiefe Commanders now in the head of the Rebels (after the Ports were stopped by order of both houses) have been suffered to passe by your Majesties im∣mediate Warrante May it please your Majesty to consider that herein they have affirmed nothing but what they had cause to believe was true, the grounds whereof they humbly present to your Majesty. The first ground is this, that both Houses of Parliament, (having upon your Majesties commendation taken into their care the suppression of the Rebellion of Jreland) had reason to be especially watchfull over the Ports, because the Rebels abounding in numbers of men for the most part ignorant of their Armes could by no meanes become dangerous or for∣midable to this Kingdome. but by the accesse of Soldiers and Commanders, wherewith they were like to be furnished ei∣ther out of France or Flanders, from both which places the passage into Ireland is speedy and easie through this King∣dome, and thereof they could not chuse but be very sensible of whatsoever gave liberty or opportunity to such a passage, as of a very hurtfull and dangerous grievance, for prevention whereof they did upon the seventh of November agree upon an Order and restraine all passage into Ireland, but upon due strict examination by such persons as were trusted to make those Licences. A second ground that the other Licence granted to the Lord Delvin, and then acknowledged by your Majesties Answer were such (both in regard of the persons, to whom they were granted,) as were apt to produce such an effect as is mentio∣ned in that positive Affirmation that is, to open a way for the passage of Papists and other dangerous persons to joyne with the Rebels, and to bee Heads and Commanders amongst them, which is thus proved.
The Warrant granted to Colonell Butler, (since the order of Restraine by both Houses of Parliament) did extend to all Ports of England and Scotland, and did give free passage to himselfe and to his Company, without any qualification of person, or Limitation of Number, and this Colonell was himselfe a Papist, had a Brother in Rebellion, and Generall of the Rebels in Munster, was expected, and very much de∣sired by those Rebels, who for a long time had kept a Reg∣ment to be commanded by him; as we have beene credibly informed. The second was granted to a Sonne of the Lord Nettersfield, which Lord had foure Sonnes in England since the Rebellion, one of which is setled in England, three others intended co passe into Ireland, and were all dangerous persons being Pa∣pists, bred in the Wars, in the service of the King of Spaine, and one of them lately become a Iesuit. The third to the Lord Delvin extends to himselfe and some persons more unnamed, that one of those who should have past with him is taken to be a Jesuit, and another calls him∣selfe Ploneket, seems to be a man of some breeding and qua∣lity, and like to have beene serviceable to the Rebels, and to have done mischiefe, if he had gone over. The fourth to Sir George Hamilton, and three more unnam∣ed; This Gentleman is likewise a profest Papist, and may be doubted to be of the partie of the Rebels, one of that name being mentioned in the instructions of Sempill the Jesuit, a∣mongst divers other dangerous persons of the popish party in Scotland and Ireland, which instructions were found in a Ship staeyd in Cornwall, which was going into Ireland with divers Iesuits, Soldiers, and others for the incouragement of the Rebels. A third ground is this, that by vertue and Authority of of these Licences severall persons have passed over, which now are in Actuall Rebellion, and have command amongst the Re¦bels, which is thus proved. One Captaine Sutton, did by vertue of your Majesties Li∣cence and Authority imbarque at White-Haven from whence he passed into Jreland, where he went into Rebellion with
the Lord Dunsany, and hath since obtained the place of a Co∣lonell amongst the Rebels, as we are credibly informed. Two of the Sonnes of the Lord Netterfield, one a Jesuite, and the other a Soldier, passed into Ireland in December last, both of them by vertue of your Majesties Warrant, as we have cause to beleeve, for that they went both together in one Ship, and the Licence acknowledged to be granted by your Warrant must needs be granted to one of them, seeing the other Brother who lately endeavoured to passe over, did produce no Licence, and upon his Examination doth abso∣lutely deny that he had any. A fourth ground (which we humbly offer to your Majesty) is this, that your Majesty cannot be assured that no other did passe upon young Licence as your Majesty doth conceive, and are pleased to expresse in your Answer, and that we had great cause to beleeve that divers other had passed over by your Warrant, besides the persons afore-mentioned, and that for these Reasons. 1. Because we received such a generall Information, that di∣vers now in the Head of the Rebels were passed by your Ma∣jesties Licence, which being true in part and easie to be effec∣ted, in regard of the Nature and extent of the Warrants and probable to be attempted, in regard of the subtilty and vigi∣lancie of that party, to make use of all advantages, seemed to deserve credit, which we should not have given to it, if it had beene a naked information without such circumstances. 2. Because wee had concurring Advertisements from Jre∣land and Chester, that divers Priests, Iesuits, and Popish Com∣manders had passed over, and were landed there and parti∣cularly some of Colonell Butlers Company, and that the Of∣ficers of the Ports had kept no Entrie of the names of these prsons, or of the Warrans by which they were transported. These we hope will be sufficient to perswade your Majesty to beleee, that as we had some cause to give credit to the said Jnformations, so we had no intention to make any ill use of them to your Majesties dishonour, but did impute the blame to your Ministers, who might have beene more care∣full to have informed yr Majestie of the Quality o those
persons named in your Licences, and so to have limited them that they might not have extended to others, as they did, how many and dangerous soever. And they pray your Majesty to rest assured, that they shall alwayes be tender of your Honour and reputation with your good Subjects, and for this cause have made this true Declara∣tion of the full State of this matter, that they may thinke no otherwise of it then the truth, and in all things shall labour to establish a good understanding and confidence, betwixt your Majesty, and your people, which they heartily desire, and pray for, as the chiefest meanes of preserving the Honor, safety, and prosperity of your Majesty, and your Kingdome. Severall Votes Resolved upon, by both Houses of PARLIAMENT. Resolved vpon the Quest, by the Lords in Parliament, nemine Contradicente. THat the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Par∣liament, for the safety and defence of the Kingdome of England, and Dominion of Wales, is not any way against the Oath of Allegiance. Resolved vpon the Question. That the severall Commissions, granted vnder the Great Seale, to the Lievtenants of the severall Counties, are illegall and Voyd. Resolved vpon the Question. That whosoever shall execute any Power over the Mili∣tia of this Kingdome, and Dominion of Wales, by colour of any Commission of Lievtenancy, without consent of both Houses of Parliament, shall be accounted a disturber of the peace of the Kingdome. Die Mrtis, 15. Martij. 1641. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament. THat the Kingdome ha een of late, and still is in so evi∣dent and emminent danger, both from our Enemies a∣broad,
and a Popish and discontented party at home; That there is an urgent and inevitable necessity of putting his Ma∣jesties Subjects into a posture of defence, for the safeguard both of his Majesty and his people. Resolved upon the Question. That such Persons as shall be nominated Deputy-Lievte∣nants, and approved of by both Houses, shall receive the Commands of both Houses, to take upon them to Execute their Offices. The Votes and Resoluto s of both Houses of Par∣liament, concerning the Kings last Message, sent from Huntington, on Wednesday, March, 16 1641. Resolved upon the Question. THat this House shall insist upon their former Votes con∣cerning the Militia. Resolved upon the Question. That the Kings absence so farre remote from his Parliament is not onely an obstruction, but may be a destruction to the affayres of Ireland. Resolved upon, &c. That when the Lords and Commons in Parliament which is the supreame Court of Judicature in the Kingdome, shall declare what the Lawes of the Land is, to have this not one∣ly questioned and controverted, but contradicted and a com∣mand that it should not be obeyed is a high breach of the priviledge of Parliament. Resolved, &c. That a Committee shall be appointed by this House to joyne with a Committee of the Lords, to inquire where this Message was framed. Resolved &c. That those persons that advise his Majesty to absent himselfe from the Parliament are Enemies to the peace of this King∣dome, and justly to be suspected to be favourers of the Re∣bellion in IRELAND. Resolved &c. That those that advised his Majty to this Message are ene∣mies to the peace of this Kingdome, and justly to be suspect∣ed to be favourers of the Rebellion in JRELAND. FINIS.
