R148 12381259 60758
A BRIEF RELATION OF Sr. Walter Ralegh's TROUBLES: WITH The taking away of the Lands and Castle OF SHERBORNE in DORSET From Him and his Heires, being his indu∣bitable Inheritance. LONDON, Printed for W. T. MDCLXIX.
To the Right Honorable, The COMMONS of ENGLAND, assembled in Parliament. The Humble Petition of CAREVV RALEGH Esquire, onely Son of Sir WALTER RALEGH, late deceased. HVMBLY SHEWETH: THat whereas your Petitioner con∣ceiveth, That his late Father Sir WALTER RALEGH, was most unjustly and illegally Con∣demned and Executed; and his Lands and Castle of Sherborne wrongfully taken from him and his, as may more at large appeare by this brief narrative hereunto annexed; The particu∣lars whereof your Petitioner is upon due proofes ready to make good: Your Petitioner therefore humbly submitting to the great Justice and Integrity of this House (which is no way more manifested then by relieving the Oppressed) humbly craveth that hee may receive such satisfaction, for these his great oppressions, and losses, as to the wisdome and elemency of this honourable House shall seem fit. And your Petitioner shall humbly Pray, &c.
A BRIEFE RELATION OF SIR WALTER RALEGH's Troubles, with the taking away of the Lands and Castle of Sherborne in Dorset, &c. WHen King IAMES came into England, hee found Sir Walter Ralegh (by the favour of his late Mistresse Queen ELIZABETH) Lord Warden of the Stannaries, Lord Lieu∣tenant of Devonshire and Cornwall, Captain of the Guard and Governour of the Isle of Gersey; with a large Possession of lands both in England and Ireland. The King for some weeks used him with great kind∣ness, and was pleased to acknowledge divers Presents, which hee had received from him being in Scotland, for which hee gave him thanks. But finding him (as hee said himself) a Martiall man, addicted to Forreigne affaires, and great acti∣ons, hee feared lest he shou'd engage him in a warre (a thing most hated and contrary to the Kings nature) wherefore hee began to look upon him with a jealous eye, especially after he had presented him with a Booke, wherein with great ani∣mosity he opposed the Peace with Spaine then in treaty, per∣swading the King rather vigorously to prosecute the war with that Prince then in hand, promising (and that with great pro∣bility)
within few yeares to reduce the West-Indies to his o∣bedience. But Sir Walter Ralegh's enemies soon discovering the Kings humour, resolved at once to rid the King of this doubt and trouble, & to enrich themselves with the lands and offices of Sr. Walter Ralegh. Wherfore they plotted to accuse him, and the Lord Cobham (a simple passionate man but of very Noble birth and great possessions) of high treason. The particulars of their accusation I am utterly ignorant of (and I think all men borth then and now living) only I find in gene∣rall terms, they were accused for plotting with the Spaniard to bring in a forreigne Army, and Proclaime the Jnfanta of Spaine Queene of England; but without any Proofes, and the thing it self as ridiculous as impossible. How ever Sir Walter Ralegh was condemed without any witnes brought in against him, and the Lord Cobham, who was pretended to have accused him barely in a letter, in another letter to Sr. Walt. Ralegh upon his salvation cleered him of all treason or treasonable actions either against King or state to his knowledge, which original letter is now in the hands o Mr. Carew Ralegh son of Sr. Walter to bee produced at any time. Upon this Condemnation, all his lands and offices were seazed and himself committed close prisoner to the Tower, but they found his Castle of Sherborne, and the lands thereunto belonging to be long before entailed on his children, so that hee could not forfeit it but during his own life. And the King finding in himself the iniquity of Sir Walters condemnation, gave him all what hee had forfeited again, but still kept him close Prisoner, seven years after his imprisonment, he enjoyed Sherborn at which time it fell out, that one Mr. Robert Car, a young Scotch Gent: grew in great favor with the King and having no fortune, they contrived to lay the foundation of his future greatnesse upon the ruines of Sir Walter Ralegh. Wherupon they called the conveyance of Sherborn in question in the Exchecquer chamber, and for
want of one single word (which word was found not with∣standing in the Paper-book and was onely the oversight of a Clerk) they pronounced the Conveyance invalide, and Sherborn forfeited to the crown, a judgement easily to be fore∣seen without witchcraft, since his chiefest judge was his grea∣test enemie, and the case argued between a poore friendlesse Prisoner and a King of England. Thus was Sherborne given to Sir She was the onely Daugh∣ter of Sir Nicholas lTHrock∣morton, who was arraigned in Q. Maryes time and qun; see Fox his Acts and Monu∣ments. Robert Car (after Earl of Somerset;) the Lady Ralegh with her Children, humbly and earnestly Petitioning the King for compassion on her and hers, could obtaine no other answer from him, but that hee mun have the land, hee mun have it for Car. She being a woman of a very high spirit, and Noble birth and breeding, fell downe upon her knees with her hands heaved up to heaven, and in the bitternesse of spirit beseeched God Almighty to look upon the justice of her cause, and punish those who had so wrongfully exposed her and her poore children to ruine and beggery. What hath happened since to that royall Family is too sad and disastrous for me to repeat, and yet too visible not to be discerned. But to proceed: Prince HENRY hearing the King had given Sher∣born to Sir Robert Car, came with some anger to his Father, desiring hee would be pleased to bestow Sherborn upon him, alledging that it was a Place of great strength and beauty, which hee much liked, but indeed with an intention to give it hack to Sir Walter Ralegh, whom hee much esteemed. The King who was unwilling to refuse any of that Princes desires, (for indeed they were most commonly delivered in such language as sounded rather like a demand then an intrea∣ty) granted his request; and to satisfie his Favorite gave him five and twenty Thousand pounds in ready money, so farre
was the King or Crown from gaining by this Purchase. But that Excellent Prince within a few Moneths was taken away, how and by what means is suspected by all, and I fear was then too well known by many. After his death the King gave Sherborn againe to Sr. Robert Car, who not many yeers after by the name of Earle of Somerset was arraigned and codm∣ned for poysoning Sir Thomas Overbury, and lost all his lands. Then Sr. John Digbie nov Earl of Bristol begged Sherborn of the King and had it. Sir Walter Ralegh being of a vigorons constitution, and perfect health, had now worne out sixteen yeers Imprisonment, and had seen the disastrous end of all his greatest enemies; so that new persons, and new interests now springing up in Court hee found means to obtaine his liberty, but upon condition to go a voyage to Guiana in discoverie of a Gold mine; that unhappie voyage is well known (almost) to all men, and how hee was betrayed from the very beginning, his lettrs and designes being discovered to Gondomar the Spanish Ambassador, whereby hee found such strong oppo∣sition upon the place, that though hee took and fired the town of St. Thomà, yet hee lost his eldest Son in that service, and being desperately sick himselfe was made frustrate of all his hopes. Immediately upon his returne home hee was made Pri∣soner, and by the violent pursuit of Gondomar and some others (who could not think their estates safe, while his head was upon his shoulders) the King resolved to take advantage of his former condemnation sixteen yeers past (being not able to take away his life for any new action) and, though hee had given him a Commssion under the Broad seal to execute mar∣tiall law upon his own Soldiers, wch was conceived by the best Lawyers a full pardon for any offence committed before that time, without any further trouble of the law, cut off his head.
Here Iustice was indeed blind, blindly executing one and the same person upon one and the same Condemnation for things contradictorie; for Sir Walter Ralegh was condemned for be∣ing a friend to the Spanyard, and lost his life for being their utter enemie. Thus Kings, when they will doe what they please, please not him they should, God, and having made their power subservient to their will, deprive themselves of that just power whereby others are subservient to them. To proceed; Mr. Carew Ralegh only Son of Sr Walter being at this time a youth of a∣bout 13. bred at Oxford, after 5-yeers came to Court, & by the favor of the right Hon. Will: Earl of Pembroke his noble kins∣man, hoped to obtain some redresse in his misfortunes; but the King not liking his countenance sayd, he appeared to him like the ghost of his Father, whereupon the Earle advised him to travaile, which he did untill the death of King James, which, happened about a yeer after. Then comming over, and a Par∣liament sitting, he according to the custome of this Land, ad∣dressed himself to them by Petiion to be restored in blood, thereby to enable him to inherit such Lands as might come unto him either as heyr to his Father or any other way, but his Petition having been twice read in the Lords house, King Charles sent Sir Iames Fullerton, (then of the Bed-chamber) unto Mr. Ralegh to command him to come unto him, and being brought into the Kings chamber by the sayd Sir James, the King, (after using him with great civilitie) notwith∣standing told him plainly, that, when hee was Prince, hee had promised the Earle of Bristol to secure his title to Sherborn against the heyrs of Sir Walter Ralegh; wherupon the Earl had given him then Prince ten thousand pounds, that now hee was bound to make good his promise being King; that therefore unlesse hee would quit all his right and title to Sherborn, he neyther could nor would passe his bill of restauration. Mr. Ralegh urged the justice of his cause, that hee desired onely the libertie of a Subject, and to be left to the Law, which was
ever denyed any free-man. Notwithstanding all which allega∣ions, the King was resolute in his denyall, and so left him, After which Sir James Fulerton used many arguments to perswade submission to the Kings will, as the impossibilitie of contesting with Kingly power, the not being restored in blood, which brought along with it so many inconveniences, that it was not possible without i to possesse or enjoy any lands or estate in this Kingdom, The not being in condition, if his cloke were taken from his back, or hat from his head, to sue for re∣stitution. All which things being considered, together with splendid promises of great preferment in Court, and particular favors from the King not improbable, wrought much in the mind of young Mr. Ralegh, who being a person not full twen∣tie yeers old, left friendlesse and fortune-lesse, prevailed so far that hee submitted to the Kings will. Wherupon there was an Act passed for his restauration, and together with it a settlement of Sherborn to the Earl of Bristol, and in shew of some kind of recompense, four hundred pounds a yeere pension during life granted to Mr. Ralegh after the death of his Mother, who had that sum paid unto her during life in lieu of jointure. Thus have J with as much bre∣vity, humility, and candor, (as the nature of the case will permit) re∣lated the pressures, force, and in∣justice committed upon a poore oppressed, though not undeserving Sir Walter Ralegh discove∣red Virginia at hs owne Charge, which cost him 40000. Pounds. He was the fist of the English that discovered Guiana in the West Ind. Hee tooke the Islands of Fayall from the Spyard, and did most signal and eminent Service at the takng of Cadiz. He tooke from the Spaniard the greatest, and richest Carick, that ever came into England. And an∣other ship laden wth nothing but Gold, Pearls, and Cochincel. Family; and have forborne to specifie the Names of those, who were Instruments of this evill; left I should be thought to have an inclination to scandaize particu∣lar, and perchance Noble families.
Vpon the consideration of all which, I humbly submit my selfe to the Commons of England now represented in Parliament; desiring according to their great Wisdome and Justice, that they will right me, and my Posterity ac∣cording to their owne best liking; having in mine own Per∣son (though bred at Court) never opposed any of their just Rights, and Priviledges, and for the future being resolved to range my selfe under the banner of the Commons of Eng∣land; and so farre forth as Education, and Fatherly instru∣ction can prevaile, promise the same for two Sons whom God hath sent mee.
