R599 R26975 9601865 43770
THE Rebels Doom: OR, AN Historical Account Of the Most Remarkable REBELLIONS FROM EDWARD the Confessor's REIGN, TO His Present MAJESTIES Happy RESTAURATION. With the Fatal Consequences that have al∣ways attended such Disloyal Violations of Allegiance. Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Robert Clavel at the Pea∣cock in St. Pauls's Church-yard. 1684.
TO THE READER. IT was th Opinion of the Hetrurian Princes, That the Power of Rome would remain Eternal, un∣less it should be Ruin'd by the Intestin Discords of its own Citizens; The same may be said of the English Monarchy, whose Diuturnity is Established upon the Rocks that Environ and Guard it. Did not Her Neighbours, dreading the fatal effects of British Unanimity, use thir utmost endeavours to foment the Discontents of the Grreat Ones, and cherish the Jea∣lousies of the Common People; which is the Reason that the Settled Government can never long rest in Quit, and that the People so often stagger in their Obe∣dience, if they do not altogether withdraw it from their Lawful Sovereign; For, shake the Foundations of Obedience, and immediately Rebellion, Sedition, Tumult, and Faction, rowle in with an Irresistable In∣undation, and cover the fallen Ruins of all True Loyalty, and Kingdom-preserving Subjection. The Destructive Consequences of which, blinding un∣thinking Men with their own Ambitious Politicks, bring those Unfortunate Mischiefs upon themselves, which perhaps their most Potent Enemies could never do. However, what can be expected from such as a∣bandon the Steerage of Reason, and suffer themselves to be Govern'd by the Giddy Perswasions of their
own Disorderly Passions? For that there are several Occasions that inveagle Men to lay aside their Reason is plain; of which there is not the lest Argument, when Persons meditating Revolutions of State, will not give themselves the Liberty from the Ill Successes that have befallen Others, to Consier and be Admonish∣ed of the Fatal Events that may pursue their own At∣tempts of the same Nature. Therefore in this Wavering Age, that has ben so apt to take all Opportunities to spurn against the Law∣ful Authority of their Sovereign Prince, it may not be unseasonable to give the same Admonition to the Restless and Impatient of whatsover is the Settl'd Government; which Isocrates the Orator, gave to his Friend Nichocles amongst the rest of his Poltical Precepts, Not to keep any Societies or Clubs, but what are allow'd by the Government, and which was to avoid all Clandestine Consultations in reference to State Disturbance, which if they do not tend to the Overt Act of Rebellion or Sedition, are ridiculous; but if driven on to their common end, are still attended with a Thousand Cares, Anxieties, Fears, Terrors, and Tormenting Mistrusts, and generally at last most fatally Calamitous. For which he gives this Infallible Reason, That the more secure the Prince is, the safer also are the People; there being nohing that more en∣forces a Prince to Rigour and Severity, than the Fro∣wardness and Repugnancy of the Subject, to obey his Commands. For Confirmation of these Truths, all Histories are so full of Examples, that there is no Age or Nati∣on, hardly the Reign of any Prince, which has not Ex∣perimented
the Miseries of the Unhappy Deviation from ths Necssary Instructions. The Mutinous and Head-strong Elections of Otho, Galba, and Vitellius, in ho short a time did they empty thmselves into the Succession of the Flavian Family? Nor could the Roman Mutineers, when whole Legions bandyed toge∣thr, tho' with their Arms in their Hands, Victori∣ous against the Common Enemy, resist the Frowns of th ir Lawful Commanders, according to that of Livy; No sooner the General ascended the Tribunal, but all their fierceness melted into nothing. The whole Army, but now all in an Uproar, could not dfend their Revolting Leaders, Triumphing so lately in their Loud Acclamations, from being publickly Whpp'd, and Beheaded, in the mdst of their Camp, so far from Murmuring, that they did not so much as sigh at the Severity of the Execution. For the Majesty of Law∣ful Authority scatters the Threatning Tempests of Tumult and Insurrection, as the Sun consumes the Gloomy Foggs of Winter, and serenes the Air of Clouded Government. Nor durst the Macedonian rage in the height of their Seditious Fury, withstand their Unarmed Prince, at what time he flew among the Armed Multitude, and dragged from their Protecti∣on with his own Hands to deserved Execution, the Capital Promoters of the Revolt; For though they fear'd not to Disobey, yet they were afraid to interpose between hir Lawful Sovereign's Just Revenge, and the Merited Punishment of the Miserable Fomenters of their Disobedience. But wat need we travers Forreign Writers, seeing we have such Plenty of Presidents among our own Hi∣stories,
enough to convince the most Factious, if not Factious to Stupidity, how vain it is? And how fatal it has been to the Undertakers, to resist the Stream of Settled Government, and Machinate against Sove∣reign Inheritance? Which ought to take the deeper Im∣pression in the Minds of His Majesties Subjects, when they shall find how ill such Irregularities thrive in their Native Soyle, and what Blasted Harvests the Wounds of Rebellion produce in their own Cli∣mates.
THE Rebels Doom: OR, AN Historical ACCOUNT Of the Most Remarkable REBELLIONS, &c. EDWARD the Confessor. WE shall Commence where the Truth of English History first begins to disperse the Clouds of Antiquity, in the Reign of Edward the Conf s∣sor, at what time we find Godwin Earl of Kent, actually in Arms against his Prince, surrounded with vast numbers of the deluded People, whom he had incens'd agains their Soveraign, under pretence that he had a greater kindness for For∣raigners, then his own Subjects. A disturbance that cost King EDWARD no small trouble upon a slight occasion. For Eu∣stace
Earl of Bulloign having married the Kings Si∣ster by the Fathers side, happened to have come into England some time before, ouly to give the King a Visit, then lying at Gloc ster. Upon his return home, at Canterbury one of his Harbingers quarrelling with one of the Burgesses of the Town about Lodgings, chanced to be the occasion of his own Death; which when his Lord heard of, in revenge, he slew eighteen of the Citizens in the heat of his fury. On the other side, the Citizens in as great a rage betook themselves to their Arms, and slew twenty of his Retinue, wounding many more, and putting the Earl to retire. Upon whose Complaint to the King of the Injury done him; E. Goodwin was commanded by the King to see Execution done upon the offenders. Here God∣wins's Ambition took its Opportunity to ingratiate himself with the People, to which purpose he ad∣vised the King to Examine the Cause, before he put his true Subjects to Death, at the Instigation of Strangers: Whereat, though King Edward were highly offended, yet it gained the Politick Earl what he sought for, the Affection of the Commons. Moreover the Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury a Norman, and Goodwin's Capital Enemy, made the Breach wider; incensing the King, that Godwins Refusal of his Command, was an Act of Contempt, wherein more Dangers lay concealed then were to be endured. Upon which the King called an Assembly of Estates, and appointed a day of Meeting at Glocester.
The Commons (whose common Custom it is mortally to hate all Strangers, though for reasons of which, they can give no account) seeing, or at least being made beleive that E. Godwin was in danger for his care of their Priviledges, were ea∣sily drawn to revolt from their Soveraign, to as∣sist the Earl and his Popular Cause, and in a war∣like Posture guarded his person at Beverstame not far from the King. The Estates being met, Godwin who was sent for, refused to attend, pretending Service against the Welsh, so that now suspitions on both sides encreasing, great preparations were made on both sides. To the King repaired several of the most powerful Nobility: To E. Godwin the People of Southwark and Kent: His Son Swain brought him the Men of Oxford, Somerset, Hereford, Glocster and Berkshire, to which his Son Harold joyned those of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk and Huntington∣shire. So that being now surrounded with a for∣midable Army, he made no scruple to send a Bold and Trayterous Message to the King, to have the Earl of Bulloign, with all his French and Normans, then in the Castle of Dover, delivered to him and his Sons. Which being by the King refused (as it was but reason) the haughty Earl prepared to give his Soveraign Battle: But the more prudent, guided by their foresight of the Imminent dan∣gers, threatning the Kings Person, and the fa∣tal Consequences on both sides, probably to be expected, laboured so industriously, that the whole matter was at last referred to a Parlia∣ment
to be held at London, with all convenient speed. In order to this Agreement, King Edward strong∣ly guarded with an Army of Mercians and Nor∣thumbrians, enters London, while Godwin and his Son, with an attendance no less formidable, quar∣ters himself at his own House in Southwark. But then his Army wavering, and as bad causes and consciences make men do, suspecting the worst, by little and little shrunk away from him, which being known to the King, he presently pronoun∣ced Sentence of Banishment against the Rebel God∣win and his five Sons, without farther proceeding by way of Parliament, as he had determined. Thereupon Godwin with a vast Mass of Wealth, and three of his Sons failed into Fland rs, while the other two passed into Ireland; who being thus dispersed, were by the King proclaimed Out∣laws. In the second year of his Banishment, Godwin and his three Sons, having furnished himself with several Ships of War, came upon the Coasts of Kent and Sussex, where they landed and returned laden with Spoiles. The like did Harold and Leof∣win, his two other Sons, upon the Coasts of So∣merset and Devonshire, whence coasting about the point of Cornwal, they joyn'd their Fathers Fleet near the Isle of Wight. The King not enduring the Insolence of these Outlaw'd Rebels, with a Navy of sixty Ships well fitted for War, intended to have made an end of those Rebellious Devestations, by the Destru∣ction
of the Disloyal Godwin and his Sons: But the Fleets being ready to engage, such a thick Fog overspread the Sea, that the Fleets could not see one another; at what time Godwin and his Accom∣plices were driven by contrary Winds, to the place from whence they came. However King Edward still jealous of his Return, set forth a Navy of forty stout Ships to secure the Seas, who did not keep so strict a watch, but that Godwin slipped by them, and having gained the People of Kent, Es∣sex and Surrey to his Assistance, entered the Thames, where he did the like to those of London, who accepted of his Arrival, though King Edward lay there, so that without disturbance, his Navy warp'd up with a Tide through the South-Arch of the Bridg, while a mighty Army mustered to his aid upon the same side of the River. Thus the Nobility finding English against En∣glish, ready to embrue their hands in each others Blood, wrought so far with the King and his Re∣bellious Subject, that conditions of Peace were agreed on, and pledges delivered for the perfor∣mance. Godwin now restored to the Kings favour, might seem to have prospered by his Rebellion, and to have gained by the Breach of his Allegiance, to his Lawful Soveraign; but if he were too power∣ful for the King to punish for his misdeeds, yet he could not escape the Vengeance and Ju∣stice of Heaven, which prosecuted him so far, that he was suddainly surprized with the stroke of Death, as he sat at Table with that Soveraign
Prince of his, to whom he had given so much vex∣ation and rebellious Trouble, contrary to his sworn Fealtie and Homage. Nor were his Counsels less Traiterous than his Actions: For by his continual incensing the King against his vertuous Wife, he abstained obstinate∣ly, from her Bed, by which means he left the Kingdom Heirless, and at last subjected it to a Forraign Race. Therefore was he punish'd by the hand of Hea∣ven as we have heard, in his own person; and afterwards in the Persons of two Sons, Swain and Harold. The first of which was murdered by the Saracens: His other Son Harold, who had taken part with his Father in his Rebellious Practises, as one whom Heaven had decreed to depress, accept∣ing neither the good Councel of his Frinds, nor the offers of the Norman, was forced to surrender his life and usurped Kingdom, to the punishment of his Treasons to his Prince, and his perjury to the Conquerour, as if he had been only set up by the hand of Providence for a while, to bury the Glo∣ry of the English in his Ruins, and render him the more Illustrious mark of Divine Vengeance. WILLIAM I. What ever opinion the English might have of the Norman, being as yet no more then a Duke, and looked upon as their Invadr and Conquerour, while Edgars Title had several Abettors of great Birth and Power, I will not dispute. But when
the Kingdom had once acknowledged King William their Soveraign, and set the Crown upon his Head, when the Prince had taken his Coronation Oath, and they as his Subjcts had sworn to him Fealty and Homage, then for the Northumbrians to take Arms, though it were for the recovery of their former Liberties, and for the Citizens of Exetr to shut their Gates against Him, was absolute Re∣bellion. The Citizens of Exeter were not only content to shut their Gates against their Soveraign, but contemptuously to flout and revile Him, till the very stones ashamed of so much Insolence a∣gainst a King, fell down of themselves, and sur∣rendered the Rebels that trusted in their defence, to the Mercy of their incensed Prince. As for the Northumbrians, they were so fortu∣nate, as to overthrow the Kings Lieutenant whom he sent against them, but when the King himself drew near them in Person, the very terrour of his Approach daunted all their farther Attempts, so that he easily took several of the Chief Authors of the Rebellion, of which he punished some by cutting off their Hands, and others by taking off their Heads, according to the merits of their Crime. Nor did it fare better with Ralph de Ware, Earl of Suffolk and Norfolk, who upon his Wedding day, perswaded his Guests into open Rebellion, having also inveagled his Brides Brother into the same Conspiracy. But though King William were then in Normandy, so fair an opportunity availed them nothing; forsaken in their extremity by those they most trusted, and betrayed by one of their
own party, the Earl of Northamp. the one was Con∣demned to perpetual Imprisonment, and the other constrain'd to fly his Country and live in Exile. Nor may we here omit the unnatural Rebellion of his own Son, whose impatient Ambition claim∣ing his Fathers Inheritance before the Law of Na∣ture gave it Him, or that his Father was willing to resign it to him, fermented his hasty fury to that height, that he brake forth into open Hstili∣ty against his Soveraign that begot him, insomuch that the business came to a battle, wherein the Son wounded the Father, and bore him off his Horse to the Ground. But what was the issue of this Disobedience? For the Dishonour done to his Fa∣ther, and Disloyalty for his unnatural Arms, he lived afterward bitterly cursed by his own Parent; who execrated the time when he begat Him. Which Curses pursu'd him so violently, that what he so rapaciously and unseasonably endea∣vour'd to wrest out of his Fathers Hands, he after∣wards, when he was in Possession of it, lost to his Brother Henry, was by him bereft of both his Eyes, and after twenty Years Imprisonment in the Castle Caodiffe, there miserably ended his days. The words of King William himself are very re∣markable to our purpose. In Normandy, saith he, my Forraign Foes have risen up against me; yea my inward Friends I may say have invaded me: My Son Robert and other Younglings whom I have brought up and given Armes, have rebelled; to whom my false Clients and Subjects have given their Assistance, but they have not prospered, God, whose Servant I am,
ever defending me, neither have they got any thing of mine, besides Iron in their Wounds. WILLIAM II. In this Kings Reign, Odo Bishop of Bayeux, the Kings Uncle, out of a spleen taken against Lan∣frank the Arch-bishop complotted the Downfal both of the one and the other, to which purpose, draw∣ing into the Conspiracy, Roger Earl of Hereford, with several other of the Nobility, he wrote Let∣ters into Normandy to his Nephew Duke Robert, hastning him to recover his right against his Bro∣ther, then King of England by his Fathers Will; which he promised should be soon effected by his means. Duke Robert being easily drawn into this Rebel∣lion, the Bishop was the first that appeared in the Action, and fortifying Rochester began to set all Kent in a Combustion. His accomplices encou∣rag'd by his example, did the lke in other parts of the Kingdom; for in the West, Robert Mowbray Earl of Northumberland assisted by another Bishop sack'd Bath, and fortifyed the Castle of Bistow a∣gainst the King. In Norfolk Roger Bygod, in Lëce∣ster Hugh Grentemeisnel wasted those Counties. Roger Montgomery assisted by the Bishop of Dur∣ham, the Kings Domestick Chaplain, harrassed the County of Worcester with Fire and Sword. The Kingdom thus in a Rebellious uproar, and Rufus thus turmoiled, raises an Army of his faith∣ful Subjects, which he first led into Kent, took
the Castles of Tunbridge and Horn, besieged Odo in the Castle of Pomsey, which he constrained him to surrender, together with the Castle of Roche∣ster, and then having deprived him of all his Lands and Livings in England, banish'd him out of the Kingdom. Duke Robrt having by this time set footing in England, when he saw the main Pillar of his hopes thus fallen, made peace with his Brother, return∣ed back into Normandy, and left the rest of the Conspirators at the Kings mercy, to make what Compositions they could for themselves. And thus the vain Project of tha aspiring Prelate a∣gainst his King and Soveraign, vanished into smoke. Not long after Robert Mowbray before mention∣ed and William of Anco, with others, conspired to deprive the King both of his Crown and Life, and to have set up Stephen de Albemarle his Aunts Son. The fatal event of which Treason was pre∣vented by surprizing Roger de Mowbray, who for his former Treachery and this, dyed a Prisoner. William of Ancho was punished with the loss of both his Eyes and his Virelities: And William Al∣merick another of the Conspirators, the Kings God∣father, Kinsman and Sewer cruelly whipp'd, and afterwards all naked as he was and besmeared with his own Goare, more Ignominiously hang'd.
HENRY I. In the Reign of this King, several Male-contnts of whom the Chief was Robert Beliasme Earl of Shrews∣bury affecting alteration, beheld with a Malignant Eye, the Glory of His beautious Crown: Robert as the most powerful, fortified the Towns of Shrewsbury, Bridgnorth, Arundel & Tickhil, with Victuals, Ammu∣nition and Men, and allur'd the fickle Welshmen to his designs, of which the King having Intelligence march∣ed into those parts with a Poerful Army, recovered Bridgn' compelled Shrewsb' to send him the Keys of her Gates, and at length constrained Beliasme & other Heads of the Rebels to abjure the Ream for ever. In his Territories beyond Sea, the Earl of Mol∣lent conspiring with Hugh Earl of Mantfort against their Soveraign, and breaking forth into actual Rebllion, were by the Kings Lieutenant in those parts trained into an Ambush laid for that purpose, and being both taken alive, were delivered up by the Victor to the revenge of their offended Prince. HENRY II. Against Hen. 2. Hugh de Mortimer stufft his Ca∣stles of Glocester, Wigmore and Bridgnorth, with Rebellious Garrisons, for no other reason, but be∣cause he would not be under his Soveraigns Con∣troul, but he was soon tamed by the King, who suddenly reduced all his Castles to Obedience with very little labour or expence. As for the Troubles which he had from his Son, after he had caused him to be Crowned King with himself, and given him a share of his Royal Sove∣raign
Authority, they might be called an unnatu∣ral and ingrateful Retaliation of Paternal Kindness, yet it could not be said to be a Rebellion of one Crowned Head against another. Nevertheless they who advanced the unjust Pretntions and Animosi∣ties of the Son were no way to be excused: They who blew the Coles of Dissention, and were the chief Incendiaries of the Divisions between the Crown'd Son, and Diademn'd Father; I mean those that were no less the Subjects of the one then the other were equal Traitors to both. Therefore did Providence, meaning only to Chastize the King, and not to deliver him up into his Enemies Hands, destroy those hopes that mov'd the Son to his un∣natural Attempts: So that the Earl of Leicester, one of the most violent Fire brands in that Disunion, one who was not contented to have affronted King Henry the Father, in the behalf of his young Lord and Master, but is Recorded to have laid his daring Hand upon His Sword to have struck the King, had he not been withheld, was encountred by several of the Loyal Nobility stedfast to the Old King, and with the loss of five Thousand of his Flemings, Himself and His Amazonian Countess taken Priso∣ners and carryed over ito Normandy, where at that time the Old King was, to be at his disposal. And it is observable, that His Son Richard the First, though he had a deep Hand in these Conten∣tions against his Father, yet when he came to the Crown, he banished from his Familiarity, and hat∣ed all those who had forsaken his Father, and both retained and enriched those other, who had Loy∣ally
stood for the Elder King at all times, both against his Brother and Himself. King JOHN. The Reign of this magnanimous Prince was no∣thing but a continual contest against Treason and Disloyalty, as well Ecclesiastick as Secular. Which were the two Handles that Philip of France took hold off, to wrest the Dukedom of Normandy from his Dominion. Never did Prince with more Re∣solution, or with more Success, oppose the Power of his Forreign Enemies, till the Infidelity of his own haughty Prelates gaves his Barons the Oppor∣tunity to manacle his victorious Arms. For by the Traiterous Contention of a Proud Monk, advanced to the Primacy of England by the humble Order of Cloistered Monks at Canterbury, without the Kings knowledge or consent, and upon the Election of a another by the Kings Approbation, disclaiming his subjection to his Lawful Prince and appealing to the Pope, an equal match for English Princes at that time, the Kings Affairs were strangely disor∣dered. The Barons also from Arch-Bishop Huberts treasonable Doctrine preached before 'em, when they were preparing for the King's Inauguration, That the Crown of England was meerly Arbitrary, and at the Peoples Devotion; and from their own unwillingness to foregoe that uncontroulable great∣ness, to which they had habituated themselves through King Richard's long absence in the Hoy-Land, had suckt the Princples of Rebellion, nor would be brought to swear other then conditio∣nal
Fealty to the King, that is, they would no longer keep Faith and Peace to their Soveraign, then he continue to them their Rights and Liberties. For under those specious Vals they covered their Am∣bitious designs to copemate their Prince, and put undue Restraints upon Regality. This Philip of Frace well understod, and therefore sedulously kept up the humour amongst the Rebellious Barons, and sed the craving Appetite of Disloyal Hubrt with Golden Morsels, who thereupon was no less dili∣gent to cross the Kings Designs, by a dexterous ma∣nagement of the perverseness of the Nobility, whenever he attempted to repair his Honour and Losses. Which Combinatin was carried on with more secrese while Hubert lived, for then he could make use of his Legative Pwer to countermand the Kings Commands as he pleased, and the Barons could pretend Reverence to the Holy See for their Disobedience, which Treachery of his, when the King had discovered, he dyed for grief, and the King after his Death had the Satisfaction to seize his ill got Wealth and vast Possssions, too unweildy for a Church man, in part of amends for the Trea∣sons of his Life. But Hubert being dead, the Proceedings of the Barons were then more open, but still the Church contentions gave them their chiefest Oppor∣tunies. For upon Reginald the Monk's Appeal to Pope Innocent, the cunning Roman set aside both Reginalds claim, and the Bishop of Norwich's chosen by the Kings Order, and imposes upon the King, Stephen Langton a Cardinal and the Kings
mortal Enemy. By the way you are to understand that this Innocent was one of that blessed Trim∣virate, Innocent at Rome, Saffudine the Turk at Jerusalem, and Alexander the Fratricide at Constan∣tinople, of whm thus yoaked together it was said that the Prophesie of St. John was fulfilled, where the Devil was to be let loose after a Thousand Years restraint. The King gall'd to the quick with this leud and villanous Obtrusion of the Pope, so much to his dishonour, the prejudice of his Cron, and his own safety, vows to stand by his own Elect, and to die in Defence of the Liberties of his Crown, threatning withal, that if he were cross'd in this, to hinder all Persons from crossing the Seas to Rome, and no longer to be a beggar for Forreign Justice, but Innocent slighting his Menaces, sent his commands to the English Bishops not only to submit to Langhton, but to interdict the King him∣self if he continued as he called it Contumacious. Nor was the Pope more Insolent in his commands, then the Bishops officiously Disloyal and Unfaith∣ful to their Prince in the Execution, so that the King was deprived of the very Face of Christianity for many Years ensuing, as if not Pope Innocent, but Julian the Apostate had mov'd up the Temples of the true God; for which Disloyalty of theirs, he made his own Dominions to hot to hold such a Disloyal Broode, confiscating their Revenues, and sending their Persons for maintenance to him that had set e'm to work: Amongst the rest, the Arch-Deacon of Norwich, for advising the Kings Sub∣jects to relinquish their Obedience to their Sove∣raign,
because of the Popes Anathema, was im∣prisoned and forced to wear a Coat of Lead, the weight of which sunk him in a short time to his Grave: Nor were there wanting some among the Abbots themselves, who preached that the Cala∣mities of the perfidious Clergy were no reproach∣es to the Prince, but due rewards of their heinous Trespasses; in regard it belonged to the King to govern and bridle the disobedience of his Subjects. Nor is there any doubt to be made, but that the King had been an easie Victor over Romes Ful∣minations, had not the Nobility been envenom'd with the Clergy's infection. For notwithstanding the fiery heat of Antichristian wrath, at first he re∣duced Ireland to Obedience, and was marching to suppress the Rebellious Welsh, but then as he was sitting at Table at Nottingham, he received intel∣ligence from his faithful friend Malcolme King of Scots and his Daughter Joan, Prince Leolins Lady, that Imminent Treason was plotted against him by sundry of his Barons, who had designed either to Murther him or betray him to the Butchery of his Foes, which dreadful Informations from such true and cordial Friends could not however fright his couragious Heart, till coming to Chester, he there understood by several other Intimations, that his Nobles had discharged themselves from his Alle∣giance, upn which he dismissed his Army, pur∣sued the detected Conspirators, of which the three Principals flying the Land, he prosecuted their Persons, Demolished their Castles, and Confis∣cated their Possessions. Nevertheless they left many
more of as vile and virulent affections behind, such were those, who sent to Philip of France their sealed Charters, promising to settle the Crown of England on his Head, if he would come and receive it. Nor was this all, for then the Church-men be∣gan to act their parts again, and Stephen Langhton with the Bishops of Ely and London, thirsting af∣ter revenge, though with the ruine of their Prince and Country, with loud complements sollicited their Lord the Pope, to support the English Church at the point of Ruin. Thereupon the Pope de∣crees, that the King should be deposed, and that his Holiness should provide some other in his Rome, who to that purpose sends to Philip of France, re∣quiring him to undertake the labour of Dethrown∣ing Him, with no less reward then the Pardon of his Sins, and to enjoy the Crown of England to him and his Heirs for ever. Thereupon King Philip having this fair opportu∣nity to make use of the spacious pretences of Ju∣stice and Devotion, not so much in obedience to the Popes command, as encouraged by the Traite∣rous requests of the Barons, raises a vast Army, and prepares a Navy answerable for their tran∣sportation, in order to kill and take Possession. On the otherside King John was no less vigilant for his own defence: Nor was he yet so ill beloved a∣mong the People, but that upon his Summons, such infinite Numbers flockt to Dover and the Sea Coasts there abouts, that the Officers were for∣ced to dismiss many Thousands, retaining only the
Choisest and most Valiant for Service, that had the leaders been but Faithful and Cordial to their Prince: There breathed not any Prince under Heaven, whose Assault England had not been able to repel. But in the midst of these preparations arrives Pandolph the Popes Legate, and in a long harangue perswades the King to submit, who at length, ra∣ther out of Compassion to his People, then out of any fears of his own, condescends to such conditi∣ons as Necessity and the Pope, who neither of hem have any law were pleased to impose, altho much too Ignominious for so Brave and Generous a Prince, whose powerful Arms were fettered by the mistrust of his own unaithful Nobility. How∣ever with that little liberty which he had left him, he made a shift to ruin Philip's Fleet, upon Pan∣dolphs command to forbear England, design'd upon one of the Kings Alleys, and to bring in Triumph to his own Dominions, the great preparations in∣tended for his own Extirpation. And now the Barons break out into open diobe∣dience; for when the King in prosecution of this Victory, had mustered together a Potent Army and expected at Portsmouth, that all truely English would gladly have embraced so fair an opportunity, to recover the Hereditary Provinces belonging to the Kings Dominions from the false French, his Ba∣rons restless in proclaiming their Soveraigns un∣rest, flatly oppose themselves against his com∣mands and their Countries good, denying him both their Service and Attendance, until he were ab∣solved
from his Excommunication. Afterwards, when the King was assoiled and hastning again to embark his Army at Portsmouth a second time, they found out new excuses to impede his designs; so that when the King had put to Sea himseif, with a small Attendance, expecting his Disloyal Barons to follow him, they all departed home, insomuch that the forsaken King was forced to return as he went. Afterwards upon the high Altar at St. Ed∣munds-bury, they swore every man severally to re∣nounce their Fealty to the King, till he had con∣descended to their specious pretences of Liber∣ty. In persuance of which they raise a vast Army, appointing Robert Fitz-Walter to be their Com∣mander, under the Title of Martial of Gods Army and the Holy Church, and constrained the King in Running Mead near Windsor, to yeild to several Propositions altogether derogatory to his Soveraign Prerogative, and to admit Twenty Five Sel ctd Peers to be sharers with him in his Government; by which means, one of the Greatest Soveraigns in Christendom was become the Twenty Sixth Pet∣tie King in his own Dominions. But as it is the fate of such Savage madness of Disloyal Dispositions, that to attain the shadow of seeming Liberties, they immerge themselves and their Abettors into bottomless Distresses, so it fair'd with these Rebellious Barons; for King John having now two Armies on Foot, the one led by himself, the other by the Earl of Salisbury, victo∣riously subdued thess Rebels where ever he mar∣ched.
Stephen Langhton the Arch-bishop and Ring∣leader of the Conspiracy was at an Assembly in Rom of Sixty one Arch bishops, four Hundred, Bishops, and eight Hundred Abbots and Priors ac∣cus'd and convicted of High Treason against his Natural Prince, and suspended by the Pope from his See and Dignities; the Barons were all Excom∣municated by Name, and their Possssions interdi∣cted, so that the Rebels were now reduced to ut∣most Despair, and therefore hopeless to find any favour from their justly offended Prince, as if the Treasons they had committed could not be safe, but by attempting greater, they call in Lewis the French Kings Son to their Assistance, who came in∣deed for his own ends, and boy'd up the Rebellion for a while, but with a Resolution, if ever the Crown were setled on his Head, to have Con∣demned to perpetual Exile, all such as then ad∣her'd to him against King John, as Traitors to their Soveraign, and to have extirpated all their Kindred in the Land. Such is the Abomination of Rebellion, even in those that make advantage of it; which being detected to them by Vincent de Melan, a Noble French-man upon his Death Bed, wrought such a Consternation among the Barons, that above forty of them prepared to prostrate themselves at the Kings Mercy; which the King was not in a Condition to receive, as lying him∣self upon his Deaths-Bed; but though they scaped the Kings Chastisement upon their Persons, yet was it remarkable to see how impetuously they drove on the intended punishment to themselves of their
falshood to their Prince, and the due rewards laid up in store for their Disloyalty and disobedience; so that now finding to what a miserable pass they had brought themselves more afraid of their Prote∣ctor, they hastned to eject him out of the King∣dom, with the same eagerness with which they had brought him in. But as for those who obstinately adher'd to Lewis, they were most of 'em taken upon the Storm of Lincoln, and in a short time found themselves at the mercy of their injured Soveraigns Son and Suc∣cessor. HENRY III. In the Raign of this Prince we find a hot Sedi∣tion raised to set up Lewis the French King again, by Constantine Fitz Arnulph, a Wealthy Citizen of London: But notwithstanding the numerous Rable which he had got to defend Lewis's Title, he was at last taken and hang'd: But this was a Commotion of no great Moment, in respect of what ensued; for now Simon Earl of Leicester, and the Earl of Glocester Rebels far more dange∣rous and powerful gave the King new Troubles. To which purpose, having drawn into their Con∣federacy several others of the Baronage, they en∣ter into a League against the King; and coming Arm'd to a Parliament then held at Oxford, with whom also joyned sundry of the Bishops, who had taken the same Counsels against their King, the Lords anointed, they strenuously propounded se∣veral
Traiterous Articles to the King, imperiously demanding his Assent thereto, the Chief points of which were, that the King would observe their darling Charter of Liberties, and admit of such Justiciaries and great Officers as they pleased them∣selves. Then they renewed their Confederacy, solemn∣ly swearing, that neither for Life nor Death, Love nor Hatred, they would be drawn to relent in their Trayterous purposes, till they had cleared England from their over nice and pretended fears of Aliens and Strangers. They had also a farther Project than all this, broached by the Disloyal Bi∣shops; that four and Twenty Persons should be chosen to have the sole Administration of the King and State, and the yearly appointment of great Of∣ficers, reserving only to the King the Highest place at Meetings and Salutations of Honour in publick Places: To all which the King and Prince were en∣forc'd to swear, for fear of perpetual Imprison∣ment; the Traiterous Lords having threatened Death to all that resisted, upon which the Peers and Prelates took their Oaths to be Faithful in this their Infidelity, and the Arch-Bishops and Bishops solemnly cursed all that should Rebel against it, which impudent Treason, the Monks themselves detesting, asked with what Fore-head, especially the Prelates, durst thus impair the Kings Majesty con∣trary to their sworn Fidelity to him? Which con∣juration they prosecuted so far, that when William de Valence denyed to render up any Castle that was committed to his Charge; the Earl of Leicester
and the rest of the Conspirators replied, they would either have his Castle or his Head; And when Henry the King of the Roman's Son denied to combine with them, or to take their Oath with∣out his Fathers consent, the roundly told him, That if his Father himself would not hold with the Baronage; he should not hold a Furrow of Earth among them. On the other side, the King to vindicate his Royl Power out of the Usurping Barons Hands, takes the Tower of London and prepares force against force, by the help of his Brother the King of the Ro∣mans. At first the King proved successful, encounter∣ing his Enemies at Northamptn, where he took fourteen of the Principal Barons, but afterwards loosing an unfortunate Battle to the Earl of Lice∣ster, was himself taken Prisoner, together with the Prince, the King of the Romans and Henry his Son; By which advantage the Kingly Rebel got all the Chief Castles of the Kingdom into his Hands: But at length the Earls of Leicester and Glocester, the two main Pillars of the Rebellion, falling out about their Shares of the spoils (for what ever they pretended for the Kingdom; their own Greatness and Gain was the Chief Motive) Glocester deserts the Party of Leicester, and Asso∣ciates with the Kings Friends, to whom after∣wards the Prince escapes out of H reford Castle; who altogether joyning Battle with the Rebels near Evesham, the Earl of Leicster's Army was totally routed and himself slain, his Head sent to
Worcester, and his Hands and Feet chopt off from the rest of his Body: The King being thus at Li∣berty calls a Parliament at Winchestr, by Authori∣ty of which, he seized into his Hands the Charter of London and other Towns that had sided with the Rebels: Those that were taken in the Batle were committed to safe Custody, and all that had taken part with the Earl were Disinherited, and a rata∣ble distribution made of their Estates, to the K ngs deserving Friends. The Earls two Sons were attainted, and their Mother the Countess sent out of England ever to return. Simon the Eldest Son of the Earl, upon his Submission, was Condemned to perpetual Exile, with only a smal allowance of five Hundred Marks a year for his Sub∣sistance. As for the Clergy, Ottobon the Popes Le∣gate Excommunicated the Bishops of Winchester, Worcester, London and Chichester, for adhering to the Rebels, and condemned the Clergy to pay their Tenths for seaven years to the King. And this was that which the Disloyal Leicester and his Confede∣rates got, instead of that Power and unjust Autho∣rity at which they aimed, for their Treason and In∣fidelity to their Soveraign. EDWARD II. In the Raign of Edward the 2d. upon the Ad∣vancement of the two Spencers to the Kings favour, Thomas Earl of Lancastr, and in a manner all the Barons of the Kingdom, as if it had been a Crime in the King to love any one but whom they pleas'd,
never rested till by the Terrour of Rebellious Ci∣vil Arms, they had enforced the King to banish his two favourites. Thereupon the King manfully resolving to die in the quarrel, or bring his Lords to be at his dis∣posal, levies an Army, marches to Cicester, taking many Castles and beseiging others. This put the Barons into such a Consternation, that many of them deserted their Chieftain the Earl of Lancaster, and rendred themselves to the Kings Mercy. Others were apprehended, as were the two Mortimers; the rest sent to Walling∣ford Castle. However the Faction, tho weaken'd by these defections, made head in the North un∣der the Earl of Lancaster: Thither the King march∣ed, and with the only shew of his Army made the Earl fly to Burton upon Trent. Nor did the di∣spleasure of Heaven, nor the revenging Arm of Soveraign Power leave them so; for at Borrough-bridge Humfrey de Bohun, one of the Chief Rebels was slain by a Welshman, who thrust him from un∣der the Bridge into his Body with his Spear. The Earl of Lancaster also, with other Principal Barons and Knights, to the number of Fourscore and ten were also taken Prisoners, by Persons of no great Note, the Captains of Carleil and York, who with considerable forces out of those parts, stopt the farther Progress of the Rebels at Borrough-bridg already mentioned. The Earl of Lancaster with five or six Barons more were beheaded at Pontfraict. The Lords Clifford, Mowbray and Dey-vil were hanged in Iron
Chains at York; the Lord Badlesmore was Exe∣cuted at Canterbury, and others in other places, as the Lord John Clifford at Glocester, the Lord Henry Teys at London, and at VVindsor the Lord Francis de Aldenham; all which miserable Tragedies were only the dire Effects of Disloyalty and Rebellion. True it is, that this unfortunate Prince was depo∣sed by the revengful Contrivances of a Disloyal Wife overswayed and governed by the most Ambitious and vindicative Rebel then alive, Roger Lord Mortimer. But Heaven would not permit that either should long enjoy the Fruits of that dismal Tragedy which they had acted: For Mortimer when he least suspe∣cted it, was ravished by the Young King from the Embraces of his Adulterous Moth r, and ignomi∣niously hanged at the common Gallows at Tiborn. The Queen Mother was deprived of aler Ample Dower, confined within the streight Limits of a nar∣row aboad at Risings near London, put to a short Pension and Allowance of only a thousand Pounds per annum, upon which she liv'd a solitary Widow for thirty Years together, debarred of all those Pomps and Honours, otherwise due to her high Birth and Quality. RICHARD II. Hitherto we have seen the Disloyalty and Disobedience of the most Eminent Personages of the Nation severely punished by the Revenging Hand of Providence: In this Kings Reign, the rabble would needs undertake to be the Kings Re∣formers,
and like a Monstrous Hydra, erecting their shapeless heads, began to hiss against their So∣veraigns Regal Power and Authority. This Prince coming young to the Crown, had appointed for his Governour John D. of Lancaster the Kings Uncle, who also assumed the Titles of King of Castle and Leon; whose Government not pleasing the People, by reason of a Tax Levied by Poll upon all Persons above sixteen Years of Age, moved the enraged Multitude to roul together in such a dreadful Torrent, that the King and King∣dom, seemed as it were suddainly fallen under their most wicked fury. There were in this rebellious Insurrection, the Commons and Peasants, principally those of Kent and Essex, who drew into their Infernal Associati∣on the Neighbouring Countries of Suffolk, Nor∣folk, Cambridg, Surrey, Kent and other places. They of Kent embattel'd themselves under two Banners of St. George, and threescore and ten di∣splayed Engsigns, upon Black Heath, and from thence came to London, where the Generality of the Peo∣ple inclining to them, they became Masters of Mis∣rule, and burnt the Priory of St. Johns, and the Magnificent Palace of the Savoy then belonging to the D. of Lancaster; with all the Riches in it; and all this in a kind of Holy Outrage, throwing one of their Fellows into the flame, for having thrust a piece of stollen Plate into his Bosom, like another Achan. The Rebels of Essex marched to Lambth, where they burnt all the Archbishops Goods, and defaced
all the Writings, Records, Rowles and Monuments of the Chancery; Nor was their desperate fury satisfyed to extend it self to the spoyl of Houses and Substance; they laid bloody hands also upon the most eminent and worthy personages in the Kingdom, Simon Tibald Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and Sir John Hales Lord Prior of St. Jhns and Treasurer of England, whom without respect to the Majestie of the King, or the priviledge of their Honourable Dignities, they most inhumanly murdered by cutting off their Heads upon Toer-Hill, in the midst of their Infernal shouts and im∣pious Yels. They had many Captains to lead them on and encourage them in their Mischievous Enterprizes, of which the chief were Wat Tyler of Maidstone, and Jack Straw; They had besides a Chaplain as Graceless as themselves, one John Ball an Excom∣municated Priest, who with his precious Doctrine nourish't their enflamed Rage, and their Number was esteemed at one time to have been a hun∣dred Thousand. Of these a great Number accep∣ting the Kings Mercy, returned home, but then VVat Tyler nothing dismayed, but rather beleiv∣ing himself now surrounded with a more despe∣rate and resolved party, who having refused the Kings Pardon, were bound to adhere to him in his Disloyalty, under pretence of disliking the Arti∣cles tendered to him by the King, sought to win time, till he might put in Execution his intended execrable Treasons, which were to murder the King and Great Men of the Kingdom, and to Erect
Petty Tyrannies to themselves in every Shire. In Norfolk also one John Littistar a Dyer, had taken upon him the Title of King of the Commons, and in Suffolk one John VVraw another leud Priest, had assigned the same Dignity to one Jhn VVest∣broom. The Young King in these fears and dangers re∣paired to VVestminster, while VVat Tyler with his Camp of Rakeshames attended in Smithfield, still caviling with the conditions of Peace, till the King arriving from VVestminster, placed himself on Horsback before St. Bartholomews Gate, attended by Walworth Lord Mayor of the City, and others of high place and quality, and from thence sent for the Lordly Rebel to come and speak with him. Nor was it without great entreaty that the dis∣dainful Mushrome vouchsaf'd to come, and when he came behaved himself so insolently, that he of∣fered to Murder Sir John Newton for his Omission of some Punctillio of Respect, which he arrogated to his Usurped Dignity, upon which he was pre∣sently with a drawn Sword arrested by Walworth, who followed his blows with that success, that the new Prodigie of a Traytor was soon fell'd to the ground and slain, only pitied in this, that his fall was by an Honourable Arm, and not by the Hand of the Common Executioner. The Rable seeing the fall of their Captain, pre∣pared for extremity of Revenge, at what time the young King with a present Wit and Courage spur'd forth his Horse, and bid the mutinous Throng fol∣low him without being grieved for the loss of a
Ribauld and Traytor, for that he would be their Captain, upon which the Multitude not daring to lift up a Hand against him (such is the awe of real Majestie) pressed after him into the Field, belei∣ving themselves now sure of their desires. In the mean while the Lord Mayor slips into the City, Arms immediately a thousand stout Citizens, and with Tyler's Head born before them, speeds to the Kings relief. The Rebels now seeing themselves hem'd in with Armed Men, some fled, some fell upon their knees, and answerably to their baseness beg'd their lives, who lately thought themselves both Masters of the Field, and of the King himself. In Norfolk, Henry de Spencer Bishop of the Dio∣cess, making use of St. Peters Sword, flew into the Rebels Trenches, and after he had slain a great number of the Disloyal Croud, caused their Mu∣shroom King Littestar, to be drawn and hang'd, and then to have his Head chopt off. Into Essex the Lord Thomas of Woodstock the Kings Uncle, with Sir Thomas Percy were sent, where the Rebels were strong in Number, they were ne∣vertheless broken at the very first charge made up∣on them. The same Fortune attended them in all other parts where they had embody'd; so that at length being all quell'd and dissipated, nothing remained but the deserved punishment of their detested Insolence; for which about 15 hundred were Executed in several places. And this end for the present had these Infer∣nal
Attempts of the baser People, in which was plainly to be beheld the hideous Face of Anarchie and Plebeian Rage, which tho' it be violent for the time, yet seldome proves durable, still melting at the Approach of over-awing Majesty; it being ob∣served, That the heat of this popular Fury did not last above eight days. But to shew that the People are only like good Tools, altogether ineffectual unless in the hands of them that know how to make use of them, the ensuing Rebellion of the Lords, was an apparent Argument: For tho they could not manage them∣selves, yet being in the hands of them that knew how to make advantage of their Discontents, and their Robustious Numbers, they wrought that mis∣chief to their Soveraign as sturdy Instruments, which they could not effect by their Impolitick Con∣trivances. Nor were the Discontented Lords neg∣ligent to lay hold of the Opportunity, while they were in this floating Humour. The Duke of Ireland, whom the King most Cor∣dially lov'd, for that very reason was become a great Eye-sore to several of the Nobility, but more especially to the Duke of Glocester, one of the Kings Uncles; for that the Duke of Ireland had Repu∣diated his Wife near Kins-woman to the King and him, and had taken to his Bed one of the Queens Women, a Bohemian of mean Birth. This Injury to his Kins-woman boyl'd in Gloce∣sters Stomach, and therefore under the pretence of Reformation, and removing Evil Counsellors, he Confederates with the Archbishop of Canterbury,
the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, Marshal, and others at Arundel in Essex, where they also take an Oath of Secresie, and conclude to raise a Power against the King to obtain what they aim'd at, not Reformati∣on, but Revenge, and the Mastery of their Gentle Soveraign, by main force. This Conspiracy was Discovered by Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham, a Party in the Plot to the King; upon which the Duke of Glocester was surprized by Mowbray, who waited for him in the Woods thorough which he was to pass, and sent Prisoner to Callis. The Earls of Arundel and Warwick, with the Lord Cobham, and Sir John Cheney, were likewise Arrested, and Committed to safe Custody. And now what was the Fruits of this Topping piece of Disloyalty, hatch'd by these Personages of such eminent degree? The Earls of Arundel and Warwick Convicted before the Duke of Lancaster, Lord High Steward for their Tryals, for the Treasons already Rehears'd: the former lost his Head, and the other was Banish'd to the Isle of Man, though under the same Sentence of Condemnation. The Duke of Glocester was put to Death at Callis, being too much the Darling of the unruly Multitude to be brought to publick Ju∣stice. As for those that were his Favourites, by their ill-Counsels and worse management of Affairs, betray'd him to his Deposal; they, for their Di∣sloyalty to his Successour, had their Portion of Ca∣lamity in the next King's Reign.
HENRY IV. Henry the fourth, while Duke of Lancaster, hav∣ing made his claim to the Crown, it was by all the States of the K ngdom with one consent grant∣ed, That the said Lord Duke should Reign over them: and thereupon he was first placed in the Royal Throne by the Arch-bishops of Canterbury and York, and afterwards solemnly Crowned and Anointed at Wstminster, which certainly invested him in all the Prerogatives of an English Monarch, and thereby the Fealty and Homage of all his Sub∣jects became due to him. But scarce was he warm in his new Atchiev∣ed Soveraignty, when a Nes;t of powerful Enemies began to hatch his Destruction under the shadow of his own Wings. The chief in the Conspiracy, were the Earls of Huntington, Rutland, Kent, and Salisbury, the Bishop of Carl sle, and several others of great Quality. The main Point of the Plot was to Kill the King and his Son, and to restore depo∣sed Richard; But the Plot was Discovered first by the Earl of Rutland, and then by the Lord Mayor: tho' with so short a warning, that the King was scarce out of danger, when the Earls of Kent and Salisbury entred Windsor Castle with four hundred Men, with a Resolution to have seized upon the K ng. The two Lords having thus missed their Prey, Marched away to Wallingford, thence to Abington, and so to Circester, giving out as they went, That King Richard was at Liberty, and at Pontfract, at the
Head of a hundred thousand Men. But this Re∣port not taking with the People, they suborn'd one Maunden, who had ben one of Richards Chaplains, very like him in Features and Complexion, to take upon him the person of the King. But the Event was not answerable to the Pro∣ject; for the Townsmn of Cicestr fell upon the two Earls with that Vigour, That they took 'em both Prisoners; and seeing their Town on Fire, which was procured by some of the Lords Followers, the better to rescue them again, while the people were busied in the quenching the Flames, they imme∣diately hal'd their Noble Prisoners forth, and with∣out more delay, according to the Method of Popu∣lar Justice, sever'd their Heads from their Bodies. The Earl of Huntington was Apprehended in Essex, and Beheaded at Pleshie, at the Instigation of the Widow of the late Duke of Glocester, put to Death at Callis by Richard. The Lord Spencer had the like Execution done upon him at Bristol: and Maunden the Counterfeit Richard, was Drawn, Hang'd, and Headed; there being no less then Nineteen in all that were put to Death for this Conspiracy, only the Bishop of Carlisle was preser∣ved alive by the Kings Clemency after Sentence of Condemnation. So far was Heaven from being propitious to Subjects in their Officious intermed∣ling with the Rights of Crowned Princes, who when once they come to be anointed, are the Sacred Wards and Pupils of God himself. Nor would God permit those rash Attempters against their Reigning Monarch to regain, what their former
Prince had been forced to lose and resign, through their unfaithful Conduct of his Prosperiy. Several other Conspiracies there were of Per∣sons of meaner Rank, which being Discovered (as all Clandstine Tracheries generally are) the first that fell under the Kings Justice was a Priest of Ware, who was Drawn and Hang'd; the same fate befel Walter Baldock Prior of Lawnd. A Fryer Minorite was likewise for concealment Hang'd in his Fryers Weeds; and not long after eight Franciscans for the same Confederacy ended their Days by the hand of the Common Executioner: as also did Sir Roger Clar nden, Reputed to be the Natural Son of the Black Prince. For the King being endanger'd in the Main, resolved to spare none upon whom the Crime or Concealment was found. But if these had any pretence or colour while deposed Richard was yet alive, yet the Fiery Hot∣spur, the Earl of Northumberland's Son, and the Earl of Worcester his Fathers Brother after Ri∣chard's Decease, could alledge no excuse for those fatal Animosities which Armed them against their Sovereign, to both their Confusions. However, the colourable causes of their taking Armes, were the usual Paintings and Flourishes that set off such Attempts, the great care of the Com∣mon-wealths Reformation, and their own safety. But the Kernel of their Design was, to thrust Henry out of his Seat, and deprive him of his Life, and then to advance the Title of Mortimer, Earl of March, their nearest Kins-man. To this purpose, Pierce, Mortimer, and Owen Glendour of Wales, ha∣ving
entred into a Triple Confederacy, and divi∣ded England and Wales between them, Young Hot∣spur first makes Head about Chester and the Mar∣ches, to whom with the privity of his Father, re∣paired the Old Earl of Worcester, leaving the Go∣vernment of the Young Prince and his Houshold, over which the King had placed him. On the other side the Kings Armies with all speed, and with the Prince his Son, Guarded by a considerable Force, advances towards Shrewsbury, before which Town Hotspur was sat down, and just ready to give the Assault; when the Royal Standard bing Discovered, he was forc'd to draw off from that Enterprize, so that now he thought of nothing more then to Embattle his Army, consisting of fourteen thousand strong and hardy Blades, to try the Fortune of War against an ap∣proved Souldier. Nevertheless Peace was offer'd and had ensu'd, but that the mischievous Earl of Worcester, by misreporting and falsifying his Sovereigns words, precipated his Nephew into suddain Battle. The Kings Courage was not small in the Fight, as neither was the Danger: The Young Prince of VVales being Wounded with an Arrow in the Face, the Lord Piercy, and Earl Douglass, then whom it is said, That the wide World had not two greater Champions, instead of spending them∣selves upon the Multitude, bent all their fierceness upon the King, in whose Person they were sure ten thousand fell. With this Resolution they most furiously rush'd forward with their Spears and
Swords, but the Earl of Dunbar discovering their purpose, drew the King from the place which he had design'd to make good, and thereby in likeli∣hood sav'd his Life; for the Standard was over∣thrown, the Standard Bearer slain, and ten other Knights Fighting to defend the Standard, all mor∣tally Wounded: besides that, Douglass with his own hand slew three that day that were severally in the Kings Coat-Armour, so that many thought that the King had been kill'd, and ran out of the Field. Thus lasted a most obstinate and bloody Contest between a Sovereign and his Rebellious Subjects for above three hours, till at length Hotspur still Riding in the Head of the Battle in contempt of Death and Danger met with his match, and was slain by an unknown hand, with whose fall the Courages of all the rest fell into their Feet, of which they made the speediest use they could to save themselves. Rebellion and Disloyalty thus vanquished in the Field, and Treason having by Providence lost her chief support, the Earl of VVorcester, Sir Richard Vernan, and the Baron of Kinderton, three of the most eminent Rebels, had their Heads chopt off the next day but one after the Battle; And as for the Earl of Northumberland, though his Life was pardoned, yet his Revenues were Confiscated, and himself reduced to a Pension of Necessary Mainte∣nance, which (however) the King, when he had sufficiently humbled him, out of a particular fa∣vour and compassion toward him, restored him
afterwards in Parliament, all which nevertheless did not save his Head at the long run. No sooner was this Rebellion thus appeased, but Tho. Mowbray, E. Marshal, disliking it seems the Carriage of publick matters, draws Rchard le Scroope Arch-bishop of York into a new Conspi∣racy, in full hope that the Erl of Northumberland, the Lord Brdolph, the Citizens of York and the common People would assist their Cause, which was glossed with the usual specious pretence of re∣dressing publick abuses. The Earl of Westmore∣land hearing of this Attempt, gathers a force to∣gether to encounter 'em, but perceiving himself too feeble, he betakes himself to stratagem, and by feigning to Embrace the Quarrel got both the Ring-leaders into his own Power, and presented them as an acceptable Oblation to the King, who Sacrificed the Traiterous Heads both of the Earl and the Arch-bishop, to his just Anger. Which done, the King pursued the Earl of Nor∣thumberland, who notwithstanding all his late fa∣vours was relapsed again into his former Disloy∣alty, and the Lord Bardolph, and forced them both to take Sanctuarie in Scotland, with the loss of his Castles and Mannors, which the King seized a se∣cond time into his own Hands. The said Earl and Lord, not long after endeavouring to raise new stirs in the North of England, were encountered by the Sheriff of Yorkshire, at what time the Earl was slain out right, and the Lord Bardolph mor∣tally wounded. The Head of the Earl was chopt from his dead Body, and being ignominiously car∣ried
through the City of London, was fixed upon London Bridge, so difficult a thing it is for Tray∣tors to be assured of rest and quiet in their Graves. HENRY V. This Warlike and Renowned Prince found so much Employment abroad for the Active Spirits of his Fiery Nobles, that open Rebellion had no leisure to set on foot the Intreagues of Disloyal Con∣trivance, only the Reign of this most vertuous Prince affords one Remarkable Example of Divine Justice, upon the most detestable and inhumane Machinations against a Soveraign Princes so little deserving such ill usage, that ever could harbour in the breast of Men pretending to Honour and High Birth. For the King of France having tryed all ways to divert the Storm that threatned his Do∣minions from the English Invasion, and every way frustrated in his Expectations, at length sent over a Million of Gold to the Earl of Cambidge, the Lord Scroop and Grey, all three at that time in special favour with the King, either to betray Henry into his Hands, or to Murder him before he could arrive in Normandy. These persons unwor∣thily tempted with such a Golden bait, to make their Faction the stronger, though Scroop was Lord Treasurer, Grey a Privy Councellour, and Cam∣bridg Son of Edmund Duke of York, meant to draw in Edmund Earl of March, the Heir to Lio∣nel D. of Clarence, and the next in Succession of the
House of York, and revealing to him their intend∣ed purposed, enforced him to swear to their Secre∣cie, which if he refused they threatened his Death; whereupon the Duke required but an hours Respite which being with great difficulty granted, he went to the King and revealed the Conspiracy but the Night before the Day that the King intended to put to Sea. Upon which the Parties being apprehended and brought before the King, in the presence of many of the Nobility, the Magnanimous Henry thus spake. With what Horror O Lord, may any true English Heart consider, that you for plea∣sing of a Forraign Enemy, should imbrue your Hands in our Blood, as also in the Blood of our Brethren to the ruin of your Native Soil! Re∣venge herein though I seek not, yet for the safe∣guard of you my dear Friends, and for the Pre∣servation of the Realm, I am by Place and Office to Minister a remedy against these Offencers. Then addressing himself to the three Traytors, Get ye hence therefore, said He, Miserable Wretches, and receive the just reward of your Deserts, wherein God give you Repentance for your so foul Crimes. After which they were all three upon a legal Tryal and Conviction, beheaded at Southampton, to their Eternal Infamy.
HENRY VI. Truly might this Prince be called a Prince of Peace, had not the Title which he held, requiring se∣verily and Prowess, not Meekness and Devotion, to defend it, involved him in the most runous Wars that ever afflicted England; for now the House of York resuming fresh hopes from the weakness of a Young, Gentle and Relgious Soveraign, lays the Foundations of bloody Designs and dismal Trage∣dies, nor was it the meanest of their Projects to sow the Seeds of Disloyalty and Dis bedience among the People, who were to be the Instruments and Tools for the Master Workmen to make use of. For the heat of Faction, as the preternatural and sultry heats of Summer, engender infectious A∣nimals and Insects to fill the Air with their Conta∣gion, produces those popular Tumults, that no less molest the quiet State of Kingdoms; and this Factious Hat it was that begot that pestiferous In∣surrection in this Kings Reign, under the Insolent and Hair-brain'd Conduct, if I may so call it of Cade and his followers, so pernicious to the Com∣mon-weal, though more ruinous to the Authors. Hence it came to pass, that the Commons of Kent, cherished and emboldened by persons of high Quality and Contrivance, took Arms against their Soveraign. They were headed by one Jack Cade, who had been Servant to Sir Thomas Dacre a Sussex Gentleman: But having killed a Woman with Child, he was forced to abjure the Land, and to
turn French, to whom he swore Service. But now returning, he is the Instrument to hang out Mor∣timers Name, like a displayed Ensign, to draw a party, feigning to be Cousin to the Duke of York: This Cade, whom others call John Mendal, or ra∣ther John Merral, having drawn great Numbers to follow him, encamped at Black-Heath, and in his Writings called himself the Captain of Kent. His pretences, like those of all Disloyal Actions were the common good, with others of the same alluring strain. But his particular demands were; 1. That Richard Duke of York should be sent for out of Ireland, and with others, whose Names were only set down for Stales and Colour, be principal∣ly used in Council. 2. That the Authors of the Duke of Glocesters death might be brought to Condign Punishment. Thus Traiterously to the Kings Welfare, and scandalously to the Kings gentle Government did this arrogant Traytor pretend to write to his So∣veraign. The King moved with the Indignitie and Danger of these bravely advances with an Army toward the Rebels, upon which their Captain re∣tires with his Rabble to Sennock in the same Coun∣ty; the King supposing he had fled, sends after him Sir Humfrey Stafford with some forces: But Cade made a bold halt at Sennock, and after a long fight slew Sir Humfrey with several others, and then armed himself in the slain Knights habil∣ments, and wore his guilt Spurs. The King and Queen having Intelligence of this Misfortune,
leave the Tower of London in the Custody of the Lord Scales, and one Matthew Gough a famous Souldier, and the City to the Fidelity of the Lord Mayor, departing themselves for Kenelworth. However the Head-long Vulgar of London favouring the Re∣bels, gave them Entrance within the Walls, where the Arch-Traytor took upon him to fine one of the Aldermen five Hundred Marks, for proposing to make resistance. At the same time also the Essex Men were encamped upon Mile-end Green, equally involv'd in the same Disloyalty. Cade thus admitted into the City, as he March'd thorough Canon-street struck his hand upon London-Stone, crying out, Now is Mortimer Lord of this City. And then proceeding to act the Tyrants Part, sends for the Lord Say, Treasurer of England, Commit∣ted to the Tower by the King, a little before his de∣parture, at the Instigation of his worst Adviser, and caus'd that Noble Gentleman to be Beheaded in Cheap-side, and his Body to be cut into Quarters; by which loss of so trusty and grave a Person, the King's Party was not a little weaken'd. The next Tragedy was Cromre's, the High She∣riff of Kent, and Son in-Law to the said Lady, who was drag'd out of the Fleet, and had his Head Sa∣crificed upon Mile-end-Green, to atone the Essex Rebells, without any Tryal or Ceremony of Law. The Major, and wiser wealthy Citizens, over-rul'd by Faction till then, grow now apprehensive of their danger, and secretly send to the Lord Scales for aid, who sends Matthew Gough to their assist∣ance; upon which the Kentish Men ran furiously
to their Armes, seeing their entrance into the City was barr'd, for they us'd every Night to retreat in∣to Southwark, where their Captain had taken up his head Quarters. Cade therefore endeavours to open his passage by force, but in spight of all his power, the Citizens made good the Bridge against him, though wth the loss of Gough himself, and several others. At length to put a quick-end to their miseries, Impunity is proclaim'd for all of Offenders, and sent to the Rebels in the King's Name by the Arch-bi∣shop of Canterbury, Lord-Chancellor under the Great-Seal of England; upon which assurance of their safeties the Rebels disperse, and leave their Pesti∣lent Impostour in the Sudds. It was time then for Cade to seek for shelter; but upon a sum of Money set upon his Head for any one that should kill or take the Counterfeit Mortimer, he was at length discover'd, and slain by one Alexander Eden, a Gentleman of Kent. After which, his Carcass was brought up to London, where he had the Honour to have his Head set Sentinel upon London-bridge, and his Quarters advanced in several parts of the Coun∣ty, where he was laying the Sandy Foundations of his vainly fancy'd future Grandeur. Some six and twenty more also fell by the stroke of Justice for a terror to the rest, who now Conscious of their Crimes, where they had revel'd in Disloyalty before, came to Black Heath in their Shirts, to implore the King's mercy: who satisfyed with the punishment of the Ringleaders, was easily induc'd to pardon the submissive.
Nor may it be omitted, That the Duke of Busk∣ingham, by whose popular sway in the Nation, Ri∣chard the Third advanced himself to the Crown, by shedding the Blood of so many Innocent Peers, and the Murder of the Lawful Heirs, at all which vio∣lent Proceedings the Duke most Trayterously con∣niv'd, was the first who revolting from Richard, after he was become his Sovereign, who being him∣self betray'd by his own Servant, whose Fortunes he had particularly raised, that fell a Sacrifice to Richard's revenge for confederating with the Bi∣shop of Ely and others, to restore the Lancastrian Line, being Beheaded without any Legal Proceed∣ings or Form of Justice. HENRY VII. Henry the Seventh, as a Prince that had been vi∣ctorious in Battle, and at the beginning of his Reign had prevailed with the Parliament in what ever he desired, and had the ring of the Peoples acclamation still in his Ears, thought the rest of his Reign would have been but a Play, and the meer enjoying of a Kingdom. But he did much overcast his Fortunes, which for many years toge∣ther prov'd full of broken Seas and Tempests. For e're he was hardly warm in his Government, as he was taking a Progress to visit and settle the North parts of England, he was no sooner arrived at Lincoln, but he received Intelligence that the Lord Lovel and the two Staffords were escaped out of Sanctuary, no body could tell whether; which
Advertisement the King at first despised and con∣tinued his Journey to York, but when he was come thither; he received fresh News that Lovel was at Hand with a great Power of Men, and that the Staffords were in Arms in Worcestershire, and were preparing to Assail the City of Wocester it self. Upon this the King fends a force of three Thous nd Men, under the Conduct of the D. of Bedford, against the Chief Rebel the Lord Lovel, giving Commission however to the Duke, to Pro∣claim his pardon to all that would come in, which fell out as the King Expected. For upon the Pro∣clamation of Pardon, the Lord Lovel mistrusting his own followers fled away into Lancashire, and from thence into Flanders to the Lady Margaret. The two Staffords and their forces hearing what had happened to the Lord Lovel, despaired and di∣spersed: But being both taken out of Sanctuary, which was then thought to be no sufficient Refuge for Rebels, the Elder Brother was Executed at Ty∣burn, and the Younger Brother as being seduced by the Elder Brother received his Pardon. And this was the disastrous Event of the first Rebellion hap∣pening in this Kings Reign; which might have been a sufficient warning to others, but that Re∣bellion is a Monster that has neither Eyes nor Ears. In his second year was acted that famous Farce of Lambert Simnel, which cost him a second Push for his Royal Diadem, before he could pull the Idol down. This Lambert Simnel was a Bakers Son of the Age of fifteen Years, a well Favoured and Beauti∣ful
Youth, and one who had something of extra∣ordinary Dignity and Grace, fulness of Aspect in his Countenance. This Youh living in Oxford, under the tuition of Richard Simon a suttle Priest, it came into the Priest's mind, hearing what Men talked abroad, to cause this Lad to Conterfeit and Personate the second Son of Edward the fourth, supposed to be murthered in the Tower; but after∣wards changed his mind, to take upon him the Person of the Lord Edward Plantagent then Priso∣ner in the Tower, with great Pains and Industry instructed him in the part which he was to Act. But because he doubted there would be too near looking, and too near a prospective into his dis∣guise, if he should display his Counterfeit in Eng∣land, he thought it more convenient at a distance, and therefore sailed with his Scholar into Ireland, where the affection to the House of York was most in Height. Simons first Address was to the Lord Fitz Ge∣rard, Earl of Kildare and Deputy of Ireland, be∣fore whose Eyes he cast such a Mist, by force of his own Insinuation and the Carriage of his Pupil, who expressed a perfect natural Princely behavi∣our, as left him fully possessed that it was the true Plantagenet. The Earl presently communicated the matter with some of the Nobles and others at first secretly, but finding them equally affected with himself, he suffered the business to take Air and vent it self abroad, on purpose to taste the In∣clinations of the People, who if the great ones were in a forwardness, were themselves all in a fury, en∣tertaining
this same Airy Phantosme with an Incre∣dible Observance; so that with marvellous Con∣sent and Applause this Counterfeit Plantagenet was brought with great Solemnity to the Castle of Dublin, and there saluted, serened and honoured as a King, all Allegiance to King Henry being laid aside: And within a few days after, he was pro∣claimed King in Dublin, by the Name of Edward the sixth, there being not so much as a Sword all this while drawn in King Henry's Quarrel. Upon this the King summons his Counsel toge∣ther, and upon Mature deliberation, suspecting upon what Hinges the Plot mov'd, thrusts the Queen Dowager Edward the fourth's Widow into the Nunnery of Berdmonsey, and seizes all her Lands and Goods, orders Edward Plantagenet then a close Prisoner in the Tower, to be shewn to the People in the most notorious and publick manner that could be devised; and sets forth a Proclama∣tion of general Pardon, to all that would reveal their Offnces and submit by a day, all which Re∣sults of the Councel were duly Executed. In the mean while the Rebels in Ireland were not idle, but had sent private Messengers both into England and Flanders; who in both places had wrought effects of no small Importance. For in England they won to their party the Earl of Lin∣coln, a person of great wit and courage, who was induced to participate with the Action of Ireland, not upon the strength of the Proceedings there, which he looked upon but as a Bubble, and as knowing the pretended Plantagenet to be but an Idol:
But upon Letters from the Dutches of Burgundy, upon whose Succors and Foundation for the enter∣price there seemed to be a more solid Foundation: With which resolution he sailed secretly into Flan∣ders, where he met the Lord Lovel, having left a Correspondence in England with Sir Tho. Brough∣ton, a man of great Power and Dependencies in Lan∣cashire. Thereupon it was concluded that the two Lords Assisted with a Regiment of 2000 Almains, under the Command of Martin Swart an old expe∣rienced Captain, should pass over into Ireland to the new upstart King. After these two Lords were arrived in Ireland, the party taking Courage, as seeing themselves in a Body first for a Bravery Crowned their Mushroom Prince in the Cathedral Church of Dublin, and then calling a Council, it was resolved with all speed to transport their for∣ces into England. Not long after the Rebels with their King under the leading of the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Lovel, the Earl of Kildare and Collonel Swart landed at Foul∣drey in Lancashire, whither repaired to them Sir Tho. Broughton with some few Companies of English. Upon this the King marches as far as Coventry, and from thence sent forth some Troops of light Horsemen for discovery, and to intercept some straglers for the gaining of Intelligence. But the Rebels took their way to Yrk without spoiling the Country, or committing the least Act of Hostility, the better to put themselves into the favour of the People, and personate their King as being one that was sparing and compassionate to∣ward
his Subjects. But the Snowbal did not gather as was expected; so that the Earl of Lincoln de∣ceived of his hopes of the Countries Concords to him, and seeing the business past recalling, resol∣ved to make on where the King was, and to give him battle, and thereupon marched toward New∣ark, thinking to have surprized the Town: But the King being reinforced with a supply of six Thousand Men, brought him by the Earl of Shrews∣bury and the Lord Strange, put himself between the Enemies Camp and Newark. The Earl no∣thing dismayed came forward to a little Village called Stoke, and there encamped that night upon the Brow of a Hill. The next day the King presen∣ted him Battle upon the Plain; Nor did the Re∣bellious Earl refuse him, but coming down, joyned Battle with him: The fight was fierce and obstinate for three hours; but at length the Victory fell to the King, to whom of right it be∣longed. The Chieftains of the Rebels, the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Lovel, the Earl of Kildare, Sir Thomas Broughton and Swart were all slain: The Young Counterfeit Plantagenet, now Lambert Simnel again with his Crafty Tutor were all taken Prisoners, so that the King was now absolute Ma∣ster of the whole Rebellion. As for Lambert Sim∣nel he was preferred from wearing a Counterfeit Crown to be a turn-broach in the Kings Kitching: and his Tutor being committed a close Prisoner, was never heard of more. All the Adherents and Abettors of these Rebels were strictly enquired after, and some punished by Death, others by
Fines and Ransomes, which though it spared Death, reduc'd the unwary partakers to want and pover∣ty, far worse then Death. Not long after the Parliament having given the King a considerable Subsidy, when it came to be le∣vy'd in the Counties of Yorkshire and Durham, the People upon a suddain grew into a great Mutiny, openly Declaring, That they neither would nor could pay the Subsidy. Of this the Earl of Nor∣thumberland wrote to the King, praying his Directi∣ons. The King wrote peremptorily back, That he would not endure the base Multitude should fru∣strate the Authority of Parliament, wherein their Votes and Consents were concluded. This message being made known did so incense the Multitude, that immediately routing together, they assail'd the Earl of Northumberland in his own House, with se∣veral of his Servants; And then Creating for their Leader one Sir John Egremomd a Factious Person, and withal animated by a base Fellow, call'd John a Chamber, a very meer Incendiary, who therefore bare a great sway among the Impruous Vulgar, they brake forth into open Rebellion, and gave out in flat terms, That they would March against the King, and Fight with him for the maintenance of their Liberty. Against these the King sent the Earl of Surrey with a Competent Power, who fought and defeated the Rebels, and took their Fre-brand, John a Chamber, alive; whose Glorious Reward for taking Armes against his Prince was, to be Executed at York in great State: For he was Hang'd upon a Gibbet rais'd a Stage higher, in the middle of a Square Gal∣lows,
as a Traytor Paramount; while a certain num∣ber of Men that were his chief Accomplices, were Hang'd upn the lower Story round about him. Upon the like Occasion, that is upon disgust ta∣ken for a Subsidy that was about to be levy'd in Corn∣wall, the People of that County likewise began to Mutiny and Murmure, Crying out, That it was for them to pay that had too much, and liv'd Idly, but as for themselves, they would eat the Bread which they got with th sweat of their Brows, and no body should take it from them. Being thus in a ferment, they lighted upon two Ringleadrs suitable to their Humour, the one a Black-smith, or Farrier of Bodmyn, by the Name of Michael Joseph, a notable talking Fellow, and no less desirous to be talk'd of. The Name of the other was Thomas Flammock, a Petty-fogger, who bare a great sway among the Rabble. These two fail'd not to fill the Ears of the People with their Rebellious Notions, so that at their Seditious Instiga∣tions, the Multitude presently Arm'd themselves with Bows and Bills, and such other Weapons as their Habitations afforded; and forthwith under the Command of their Leader, took their March out of Cornwall thorough Devon-shire to Taunton, with∣out any slaughter or violence offer'd. From Taunton they Marched to Wells, where the Lord Audley, with whom their Leaders before had held some se∣cret Intelligence, a Noble-man of an antient Fami∣ly, but unquiet and popular, and aspiring to his Ruine, came into them, and was accepted by them with great joy and gladness as their General, now proud that they were led by a Noble-man.
The Lord Audley led them from Wells to Salisbu∣ry, thence the silly people not heeding their Leaders, would needs be Conducted into Kent, fancying that they should receive great assistance from the Peo∣ple of that Country; But the County was so well settled, that neither Gentleman nor Yeoman came into their aid, which so much dismayed many of the simple sort, that several deserted their Rebel∣lious Leaders, and in good ti returned home: but those that were engaged stood by it, and rather grew proud, then fail'd in Hopes and Courage. Wherefore they kept on their way, and encamp'd upon Black Heath, between Greenwitch and Elham, threatning to bid Battle to the King, and to take Lond n within his view, imagining with them∣selves there to find no less fear, then wealth. While the Rebels were thus encamp'd upon the Hill from whence they might behold London, and the fair Valley about it, the King, having a power∣ful force about him, the better to master all events and accidents, divided them into three Parts, of which he Commanded one Part to put themselves beyond the Hill where the Rebels lay encamp'd, and to be-set all the deserts and skirts of it, except those that lay toward London, to the end he might have the Wild Bears as it were in a Toyle. The se∣cond part he assign'd to the Lord Chamberlain, who was appointed to assail the Rebels in Front, from that side next toward the City. The third part he retain'd about himself, upon all events to restore the Fight, or Consummate the Victory, encamping himself to that purpose in St. George's Fields, and
puting his forces between the Rebels and the City. Upon Saturday the 22d. of June, the Lord d' Au∣bigny March'd toward the Rebels, and first beat some of their Troops from Deptford Bridge, where they fought manfully, and then charged their main Body with so much fury, that he had by his incon∣siderate forwardness almost call'd into Dispute the Fortune of the Day; for Fighting in the Head of his Troops he wa taken Prisoner by the Rebels, but immediately rescu'd and deliver'd. The Re∣bels maintain'd the Fight for a small time, and for their persons shew'd no want of Courage; but be∣ing ill-arm'd and ill-led, without Horse and Artil∣lery, they were with no great difficulty cut to pieces, and put to flight: And for their three Lea∣ders, as commonly the Captains of Commotions are but half-Courag'd Men, they suffered themselves to be taken. And now follow the Rewards of their Disloyalty. The Lord Audley was led from Newgate to Tower-hill, in a Paper Coat, Painted with his own Armes revers'd, and there Beheaded. Flammock and the Black-smith were Hang'd, Drawn, and Quarter'd, at Tyburn. But now comes Perkin Warbeck upon the Stage, a Youth of Time, Favour, and Shape, and one that had such a crafty and bewitching manner; both to move pity, and induce belief, as was like a kind of Fascination or Inchantment to those that saw or heard him. Besides that, King Edward the Fourth had done his Father a Converted Jew the Honour to be his Godfather.
This Youth the Lady Margaret finding for her turn kept by her a great while, with great secresie, and instructed him by many Cabinet Conferences, how to act his part. When she thought him per∣fect in his Lesson, she sent him into Ireland, where he took upon him the Person of the Duke of York, and drew to himself Accomplices and Partakers by all the ways he could devise, insomuch that he wrote Letters to the Earls of Desmond and Kildare, to come to his aid. When he was in Ireland, the King of France rea∣dy to embrace all advantages against the King of England, and instigated by several English Fugitives then in his Court, and already prepared by the Dutchess of Burgundy, sent over to Perkin two English Renegado's in the Nature of Embassadors, to advertise the upstart of his good Inclinations to∣ward him, and that he was resolv'd to aid hm to recover his Right against Henry the Usurper of Eng∣land, and Enemy of France. Upon this Perkin Sail'd over into France, where the King received him with great Honour, stil'd him by the Name of the Duke of York, lodg'd and accommodated him in great State, and assign'd him a Guard for his Person. Thither also several English Male-contents of Quality repair'd to him, as Sir George Nevil, and about a Hundred more. But this being only a trick on the French King's part to bow King Hnry to Peace; no sooner was the Treaty entred into, but Perkin was warn'd and dismiss'd out of France, from whence he again re∣tires to the Lady Margaret into Flanders, who re∣ceived
him as one that she had never seen in her Life before. At first she pretended to sift him whether he were the very Duke of York or no? but then seeming at last to be fatisfyed, she did him all Princely Honour, call'd him The White Rse of England, and appointed a Guard of 30 Halbuteers, to attend his Person. These Reports took hold of divers, in some up∣on Discontent, in some upon Ambition, in some upon Levity and Desire of Change. Nor was it long before these Rumours of Novelty had begot∣ten others of Scandal and Murmur against the King, and his Government, taxing him with severe Impo∣sitions upon the People, and Discountenancing his Nobility. At length all these ill-humours gather∣ing to a head, settled in several eminent persons, as the Lord Stanley, the Lord Fitz Walter, Sir Simon Montford, Sir Thomas Thwaites, and others, though none engaged openly but Sir Robert Clifford, and Mr. Barley, who were sent into Flanders from the rest of the Conspirators, to understand the truth of Things. The Person of Clifford was extreamly welcome to the Lady Margaret, and he being ad∣mitted to the sight of Perkin, wrote over into England that he knew the Person of Richard Duke of York as well as he knew his own, and that this Young-man was undoubtedly He. By which means all things grew to be prepared for Revolt and Sedi∣tion in England, and the Conspirators came to have Correspondeney between England and Flanders. The King on the other side not asleep, resolves to work by Countermine, and to that purpose of
the four Persons employed by Richard in the Murder of his Nephews, causes the Examinations of two that were still alive to be taken a new and Print∣ed, who attested the Murder to be absolutely done as is recited in Story. Then he employed several of his Friends to insinuate themselves into the Fa∣miliarity of the Party in Flanders, and so to learn what Associates and Correspondents they had in England, and how far every one was engag'd; but above all if they could, to regain Sir Robert Clifford to his side, who knew the most inward of their se∣crets. These Espialls ply'd their Charge so roundly, that Sir Robert was won to be assur'd of the King, and to be industrious and officious in his Service, so that the King was well inform'd of all the parti∣cular Correspondents in England; insomuch, that upon Clifford's Discovery, the Lord Fitz Water, the Lord Hastings, Sir Simon Montfort, Ratcliff and Dawbeney were all Arragn'd, Condemn'd, and Be∣headed. And this was the first act of Warbecks Rebellious Tragedy. However Perkin encouraged to proceed, resolv'd to try his Fortune in some attempt upon England, and to that purpose having got together a consider∣able force of all sorts of Nations, Bankrupts, Fe∣lons, and such others as liv'd by spoil and rapine, puts to Sea, and shews himself upon the Coast of Kent, about Sandwich and Deal, where some few of his People Landed; but not being followed by any English of Account, but by a sort of Free-booters, fit∣er to spoil and ransack, then recover a Kingdom.
No body stirr'd in his behalf, only some forces were directed to shew themselves upon the Coast, and by Signs to entice Perkin's Souldiers to Land, as if they would joyn with him; but Perkin not liking their Countenances would not stir a foot. Thereupon they fell upon those that were Landed already, and took of them about a hundred and fifty Prisoners, who for their welcome into England, were every one Hang'd, being first brought to Lon∣don, rail'd in Ropes together like H rses in a Team. Upon this Perkin Sails into Ireland, but finding there nothing but the blustering affection of a wild and naked People, his Council advis'd him to seek aid of the King of Scotland; By him he was re∣ceiv'd in State in his Chamber of Prsence, and en∣tertain'd in all things as became the Person of the Duke of York, and was by him allow'd to Marry his near Kins-woman, a Young Virgin of excellent Beauty ond Vertue. And so far did the King of Scots espouse his Quarrel, that he enter'd England with an Army: but seeing none came in to Perkin, nor that any stirr'd in any other parts in his fa∣vour, he only wasted Northumberland, and return'd laden with Booty. So that at length, though he was in his own Opi∣nion perswaded that he was a Counterfeit, ye in regard he had taken him into his protection, he dismiss'd him Honourably with shiping, and means, to Transport himself where he thought most for his advantage; so that he return'd a third time in∣to Ireland. While he was there the Cornishmen, though so
lately and so generously Pardon'd by their justly incensed Prince, being returned home, were still in a heat, and not having yet laid dovvn their dis∣loyal Animosities, but hatching nevv Rebellions, thought Perkin a fit Person to head their Traite∣rous Attempts, and to that purpose found meanes to send to him, to let him knovv that if he would come over to them, they would serve Him. Thereupon his Chief Councellors Hern a Mer∣cer, Skelton a Taylor, and Astley a Scrivener, ad∣vise him to take opportunity by the Forelock; up∣on which incitement, with about six score fighting Men, he put to Sea, Lands at Whitston Bay, and marcht directly to Bodmin, where there assembled to him, to the number of 3000 of the ruder sort of People. There he set forth a new Declaration stroaking the people with fair promises, and hu∣mouring them with invectives against the King and his Government, and then took upon himself the Title of Rchard the fourth King of England. After which he marched forward and besieged the City of Exeter; upon which he made a fierce Assault, but was driven from the Walls with great loss. Thereupon hearing of great Forces that were coming against him, he raised his siege, being at that time seven Thousand strong, and encouraged with the Oaths and Vows of the Rebels not to leave Him, till the uttermost drop of their Blood was spilt: When he was come near Taunton, the new King dissembling his fears seemed all the day to prepare for a Fight; but in the still Midnight, with about threescore Horse he fled to Bewley in the
New Forrest, where he and his followers Register'd themselves for Sanctuary Men, leaving his Cor∣nish Assistants to shift or combate for themselves; who being destitute of their Head, without a stroke strucken, submitted all to the Kings Mercy, who were all a second time pardoned by the King, except some of the most desperate and notorious Persons, whom the King reserved for the stroke of Justice. Perkin being taken out of Sanctuary, was shewed for a publick Maygame through the City, and then committed to custody; after which, having deceived his Keepers, he made his escape to the Sea Coast; but being brought back again, was set fettered in the Stocks for whole days toge∣ther upon a Scaffold, in the Palace Yard at West∣minster, Ch apside and other Places, and then laid up in the Tower, from whence, for endeavouring to procure his own, and the escape of George Plan∣taget, by murdering the Lieutenant of the Tower, he was at length tryed by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, and hanged at Tyburn. And this was the end of this Cockatrice of a King, whose continual slurs of Fortune plainly shewed the dif∣ference between Real and Counterfeit Majesty. HENRY VIII. Henry the Eight, after the Dissolution of the Ab∣beys, having made some slender Reformations, and particularly given way, that the Creed, the ten Commandments, and the Lords Prayer might be read in English, which was also Enacted by Parliament,
the Commons discontented that their Mumblings must down, and the Monks sore troubled to min∣gle English in their Masses, the Lincolnsh re men began a Commotion under Duke Mackarel, a Monk who named himself Captain Cobler, and his follow∣ers were sweld near to the number of twenty Thou∣sand. Against these the King prepared in Person, sending forth into several Counties, to charge them with a Levy of so many well appointed Souldiers to meet him at Ampthil; which being known to the Rebels, they were so bold as to send to the King several Articles subscribed with many of their Hands, demanding the Restitution of Abbeys, the removal of Cromwel and Sir Richard Rich, Chan∣cellor of the Augmentations, and several of the Bishops. But these Rebels seeing the Kings For∣ces grow upon 'em, were soon dissipated by the meer Breach of a General Pardon, so that they submitted themselves to the Kings Mercy, after a vain Breath of their Allegiance. Yet did not their ill success daunt the Northern Commoners, who threatned a severer Storm: For in Yorkshire there Assembled no less then forty Thousand Rusticks well furnished with Horse, Ar∣mour, Artilery and other War-like Habiliments, threatning to set the stay of the State upon their Giddy Inventions; their pretence was Religion and the Defence of the Holy Church. Their Ban∣ners Painted with the four Wounds of Christ, the Challice and the Cakes, and upon their Sleevs was writ the Name of the Lord; and so fervent were they in their Proceedings, that this attempt of
theirs must be called the Holy Pilgrimage: Nor were the Boores and Swains only involved in this Insurrection, but others of Place and Degree, as the Archbishop of York, the Lord Darcy, the Lord Lumley, with several Knights and Bayliffs of Cor∣porations, but their Captain General was one Robert Aske a mean Gentleman, to whom one Rudstone was Associate in the Field: Other Commanders they had out of the Common Rabble, of whom the Chief was one James Diamond General of the Foot, a poor Fisherman who styl'd himself the Earl of Poverty. These set forth a Declaration, subscribed to all Lords, Knights, Masters and Friends, wherein they declared their Intentions to Fight against all that should oppose them in their Pilgrimage for the Punishment of Hereticks and Lawyers. And so terrible and haughty was their Captain Ask, that when Lancaster Herald was sent to de∣clare the Kings Message to them at Pomfrait Castle, which the Rebels had got by surrender from the Lord Darcy, he so blustered out his Answers, that the poor spirited Fellow excusing himself to be but a Messenger, fell before him on his Knees: These Rebels also sent forth their Mandates for the Country to come into their Assistance, under penalty of pulling down their Houses, loosing their Goods, and their Persons to be at the Cap∣tains disposal. Against these the King sent the Duke of Norfolk, accompanied with Marquis of Exeter, the Earls of Huntington and Rutland, who joyning their
Forces together, made toward the Rebels then ly∣ing near Doncaster, in whose sight they immedi∣ately set up their Tents, resolving the next day to give them Battle. But in the Night time such Floods of Water fell, that the River Don over∣flowed its Banks, so that there was no passage over the Bridge, Thereupon the Lord General offered the Rebels a Parley, which being with much ado accepted, at length this Meteor of an Infurrection was also Disolved by the warm Rayes of the Kings Pardon, and the Multitude melted away like Hail in Spring; but Heaven determining to bring these boisterous Rebels to a more remarkable Punish∣ment, neither could this gentleness of the King reclaim their tumultuous Rage, so that after they had taken a little breath, a new Insurrection was set on Foot in the same Places, and by the same Per∣sons, Dacres, Ash, Sir Robert Constable, Sir Fran∣cis Bigot, Dulmer, Peircy, Tempest, Hamilton and Lumley, who being taken in this last attempt, were all put to Death, as well they deserved. In which Executions they were accompanyed by four Abbots, three Monks, two Priors, one Parson and five Priests, together with Captain Cobler their Ge∣neral, who were all hanged at the same time for Treason. EDWARD VI. In this Young Princes Raign the Commons grew very mutinous, some murmuring at the Inclosing of Lands, some at the change of Religion, so that
they rose almost at one and the same time, in Oxfordshire, Dvonshire, Norfolk and Yorkshire. Those in Oxfordshire were soon dissipated by a force of one Thousand five Hundred Men led against them by the Lord Grey, and their Chief Leaders taken and hanged by Martial Law. But in Devonshire the Insurrection grew to be better formed, set on by many of the old dis∣carded Priests, who ran in among them. They grew in a short time to be ten Thousand strong, a¦gainst whom the Lord Russel was sent with a small force to stop their Proceedings; Who remembring how the Duke of Norsolk had broken a formida∣ble Rebellion in the North, with a small Army, kept at a distance, hoping that time would Weaken and Disunite these Rebels; but his delays gave them Advantage and Strength. who were now led by some Gentlemen, of whom Arundel of Cornwal was Chief. Thereupon they sent to the King for the redress of their Greivances; in Answer to which the King required their Obedience and Submission to his Royal Authority, as others had done; to whom for so doing he had already not only shewed Mer∣cy, but granted redress of their just grievances, otherwise that they were to expect the utmost se∣verity that Traytors deserved. But nothing prevailed upon this inraged Mul∣titude, whom the Priests inflamed withal the Artifice Imaginable. In this heat they marched forward and beseiged Exeter, where the Citizens resisted them with
great Courage and Resolution; so that the Rebels finding they could do nothing by force, resolved to lie about the Town, and starve it to a surren∣der. At first the Lord Russel finding himself too weak, retired to Hamilton, but perceiving they had ta∣ken a Bridge behind him, he was forced to an en∣counter, wherein he slew six Hundred of the Re∣bels without any loss, By which he understood their Courages were Mortal, and that they could not stand a brisk Charge, nor rally again when disordered, so that having received a recuite of Men, he return'd to raise the seige of Exeter, where the Citizens were by that time reduced to eat their Horses; but they resolved to suffer any great extremity, rather then to fall into the hands of these Savages: while they lay before the Town, the Rebels had blocked up all the ways, and had left two Thousand men to keep a Bridge which the Kings forces were to pass; but the Lord Russel brake through 'em, and killed above a Thousand upon the place; upon which the Rebels rais'd their siege, and retired with ignominie to Lanceston. The Lord Russel pursu'd the Fugitives in their Conster∣nation, who now beginning to draw off in par∣ties, were killed in great numbers. The Ring∣leaders themselves were also taken. For it is the Overruling appointment of Providence, that Traytors and Rebels generally choose rather to fall into the Hands of Exemplary Justice, then to Sa∣crifice their pusillanimous Souls, to the Honour of their vile cause. And therefore Arundl the May∣or
of Bodmin and two of their Arch Priests, with seven more of the most Illustrious of the Crew, were splendidly Hanged to attone for the rest of the deluded Multitude. But the Rebels in Norfolk stood it out somewhat more boldly, being led by one Ket a Tanner. They pretended nothing of Religion but to suppress and destroy the Gentry, and to put new Counsellors about the King. These increased to the number of twenty Thousand, and committing many Outra∣ges: The Sheriff of the County came boldly to them and required them to disperse, but had he not been well mounted, he had paid for his ven∣turing. Against these the Marquiss of Northampton was sent with one Thousand one Hundred Men, who marched into Norwich, where the Rebels were not a little Elevated in their Thoughts, so that their Captain Kett erected a Tribunal under an Oak, which was called the Oak of Reformation: where the haughty Tanner sate in Judgment upon all whom they thought fit to call offenders. The Marquisses ill success being understood at Court, the Earl of Warwick was sent away with six Thousand foot and one Thousand five Hundred Horse; who coming to Norwich, was however scarce able to defend the Town, for the Rebels fell often in upon him, besides that he was not well assured of the City it self. At length he so laid his forces as to cut off all Provision from the Re∣bels, who thereupon having wasted all the Country round about 'em, were forc'd to remove: Then the
Earl followed 'em close with his Horse, and tho the Rebels turned upon him, and made a stout re∣sistance for a time, yet he quickly routed the Re∣bellious Croud, of whom he slew two Thousand up∣on the place, and then took their famous Captain Ket Prisoner, together with his Brother and seve∣ral others, of which nine were hanged upon Ket's Oak of Reformation, which never till then bare fruit so proper to the Nature of its Name. Ket's Brother was hanged upon the Steeple of Wymond∣ham, and the Arch-Rebel himself was hanged in Chains upon the Castle of Norwich, whose Citi∣zens annually solemnized the day of their delive∣ry, with no less joy then the Jews did when they had escaped the Hands of wicked Haman. These Hazards thus appeased in the West and East, the North would likewise come in for a Cast, under the leading of one Ombler a Yeoman, Tho∣mas Dale a Parish Clark, and one Stevenson the Post; their pretences were to disburden the Land of all Grievances. Their number was now encreased to three Thou∣sand, so that the better sort began to grow in great fear of their Lives and Estates. But presently down came the News of the defeat in other parts, which being followed by the Kings pardon with proffers of Life, Ombler and Dale were quite for∣saken, and almost left alone, and so being easily ta∣ken, they two, with four more of the principal Ring-leaders were hanged at York, according to their deserts, for publick Examples, as being the best Books for the unruly Vulgar to read in.
Queen MARY. After the Death of Edward the Sixth, the Duke of Northumberland made a heavy bustle to advance the Lady Jane Gray to the throne of England. But such was the prevalency of Legal Right, over the ill grounded Claims of usurpation, that no sooner did Mary appear in Norfolk, in the challenge of her Inheritance, but while the Title of Jane was Proclaiming in the Towns near London, the People were all flocking to the Lawful Heiress; so that the Duke, who was sent to reduce his Lawful So∣veraigness to pretended obedience, finding him∣self forsaken by the Council, who were seasona∣bly sensible of their Error, and seeing that no bo∣dy came into his Assistance, as pusillanimously as he had Traiterously engaged in an ill design, deser∣ted himself, dismissed his forces, and going to the Market place in Cambridg, was one of the first that proclaimed the Lawful Queen; by whom the Earl of Arundel being sent to apprehend him, in a most abject manner he fell at the Earles Feet to beg his favour; but all nothing availed him, for he was sent to the Tower with three of his Sons; and soon after Beheaded with Sir John Gates and Sir Thomas Palmer, tvvo of his great Accom∣plices. The next thing that gave Offence was, the March with Spain, which had Influence of many; but the chief Conspirators were, the Duke of Suffolk, Sir Peter Carew, and Sir Thomas Wyat; the one was to
raise the Midland Counties, the other Cornwall, and Wyat Kent. But as Carew was carrying on his De∣sign in the West, the Conspiracy happened to be discovered by one that he had intrusted too far: and thereupon Carew fled into France. The Duke always a Person of a mean Spirit, after a faint en∣deavour to act his part, gave it over, and conceal'd himself in a private House, where he was betrayed to the Earl of Huntington, by him to whom he had intrusted himself, and carryed to the Tower. Wyat searing to be undone by the Discovery al∣ready made, gathered some Men together and Marched to Maidstone, where he made Proclaima∣tion, That he intended nothing but to preseve the Liberty of the Nation, and keep it from coming under the Yoke of Strangers. Against him the Duke of Norfolk was sent with 600 Foot, and 200 Horse, Commanded by one Bret. But the Londoners being wrought upon by one Harp, that Wyat intended nothing but the preservation of the Nation from the Spaniards, and a deep in∣sinuation that none would suffer under that Yoke more then they went over with their Captains to Wyat, so that the Duke of Norfolk was forc'd to re∣treat. Wyats Party thus encreasing they turn'd to∣wards London, and at Deptford were met by two of the Privy-Council, who were sent in the Queens Name, to demand what would content them? In answer to which Wyat demanded the Command of the Tow∣er, and that the Queen might be under his Guard. Upon these extravagant Propositions, the Privy-Counsellors return, and Wyat enters Southwark four
thousand strong, in hopes the City would have de∣clared for him; but finding the Bridge shut against him, he cross'd the River at Kingston, and thence Marching directly for London, advanc'd as far as Charing-Cross. There the Lord Clinton fell in be∣tween the several Bodies of his Men, and dispersed them so, that he had scarce five hundred left about him; but with those that remain'd, he passed through the Strand and Fleet-street up to Ludgate, in hopes to have found the Gates open to him; but those hopes being frustrated, he return'd back, and being now out of all heart, was taken at Tem∣ple-Bar by a Herald. Soon after the Duke of Suffolk was Condemn'd by his Peers, and Beheaded. Wyat being brought to his Tryal, begg'd his Life in a most pitiful and abject manner, but for all that his Head was se∣ver'd from his Shoulders. Bret was Hang'd in Chains at Rochester: in all fifty eight were Execu∣ted in several places, and six hundred of the Rabble were order'd to come before the Queen with Hal∣ters about their Necks to beg their Lives. Queen ELIZABETH. The first that desturb'd the quiet of this Prin∣cess, were the two Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, both Zealous Catholicks; who could not carry their Conspiracy so closely, but that the Rumour of their frequent meetings encreased in such sort, that the Queen, by peremptory Letters Commanded them (all excuses set apart) to ap∣pear
before her, to the end she might quite deter them from Rebellion, or else that they might be forced to break out forthwith, before they could gather their forces together. Northumberland being a Person of an easie Na∣ture, and Conscious of his own Guilt, waver'd in a careful doubt whither he should go to the Queen, or flie, or break out into open Hostility. His Friends and Servants already prepared for the Re∣bellion, seeing him thus wavering and fearul, to awaken his drowsie humour, came to him in the Dead of the Night, crying out, That his Enemies were at hand to carry him away Prisoner, beseeching him withal, not to neglect himself, his friends, nor the Religion of his Fathers: who thereupon in a trembling condition with-drew himself to a House of the Earl of Westmorlands, where several who were not ignorant of the Matter were already assembled. Their pretences were several; to some they pre∣tended the defence of the Queen: to others the restauration of the Catholick Religion: and to others that they were forced to take Armes, least the An∣tient Nobility of England should be troden under foot by new Upstarts. Upon these Grounds they rush into open Rebellion, and set forth a Writing, That they had not taken Armes with any other intent, but that the Religion of their fore-Fathers might be restored, Corrupt Counsells remov'd from the Queen, and the Duke, and other faithful Lords restored to their Rank and Dignity, to Liberty and Grace. They al∣so sent Letters to the Papists throughout the whole
Kingdom, to joyn their forces with theirs: but they were so far from Associating themselves, that most of them sent the Letters which they receiv∣ed togethet with the Bearers, to the Queen. The Rebels went first to Durham, where they rent and trampled under foot the English Bibles, and Books of Common-Prayer, which they foun'd in the Churches. From thence they Marched easie Mar∣ches under their Colours, wherein were painted in some the five wounds of Christ, in others a Chalice, as far as Clifford Moore, where they mustered their Army to the number of 4000 Foot, and 600 Horse. Here when they understood that forces were eve∣ry where rais'd against them, and that Carlisle was reinforc'd with fresh supplies, they retreated the same way they went, and coming to Bernard's Ca∣stle, they took it for want of Victuals by Composi∣tion. Upon which very day, they being now Proclai∣med Traytors to their Country, the Earl of Sussex Marched against them with 7000 Men, accompa∣nied with the Earl of Rutland, the Lords Hunsdon, Ferrers, and Willoughby of Parham. When Sussex was arriv'd at Aukland, the Rebels in a most fearful Consternation fled to Hexam, and shortly after in scatter'd Parties, came through by-ways to Na∣worth Castle, where understanding that the Earl of Warwick, and Clinton Lord Admiral pursued them with a power of 12000 Men, the two Rebellious Earls presently withdrew themselves into Scotland: Westmorland lurkt privily at Harclaw in poor Cottages among the Grahams, Famous Thieves,
by whom he was delivered into Murray's hands. Northumberland found a sculking place with Car, Furmhurst, and Bucklugh, at length escaped with some English-men into the Neitherlands, where he led a very poor Life, even to his old Age, living upon a sorry Pension from the Spaniard. Threescore Petty Constables and others were Hang'd for a Terror at Durham, among whom the Man of most note one Plumtree, a Priest. At York were Executed four more, and at London two more, and some others else-where. Afterwards such of the Rebels as were of best note were Convicted of High-Treason, and proscri∣bed. The Earl of Westmorland and Northumber∣land: The Countess of Northumberland: Edward Dacres of Morton: John Nevil of Leversedge: John Swineborn: Thomas Marhenfield: Egremond Ratcliff: The Earl of Sussex's Brother: Four of the Nor∣tons: and two Tempests: with about fifty more of Noble Birth. Such bitter Fruits did the Tree of Re∣bellion bare. Out of the smother'd Fire of this Rebellion, broke forth a new flame at Naworth, kindled by Leonard Dacres, second Son of William Lord Dacrs of Gillesland, who having got together 3000 of the rank Rioters of the Borders, and some others ad∣dicted to the Family of the Dacres, then in great Repute in the North, fortifyed the Castle of Na∣worth, and stood at defiance against his lawful Princess. Against these Marched the Lord Hunsdon, with the old Garrison Souldiers of Barwick. The Re∣bels not trusting to their strong Holds, Marched
forth to encounter him; the Fight was maintained on both sides very sharply, while Leonard omitted nothing that could be expected from a Valiant Leader. But after the loss of many of his Men he left the Victory to the Lord Hunsdon, and fled into Scotland; from whence he crossed the Seas into the Neitherlands, and Dyed a poor Man at Lovaine. Sometime after a Rebellion was hatching in Nor∣folk; For certain Gentlemen of the County having an intention to set the Duke of Norfolk at Liberty, had laid a Plot, that when the People resorted to a Fair at Harleston, they would gather the Multitude together by the sound of a Trumpet, under pre∣tence of repelling the Neitherlands out of England, who had withdrawn themselves in great numbers into those parts, for fear of the Duke of Alva's Ty∣ranny. Of these Gentlemen, several were brought to their Tryals, and Condemn'd of High-Treason, but three only Executed, among whom was John Throckmorton, of chiefest note, who at the Bar stood mute, but at the Gallows confessed himself the principal Author and Perswader of the Rebellion intended. No less fatal were the Rebellions in Ireland, to the Authors and Contrivers of them. Shan O Neale driven to that distress, that he was once minded to have submitted himself with a Halter about his Neck to the Lord Deputy: afterwards slain by his own Relations and Country-men, in revenge of a Rape committed upon the Wife of O Donnel. The great Earl of Desmond slain in a little Cottage, af∣ter he had escaped the hands of the Victorious Eng∣lish
for almost two years together, lurking up and down in private Holes and Corners. Hugh Roe Mac Makon, a potent Lord in the Territory of Mo∣naghan, subjected to a Tryal by Common Souldi∣ers, and by their Sentences Hang'd, and his large Possessions divided among the English. Tea Mac Hugh taken, and his Head sent to Doublin. And lastly the haughty Tyr-Owen brought to prostrate himself before the Lord Deputy, and in the sordid Weeds of an abject Suppilant to implore the Queens Mercy. Traytors thus at length betray themselves to be the vilest and most degenerate per∣sons living, whose Souls can endure the Torments of such low and sordid Condescentions as these? For who would not scorn to exchange his Liberty for a Pardon? or to Rebel with a Design to pur∣chase the Prolongation of an Ignominious Life, at the expence of a slavish Prostration at his Tri∣umphers feet? or to be beholding to a defy'd Enemy for a Precarious Being? Nor must we omit that in the Reign of this Mag∣nanimous Princess, when the Duke of Parma was order'd to second the Spanish Invasion of England, he had no less then 700 English Fugitives, Rebels and Traytors to their Princess in his Army; Of whom it is said, That of all others they were the least esteemed: and that neither Stanley who had the Command of them, nor Westmorland, nor others who both offered their Service and Council, were once heard: but for their unnaturalness to ther Country they were debar'd of all Access, as most inauspici∣ous persons, worthily, and with detestation rejected.
King JAMES. Upon the Death of Queen Elizabeth, the Popish Priests and their Bigotted Party began to conceive fresh hopes of bringing about their Designs of re∣advancing the Papal Interest in the Nation; but finding themselves defeated by the coming in and quiet Reception of King James, they contriv'd to∣gether a most desperate peice of Treachery, to sur∣prize the Persons of the King and Prince, Henry his Son. Nor did they make any doubt of forces to effect it, meaning to retain them Prisoners in the Tower, and with the treasure there to maintain the Enterprize. Or if the Tower were not to be taken, then to carry their Royal Pledges to Dover Castle, and there by violence to obtain their own Pardons, a Toleration in Religion, and a Removal of Counsellors of State, not fitting for their purpo∣ses. To conceal this Treason, Watson the Priest devi∣ses Oaths of Secresie; he himself, together with one Clark a Priest, instilling into the heads of the Confederators, That the King was no King before his Coronation. Persons of note in this Conspiracy were, the Lord Cobham, Lord Grey of Witton, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir Graftham Markham, Sir Edward Par∣ham, George Brook, Bartholomew Brooksby, and An∣thony Copley. But this Conspiracy being seasonably discover∣ed, they were every one Apprehended, and Com∣mitted
to several Prisons in London; from whence being carryed to Winchester, they were Condem∣ned of High-Treason, and Sentenc'd to Dye. Watson and Clark the two Priests, and George Brooker, were all three Executed, as being Plotters and Enticers of their Associates. The Lords, with the rest that were Condemned, were Repriev'd upon the Scaf∣fold, to render the Kings mercy the more unex∣pected, the more highly to be valu'd by the Offen∣ders. CHARLES the First. We are now coming to the Toping Rebellion of the World, the most insane, and yet the most una∣nimous Hudle and Chaos of Destraction that ever appear'd since the Creation, and yet so finely and so dexterously cemented by the cunning Architects of the Confusion of those Times, that they foild an Unfortunate Prince in the Field, though in his Ru∣ine they at length wrought their own Destruction, as by the sequel will appear. Among the chief pretences, that gave Birth and Encouragement to this Unnatural Rebellion, the most remarkable that led the Van, were those that lye always ready to be improv'd by the subtil Con∣trivers of National Confusion, Religion, and con∣ceiv'd ill management of Publick Affairs; And these were heightned at such a Conjuncture of Time, when the people grown wanton with luxurious plenty, and a long Peace, were fitted to admit the pleasing alterations of Tumult and Disorder. And
yet such was the fatal Blindness of these Unruly People, that they suffered themselves to be sway'd, and to have those very Grievances, and ten times worse by their own Ambitious Tyrants, for Redress whereof, they had taken illegal Arms against their lawful Sovereign. But the chiefest Corruption of the People pro∣ceeded from their Seducers, of whom the chiefest part were such as fairly pretended to be the Mini∣sters of Christ, and Gods Embassadors, who layed claim to a Rite to Govern every one his Parish, and their Assembly the whole Nation. These per∣sons made it their business to decry the Rites and Ceremonies then us'd and practis'd in the Church, which begat several Invectives against the Bishops and their Ecclesiastical Government. So strange it was and yet so true, That the miseries and distra∣ctions which ensu'd, should be deriv'd from no greater beginnings then only a few Ceremones, and that a War, which never stands upon any, should be grounded and fix'd upon them. Others there were of the better sort, who having been so Educated, as to have read in their Youth the Writings of several Famous Men, concerning the Grecian and Roman Commonwealths, wherein Popular Government was extoll'd by the Glorious Name of Liberty, and Monarchy disgrac'd by the Name of Tyranny, they became in love with that Form of Government; out of which were chosen the Greatest, or the most Eloquent of the House of Commons. The City, and other great Towns of Trade, ad∣mired
the Prosperity of the Low Countries, after their Revolt from the King of Span, and were in∣clin'd to think the like Prosperity would happen to them from the like change of Government. Others there were, and those in a very great number, who had either wasted their Fortunes, or thought them too mean for the great parts of which they believed themselves to be Masters, while others that had able Bodies, saw no better way to get their Bread, then by Fishing in troubl'd Wa∣ters. All these long'd for War, hoping to live more splendidly by the lucky choice of a Party to side with, and therefore generally serv'd them who had most plenty of Money. But lastly, the people were in general so igno∣rant of their Duties, that not one perhaps of a thousand, knew what right any Man had to Com∣mand him, or what necessity there was of a King, for whom he was to part with his Money against his will; So that the People being thus Principl'd of themselves, were easily made the Kings Ene∣mies by the Indefatigable Preaching of the Presby∣terian Ministers, and the Seditious Whisperings of False and Ignorant Politicians. At this Unfortunate Time a Parliament was call'd, to sit at Westminster the 3d. of Novembr, 1640. to determin the Differences to them, by Agreement, refer'd between the King and his Sub∣jects of Scotland. And now the Mutinous Democraticks being got together, first they call'd in Question such as had either Preach'd or Written in Defence of those
Rites that belong'd to the Crown; And for those that had been Imprison'd for Writing and Preach∣ing Sermons and Books tending to Sedition, by their own Authority they order'd their setting at Liberty. In the next place they accus'd the King of a Purpose to Introduce and Authorize the Ro∣mish Religion, than which nothing was more hate∣ful to the People; and to deprive the King of such Ministers, as by their Courage, Wisdom, and Au∣thority, they thought most able to prevent or op∣pose their Designs against the King; They first Im∣peach'd the Earl of Strafford of High-Treason, who was soon after Beheaded. Afterwards they ac∣cus'd the Archbishop of Canterbury, and got him lay'd up fast in the Tower: And to make sure of their sitting, they obtain'd of the King to pass an Act, That the present Parliament should continue, till both Houses should consent to the Dissolution of it. Their next Dispute was, concerning the Militia, which, because the King would not part withal, as being the undoubted Right of his Prerogative Roy∣al, they told him plainly, That they should be forc'd, unless he would consent to their desires, to dispose of the Militia by the Authority of both Houses, for the safety of His Majesty, and the Kingdom. To which purpose they resolved in case of ex∣tream danger, and of His Majesties refusal, the Ordinance agreed upon by both Houses for the Militia, did oblige the People by the Fundamental Laws of the People; to back which, they added
farther, that when the Lords and Commons in Par∣liament, which is the Supreme Court of Judicature in the Kingdom, shall declare what the Law of the Land is, to have that not only questioned but con∣tradicted, was a high breach of the Priviledge of Parliament, which was not only to take the Mili∣tia, but the Legislative Power also from the King, who as he only made the Laws, had only Power to declare what the Law was. Much about this time the King being retir'd to York from the affronts and clamours of the Insolent and Audacious City Tumults, the Democraticks sent down Sir John Hotham to secure that Town and Magazine for their use; so that when the King came to demand with only some of his own Do∣mestick Servants and some few of the Gentlemen of the County, he was denyed, entrance by the said Sir John then standing upon the Wall: For which, when the King required Justice to be done him, and that the Town and Magazine might be delivered into his Hands, the Democraticks return'd no answer, but in a Declaration full of slanders a∣gainst his Majesties Government published. That whatsoever they declared to be Law, was not to be questioned. That no Precedents could be limits to bound their Proceedings. That the Parliament for the publick good might dispose of any thing wherein the King or People had right. That the Soveraign Power resided in the Houses, and that the King was to have no Negative Voice.
That the Levying of Forces against the perso∣nal commands of the King is not Levying War a∣gainst the King, but Levying War against his Po∣litick Person, his Laws, &c. That Treason could not be committed against the King otherwise then as he is entrusted with the Kingdom and discharges his Trust, and that they had a Power to judge whether he had discharged his trust or no. And lastly, that they might dispose of the King as they would; having gone thus far, as it were a He∣rald of defyance to pronounce open Hostility, they sent the King nineteen Propositions, with a choice of War or Peace upon refusal or condescention, the Chief of which were, 1. That the Lords and others of the Privy Coun∣cel, and all great Officers of State, both at home and abroad, be put from their Employments, and from his Council, save only such as should be ap∣proved by both Houses of Parliament, and none put into their places but by approbation of the said House, and that the Privy Councellors should take two Oaths for the Execution of their places, as should be agreed on by both Houses. That the great Affairs of the Kingdom should be resolved and transacted only in Parliament, and such as should presume to do any thing contrary to be reserved to the Censure of the Parliament. That the Lord High Steward, High Constable, Lord Chancellour, Lord Treasurer, Privy Seal, Earl Mar∣shal, Lord Admiral, Warden of the Cinque Ports, Deputy of Ireland, Chancellor of the Chequer; Se∣cretaries
of State, two Chief Justices and Chief Ba∣ron should be chosen by the approbation of both Houses, that the Votes of Popish Lords in the House, should be taken away, that the Church should be reformed as both Houses should advise, that the Militia should be setled in the Parliament. That the Peers by Bill should be restrained from Acting and Voting in the House, unless admitted with the consent of both Houses. That the King should raise no Guards but ac∣cording to Law, in case of actual Rebellion. After the sending of these Propositions, which was no more then Actual Rebellion in it self, and that his Majestie had refused to grant them, they began on both sides to prepare for War. The King raised a Guard for his Person in York∣shire, and the Parliament thereupon having Vo∣ted, that the King intended thereupon to make War upon the Parliament, gave order for Muster∣ing of Forces, and raising Money, of which they made the Earl of Essex General. The Rebellion thus begun, many Battles and Skirmishes were fought with various success, tho for a while with much more advantage to the King than the Parliament, who finding that the King made good his ground so well in the South, and that his Lieutenant prospered so victoriously in the North, were forced to call in the Scots for their assistants, for whose satisfaction they Sacrificed Arch-bishop Laud, and entered into that solemn Leage and Covenant, wherewith they cemented their Iniquity together, and like Thieves and Pi∣rates,
or like so many Catilines and Cetheguses, they in dangerous attempts, vow'd to live in their un∣natural Enterprizes. In two Battles the Parliament were eminently victorious in that of Marston Moor, and that other called the second Nembury Fight; by which the Parliament believing that Essex did not Prosecute as he ought to have done, the advantages he had got, the Parliament began to have an ill opinion of him, and from hence the new modelling of the Army was projected; to which purpose, as every Change begins with Outcries, the noise of Justice was now against Delinquents. And here we must begin to observe the first Fruits of Gods revenge up∣on the Maintainers and Abettors of this Rebellion, which Heaven did afterwards so fully Prosecute to the ignominious fall and destruction of so many detestible Rebels and Regicides. For who were these Delinquents, but such as have been their Creatures, and done them that Service which enabled them to play the pranks they pay∣ed. The first was Sir Alexander Carew, and the two Hothams both Father and Son, who for their Disloyalty to their Soveraign, were put to death for being false to Rebels and Traitors. This was the same Person, who being desired by Sir Bevil Greenvile, not to give his Vote against the Bill of Attainder of the Lord Strafford, made answer, that if he were sure he should be the next Man that should suffer upon the same Scaffold, with the same Ax, he would give his consent to the passing it.
Some few days after, both the Hothams were Be∣headed at the same place, for endeavouring to be∣tray Hull to the King, and holding Correspondence with the Marquiss of New-Castle, of whom it will be enough to observe what his late Majesty himself observed upon their last ends. Nor did a single Vengeance serve the turn; the cutting of one Head in a Family is not enough to ex∣piate for the affront done to the Head of the Com∣mon-weal. The Eldest Son must be involved in the Punishment, as he was infected with the Sin of his Father, against the Father of his Country, Root and Branch God cut off in one day. That which makes me more pity him vvas, that after he began to have some Inclinations of Repen∣tance for his Sin, and reparation of his Duty to me, he should be so unhappy as to fall into the Hands of their Justice and not my Mercy, vvho could as vvil∣lingly have forgiven H m as He could have asked that favour of Me. Poor Gentleman, he is now become a notable Monument of unprosperous Loyalty; teaching the world by so sad an unfortunate Spectacle, that the rude carriage of a Subject carries always its own Vengeance as an unseparable shadow with it, and those oft prove the most Fatal and Impla∣cable Executioners of it, who were the first Em∣ployers in the Service. But now the Presbyterian Democraticks went vi∣gorously on with their new Model, which Essex, Manchster and Denbigh perceiving, that they might not be seen to have their Commissions taken
from them, resigned them of their own accord. And this was the reward which Essex received for all the good Services which he performed for a Nest of Rebels against their Prince; who having now lost the opportunity of blessing the Kingdom with a Peace, when it lay in his Power; and to which he was Courted but a while before by the King at Lestithiel, withdrew himself in discontent to his House at Eltham in Kent, where not long after he died, not without suspicion of being poysoned by them, for whom he had so far blasted his Reputa∣tion in heading their unnatural Rebellion. They who were before such great adorers of his Person, now scorned and contemned him like Adulterous kindness, which changed into Hatred and Con∣tempt, the admiration of those whom his Popu∣larity had estranged from their first love to their Prince, who ceased not to prosecute his Honour with publick Dicteries and ridiculous Representa∣tions in Print. By his Death it plainly appeared that the Soul of Presbytery was departed, which had actuated that self-designing, formless Schism of the Church, to a mad and infatuated Division in the State, and armed its Hands with Force and Vio∣lence to propagate its Dominion and Magisterial Usurpation. For when this first great Pillar of it fell, it submitted to its fatal Period. The great Blaze and Flames it had raised, waning into a glimmering and suspicious Light, were lookt up∣on even as Meteors or Exhallations rather than a∣ny fixed or certain Luminary.
For by this time the Army was new modell'd, and committed to the Conduct of Sir Thomas Fair∣fax as General, and Cromwe as Lieutenant Gene∣ral, all Essx's Officers being Discarded with a flea in the Ears, instead of the promised payment of their Arrears, (a just reward for their Fidelity to Disloyalty;) so that Cromwell, who far exceeded the General in Policy and Design, though not in Va∣lour, had the opportunity to Garble the Officers of the new moulded Army as he pleas'd himself; however he must do his work before he pretend∣ed to Quarrel with his Masters. Thereupon the General and he fell to their business, and that with such an unfortunate Gale of Prosperity, That the King was not only beaten out of the Field, and strip'd of all his Garrisons, but was forc'd to flye to the Perfidious Scots for Refuge: out of whose hands when the Presbyterians had bought him, then Cromwell high in Repute for the Fame of Va∣lour and Conduct, and in great esteem with the Army, began to play his own Cards, making use of his own Independants and their Adherents, Brow∣nists, Anabaptists, Fifth-Monarchy Men, and Qua∣kers, all included under the Name of Fanaticks, of which there were a great number in the Army and several by this time crept into the House, enough to put in doubts, and delay the Proceedings of the contrary party: and sometimes upon an opportunity of a thin House, to carry a Vote in fa∣vour of Cromwell. Neither was Cromwell so bad a Scholar, but that he knew how to practise the same Falsities, Dissimulations, Perjuries, and Rebelli∣ons,
against his Pr sbyterian Masters, which they had practised against their Sovereign Lord. The Presbyterians began with Tumults and Mu∣tiny, so did He; to which purpose, he and his Son Ireton contriv'd a way to make the Army Rebel a∣gainst the Parliam nt, that had payed them all along, and under whose Banner they had hitherto fought, by spreading a Rumour, That the Parlia∣mnt, now they had the King, intended to disband them, and cheat them of their Arrears. The Army enraged at this, erect a Council a∣mong themselves of two Souldiers out of every Troop and Company, to Consult for the good of the Army, and for the peace and safety of the Kingdom, so that whatever Cromwell would have done he needed nothing to make them do it; and the effect of their first Consultation was, to take the King from Holmby out of the Hands of the Presbyteri∣ans and carry him into the Army, whereby Crom∣well thought he had gotten such an advantage, that he said openly, That now he had the Parliament in his Pocket, and the City too. In the next place, as the Parliament by Impeach∣ments and Attainders had depriv'd the King of the choicest of his Confidents and Counsllors, so Cromwell sends to have the House purg'd, and de∣mands the Suspension of eleven Members at once, whom he knew to be his most potent and most able Adversaries. Which when the Parliament refused to do, and had drawn the City to raise Forces, and Man their Lines in their Defence, the City it self, after a
Bustle to no purpose, was in some measure brought to confess their deserved punishment of their former Disloyalty, by feeling the Effects of that Tyranny which they had brought upon them∣selves, and constrain'd to relinquish their Militia, to desert the eleven Members, to deliver up their Line of Communication and the Tower, to disband their Forces, and turn out all Essex's Old Souldi∣ers, and to draw off their Guards from the Parlia∣ment, and to suffer the Army to March in Triumph through their Principal Streets. During these Stirs, several of the Armies driven Members of both Houses with both their Speakers fled to the Army, and Voted in a Parliam ntary way in the Council of War, while they that remain∣ed behind chose themselves new Speakers, and re∣admitted the seven of their number: but the Ar∣my having ended their Triumphant March, released their Fugitive Members, and restored the Speakrs to their Chairs, so that the eleven finding the place too hot, were forced to quit that Hive, where they had so long reign'd Master Bees, for all together. And now the Presbyterian Party too late percei∣ving the fatal Errors into which they had run themselves, and the Ruin that was falling upon their Heads, whither out of a true Repentance, or to obviate the Progress of their Enemies, began to think of reconciling themselves to their injur'd and slighted Prince. But whither it were, that Hea∣ven well knew that their Repentance was but forc'd, and out of necessity, and therefore reser∣ved them for the ensuing Ignominies that befel
them for the Crimes of their former Disobedience, all their Consultations and Contrivances against the Army were now as unsuccessful, as they were prosperous against their Sovereign. For the Fugitive Members being replac'd, they who had sat in the absence of the two Speakers, sat in such a servile fear, that they durst not dissent from what the contrary Faction propounded. The effects of which was, That the Independants im∣mediately displac'd all Governours, and put in Men of their own Party that they could confide in; the Militias of London, Westminster, and Southwark, were divided, and the Works and Lines of Com∣munication dismantl'd. Having thus levell'd all things before them, they procur'd an Abolition of all Orders, Votes, and Ordinances, that had pass'd in the absence of the two Speakers. And yet this Ordinance of Anni∣hilation would not pass among the more stubborn of the Presbyterians, till the Speaker pull'd out a Letter from Cromwell, taxing them with what was truly cast in their Teeth in reference to their So∣vereign, though not so deservedly for what they then had done, with Treason, Treachery, and Breach of Trust, declaring further, That if they should presume to come there before they had clear'd themselves from assenting to such and such Votes, they should sit at their peril, and that he would take them as Prisoners of War, and try them by a Council of War. And to make his words good, an Impeachment was carryed up to the House of Lords, upon which the Earls of Suf∣folk,
Lincoln, and Middlesex, the Lords Berkley, Willoughby of Parkham, Hunsdon, and Maynard, were Committed to the Black Rod: several of the House of Commons were likewise suspended, and others committed to the Tower, together with the Lord Major, and several of the Aldermen, while Points and Massey were forc'd to flye into Holland. And thus by a just Retaliation of Providence, they who had made their Prince a Captive were now become most miserable slaves to their own Merce∣naries. As for the subsequent Prevarications and pre∣tended Overtures made by Cromwell and his Facti∣on to the King, and their close restraint of him to supple him to Condescention, we pass them over, as hastening to the Catastrophe of the Presbyterians, who were the first Authors of the Rebellion. This is only to be said, That those Shufflings and Cuttings with His Majesty had so enraged the Discontents of the People, that the Nation was in several parts almost in∣volv'd in a second War: what with the Kentish In∣surrection, the Revolt in Wales, and the Scotish In∣vasion; so that the Parliament seeing so many Dangers appear at one and the same time with doubtful Faces, and fearing the Dubiousness of success, began to think of making some Provision for their own safety, dread∣ing more especially the Scotch Storm; to which pur∣pose, they recall'd, Their Votes of Non Addresses, and voted the Kings Condescentions a sufficient Ground to proceed to a personal Treaty, with Honour, Freedom, and Safety. But Fairfax having Dissipated the Southern
Storms, and Cromwell having clear'd Wales, and ut∣terly defeated the Scots, and both returning home Arm'd with fresh Lawrels, and now more Insolent with success, call'd their presumptious slaves to a severe account, which now must pay off all their old Scores with Ignominy and Dismission. For now these Catiffs understanding the Intenti∣ons of the House, resolv'd to play no longer with the weak Read of Priviledge, but with a bold Sword dissolve the Oracle of their Villanies; To this purpose, Pride, Huson, and some other Officers, having had some Conferences together in West∣minster Hall with the Speaker, the Dore being shut, sent in a Paper to the House of Commons, requiring the Impeach'd Members, and Major General Brown, as Guilty of calling in Hamilton, to be secur'd and brought to Justice, and that the 90 odd Members, who refus'd to Vote against the late Scotch Engagement, might be immediately suspend∣ed the House, and that all such faithful Mmbers, who were Innocent of those Votes, would by pro∣testation acquit themselves of those Votes. To this Paper they admitted no demur, but pre∣sently brought three or four Regiments of Horse and Foot, and set strong Guards at the House Doors, the Lobby Stars, and every where about the Palace, admitting none but Parliament Men into the Hall, where the two forementioned Col∣lonels and Sir Hardress Wller violently seized se∣veral of the Membrs whom thy thouh fitting, and forcibly carryed them away P soners. Of these a Catalogue was afterwards taken by Hugh
Peters, after which they were thrust into Hell, where they were kept without any Accommoda∣tion all Night, and the next day committed under Guard to several Inns in the Strand; about one Hundred and Sxty more were by the same Com∣manders debarred entrance into the House, besides Forty more that voluntarily withdrew themselves, most of the Forty Mmbers, after many Expostu∣lations, and their Protestations in vain against the force put upon them, were at length released. Ireton insolently biding them look to themselves, and how they acted any thing against the present Government and Army at their Peril. And thus were the mighty Grandees of Presby∣tery cast down from their Seats, where they had so long usurped their Soveraign's Dominion, and laid the Foundation of his utter Ruin. Nor did this Jeroboam of a Cromwel, rending the Tyranny out of their Rebellious Hands, leave them so much as one Tribe to Domineer over: But first pull'd 'em out as it were by the Ears, then Imprisoned 'em, and afterwards with shame and Ignominy dismissed 'em, Cashier'd, Discarded, Contemned and Scorn'd by those whom they themselves had mounted into the Saddle of their own Illegal Go∣vernment, And this was the Just reward of the first Fllies and Treasons of the Independants. And now was the whole Body of the Parlia∣ment reduced to an Inconsiderable Juncto, wholly at the Devotion of their Great Sultan Cromwel, who nevertheless served them outwardly with great Diligence, till by their assistance he had most
Inhumanly & Irreligiously taken away the Kings Life. But that being done, and himself now swelled to that excessive bulk of loftiness, not to be con∣fined within the narrow limits of a General-ship, as he that had so lately reduced Ireland, conquer∣ed Scotland, overthrown the King at Worcester, thought it now time to reap the benefit of his Suc∣cessful Labours. And therefore looking upon the Juncto of his pretended Masters, only as an impo∣tent and feeble Crew, that stood upon his Crut∣ches, yet threatned to beat him with them, and to Essex him out of all his Grandeur, he resolved to cut the Gordian knot of all their Intreagues. To this purpose attended with Lambert, Harison and some other of his great Officers, he entered the House, and after a short speech, wherein he shewed the Reasons and necessities of their Disso∣lution, he declared the Juncto to be dissolved, and desired the Members to depart. Upon which Harison peremptorily bid the Speak∣er leave the Chair, which he refusing to do with∣out order of the House; or till he was pulled out, Harrison desired him to lend him his Hand, and gently heav'd him out. Cromwel also commanded their Bauble as he called it the Mace, to be taken away, and so having turned the Wretches out of Doors, lock't 'em up, and clapt Guards upon 'em, and about all the Avenues into the Palace, to prevent those Spirits from possessing it again. The News of the fall of these Lucifers was quickly spread through the City, and from thence over the Country, where it was related and recei∣ved
with all imaginable gladness, while the Mem∣bers slunk away muttering to themselves the af∣front they had received, and laying their Heads to∣gether how to retrieve themselves; for loath they were to acknowledg their Dissolution, but whatever they fancied to the contrary, raving at this Bold∣ness and Audaciousness of their Servant as they called him, Cromwel their Master, minded it not, but went on with his Business. Certainly Fate never plaid such a frolick part, nor was there ever such a Scene of Mirth in all her Mazes and Varieties of Government, so unusual it is for the greatest and most potent of wicked men, to survive the Infamy and Dishonour of their Actions, unless it be to live the Ignominy and Re∣proach of themselves. But as if God would in∣vert the threatned punishment of the fifth Com∣mandment, these unparallel'd Parricides were de∣creed to out live the Desire of Life, and to see all their Greatness buried, their Reputation abroad, and their Dread at Home fallen into such Ignomi∣ny and Disgrace, that it was the common Theme of Ballads, the most scurrilous and contemptible that was to be imagined. On the other side Crom∣wel was more applauded by the People for this A∣ction, then any of his Victories in the War, while none were more derided and scorned than those Reformado's of Petty Princes. Thus the two first Scenes of this Tragical Rebelli∣on being past; the next was the Scene of Protector∣ship, which concluding with the Tyrants Life; the fifth were but the struglings and uttermost efforts
of Anarchy and Confusion, drawing to a Mortal Dissolution, which ended at length in the happy and long panted-after Restauration of his present Majesty. And then it was, that Divine Vengeance having trac'd the Murderers of their Martyr'd Soveraign, at last through several Mazes overtook them, the Iron Hand of Justice delivering them up to the pu∣nishment due to their unparallel'd Impiety. There∣fore though it were thought fit, as well to shew his Majesties Clemency to the lesser guilty of his undutiful People, that an Act of Oblivion should pass for the general safety of the Nation, yet that his Justice might appear as equally Resplendent in not suffering such an unexampl'd Parricide to go vvith unexampled Impunity, the Parliament thought it altogether as necessary to Exclude from Mercy, the Chief Authors and Actors in the Late Rebellion and more Hrrid Perpetration, such vvhom Death had spared, as Sacrifices to the Law and the Honour of their Country. Thereupon a Commission of Oyer and Terminer was issu'd out for the Tryal of the several Offen∣ders according to their merits; for no less then two days of Judgment will suffice for Treason and Disloyalty. Of these there were two sorts, some who were reserv'd to such Forfeitures, as should by Paria∣ment be declared; of which the principal were, Sir Arthur Hasterigg, Oliver St. John William, Len∣thall the Speaker, Nye the Minister, Burlin of Yar∣mouth, and some Sequestrators and Officers of the
Army; as Desborough, Pine, Butler, Ireton, &c. The other Classis was, of those who were Tryed at the Old-Bayly, and the Kings-Bench, by Vertue of the Commission aforesaid, directed to the Lord Mayor and Judges, of which the Lord Bridgeman, then Lord Chief Baron was the Chief. And of these some were immediately Condemned and Executed, others Condemned and Remanded to se∣veral Prisons, where they lay under Sentence, to be Executed at the Kings Pleasure. The Persons Condemned and Executed were, Captain Thomas Harrison, Apprehended in Stafford∣shire: John Carew, Brother to Sir Alexander Carew, Beheaded by the Long-Parliament, in 1644. All Executed at Charing-Cross, and Tyburn. John Cook, the Solicitor. Hugh Peters, taken in Southwark. Thomas Scot. Gregory Clements. Adrian Scroope. John Jones. Francis Hacker. Daniel Axtel. Colonel Okey. Miles Corbet. John Bearkstead. Sir Hnry Vane Tryed the Year following in Trinity Term, and Executed on Tower-Hill. The Persons that received Sentence, but were remanded to Prison under Sentence of Death, to be Executed at the King's pleasure were,
Sir Hardress Waller. William Heveningham. Colonel Henry Martin. Owen Row, a Silk-man of London. Austin Garland, Parlia∣ment-Man for Quinbo∣rough. Henry Smith, a Lawyer in Leicester-shire. Robert Tichburn. Colonel George Fleetwood. James Temple of Sussex. Thomas Waite of Rutland∣shire. Peter Temple, a Linnen-Draper's Apprentice in Friday-Street. Robert Lilburn, John Lil∣burn's Brother. Gilbert Millington. Vincent Potter. John Downes. Simon Meyne. Major General Lambert received the Sentence of Death with Sir Henry Vane, but regard being had of his submissive deportment at his Tryal, he was reprieved after Sentence at the Bar, and remanded to Prison. The Lord Muson, Si Hnry Mildmay, and Mr. Wallop, were sent for to the Bar of the Houses then sitting, where their Estates were declared Confi∣scate, they themselves degraded from all Titles and Armes of Gentillity; and farther Sentenced, To be Drawn from the Tower through the City to Ty∣burn upon Hurdles every 30th. of January, and so back with Halters about their Necks, and to suffer per∣petual Imprisonment. The Carcasses also of Cromwell, Ireton, and Brad∣shaw, were digged out of the Ground from those sumptuous Monuments, which as they Thron'd it in their Life-time, they had usurp'd at their Deahs.
They were drawn  a Cart from Westminster to the Red-Lyon in Holbourn, and thence on Sledges to Tyburn, where the Corps were taken out of the Coffins, and Hang'd at three Corners of the Gal∣lows from ten a Clock till Sun-seting, and then the Heads being cut off to be plac'd upon Westminster-Hall, their Bodies were Buried in a deep Hole un∣der the Gallows. This end at length had a long Rebellion, sup∣ported by all the Force, the Youth, the Wealth, and most crafty Head-pieces of a whole Nation, at last shatter'd to pieces, and delivered up to condign Punishment, and the effects of divine Vengeance, after a long and haughty Tyranny, by their own Ambition, and Divisions among themselves: lea∣ving this Indeleble Truth of the Proverb behind them, That Honest Men came by their own, through the falling out of Thieves and Traytors. As for the Rebellious Scots, who lent their help∣ing hand to their Covenanting Brethren in England; and at last sold their Sovereign to the Scaffold, they liv'd to see their Country quite subdu'd by Crom∣well, who after the fatal overthrow of Dunbar, over-ran the whole Kingdom, impos'd his own Judges upon them, and kept them enslav'd by the Curb of four such Cittadels as the Liberty of that Nation was never subjected to before. No less bitter was the Cup of which the Rebel∣lious Irish tasted at the long run. For being ma∣ster'd by Cromwell, they were reduc'd to that condi∣tion, that they were forc'd to surrender their E∣states and Habitations to the Arbitrary Power of the
English, who forbore not to t them, That they pos∣sessed their Estates but during their pleasure, and till they could get Planters to put into their Rooms; So that when they could hold out no longer, the best Articles they could get was, to abandon their Na∣tive Soil, and to transport themselves into Forreign Service. Providence so ordering, That they should be forced to seek their Bread in forreign Exile, who had disturbed the Peace of their own Country. And these have been the fatal Fruits of Rebelli∣on against the lawful Sovereigns of England from before the Conquest, to the Restauration of His present Majesty; which they who will not apply to themselves, have nothing to do, but to adven∣ture the same Vengeance from Heaven, and the same Punishments and Rewards of Treason and Disloyalty from Men. FINIS.
Some Books Printed for, and Sold by, Robert Clavel, at the Sign of the Peacock in St. Paul's Church-Yard. THE Annals of King James, and King Charles the First, Containing a faithful and impartial Account of the Great Affairs of State and Transacti∣ons of Parliaments in England, in Folio. Wherein several material Passages Relating to the late Civil Wars (not mntioned in former Histories) are made known in particular, some of Mr. Rushworth's Mi∣stakes and Omissions. As first the Case of the Devorce of the Earl of Essex from his Countess, which had so great Influence on the ensuing Troubles, Related from the Original Proceedings in that Court. 2. The True Cause of the Troubles in our Church, viz. The Connivance of some Church-men at the Dissntrs from the Government of the Church, as Established by Law, and the Favour found at Court from great Persons there. 3. King James not so much Influenced by Gonda∣more, as is Related by Mr. Rushworth. 4. The Three Estates in Parliament who they were, in King James's Speech in Parliament; 1620. 5. An Authentick and Impartial Account of the beginning of the Troubles in Scotland, and the Wars which ensued. 6. The True State of our late Civil Wars, their Beginnings, Causes, who the Aggressors, &c. The rest are too large to take notice here, but may be seen in the Preface.
Varenius's Geography in Folio English, Illustra∣ted with many Copper Cuts. Dr. Willis's Works in Folio, English. The History of the Irish Rebellion, traced from many preceeding Acts to the grand Eruption, the 23d. of October, 1641. and thence pursued to the Act of Settlement, 1662. Tracts Written by John Selden of the Inner-Temple, Esq and Translated by the Eminent Dr. A. L. The 1st, Jani Anglorum facies altera, with large Notes thereupon. 2ly, Englands Epinomis. 3ly, Of the Original of Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions of Testa∣ments. The 4th, of the Disposition or Administration of intestate Goods. Mr. Scrivener's Body of Divinity. Dr. Cumber on the Liturgy in Folio. Mr. Sam's Britannia. Ogleby's History of Affrica, Asia, and America. Bishop of St. Davids's Vindication of the Bi∣shops Rights to Vote in Capital Cases—his seasona∣ble Corrective. The Compleat Catalogue to the end of Easter Term, 1684. The Bishop of Lincoln's Observations, and Animad∣versions on Pope Pius the 5th. his Bull against Queen Elizabeth: wherunto is annexed the Bull of Pope Paul the 3d. against King Henry the VIII. Dr. Cumber's Vindication of the Divine Right of Tythes. Bishop of Cork's Perswasive to all Protestants. Religion and Loyalty supporting each other, in Vindication of the Loyal Addressors.
Bishop of St. Davids's Billa Vera, or Argument of Ignoramus — his short way to a lasting Settlemnt, and Answer to Sidney's Speech—his Advice to a sound Protestant and Proselyte of Rome cll'd back. Three Sermons of Dr. Standishes. Two of Mr. Richard Werge of New-Castle. One Srmon of Dr. Manue before the King. Two of Dr. Dixons's Prebend, of Rochester. Dr. Ward's Sermon of Blandford. Ogleby's Essop in English, adorn'd with 160 Sculp∣tures. A Discourse of Natural and Moral Impotency. Bishop of St. Davids's Answer to Melius Inquiren∣dum—his Answer to the Protestant Reconciler. Brown's Treatise of Preternatural Tumours. Mecket's Tractatus de politia Eccles. Anglicanae. The Reduction of Ireland to the Crown of Eng∣land. Smith's Rhetorick, the Fifth Edition. Humphrey's Resolution of Conscience. Dr. Byan's Eight Sermons, Preached before His Majesty in his Exile. Friendly Conference between a Minister and a Qua∣ker, two parts. Dr. Duport's Poems. Seneca with Farnaby. Sci∣card's Hebrew Grammer. Essop's Fables, Greek and Latin. Compend. Politicum: An Account of the Trou∣bles in the Reign of King Henry the 3d. Martindale's Book of Surveying. Book of Riddles.
THere is also Published a Book Entituled, The Royal Apology, or an Answer to the Rebls Plea: Wherein the most Noted Anti-Monarchical Tenents, First, Published by Doleman the Jesuite, to promote a Bill of Exclusion against King JAMES, Secondly, Practised by Bradshaw and the Regicides in the actual Murder of King CHARLES the First. Thirdly, Republished by Sidney and the Associators, to Depose and Murder His Present MAJESTY, are distinctly considered. With a Parallel between Doleman, Bradshaw, Sidney, and other of the True Protestant Party. London, Printed by T. B. for Robert Clavel, and are to be sold by Randolph Tay∣lor near Stationers-Hall. 1684. Price 1 s. The Judgment of an Anonymous Writer, concern∣ing these following Particulars. First, A Law for Disabling a Papist to Inherit the Crown. Secondly, The Execution of Penal Laws against Protestant Dissenters. Thirdly, A Bill of Comprehension. All briefly Discussed in a Letter from beyond the Seas to a Dissenter, ten Years ago; The Second Addition. London, Printed by T. B. for Robert Clavel, and are to be sold by Randolph Taylor, near Stationers Hall. 1684. FINIS.
