S254 12828471 94313
SAD NEWES FROM BLACK-VVALL. Being a true RELATION OF THE BLOODY DESIGNE OF SIMON MAN. Who being denyed a But of Wine by a Bristow Marchant, whose Name was Master Henry Uichols, most cruelly carryed match, powder, and Candle, into one of the lower-most Roomes, and burned the good Ship, called the Bonaventure, upon Friday night, being the 19. of November, 1641. In which Ship were burn't fifty eight men. Also, The Description in vvhat manner the Marchant and the Ma∣ter of the Ship were slaine. And how the Murtherer escaped away With a true Account of all that were lost, and how many escaped the horrible fire by swimming. London, Printed for E.W. 1641.
C · R SAD Newes from Black-wall. IT is an old saying, that there is more knavery u∣sed by Sea and by Land, then in all the whole world besides; which is most true: but my sor∣rowfull Relation proceeds no further then the river of Thames, which is not more Tragicall to be read, then the spectacle was to be seene. In divulging of which, white paper and black inke doth not well a∣gree; for white and black, the one signifies joy, the other mourning. Wherefore with sable paper, and bloudy inke, doth this most dolefull story deserve to be written with, Reader, my intents at this time is to exhaust fountaines of brinish teares, from each eye, although composed of the most dry puny stone; for the Relation so bloudy is that in Democritus himself the Reader of it, he would forget presently his laugh∣ing humor and learne how to weepe: but my pre∣ambulation must not exceed my relation: where∣fore, marke the story which shall now ensue. There was one Mr. Henry Vichole, a Bristow Marchant, who was not more famous for riches, than piety, but as God doth sometimes let tribulation fall upon the head of the righteous, so did it happen unto him Two years since did he make a voyage to Spain, and
loaded his ship very richly with Malligo-wines; which had they bin put to sale, would have returned unto him the full sum of forty thousand pounds. Neptune was mild and gentle, and permitted him a safe returne unto Black-vvall, which is about foure miles off from the City of London. To behold which place, I am not able to expresse the good Marchants joy. But alas, how soone was that joy metamorpho∣sed into sorrow, how soon was his tryumph conver∣ted to a Funerall, hee missed Scilla to fall by Charib∣dis, the unnaturall Seas did shew more love and affe∣ction to him, than a naturall man; for they did in∣deavour to enrich him comming home; but a man did undoe him, being come home: as J now shall truely declare. The Marchant and the Master of the ship being very merry together, for joy of the good ship, called the Bonaventure unto Black-wall: there was one Si∣mon Man a common Saylor, who required of the Marchant a But of wine; which the Marchant, in∣somuch as the Customers then had not received their due, denyed him; saying, that it was as then an unreasonable request. Bu notwithstanding, so soone as the Customers had their pay, he should have his desire. But the aforesaid Simon Man, the more the Marchant denyed, was the more greedy to have his desire: but at length he made this answer, propha∣ning the myracle of our Saviour, as water was turned into wine: so will I turne your wines into water, and so murmuring to himself some discontented words he left the Marchants Cabinet, which was betweene 6 and 7 of the clock in the evening: and then did hee
take counsell with the Divell, how he might be re∣venged on the Marchant for denying him his demand, the Divell which is alwayes ready to doe any thing which will cause a man to come unto wofull destru∣ction, furnished him with a bloudy mind without de∣lay to burne the ship, which after this most inhu∣mane manner he did. He descended down into the lowest roome of the ship, and did carry both powder, candle, and match when the deadest time of night was, and sleepe had locked up the casements of each mans body, he set fire to the powder, which could not blow up the ship at once, by reason that there was not enough powder, but notwithstanding, the hold vvas all in a flame, vv seazed upon many, burning off their legs, others their armes, others had their eyes burnt out, others had the force of the fire so much upon them, that their very Entrals vvere burnt out. Great cry and lamentation there vvas, some cryed out for ayd to other ships, o∣thers laboured to restinguish the fire, others againe leaped resolutely into the Thames, to avoid the dan∣ger of the fire, and so vvere drovvned in the vvater. The Marchant himselfe first seemed as one di∣stracted, and then anone, the flames vvere so violent upon him, that thereby he after great Lamentation dyed.
The Master also striving to doe his best for the good of the ship, was catch'd hold on by the fire, and so was slaine. In all the time of this most unhappy and bloudy Catasti∣tophe, not one ship dd dare to venture unto their ayd, but sent their long Boates which were to very little purpose. The fatall Executioner of this most bloudy deed, esca∣ped away himselfe by swimming, and as yet, is not to bee heard off, bt let time flye whither it will, or can: let him be certaine of this, that God will not suffer a Murtherer to continue unpunished, his Conscience will so torment him, that he will be in as unhappy a case, as despaire Judas was when he hanged himselfe. Thus, gentle Reader, hast thou the true and full relati∣on of the woefull overthrow of that good Merchant Mr. Henry Vichole, men, ship, and goods. Five passingers, the pursers mate, a boy, and the bloudy murtherer escaped by swimming, but all the rest of the offi∣cers and common men of the ship, either by Fire or Water were consumed and slaine to the number of fifty eight soules: all which came to their ends by one malicious ser∣vant, who wanting his will, forced them to dye unwillingly: I conclude thus, From pestilence and Famine, from Battell, and from sudden Death, Good Lord deliver us. FINIS.
