V110 R34691 14562122 102599
THE NUNNS Complaint Against the FRYARS. BEING The CHARGE given in to the COURT of FRANCE, by the Nunns of St. Katherine near Provins, against the Fathers Cor∣deliers their Confessours. Several times Printed in French; AND Now Faithfully done into English. LONDON, Printed by E.H. for Robert Pawlett, at the Bible in Chancery-Lane near Fleet-street, 1676.
To the Truly Honourable BELLALMO. Most Dear, and Honoured Sir: 'TIs now long since, that I have de∣sir'd your Commands, when I was about leaving England. I must confess, it was rather to testifie my esteem of those uncommon Qualifi∣cations in you, that have gained you the affections of the best men, and laid Charms of respect upon all, than to perswade you, that I had any considerable service in pro∣spect to gratifie you withal. But being loath to return without any signes of having ever been mindful of what I had made a profes∣sion to you of, I sought for some opportu∣nity to continue you in the assurance I had given you of my constant disposedness to do
any thing that I thought might be agreeable to you; and which I look'd upon as an acknow∣ledgment due from all honest men to Per∣sons so eminently virtuous. And there∣fore after I had met with these Religious Ladies, and understood the nature of their grievances, and the use that might be made of their Information; I imagin'd that this might be no unacceptable Present to you, since I found that they were Strangers in England, and scarce suffer'd to look a∣broad in France. For I found them under as great restraint in the Shops of the Stati∣oners of the Sorbonne, as ever they were in their Cloysters, and no leave allow'd them to take the air, but with such as would pay well for their company. They were indeed at first very publickly sold; so that I have seen three several Editions of them, and have at present two of them in mine own hands. But after that the Nunns had gain'd their cause, and the Cordeliers were ca∣shier'd their house; to put a stop to all farther scandal amongst the people, the Copies, that were printed, were order'd to be suppress'd and a watch set upon the Sellers. From this
severe confinement I did very much desire to deliver them, and to bring them into a freer air, where their conversation would be ac∣ceptable, and courted. And I knew so well your kind receptions of all Strangers, of whom you might learn any thing, that I que∣stion'd not but that these would find a well∣come from you. I have reason to think, that you will find them very good company, and afford you variety of entertainment. It may be they will gratifie your cnriosity by making you a spectator of such lives, as are design'd to be withdrawn from the common view, and amongst which possibly you will meet with such new Scenes of Action, as all your con∣verse never before represented to you. The innocent Gallantry of the Nunns and Fry∣ars in some Pages may give you very agree∣able divertisement: And their excesses, and disorders in others, if they raise less grate∣ful Passions in you, yet will furnish you with true, and certain accounts, how the Professi∣on of Monkery is reduced to practice. But whatever eflect you find in your self by it, I hope you will be confident, that my great de∣signe in recommending this new Acquain∣tance
to you, was to assure you, that I am ve∣ry zealously, without any fiction but what you approve of, Most excellent Bellalmo, Your most devoted humble Servant, LAELIO.
THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER. CErtainly never had Book more need of a Preface than this. For, to set no less than Eighteen an∣gry Women in the Front of it, all full of talk and story, must needs endanger the frighting away all Readers, that have any respect to their understanding. So that it looks like a malicious design a∣gainst the Stationer, kindly to present him with a Copy, put him to the ex∣pence of the Press, but to lay such a spell upon it, as no body should dare to touch it. I thought it therefore necessary fairly to bespeak the Customers, and to draw this Curtain before the first terrible Scene, till I had stroak'd the Readers into some tolerable Gentleness. It may be, when I have taken off the fear of this thing with
the rattle, the Birds will come in with more freedome. Know therefore, Cour∣teous Reader, that the Fair Strangers, I here offer to you, are above the ordinary rate of the Sexe. By their way of life they are under very solemn Obligations to silence. They have vow'd to God, that they will never speak any thing, but what is Necessary, or Useful. The things, that they come to acquaint you with, are things of importance, not all the impertinencies that were done, when they were in France. They will caution some against publike inconveniences, and Alarm others to look to their Fa∣milies, and Relations. Indeed I know no sort of men, whom they may not profitably instruct, nor any whom they should offend, but such as by the Lawes of the Land are not suppos'd to be amongst us. The Assertors of the Priviledges of the Gallican Church, and the Bishops there, have given them their applause already, and the Seculars never thought themselves better justify'd against the Regulars. The Hugonots look'd on, and
car'd not much what pleasure others took in it, but were pretty sure that it was one of the best arguments for their Wives, that they had ever met withal. I could not but hope that they would be full as useful here, as they had been at home, and so resolv'd they should tra∣vel with me for the benefit of the Na∣tion. But I must affirm, That if any party among us be more particularly ob∣lig'd by it than others, it must be those of the Roman Communion. All others can pretend to no greater advantage by it, but only that they have a confirma∣tion of what they thought they were sure of before, and had been long in the practice of: But these Gentlemen are taught new Truths about their nearest Interests, the concerns of their Families, the Education of their Daughters, Their Sisters, Their Cosins, or their Aunts. For, if these Nunnes are to be believ'd, we may easily see, to what a kind of Educa∣tion those Young Ladies are committed, that are ordinarily sent over from hence into the Convents of the Poor Clare's in
France, and Flanders. It may be, upon Examination they will be found to be far the greatest number of those, that go over into Religious Houses. Over this Order it is, that these Cordeliers pretend a particular Jurisdiction by their See Section 5, 6. &c. first Foundation, and which nothing but their scandalous behaviour has depriv'd them of, not only in this, but in several other Convents in France, as appears about the conclusion of this Factum. And had not the Affairs of the Kingdom favour'd the Interests of the Episcoparian party amongst them more particularly in this present Age, These Nunns might have groan'd much longer under their Ty∣ranny, as well as have made so many fruitless attempts as they did, to shake it off for some considerable number of years before. We find that those that are sent to Pension amongst them are not exempt from the common fate, but are as liable to the pursuits of these rude and unruly Friars as the rest. What, can we think, will become of those Early Prin∣ciples
of Virtue, and Innocency, that the care of their Parents had planted in them, when they see such different pra∣ctices, as these, authoriz'd by the per∣sons, that are not only their Guides, and Instructors, but also more peculiarly de∣voted to God, and set apart from the World by solemn Vowes, and the Obser∣vance of rigorous and severe Impositi∣ons, for an instance, and tryal of what the Principles of a Religion could do? But more especially when they see all this so customary a fashion amongst them, as to get the Authority of their Batchelors, Doctors, Superiours, and Provincials, and all the men of greatest note amongst them. What other effect can it naturally pro∣duce in the best dispos'd amongst them, than what we see ordinarily done in the World, that is an imitation of those acti∣ons which they see constantly practis'd by the most Regular, and best reputed? Surely it must make them look upon an innocent and sober life as a meer notio∣nal thing, and not to be found in nature, when they find so general a corruption
of Manners (as these Nunnes have attest∣ed) amongst those, who are bound up by all the solemn Obligations imaginable, and sequestred thereby from all the im∣pediments of common life, to attend to nothing but Divine Inspirations, and ex∣traordinary Sanctity. In all these reflecti∣ons they will be still much more con∣firm'd, when they come to hear them justifie themselves in their practices by false Principles of New Morality; when they hear them nicely state, how much may lawfully be permitted to their new relation (their Bon Amy;) how much must be allow'd to their present state, and Natural Inclinations; when they are informed by them, what are the only necessary requisites to qualifie them for a plenary Absolution; and how easie com∣pensations for their past Offences will bribe the Divine Goodness to a reconcile∣ment, and purchase them an Intimacy, and Friendship with God: In summe, when they are acquainted, what blessed Priviledges their Church is endow'd withall, that by the vertue of its Indul∣gences
upon the performance of some small bodily motions can confer an Im∣putative Saintship that shall equalize a true one. If then they take a full prospect of all these Considerations together, and find licentiousness allow'd by Principles, and made a Case of Conscience; Or, If more Exorbitant, clear'd off by Absolutions without the trouble of Reformation; Or, if yet attended with anxiety, and uneasi∣ness, turn'd into a Traffick with the Di∣vine Justice by Commutations of Penances, which also may be Exchang'd yet farther for greater Ease; what can we expect, but that they should make themselves Vota∣ries to so agreeable a state of life, assoon as might be, and abhor the regularity of true, and sincere Virtue, all the precepts of which they must needs now look up∣on as Phantastick Rules for Impracticable things, and fitted only for Naked Ghosts, and another World? Locks, and Barrs, and Iron Grates may raise fine solemn Imaginations in a stranger, but they will prove very weak Securities for their ve∣ry natural Honesty, when there are Keyes,
or a free access for the Cordelier Confes∣sour. By this time, I suppose, the Reader will fairly conclude by my zeal, That the Ti∣maretta whom I ador'd was put to School to a Convent, and that there I was base∣ly chous'd of her by a Fryar. I wholly discharge the Fathers of any such impu∣tation, yet as I would be loath to trust them, so in Charity I bid my Neighbours look to themselves. I forewarn them of sending their Women to Conventicles be∣yond Sea, when we see such ill effects of it at home. And as I shall be glad to have oblig'd those that take it for a cour∣tesie, so my revenge upon those, that will not take my counsel, shall be to commend those that do. But my Countrymen of the Reforma∣tion, I hope, will make better use of this advantage: They will now reflect with more pleasure upon the Prudence of their Ancestours, whom now we may sup∣pose to have very warily examin'd the behaviour of the Monasticks: 'Tis very likely, that they saw, that the Religious
did not alwayes spend their time in De∣votion, or Study, or Acts of Charity, or Bo∣dily labour, or Innocent Divertisement: It may be, it was not so much One Anne Bolen, as thousands of Melita's, and ten thousands of Thyrsis's, that caus'd the ruine of the famousest Structures in the Land: And it's probable, that the scan∣dalous disorders of such an Order of men, as these, who had all the advanta∣ges that men could have, to observe their Vowes of Caelibacy, might make our Sober Governours conclude, That those Arbi∣trary and unalterable Resolutions were ne∣cessary causes of very dangerous Conse∣quences. We see in the present case, that here there has been a General corruption of a whole Order of Regulars, of their very Superiours, and Provincials, and this for very considerable numbers of years toge∣ther; And yet this Order is esteemed one of the severest, and strictest of all the Re∣gulars. Their Founder, St. Francis, was the most extravagant of any, (both in his own practice, and in the Rule he lest his Disciples) for the rigidness of his Injun∣ctions.
He obliges them to Beggery, to such Self-denyal, and Mortification, and Discipline, as one would imagine should make them insensible of any kind of worldly pleasure. And all this they have solemnly sworn to observe, and in order to it have withdrawn themselves from the noise, and business of the World, and to confirm themselves in their first reso∣lutions, have deliberately ty'd themselves before God never to alter their present state. The Church, and State, where they live, oblige them under penalties of the highest nature to keep close to the obser∣vance of what they had vow'd, and pub∣lick Infamy alwayes attended the viola∣tion of it: Yet all these ill consequences are not able to secure them; But, as if there were some Magick in nature that was too irresistible for all these provisi∣ons and precautions, we see them deli∣ver'd up to the uncontrollable power of their natural Inclinations. And indeed, when we consider not the frame of our Natures, nor the dependencies of our beings upon the varieties of Objects,
that act upon us, but will, contrary to the Laws of our Creation, pretend in a very wrong notion to take the Kingdom of Heaven by violence, and forc'd Me∣thods, and bind our selves unalterably to such Laws in the doing of it, as shall contradict those inclinations, that God ha's planted in us, and (it may be) gi∣ven that power, and force to in some, that they shall not be countermanded, but by the ordinary Provision, that he ha's made for them; it is no wonder, that we find our selves rashly foolish in endeavouring to be wiser, than he that made us, and instead of being extrava∣gantly Divine, prove at last to be ridicolous∣ly brutish. But on the other side were the Designe of these Religious retirements from the world so manag'd, as that they should be free and voluntary, both for the beginning, and continuing of them, and made serviceable to the Publick, either as convenient Seminaries of such as should be any ways influential abroad, or as Receptacles for such, whose former
Merits should claim their Alimony, and Writ of ease from the places, which they had oblig'd, they would be so far from being dissik'd, that they seem to be by all means encourag'd, and promo∣ted: Before I dismiss this whole Cause, I think it not unseasonable to invite the Intelligent Reader to take a small view of the present State of the Roman Church. We know, that the Regulars are the Ja∣nizaries of the Court of Rome; That they have their exemptions from the Ju∣risdiction of the Clergy of those parti∣cular Kingdoms, where they are, and so have no dependance upon their Natural Prince, or Bishop. And yet to the care of some of these are almost all the youth of Europe committed. It was the com∣plaint of the University of Paris in 1643, That the Jesuits had ruin'd all the Universities in France, by draining all the youth into their Schools, so that the two Colledges in Paris, had more than all the Colledges besides: And that
almost all the other Universities had scarce Auditors for their Professors. 'Tis well known at present, that the Colledges of the Jesuits are almost as many as the Grammar-Schools, in France. Their teaching gratis being a great invitation to a People that ha's so many publick Im∣positions upon them, and so little Mo∣ny. 'Tis as well known, that the first Les∣son which they endeavour to insinuate into their Disciples is, to be firm and constant in the Maximes that they instil into them; which indeed we find is a natural effect of that Relation betwixt a Tutor and his Scholar, when there are not mighty precautions us'd to prevent it. But if we be at all acquainted with the Affairs of those men, 'tis still much better known, what are those Principles, that not only particular men, but such as have the Subscriptions of the Deputies of the whole Order, have publickly own'd in Print about Moral Theology, and the Government and Conduct of our Lives. The Provincial Letters have
sufficiently shewn by an infinite number of Quotations out of their Principal and Leading men, all Licens'd by the Autho∣rity of their Order, what deductions they have made from that Principle of Directing the Intention, so as to indulge all manner of Immorality; killing men for a box on the ear, though they would run away from them; Theft, Unclean∣ness, Lying in the gross sense, Killing of Judges, and Witnesses, bare-fac'd Simo∣ny, Covetousness, so as to wish the death of the Persons that stand in their way, assisting of Superiors in things known to be directly vicious, palpable Cheat∣ing, and all this with this only Proviso, that they be all the while so well-meaning men, that they look only at the Good, that may arise from the thing, to their advantage, not the hurt and damage that will follow upon it to their Neighbours, though the latter may far exceed the for∣mer. The Collections of these Maximes have been done by many out of their
Writings; some very pernitious ones, by the faithful Grotius, in his Book de Ju∣re Belli, & Pacis. But to remove all sub∣terfuges, and scruples from those who have not leisure to examine these Casu∣ists, the Learned Author of those Letters, one of their own Church, ha's per∣form'd it; the weakness of their Answers to him established it, and given Autho∣rity to what he has affirmed. Excepting therefore that small Party of Seculars, that never had their Educa∣tion under these men, and those few, that became Converts afterwards from the Principles that they had once sucked in (no very ordinary thing) shall we not conclude, that the remaining body of the Church is in a very deplorable conditi∣on, and it may be, so universally, that it may almost endanger the visibility of the other little remnant? Next to the Jesuits, in power, and in∣terest our Franciscans are esteem'd the most prevailing Party; and as the Je∣suits have got the vogue for the only Ma∣sters
of Learning, so these come in for their claim of the greatest Exemplariness of life. For there being two necessary requisites for all practical Sciences, that is, Rules, and Instances of the practice of those Rules for particular circumstances: It was thought fit by the then Governing-party of that Church, to set up a certain Order of men, retired from the common converse of the rest, who should be as so many convincing Experiments to demon∣strate the power, and efficacy of the Rules of their Religion; and these were always thought to be more necessa∣ry for their publick influence upon the lives of the people, as the power of Ex∣ample exceeds that of Precept, or as a true fire does that of a Picture. Of this kind are our Franciscans, and of all other Orders, by the severity of their Institu∣tion most likely to answer their Churches intention, both for the evidencing the Principles of it by their practice, and for perswading imitation by their Exam∣ples. See then the utmost of what such a
Religion can do, and what Fruits are to be expected amongst such, as imitate them. If Jesuits have given dangerous Pre∣cepts, certainly the Fryars had given a greater strength to them by their lives, and practices. So that they must still have that praeeminence, so often boasted of, of being at wonderful Unity with one another, of having a perfect conformi∣mity betwixt their Rules, and Exam∣ples, and (considering the indefatiga∣bleness of both for promoting the com∣mon Interest) of spreading their Do∣ctrine, and Party almost Universally. This seems to be the present repraesenta∣tion of the state of that Church, and alarms all Christian Princes, since Chri∣stianity is almost lost in Christendom, to recover this Holy Land out of the hands of this Usurping Leviathan, and to set∣tle new Teachers of Old Morality, and let punishment distinguish betwixt the or∣dinary sober practice of Virtue, and Pha∣risaical Impurity, or Holy Cheats. There cannot be a more glorious Design, than
to take care against the debauching of natural Principles by a false Religion, and of advancing their Power by the happy assistances of a true one: Nor a greater security of the Civil Government, than by excluding all other Independent Au∣thorities from the over-ruling of natural Conscience, the Spring of all humane Actions, that tend to the Publick good, and the preservation of Common∣wealths. The distinct Jurisdictions may otherwise clash with one another, in which contest we may well think, that the Conductors of the Conscience will have the superiority. The experience of this has been fatal to the Persons of Princes, and does always make them obnoxious to bold Assassinates in their greatest secu∣rity. If there happen any Disputes a∣bout Civil Rights in the Bowels of a State, the way ordinarily taken to de∣termine them is by open and generous Methods; but if once Bulls of Excom∣munication are pass'd, or it be generally suppos'd, that the Prince is an ill friend
to some Usurpations, or ill conduct of the Church, he is no longer secure in his Pri∣vy Chamber, nor in the midst of a well∣arm'd Guard of Suisz. The Desperate Religionist is ambitious to oblige God, and his Church by murdering his Prince, and losing his own life in the most exquisite tortures. In one Age have we had no less than two Instances of this nature from France, and a third attempt without effect. Is not this a sufficient forfeit of their Liberty, and to∣leration, that maintain this Opinion, and have often evidenc'd it by their practice for more than 800 years, not only to the prejudice of the Princes person, but frequently also to the dissolution of his Government? I leave the instancing in known Stories to those that have made it their particular design. It is, I confess, no very easie thing to remove an established Power, that has a general Interest to second it, and Henry the Fourth (who foresaw the danger, which at last had its effect upon him)
when often sollicited to banish the Jesu∣its, who were something insolent upon their Restauration, was afraid, that they would send him out of the world before he could send them out of France: And therefore sure these should applaud, and rellish their present condition, that are far from fearing the power of such men, as they would hardly be able to get rid of, and encourage all endeavours that are us'd to prevent the increase of them. Notwithstanding all this Tragical, and true repraesentation, that I have drawn of the present Face of things, I cannot but take notice of a particular Mystery of Providence, that ha's layd such strong and sensible obligations (in the frame of our mind, and the state of things without us) to a right, and due behaviour of our selves, and doe's more∣over so second them with peculiar in∣fluences of his good Spirit, that we of∣ten see good men secur'd from most of the ill effects of pernicious Principles,
and that they contradict their Belief by their Actions. This ha's made me have a respect for many of that Party of men, (whom I have here been so free withal), such namely, as have given all outward proofs of Innocencie, Justice, and (which is strongest) of Universal Benignity, and Charity. And the like Observations, I have very much pleas'd my self in, when in all the converse that I have had with the several varieties, and Sects of Reli∣gion, I could not but perceive, that in all kinds, and sorts of them, there were some very signal instances of Good, and Virtuous Tempers. But then the De∣signe of Religion, and Rules of Practice being to lay firmer, and closer Engage∣ments to Reformation of Life, and Man∣ners, than the ordinary helps of our natural dispositions, it follows, that whatsoever Religion contradicts this, puts men into greater danger, than if they were without it. And consequent∣lp, that many of those who in other cir∣cumstances would obey the motions of
their good Inclinations, when back'd, and encourag'd by the Learned, and the Grave of that Religion will make no scruple of taking the Determinations of the Church for Guides, and Condu∣ctors to a more easie, and pleasant, though a very mischievous way. After all this long and tedious Di∣scourse, the main of which is ground∣ed upon the truth of the things that are alledg'd in the Factum, It may be scru∣pl'd by some, whether it were not either a contrivance of the Archbishop of Sens, or an excess of passion in the Nunns, that transported them beyond the bounds of truth, and honesty to depose such things of the Fryars, as never were done. To both which I shall return, That after that the composure of the Factum had been charg'd upon the Archbishop, the Nunns call'd the Notaries of the next Town over to them, and there made a Protestation to them, which (as all pub∣lick Acts usually are) was registred by them; in which they vouch that Wri∣ting
to be their own: and add besides, that they have still far more horrible things to depose against them, if they still persisted to molest them: That the Nunns did all this deliberately, for a great continuance of time together: That they were the Gravest, and most Antient amongst them: That there were no less than eighteen of them: That by their Quality, the Testimony of one of them is esteem'd of aequal validity, with that of many others put together, since, when there is no evidence to the con∣trary, their integrity is suppos'd to be more strictly preserv'd, and secur'd by the solemn Consecration of themselves to God's Service: That they expos'd their own Reputation to the censure of the World by thus doing, and were sensible of it before they did it: That they them∣selves were Actors, and Parties in most of the things, that are deposed; and is not all this sufficient to qualifie them for Witnesses, and make it clear, that they did both know the matters, which
they testifi'd; and did faithfully deli∣ver the matters which they knew? What Judge can desire more suffici∣encie in a Witness, than Knowledge and Integrity? But yet to this I add, That the Fact was so notorious, that the Court of France thought fit, not∣withstanding the great Scandal that must needs arise upon it in those Ca∣tholick Countries, to discharge the Cor∣deliers of their Office, to deprive them of a Jurisdiction, that they had en∣joy'd for many hundreds of years. That this could not be prevented by all the Interest that those Fryars could make, although 'tis well known that they are the most numerous of all the Orders of the Regulars, and the most powerful (except that of the Je∣suits) and notwithstanding that they had made use of all their Arts of Ad∣dress, and all kind of Sollicitations both in the Courts of Rome, and France to prevent the Execution of the Sentence against them.
For the care taken in the Transla∣tion, I have only this to say, That I make no Question, but that upon the comparing of the Copies, it will ap∣pear, that I have very industriously a∣voided all manner of liberty, that might any ways endanger the true meaning of the Testimonies, and have purpose∣ly omitted all the Ornaments, that would, it may be, be requisite for the recommending any other Writing to the Reader. For I imagin'd, that where Religious Persons are brought in to ac∣cuse one another, all care ought to be taken that their words be faithfully related; and if made to put on a for∣reign Dress, that it do not disguise the natusal Meen, and Air of the Parties; That the Translation be as little diffe∣rent, as may be, from the Words, and Connexion, that were made use of in the Original Narration. So that I believe, it will be found, that I have here follow'd the Style of a Court of Justice, rather than that of the Modish
part of the Town, or the Theatre. For the whole Design of it being a matter of Fact, I thought a Verbal Translati∣on would the best suit it, lest the alter∣ing of the Words should cause a misre∣presentation of the true Sence.
A CHAPTER-ACT OF THE RELIGIOUS SISTERS OF THE Royal Monastery of Saint Ca∣tharine, near Provins, to own their Factum against the Cor∣deliers, and all the Matters of Fact contained in the same. THis day Monday the fourth day of the month of April, one thousand six hundred and sixty seven, about three of the clock in the afternoon, We
Notaries, Hereditary Note-keep∣ers, and Registers to the King, un∣dersigned, at the request of the Sisters Margaret Le Cocq de Chauvigny, Magdelaine Pilon, Susan Gaultier, De Flovigny, Ge∣douin, Darzillers, Paris, De Beaufort, Du Pas, Bourdault, De la Salle, Rohault l' Ainee, Ro∣hault la Jeune, Vessiere, Bour∣gouin, Guignet, Des Plasses, and D' Aguerre; All of them Nuns professed in the Royal Monastery of the Mount Saint Catharine near Provins, are come over to the said Monastery, where being, the said Religious Sisters being assembled according to the usual manner, they made a Declaration to us, Tha having understood that the
Fathers Cordeliers, notwithstand∣ing, and to the prejudice of the Procuration, that they gave of it, intended and endeavoured to make the Factum, that they had composed for the defence of their Cause against the said Fathers Cordeliers, be reputed to be, A piece without any consent to it on their part, and of which my Lord Archbishop of Sens was the Authour; That so, after their ha∣ving been the causes of an infinite number of disorders in their Mo∣nastery, aswell in their Spiritual as their Temporal concerns, they might by this means still frustrate the design that the Religious Sisters had to publish the parti∣cular accounts of them, (though
with a great deal of regret, and confusion of Spirit;) since that they have learnt at last by God's mercy to prefer the Salvation of their Souls before all Temporal and Worldly considerations: They do now acknowledg and declare, That they made the said Factum, that they gave the Copies and Originals of it, and that they are ready respectively, and every one in particular for her own part, to maintain the said Factum in all the things that it contains, and moreover to add to them Things much more horrible, which also have been already declared by them, and are in the hands of the said Lord Archbishop of Sens, if what is contain'd in the said Fa∣ctum
be not thought sufficient. Moreover, They have told us, and declared to us, That the Wi∣dow Du Gast could not truly say, that the said Lord Archbishop of Sens did compose the said Factum, that he gave her the Papers, and Manuscripts of it, and took the Sheets back again: but only, that the person who was intrusted to carry it to be printed, did, it may be, make use of the name of the said Lord Archbishop to secure himself, and to avoid the having it seized upon by the Fathers Cordeliers, in case it had been printed in the Nuns name. As in effect, not∣withstanding all kind of precau∣tion they could use to prevent it, they have been acquainted, that
the said Fathers Cordeliers did seize upon some of the Sheets of it, which they would have put into the hands of Monsieur the Lieute∣nant Criminal of Paris, to hin∣der all their designs and inten∣tions. Of the which present Decla∣ration thus made by the above∣named Religious Sisters after they had been heard separately, being assembled together, as is a∣foresaid, those Religious Sisters did demand an Act of us: And to them this present one is given, and granted to serve for what it is proper. This was done, passed, and dis∣patch'd in the said Monastery: And all the said Religious Sisters
before-named, and appearing in their own persons have signed up∣on the Copy of these presents, to∣gether with us Notaries signed underneath, it remaining in the possession of Bruyant. Signed, Bruyant, and De Huchy. Each of them a Paraphe. Compared with the Ori∣ginal by the Kings Coun∣sellor, Secretary of the House of the Crown of France, and of the Fi∣nances.
A FACTƲM, OR, DECLARATION in COURT; FOR The Religious Sisters of Saint Catha∣rine, near Provins, against the Fa∣thers Cordeliers. IT is with a great deal of regret that the Religious Sisters of Saint Catharine, near Provins, see them∣selves forc'd to give an account to the Publick of the Suits which they make at Court against the Fathers Cordeliers. But the injustice, with which it has pleas'd those Fathers to traduce their best intentions, and to make the unanimous consent of the greatest and soundest part of their Com∣munity pass for a Faction, and a Ca∣ball
only of some private persons, will not allow them to hold their peace; and they might well fear, if they dis∣sembled their sense of this injury, that they might seem to authorize all their other disorders. It is nothing then but the bare necessity of defending and justifying themselves, which moves them to speak. And whatsoever mis∣chiefs these Fathers may have done in their House, whatsoever scandals they may have occasion'd; yet nothing does more nearly affect them, than the force which they now constrain them to put upon themselves to pub∣lish such things, as they could have wish'd for the interest of God and his Church, for the honour of that whole Order, aswell as upon the account of their own reputation, to have buried in an eternal silence.
SECTION I. What gave occasion to the Suits, which the Nuns of Saint Catharine make at Court against the F. Cordeliers. THe Monastery of the Nuns of Saint Clare near Provins, was founded in the year 1237. by Theo∣bald the Fourth, King of Navarre, and Earl of Brie and Champaigne. The Traditions of this Monastery say, that this Prince caus'd it to be built in ho∣nour of Saint Catharine upon occa∣sion of a vision, which he had in his Castle of Provins, from whence he had for several nights together seen upon the Hill, where the Monastery now stands, a bright shining light, in the middle of which he discovered a Lady of extraordinary beauty, who with the point of a Sword mark'd out the compass of this House. This Prince, who had a great devotion for Saint
Catharine, was perswaded that it was she, that thus design'd out the place, where God would be serv'd under her good guidance. He resolv'd therefore to build a Nunnery there, to endow it, and to settle those Nuns there, whom Saint Clare, who was then living, had sent him from Assize, from whence the fame of her great Sanctity had dif∣fus'd it self all over the World. These holy Maids liv'd in his Castle of Pro∣vins the space of four years, at the end of which the House being com∣pleatly finish'd, they at last took pos∣session of it. Theobald the Fifth, who succeeded him, had not less affection for this Mo∣nastery than his Father, who had left his heart there for a pledge of his love. He gave these Nuns great en∣dowments, granted them great privi∣ledges, and at the sollicitation of Isa∣bella the daughter of Saint Lewis, whom he had married, he procured of Pope Ʋrban the Fourth a permis∣sion
for them to take the Rule, which at the desire of Saint Lewis he had made for the Nuns of Long-Champ, who had been founded by this holy King twenty two years after the Mo∣nastery of Saint Catharine. Theobald the Fifth dying as he return'd from the voyage, that he had undertaken with Saint Lewis his Father-in-Law beyond Sea, would be buried in this Monastery: The Princess Isabella his wife, who died the same year, chose likewise this place for her interment; and accordingly their ashes lie here to this day. This is all that is known of the Hi∣story of this Monastery. The seve∣ral Fires that have happened, and the care that the Cordeliers have taken to make away all the Titles and Writings, hinder us from being able to give any further light into it. There is nothing but a Bull of Alexander the Fourth, which escaped them, which shall hereafter in its place be mentioned,
and a permission from the Archbishop of Sens to beg in the Diocess for the rebuilding of the Church of Saint Ca∣tharine, which had been burnt down by the English; so that one cannot precisely determine the time, when these Cordeliers first intruded them∣selves into this Monastery. All that is known for certain, is, that about an hundred years since, this House having been again consumed by Fire, was a while after rebuilt by the care of the Lady Margaret de Billy, of the Illustrious House of Prunay, then Ab∣bess of it, who retired in the mean while into the Castle of Provins, as her Predecessors had done upon the like occasions. Five or six and twenty years after Madam d'Osonville being chosen Ab∣bess, and finding the House in horri∣ble irregularities, occasion'd by the conduct of the Cordeliers, who had made themselves Masters of it, set her self about applying some remedies a∣gainst
it. She got a Nun of Amiens, where the Rule was observ'd, to come over to her for this purpose, to teach it her Nuns, to give them the example of it, and to be assistant to her to de∣ny those Fathers entrance into the House. God preserv'd her forty years in this Charge in spite of all the at∣tempts, and persecutions of those Fry∣ers, during all which time they fru∣strated all her good designs, and all the regulations which she had made for settling the Discipline according to the advice of many learned Divines; so that as the greatest number of the Nuns were habituated to these infa∣mous communications, she could never draw them out of it, notwithstanding all the precautions she could make use of: and the disorder did still much more encrease after her death, which happen'd in 1636, which was the time, when the Cordeliers bethought themselves of making the Nuns accept of the Triennial, that the Abbesses might
be in greater dependance upon them, that they themselves might be abso∣lute Masters of the Elections, and that they might with the more ease and success oppose the good designs of those that should be elected. They exercised their Tyranny in this House till the year 1648, when many of the Nuns abhorring their ex∣travagancies did make suit in Parlia∣ment to be discharged of their con∣duct. But Father le Fort, who was then appointed Commissary, and who rul'd all in this Monastery, imagin'd, that now was the most favourable op∣portunity offer'd him to advance him∣self higher in the esteem of those of his own Order, and to make himself still more absolute in this House. He thereupon gives such advice to each of the Parties, as was most proper to foment the Division; and in the Chap∣ters, which he called no less than three times a day, he loaded them with such horrid and injurious language upon
their intending to withdraw them∣selves from under their direction, cal∣ling them People of Sack-cloath and Cord, Souls of Brimstone and Salt-peter; That those Maids being terrifi'd with it, seeing that unless they were assist∣ed in it, they could not yet shake off this so intolerable a Yoke, were con∣tented to let them make some new regulations, and to let the late Mon∣sieur Coqueret be named by the Parlia∣ment to draw them up for them: and thus they continued under the same Government, but yet hoping with∣al that the Regulations that were made for them, would give some re∣medy at least to the evils that they laboured under. But these Regulati∣ons were never put in practice, nor so much as communicated to the Nuns, the Cordeliers being always resolved to retain to themselves the same pow∣er, and the same facility, to commit the same disorders. At last in the year 1663, The Nuns
seeing that the Abbess, who had then finished her Triennial, and who had never been advanced to that charge but by the factious arts of the Corde∣liers, would, if she were longer con∣tinu'd, wholly consume both Tempo∣rall and Spiritual incomes of the Monastery to satisfie the greediness of these Fathers, were resolved to make choice of another. The Cordeliers were well aware of this design, and omitted nothing to continue this Nun in her Government. They made use of all ordinary artifices in order to it. The Provincial took those for Associates, Scrutatour, and Secretary, whom he knew to have most power over the inclinations of the Nuns. They had private conferences with them, some of which were continued till two a-clock in the morning: They used the assistance of Kindred, and Friends abroad, who openly made parties for her. They spared not for either promises, or threats. Some
of the Nuns a great while before had by the Physitians order desired leave to go out to take the waters. They were now offered to have it upon con∣dition that they would give her their vote: They had refused it them for two years before, foreseeing what use they might make of it at the time of the Election. They gave them and many others Notes to signe, that were wrot by a Cordelier to assure themselves of their votes, and of their faithfulness to what they had promised: They took away the office of Scribe from her, to whom it did belong according to the order of the House. And in fine, after all these precautions proceeding to an Election, after that the scruting had been renewed no less than nine times, without being able to overcome the resolution which the best-inclined amongst them had taken, never to con∣sent to the Election of a person who was so directly contrary to the good of their House; They advised her to
give her vote for her self, and the Provincial also gave her his, a practice never before heard of amongst them: so that of thirty three votes counting that of her own, and another of the Provin∣cial's, who had no manner of right to give any, she had in all but seventeen. Although this Election was against all forme, yet they were forced to suf∣fer it: but not without this provision, that the Treasurers should be joyned with the Abbess in the management of the Temporal revenue, and should signe the Acquittances: which nevertheless was never put in execution, no more than all those other things, which the Society has demanded from time to time for the settling of good Order, and which these Fathers to draw them to consent to their desires promised them, but did afterwards make sport at it, when they had obtained their ends so that all things have ever since continu∣ed in greater confusion, and disorder. But at last God being weary of the
insolence, with which these Religious abused the easie natures of these poor Maids, did so provide, that a person un∣known to them, who was deeply affected for the loss of so many Souls consecrated to God, presented a Remonstrance to the late Queen Mother, wherein was declar∣ed in short to her Majesty a part of the excesses, which the Cordeliers com∣mitted in their House, and the neces∣sity there was of removing those Di∣rectors from the Nuns. That Princess was concerned at those disorders; she testified her indignation against the Authors of them, and got a letter of the Kings Privy Seal, to command the Pro∣vincial to set things in right order a∣gain. In this Remonstrance there was men∣tion made of two Nuns, to whom the Cordeliers had given leave to go out of the House: My Lord Archbishop of Sens upon the scandalous reports that were spred abroad concerning them, had advised the Provincial to make
them come home again: That Father therefore commanded them to return to the Monastery: They obeyed him. And he himself went over thither a little while after to punish them for the pretended scandal they had given. And to do it after a more exemplary manner, this severe Judge, and sage Reformer, as those Nuns themselves report it, set himself to caress them for three days together, to entertain them with a thousand expressions of fondness, & an infinite company of idle professions of love, and to turn all that had been said of them abroad into rail∣lery. After all which the Secretary made them signe a paper, which upon the faith of the Provinciall they were made to believe, was a declaration of their Innocence, as indeed they had all reason to believe; since that one of them maintains, That in an entertaine, which he had with her for a good part of the night, and in which he had made her a thousand foolish caresses, so as se∣veral
times to desire to kisse her, That he had then declared to her, that he was not at all perswaded, that either she or her Companion had deserved any punish∣ment, but that what he did in it was on∣ly to take off all blame from their Order out of the Queen Mother's apprehension: Adding, That he would not have her trouble her self for what he should do the next morning, which he had not so much as acquainted his secretary withall; And, that the excommunication, which he must of necessity pronounce against her, should be but a formal shew, a counterfeit anger, and a piece of Mummery. But the next morning having entred the House, and called these two Nuns to a Chapter, to make them confess that they had put off their Habit, and consequently had in∣curr'd the penalty of Excommunication, for which he would have them desire Absolution in full Chapter, that Nun to whom the Provincial had made so many professions of Friendship, and who made account, that she had signed
him a certificate to the contrary, was so touched with this kind of procedure that she withdrew from them instead of coming on forwards. The Provin∣cial thereupon commanded his Secreta∣ry to goe and seize her, and to bring her upon his back: Those were his very words. The Secretary pressed her with a great deal of earnestness to doe what was desired of her; and to make her more tractable, and to free her appre∣hension of the fear she might have of some ill usage, he had the impudence to embrace her, and to kiss her by force in the presence of all the Nuns, and said to her aloud, My Heart, My Dear, My Friend, be our deliverer with the Queen Mother, thou wilt oblige us more than I am able to express. But seeing that all this could not incline her, he fell down on his knees before her, and protested to her, that as the Provincial had promised her all that they did was but a piece of Mummery, and that they
would null the sentence immmediately after it was pronounced. All these extravagant submissions not being able to overcome the resolution of this Nun, the Provincial gave sentence against her and her Compani∣on, by which he deprived them of Active and Passive vote, of the offices of the Religion, of the freedom of Conversing at the grate, and this for as long a time as he and his successours should think fit, and told her particu∣larly that had shown so much stiffeness, that he Excommunicated them: And in effect, the Cordelier Confessor of the House would not since that time admit them to the Sacraments. These Nuns seeing themselves con∣demned to such rigorous severities without other form of process, without bringing in either charge or informa∣tion against them, and without confront∣ing them with witnesses, notwithstand∣ing that they pleaded that they had witnesses of their Innocency, thought
themselves obliged to seek for redress at Court by way of appeal for redressing of abuses, and to make known their grievances there, as well for their making of factions at the Election, as for the disorderly conduct of the Cor∣deliers, and the ill government of the Abbess both as to the Spiritual, and Temporall concerns of the House. Up∣on these complaints the Court by a De∣cree of the 15 May 1664. remitted them to my Lord Arch-bishop of Sens their na∣tural Prelate, and ordained, That what∣soever should be done, and ordered by him should be put in execution, not∣withstanding any opposition, or appeal whatsoever to the contrary. These Nuns, in conformity to the wise pro∣vision of this Decree, presented their request to my Lord Arch-bishop of Sens, that he would please to come over to them to do them justice. Then it was that many of the Nuns in the House, who had for a long time groaned under the disorders that the
Cordeliers had committed in their House, and who had very passionately wished, that it would please God to withdraw from under their Tyranny, now thought themselves obliged to declare them∣selves, and to make use of this favour∣able occasion, which God had put in∣to their hands, for the regaining of their liberty. They united themselves therefore with their Sisters, and with them did unanimously present a new request to this Prelate, to beseech him, in execution of the Decree to come over to their Monastery to inform himself of the disorders of the Religious Fathers, and of the truth of those things which they had specified in their re∣quest. But neither did they stop there: Their number being encreased according as their good intentions came to be better known to their sisters, they drew up a solemn Act signed by the hands of seven∣teen Nuns of the Quire the most ancient amongst them, by which they voted
amongst themselves, To petition my Lord Arch-bishop of Sens in all humili∣ty to receive them under his jurisdiction and conduct, seeing that the disorders of the Cordeliers both in their Spiritual and Temporal concerns were grown to such an height. In this Act they also mutually engaged not to separate, or disunite themselves in the good design which God had put into their minds to esta∣blish good discipline in their House; and for this end to make all earnest endea∣vour and suit to effect it, to give unanimous consent to all that should be thought necessary for it, and to beseech my Lord Archbishop of Sens not to for∣sake them in this good design, and to give them his protection for the com∣pleat execution of it. My Lord Archbishop of Sens consi∣dering the duty of his Character to watch over these Religious Maids for the good of their Souls, and that he ought to be so much the more sensible of this obligation, as they were more
earnest in begging his assistance in their extremity, came over to their Nun∣nery, began his visitation there the 3d of September 1664, drew up their Declaration; and seeing that a part of the disorders of the House proceeded from an ill management of the Tem. poral revenues, and from the driving a Trade of blanching of linnen by the Servitour-sisters for people abroad, he took care to remedy that by wise and most judicious Orders. But as it had been no great matter to have made good provisions for the Temporal, if he had not applyed his charitable cares to reform their Spiritual condition, especially after he had particular infor∣mations from the Religious Nuns, of the state of their Monastery and of the danger they were obnoxious to, if they were not put into a perfect li∣berty of Spirit, and if the Authors of so many horrible scandals were not re∣moved from them, this Prelate thought himself obliged in Fatherly charity to
furnish them with Divines which he approved of, who should have the care of their Consciences, who should assist them in all their necessities, and ad∣minister the Sacraments to them, and to forbid the Cordeliers doing any fun∣ction of their Ministery without his ex∣press permission, and that under his hand. This he did by a new Order of the 10 of February 1666 by which he en∣joyned the Nuns to receive for their confessour Monsieur Bourree, Dr. of the Faculty of Paris, whose ability, life, exemplary manners, and charitable zeal were fully known to him; and commanded the Cordeliers forthwith to leave the House, which they had involved in such horrible disor∣ders. The greatest and soundest part of the Nuns submitted with joy and comfort to the Orders of their Prelate: But some others to the number of nine or ten of the Quire, engaged by no body
knows what false Maximes, to say no worse, to the interest of the Cordeliers, made opposition against them together with the Servitour-sisters, whom the Cordeliers had managed for such a kind of design a long while before, and whom they had won over to their party by making them equall to the Religious of the Quire against all order, and by allowing them all kind of Liberties a∣gainst their vowes of Confinement and Po∣verty, and against the particular obliga∣tions of their quality. Upon the refusal of these nine or ten Maids, there was issued out a De∣cree of the 24 of March 1666, by which it was enjoyned that the Orders of my Lord Archbishop of Sens should be put in execution according to their form and tenour. This Decree was backed with another of the 14 of April following, by which the united Nuns being received as Appealers from the abuse of a pretended obedience to the Commissary General given to F.
Houdry a Cordelier, and of certain pretended Bulls of exemption from the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary in fa∣vour of the Religious Maids of St. Clare denounced to them under the penalty of Excommunication to the pre∣judice of the Decrees of the Court, the Orders of my Lord Archbishop of Sens, were confirmed a new, and the Lieu∣tenant General of Provins enjoyned to give his assistance to the execution of those Orders. Those absolute Commands, which came from an Authority which all ought to reverence, instead of open∣ing the eyes of these nine or ten Religious Maids, and making them listen to the reasons that perswaded the Court so effectually to maintain the Order of my Lord Archbishop of Sens, served to no better purpose, than to make them give clear evidence of that spirit of Rebel∣lion, with which the Cordeliers had inspired them. It was therefore ne∣cessary to have recourse to the Lieute∣nant
Generall of Provins and that the Eldest Counsellour of that Court should come over to the Monastery of St. Ca∣tharine the 18. of Aprill, in Execution of this last Decree to settle the Sieur Bourree in the Ordinary House of the Confessors of this Monastery, in spite of all the opposition of these nine or ten Nuns. Such a publick Contempt of My Lord Archbishop of Sens's Orders, and so notorious a Violation of the Just Authority of his Sacred Character, could not but raise a very reasonable In∣dignation in him, and one would think should have drawn down upon the heads of these nine or ten Nuns, the Thunder which God had put into his hands. But this Prelate considering, that their Obstinacy proceeded from their Errours, and the false Maxims that the Cordeliers had instilled into them, rather than from any deliberate malice, resolved to try all possible wayes of Sweetness and Charity, to reduce them to a Sense of their duty. He therefore
took care to have that particular obe∣dience, to which they were obliged by their Vows, and the hainousness of that Sin, which making them violate those Vows would make them lose the qua∣lity of the Spouses of Jesus Christ, re∣presented unto them. He moreover provided to have it remonstrated unto them, how unwarrantable those strange Heats were, and that violence of spirit, which they had added to this disobe∣dience, and which deserved an Exclusi∣on from the graces that God has united to the Sacraments of his Church; and a separation from the Society and Com∣munion of his Holy Family. And finally, he made it be declared to them, with that Fatherly Authority which God had given him for their concern, That he was most tenderly inclined for their Spiritual welfare; but withall, that he did most perfectly abhor their Rebelli∣on: That he would root that out to the preservation of their Souls, and that after he had waited for their Re∣pentance
with patience, and used the admonitions which Charity required of him, he should be constrained at last to make use of the sharpest remedies to penetrate into, and so to dissipate that hard Tumour of their hearts. But all these Charitable Remonstran∣ces were wholly ineffectual. The Ser∣vitour-Sisters continued their unlawfull commerce, and the nine or ten Sisters of the Quire remained still as pertinacious, and obstinate in refusing to acknow∣ledge Mounsieur Bourree their Confessour. And as if the Cordeliers were afraid lest these Maids by doing their duties, and frequenting the Sacraments, should come to be sensible of the precipice they had engaged them in, they per∣swaded them to absent themselves wholly from them: and all the care that My Lord Archbishop of Sens could use to make them come to these Solem∣nities, and the goodness he shewed them in offering them Confessours of any of the other Religious Orders to
draw them to it, could not prevent them from letting Easter-day passe with∣out receiving the Communion. That Prelate threatned them with the penal∣ties incurred by the Holy Canons, if they acquitted not themselves of a duty, which he made appear to them was so indispensible. They had three Admonitions for it according to the custome. They returned no other answer to all this, but injurious Lan∣guage and Contempt. And in fine, after a tedious Expectation of their Repen∣tance, having declared to them in the usual form, that they had incurred Ex∣communication, they behaved them∣selves so haughtily, that their Sisters, who were more sensibly affected at that violent and stubborn Deportment, with which they opposed the good Or∣der that was intended to be settled in the House, than at the particular Inju∣ries which they had received from them, having informed the Court of it, and presented a Petition, to which
was joyned a Declaration of all that had passed; The Court by a Decree of the 5th. of September, 1666. remitted them to My Lord Archbishop of Sens to be redressed by him by all wayes due and reasonable, and even to the car∣rying away of such Nuns as he should think fit into other Monasteries: Did enjoyn the Lieutenant General of Pro∣vins, and others the Kings Officers, to assist the said Lord Archbishop with the Secular Arme, and the Kings Deputy-Attourney to give his Ayd. My Lord Archbishop of Sens, seeing himself forc'd by their obstinacy to put this Decree in Execution, did cause some of them to be carried into other Monasteries. They then began to abandon their for∣mer stubbornness, and to acknowledge the voyce of their true Pastor: And as they were now no longer beset with the Cordeliers, who made them stop their Ears, and who encouraged them in this their Rebellion, they had no sooner had the taste of this happy liberty,
which was procured them by deliver∣ing them out of a place where they were held Captives, but they acknow∣ledged the need that their House stood in of the Remedy which was applyed to those wounds, that the Religious Fathers had given to their Discipline; the necessity of my Lord Archbishop of Sens's Orders, and the Justice of the Decrees of the Court that had con∣firmed them. They therefore presently wrot to this Prelate to beg his pardon for the disobedience which a false Zeal for their Rule had made them commit, and to assure him of the good dispositi∣on they were in to submit themselves to his Orders, and to acknowledge him for their lawful Superiour. And not only those who were carried out to other Monasteries, but even those who stayed still at St. Catharines, did by publick Acts, and before Notaries, pro∣test the Nullity of all that they might have done, or signed to the contrary. But the Cordeliers, who whilest these
nine or ten Nuns did make profession of so much resolution to retain them still in their House, had several times made a shew of leaving them to themselves, not considering with themselves, that these Nuns being no longer managed by them would soon return to their duty, and would not fail to execute that themselves, which the Fathers did but make a shew of doing, betook themselves to other Artifices to main∣tain themselves in the Ʋsurpation they had assumed in making themselves the Directours of this Monastery. For this purpose they undertook two things equally contrary to the Laws of the Land, the Priviledges of the Gallicane Church, and to the Authority of Parliament: The one under the name of the Procuratour General of the Order; and the other under the name of the Nuns of St. Catharine. Under the name of the Procuratour General of the Order they addressed themselves to the Congregation of the Regulars at Rome,
where thinking to elude the Executi∣on of the Decree of the 15th. of May, 1664. and of those others issued out since, by which the Nuns of St. Catha∣rine are remitted to the Archbishop of Sens, they procured a Decree bearing, That that Prelate should have a time as∣signed him to be heard, That in the mean while the Censures pronounced by him should be taken off, and that the Monaste∣ry should continue under the Conduct and Jurisdiction of the Cordeliers. Under the name of the Nuns of St. Catharine, they obtained of their Ge∣neral a Commission, by which Father Pinault Warden of the great Convent at Paris, is fully empowered to reform the Nuns of St. Catharine, to correct them, to govern them, and to give them Re∣ligious Fathers for Confessours; And they are all commanded under penalty of Excommunication to obey him, and to acknowledge him Commissary; which is in plain terms to make all that is de∣pendant, and undecided in the Court,
to be judged at Rome by their General, without any cognizance of the cause, and without hearing of the parties. The Religious Sisters of St. Catharine, being acquainted with the private in∣trigues of the Cordeliers, met in Chapter the 5th. of February 1666. and did to the Number of twenty of them, all Nuns of the Quire, resolve to present a Petition at Court to get a Decree, by which My Lord Archbishop of Sens should be de∣clared Superiour of their House, with a prohibition to all others to disturb, or hinder him in the Possession and Juris∣diction of this right: And the 4th. of August the same year, it being noised abroad, That Father Pinault Warden of Paris, had got the Kings Letters Pa∣tents upon the pretended Commission of the Father General, they presented a new Petition to My Lord Archbishop of Sens, signed by twenty Nuns, all pro∣fessed of the Quire, to request him in all Humility, to receive them once more under his Protection, and immediately
to come over to their Monastery, to settle the Regulations there, which he should find necessary, as he had already began to do. And that they might omit nothing, that might contribute to the procuring them so Powerful an Assist∣ance against the mischiefs with which they saw themselves over-run; On the twentieth of the same Moneth, they op∣posed the Registring of the Letters Pa∣tents, which might have been imposed upon them upon this pretended Com∣mission from the General: and on the thirteen of November they appealed as from the abuse of this same Commission; and on the seventeenth, they signified their Appeal to Father Pinault. But be∣cause they had not as yet made their Appeal as from an abuse of the preten∣ded Decree of the Congregation, ob∣tained by the Procuratour General of the Order, not imagining that in France there ought any regard to be had to a Grant, so contrary to the rights of the Bishops, and to the Maxims of both
Civil and Ecclesiastick Law; they pre∣sented a new Petition to the Court on the 29th. of the same November, 1666. Upon which by a Decree of December the second, they were received Appeal∣ants, as from an abuse of the before∣mentioned pretended Decree of the Congregation: and it was ordered in these terms; That the Declaration of the Visitation, and Hearings of the said Religious Sisters made, and received by the said Archbishop of Sens. shall within a moneth be brought to the Civil Office of the Court, the Clerk to be obliged to do it by all due and reasonable ways, and in the mean while prohibited to put the said Decree of the Congregation in Execution, as also against the Archbishop's making his appearance upon any such assignations, which might be set him in vertue of that Decree; and Ordered that those under∣named, Hubert, Apostolick Notary, Bru∣gare and Messagio, Notaries of Provins, who signified that Decree, shall be appoin∣ted to appear at Court, to answer to the
Articles that the Attourney-General may draw up against them, for having dar'd against the Duty and Obligation of their place to signifie a Decree, which does so openly wound the Liberties of the Gal∣licane Church, and the Laws of the Realm. This is the state of the Affairs of the Nuns of St. Catharine, and whither all the suits they have made at Court for these two years do tend, that is, to be discharged of the direction of the Cor∣deliers, and to return under that of my Lord Archbishop of Sens, who is their Lawful and Natural Superiour: And this is that which is here design'd to be Just∣ified, by making it appear that these Two Pleas are agreeable to all the Rules of the Church, and to the particular Obligations of these Nuns: That the State and Religion are concerned in it, and that Reasons, which to them seem Invincible, and which respect the Glory of God, and the good of their Souls, will not suffer them to neglect them.
SECTION II. The first Plea of the Nuns of St. Catha∣rine, which is to return under the Con∣duct and Jurisdiction of My Lord Archbishop of Sens, their Lawful Prelate. THe Nuns of St. Catharine have such powerful reasons to live under the Government and Direction of my Lord Archbishop of Sens, their lawful Prelate, that one can scarce com∣prehend how they come to be engaged under any other Conductors, nor by what Charm they have been kept in subjection to that of the Cordeliers, who have made themselves Masters of the Government of their House. For besides the reasons in general, which do submit, as shall be made appear, all Religious Houses to the Bishops, they have such particular ones from the na∣ture of their Order, and the Maxims of
their Holy Founder, that the Extrava∣gant disorders, which have been com∣mitted in their Monastery under these Mercenary and Self-interested Pastors, as we shall afterwards show, cannot but be attributed to the Violation of all those Holy Rules. Here follows a Discourse of above Eighty pages, to prove that of Right all Reli∣gious Houses belong to the Jurisdiction of the Bishops, and not to any Mona∣stical Superiours, which being likely to prove very tedious to English Readers, was thought fit to be omitted: The Heads of the Chapters are these that follow. SECTION III. That Religious Houses cannot be with∣drawn from under the Jurisdiction of the Bishops, and that whatsoever Ex∣emptions have been granted them, the Bishops notwithstanding are their Lawful Superiours.
SECTION IV. That the Order of St. Francis was in its first Institution submitted to the Bish∣ops; and that it was the intention of that Holy Founder, it should always continue under that Subjection. SECTION V. That it is far from the mind of St. Fran∣cis, that the Religious Sisters of St. Clare, should be under the Conduct of the Friers Minors. SECTION VI. That although the Friers Minors a little after the setting up of the Order of the Nuns of St. Clare, did insinuate them∣selves into the Government of their Monastery, they were notwithstanding always under the Jurisdiction of the Bishops.
SECTION VII. That the Nuns of St. Catharine, were at their first Institution submitted to the Archbishop of Sens. SECTION VIII. The Bulls alledged by the Cordeliers, to maintain their pretended Jurisdiction over the Monastery of St. Catharine, are answered. SECTION IX. The second Plea of the Nuns of St. Ca∣tharine, which is, to be discharged of the Direction of the Fathers Corde∣liers. 'TIs not enough to have proved, (as has been done.) That if the Cordeliers have had any Jurisdiction in the Monastery of St. Catharine, they
have usurped it against the Rights, which the Holy Scriptures, the Councils, and all Tradition do give My Lord Archbishop of Sens, and against the in∣dispensible Obligations that lye upon the Nuns, according to the mind of St. Francis, and the Rule of their Foun∣dation to live under his Conduct and Authority. It must besides be made ap∣pear, that they have rendred them∣selves unworthy, upon the account of those Horrible Disorders committed by them in their House, and that utter Im∣possibility there is of ever resettling any good Discipline there.
SECTION X. That the Cordeliers have rendred them∣selves unworthy of Governing the Nuns of St. Catharine, by reason of those horrible Disorders they have com∣mitted in their Monastery. 'TIs a certain Maxim in Law, That He that abuses a Priviledge granted him deserves to lose the Power he has in vertue of that Priviledge. Privilegium meretur amit∣tere, qui permissâ sibi abutitur potestate. There need then nothing else be done, but to bring into open view the abuses, that the Cordeliers have committed of this pretended Jurisdiction over the Monastery of St. Catharine, to give un∣deniable proof that they deserve to lose it, although they had been law∣fully possessed of it: and that they are wholly unworthy of bearing the stile of Pastours to these Holy Sisters;
having all the Characters of those mi∣serable Mercenaries, those False Pro∣phets, those Thieves, those Robbers, who are mentioned in the Holy Gospel; To whom the sheep belongeth not, who are cloathed like sheep, but within are rave∣ning Wolves; who enter not by the gate of the Fold, that is, by the Order of the Bishop, but climb over another way, that is, by the way of Exemptions and Priviledges, and come for nothing but to steal, devour and destroy. Fur non venit nisi ut furetur, &c. SECTION XI. The Disorders that the Cordeliers have committed in the House of St. Catha∣rine, as to the Spiritual concern. IT were to be wish'd for the Honour of the Church which suffers by all her disorderly Children, that the Cordeliers would have made good use of the moderation, which had been ex∣ercised
towards them till now. There would then have been no necessity at this time to declare things which Chari∣ty, that covers a multitude of Sins, has so long concealed, and which seemed to have kept them secret from her own view, lest Zeal should oblige her in Justice to prosecute the Authors of them. But 'tis found too plain, as it shall soon be shown, that this long Pati∣ence hath served to no other purpose, than to make them the more insolent, and to give them liberty to carry their Excesses to such an height, as has ren∣dred them the scandal not only of one Town, or one Province, but of the whole Church. To be able to conceive an Idea of it in general, one need but represent to ones Fancy all the mischiefs that humane passions are capable of producing when they are cover'd with pretences of Piety, and abuse the most Holy and Sacred things to satisfie their own incli∣nations, and as much as in them lies, to
corrupt poor innocent Souls. One need but fancy all the most shameful and base ways, that may be made use of to overthrow good discipline in a Religious House. In fine, One need but imagine all the abuses, which people that are not restrained either by the fear of God or man can commit, of an Autho∣rity which they have usurped, and which they employ to inspire Vicious∣ness, and to set up Wickedness in full power. And one need not fear that these general Idea's should be either too high or too large, seeing that these Fathers have this unhappy advantage, That the Wit of man is not capable of imagining that which they are capable of com∣mitting. For that reason, as their Ex∣travagancies exceed all imagination, there shall be nothing said of their Dis∣orders here, but what is faithfully drawn out of their own writings, and the depositions of a great number of the Nuns. And besides, there shall be so much condescension shown in their be∣half
as not to name them openly, when∣ever it shall appear necessarily to parti∣cularize any of their Disorders: and those Actions shall be suppressed, which could not be mentioned without doing violence to Modesty. The Education of Pensioners. THE First care of those who de∣sign to make Vertuous and Re∣ligious Nuns, is to bring them up as soon as possible in the Fear of God, and to withdraw them in their tenderest years from the Vanities of the World. But as the Cordeliers who have had the direction of the Monastery of Saint Catharine have had ends far enough di∣stant from this, so have they taken dif∣ferent measures; and their first care on the other side has been to inspire the young Virgins, who were sent to pensi∣  this House, with a spirit of Wan∣ and Libertinism, and to incline
them from their tenderest infancy, to love to be Caressed and Courted. See how one of these Sisters speaks in her depositions. The Education that they gave was most pernicious: The Con∣fessours spent their time in caressing the Pensioners that were sent them to be instructed for the Holy Com∣munion, and entertaining them with all kind of ridiculous stories. When upon occasion they went to the Fa∣thers Convent, they used all kind of unseemly privacies with them, to take away from them that Modesty that is natural to their Sex, and so early enough dispose them to be after∣wards the more complaisant to them. The Ancientest and the most Reverend amongst them appointed their Novi∣ces to entertain those Pensioners, whose inclinations were most suited to theirs: They gave them names of Kindred, and from time to time made them give them visits to foment their Intimacy, and to give
one another mutual assurances by Words, by Presents, and by Collations. This was the foundation, upon which they laid their Education of Youth, and which in my opinion might easily convince them of what has been done since in their riper years, having taken such timely care to perswade the young Virgins that all these things were innocent. Education of Novices. THey were not content to in∣stil such dangerous inclina∣tions as these into the young Virgins, but took care also to foment and cherish them according as they advanced in years. And whereas in other Monasteries the time of Novi∣ciate is that, wherein they apply them∣selves most to those who design to enter into the Religion, and acquaint them with all the least appearance of
a Religious severity, the Cordeliers on the other side made it their busi∣ness to divert the Mistresses of the Novices, from informing them of the obligations of a Religious Life, which they conceal'd from them with a great deal of care, that whilst they put them upon some trifling or∣dinary Observances, they might not lose any thing of that spirit of Wan∣tonness and Vanity, which they had endeavoured to inspire into them be∣fore the time of their Noviciate. I can affirm, as having assured know∣ledge of it, that Three Novices ready to be professed, having been with Father N. Confessour, to be instructed in order to this Sacred Action, He made them an hundred idle Comple∣ments of Love, and gave every one of them a token of his Affection, ob∣liging them to wear them; gave them very earnest advice to get them good Intimates amongst the Fathers, tel∣ling them that it was very conveni∣ent
for the Fathers, keeping them from going to the Tavern, and diver∣ting entertainment for themselves to make them passe their time pleasant∣ly, and gave them very particular silly Instructions about the way to manage these Intimacies. He desi∣red one of the three to retire pri∣vately, that he might acquaint her with the Passion he had for her, when he gave her Holy Water at the great Grate of the Church; That he reser∣ved himself for her, That if it were the Rule of the House, that the Nuns should not come to the Grate till four years after that they had been pro∣fessed, he would wait till then to have her for himself. He told ano∣ther Father, who also had an Inclina∣tion for this Novice, That he had no∣thing to do to pretend to her, that he had reserv'd her for himself. But not having found in these Novices all the compliance he could have wish'd, he threatned to stop their Profession,
as indeed he did endeavour, but to no purpose. The Sisters being nigh the time of their Profession, were of∣ten sent to Father N. the Confessour, to be instructed by him in the Obli∣gations of the Religion. But he, instead of acquitting himself of this duty, talked to them of nothing but Love, and to effect it with more suc∣cess, he often entertained them in private, and gave them Medals with knots of Ribbons of divers colours, according to the variety of his incli∣nations, making them promise him to wear them for his sake. And per∣ceiving once that they had not put them on, he was in such a rage, that he threatned to keep them from their Profession, which he set himself on work to do, by perswading their Mistress, that they were not well in∣structed in the things which were ne∣cessary for them to know. He called Sister N. his Inclination; Sister N. his Sweeting; Sister N. his faithful Con∣fident.
These were the subjects of his Entertaines with them. Some No∣vices having been sent to receive In∣struction of the Confessour, he instead of preparing them to the Sacrament, of a true Religious Vocation, gave them for a constant rule, to make themselves sensible of the Love he bore them. For tokens of the ar∣dent zeal of his Love to them, he gave them Ribbons of Fire-Colour, blew, green, and other colours, that were significative of his passion, enga∣ging them above all to come to the Holy Water, the better to encourage him to sing Mass: And that he might have them daily at his grate, he blamed the Mother Governess for the unpreparedness of these Novices, to oblige her to send them to him un∣der this false pretence of Piety.
Of the young Professed Nuns. ONe may Judg by what has been said about the manner of the Cordeliers instructing the Novices, what measures they took with the young Professed Nuns. In effect, it were strange if they should not have taken all kind of liberty before them, since now they feared not, That Modesty would make these Maids leave the House to avoid the snares that were laid for their Chastity. A young Profes∣sed Nun, who had taken very strong resolutions (by the assistance of Gods Grace, and the Instructions of a Di∣vine that was a friend of her Family) never to entertain any communica∣tion with the Cordeliers, upon occa∣sion found her self engaged to see one of them, and to entertain him. And because she stood very cauti∣ously upon her guard; this Corde∣lier gave her an hundred reproach∣ful
taunts. He told her, that such a kind of reserved life was fit enough indeed for meer Innocents; but that it was pity, that she should affect such preciseness: That she was too well made both in body and mind, to hide her self from the World: That when she came to be a little more advanced in years, she would run into despair for not having improved her parts, or had the pleasure of being Loved; and to this he added all that might make impression upon the inclinations of a young Virgin. Books allowed. But yet they thought it not suffici∣ent to make use of such kind of dis∣course as this, to draw off the young Nuns from doing their duty, and in∣sensibly to ingage them in vitious in∣clinations. They brought them Ro∣mances and Plays to read, and all other books that might choak the sentiments
of Piety in them, and make them easily susceptible of the Affections which they endeavoured to cherish in them. Their Passion besotted them so far, as to make them give the Nuns, The Max∣ims of Love, The School of Maids, The Catechism of Love, whch are most abo∣minable pieces, and which one may say, were suggested by the Devil of Impurity. Nay they have even given them books of Magick, and full of an infinite number of infamous and dia∣bolical secrets: And one of them was so beastly, as to give a Nun a Character to write nasty things withal. Instructions. To these Books they added In∣structions, which were not less impu∣dent. They have been heard at the Grate an infinite number of times to sing Lascivious songs, and one could scarce go thither when they were there, without hearing some sottish
thing or other. Once in a pretty round company, upon a refusal made by a Nun to put her fingers through to one that desired her, he fell to a∣buse her, and told her that she must know, that all from the middle up∣wards was so wholly at the disposal of their particular Friend, that he was not to be refused, neither the sight, nor the handling of them. Our Mothers Governesses have assured me, and many others of our Ladies, that the Cordeliers gave them this for a lecture that 'twas to be well practi∣sed, That the Bosome, the Mouth, and the Hand, must be their particu∣lar Friends. A Sister complaining to a Cordelier that they talked so freely of immodest things, He told her, that it was not so great a sin as she made account of; That in the Primitive Church every one gave the Kisse of Peace, and that it was not forbidden but upon the account of those that abused it.
the same person telling another Fa∣ther, That she wondred that Priests dare present themselves before the Altar, in the midst of such communi∣cations; That for her part, the meer shame of confessing such actions, were enough to withold her from them: He told her, That these things being not done for any ill end, but only to express the tenderness of their Friendship, it was at the most but a venial Sin. Presents. These Instructions were backed with Presents, which relisht of nothing but Vanity and Libertinisme. Father N. (when our Confessour) desired of∣ten to speak with two Nuns, to enter∣tain them with professions of his Friendship, and gave them wet and dry sweet-meats, to oblige them to comply with him, and to satisfie his unlawful desires. Father N. Rival
of Father N. gave his picture drawn as a Gentleman to Sister N. and made that Lady be drawn as a Pallas. O∣thers as great Gallants as these gave them Rings, Gloves trimmed with Ribbons, Watches, Looking-glasses, Seals, wherein they engraved their Ciphers, and the first letters of their Names, interwoven with Motto's and Emblems that expressed their Passion: And for fear they should not comprehend the mysteries of them, they accompanied them with passionate Letters and Verses which did unriddle them. See how one of the most reputed amongst these Fa∣thers, has explained them in one of his Posies and dear Letters which is under keeping. LETTER. My Heart is wholly yours, wholly in you, and wholly for you, seeing it lives only for you. Doubt not of it no
more than of those Oaths which I have made to you, and which I now renew to you, to Honour you with∣out Equal and without End. 'Tis the Device, which I have caused to be graved upon one of the Seals which I send you, of the Ciphers of our names interwoven; which in its first part expresses the high and singular esteem I make of your Affection: The other part expresses the durati∣on of it, which shall have no end, no more than the ardour of my Affecti∣on, and the absoluteness of my sub∣mission shall have bounds. As you have most Amourea∣sement. Af∣fectionately given me up your Arms, and as I have received them and kept them by me, because the Caske becomes not your Sex, which ought never to conceal the Charms of their face and eyes; and besides, because I should be sorry that those that should set upon N. should find him unprovided of his
Arms, and not able to defend him∣self, so now I send you them back a∣gain in another Seal. As they con∣sist of two flames and a bell, the first of which make themselves sensible by the effects of heat, and the other by sound and noise, I have put for the Device; more of Fire: suppres∣sing the rest, which would make up a perfect sense: More of fire than sound, that is to say, more of effects than words, more of fruits than noise, more of passion than talk, more of love in the heart than in the mouth. The bell also is enclosed, and covered with a Chevron, and though provided of its clapper, yet it is at rest, to sig∣nifie, that it says not a word. The ribbon that ties them together with its three colours, expresses the qua∣lity of our affections. You love the Ash-colour, which signifies the infini∣ty of your love. I have a fancy for the White and Green, the one of which signifies fidelity, candour, and sincerity;
the other, hope and encrease. So that beginning at yours, they sing: My Love has no bounds, because my fidelity alwaies encreases: beginning at the white: My fidelity shall alwaies en∣crease, and therefore my Love shall have no end: And at the Blew: I hope that my fidelity will acquire me a Love without End. These Artificial pie∣ces of the workman, and these weak productions of my own fancy, will however acquaint you with that So∣veraign empire you have over my will, and what constant employ∣ment you give my heart, which thinks of nothing but of my Conquer∣ess and Soveragn. I protest to you, most amiable Melita, it is true, and if it were in my power to give you any considerable proofs of this truth, I would soon put your mind out of a capacity of ever doubting of it, and your heart in a condition of feeling as constant and tender inclinations for Thyrsis, as he now wishes for his hap∣piness
and repose. I conclude with these ten ill-made, but true lines, spea∣king to this pitiful Present. Vous partez Avortons? Vous osez ha∣zarder? Allez foibles efforts d'un Caeur plein de Courage; Si Melite pour vous aussi bonne, que Sage A'l abord sealement daign vous regarder Vostre bonlieur digne d' Envie Allumera ma jalousie. Ne me derobez rien, ny du caeur, ny des Yeax: Dites-luy settlement, que je suis tout en Elle, Et jurez-luy pour moy sur le plus grand Des Dieax, Que je serray constant autant qu'elle est belle. OR, Dare you Abortives thus your For∣tune try? Go then weak sallies of a Generous mind;
If you as Good as Wise Melita find. T' allow you but one glance of a kind Eye, Your Happy Fortune will in me Kindle the flames of jealousie. Rob me not either of her heart, or Eye, Tell her, in her I only live; and swear, Swear't for me by the greatest Deity That I'le be full as Constant, as she's Fair. But these Fathers were not conten∣ted only at this rate, to employ such profane stuff as this to win the hearts of these Religious Sisters: There was no∣thing that appeared any thing glorious in the world, which they did not make use of to corrupt them. See how one of them has turned the entry of the King and Queen into Paris into appli∣cations of flattery to his Correspon∣dent, where he says he was with the body of the University in his rank of Doctour.
LETTER. Seeing the Queen under the Cano∣py of State and upon the throne, I wished her the shape and meen of my Soveraign. Hearing the publick Ac∣clamations, and the solemn vows they made for her, I wished that the merit of Melita had been as much revealed. Nay sometimes when I saw the King enter his City, I felt the transports of my heart, and the urgent efforts of my Soul carried forth to wish my self a like happiness, which would have compleated my felicity, if it had been with less Pomp and with more secrecy. Thus this whole pompous day was spent in a continual commerce be∣twixt my eyes and my heart, applying all the glorious representations that charmed the one to the Charms that triumphed over the other.
THESES. THey have sometimes employed even things, which common de∣cency and piety seemed to have secu∣red from the attempts of their wicked passion: For to signalize it the more, they have even dared to dedicate The∣ological Theses to them, borrowing to this purpose after a new-invented sort of impiety, the pictures and qualities of the Saints, whose names they bore. This possibly could hardly be believed, if the very Extracts of their own Let∣ters were not here produced. LETTER. I am just now going to carry my Theological Theses to the Printer: I must defend it the sixth of October, and I intend it shall be under your Patronage. If I did not apprehend the talk of people, I would set out
your name and merits in publick upon the Title, and the Epistle De∣dicatory of the same Theses. But I will content my self to dedicate it to you tacitly, for the picture putting a Magdalen, and for the Title these words: Multum Diligenti, that is, To her who Loves much— This is the design, see now the execution of it in another. LETTER. My Beloved Heart, I desire you im∣mediately upon the receit of this to send to Monsieur Michels (He is the Messenger of Provins,) you shall there find that which I promised you, that is, a piece of Satin with a dozen of Theses, which I send you to give to your Friends. Send me word whe∣ther you have received them all, and if there be nothing spoiled, especially the satin. If I were with you I would have a Frame made to put it in. You
will find at the opening of the pac∣quet a piece of my hand, which is an Epistle Dedicatory. I would have put it all in French, with your name in the press, and would have printed it so. But it is not time yet to take such liberties. I believe you know the reason why. Although there be but one Title upon the Theses, yet it makes a great many people talk who know the Mistery of it, and to declare their sense about it, and to say, that it is to you that I dedicate it. They must have very little wit if they should judge otherwise, since the Title makes it clear enough to them. To testifie then that it is to you that I dedicate it, I was not con∣tent to put those two words only, which I sent you notice of. I should not have thought that I had suffici∣ently gratified the ardour of my Love. And so I would put in all the Title, which you may now see, together with a picture of her, whose name
you bear. See then the explication of the Title— To both the Disci∣ple and Mistress of the Sacred Love, Mary Magdalen, who as a mark has been struck with the Arrow of Love, and who reciprocally as another Ar∣row has struck another mark: To the Well-beloved: To Her who has loved much, and does love much: To the Well-chosen: To Her who has made choice of the better part, which shall never be taken from her. This is the Explication of the Title, which may be understood of the Magdalen in res∣pect of Jesus Christ, of Jesus Christ in respect of the Magdalen. But I un∣derstand them of you and my self re∣ciprocally: Let them talk of it that will. 'Tis too long a while since, that I could but only wish for an op∣portunity of giving you a testimony of the sincerity of my heart: And these are the least testimonies I could give you of it. I hope one day to do more to assure you, that I Love you in
reality, and not in appearance only, and that I am, My beloved Heart, your Engaged for ever. One must be very curious about profanations and impieties, not to be satisfied with this; for 'tis not very easie for impiety to go higher, than to abuse the words of the Gospel and of Jesus Christ himself, to express a scan∣dalous criminal passion by; and to borrow the Idea of the chastest and purest Love that ever was, for to dedi∣cate and sacrifice, as one may say, the truths of Divinity to a ridiculous and abominable Love. And yet these are the least testimonies of affection, that these Fathers thought they could give the Nuns, and made use of Profanations yet still more impious and exorbitant.
SERMONS. HOw frequently have they made the Talent that God gave them to preach his word, serve to entertain their infamous commerces? How often have they endeavoured by a most ex∣ecrable profanation of this Divine Mi∣nistry to make the Nuns believe, that it was they that animated them in their preaching, that encouraged them to un∣dertake it, that upheld them in this pain∣ful work, and that they proposed to them∣selves nothing else, but the glory of plea∣sing them. See how one of them, when about to perform the Lent-course in a very considerable town, has expressed himself in one of his Letters. LETTER. This does testifie to you, Most dear Melita, that Thyrsis loses no oppor∣tunity, whereby to assure you of
the extraordinary pleasure he finds in entertaining himself with her, whom he loves more then himself: His constitution, which is none of the strongest, fills his mind with terrour, as often as he thinks of the approach of a five weeks labour, under the toil of which he foresees either the shame of sinking, or the danger of death it self: He shuts his eyes against these disasters, and stops his ears aganst the complaints of his head, and his lungs, by the strength of that desire he has to see before, and after these hard∣ships; the object that will animate him to undertake them, and that will give him a sweet consolation after all his languor. If you are very well ac∣quainted with the incomparable Meli∣ta, you may assure her, that it is none but her, that can effect these wonders in an heart, that is more her's than its own. Nothing refreshes this languish∣ing creature in his continual indispo∣sitions, but the Idea of her perfecti∣ions.
'Tis to that, that he makes the most pompous sacrifices: 'Tis to that, that he addresses his most solemn Ʋows: Tis that, where he places his most affecting delights: Tis upon that, that he intends to set up his rest, and without End, and without Change. MARRIAGES. BUT they were not thus satisfied with the Profanation of a Ministry that ought to be so much reverenced: They carried their Sacriledge yet high∣er, by profaning the Sacraments and the most Holy Ceremonies of the Church. They had taken care so to contrive it, that there should not be one Nun in the House, that from her Novice-ship, that is, in an age, and at a time when she durst not oppose them, had not some Cordelier for her particular friend,
and with whom also she was made to contract a very intimate Alliance. This was done with all possible solemnity: and as for the future they were to call themselves Husband and Wife, accor∣ding to an Order long since established by them in the Nunnery. When they would make any new Intimates, they observed the same formalities, which were used in common Marriages. The new Lovers addressed themselves to the kindred and friends of those, that they desired to encline to them. They gave pledges of their Affection, made de∣mands and conventions: They assigned days to draw up the Articles, to make the Contracts, and at last the Marriages, where there was jollity and feasting, and a thousand impertinencies uttered. It is now sixteen, or eighteen years since, That Father M. Cordelier and Doctour of Paris, being come to court a Sister, and to take her for his good Friend, (That was their Or∣dinary Character) did scarce part
from her for three days together, the time that he staied there. He advanced his discourse with her by degrees, made insolent propositions to her, alledged those unwarranta∣ble liberties, that he had taken with the Ladies of the N. Cordeliers, to her; and such freedom as many of his Order had told him they had ta∣ken in our House, at which without the particular Grace of God, she had yielded to him. Another Sister after she had been courted a long while by Father N. at present Warden of— had all solem∣nities provided for her Marriage. A Cordelier as the Father of F. N. de∣manded her of M. N. the Abbess, who passed for the Mother of this Sister: Father N. Cordelier served for the No∣tary to pass the Contract: They pub∣lished the banes at the Grate of the asorementioned Lady, and in the Hall below. Father N. served for Curate, making them say the very words, and
he for his part reading the same Pray∣ers, and using the same Ceremonies that are observed in ordinary Marria∣ges. There was a Ring given, and put upon the finger of the Bride, Sister N. disguised like a Cordelier, made them an exhortation about the duties of Marraige, and after that, he and she were sent alone to another Grate, to consummate the Marriage to∣gether. Entertainments. THese Solemnities, which were almost continuall, never passed without all the frolickest humours that these Fathers could put themselves in. They eat together at the Grate, They drank together in the same glass with hollow reeds: They drank healths on their knees, and broke the glasses after
they had drank them off: They made use of little Artifices to lift up the Sisters Neckcloths: They reproached them, that they were but meer geese in com∣parison of the Ladies of the N. Cordeliers, in whose Nunnery ten or twelve Cor∣deliers did constantly lodge. And after that cited the debauches, that were practised in other Houses of their Or∣der, to excite them to imitate them. From these Entertaines they procee∣ded to discourses, that were yet more li∣centious & impudent: They danced their parts to tunes that were sung to them: They threw off the Cordeliers habit, and dressed themselves in Suits of Satin, and trimming of coloured Ribbon: sometimes the Cordeliers gave the Nuns their ha∣bits, and the Nuns theirs to the Cordeli∣ers: some of the Nuns at the Friers en∣treaty disguised themselves like seculars, and appeared before them at the Grate, with their Necks naked, and set thick with patches, as well as their faces. O∣thers of them disguised themselves like
Comedians, and acted Plays before them: And others were to be seen with necklaces of Amber, yellow Tiffany Hoods, with their hair curled upon their foreheads, and with neck-cloths, and vails of silk. In this condition they played for kisses at cards, and other idle games, till five a clock in the mor∣ning. They brake the very Grates to doe things with more ease, and they spent whole days and nights in these kind of entertainments. If they were obliged to be long ab∣sent from this Monastery they took care to maintain their correspondence by Letters, where nothing was for∣got that would serve to express the heighth of their most shameful passi∣ons, or to debauch a mind, and make it sensible of amorous Inclinations. There are a great number of these Letters in keeping, whose Language is full of pro∣phaneness and impurity, and in which these Religious Fathers talk of nothing but of destiny and fate, and of good and
bad fortune: Nothing but expressions of the bitterest and most invective jea∣lousie, protestations of fidelity and ser∣vices, complaints of the cruelty and indif∣ference of those to whom they write. LOVE LETTERS. One of them there treats her be writes to, with the Title of his Mist∣ris; another with that of his Sover∣aignness: another calls his, his Dutchess, another his, his Princess: another his, his Beloved; another stiles his his Dear Heart, another his his dearest Gallant, another his his dear Confident; another writes to his dear Comrade, another to his Beloved Heart, another to his little Dove, another to the In∣comparable One, that makes the subject of his adoration. The superscriptions are, To her whom I soveraignly honour: To my Amiable cruel one, To the Victorious
Melita, To my Dear Child, To the only subject of my most tender affections, To Her whom I think of, To my new Con∣quest, To the Loadstone, that draws me to your self, my Dear, To the most Ami∣able, and most beloved of the Nymphs of the sacred Mount. 'Tis not hard to judge, of what stile the Letters might be that were wrot to Virgins, to whom they gave such qua∣lities as these, and whom they ordina∣rily called Mardana, or Mariana, or Timaretta, or Cleopatra, or Melita, ac∣cording as the Friers fancied them to have any resemblance with these Here∣inaes in Romances. There shall be here some extracts of them set down, or at least of some of them, that are the least impudent, and the most Ingenious a∣mongst them, and such as are written in the most respectfull terms. For, as for the rest, they are too beastly and impious to be exposed to the view of all the world.
LETTER. It is but just Madam, that you should serve for a Sanctuary for my complaints to fly to, since that you gave them birth, and that they tend to no other end, but the cause which produced them. I beseech you then condemn me not, if I open my pain to you, and if I force my self to give you a small intimation of my Love. Give my spirit, that lives only for you, some encouragement to its pursuit: and if Love has made so fair a composition as to unite my heart to yours, I hope to enjoy without Rival, the Glory of calling my self, — LETTER. — This must be the subject of one of your Letters, if you desire to make the happiest man that lives: you must acquaint me, if the In∣comparable
Timaretta has not alto∣gether forgot the Ʋnfortunate Sesost∣ris. LETTER. — 'Tis not only, as you tell me in yours of the sixteenth of May, the effects of my good nature, and Generosity: No, you make other kind of Impressions upon me. But I durst tell you them, that I might not be contradicted in a thing, which I do tenderly cherish, and the bare Idea of which gives me satisfaction enough for ever suffering my self to be diver∣ted from it, or to be undeceived. LETTER. Is it possible, Incomparable and Dear Timaretta, that you should be strangely surprised at the sight of my Character. And is my missor∣tune so great, that for an involunta∣ry,
and forced silence, you could be able to do me the injustice to think, that I could live without being wholly yours, and wholly sacrificed to your service. LETTER. —See now, we are in all ap∣pearance sixscore leagues distant one from another, and consider whether I be as near you here as I was at Pro∣vins. I know not whether I my self stayed behind in that place, as I have brought you hither along with me into this. However I dare say, you ought to have stopped me, and kept me there, to be revenged of my Stealing you away, and that you might have neer you one full of Respect, Esteem, and Reverence for your merit. LETTER. —You may assure her, whom you know, that there is nothing in
this world that is better beloved, more tenderly thought of, nor more Religi∣ously adored, than she is in the heart of that other person, of whom I am speaking. LETTER. —Whatsoever Idea your Imagi∣nation may frame of my Love, believe it, my Dearest, it must be less, than the reality of that passion that I have for you. Injure me not so far as to doubt of it, — chear up your self my amiable One, and let me bear all the burden of this Affliction. It is not reasonable, that I should be the occasion of the least trouble to her, who makes up all the sweetness of my life. — For mine own part I'le en∣deavour to sweeten the trouble by reflecting upon your worth, and your relation to me, and the faithful testi∣monies you have given me of it.
LETTER. — But my candle is all melted: Midnight has struck. I'le go see if the Organ can give me an entertainment any thing nigh those agreeable delights, which you have made me relish in your Charming conversation. LETTER. —Though my Heart swims in the mid'st of the Waters, and baths, and Minerals, which I drink; yet I feel not that they have quenched the least spark of those fires, which yours has kindled there. — Alas that it should not be as Aussi puissant. able, as affectionate: with∣out doubt I should live with more con∣tent, if it were so, because I should give you more satisfaction.
LETTER. —Do not bemoan me, fair N. The tears that Heaven shed something too plentifully at the time of our short interview, and the many waters that fell, could not quench the flames, which a flash of Lightning from you had kindled in my spirits. None but my self should be concerned at my trou∣bles, because I did imprudently search for the occasion of them: But the cause of them is too Lovely to be sorry for the effects. LETTER. —I have but this moment — to protest to you, that if I had as many hearts as hairs, I would carry them all to be lodged in the bosom of my Dearest, and most amiable Melita.
LETTER. —Our Daughter has done very prettily to send me those two little glasses. But I am not satisfied with so little sweetness, and do not let her think to perswade me that she Que elle ait tout petit. has every thing little. I'le doubt of it, till I have found it so by expe∣rience. Our Son's Ink is frozen, and I hear no talk of him. Let her know, he shall be soundly whipt, as soon as he appears, and I do not know whe∣ther she can scape it. LETTER. —Time is a great workman, as he is a great Master. It has taught me a great many things; but it was ne∣ver so favourable to me, as when it made me know Melita, and her true value, by the sweetness of her Con∣versation,
versation, and what she can do, if she please, to oblige those persons that she has engaged to her. Whatsoever she may merit, though she had as many Adorers, as she has hairs, that is, chains upon her head, and as many as she has rays, that is, darts in her eyes: yet Thyrsis has the vanity to think, and say, That he alone will not yield to all that Troup, That his heart con∣tains as many fires in it for her, as all those put together could do; and although he should yield to them in merit and good fortune, he thinks with justice that he should carry it from them all in Love and Fidelity: So that it will always be true, That as the amiable Melita is without Equal, so the respects and tenderness of Thyrsis shall be without End. 'Tis by these mysterious words, my Queen, betwixt us two, that I would for the future conclude all my Letters, and I desire the same favour of you. The first of these Motto's represents me the
Object of my happiness, and the second intimates the extent of the de∣voirs of your faithful and inviolable subject. Adieu my Queen, good morrow my Soveraign; good night, thou most faithfull to the happiest of Shepherds. LETTER. You have, my Amiable Melita, a very particular Grace in tickling the passion of your Faithfull and Sincere Thyrsis, by the charming assurances you give him of preferring him be∣fore a Cavalier much worthier and a fitter object for your Love, than that poor Shepherd, whom Age, Me∣lancholy and Infirmities, have already made gray. 'Tis this, that would make him assure you of all his affe∣ctions, if he could have reserved any thing when he sacrific'd his heart up∣on your Altars. Live then my So∣veraign, in full security of this pos∣session.
Put Thyrsis amongst your Conquests, though none of the richest indeed, yet doubtless the most abso∣lutely gain'd; and believe that nei∣ther Death nor Time shall ever inter∣rupt the duration of an engagement, that this Shepherd makes accompt is eternal. Keep your self in good hu∣mour, and think upon the bounties which you design Fair Melita, to Yours, Wholly Yours, Thyrsis. LETTER. —Speak the truth, she resembles you, Elle est bel∣le toute nue comme vous. she is Fair all na∣ked as you. LETTER. —If the cold hinders you from writing 'tis no matter, provided that it be not at the Heart: for my part, I am never cold in the aux parties cas∣tees. hidden parts.
LETTER. —The reading of your last has excited a greater passion of Joy in my heart, than I have felt these ten years; I know not, whether I ought to except even the moments I enjoy∣ed in the happiness of seeing and conversing with you. For in fine, my Dear Sister, I am of opinion, that there is more sweetness in a little cor∣respondence, than in a une visite sterile. barren dry visit to her that one loves. And it is always the peculiar talent of your sex to make fewer advances in Con∣versation, than upon the Sur la papi∣er. — Paper—I am not at all ungrateful, yet I know very well, that I am not yet where I would be, since you condemn the irregularity of some of my thoughts.
LETTER. —You reproved me for having wrote I will, and I will not, and you call me presumptuous. I remember very well, Melita, how I made use of those imperious words. But in short, if you had but once in your life been in Love, you would have found in this manner of expression more of tender∣ness than Authority, more of sweetness than Arrogance— You are in the right, Melita, you are to give Laws for all things, not only for what pas∣ses betwixt you and me, but to my whole destiny also—you would have me believe that you are full of ac∣knowledgement, and an enemy to in∣gratitude. Alas! if you love me for no other reason, but to avoid that base vice, you love me little enough, and after a very languid manner. However I will acknowledge my ob∣ligation to you for that. How small
a part soever you can allow me in your favour, I cannot claim it as due to me, and it is a pure free gift. 'Tis true I had reason to hope for some∣thing more, and I had all manner of probability for it. But what? appear∣ances are very deceitful, especially appearances drawn from the discourse of women. Allow me this expression of my anger, and trouble. One, and t'other have reduced me to a conditi∣on that would make you pity me, if you saw it. LETTER. —Although you be the Sover∣aign of my Will, you have given birth to I know not what Rebelli∣ous motions in my Heart, which will not be satisfied by you with such things as you undertake to stifle them with. If it be so, Melita, and that I am not able to rule them after your way, be so good as to indulge some∣thing to their Rebellion, and to suffer
them for the future to show them∣selves. LETTER. —There are so many marks of your goodness in the last lines you wrote to me, that if my passion were never so little regulated, very likely it would have nothing more to pretend to: and yet I find I know not what, that enclines me to desire of you some∣thing beyond the passions of honour, est∣eem, and gratitude: And, Sister, do not object to me that injurious veil, that covers a part of your Graces. The little god, whom you know, has his veil too, as well as you, which suffers him not to take notice of the austere ha∣bit which encloses you. Sacrilege, and Profanations. 'TIS but too true, that the passion, that possessed these Religious Fathers, has blinded them to such a
point, as to make them an hundred times forget themselves, and as often those to whom they discoursed. In effect, can one without an extraordinary blindness say to a Nun in the very Tri∣bunal of Penitence: my dear sweeting, be confident, and then sighing, Confess you of your cruelty, my Dear Heart. Can one without an extraordinary blindness and impiety, (demanding the Ornaments to say Mass withal,) fall down upon his knees to a Nun, and tell her, That she is the first Deity that he would sacrifice to? Can one without extraordinary blind∣ness, impiety, and beastliness, when he is Confessour, and sees a penitent give rea∣sons for scrupling that amorous passio∣nateness, and those insolent transports that he acquaints her with, and that she protests, she could not yield any compli∣ance to what was proposed to her, not knowing how to con∣fess her self of such infamous Attouche∣mens. Contracts, if she should allow him, there∣upon
offer himself to learn her how to do it, and to give her a forme in writing to help her to confess her self of it. ENTRIES. THere shall be no particular men∣tion here made of secret and nocturnal entries into the Garden and Monastery by the help of false keys, or ladders of cord, and in baskets: of such as were made in open day-light upon frivolous pretences: of dancings, per∣formed in the Refectory, and other re∣gular places: nor lastly, of the insolen∣cies committed at the Nuns Funerals. It was ordinary for the Cordeliers before and after these kind of Ceremonies to run after those they fancied, to take them in their Arms, to kiss them, to carry them from one place to another, to play the foolwith them, to go into private Nuns Chambers, to feast it there, and be frolick, to stay whole hours there, a Fa∣ther and a Nun alone by themselves,
and a little pensioner set as sentinel in foolery to keep the door. Nothing was ever able to put a stop to these insolencies, and they have scarce ever gone in to confess the sick, or to administer the Sacraments with∣out committing new ones. There has been some of them, who after they had heard the Confession of one sick Nun, were upon a bed with others, and after they had spoken some devout words aloud to them, laid themselves down again to kiss them, and would have put their hands into their bosoms. There has been some of them, who after they had given extream Ʋnction to a sick Nun, and entred in again to assist her at her death, instead of per∣forming this duty, have conducted other Nuns to their Chambers, and there cooped up themselves together in a small closet. There has been some of them, who after they had sate up a night with one
that was dangerously ill, made them∣selves be carried into the Dormitory, to go into the Nuns Chambers to see, as they said, their Loves in their beds before them. In fine, there has been of them, that, at the very foot of the Altar did violence to a Novice upon the holy day of Good Fryday it self, who had been ordered to go out into the Church to take down the Reposier, according to the custom of this Monastery: she was kissed by force, and her neck∣cloth was torn off, and she was often∣times Plusieurs at∣touchemens. very rudely handled. IN SOLENCIES. IT is fit now to conclude the re∣presentation, that was undertaken to be given of these horrible disorders. That which remains is too abominable, and our tongue is too chast to be able to
express it. Not, but that a just regret and indignation has made the greatest part of these Religious Sisters, find terms to declare such things in their De∣positions, as to use their own words, passe all Imagination, and the bare men∣tioning of which makes them blush. But 'tis enough that they have been once wrote, that they are under the hands of the Judges of the Court, and that Time has not been able to blot them out of the memory of those, who have seen them themselves in the time of their youth, or by eye-witnesses have been acquain∣ted with the names of those Nuns, whom the Fathers have engaged in the Dans le der∣nier Desordre. last Act of Incontinency, with the number of Children, that they have had, Les Artifices criminels. the hor∣rid contrivances, that they have made use of to hinder these crimes from making a noise abroad, and other abominable circumstances of Des plus horri∣bles corruptions. most horrible cor∣ruptions,
which made one of the An∣cientest amongst them, who had her self been overtaken in these dreadful de∣baucheries, say, That she stood in admira∣tion how this House could still subsist, and how it came not to be swallowed up, as those miserable Cities, of which the Holy Scriptures speak. But if the Cordeliers have omitted nothing that might draw down these sad judgments upon this miserable House: And if the Nuns who have sent their complaints to Court, may justly say, that they owe it only to the mercy of God, that (these Fathers have laid all the traps imaginable to make them fall into these dangerous precipices) they do not continue still engaged in them: certainly they have not less reason to acknowledge, that if there be yet amongst them any remain∣ders of Piety and Religion, as it can∣not well be doubted, considering the warm instances they make at Court, they do also owe that wholly to the particular providence and special fa∣vour
of the same Mercy. For the Cor∣deliers have omitted nothing that might plunge them in impiety, and take away from them the respect, that is due to the Sacraments of the Church, and the just confidence that ought to be reposed in them, that are the dis∣spensers of them. See what the Nuns say of it in their Depositions. The Disorders of the Cordeliers. One called N. when Confessour, being come into the Monastery to give the last Sacrament to a Nun, was so full of Wine, that he put on the Priests Garments the wrong side out∣ward, and the Mother Infirmiere was fain to guide his hand to apply the Holy Oyle. Another called N. Confessour too of our House came once into the Confes∣sion-Chayr so overcharged with Wine, that he fell asleep, and the Nun, that was confessing to him after she had
began a part of her Confession twice, and often endeavoured to wake him, was at last forced to withdraw. I my self happened to confess my self to one Father N. who was so full of drink, that after I had repeated ma∣ny Articles of my Confession over a∣gain, I was forced to leave it. One called Father N. who was here about eighteen years ago, has revealed the Confessions of all the Nuns of our Community, and has given them in writing to many Cordeliers to favour their design upon those whom they had a mind to seduce, beginning these Sacrilegious writings by some passage of Holy Scripture, that was agreeable to the humour of the several respect∣ive persons. I have seen and read this paper, A Cordelier having intrusted me with this secret— I made my com∣plaint of it to Father N. at that time Provincial the first time, who confes∣sed to me that he had seen that wri∣ting.
Father N. twelve years ago did the same, and besides, had always Wo∣men with him. Once he kept a maid of Provins in his Closet, and her Pa∣rents being very much troubled for her, thinking she had been stolne, he sent her away to Paris. He himself intrusted me with this secret to oblige me to conceal what I knew of it. They commonly gave us Directours who had no sense of Piety in them, who came into the Confession-Chair, after they had been well-drunk. And for proof of this, I my self once confes∣sed to one Father N. to no purpose: for he slept so soundly that he heard not a word, which made me draw the curtain, and endeavour to awake him; but to no effect at all: many saw him in this condition, and made him be carried to bed. Another called Father N. was con∣tinually thus distempered. A Ca∣non of Provins called M. N. came of∣ten to sup with him, to make him
drink, that he might afterwards have the pleasure of making him reveal our Confessions. I know it for a cer∣tainty, that he did so; And when he took his turn to go and divert him∣self with the Canon, they carried him to his bed at eleven a clock at night upon a Hand-barrow, which was known but to two other Nuns, sister N. and N. and me. 'Tis fifteen years a∣go that this happened. Another called N. who was here two years ago, and was the Provincial's brother, was also of this humour, which made him entertain the Nuns with a thousand impertinent follies, and made them perfectly ashamed of him. If some of them have been free from these faults, they have had o∣thers that were not less considerable. They have never set themselves about planting any sense of Piety or Vertue in us, but on the contrary have studi∣ed the ruine of both the temporal
and spiritual state of our House. The only Devotion, that the Cordeliers in∣spired our Sisters withal, was that of making them often desire Masses, that they might get their mony, and that they might have an occasion to visit us in the morning, and so to stay at the Grate all the rest of the day to di∣vert themselves and to make Collati∣ons. These were their dayly practi∣ses which I have been a constant spectator of for near these thirty years, the time that I have been in this Mo∣nastery, without mentioning other things that are yet more wicked. This Factum would be too much swelled if we should relate all the par∣ticular proofs, that we have of the va∣rious disorders, that the Cordeliers have committed in this Monastery, about the Spiritual concern of it. That which has been hitherto set down is but too sufficient to raise horrour in all, that have any concern for the Holiness of our Mysteries, any love for the purity of
Virgins, and any tenderness for the interest of Jesus Christ in the Souls that are consecrated to him, and whose fi∣delity these miserable Directours have endeavoured to corrupt for these so many years together: A rabidis enim hominibus nomen sceleratum est sanctita∣tis; et ab immundis, et luteis pretiosum conculcatum est propositum Castitatis. SECTION XII. Of the Disorders committed by the Cor∣deliers in the Temporal concerns of the Monastery of St. Catharine. AFter the horrible extravagancies which have been mentioned, it will not be difficult to believe, That the Cordeliers have consumed all the Temporal incomes of this Monastery. It may easily be concluded, that Religi∣ous
Fathers, who by so many diffe∣rent ways have made it their business to draw off Virgins from the fidelity they owed to their divine Spouse, and to rob them of their Honour, and the Spiri∣tual inheritance, which he had acqui∣red for them with the price of his blood have not spared the Temporal inheritance; which they had received from the magnificent bounty of their Illustrious Founders, and the liberal Charity of their Relations. The profuseness, which the Corde∣liers have engaged them to shew in feasting, in presents, and a thousand o∣ther vain expences, and unworthy of their profession, are alone sufficient to make any one imagine the abuses that have been committed in this point. For as the Pensions of pri∣vate Nuns were not sufficient to fur∣nish out the almost continual Collati∣ons that were made at the Grates, the Sisters were fain to sell their sil∣ver-plate, and whatever they could
lay their hands on, of the provisions of Linnen and other goods of the Com∣munity (even to the Church Vest∣ments, and the Ornaments of the Altars) for the effecting of their pur∣pose, particularly the Servitour-Sist∣ers; who being of mean birth, and not having ordinarily any Pensions, yet would have their Gallants, and their Confidents amongst the Cordeli∣ers, and would treat them like Gran∣dees. This was done without any check, or scruple of conscience: For the Superiours of the Order had taken care to fortifie them against any that might rise in them; and Father N. the Provincial, upon the complaints that were made at the last Chapter-meeting, of the theevish filching pract∣ised in the House, told them in ex∣press terms, That according to the Coun∣cil of Trent, One might steal to the va∣lue of twenty Crowns when he wanted Necessaries; which indeed was an a∣buse of the Name and Authority of
that Council to expose the Monastery to pillage, under pretence of setting bounds to that licentiousness of which they complained. Those Ne∣cessaries having no other measure, than the passion that the Nuns had for the Cordeliers, and the Presents that they had a mind to make them. They have further proceeded to ruine this Monastery by another con∣trivance no less destructive than the former: They allowed those, whom they knew to be wholly at their de∣votion, to be Heiresses to their Sisters, and their Aunts, that happened to die in the Religion: and the Father Provincial, made the Abbess Madam de Montbron give one of the Nuns, one Sister N. five or six considera∣ble pieces of Silver-plate, that an Aunt of hers in the House had left her when she died: and all this plate, which amounted to a considerable Sum, failed not of being sold a little while after, and consumed in Feastings,
and Presents made to the Cordeliers. Besides all this, against their own Orders, and the general complaints of all the Nuns, they suffered the Ser∣vitour-Sisters to blanch linnen for people abroad, which made them not only make a gain to themselves a∣gainst their vows (for they disposed as they pleased of the gains of this traffick) but also made them very chargeable to the Community. For by this trade of theirs, which took up all their time, they became inca∣pable of doing them any service: They broke their vow of Confinement by letting in men and women to them every day, whose service they stood in need of, and who consumed the provisions of the House with them: They spent a vast quantity of wood to make the ashes, which they needed for blanching; so that they have burnt twenty four thousand Fag∣gots, once or twice as big again as those of Paris, in the compass of a
Year, and more than fourscore strings of wood; and thus they wasted all things else, Salt, Wine, Corn, Meat, making money of all that came into their hands to satisfie the sensuality of the Cordeliers, who maintained them in these unlawfull intercourses, be∣cause all the advantage of them re∣turned to them at last; and the money that these Nuns raised by them, which amounted to more than an hundred Crowns a year for each of them, was spent in Feasting, in Pre∣sents, and in all kind of profuseness. But the Waste that these Fathers made of the Revenue of this Mona∣stery, never appeared more visibly, than since the Election of the last Ab∣bess, who was wholly devoted to their Interests, and whom, for that reason, they have used all industry to con∣tinue in that office by so many shame∣full and unlawfull means. 'Tis ready to be justified, that besides the Ordi∣nary Revenue, and the private allow∣ances
of the Nuns, besides eighteen thousand Livres of debt contracted by her, A Muid is five quarters, one combe, and a bushel at London. and which is charged upon the House; besides fifteen Muids of corn, that were due to the House since the time of the Abbess that preceeded her, and which she received, and above thirty Muids more which she has caused to be sold within these thirty years, she has besides all this, since the moneth of February 1660. in Rents, Nuns-Portions, and other incomes of the House received more than 40000. Livres of ready money. And all this has been consumed partly in feastings and presents, and partly in other prodigalities, done to satisfie the greediness of the Cordeliers, who abused the easie nature of this poor Nun, to enrich themselves with the spoils of this Monastery, and this with a greater insolence, than they ever did under other Abbesses:
As it is visible in this, that in so ordina∣ry a town as Provins they have with∣in few years very jollily expended more than 25, or 30000 Livres in nothing but Gallantries, and unnecessa∣ry things. 'Tis not by this denied, but that the better disposed part of the Community, when they perceived the insatiableness and unreasonableness of the Cordeliers, did sometimes force themselves to make opposition against it, and from time to time demanded, that according to the Order of their House, and con∣for mably to their Rule, they might choose a Receiver, and that the Abbess might not dispose of the income of the House but in conjunction with the Treasurers. But the Cordeliers have always frustrated all such kind of en∣deavours, one while perswading the Of∣ficers, whom they ruled, to take the rent themselves, and to employ faith∣full and intelligent men abroad, who should be intrusted with it, and some∣times
making them take people for their Receivers, that were worth no∣thing, but such as were wholly at their beck; and sometimes exciting the Abbess as particularly the last, to take all the Revenue into her own hand, and to dis∣pose of it without giving account of it. So that notwithstanding all that could be done, they have still found out ways to make themselves Masters of the Re∣venue of the Monastery, and to dis∣pose of it to furnish them for Voyages into Italy, for the Provincials visita∣tions in their Province, and to make provision for Father N's Table, which is one of the most magnificent in all the Province of Brie. There is no mention here made of the cheats, that were usuall upon the death of the Confessours of the Mona∣stery: Of the summes of money intrust∣ed in the hands of these Confessours for the affairs of the House, and which after their death were carried away by the Provincialls: Of the Goods and
Habits which the House had furnished them with, and which they caused to be conveyed away: Of the waste they made of the Wood of the Nunnery for warming & building of their Convent: Of their custom of sending such Corde∣liers into the Monastery as were the particular intimates of the Nuns to en∣gage their votes, and to live as they pleas∣ed for two or three months together before the Elections: Of Feasts made for the Provincials at the Elections of the Abbesses, and the two last of which amounted each of them to four or five hundred livres: Of blank papers signed by the last Abbess and put into the hands of a person appointed by them for the same purpose, and of a thousand other ways that they have used to devour, and waste the whole estate of this House. What has been related is sufficient to shew the necessity of having these Cordeliers removed from this Mona∣stery, since 'tis evident they have
made use of the access they have had into this House, and of the Jurisdiction that they have usurped, for nothing but to inrich themselves with its spoils, and to lavish out an estate, that was given for the subsistence of the spouse of Jesus Christ, in feastings, debauches, and in all sort of idle and shameful ex∣pences; so that one may too justly compare these self-interested Direct∣ours to those Mercenary Pastours, that Holy Scripture speaks of, who instead of taking care to lead out the sheep that God had committed to them, thought of nothing but of feeding themselves with their Milk, of clothing themselves with their Wool, and of eating up the best and fattest of them: Which made God declare by the mouth of his Pro∣phet, that he would take his flock out of their hands, and would not suffer them to be any longer under their keeping, nor be made a prey of by them. Ecce ego super pastores requiram gregem meum de manu eorum &c.
SECTION XIII. That the Cordeliers are under an impos∣sibility of ever establishing good Order, and Regularity in this Mona∣stery. THe Cordeliers have not only rendred themselves unworthy of the government of the Monastery of St. Catharine by the abominations that they have committed, and by the Waste they have made of the Tem∣porall income; but 'tis even impossible for them to remedy the mischiefs that they have caused in this House. This is now undertaken to be made evident by shewing, That those Fathers, to whom it most appertains to maintain Regularity in the Monastery, are the persons who have committed the greatest Disorders: And that these Nuns have invincible reasons to have no
confidence in all the Fathers of the Or∣der put together. SECTION XIV. That they are the Superiours of the Order, who have engaged the House of Saint Catharine in the Disorders it is in. WHen the noble parts of a mans body are not affected, and that the Malady has not seized the Heart, nor the Head, we despair not of a sick person how dangerous soever the distemper may be, that he labours under. But when the whole disease is got into the Heart or the Head, or that 'tis from one of these parts it passes into the rest, he becomes in∣curable, and we have no more hopes of doing him any good. 'Tis the same in Religious societies. Whilst the Dis∣order is but amongst private persons there is reason to hope to remedy it. But when 'tis the Superiours that
commit it, and that those, who are set up to prevent it, infuse it into others, the corruption in a small time becomes general, and there is no remedy to be had but by that way of Cutting off, and Casting away, that Jesus Christ pre∣scribes to all the faithful in these words.—If your right eye be an occasion of of∣fence to you, pull it out, and cast it from you, and if your right hand be an occa∣sion of offence to you, cut it off and cast it away from you. 'Tis then with Prudence and Justice that the Nuns of Saint Catharine de∣sire to have the Cordeliers removed from them, since those of the Fathers, that are stiled their Superiours, and who ought in that character to serve as Eyes to conduct them in the way to Heaven, and as hands to uphold them in the practice of their Rule, are those who have diverted them from it, and have been the greatest occasions of scandall and falling, that they ever had in their Monastery. In effect, They
are not only private, and ordinary Cordeliers, that have committed all the horrible Disorders before∣mentioned in their House: They are the Visitors, Their Deputies, The Provincial, The Commissaries Ge∣neral, Their Secretaries, The Wardens, The Doctours, and the Batchelours of the Order, The most Famous among their preachers. In fine, They are those that have the greatest dignities amongst them, that are the occasions of all these Disorders, that have main∣tained them, and have ever been the most pertinacious opposers of the Re∣medies, which from time to time have been endeavoured after. 'Twas they that presented the young Nuns with their confidents, that wrote to them in their behalf, that engaged them to those un∣lawful intercourses before-mentioned, and that took care, when they were fallen out, to reconcile them again, and to renew their wicked intimacies. These sottish absurdities (says a
Religious sister, speaking of the alliances and marriages that they contracted to∣gether) were so far from being re∣proved by the Superiours, that a Nun, that often nauseated these kind of fa∣miliarities, having taken an occasi∣on to break off that Marriage that she had made with one of these Fa∣thers, Father N. the Provincial took cognizance of it, and interested him∣self so far in it, that at his Visitation he perswaded her in very idle, imperti∣nent terms to renew that correspon∣dence; He informed himself of her other intimates, & told her it was not enough to see them but once a week, that he allow'd her twice at least. Father N. Cordelier writing to a Servitour-sister in very passionate and sottish terms, and the Letter coming into the hands of a Lady of the Quire, addressed to her from a person with∣out, she gave the Father Provirciall notice of it, & of all the unseemly com∣munication betwixt them that she
had been acquainted with, that so for the future he might give check to it: And yet notwithstanding he gave not the least discountenance to it, and suffered the Father to give the Servitour-sister as frequent visits as before. Again, These Fathers have not only brought us in hither Books of natural secrets, Romances, Cate∣chismes of Love, and other pieces of that nature; but the Superiours al∣so have approved the same: And Father N. the Provincial in the pre∣sence of a good part of the Commu∣nity having found one of these books in the chamber of a Servitour sister did only smile at it, and that passed for a consent. Father N. Provincial gave all the young professed Nuns particular intimates. He preached when I was professed, and called me his Daughter upon this account: He told me as∣soon as I had my profession that he would give me a Cordelier for my consident, an handsome fellow, a
Gallant, and well-fashioned, and that he would marry me to him: And he talked oftentimes of these kind of Marriages. All the Superiours, the Provincials, the Confessours, have thus abused their employment, favouring, or being them∣selves the cause of, the Disorders, by ad∣mitting other Cordeliers into the House to engage the Nuns to these insinuating intimacies, and by this means to con∣tinue themselves Masters of all. For as favours, or persecutions, were always at the disposal of the Cordeliers, ac∣cording as their Beloveds were either complyant with, or inflexible to, what the Superiours would have them do, the Sisters were fain to suffer all that they pleased to have done, and to give their assistance to the furthering of all their passions: And this made the Pro∣vincials, instead of imploying their Visi∣tation in enquiring after the misdemea∣nours that were to be corrected, to set themselves about courting and caressing the young professed Nuns, to talk to them
of their Good friend, and to excite them to take one, that they might have the pleasure of being served by him. And in pursuance of this they authorized the Collations and Entertainments at the Grates, Gaming, lascivious Songs, breaking of Glasses, in honour of their Ladies before the eyes, and to the scan∣dal, of the whole Town: And yet they always talked of, and amused the peo∣ple with Reformations in paper, which they never so much as propounded, much less intended to have executed in the House. Besides, They did not only study to engage these young Virgins in such dangerous communications, but took care also to put those into the Offices of the House, whom they judged most proper to encourage & maintain them. Ten years since at the Election of Madam d' Osonville, the fourth Abbess of that name, they did what possibly they could to put Madam N. in her place, who had committed the Le dernier mall. last act of incontinency
with Father N. Cordelier, and one of the reasons of their persecuting Madam d' Osonville, was because she had been pre∣ferred before that other Nun. After the death of that Abbess Father N. Provincial used great violence to hinder the Election of Madam d'Osonville her Niece, who had 25 votes against se∣ven for Madam N. whom the Cordeliers would notwithstanding make Abbess by force, though she had neither desert nor birth, nor any thing more consi∣derable than a passionate love for the Cordeliers, who had ordered her in her youth as they pleased. Sister N. did very freely show about the Letters wrote to her from the Cordeliers, & told all the idle fancies that they made her: she gave them access into her Chamber night and day; and in consideration of her corre∣spondence she was made Mistress of the Novices. Father N. esteemed the most Re∣gular of them all did not scruple the taking these kind of liberties in the
cloyster. At four a clock in the morning he went into a garden with Sister N. his Good Friend, and gave this rea∣son for it, that they were fallen out with one another, and that he had a mind to be reconciled. They were so well reconciled again, that she be∣ing made Mistress of the Novices per∣swaded them all to entertain the Cordeliers, so that she pressed her own Niece to receive Letters from them: she acquainted them with all the Gallantries that the Cordeliers had shown her in her youth, made them act Comedies against the express prohibition of Madam N. the Abbess. And when a Novice was fallen out with her Cordelier, she slept not till she had made them friends again. But in spite of all the intrigues of the Provincials, and other Superiours of the Order, they yet gave Offices to the bet∣ter disposed part of the Nuns; they then maintained the other Sisters in their licentiousness and libertinisme against them, and endeavoured to raze out of
their minds the good impressions, that these Nuns had laboured to give them. Father N. Provincial, in a Sermon that he made at the profession of a Novice, exhorted her to vomit up the bad Education that her Mistress had given her, which was to alienate her mind from these infamous correspon∣dences; and told her, That her Mi∣stress did draw off the Nuns from honouring and loving the Order. All those frequent Entertaines, that the Nuns had with the Cordeliers in the time of Madam N. were by the Or∣der of the Father N. the Provincial, and of other Provincials also with a note from them under their hand. So that when she shut up the Grates, whilst the General Chapter was held at Pro∣vins, as also upon other occasions, they found out ways to visit one a∣nother by the windows, or else the Cordeliers disguised themselves like Gentlemen to visit the Nuns without being known. When Madam N. the Abbess had
withstood some permissions that the Nuns desired, which might have pre∣judiced the reputation of the House, Father N. procured them for them un∣der the Provincial's hand, and gave them this for a lesson, That if she would not obey her Superiour in this, that they were not obliged to obey her. One has no reason to wonder, That all these Provincials and Superiours were so indulgent to others, since that they cared not for condemning others, in that which they practiced them∣selves after so scandalous and wicked a manner. The Licentious familiarities of Father N. with Mother N. has been these 38 years the scandal of all Pro∣vins. It was begun by magnificent treats, which he caused to be fetched from the town for her, and her party: Was continued by presents of Rings, Watches, Looking-glasses, and all kind of vanities, which were even laid upon the Altars for her, where were interwoven the first letters of
their names with Hearts made up of Flowers, set with ribbons of flame-co∣lour, and born up by the Images of St. Francis and St. Clare, who served as supports for this abominable Gal∣lantry. After this Sister was made Porter he discoursed with her ordina∣rily four or five hours together at the great Gate (a place far remote from all company) with a Cordeliers cloak spread out like a tent to defend her from the Sun. The Porter on the other side to please the Reverend Father, dressed her self ridiculously with bracelets of Pearle, and medals of Gold upon her arms, and with all manner of ribbons at her waste: so that a Lady of quality taking notice of all these vanities at the dressing one of the Nuns was so scandalized at it, that she could hardly endure to let them finish it, and she has testified it in a Declaration that was drawn up 17, or 18 years ago, when the Nuns of St. Catharine addressed themselves the first time to the Court of Parliament to
be delivered from the direction of the Cordeliers. The scandal has continued ever since, and 'tis not a∣bove two or three years since, and the Reverend Father having sent a nosegay of Flowers with a great many dryed sweet-meats, and march∣pane to this Mother by the R. F. at present Warden of N. on the vigills of her Festival, & the Mother having en∣tertained them the next day (the day of her Festival) at a noble Treat, car∣ried to the Convent of the Cordeliers by a victualler of the Town, in the afternoon the Reverend Father ac∣companyed with a great many o∣thers, who soon took up all the Grates, came to her to give her a sere∣nade under her chamber-window that looks toward the great Court, and afterwards carried the Violin in∣to the Hall below, where Sister N. was, whose Nuptials, he said, he was come to solemnize with Father N. who the mean while did entertain her. He began to dance first, and invited
others also to take their part, which other Provincials before him have often done as well as he. After all this can it be denied, that the Superiours of the Order are to be charged with these Excesses that have been committed in the Monastery of St. Catharine? That they have not only tolerated them, while they were in Office, but also fomented and autho∣rized them by their own irregularity: And that if the Integrity of those that command be the security of those that obey, that the visible corruption of all the Superiours of the Cordeliers is the principal cause of all the mischiefs of this Monastery. SECTION XV. That the Religious Sisters of St. Catha∣rine have invincible reasons not to have any Confidence in the Cor∣deliers. TWo things are absolutely necessa∣ry to the settling of good Order
and Regularity in a religious House, Authority, and a good esteem of that Au∣thority. Now it has already been made appear, that the House of St. Catharine can hope for no good from those who have any Authority amongst the Cor∣deliers. For they are the persons, that have cast it into the miserable condi∣tion wherein it is. There remains then nothing, but to show that it is impos∣sible they should have any Confidence in them, to make it evident; That they are in an utter impossibility of ever resettling good Orders and Regu∣larity. 'Tis omitted here, to represent the injustice and violence they have com∣mitted against private persons, when their consciences have not allowed them to give their Votes for those that the Fathers would have put into Office, and who were often the least regular of any, but the most linked to the in∣terest of the Friers. 'Tis omitted here, to mention their refusals to allow extro∣ordinary Confessours even at the point
of death, when any Nuns for the secu∣rity of their consciences have desired others than those of the Order: Their Excommunications pronounced upon very slight occasions against those, that had no other crime than the dis∣allowing of their disorderly conduct: Their taking away the Right of suffrage from the young professed Nuns because one of them once signed a paper made by the greatest part of the Community in opposition to the veiling of a Ser∣vitour-sister, which was solicited by Father N. Their abusing the submissions of the easie-natured Abbesses to them, making their advantages thereby to make them prefer the Servitour-Sisters before the Religious of the Quire upon several occasions, so that they them∣selves laughed at them for their soft∣ness. Although all these things con∣cern the whole Community, seeing that there is no private person that has not reason to fear the same treatment that they have shown their Sisters, they shall however be passed over in
silence. For that which they princi∣pally insist upon, is what condition their House was in under the conduct of the Cordeliers before the time of their admission into it, In what condition they found it upon their entring it, and how they have continually seen it governed for more than these for∣ty years, during the space of which they have continued their professi∣on. They themselves have painted out these Fathers so lively in their Depositions as to make all abhor them, and which one cannot consider without being sensibly affected, to see Virgins thus en∣gaged, almost in spite of their wills, to live without regularity, without di∣rection, without light, without in∣struction, and without piety. How then could the Religious Sisters of St. Catharine after all this with any rea∣son put confidence in the Cordeliers? How could they hope to be moved by them to keep a strict observance of the hours of Divine Service, when they
knew that ordinarily. These Fathers kept their Sisters at the Grates at that time, and often made them stay there whole nights till five a clock in the morning: so that they were forced to take the hours of Mattins and Mass to repose themselves. How could they hope to see them re∣settle the silence, that their Rule enjoyns them, in the House, when they knew, that by their continual Entertaines they had plunged it into an horrible disso∣luteness, and that their Sisters were used to repeat Songs that they had learnt them, not only in the gardens, whither they came to hear them, and whither they often came to surprize them, and there passed whole nights with them; but even in the cloysters, and other con∣secrated places? How could they hope, that they should perswade them to modesty in their Habits, when they knew, that they suf∣fered their sisters to dress and trick up themselves with an extraordinary nice∣ness, when they were to come to visit
them, and that they furnished them with several sorts of coloured Ribbons, with trimmed Gloves, and many other instruments of vanity. How could they hope to be inclined by them to keep nothing in propriety, & to put all to the common stock, that they might not break their vows of Poverty, when they have always al∣lowed them to take as much of their Pensions as should be sufficient to pro∣vide for the Treats, that they engag∣ed them to make them at the Grates, & for I know not how many other idle expences that they advised them to, even to the letting them distribute the bread to them, which they disposed of as they pleased? How could they hope to be instructed by them in the Fidelity that they owed to their Divine Spouse, when they knew the measure of these Fathers dissolute∣ness against all their vows of Chastity, and had been witnesses of all their Pro∣fanations and Sacriledges? Lastly, How could they hope to be
assisted by them in their design of la∣bouring to live conformably to their Rule, to perform the Obligations of the life that they had embraced, and to re∣settle the honour of their House, when they saw that in all the conduct that they have observed in their Monastery (from the time that they first made themselves Masters of it) nothing but a base indifference for the interests of God, horrible libertinisme, and most dreadful debauchery? Of Whom should they expect this re∣medy? Of Private persons? They have an hundred times blusht at their impu∣dence and impiety. Of Confessours? They have scarce seen any that have not wallowed in all kind of vice and debauchery. Of Provincials? They have committed and authorized the greatest Disorders of their House. Of Those, who are advanced to be Doctors, Batchelours, and Preachers amongst them? They have still their Letters in keeping, that are full of impurity and abominations. Of the Warden of Paris?
There is so much disorder in his own house, that his Majesty has been forced to name Commissioners to rectifie it. Of the whole Province? They have seen an Assembly in a General Chapter, held at Provins about nine or ten years since, render themselves complices of all the extravagances that the chief of their Fathers had at that time commited in their Monastery: And besides, They know that the whole Province is in a very dismal division and disorder. Of the Cordeliers of other Provinces? Have not they learnt with horror, what passed at Desize, and in the other House of Nuns that are subject to them? And have not the Cordeliers themselves made use of it to entangle them, if they could have done it, in the same Disor∣ders? There is not then any security for the Religious Sisters of St. Catharine but by absolutely removing from them all the Fathers of the Order; and 'tis with a great deal of ground, That they have not only distrusted, but even ab∣horred
their Conduct, seeing it has been always full of corruption, and that they have with horrible licenti∣ousness and scandal violated all the laws of Discipline before their eyes, which by all the obligations of the charge that they had usurped, they stood engaged, either to uphold when it began to fall, or to raise up again when it was once fallen. SECTION XVI. The Cordeliers Reasons to colour the Dis∣orders, that they have committed in the Monastery of St. Catharine, and to maintain themselves notwithstanding the Abuses they have made of the Juris∣diction that they usurped, are answer'd. THe Cordeliers perceived well e∣nough, that if the Misdemea∣nours they committed in the Monastery of St. Catharine came once to be dis∣covered, they should be universally
condemned by all the world, and that there would be no person of any judg∣ment but would conclude them un∣worthy of the conduct of these Nuns, though it had of right belonged to them. 'Tis that, that has since put them upon using all kind of arts to prepossess the Higher Powers, and to fill them with impressions to the disadvantage of the Nuns that prosecute them at Court, hoping by that means to oblige them the easier to lay hold of their Prote∣ction. To this purpose they presented Petitions to their General at Rome, and to the Congregation of Cardinals; They presented others to their Majes∣ties in France, and we have in our hands the copy of a Writing, made and pre∣sented by them to a Minister of state. And 'tis out of all these Petitions this Writing, and also out of some of the Letters, which their Friends have wrote to the Nuns, from whence we fetch the Reasons, which we are going to set down here with all their strength, endeavouring to answer them the most
briefly and clearly that is possible. The Cordeliers Reasons. The Nuns are subject by their Foundation to the General of the Friers Minors, and they cannot, without breaking their Vow and their Rule, return under the Jurisdiction of My Lord Archbishop of Sens. 1. THese words must be under∣stood either of all the Nuns of St. Clare, or particularly of those of St. Catharine. It has been made appear that both one and other are alike sub∣ject by their Foundation to the Au∣thority, and under the Jurisdiction of their Bishops: and surely after the proofs that have been brought of it, there can no difficulty remain behind; whether we regard the Right, that is, the obli∣gation, that binds the Nuns to live un∣der the Conduct of their Bishops, or whether we regard the Fact, that is, the actual dependance they have lived un∣der, aswell for receiving the Sacraments
of them, as for the Elections of the Ab∣besses and admissions of Nuns: And con∣sequently, that it is not true, that these Nuns have been submitted to the Ge∣neral of the Friers Minors by their Foundation. 2. Neither is it true, That their Vows oblige them to continue under the General of the Friers Minors: There is not one word of it in all their form of Profession. And although they should think themselves tacitly enga∣ged to it, yet they could not performe it to the prejudice of their other Vows, that make up the essential parts of their Religion, which it is impossible they should acquit themselves of under the Direction of the Cordeliers. 3. It is true, that their Rule seems to commit the care of their Monasteries to the Cordeliers. But it has been made appear that it is rather a permission, that the Pope has given them to un∣dertake to be their Guides against the express prohibition of St. Francis to the contrary, than an obligation upon
the Nuns to be subject to them: That whatsoever intention the Popes had that drew up their Rule, it could not prejudice the Rights acknowledged due to the Bishops, by the Holy Scripture; The Canons of Councils, and the General practice of the whole Church, to go∣vern the Monasteries; and conse∣quently, that the Cordeliers could never exercise any Hierarchical Office, but in dependence upon their Authority. 4. Though it should be granted that the Nuns of St. Catharine were by their Foundation subject to the Gene∣ral of the Cordeliers, that their Rule ob∣liges them to it, and that their Bishops consented to it, (which yet is not true;) they could not for all that without evi∣dently endangering their Salvation, conti∣nuelonger under them, & consequently are obliged by all Divine and Humane Laws to deliver themselves from them, and to expect all their assistances from the Conduct of their Prelate, for what∣soever they shall stand in need of to the better acquitting themselves of their
Obligations, and to the reforming of their Lives. 'Tis ridiculous to pretend, as the Cor∣deliers do, that the Nuns of St. Catharine being without any necessity, and against the command of God and the Rules of the Church, withdrawn from under the Jurisdiction of my Lord Archbi∣shop of Sens, that they cannot now with∣out sinning return under it, how great, how pressing, and how evident soever the necessity be, which forces them to it. The Cordeliers Reason. 'Tis only the Capriciousness of some pri∣vate Nuns, and the Revengefulness of two of them, that they would have pu∣nished for the scandalls they have oc∣casioned. IT is not intended here to make a particular discussion of this Affair, nor to apologize for those two Nuns, who are acknowledged in the process of the Declaration to have been the
first that implored the protection of the Court against the unreasonableness and the Disorders of the Cordeliers. 'Tis asserted here only, That the most Reputed amongst these Fathers, should not then, as they did, and as it is ready to be justified by their own Let∣ters, have themselves procured their going out of the Monastery, and given them recommendations to make use of to accomplish their design. 'Tis asserted, That the Provincial and his Secretary ought not to have made them buy their leave to go to take the waters at the price of their Votes for the Election of an Abbess, to whom they thought themselves obli∣ged in conscience not to give it; and if there be any scandal come of it, 'tis they that are to answer it to God and the World. 'Tis asserted, That if those Nuns were guilty of the Crime that they were accused of, The Provincial and his Secretary ought not to have protest∣ted to them, that the Excommunicati∣ons,
that they should pronounce a∣gainst them, should be but a formàl shew, counterfeit anger, and a bug-bear, and that the sentence should be nulled im∣mediately after the thundering it out: That they ought at least to have ob∣served some shadow of Justice, and not declare them Excommunicated, deprived of both Active and Passive Vote, of the Offices of the House, and of the liberty of the Grate, and this for as long as the Provincial and his succes∣sours should think fit, against all usual forms of procedure, without any infor∣mation, without confronting of wit∣nesses, and only after that the Provinci∣al had entertained them for three days together at the Grate with sottish im∣pertinencies, and that the Secretary had the impudence to kiss one of them by force in the presence of her Fellow-sisters, and consequently that they had Right to appeal from a sentence so unequita∣ble, and so abusive as this was. Lastly, 'Tis asserted, That if the Pro∣vincial had had the least respect to God
in this pretended Chastisement upon the account of the scandall, that the Nuns were accused to have been occa∣sioners of, he should not have given one of them any ground to write that, which we shall presently extract word for word out of a Letter which she wrote at the very time that she hoped he would be more favourable to her, and therefore cannot be accused, of ha∣ving wrote it out of Revenge. LETTER. I should never have believed, that a Provincial could ever have been ca∣pable of talking as he does: He makes all things trifles and niceness: He calls well-grounded Denyals, weakness of spirit, signs of Ignorance: In a word, we are, said he, Novices in Love: If I were not affraid that this would be intercepted, I would tell you such things as you are not able to ima∣gine. No, you shall never know them, for I shall never be able to
acquaint you with them, without blushes. If it be thus that he courts his Angelica, and desires such favours as these of her, sure she must be far from being very squeamish to be a∣ble not to nauseate him. His Passion and sighs, that he reproaches us for being insensible of, do nothing but scandalize us; and the testimonies of his affection that he would give us, do but make us hate him the more: sometimes he thinks he has Right to command us to receive them, and at other times is sorry that his Power extends not to the motions of the heart to gain him that which he de∣sires without further delay, &c. The Cordeliers Reason. They have the greatest and soundest part of the Community on their side. 'TIS not to be wondred at, That the Cordeliers should make such stories to their General, and to the Con∣gregation of the Regulars in Italy; But
that they should dare to procure Let∣ters Patents in France upon such suppo∣sitions as these, is a very strange thing, and such as does sufficiently acquaint all people with the quality of their Spi∣rit, which is, to dare to doe, and to un∣dertake, any thing. There were in the year 1664. in the Monastery of St. Catharine, twenty nine professed Nuns of the Quire; There were seventeen of them, that on the fifth of September, the same year, signed the Act, by which they agreed amongst themselves, to petition my Lord Arch∣bishop of Sens to receive them under his Conduct, and to show all earnest readiness that was requisit to return under his Jurisdiction. There remain∣ed then not above twelve, Two of which a little while after joyned with the other seventeen; so that now there was but ten of the Quire that declared for the Cordeliers, and that continued for any time in this party. Of these ten there were two that did most re∣markably abandon them, and with the
other nineteen Sisters signed all the Petitions that were since presented to the Court, and to my Lord Archbishop of Sens: and so the procuration to de∣sire the Court to let them be under the Direction of this Prelate, and to be dis∣charged of that of the Cordeliers, is signed by twenty one Sisters, all Pro∣fessed, and the most considerable of the Community, being almost all Officers of the House, and having amongst them six discreet Matrons, and Mothers of the Council, The Mistress of the Novices, The Treasuress, the Porters, The Tourner of the box, The Chauntress, The Stew∣ards, and the Overseers of the sick. And besides, those eight remaining Nuns of the Quire have since protested, and de∣clared by several Acts passed in the presence of Notaries, and that are now in their keeping, That they did ap∣prove of all the Orders that my Lord Archbishop of Sens had made for the regulating their House, and that they would observe them: That they be∣seeched him to receive them under his
Conduct and Jurisdiction, to which they submitted themselves as being their lawful Superiour, and that they did revoke, and disallow, all that they might have signed to the con∣trary. The Servitour-Sisters themselves, who had imitated them in their revolt, followed them also in their return to their obedience, and besides have be∣fore Notaries declared: That formerly they had adhered to some of their Sisters Opinions, and resisted the Or∣ders of my Lord Archbishop of Sens, in a perswasion that they were obliged in conscience to continue under the Ju∣risdiction of the Cordeliers: But that being since better enlightned in the truth they did depart from them, and submit themselves to his Orders and Jurisdiction. So that either these eight Nuns of the Quire, and the Servitour-Sisters have been sincere in all these Authentick Acts, or they have not been so, but Cheats and Hypocrites: If they have been sincere in it, then is there not
one of the Nuns of St. Catharine, that desires not to be under the Jurisdiction of my Lord Archbishop of Sens, and that does not acknowledge the necessi∣ty of banishing the Cordeliers out of their House: If they have not been so, the Cordeliers must then confess, that they have but seven or eight Nuns of the Quire, and some Servitour-Sisters, all of them without any sincerity, on their side. The Cordeliers Reason. The Zeal with which these Nuns have es∣poused the Interests of the Cordeliers, does sufficiently vindicate them. LET it be supposed, that these seven or eight Nuns of the Quire that made so much show of adhering to the Cordeliers were enclined to do so only upon scruples of Conscience ill∣grounded, since that they have declared it so themselves. Let us not suspect
them to have had so much as any kind of regard to the Offices, that the Ab∣bess had given them for giving her their Votes, nor any Artifices that the Corde∣liers used to maintain them in the Re∣volt, and of which one may judge by an extract out of one of their Letters of the twenty fourth of December 1666. which is in keeping. — If these Good Ladies (This Cordelier speaks of the united Nuns.) did but know what the Government of Bishops is, they would not be so eager for it. They ordinarily court one Superiour Nun, and let the rest live miserably, and never see any body. We have exam∣ples of it every-where.—Discour∣ses of this nature do sometimes make impression upon the mind, let it be ne∣ver so well fortified: And thereupon it frames to it self strange Ideas of si∣lence and retirement, that fright any that are not averse from conversation, and not accustomed to slight the pro∣testations of Esteem and Affection, that they might receive by means of it.
Whatsoever the true account of it is, it is certain, that the heat, with which these Nuns have espous'd the Interests of the Cordeliers, could not proceed from any esteem they had of their conduct, and sufficiency; since they have acknow∣ledg'd in their Depositions, That there is but a shadow of Religion in their Mo∣nastery, both in Spiritual and Tem∣poral concerns: That there is but a pretence of Noviceship, and that the Mistress of the Novices has but the bare name of it: That there is no regular silence there: That there is no Chri∣stianity: That the Superiours allow the Servitour-Sisters every thing, be∣cause they have votes at Elections: That the Nuns have unlawful familia∣rities with the Cordeliers: That there are great abuses in the admission of Novices and profess'd Nuns: That all this is told the Provincials at the times of their Visitations, but that they take no care to remedy it: And that if at the last Visitation they gave some Order for it, it was only because of
the Letters of the Privy Seal, and that they never were observed, no more than those made in the time of Mon∣siour Coqueret: That the Provinciall himself laugh't at the Order he had made before the Election, which for∣bade the Abbesses disposing of the in∣comes of the House without the Trea∣suresses: That These Nunns themselves were drawn in to the Cabal for the last Election: And that there are so many disorders in the house, that they did heartily desire to leave it. The Servitour-Sisters, for whose sake the Cordeliers have acted so many pieces of injustice, have not given them any Characters that are more to their ad∣vantage. One of the most Ancient of them has declared in plain terms, That the Disorders have been very great amongst them for this long while: That she does not believe, that any good Discipline can be settled a∣gain under the direction of the Corde∣liers: That whatsoever she was made to sign to continue under their con∣duct
was not her intention: That her heart bleeds, when she considers all the disorders, and scandals that the Cordeliers have introduc'd and ap∣prov'd of there: That the Nunns make their Cordeliers Gods upon Earth: That upon the death of a Nunn they go into the Sisters Chambers, and they give them all they have: That she knowes of many Night-Entries of the Cordeliers into the Gardens over the Walls, and in at the Windows of the house, to enter∣tain the Nunns there, and to pass whole Nights with them. All the rest confess, That there is no observation of regularity in the House at all: That they have known it alwayes as irregular, and as full of licentiousness in the Spiritual affairs as now: And that the Cordeliers con∣tract Alliances of near relations with the Nunns of the Quire, and the Servi∣tour-Sisters. In fine, One of these Servitour-Sisters, that seem'd the most reserv'd in her De∣positions, and studi'd the most to spare
them, having well consider'd upon it, and acknowledg'd the necessity there was, that their House should return un∣der the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Sens, wrote to him in these terms: LETTER. —Suffer me, My Lord, to repeat my Vowes under your hands, amongst which is comprehended that Vow of Obedience, which I promise to pay, as long as I live, to your Orders: 'Tis They, that must give us a new life of Grace and Reputation, hitherto in great danger of being forfeited—Which has alwayes made your Un∣worthy Daughter say; We stand in need of an Assistant as great as My Lord Archbishop: But yet I oppos'd it un∣der the mistake of a pretended Chari∣ty, that I was afraid to break, though in the mean time I violated the Obli∣gations of true Charity, which should have made me adhere to you, as to my true Pastour...... I therefore beseech
your Grace to receive me under your Protection, as I submit my self to your Authority with affection and reve∣rence. Could Virgins, that, after they had sworn, and promis'd upon their Holy Vowes to speak the truth, speak after this manner, or that write thus of their own accord, and according to the di∣ctates of their Consciences; could they do any thing, that should not turn to the confusion of the Cordeliers, that had all this while seduc'd them? The Cordeliers Reason. There are none against the Cordeliers, but a few factious spirits, that were offended at the Reformation which they would have brought in in Execution of his Ma∣jesties Letters of the Privy Seal, and the Command of the late Queen Mother. THe Defence of those persons, that have none to make, is to render
those, that accuse them the most justly in the world, suspected. It has been just now made appear, what the Cordeliers mean by these Factious spirits, and that 'tis of 21 Nunns of the Quire, The An∣cientest, and the most considerable in the House, of whom they speak after this fashion, because they were not able to en∣dure their disorders and villanies any longer. They may in the judgment of the Cordeliers pass for what they please to think them; That will not hinder them from glorying in this re∣proach, nor from declaring, that they were not Offended at any design they had to reform the House, (since they are ve∣ry well perswaded, that there was an ex∣traordinary need of it) but at the man∣ner of the Provincial's proceeding in it. They were Offended to see a man, that had the title of Provincial, and one de∣puted from their Majesties by vertue of Letters of the Privy Seal, which gave him full power to punish, and to make those, who should oppose his Reformation,
be carried away into other Monasteries, to see him declare to all the Nunns af∣ter he had assembled them together, That he did not believe they were in any fault, but that he must do some∣thing to make a shew for a little time only: That he assured them upon the Faith of a Priest, that the consent, that he required of them to the refor∣ming of their Monastery, should not engage them to any thing, and that he took this course only to salve his own Credit, and the Honour of the Com∣munity, which had been reflected up∣on by an information given in to the Queen. They were offended, that during the three days that this Provincial made his scrutiny, he promis'd many in private, That all the Orders, that he should give should be but for a small time; And That from that very time he, and his Secretary made themselves sport with them about all that great design of Re∣formation. They were offended, That after they
had under this pretence of Reformation, spent three whole weeks in their House in Feasting, and as loose conversation, as they had ever used, he thought it suffici∣ent to read them some Regulations, that he had drawn up, and which the Corde∣liers were the first that did openly vio∣late, entertaining the Nuns at the time of Divine Service, and Solemn Festivals, against the Injunctions that he had made to the contrary. Lastly, They were offended, That those whom their Majesties had entrusted with the Remedies that they thought fit to apply to their Disorders, had on the other side labour'd after nothing more, than to disguize them, to conceal them, and to invalidate them, by giving encouragement to hope for impunity. So that if it be true, that this pretended Reformation gave the occasion to all the hot pursuits that the Nuns make at Court, 'tis because it has perfectly convinc'd them, That there was no good to be hop'd for from the Corde∣liers; That they would always engage
them still deeper and deeper in the great∣est Disorders; and, That they were not to expect Reformation from People, that had so many things to reform amongst themselves, and who ought to have ta∣ken care to cure themselves, before thinking of healing others, if they would avoid the reproach mention'd in the Gospel. The Cordeliers Reason. They made Songs of the Cordeliers, and turn'd the Provincial's Words and Actions into Raillery. 'TIs not here intended to justifie all that a false zeal, or the too great liberty, that the Cordeliers had us'd these Nuns to, might make them say against them. 'Tis only affirm'd, That it was the interest of these Fathers not to draw upon themselves the contempt of these Virgins by their disorderliness so un∣avoidably
as they did: Nor to vilifie their Ministery by the execrable profa∣nations of it, that they acted before their faces: Nor to render themselves ridiculous by transforming themselves into Gallants, and Romantick Heroes; by using their language, and imitating their Actions, and Fashions. Would not these Fathers have had the Sisters show respect to the fooleries, and impertinencies, that they heard them utter? That they should have had a ve∣nerable opinion of a Provincial, that danc'd, and play'd the Gallant at their Grate? And that they should have ex∣press'd Esteem and Reverence for peo∣ple, in whom the most tolerable thing that they saw was the meanness, and extra∣vagance of their talk? Let them know, that in the opinion of the Holy Fathers, there are Railleries, that are Acts of Ju∣stice, and that there are some things, as Tertullian says, that cannot be confuted but by laughing at them, lest that if they should be taken notice of in a se∣rious
way, one should seem to give them respect. Multa sunt sic digna revinci, ne gravitate adorentur. The Cordeliers Reason. My Lord Archbishop of Sens instead of Executing his Commission, endeavour'd usurp the Power over them by infusing Rebellion into them, and by maintaining them in it ever since. THis Prelate never endeavour'd to usurp that Jurisdiction; for it be∣longs to him by Divine right, and so is inseparable from his Character. Is it not an impudent presumption for Friers, who in that quality are no more than Laicks, and ought to esteem themselves happy, that God has separated them from the World to serve him in silence and retirement, should dispute with a Great Archbishop for his most Hierarchi∣cal Rights, and the most essential to his Priesthood? Multùm erigimini, Filii Le∣vi—num
parum vobis est, &c. Though my Lord Archbishop of Sens (in the Visi∣tation, which he was oblig'd to make in this Monastery to satisfie the duty of his Charge, and the urgent supplicati∣ons address'd to him for it by the Nuns, whom the Court by Order had remitted to him for redressing of their Grievan∣ces) were suppos'd to have warmly re∣presented to them, and with that ten∣derness, and Fatherly Charity, that in all his discourses he joyns to the Au∣thority, and Holy Majesty, that goes along with the Word of God, made them see the necessity there was of recurring to the most powerful, and wholesome Remedies to cure the distem∣pers that they labour'd under, and others yet greater, that threatned them; Could they make such just Remonstrances pass for the seeds of revolt and rebellion? If the Religious Sisters of St. Catharine had not of themselves been convinc'd of the necessity there was of removing the Authors of so many Disorders away from their House, and of seriously apply∣ing
themselves to the salvation of their Souls; Could My Lord Archbishop of Sens, without wounding his Conscience, and being wanting to the principal function of his Ministery, leave them any longer under such mischievous engagements, and not draw them to a solid Conver∣sion, to a true Change of their lives, and to make the best improvement of those precious moments of Mercy and Grace? And may not this Prelate, seeing the un∣just Slanders, that the Cordeliers spread of him, with a great deal of Justice use those words to them, that Jesus Christ us'd to the Ruler of the Synagogue, who was in indignation to see him heal a Woman on the Sabbath-day, that had been for many years possess'd with a spi∣rit, that render'd her infirm, and that bowed her so together that she could not look upwards; Ye Hypocrites, is there any of you, that looses not his Oxe, or his Asse on the Sabbath-day, and drawes them not out of the stable to lead them to drink? Why then should not this Daughter of Abra-ham, (This Society of Virgins) whom Sa∣tan
had kept bound for so many years (by the means of your Ministery) be once in its life deliver'd from those bonds? The Cordeliers Reason. He Excommunicated those, that were zea∣lous for the Observation of their Rule, and caus'd Nine of them to be forcibly carried away, so as was never before heard of. 'TIs the least that people, who have so little Conscience as the Cordeliers, could do to revenge themselves of the wrong, that they pretend to have recei∣ved of My Lord Archbishop of Sens, To suppose some things, and to disguise others. It has been seen in the process of the Declaration what oblig'd that Pre∣late to make it be declar'd to some of the Religious Sisters of St. Catharine, that they had incurr'd the Censures of the Church, and that for not having pre∣sented themselves to the Communion at
Easter, and not for having zealously ad∣hered to the observance of their Rule. When one reflects upon the man∣ner of observing the Rule in this Mona∣stery ever since the Cordeliers made themselves Masters of it, and that there is scarce any single Article of it, that they themselves have not openly violated, what can one judge of the pretended zeal of these 7 or eight Nunns for the obser∣vance of their Rule? And is there not ground to fear with St. Augustine, That this shadow of Piety comes from the leaves of that Tree, which our First Parents covered themselves withal, when they were ashamed of their na∣kedness? Ista umbra pietatis, &c. As for the pretended violence us'd in the car∣rying away of these Nunns, there is no∣thing more false, as appears by the De∣claration of it drawn up in Court: And we refer it to the testimony of the Nunns themselves, who cannot deny but that they were treated-with all pos∣sible kindness and civility.
The Cordeliers Reason. Although the Nuns of St. Catharine should of right be under the Authority of my Lord Archbishop of Sens; yet this cannot be done but by the Pope, who withdrew them from under his Jurisdi∣ction. THis way of reasoning supposes, that the Nuns of St. Catharine have been wholly withdrawn from under the Jurisdiction of my Lord Archbishop of Sens, which the Cordeliers can never ju∣stifie by any Title; and though they could, 'tis prov'd that these Titles would be null, and unlawful, being contrary to the Holy Scripture, the General Councils, and Tradition, all which do (as we have made appear) submit the Nuns to the Jurisdiction of the Bishops. But supposing that these Nuns had been withdrawn from under the Juris∣diction of my Lord Archbishop of Sens,
'Tis deny'd that there is any need of the Pope's Briefs to make them return under his Jurisdiction. For 'tis a constant Ma∣xime in France, That to Authorize an Exemption, there must be certain and lawful Titles, that is, such as are accom∣pani'd with all the conditions that the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties of the Gallicane Church do require: But that to render to the Ordinaries what belongs to them, there needs no Titles nor Apo∣stolical Briefs; the return to a common Right being natural and spontaneous, and having no need of any thing, but the bare Renunciation of those, who are in possession of the Priviledges, by which the effect of that subordination that God has set amongst the Members of the Bo∣dy of Jesus Christ, that is, his Church, is suspended, and obstructed. So that this Renunciation only does happily return them to that rank to which they belong, and where God, according to St. Paul, had plac'd them himself. The Officers of the Court of Rome have acknowledged this truth themselves up∣on
on many occasions, and 'tis to be seen in the Registers of the Parliament, in a Plea of the late M. Advocate General Bighon, inserted into the Decree that was made betwixt my Lord Bishop of Bo∣logne, and the Cordeliers, That they have asserted, when they were recurr'd to upon like occasions, That there was no need of the Pope's Briefs to restore things to a common Right. The Parli∣ament has often decided this Question, but particularly in the Decree before∣mentioned: For some Religious Sisters of the Annunciade of Bologne having ap∣peal'd as from the abuse of the Orders, which the Bishop of Bologne had made in their Monastery; and the Provincial of the Cordeliers having interven'd in the cause, and having also appeal'd as from the abuse of the same Orders; amongst the Reasons that were us'd at the Hear∣ing to confirm their Appeals, and which were very nigh, the same that the Corde∣liers now alledge against my Lord Arch∣bishop of Sens, they stuck not openly to maintain, That the Pope having put
those Nuns under the Jurisdiction of the Order of St. Francis, His Holiness ought to give his leave to withdraw them, and remove them from it. But yet the Court by a Decree of the 6th of January, 1651. (without having any regard to the interventions) declar'd them not re∣ceiveable in their Appeal as from Abu∣ses: And the Jurisdiction, that My Lord Bishop of Bologne had some years since reassum'd over that Monastery, was confirm'd, though the Cordeliers had al∣ledg'd, That those Nuns had been sub∣jected to them from their very first foundation, and that there had been neither Briefs nor Priviledges obtain'd of the Court of Rome to withdraw them from under their Juridsdiction.
The Cordeliers Reason. This is to affront the whole Order, to disho∣nour it, and to scandalize the Church. THere is nothing more abus'd, than the words that Jesus Christ made use of to exhort the Faithful carefully to avoid the scandalizing of their Bre∣thren; for they are indifferently apply'd to those that reprove Vice, and to those that commit it: And there are people, who value themselves highly for their Spirituality, that are scarce at all touch'd at the licentiousness, with which the greatest crimes are committed, and yet are even transported with rage at the zeal, with which they are reprov'd. The Holy Fathers were of another mind. They thought, That true Charity towards persons oblig'd them to write with heat against their Extravagances, and they were not at all afraid, that they should trespass upon that Charity, or pass for slanderers for reproving them openly,
if they were of a publick nature. They thought, that they were the true causers of scandal that committed these publick Disorders, and the persons, to whom Je∣sus Christ spoke, when he said; Wo be to the World because of scandals: Wo be to the Man by whom scandal comes: And that on the other side, Those, that re∣prov'd them, that put a check to them, were those, that Jesus Christ had encou∣rag'd to this Pious Office, when he said, It is necessary, that scandals should come. The rank, which the Scribes, Phari∣sees, and Doctours of the Law held amongst the Jews, was much more considerable than that which the Cordeliers hold in the Church; since that Our Saviour says of them, That they sate in the Chair of Moses, and therefore commands to observe and do all that they taught: And yet the eminent Condition to which they were rais'd, and the need that they had of being in esteem amongst the people, that they might follow their instructi∣ons, did they hinder him from reproving
the irregularities of their base and self-interested practices? Does he not call them Hypoerites, full of stupidity, blind Guides, Serpents, and a brood of Vipers? Does he not compare them to whited Sepulchres, which appear fair without to the eyes of men, but within are full of dead mens bones, and all kind of rottenness? Does he not tell them, That they appear also just to the eyes of men, but within are full of Hypocrisie and In∣iquity? That they make clean the out∣side of the platter and cup, whilst their inward parts are full of rapine and un∣cleanness? And though one of those Do∣ctors replies upon it, That in speaking so he dishonoured them also, Does he for all that leave off discovering their Vil∣lanies? And does he not on the contrary add, Wo be to you also, ye Doctors of the Law, who load men with burdens not to be born, and will not touch them your selves with your little finger? In fine, when his Disciples themselves re∣presented to him, That the Pharisees were offended at the liberty, with
which he reproved their errors, Does he not answer them, Let them alone; They are blind leaders of the blind, Si∣nite eos; Coeci sunt, &c. Let not the Fathers Cordeliers then fancie, that the Rules of any Charity, that was due to their Order, are viola∣ted by representing, as has been done, their disorderly practices, to shew what necessity there is of taking an House of Virgins out of their hands, who are in such evident danger of being ruin'd. 'Tis the Abuses and Disorders that they have committed in this Monastery, that dishonour the Order, and scandalize the Church, and not the zeal of those that endeavour to purge the House of the corruption, with which they have infect∣ed it: And there has been so little of a Design in this to diminish the true Glory of the Order, and that of their Founder, that on the contrary, 'tis acknowledged for a reason of the Cordeliers falling in∣to all these horrible misdemeanors: That they have departed from the spirit of St. Francis, and that contrary to all his
Maximes, and Prohibitions they have en∣gag'd themselves in the Government of the Nuns. But if any Persons after all this be yet offended at the liberty with which these Excesses are represented, they will by that shew (as St. Bernard said formerly to justifie himself for the holy liberty, with which he had in his Apology reprov'd the Disorders that were slipt into the Order of Cluni) that they love not the Order, since that they are unwilling, that the Corruptions and Abuses of it should be condemn'd and banish'd out of it. And there is nothing to be answer'd to these persons, but the saying of St. Gregory the Great, cited also by St. Bernard: 'Tis better that Scandal should come, than that the truth should be abandoned. It is better that Scandal should come of it, than that Religious Fathers upon the account of their being Religious (and therefore that their disorderly Practices cause great Scandal, when they come once to be known) should without check profane the most sacred things, and carry unchast
flames into the very Sanctuary, and into those hearts, which Jesus Christ has after a peculiar manner made his Temples and a part of himself. This is now that, which oblig'd them to discover the Disorders that the Corde∣liers have committed in the House of St. Catharine, and not the desire of affront∣ing an Order, which it may be, would be still in the high esteem that the hu∣mility and simplicity of St. Francis had put it into, if it had continued obedient to the Bishops under whom it re∣ceiv'd its birth; and if these Fathers had taken care, as their Saint had often warn'd them, to avoid having any com∣munication with the Religious Sisters. It was thought to be the Interest of the Church, That the Bishops, who have Nun∣neries of the Religious of St. Clare in their Diocesses, and who are oblig'd to give an account to God of them, should have knowledge of these Disorders, that so having a pious indignation at them, they might apply themselves, as they are bound by their Office, to hinder the
committing of the like Crimes in those Houses, or to banish them out of them, if by ill hap they were slipt in. It was thought to be the Interest of the State, That Magistrates, and Pub∣lick Persons should have knowledge of these Disorders, that so they might be convinc'd of the necessity there is of maintaining the Bishops in the Rights gi∣ven them by the Holy Scriptures and Councils over all the Monasteries of Nunns, for fear that the Friers, who have gain'd upon their Jurisdiction, should change those Holy Retirements and Sanctuaries into Houses of Debau∣chery and Temples of Venus; and lest this abuse (that the Cardinals and Pre∣lates assembled together by the Order of Paul the Third did so long ago declare, That it did disfigure the Church, and confound Christianity, should at last draw down the wrath of God upon the whole Kingdom by the publick Sacri∣ledges, which, say they, are committed with horrible Scandal in most of the Nunneries, that are under the Con∣duct
of the Cloistered Friers. It was thought to be the Interest of all the Friers to have knowledge of these Dis∣orders, that they might the more zea∣lously love and value the retirement and solitude of their Cloysters: That they might take the more care to avoid the Nunns Grates, with whom all the Founders of the several Orders have ex∣presly forbidden them to have any com∣munication; And that that they might mind themselves of that excellent say∣ing of St. Augustine: Quid interest, utrum in uxore, an in matre, an in sorore, dum ta∣men Eva in qualibet muliere caveatur. It was thought to be the Interest of all the Nunns to have a knowledg of these Dis∣orders, that they might unite them∣selves with joy to the Government of their Bishops, their true Pastors, and law∣ful Superiors, and that they might care∣fully fly from those Strangers, those Mer∣cenaries, and those false Pastors, That come to them cloathed like sheep, but within are ravening wolves; That devour their houses under a pretence
of making long Prayers, and that even to this day compass Sea and Land to make one Jew, and after he is made so, they make him twice as fit for Hell as themselves. Lastly, It was thought to be the interest of the Nuns of St. Catharine, That the World should have a knowledge of these Disorders, that they might withall ac∣knowledge the Justice of their Suits at Court against the Cordeliers, the Genero∣sity that has made them shut their eyes against all humane Interests and Consi∣derations, that might have drawn them from it, and the Christian Contempt they have shown of Worldly Reputation to re∣cover their solid and true honour, which consists in resettling good Order and regularity in their House. The Conclusion. AFter what has been represented in both parts of the Factum, and the Answers now made to all that can
be alledg'd in favour of the Cordeliers, it cannot be imagin'd that there is any person, that is not fully convinc'd of the Justice of the Pretensions of the Reli∣gious Sisters of St. Catharine. They desire not that the Authours of all the Disorders, that have been com∣mitted in their House; should be in∣form'd against, That so long a continua∣tion of crimes should be punish'd; That the violation of so many Laws, so many abominable profanations should be cha∣stiz'd according to the severity of the Rules of Church and State. They freely offer to chastise them upon themselves by the ways of Christian Pe∣nance, to expiate them by their groans and tears, and (as much as in them lyes) to appease the Wrath of God (justly provok'd by all these abominations) by the Mortifications of a Religious life, and the constant Sacrifice of an humble and contrite heart. They only desire, that by removing these pernicious Directours of their Consciences from their House, they
might recover their liberty of acquit∣ting themselves of that, and their other Obligations: That by preventing these Fathers from having any access to them, they might put a stop to the Scandals that they have occasion'd for so many years together: And that such people, as have neither Faith, nor Honour, nor Conscience, might not be any longer suf∣fred in the face of the whole Church to abuse a Jurisdiction, which they have usurped over them against the most Essential Rights of Episcopacy. If nothing but their temporal interests had been concerned in it, and that the Cordeliers would have been contented to have consum'd their whole Revenue in Feasting, Dissoluteness, and Debauchery, or to have robb'd them of it, according as they had occasion for it, and stood in need of it to satisfie their ambitious ends, their self-interest, or their plea∣sures with it, it may be, they should have dissembled the injury. But the honour of their Monastery is now concern'd in it, which cannot be re∣settled
in its former splendour, but by restoring it again to the Authority of My Lord Archbishop of Sens, unto which, according to the Holy Scripture, accord∣ing to the Canons of the Councils, according to the Maximes of the Gallicane Church, according to the mind of St. Francis, and according to the first settlement of the Nuns of St. Clare, it ought to be submit∣ted. The Salvation of their own Souls, and of the Souls of all those Virgins, that in Succession of time shall be engag'd in this Monastery, are concern'd in it, whom these Fathers, considering what kind of people they are, will most indubitably alienate from the Fidelity, which they owe to Jesus Christ. Lastly, The main thing, that is made the matter of the present concern, is, To procure a Favour for a great number of Virgins Consecrated to the Service of God, that would never be refus'd to any Ordinary Virgins of the World, who had been stolne away from their
Parents, and implor'd the assistance of the Laws to be restor'd to them back again, and to be forc'd out of the hands of those Villains, who would with so much insolence have attempted upon their honour. The Religious Sisters of St. Catharine expect this favour from the Court with so much the more Confidence, as the danger in which they are is more evi∣dent. They hope that that August Tribunal having always testify'd so much zeal for the Rights of the Bishops, and for the true liberty of the Nunneries, will be tenderly affected at the hard captivi∣ty, under which they have for so many years groan'd: And that they shall not have a less favourable Audience, than the Religious Sisters of St. Eutrope of Chanteloup, Those of St. Nicholas of Melun, Those of the Annunciate at Bologne, and so many others besides, who have been restor'd to the Jurisdiction of their Bishops for abuses very like to
those, that the Cordeliers have commit∣ted in their House. They hope, that It having given testi∣mony of its great zeal for upholding all Religious Orders in the first spirit, and sincerity of their Foundation, It will not refuse this favour to the Order of St. Francis, by obliging the Cordeliers to leave off being Directours to those, whom their Holy Founder has so streight∣ly forbid them to meddle withall, which he so earnestly endeavour'd to separate them from, and which we look'd upon as a very dangerous snare that the De∣vil had laid for his Order, and which they themselves have found by dread∣ful Experience to have been so mischie∣vous to them. Lastly, They hope, that the Court ha∣ving always given evidence of so much Judgment, Prudence, and Equity in its determinations, It will not now aban∣don them to the power of those, who have engag'd them in that sad condi∣tion, that they have for so many years continu'd in; but will on the contrary
conclude, That the Mischief that the Cordeliers have done to their Monastery cannot be prevented but by the cares of their true Pastour. FINIS. Jan. 5. 1675/1676. Imprimatur, Geo. Hooper. Ex Aed. Lam∣bethan.
The Contents. A Chapter-Act of the Nuns to own their Factum. A Factum or Declaration in Court for the Nuns against the Friers. Page 1 Section I. What gave occasion to the Suits made by the Nuns against the Cordeliers at Court. page. 3 Sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. That the Cordeliers have no just Title for their Jurisdiction over the Nuns. p. 37 Sect. 9. 10. That if they had had any Title, they have now lost their Right to it by their Misde∣meanours, which are specified by these particu∣lars. p. 40 Sect. 11. Abuses in their Spiritual Concerns. p. 43 In the Education of Pensioners. p. 46 Novices. Education of young Novices. p. 48 And of young professed Nuns. p. 53 Ʋndecent Books allowed them. p. 54 Instructions. p. 55 Presents to the Nuns. p. 57 Letters, Posies and Devices. p. 58 Publick Allusions. p. 64 Dedication of Theses. p. 65 Profanation of Sermons. p. 70
The Marriages of the Friers and Nuns. p. 72 Frolicks and Entertainments. p. 75 Love-Letters. p. 78 Sacriledge and Profanations. p. 93 Mad Revellings and secret Entries into the Nun∣nery. p. 95 Insolences and Disorders of the Friers. Which the Nuns blusht at. p. 97 Sect. 12. Abuses of the Temporal Concern. p. 105 Riotous Wastes of the Revenue of the Nunnery in Debaucheries, by Thefts and Cheats, in Licen∣tiousness. p. 105. to 115 Sect. 13. That it is impossible there should be any good Discipline settled in this Nunnery by the Cordeliers. p. 116 Sect. 14. The Superiours of the Order caus'd the Disorders, viz. The Provincials, Masters of the Revels. The Nuns Preferred for their kindness. p. 117 Sect. 15. That the Nuns have Invincible Reasons not to trust the Cordeliers. p. 130 Sect. 16. The Cordeliers pretences to colour their Designs, are answered. p. 138 The Conclusion representing the whole Case. pag. 180
A Catalogue of some Books, Printed for, and sold by Robert Pawlet, at the Bible in Chancery-Lane, near Fleet-street. MAry Magdalen's Tears wip'd off, or, A Voice of Peace to an Ʋnquiet Conscience; Pub∣lished for the Comfort of all those who mourn in Zion. Sermons Preached by that Eminent Divine, Henry Hammond, D.D. Golden Remains of that ever Memorable Mr. John Hales of Eaton Colledge, &c. The Second Impression, with Additions not before pub∣lished. Episcopacy, as Established by the Law in England, written by the Especial Command of the late King CHARLES, by R. Saunderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln. A Scholastical History of the Canon of the Holy Scripture; or, The certain and indubitable Books thereof, as they are received in the Church of En∣gland; By Dr. Cosin, late Lord Bishop of Dur∣ham. A Collection of Articles, Injunctions, Canons, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions Eccle∣siastical, with other Publick Records of the Church of England, with a Preface, by Anthony Sparrow, Lord Bishop of Exon.
The Bishop of Exon's Caution to his Diocess against false Doctrines; Delivered in a Ser∣mon at his primary Visitation. The whole Duty of Man, laid down in a plain and familiar way for the use of All, but especi∣ally the meanest Reader: necessary for all Fa∣milies, with private Devotions on several occa∣sions. The Gentleman's Calling, written by the Au∣thor of the Whole Duty of Man. The Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety: or An Impartial Survey of the Ruines of Christian Religion, undermined by Unchristian Practice: by the Author of the Whole Duty of Man. An Historical Vindication of the Church of England, as it stands separated from the Roman, &c. by Sir Roger Twisden, Baronet. Mr. Chillingworth's Reasons against Popery, perswading his Friend to return to his Mother the Church of England, from the Church of Rome. The Book of Homilies, appointed to be read in Churches. Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical. Divine Breathings, or, A Pious Soul thirsting after Christ; In 100 Excellent Meditations. Hugo Grotius de Rebus Belgicis, or the Annals and History of the Low-Countrey Wars, in English; wherein is manifested, that the United
Netherlands are indebated for the Glory of their Conquest to the Valour of the English. A Treatise of the English Particles, shewing much of the variety of their significations and uses in English; and how to render them into Latin, according to the propriety and elegancy of that Language, with a Praxis upon the same: By William Walker, B. D. Schoolmaster of Gran∣tham. The Royal Grammar, commonly called Lillie's Grammar, explained; opening the meaning of the Rules with great plainness to the under∣standing of Children of the meanest capacity, with Choice Observations on the same from the best Authors: By W. Walker, B. D. Author of the Treatise of English Particles. A Treatise proving Spirits, Witches, and Supernatural Operations, by pregnant Instances and Evidences: by Meric Casaubon, D. D. A Catalogue of the Names of all the Parlia∣ments or reputed Parliaments, from the Year 1640. A Narrative of some Passages in, or relating to the Long Parliament; By a Person of Ho∣nour. Nemesius's Nature of Man, in English: by G. Withers, Gent. Inconveniences of Toleration. A Letter about Comprehension. A Thanksgiving Sermon, preached before
the King, by J. Dolben, D. D. Dean of Westmin∣ster, and Clerk of the Closet. Bishop Brownrig's Sermon on the Gun-pow∣der Treason. A Narrative of the Burning of London 1666. with an Account of the Losses, and a most Re∣markable Parallel between it and MOSCO, both as to the Plague and Fire. A Collection of the Rules and Orders now used in Chancery. Mr. White's Learned Tract of the Laws of England. Graphice, or the Use of the Pen and Pensil, in Designing, Drawing and Painting; By Sir William Sanderson, Knight. The Communicant instructed for worthy Receiving the Lord's Supper: By Tho. Trott of Barkston near Grantham. Military and Maritime Discipline, &c. Sir Francis Moor's REPORTS. Baron Savil's REPORTS. All Sorts of LAW-BOOKS. FINIS.
