v334 13317783 99028
THE ENGLISH-MANS TREASVRE. With the true Anatomie of Mans Body Compiled by that excellent Chyrurgion Mr. Thomas Vica Esquire, Sergeant Chyrurgion to King HENRY the 8. To King EDVVARD the 6. To Queene MARY, and to our late Soveraigne Queene ELIZABETH, and also chiefe Chyrurgion to St. Bartholmewes Hospitall. Whereunto are annexed many Secrets appertainin to Chyrurgerie, with divers excellent approved Remedi for all Captaines and Souldiers, that travell either by Water or Land: And likewise for all Diseases which are either in Man or Woman: with Emplaisters of especiall Cure: with other potions and drinkes approved in Physicke. Also the Rare Treasure of the English Bathes: written by William Turner Doctor in Physicke. Gathered and set forth for the benefit and Cure of the Poo∣rer sort of people, who are not able to goe to the Physitians: By WILLIAM BREMER, Practitioner in Physicke, and Chyrurgerie. And now ninthly much augmented, corrected and enlarged, with almost a thousand approved Waters and Medicines, meet and necessary for Physicke and Chyrurgerie: as also Oyntments and Plaisters, with especiall and approved Remedies for the Plague, and Pestilent Feaver, which never came to light before this present; By W. B. Practitioner in Physicke and Chyrurgerie. With a necessary Table for the ready finding out of any secret therein contained. Printed as London by B. ALSOP, and THO: FAVVCET, dwel∣ling in Grubstreet neere the lower Pumpe: 16
TO THE RIGHT VVORpfull: Sir ROWLAND HAYWARD Knight, President of little St. Bartholmewes in West-Smithfield, Sir Ambrose Nicholas Knight, with the rest of the Wor: Masters and Governors of the fame; William Clowes, William Beton, Richard Story, and Edward Baily, Chyrurgions of the same Hospitall, wisheth Health and Prosperity. AMong the people in times past, it was common, to praise and extoll by Pi∣ctures and Epigrams, the famous deeds of all such persons, whosoever in any vertuous quality or Liberall Science excelled. Sulpitius Gallus among the Romans, was highly renowned for his singular cunning in Astronomie, by whose meanes Luci∣us Paulus obtained the victory in this Warres against Per∣sius. Pericles also among the Athenians, was had in great admiration and honor, for his profound knowledge in Philosophie, by whom the whole City of Athens was from care and woe delivered, when they supposed their destruction to be neare at hand, by a black darknesse, of some admiration hanging over their City. How hono∣rably was Apelles the Painter esteemed of mighty A∣LEXANDER, by whom onely he desired to be Painted? But amongst all other Arts and Sciences, whose praise
in times past flourished and shined most brightly, Chy∣rurgerie among the Grecians lacked not his Praise, ho∣nour and estimation. For did not that worthy and fa∣mous Captaine of the Greekes, Agamemnon, love deare∣ly, and reward bountifully, both Podalerius and Machaon, through whose cunning skill in Surgerie, thousands of the worthy Greekes were saved alive and healed, who else had dyed and perished? And further, here to speake of Philometur, of Attalus, of Hiero, of Archelaus, and o luba, Kings of famous memory, who purchased Eternal praise, by their study and cunning in Physicke and Sur∣gerie. But now in these our dayes Envie so ruleth the roast, that Physicke should be condemned, and Surgerie despised for ever, but that sometimes paine biddeth Bat∣taile, and care keepeth skirmish in such bitter fort, that at the last his Alarum is sounded out; Now come Phy∣sicke, and then helpe Surgerie. Then is remembred the saying of IESVS the Son of SYRACH, which is notable, Honour the Physitian and Chyrurgion for necessity; whom the Almighty God hath created, because from the high∣est commeth Medicine, and they shall receive gifts of the King. Wherefore we exhort the wise man, that hee in no time of Prosperity and Health, neglect those noble Arts and Misteries of Physicke and Chyrurgerie, because no Age, no Person, no Country, can long time lacke their helpes and Remedies. What is it to have Lands and Houses, to abound in Silver and Gold, to be deckt with Pearles and Diamonds, yea, and to rule over Nations and Countries, and to lacke Health, the onely Iewell and greatest treasure of mans life and delight? Consider then (we beseech your Worships) what praises are due
to such noble Sciences, which onely worke the causes of this aforesaid Health, and how much the Weale-pub∣like are bound to all them, whose cares and Studies dai∣ly tendeth to this end. Amongst whom here is to be re∣membred, Mr. VICARY Esquire, Sergeant Chyrurgion to two Kings and two Queenes of famous memory: whose learned worke of Anatomie, is by vs (the forena∣med Surgions of St. Bartholmewes in west Smithfield, newly revived, corrected, and published abroad to the commo∣dity of others) who be Students in Chyrurgerie: not without our great study, paines and charges. And al∣though wee doe lacke the profound knowledge, and sugred Eloquence of the Latine and Greeke tongues, to decke and beautifie this worke, yet we hope the studious Reader shall thereby reape singular commodity and profit, by reading this little Treatise of the Anatomie of Mans Body; the which is onely grounded vpon Reason and Experience, which are two principall rootes of Physicke and Chyrurgerie. As it is granted by Galen, in his third Booke De Methodo medendi. And we who dai∣ly worke and practise in Chyrurgerie, according to the deepenesse of the Art, as well in grievous Wounds, Vl∣cers, and Fistulaes, as other hid and secret diseases vpon the Body of Man, daily vsed by us in St. Bartholmewes Hospitall, and other places, &c. These poore and grie∣ved Creatures, as well Men, and Women, as Children, doe know the profit of this Art to be manifold, and the lacke of the same to be lamented. Therefore Galen tru∣ly writeth, saying: That no man can worke so perfect∣ly as aforesayd, without the knowledge of the Anatomie: For (sayth he) It is as possible for a Blind man to carve
and make an Image perfect, as a Chyrurgion to worke without error in a Mans body not knowing the Anato∣mie. And further, for as much, as your Worships are very carefull for those poore and grieved Creatures within the Hospitall of St. Bartholmewes, &c. whereof Mr. VICARY was a member. Wee are therefore now the more incouraged to dedicate this little worke of the Anatomie, being his and our Travels, to you as Patrons of this Booke, to defend it against the ravenous jawes of Envious Backbiters, which never cease by all unlawfull meanes, to blemish and deface the workes of the Lear∣ned, Expert, and well disposed persons. And wee shall not onely thanke your Worships for so doing, but also pray unto Almighty GOD to requite your goodnesse, and receive you into his protection and keeping.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, EDMOND WRIGHT, Lord To the Right Worshipfull, Sir NICHOLAS RAINTON Knight, President; To the right Worshipfull, Sr. MAVRICE ABBOT Knight; To the Worshipfull, MARTIN BOND Esquire, Treasurer: And to the Worshipfull, Alderman HARRISON, Alderman SOAME, and others the Governours of the Hospitall of little St. Bartholmewes neere West-Smithfield, London: T. F. wisheth Health and Happinesse. Right Hon: and Worshipfull, THis Booke hath beene Eight severall times im∣printed, and as at the first time, so ever since in every Impression in hath beene dedicated to the Governours of your Hospitall: The Excellency and necessity of it easily appeareth by the often reprinting thereof: And the times now requiring a Ninth im∣pression, I would not so much forget my selfe or wrong You, as to Publish it without due Dedication to your Honour and Wor∣ships. If You please to vouchsafe it Patronage, and my Service in the Dedication thereof your acceptance, I shall ever rest obliged; Ready to doe your Honour, and Worships service: T. F.
To the Reader. DEare Brethren and friendly Readers, we have here according to the truth and meaning of the Author, set forth this needfull and ne∣cessary worke concerning the Anatomy of Mans body, being collected and gathered by Mr. Thomas Vicary, and now by us the Chy∣rurgions of St. Bartholmews Hospitall revi∣ved, corrected and published. And albeit this Treatise be small in volume, yet in commodity it is great and profitable. Not∣withstanding, if the things therein contayned be not discreetly and wisely studied and applyed, according to the true meaning of the Author, we have to tell you hereof, that therein is great perill, because through ignorant Practitioners, not knowing the Anatomy, commonly doth ensue Death, and separation of Soule and Body. Furthermore, whereas many good and Learned men in these our dayes, doe ceae to publish abroad in the English tongue, their Workes and travels, it is, for that if any one fault or ble∣mish by fortune be committed, eyther by them or the Printer escaped, they are blamed; yea, and condemned for Ignorant men, and errours-holders. But now wee cease here from these points, to trouble the gentle Reader with long Discoursing, for whose sakes and commodities wee have taken these paines: Wishing that men more skilfull and better learned would have borne this burthen for us. Craving onely thus much at your hands, for to correct our faults favourably, and to report of the Author curteously, who sought (no doubt) your commodities onely, and the profit of the Common-wealth withou praise and vaine-glory of himselfe. Thus the Chyrurgions aforesaid com∣mit you to the blessed keeping of Almighty God, who al∣wayes defend and increase your studies and ours, Amen.
THOMAS VICARIE to his Brethren, practising Chyrurgerie. HEreafter followeth a little Treatise (entituled A Treasure for English-Men) of the Anato∣my of Man: made by THOMAS VICARY, Citizen and Chyrurgion of London, for all such Brethren of his fellowship practising Chyrurgerie: Not for them that be expertly seene in the Anatomie: for to them Galen the Lanterne of all Chyrurgions hath set it forth in Canons, to the high glory of God, and to the erudition and knowledge of all those that be expertly seene and learned in the Noble Science of Chyrurgerie. And because all the noble Philosophers writing vpon Chyrurgerie, doe condemne all such persons as practise in Chyrurgerie not knowing the Anatomie; therfore I have drawn into certaine Lessons and small Chapters, a part of the Anato∣mie, but touching a part of every member particularly: Requi∣ring every man that shall reade this little Treatise, to correct and amend it where it shall need, and hold me excused for my bold enterprise, and accept my goodwill towards the same. O Lord which made the lofty Skyes, worke in our Rulers hearts: Alwayes to have before their eyes, safe guard to godly Arts. Now he that is the perfect guide, doth know our helpes were here alone; By homely stile it may be spy'd, for rules in Rhetoricke have we none. Our heads doe lacke that filed phrase, whereon fine wits delight to gaze; If any say, we deserve here blame, we pray you then amend the same.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOKE. PART. I. A Discourse of Chyrurgerie; as also, a Description of the Anatomy of Mans Body, by Mr. T. Vicary Esquire, &c. PART, II. Of things necessary for a Chyrurgion, &c. PART. III, and IV. Of Wounds, and their Cure, &c, PART. V. Of the Rare Treasure of the English Bathes, by W. Turner, Doctor of Physicke, &c. PART. VI. A Treatise of the Judgement of Vrines, &c. PART. VII. A Physicall Discourse, how a man should order himselfe, &c. PART. VIII. Of the making of divers Waters, &c. PART. IX. Of the making of Vnguents, or Oyntments, &c. PART. X. Of the making of sundry Emplaisters, &c. PART. XI. Of Medicines and Remedies to heale all Diseases (by the grace of God) curable. As also the vertue of divers Hearbes, Plants, and Drugs, &c. by G. E. PART, XII. A briefe Treatise of the Pestilence, By W. B.
A TREASVRE FOR ENGLISH-MEN. Containing the Anatomie of mans body: Compiled by Thomas Vicary Esquire, and Sergeant Chyrurgion to King Henry the 8. to King Edward the 6. to Qu. Mary, and to our late gracious Soveraigne Lady, Queene ELIZABETH. And also, chiefe Chyrurgion of St. Bartholmewes Hospitall for the use and com∣modity of all unlearned Practitioners in Chyrurgerie. CHAP. I. Heere I shall declare unto you shortly and briefly, the sayings and determinations of divers ancient Authors in three Points, very expedient for all men to know, that intend to use and exercise the Mysterie or Art of Chyururgerie. The first is, to know what Chyrurgerie is: The second is, how that a Chyrurgion should bee chosen: And the third is, with what properties a Chyrurgion should be indued. FOr the first, which is to know what thing Chyrurgeris is. Herein I doe note the saying of Lanfranke, whereas hée sayth: All things that man would know, may be knowne by one of these thrée things: That is to say, by his Name, or by his Working; or else by his very being and
shewing of his owne properties. So then it followeth that in the same manner we may know what Chyrurgery is, by thrée things. First, by his Name, as thus: the Interpreters write that Chirurgery is derived out of these words, Apo tes chi∣ros, ca touergou, that is to be vnderstood: a hand working, and so it may be taken for all handy Artes: But Noble Ipocras saith, that Chirurgerie is hand-working in Mans bo∣dy, for the very end and profit of Chirurgerie is hand-wor∣king. Now the second manner of knowing what thing Chyrurgery it, it is the saying of Avicen; To be knowne by his being, for it is verily a Medicinall Science. And as Galen saith, He that will know the certainty of a thing, let him not busie himselfe to know onely the name of that thing, but also the working and the effect of the same thing. Now the third way to know what thing Chirurgerie is, it is also to be knowne by his being or declaring of his owne proper∣ties, the which teacheth vs to worke in mans body with hands, as thus: In cutting and opening those parts that be whole, and in healing those parts that be broken or cut, and in taking away that that is superfluous, as Wartes, Wennes, Skurfulas, and other of like effect. But further, to declare what Galen saith Chirurgery is, it is the last Instrument of Medicine: that is to say, Diet, Potion, and Chirurgery: of the which thrée saith he, Diet is the no∣blest, and the most vertuous: and thus he saith. Whereas a man may be cured with Diet onely, let there be given no man∣ner of Medicine. The second Instrument, is Potion: for and if a man may be cured with Diet and Potion, let there not bée ministred any Chirurgery, through whose vertue and good∣nesse, is removed and put away many grievous infirmities and Diseases, which might not haue béene removed nor yet put a∣way, neither with Diet nor with Potion. And by these thrée meanes, it is knowne what thing Chirurgery is. And this sufficeth vs for that point.
Now it is knowne what thing Chirurgerie is, there must also be chosen a man apt and méete to minister Chirurgery or to be a Chirurgion. And in this point all Authors doe agrée, that a Chirurgion should be chosen by his Complexion, and that his complexion bée very temperate, and all his members well proportioned. For Rasis saith: Whose face is not séeme∣ly, it is vnpossible for him to haue good manners. And Aristotle the great Philosopher, writeth in his Epistles to the Noble King Alexander (as in those Epistles more plainly doth ap∣peare) how he should choose all such persons as should serue him, by the forme and shape of the face, and all other members of the body. And furthermore they say, he that is of an evill Complexion, there must néeds follow like Conditions. Wherefore it agréeth, that he that will take vpon him to practise as a Chirugion, must be both of a good and temperate complexion, as is afore rehearsed: and principally, that he be a good liver, and a kéeper of the holy Commandements of God, of whom commeth all cunning and grace, and that his body be not quaking and his bands stedfast, his fingers long and small, and not trembling: and that his left hand be as ready as his right, with all his limmes, able to fulfill the good workes of the soule. Now as here is a man méete to be made a Chirur∣gion: (and though he haue all those good qualities before re∣hearsed) yet is he no good Chirurgion, but a man very fit and méete for the practise. Now then to know what properties and conditions this man must haue before he be a perfect Chirurgion. I doe note foure things most specially, that every Chirurgion ought for to haue: The first, that he be learned: The second, that he be expert: The third, that he be ingenious: The fourth, that he be well mannered. The first (I said) he ought to be learned, and that he know his principles, not onely in Chirurgery, but also in Physicke, that he may the better defend his Chirurge∣ry; also hée ought to be séene in naturall Philsophy, and in Grammar, that he speake congruity in Logicke, that tea∣cheth
him to prooue his proportions with good reason: In Rhe∣toricke, that teacheth him to speake séemely and eloquently: also in Theoricke, that teacheth him to know things naturall, and not naturall, and things against Nature. Also hée must know the Anatomie: for all Authors write against those Chi∣rurgions that worke in mans body, not knowing the Anatomy: For they be likened to a blind man, that cutteth in a Vine trée, for he taketh more or lesse then he ought to doe. And here noe well the sayings of Galen, the Prince of Philosophers, in his Estoris. That it is as possible for a Chirurgion (not knowing the Anatomy) to worke in mans body without error, as it is for a blind man to carue an Image and make it perfect. The second, I said, he must be expert: For Rafus saith: He ought to know and to sée other men worke, and after to haue vse and exercise. The third, that he be ingenious and witty: for all things belonging to Chirurgery may not be written, nor with letters set forth. The fourth, I said, that he must be well man∣nered, and that he haue all these good conditions here following. First, that he be no Spouse-breaker, nor no Drunkard. For the Philosophers say, amongst all other things, beware of those persons that follow Drunkennesse, for they be accoun∣ted for no men, because they liue a life bestiall: wherefore amongst all other sorts of people, they ought to bée sequestred from the ministring of Medicine. Likewise, a Chirurgion must take héed that he deceiue no man with his vaine promises, for to make of a small matter a great, because he would be accoun∣ted the more famous. And amongst other things, they may neyther be flatterers nor mockers, nor priuy backbiters of other men. Likewise, they must not be proud, nor presumptu∣ous: nor detracters of other men. Likewise, they ought not to be covetous, nor nonyggard, and namely amongst their friends, or men of Worship, but let them be honest, courteous, and frée both in word and déed. Likewise, they shall giue no counsell except they be asked, and then say their advice by good deliberation, and that they be well advised before they speake,
chiefly in the presence of wise men. Likewise, they must be as priuy and as secret as any Confessour, of all things that they shall either heare or sée in the house of their Patient. They shall not take into their cure any manner of person, except hée will be obedient vnto their precepts: for he cannot be called a Patient, vnlesse he be a sufferer. Also that they doe their dili∣gence as well to the poore as to the rich. They shall never dis∣comfort their Patient, and shall command all that be about him that they doe the same, but to his friends speake truth as the case standeth. They must also be hold in those things whereof they be certaine, and as dreadfull in all perils. They may not chide with the sicke, but be alwayes pleasant and merry. They must not covet any woman by way of villany, and specially in the house of their Patient. They shall not for covetousnesse of money, take in hand those cures that be vncurable, nor never set any certaine day of the sicke mans health, for it lyeth not in their power: following the distinct counsell of Galen, in the Aphorisme of Hypocrates, saying: Oporter seipsum non solum. By this Galen meaneth, that to the cure of every sore, there belongeth foure things: of which, the first and principall belon∣eth to God: the second, to the Surgion: the third, to the Medi∣cine: and the fourth, to the Patient. Of the which foure, and if any one doe faile, the Patient cannot be healed: then they to whom belongeth but the fourth part, shall not promise the whole but be first well aduised. They must also be gracious and good to the poore, and of the rich take liberally for both. And sée they never praise thēselues, for that redoundeth more to their shame and discredit, then to their fame and worship. For a cunning and skillfull Chirurgion, néed never vaunt of his doings, for his works will ever get credit enough. Likewise, that they despise no other Chirurgion without a great cause: for it is méet, that one Chirurgion should loue another, as Christ loveth vs all. And in thus doing, they shall increase both in vertue and cunning, to the honor of God, and worldly same.
SIC TRANSIT GLORIA MVNDI.
OF THE ANATOMIE. CHAP. II. The Anatomie of the simple Members. ANd if it bee asked you how many simple Members there be, it is to be answered, Eleven, and two that be but superfluities of Members: and these be they, Bones, Cartlages, Nexes, Pannicles, Liga∣ments, Cordes, Arteirs, Veynes, Fat∣nesse, Flesh and Skinne: and the super∣fluities bée the Haires and Nailes. I shall begin at the Bone, because it is the Foundation and the haidest Member of all the Body. The Bone is a cosimile Member, simple and spermaticke, and cold and dry of Com∣plexion, insensible, and inflexible: and hath divers formes in Mans body, for the diversity of helpings. The cause why there be many Bones in mans body, is this: Sometime it is néedfull that one members or one limbe should mooue without another: another cause is, that some defend the principall members, as both the Bone of the Brest, and of the Head: and some to bée the Foundation of divers parts of the Body, as the Bones of the ridge and of the Legges: and some to fulfill the hollow places, as in the Hands and Féet, &c. The Gristle is a member simple and Spermaticke, next in hardnesse to the Bone, and is of complexion cold and dry, and in∣sensible,
The Gristle was ordained for sixe causes or profits that I find in it: The first is, that the continuall mooving of the hard Bone might not be done in a juncture, but that the Gristle should be a meane betwéene the Ligament and him. The second is, that in the time of concussion or oppression, the soft members or limbes should not be hurt of the hard. The third is, that the extremity of Bones and Ioynts that be grisly, might the easier be foulded and nwved together, without hurt. The fourth is, for that it is necessary in some meane places, to put a Gristle, as in the throat bowle for the the sound. The fifth is, for that it is néedfull that some members be holden vp with a Gristle, as the lids of the Eyes. The sixt is, that some Limbes haus a sustaining and a drawing abroad, as in the Nose and the Eares, &c. The Ligament is a member consimple, simple, and sperma∣ticke, next in hardnesse to the Gristle, and of complexion cold and dry, and is flexible and insensible, and bindeth the Bones together. The cause why he is flexible and insensible, is this: If it had béene sensible, he might not haue suffered the labour and mooving of the Ioynts: and if it had not béene flexible of his bowing, one Limme should not haue mooved without ano∣ther. The second profit is, that he be joyned with sinewes, for to make Cordes and Bawnes. The third helpe is, that he be a resting place to some sinewes. The fourth profit is, that by him the members that be within the Bone be sustained, as the Ma∣trixe and Kidneys, and divers other, &c. The Sinew is a consimiler member, simple and spermatick, a meane betwéene hard and soft, and in complexion cold and dry and he is both flexible and sensible, strong and tough, ha∣ving his beginning from the Braine, or from Mynuca, which is the Marrow of the backe. And from the braine commeth sea∣ven paire of Nerues sentatine, and from Mynuca commeth thirty paire of Nerues motiue, and one that is by himselfe, that springeth of the last spondell. All these sinewes haue both fée∣ling and mooving, in some more, and in some lesse, &c.
A Corde or Tendon is a consimple or officiall member com∣pound and spermaticke, sinowy, strong and tough, meanely be∣twéene hardnesse and softnesse, and meanly sensible and flexible and in complexion cold and dry. And the Corde or Tendon is thus made: The sinewes that come from the braine and from Mynuca, and goe to mone the members, is intermingled with the Lygaments, and when the sinewes and Lygaments are in∣termingled together, then is made a Corde. And for thrée cau∣ses I perceiue why the Cordes were made. The first is, that the sinew alone is so sensible, that hée may not suffer the great labour and travell of moving, without the fellowship and strength of the Ligament that is insensible, and that letteth his great féeling, and bringeth him to a perfit tempe∣rance. And so the Cordes moue the limbes to the will of the soule. And this Corde is associated with a simple feh, and so thereof is made a Brawne or a Muskle, on whom he might rest after his travell: and this Brawne is called a Muskle. Then when this Corde is entred into this Brawne, he is departed in∣to many small thréeds, the which be called Will: and this Will hath thrée properties: The first is in length, by whose vertue that draweth it hath might. The second in breadth by whom the vertue that casteth out hath might. The third, in thwartnes, in whom the vertue that holdeth hath might: and at the end of the Brawne those thréeds be gathered together to make another Muskle, &c. Now I will begin at the Arteir. This Arteir is a member consimile, simple and spermaticke hollow and finowie, having his springing from the heart, bringing from the heart to every mem∣ber, blood and spirit of life. It is of complexion cold and dry. And all these Arteirs haue two coates, except one that goeth to the Lungs, and he hath but one coate that spreadeth abroad in the Lungs, and bringeth with him to the Lungs blood with the spi∣rit of life to nourish the Lungs withall: And also that Arteir bringeth with him from the Lungs ayre to temper the fumous heate that is in the heart. And this Arteir is he that is called
Arteria Venalis, because he hath but one coate, as a vaine, and is more obedient to be delated abroad through all the Kings, because that the blood might the sooner sweat through him: whereas all other Arteirs haue two coates, because one coate may not with∣stand the might and power of the spirit of life. Divers other causes there be, which shall be declared in the Anatomie of the breast, &c. The Veyne is a simple member, in complexion cold and dry, and spermaticke, like to the Arteir, having his beginning from the Liver and bringeth from the Liuer nutritiue blood, to nourish euery member of the body with. And it is so to be vnderstood, that there is no more difference betwéene these two vessels of blood, but that the Arteir is a vessell of blood spirituall or vitall. And the Veyne is a vessell of blood nutrimentall, of the which Veynes, there is noted two most principall, of the which, one is called Vena Porta: the other is called Venacelis, of whom it is too much to treat of now, vntill we come to the Anatomy of the Wombe, &c. The Flesh, is a consimile member, simple, not spermaticke, and is ingendred of blood congealed by heate, and is in complexi∣on hot and moyst. Of the which is noted three kinds of fleshes; that is to say, one is soft and pure flesh: the second is Musculus, or hard and brawny flesh: the third is Glandulus, knotty, or kurnelly flesh. Also the commodities of the flesh, be indifferent, or some be common to every kinde of flesh, and some be pro∣per to one manner of flesh alone. The profites of the flesh be many, for some defend the body from cold as death cloathes: also it defendeth the body from hard things comming against it: so through his moysture he rectifyeth the Body in Summer, in time of great heate. Wherefore it is to be considered, what profitablenesse is in every kind of flesh by himself. And first of simple and pure flesh, which fulfilleth the concavities of voyd places, and causeth good forme and shape: and this flesh is found betwéene the téeth, and on the end of the yard. The profit of the Brawny flesh or Mus∣culus
flesh, shall be spoken of in the Anatomy of the Armes. The profits of the Grandulus flesh are these. First, that it tur∣neth the blood into a colour like to himselfe, as doth the flesh of a womans pappes turne the menstruall Blood into milke. Se∣condly, the Grandulus flesh of the Testikles, turneth the blood into Sparme. Thirdly, the Grandulus flesh of the chéekes, that engendreth the spettle, &c. The next is of Fatnesse, of the which I finde thrée kindes. The first is Pinguedo, and it is a consimiler member, not sper∣maticke, and it is made of a subtill portion of Blood congealed by colde: and it is of complexion cold and moyst, insensible, and is intermingled amongst the parts of the flesh. The second, is Adepper, and is of the same kind as is Pinguedo, but it is de∣parted from the flesh besides the Skinne, and it is an Oyle hea∣ting and moysting the Skinne. The third is Auxingia, and it is of kinde as the others be, but he is departed from the flesh with∣in foorth about the Kidneyes, and in the Intrailes, and it helpeth both the Kidneyes and the Intrailes, from drying by his tio∣sity, &c. Then come wée to the Skinne. The Skinne is a consimile member of officiall, partly spermaticke, strong and tough, flexible and sensible, thinne and temperate: whereof there be two kinds: One is the Skin that covereth the outward members: and the other the inner members, which is called a Pannicle, the profi∣tabless of whom, was spoken in the last lesson: but the Skinne is properly wovent of Lréeds, Nerues, Veynes, and Arteirs. And he is made temperate, because he should be a good déemer of heate from cold, and of moystnesse from drynesse, that there should nothing annoy or hurt the Body, but it giveth warning to the common wits thereof, &c. The haires of every part of mans Body, are but superfluity of members, made of the grosse sume or smoake passing out of the viscous matter, thickned to the forme of haire. The profita∣blenesse of him is declared in the Anatomy of the heard, &c. The Nayles likewise, are a superfluity of members, engen∣bred
of great earthly smoake or fume resolved through the natu∣rall heate of humors, and is softer then the bone, and harder then the flesh. In complexion they be cold and dry, and are al∣wayes waxing in the extremity of the fingers and toes. The vtility of them are, that by them a man shall take the better hold: also they helpe to claw the body when it néedeth. Lastly, they helpe to divide things for lacke of other fooles, &c. CHAP. III. The Anatomie of the compound Members, and first of the Head. BEcause the Head of man is the habitation or dwelling place of the reasonable soule of man, therefore with the grace of God, I shall first speake of the Anatomie of the bead. Galen saith in the second Chapter De juva∣mentes, and Avicen rehearseth the same in his first Proposition and third Chapter, proving that the head of man was made nei∣ther for wits, nor yet for the Braines, but onely for the Eyes. For beasts that haue no heads, haue the organs or instruments of wits in there breasts. Therefore GOD and Nature haue reared vp the head of man onely for the eyes, for it is the highest member of man: and as a Beholder or Watchman standeth in a high Tower to giue warning of the Enemies, so doth the Eye of man giue warning vnto the common Wittes, for the defence of all other members of the body. Now to our purpose. If the question be asked, how many things be there contained on the Head, and how many things contained within the head? As it is rehearsed by Guydo, there be fiue containing, and as many contained, as thus: The haire, the skin, the flesh, the Pannicles, and the Bone; neither rehearsing Veine nor Arteir. The which Anatomy cannot be truly without them both, as thou shalt well perceiue both in this but especially in the next. And how in this Lesson I shall speake but of Haire,
Skin, Flesh, Veynes, Pannicles, and Bones, what profit they doe to man, every of them in his kind. Of the haire of the Head, (whose creation is knowne in the Anatomy of the simple mem∣bers) I doe note foure vtilities why it was ordained. The first is, that it defendeth the braine from too much heat, and too much cold, and many other outward noyances. The second is, it maketh the forme or shape of the Head to séeme more séemelyer or beautifuller. For if the Head were not haired, the Face and the Head should séeme but one thing, and therefore the haire formeth & shapeth the Head from the Face. The third is, that by colour of the haire, is witnessed and knowne the complexion of the Braine. The fourth is, that the fumosities of the Braine might ascend and passe lightlyer out by them. For, if there were a sad thing, as the skinne, or other of the same nature, as the Haire is, the fumosities of the Braine might not haue passed through it so lightly, as it doth by the Haire. The Skin of the head is more Lazartus, thicker, and more Porrus, then any other Skinne of any other member of the body. And two causes I note why; One is, that it kéepeth or defen∣deth the Braine from too much heat and cold as doth the Haire. The other, that it discusseth to the common wits of all things that noyeth outwardly, for the haire is insensible. The third cause why the skinne of the head is more thicker then any other skinne of the body is this; that it kéepeth the braine the more warme, and is the better fence for the Braine, and it bindeth and kéepeth the Bones of the head the faster together. Next followeth the Flesh, the which is all Musculus or La∣zartus flesh, lying vpon Pericrantum without meane. And it is made of subtill Will, and of simple flesh, Sinewes, Veynes and Arteirs. And why the flesh that is all Musculus or Lazartus in every member of a mans body was made, is for three causes. The first is, that by his thicknesse, he should comfort the digesti∣on of other members that lye by him The second is, that through him every member is made the formelier, and taketh the better
shape. The third is, that by his meanes every member of the Body, drawing to him nourishing, the which others with-hold to put foorth from them, as it shall be more plainlyer spoken of in the Anatomy of the Wombe. Next followeth Pericranium, or the covering of the Bones of the Head. But here it is to be noted of a Veyne and an Arteir that commeth betwéene the Flesh and this Pericraniam, that nourisheth the vtter part of the head, and so entreth priily tho∣row the Commissaries of the Skull, bearing to the Braine and to his Pannicles nourishing: Of whose substance, is made both Duramater, and also Pericranium, as shall be declared in the parts contayned in the Head. Here it is to be noted of this Pan∣nicle Pericranium, that it bindeth or compasseth all the Bones of the Head, vnto whom is adjoyned Duramater, and is also a part of his substance, he wheit they be separated, for Durama∣ter is néerer the Braine, and is vnder the Skull. This Pericranium was made principally for two causes: one is, that for is strong binding together, hée should make firme and stable the féeble Commissaries or seames of the Bones of the Head. The other cause is, that it should be a meane betwéene the hard bone and the soft flesh. Next, is the Bone of the Pot of the head, kéeping in the Braines, of which it were too long to declaire their names after all Authors, as they number them and their names, for some name them after the Gréeke tongue, and some after the Arabian: but in conclusion all this to our purpose. And they be numbred seven bones in the pan or Skull of the head. The first is called the Coronall bone, in which is the Orbits or holes of the Eyes, and it reacheth from the browes vnto the midst of the head, and there it méeteth with the second bone called Occipissiall, a bone of the hinder part of the head called the Noddle, of the head, which two bones Coronall and Occipissiall, be divided by the Commissaries, in the middest of the Head. The third and fourth Bones bée called Parietales, and they be the Bones of the ide∣ling parts of the head, and they be divided by the Commissaries,
both from the foresaid Coronall and Occipissiall. The fi-and Art bones be called, Petrosa or Mendosa: and these two bones lye over the bones called, Parietales, on every side of the head one, like Skales, in whom be the holes of the cares. The seventh and last of the ead is called Parillarie or Bazillarie, the which Bone is as it were a wedge vnto all the other seven Bones of the head, and doth fasten them together. And thus be all num∣bred. The first is, the Coronall Bone: the second, is the Occi∣pissiall: the third and the fourth, is Parietales: the fifth and the sixth is Petrosa, or Mendosa. And the seventh is Parillarie, or Bazillarie. And this sufficeth for the fiue things containing. CHAP. IIII. In this Chapter is declared the five things contay∣ned within the Head. NExt vnder the Bones of the Head within foorth, the first thing that appeareth is Duramater, then is Piamater, then the substance of the Braine, and then Vermy formes and Letemirabile. But first wée are to speaks of Duramater, whereof, and ow it is sprung and made: First, it is to be no∣ted of the Vyne and Arteire that was spoken of in the last Chapter before, how privily they entered through the Commis∣saries, or seames of the Head, and there by their Vnion toge∣ther, they doe not onely bring and giue the spirit of Life and m∣riment, but also doe weaue themselves so together, that they make this Pannicle Duramater. It is holden vp by certaine thréeds of himselfe, comming through the said Commissaries, run∣ning into Pericranium or Pannicle that covereth the Bones of the Head. And with the foresaid Veine and Artier, and these threeds, comming from Duramater, is woven and made this Pericranium.
And why this Pannicle Duramater is set from the Skull, I note two causes. The first is, that if the Duramater should haue touched the Skull, it should lightly haue béene hurt with the hardnesse of the Bone. The second cause is, that the matter that commeth of wounds made in the Head piercing the Skull, should by it the better be defended and kept from Piamater, and hurting of the Braine. And next vnto this Pannicle, there is another Pannicle called Piamater, or Méek-mother, because it is soft and tender vnto the Braine. Of whose creation, it is to be noted as of Duramater: For the originall of their first creati∣on is of one kind, both from the Heart and the Liver, and is Mo∣ther of the very substance of the Braine. Why it is called Piama∣ter, is for because it is soft and tender to the Braine, that if nou∣risheth the Braine and féedeth it, as doth a loving Mother, vnto her tender Chi or Babe, for it is not so tough and hard as is Duramater. In this Pannicle Piamater is much to be noted of the great number of Veines and Arteirs that are planted, ramefying throughout all his substance, giving to the Braine both spirit and life. And this Pannicle doth circumvolue or lay all the substance of the Braine: and in some place of the Braine, the Veynes and the Artiers goe forth of him, and enter into the divisions of the Braine, and there drinketh of the Braines sub∣stance into them, asking of the Heart, to them the spirit of life or breath, and of the Liver nuriment. And the aforesaid spi∣rit or breath taketh a further disgestion, and there it is made a∣nimall by the elaboration of the spirit vitall, is turned and made animall. Furthermore, why there be no more Pannicles over the Braine then one, is this: If there had beene but one Pan∣nicle onely, either it must haue béene hard or soft, or meane, be∣twéens both: If it had béene hard, it should haue hurt the Braine by his hardnesse. If it had béene soft, it should haue béene hurt of the hard Bone. And if it had qéene but meanly, neyther hard nor soft, it should haue hurt the Braine by his roughnesse, and also haue béene hurt of the hard Bone. Therefore God and Nature
hath ordained two Pannicles, the one hard, and the other soft, the harder to be a meane betwéene the soft and the Bone: and the softer to be a meane betwéene the harder and the Braine it selfe. Also these Pannicles be cold and dry of complexion, and spermaticke. Next is the Braine, of which it is marvellously to be consi∣dered and noted, how this Piamater divideth the substance of the Braine, and lappeth it into certaine selles or divisions, as thus: The substance of the Braine is divided into thrée parts or ven∣tricles, of which the foremost part is the most. The second or middlemost is lesse: the third or hindermost is the least. And from each one to another be issues or passages that are called Meaces, through whom passeth the spirit of life too and fro. But héere yée shall note, that euery Tentricle is divided into two parts, and in every part God hath ordained and set singular and severall vertues, as thus; First, in the foremost Ventricle, God hath founded and set the common wittes, otherwise, called the fine Wittes, as Hearing, Séeing, Féeling, Smelling, and Ta∣sting. And also there is one part of this Ventricle, the vertue that is called Fantasie, and he taketh all the formes or ordinan∣ces that be disposed of the ue Wittes, after the meaning of sensible things. In the other part of the same Ventricle, is or∣dained and founded the imaginatiue vertue, the which receiveth of the common Wittes the forme of shape of sensitiue things as they were received of the common Wittes without-foorth, re∣presenting their owne shape and ordinances vnto the memora∣tiue vertue. In the middle Sell or Ventricle, there is founded and ordained the Cogitatiue or estimatiue vertue: for hée re∣hearseth, sheweth, declareth, and déemeth those things that bée offered vnto him, by the other that were spoken of before. In the third Ventrickle and last, there is founded and ordained the ver∣tue Memoratiue: in this place is registred and kept those things that are done and spoken with the sences and kéepe them in his treasury vnto the putting foorth of the fiue or common Wittes, or Organes, or Instruments of animall workes, out of whose
extremities or lower parts springeth Mynuca, or Marrow of the Spondels: of whom it shall be spoken of in the Anatomy of the Necke and Backe. Furthermore it is to be noted, that from the foremost Ventricle of the Braine, springeth seven paire of sentatiue or féeling Si∣newes, the which be produced to the Eyes, the Eares, the Nose, the Tongue, and to the Stomacke, and to divers other parts of the Body: as it shall be declared in their Anatomies. Also it is to be noted, that about the middle Ventrikle is the place of Vermi-formis, with kurnelly flesh that filleth, and Retemira∣bile, a wonderfull Caue vnder the Pannicles, is set or bounded with Arteirs onely which come from the Heart, in the which the vitall spirit by his great labour, is turned and made animall. And yée shall vnderstand, that these two be the best kept parts of all the Body: for a man shall rather dye, than any of thes should suffer any manner of griefes from without-forth, and therefore God hath set them farre from the Heart. Héere I note the saying of Hly Abba, of the comming of small Artiers from the Heart, of whom (saith he) is made a marvellous Net or Caule, in the which Caule is inclosed the Braine, and in that place is laid the spirit of féeling, from that place hath the Spirit of Féeling his first creation, and from thence passeth o∣ther members, &c. Furthermore yée shall vnderstand, that the Braine is a member cold and moyst of complexion, thinne, and meanly viscous, and a principall member, and an officiall member and spermaticke. And first, why he is a principall member, is because he is the governour or the treasury of the fiue Wittes: And why he is an officiall member, is, because he hath the effect of féeling and stirring: And why he is cold and moyst, is, that he should by his coldnesse and moystnesse, abate and temper the excéeding heate and drought that commeth from the Heart. And why it is moyst, is, that it should be the more indifferenter and abler to every thing that should be reserved or gotten into him. And why it is soft, is, that it should giue place and favour to the vertue of stirring. And why it is meanly viscous, is, that his
sinewes should not be letted in their working, through his over∣much hardnesse. Héere Galen demandeth a question, which is this: Whether that féeling and mouing be brought to Nerues by one or by di∣vers? Or whether the aforesaid thing be brought substantially or rather judicially? The matter (saith hée) is so hard to search and to be vnderstood, that it were much better to let it alone and passe over it. Aristotle intreating of the Braine, saith: The Braine is a member continually moouing and ruling all other members of the body, giving vnto them both féeling and moouing: for if the Braine be let, all other members bée let: and if the Braine bée well, then all other members of the body be the better di∣sposed. Also the Braine hath this property, that it mooveth and fol∣loweth the moouing of the Moone: For in the waxing of the Moone, the Braine followeth vpwards, and in the wane of the Moone, the Braine discendeth downewards, and vanisheth in substance of vertue: for then the Braine shrinketh together in it selfe, and is not so fully obedient to the spirit of féeling. And this is proued in men that be Lunaticke and Mad, and also in men that be Epulenticke or having the Falling sicknesse, that be most grieved in the beginning of the new Moone and in the latter quarter of the Moone. Wherefore (saith Aristotle) when it happeneth that the Braine is either too dry or too moyst, then can it not worke his kind, for then is the Body made cold then are the spirits of Life melted and resolved away: and then follow∣eth féeblenesse of the Wittes, and of all other members of the Body, and last Death.
CHAP. V. The Anatomy of the Face. THE Front or the Forehead, containeth nothing but the Skinne and Musculus flesh, for the Pannicle vnderneath, it is of Pericranium, and the Bone is of the Coronall bone. How∣beit there it is made broad as if there were a double bone, which maketh the forme of the browes. It is called the Forehead or Front, from one eare to the other, and from the rootes of the eares of the head before vnto the Browes. But the cause why the browes were set and reared vp was, that they should defend the eyes from uoyance without-foorth: and they be ordained with haire, to put by the humor or sweat that commeth from the head. Also the browes doe helpe the eye-liddes, and doe beautiffe and make faire the face, for he that hath not his browes haired, is not séemely. And Aristotle sayth, that ouer-measurable Browes betokeneth an enuious man. Also high browes and thicke, betokcneth hardi∣nesse: and browes with little haire betokeneth cowardise: and meanly, signifieth gentlenesse of heart. Incisions about this part, ought to be done according to the length of the body, for there the Muscle goeth from one eare to the other. And there if any incision should be made with the length of the Muscle, it might happen the brow to hang ouer the eye without remedy, as it is many times séene, the more pitty. The Browes are called Super∣cilium in Latine, and vnder is the eye-lids, which is called Cilium, and is garnished with haires. Two causes I find why the eye-lids were ordained. The first is, that they should kéepe and defend the Eye from Dust and other outward uoyances. The second is, when the eye is wrary or heauy, then they should bée covered and take rest vnderneath them. Why the haires were ordained in them is, that by them is addressed the formes or si∣militudes of visible things vnto the Apple of the Eye. The Eare is a member seemely and griftly, able to be solden without, and is
the Organ or Instrument of Hearing: It is of complexion cold and dry. But why the Eare was set vp out of the head, is this, that the sounds that be very fugitiue, should hirke and abide vn∣der his shadow, till it were taken of the Instruments of Hearing. Another cause is, that if should kéepe the hole that it standeth over, from things falling in that might hinder the Hearing. The Sinewes that are the Organes or Instruments of Hearing, spring each from the Braine, from whence the seuen paire of Sinewes doe spring, and when they come to the hole of the Eare, there they wihe like a Winepresse: and at the ends of them, there be like the head of a Worme, or like a little tease, in which is received the sound, and so carryed to the common wi. The Eyes be next of nature vnto the soule: for in the Eye is séene and knowne the disturbances and griefes, gladnesse and joyes of the Soule, as Loue, Wrath, and other passions. The Eyes be the Instruments of sight. And they be compound and made of ten things: that is so say, of seuen Tunicles or Coates, and of thrée humours. Of the which (sayth Galen) the Braine and the Head were made for the Eye, that they might be in the highest as a Beholder in a Tower, as it was revearsed in the Anatomy of the Head. But divers men hold divers opinions of the Anatomy of the Eyes: for some men account but thrée Tu∣nicles, and some sixe. But in conclusion, they meane all one thing. For the very truth is, that there be counted and reckoned seven Tunicles, that is to say, Sclirotica, Secondina, Retyna, Unia, Cornua, Arania, and Conjunctiva: and these thrée humoure. That is to say, Humor, Virtus, Humor Albigynus, and Humor Chry∣stallinus. It is to be knowne how and after what manner they spring: You shall vnderstand, that there springeth of the Braine sub∣stance of his foremost Ventrikles, two Sinewes, the one from the right side, and the other from the left, and they be called the first paire, for in the Anatomy, they be the first paire of sinewes that appeare of all seven. And it is shewed by ales, that these  was bée hollow as a Réede, for two cases. The first is,
that the visible spirit might passe fréely to the Eyes. The second is, that the forme of visible things might freely be presented to the common wittes. Now marke the going forth of these sinewes. When these sinewes goe out from the substance of the Braine, he commeth through the Piamater, of whose substance he taketh a Pannicle or a Coate: and the cause why he taketh that Pannicle, is to kéepe him from noying, and before they enter into the Skull, they méete and are vnited into one sinew the length of halfe an inch: and then they depart againe into two, and each goeth into one Eye, entring through the braine Panne, and these sinewes be called Nervi optici. And thrée causes I finde why these Nerues are joyned in one before they passe into the Eye. First, if it hap∣pen any diseases in one Eye, the other should receiue all the vi∣sible spirit that before come to both. The second is, that all things that wée sée should not séeme two: for if they had not béene joyned together, every thing should have séemed two, as it doth to a Worme, and to o∣ther Beasts. The  is, that the sinew might stay and helpe the other. But hereupon Lanfranke accordeth much: saying, that these two si∣newes came together to the Eyes, and take a Pannicle both of Piamater and of Duramater, and when they enter into the Orbit of the Eye; there the extremities are spread abroad, the which are made of thrée substances: that is to say, of Duramater, of Pia∣mater, and of Nervi optici. There be engendred thrée Tunicles or Coates, as thus: Of the substance that is taken from Dura∣mater, is engendred the first Coate that is called Secondina: and of Nervi optici, is engendred the third Coate, that is called Reti∣na: and each of them is more subtilier then other, and goeth a∣bout the humours without meane. And it is to be vnderstood, that each of these three Tunicles be divided, and so they make fire: that is to say, thrée of the parts of the braine, and thrée of the parts outwards, and one of Pericranium, that covereth the Bones of the head, which is called Conjunctiva.
And thus you may perceiue the springing of them as thus Of Duramater springeth Citrotica  Cornua. Of iamater, springeth Secondina and Vnia. And of Pervi Optici springeth Conjunctiva. Now to speake of the humours which bee three, and their places are the middle of the Eyes: of the which, the first is uhor trus, because he is like lae, in colour very cleare, red liquit, or thinne, and he is in the inward side next vnto the Braine: and it is thinne, because the miritine blood of the Christalline, might passe, as water through a spunge should be clensed and made pure, and also that the visible spirit might the lightlyer passe through him from the Braine. And he goeth about the Chrystaline Humor,  méete with Albuginus Humour, which is set in the vttermost part of the Eye. And in the middest of these Humours Vltrus, and Albuginus, is set the Chrystaline Humour, in which is set principally the sight of the Eye. And these Humours be separated and involued with the Pannicles as aforesaid, betwéene every Humour a Pannicle. And thus is the Eye compound and made. But to speake of every Humour and every Pannicle in his one order and course, it would aske a long processe, and a long Chapter: and this is sufficient for a Chirurgion. Now to begin at the Nose: You shall vnderstand, that from the braine there commeth two Si∣newes to the holes of the braine pan, where beginneth the con∣cavity of the Nose, and these two be not properly Sinewes, but Organes or Instruments of smelling, and haue heads like teates or paps, in which is received the vertue of smelling, and representing it to the common wits: Ouer these two, is set Colatorium, that wée call the Nosthrils: and is set be∣twéene the Eyes, vnder the vpper part of the Nose. And it is to be noted, that this concavity or ditch was made for two cau∣ses. The first is, that the ayre that bringeth foorth the spirit of smelling might rest in it, till it were taken of the Organe or Instrument of smelling. The second cause is, that the super∣fluities of the Braine might be hidden vnder it, vntill it were clensed: And from this concavity there goeth  holes downe
into the mouth, of which there is to be noted thrée profits. The first is, that when a mans mouth is close, or when he ea∣teth or sléepeth, that then the ayre might come through them to the Lunges, or else a mans mouth should alwayes be open. The second cause is, that they helpe to the relation of the forme of the Nose: for it is said, a man speaketh in his Nose, when any of these holes he stopped. The third cause is, that the concavity might be clensed by them, when a man snuffeth the Nose, or draweth into his mouth inwardly. The Nose is a member con∣simple or officiall appearing without the face, some what licable, because it should the better be cleansed. And it is to be perceived that it is compound and made of Skin and Lazartus flesh, and of two Bones standing in manner triangle-wise, whose extremi∣ties he joyned in one part of the Nose with the Coronall Bone, and the nether extremities are joyned with two Gristles, and another that divideth the Nosthrils within, and holdeth vp the Nose. Also there be two concavities or holes, that if one were stopped the other should serue: Also there is in the Nose two Muscles to helpe the working of his Office. And Galen sayth, that the Nose shapeth the Face most: for where the Nose lacketh (sayth he) all the rest of the Face is the more vnséemely. The Nose should be of a meane bignesse, and not to excéed in length or bredth, nor in highnesse. For Aristotle saith, If the Nosthrils be too thin or too wide, by great drawing in of ayre, it betokeneth great straitnesse of heart and indignation of thought. And therefore it is to be noted, that the shape of the members of the Body, betokeneth and judgeth the affections and will of the soule of man, as the Philosopher saith. The Tem∣ples he called the members of the Head, and they haue that name because of continuall mouing. And as the Science of the Anato∣my meaneth, the spirit vitall is sent from the heart to the braine by Arteirs, and by Veines and nutrimentall blood, where the Vessels Pulsaties in the Temples be lightly hurt. Also, the Temple haue ents or holes inwardly, wherein hée taketh the
humour that commeth from the Braine, and bringeth the Eyes asléepe: and if the said Holes or Dents be pressed and wrung, then by trapping of the humour that continueth, hée maketh the teares to fall from the Eye. The Chéekes are the sideling parts of the Face, and they containe in them Musculus flesh, with Veynes and Arteirs, and about these parts be many Muscles. Guido maketh mention of seven about the Chéekes and ouer-lip. And Haly Abbas saith, there be twelue Muscles that mooue the nether Iaw, some of them in opening, and othersome in closing or shutting, passing vnder the Bones of the Temples: and they be called Temporales: And they be the right noble and sensatiue, of whose hurt is much perill. Also there bée other Musculus for to grinde and to chew. And to all these Muscles commeth Nerues from the Braine, to giue them féeling and mouing. And also there commeth to them, many Arteirs and Veynes, and chiefly about the Temples, and the angles or corners of the Eyes and the Lips. And as the Philoso∣phers say, the chiefe beauty in man is in the Chéekes, and there the complexion of man is most knowne, as thus: If they bée full, ruddy, and medled with temperate whitenesse, and not fat in substance, but meanely fleshie, it betokeneth hot and moyst of complexion: that is, Sanguine and temperate in colour. And if they be white coloured, without medling of rednesse, and in substance fat and soft, quavering, it betokeneth, excesse and superfluity of cold and moyst: that is flegmaticke. And if they be browne in colour or cyfren, yeallow, redde and thinne, and leaue insubstance, it betokeneth great drying and heate: that is chole∣ticke. And if they be as it were blowne in colour, and of little flesh in substance, it Betokeneth excesse and superfluity of drynesse and cold: that is Melancholy And as Avicen saith, the Chéekes doe not onely shew the diversities of complexions, but also the affec∣tion and will of the Heart: for by the affection of the heart, by suddaine joy or dread, he waxeth either pale or red. The bones or bony parts, first of the chéekes be two: of the Nose outwardly,
two: of the vpper Mandible, two: within the Nose thrée, as thus: One deviding the Nosthrils within, and in each Nosthrill one, and they séeme to be rowled like a water, and haue a hollownesse in them, by which the ayre is respired and drawne to the Lungs, and the superfluity of the Braine is purged into the mouthwards, as in before rehearsed. But Guido and Galen saith, that there be in the face nine bones, yet I cannot find that the nether Mandible should be of the number of those nine: for the nether Mandible accounted there, proueth them to be ten in number: Of which thing I will hold no argument, but remit it to the sight of your Eyes. The parts of the mouth are fiue, that is to say, the Lippes, the Téeth, the Tongue, the Vuila, and the Pallet of the mouth. And first to speake of the Lips, they are members consimile or officiall, full of Musculus flesh, as is aforesaid, and they were ordained for two causes, one is; that they should be to the mouth as a doore to a house, and to kéepe the mouth close till the meat were kindly chewed. The other cause is, that they should be helpers to the pronouncing of the spéech. The Téeth are members consimily or officiall, spermaticke, and har∣dest of any other members, and are fastned in the Chéeke bones, and were ordained for thrée causes. First, that they should chew a mans meate, ere it should passe downe, that it might bée the sooner digested. The second, that they should be a helpe to the spéech: for they that lacke their téeth, doe not perfectly pronounce their words. The third is, that they should serue to beasts as weapons. The number of them is vncertaine: for some men haue moe, and some lesse: they that haue the whole number, haue two and thirty: that is to say sixtéene aboue, and as many beneath as thus: two Dwallies, two Quadripulles, two Canniens, eight Morales, and two Causales, the Tongue is a carnous member, compound and made of many Nerues, Ligaments, Veynes and Artiers, ordai∣ned principally for thrée causes. The first is, that when a man cateth, the Tongue might helpe to turne the meat till it were well chewed. The second
cause is, that by him is received the tast of swéete and sowre, and presented by him to the common Wittes. The third is, that by him is pronounced euery spéech The fleshie part of the Tongue is white, and hath in him nine Muscles, and about the roote of him, is Glandulus, in the which be two welles, and they be ever full of spettle to temper and kéepe moyst the Tongue, or else it would ware dry by reason of his labour, &c. The Vuila is a member made of spongeous flesh, banging downe from the end of the Pallet ouer the gullet of the throat, and is a member in com∣plexion cold and dry, and oftentimes when there falleth raw∣nesse or much moystnesse into it from the Head, then it hangeth downe in the throate, and letteth a man to swallow, and it is broad at the vpper end, and small at the nether. It was or∣dained for divers causes. One is, that by him is holpen the sound of spéech: for where the Vuila is wanting, there lacketh the perfect sound of speech. Another is, that it might helpe the prolation of vomits. Another is, that by him is tempered and abated the distemperance of the ayre that passeth to the Lungs. Another is, that by him is guided the superfluities of the Braine, that commeth from the coletures of the Nose, or the super∣fluities should fall downe suddenly into the mouth, the which were a displeasure. The Pallet of the mouth containeth no∣thing else but a carnous Pannicle, and the Bones that bée vn∣derneath it hath two divisions, one along the Pallet from the division of the Nose, and from the opening of the other Man∣dible vnder the nether end of the Pallet, lacking halfe an inch, and there it divideth overthwart, and the first division is of the Mandible: and the second, is of the Bone called Piillary or Bazillary, that sustaineth and bindeth all other Bones of the head together. The Skinne of the Pallet of the mouth is, of the inner part of the stomacke and of Myre, and of Isofagus, that is the way of the meate into the Stomacke. The way how to know that such a Pannicle is of that part of the stomack, may be knowne when that a man is touched within the mouth, a∣nonhe beginneth to tickle in the stomacke, and the néerer that
he shall couch vnto the throat, the more it abhorreth the stomacke, and oftentimes it causeth the stomacke to yéeld from him that is within him, and when a man doth vomit. Also in the mouth is ended the vppermost extremity of the Wesand, which is called Myre, or Isofagus: And with him is contayned Trachia arteria: that is, the way of the ayre, whose holes be covered with a lap like a tongue, and is gristly, that the meat and drinke might slide ouer him into Isofagus: the which gristle when a man speaketh is reared vp, and covereth the way of the meate, and when a man swalloweth the meate, then it covereth the way of the ayre, so that when the one is covered, the other is discovered. For if a man open the way of the ayre, when he swalloweth, if there fall a crum inco it, hée shall never cease coughing vntill it be vp againe. And this sufficeth for the Face. CHAP. VI. The Anatomie of the Necke. THE Necke followeth next to be spoken of. Galen proveth, that the Necke was made for no other cause but for the Lungs, for all things that haue no Lungs, haue neyther Necke nor voyce, except Fish. And you shall vnderstand, that the necke is all that is contayned betwéene the head and the shoulders, and betwéene the chin and the breast. It is compound and made of foure things, that is to say, of Spondillis, of Servicbus, of Gula, and of Gatture, the which shall be declared more plainly hereafter: and through these passe the way of the meate and of the ayre, but they be not the substance of the Necke. The Spondels of the Necke be seven: The first is joyned vnto the lower part of the head called Paxillary, or Bazillary, and in the same wise are joyned euery Spondell with other, and the last of the seuen, with the first of the Backe or Ridge: and the Lygaments that kéepe these Spondels together, are not so hard
and tough as those of the backe: for why? those of the necke bée more féebler and subtiller. The cause is this, for it is necessary o∣ther while that the head moue without the necke, and the Necke without the Head, the which might not well haue béene done if they had béene strong and boystrous. Of these aforesaid seuen Spondels of the Necke, there springeth seuen paire of Sinewes, the which be divided into the head and into the visage, to the Shoulders and to the Armes. From the hole of the first Spon∣dell springeth the first paire of Sinewes, betwéeen the first Spon∣dell and the second, and so forth of all the rest in like manner as of these. Also these Sinewes receiue subtill will of the sinewes of the braine: of which the Will, and Sinewes, and Flesh, with a Pannicle, make the composition of Muscles, Lazartes, and Brawnes, the which thrée things are all one, and be the Instru∣ments of voluntary mouing euery member. The Muscles of the Necke after Galen, are numbred to be twenty, mouing the Head and the Necke. Likewise it is to be noted, that there bée thrée manner of fleshes in the Necke: the first is Pixwex, or Seruisis, and it is called of Children, Gold haire, or yeallow haire, the which are certaine Longitudinals, lying on the sides of the Spon∣dels, from the head downe to the latter Spondell. And they are ordained for this cause, that when the Sinewes be weary of ouer much labour with mouing and travell, that they might rest vpon them as vpon a Bed. The second Flesh is Musculus, from whom springeth the Tendons and Cords that moue the Head and the Necke, which be numbred twenty, as is before declared. The third Flesh re∣plenisheth the void places, &c. The third part of the Necke, is cal∣led Gutture, and it is standing out of the throat boll. The fourth part is called Gula, and the hinder part Cervix, and hath that name of the Philosophers, because of the Marrow comming to the Ridge bones. It is so called, because it is as it were a servant to the Braine: For the Necke receiveth and taksth of the braine, influence of vertue of mouing, and sendeth it by sinewes to the other parts of the body downewards, and to all members of the body.
Héere you shall vnderstand, that the way of the meate, and Mire, or Isofagus, is all one thing: and it is to be noted, that it stretcheth from the mouth to the Stomacke, by the hinder part of the Necke inwardly, fastned to the Spondels of the Necke, vntill hée come to the first Spondell, and there hée leaveth the Spondell, and stretcheth till hée come to the foremost part of the Breast, and passeth through Diafragma, till hée come to the mouth of the stomacke, and there hée is ended. Furthermore, it is to bée noted that this Weasand is compound, and made of two Tunicles or Coates (that is to say) or the inner and of the vtter. The vtter Tunicle is but simple, for hée néedeth no Re∣tention but onely for his owne nourishing: but the inner Tunicle is compound, and made of Musculus Longitudinall Will, by which he may draw the meate from the mouth into the stomack, as it shall hée more plainly declared in the Anatomy of the sto∣macke. Furthermore, Cana Pulmonis, via, trachia, Arteria, all these be one thing (that is to say) the Throt-boll, and it is set with∣in the Necke, besides the Wesand, towards Gula, and is com∣pound of the Gristle, knit each with other. And the Pannicle that is meane betwéene the Wesand, and the Throt boll, is called Ismon. Also yée shall vnderstand that the great Veynes which ramefic by the sides of the Necke, to the vpper part of the head, is of some men called Gwidege, and of others, Venae organices: the incision of whom is perillous. And thus it is to be considered, that the neck of man is compound, and made of skinny Flesh, Ligaments, and bones: and this sufficeth for the Necke and the Throate. CHAP. VII. The Anatomy of the Shoulders and Armes. AND first to speake of the Bones: It is to bée noted, that in the Shoulder there bée two Bones, (that is to say) the
Shoulder bone, and the Kannell-bone, and also the Adiutor bone of the Anne, are joyned with the Shoulder-bones, but they are not numbred amongst them, but amongst the Bones of the Armes. In the composition of the shoulder, the first Bone is, Os Spatula, or Shoulder blade, whose hinder part is declined towards the Chine, and in that end it is broad and thinne, and in the vpper part it is round, in whose roundnesse is a Concavity, which is called the Boxe or coope of the shoulder, and which entreth the Adiutor bones, and they haue a binding together with strong flexible Sinewes, and are contained fast with each Bone called Clauicula, or the Cannell bone. And this Cannell bone stretcheth to both the shoulders; One end to the one shoulder, and another to the other, and there they make the composition of the shoul∣ders. The bones of the great arme, (that is to say) from the shoulders to the fingers ends, be thirty: the first is, the Adiutor bone, whose vpper end entreth into the Concavity or Boxe of the Shoulder bone: it is but one Bone (having no fellow) end it is hollow and full of Marrow, and it is also crooked, because it should be the more able to gripe things, and it is hollow, because it should be lighter and more obedient to the stirring or mouing of the Brawnes. Furthermore, this Bone hath two eminences, or two knobs in his nether extremity, or in the juncture of the Elbow (of the which, the one is more Rising then the other) and are made like vnto a Pully to draw water with, and the ends of these Bones enter into a Concavity proportioned in the vppermost ends of the two Folbones, of which two Bones, the lesse goeth from the Elbow to the Thumb, by the vppermost part of the arme, and the greater is the nether bone from the Elbowe to the little Finger. And these two Bones be contained with the Adiutor bone, and be bound with strong Ligaments, and in like manner with the Bones of the Hand. The which Bones bée numbred eight, the foure vppermost bée joyned with the foure nethermost towards the Hands: and in the third ward of Bones, bée fiue, and they are called Ossa Patinis, and they are in the Palme of
the hand. And to them be joyned the Bones of the Fingers and the Thumbes, as thus, in every Finger thrée Bones, and in the Thumbe two bones, (that is to say) the Fingers and Thumbe of euery hand fourtéene, called Ossa digitorum: in the Palme of the Hand fiue, called Patinis, and betwéene the Hand and the Wrist eight, called Rsete, and from the Wrist to the shoulder, thrée Bones: all which being accounted together, yée shall find thirty bones in each Hand and Arme. To speake of Sinewes, Ligaments, Cords, and Brawnes: here first ye shall vnderstand, that there commeth from Mynuca, through the Spondels of the Necke, foure sinewes, which most plainly doe appeare in sight, as thus: one commeth into the vpper part of the Arme, another into the neather part, and one into the inner side, and another into the vtter side of the Arme, and they bring from the Braine, and from Mynuca, both féeling and mouing into the Armes, as thus: The sinewes that come from the Braine and from the Marrow of the Backe that is called Mynuca, when they come to the junc∣ture of the shoulder, there they are mixed with the Ligaments of the selfe shoulder, and there the Ligaments receiue both Féeling and mouing of them, and also in there medling together, they are made a Corde or a Tendon. Thrée causes I find why the sinewes were medled with the Lygaments. The first cause is, that the littlenesse of the Si∣newes, which many wayes bée made weary by there continuall mooving, should bée repressed by the insensiblenesse of the Liga∣ments: The second is, that the littlenesse of the Sinewes should bée through the quality of the Ligaments: The third is, the féeblenesse of the Sinew, that is insufficient, and too féeble to vse his Office, but by the strength and hardnesse of the Liga∣ments. Now to declare what a Cord is, what a Ligament, and what a Muscle, or a Brawne, it is ynough rehearsed in the Chapter of the simple members: but if you will through the comman∣dement of the Will or the Soule, draw the Arme to the hinder parts of the body, then the vtter Brawne is drawne together
and the inner inlarged, and likewise inwards, when the one Brawne doth draw inwards, the other doth stretch: and when the Arme is stretched in length, then the Cords be lengthened: but when they passe the juncture of the Shoulder and of the El∣bow, by thrée fingers breadth or thereabout, then it is divided by subtill Will, and medled with the simple flesh, and that which is made of it is called a Brawne. And thrée causes I finde, why that the simple flesh is medled with the Corde in the compositi∣on of the Brawne. The first is, that the aforesaid Will might draw in quiet through the temperance of the flesh. The second is, that they temper and abate the drought of the Corde with his moystnesse, the which drought he getteth thorow his manifold mouing. The third is, that the forme of the Brawne members should be the more faire, and of better shape: where∣fore God and Nature hath cloathed it with a Pannicle, that it might the better bée kept: And it is called of the Philosophers, Musculus, because it hath a forme like vnto a Mouse. And when these Brawnes coms néere a Ioynt, then the Chordes spring foorth of them, and are medled with the Ligaments againe, and so mooveth that Ioynt. And so yée shall vnderstand, that alwayes betwéene every two Ioynts, is engendred a Brawne, propor∣tioned to the same member and place, vnto the last extremity of the fingers, so that as well the least juncture hath a proper fée∣ling and mooving when it néedeth, as hath the greatest. And after Guido, there be numbred thirtéene in the Arme and Hand, as thus: foure in the Adjutor, mooving the vpper part of the Arme: and foure in the Focles, mooving the fingers. Now to speake somewhat of the Veynes and Arteirs of the arme: it is to bée vnderstood, that from Venakelis, there commeth two Branches, the one commeth to the one Arme-pit, and the other commeth to the other. And now marke the spreading, for as it is of the one, so it is of the other, as thus: when the branch is in the Arme-pit, there hée is divided into two branches: The one Branch goeth along in the inner side of the arme, vntill it come
to the bough of the Arme, and there it is called Bazilica, or Epatica, and so goeth downe the Arme till it come to the wrist, and there it is turned to the backe of the Hand, and it is found betwéene the little finger and the next, and there it is called Salvatella. Now to the other Branch that is in the Arme-hole, which spreadeth to the vtter side of the shoulder, and there he divideth in two, the one goeth spreading vp into the carnous part of the Head, and after descendeth through the Bone into the Braine, as it is declared in the Anatomy of the head. The other branch goeth on the outward side of the Arme, and there he is divided into two also, the one part is ended at the hand, and the other part is folded about the arme till it appeare in the bouget of the arme, and there is called Sephalica, from thence it goeth to the backe of the hand, and appeareth betwéene the Thumbe and the foremost finger, and there it is called Sephalica Ocularis. The two Branches that I speake of, which be divided in the hinder part of the shoulders, from each of these two (I say sprin∣geth one, and those two méete together and make one Veyne which appeareth in the bough of the Arme, and there it is called Mediana, or Coadialis, or Commine. And thus it is to be vnder∣stood, that of Vena Sephalica, springeth Vena Ocularis, and of Vena Bazilica, springeth Vena Salvatella, and of the two Veynes that méete, springeth Vena Mediana, and in ramefying from these fiue principall Veynes springeth innumerable, of the which a Chirurgion hath no great charge: for it sufficeth vs to know the principals. To speake of Arteirs, you shall vnderstand, that wheresoever there is found a Veyne, there is an Arteir vnder him: and if there be found a great Veyne, there is found a great Artier, and whereas is a little Veyne, there is a little Artier: for whereso∣euer there goeth a Veyne to giue nutriment, there goeth an Ar∣tier to bring the spirit of life. Wherefore it is to bée noted, that the Artiers lye more déeper in the flesh then the Veynes doe: for they carry and kéepe in them more precious blood then doth
the Veyne, and therefore hée hath néed to bée further from dan∣gers outwardly: and therefore, God and Nature haue ordained for him to be closed in two Coates, where the Veyne hath but one. The Breast of Thorax, is the Arke or Chest of the spirituall members of man, as saith the Philosopher: where it is to bée noted, that there be foure things containing, and right contained, as thus. The foure containing, are, the Skinne, Musculus flesh, the Pappes and the Bones. The parts contained, are, the Heart, the Lunges, Pannicles, Lygaments, Nerues, Veynes, Artiers, Myre, or Isofagus. Now the Skinne and the flesh are knowne in their Anatomy. It is to be noted, that the flesh of the Pappes, differeth from the other flesh of the body: for it is white, glan∣dulus, and spongeous: and there is in them, both Nerues, Veines, and Artiers, and by them they haue Coliganes with the Heart the Liver, the Braine, and the Generatiue members. Also there is in the Breast, as old Authors make mention, lxxx. or xc. Muscles: for some of them be common to the Necke, some to the Shoulders, and to the Spades; some to Dyafragma or the Mydriffe: some to the Ribbes, some to the Backe, and some to the Breast it selfe. But I find certaine profitablenesse in the creation of the Pappes, as well in man as in woman: for in man it defendeth the spirituals from annoyance outwardly: and ano∣ther by their thicknesse they comfort the naturall heate in defi∣ance of the spirits. And in women, there is the generation of Milke: for in women there commeth from the Matrix into their Breasts many Veynes, which bring into them Menstruall blood, the which is turned through the digestiue vertue, from red colour into white, like the colour of the Pappes, even as Chilley comming from the stomacke to the Liver, is turned into the colour of the Liver. Now to speake of the Bones of the Breast: they bée said to bée triple or thrée fold, and they be numbred to the seven in the Breast before, and their lengths according to the breadth of the Breast, and there extremities or ends be gristly, as the
Ribbes be. And in the vpper end of Thorax is an hole or a con∣cavity in which is set the foot of the Furkle-bone or Cannel-bone, and in the nether end of Thorax, against the mouth of the Sto∣macke, hangeth a a Gristle called Ensiforme, and this Gristle was ordained for two causes. One is, that it should defend the sto∣macke from hurt outwardly. The second is, that in time of ful∣nesse, it should giue place to the stomacke in time of néed when it desireth, &c. Now to speake of the parts of the Backe behind foorth: There be twelue Spondels, through whom passeth Mynuca, of whom springeth twelue paire of Nerues, bringeth bath fée∣ling and mooving to the Muscles of the Breast aforesayd. And héere it is to be noted, that in every side there be twelue Ribs, that is to say, seven true and fiue false, because these fiue bée not so long as the other seven be: and therefore called false Ribs, as it may be perceived by the sight of the Eye. Likewise, of the parts that be inwardly, and first of the Heart, because hée is the principall of all other members, and the beginning of life: hée is set in the middest of the Breast severally by himselfe, as Lord and King of all members. And as a Lord or a King ought to be served of his Subjects that haue their living of him, so are all other members of the Body subjects to the Heart: for they receiue their living of him, and they doe service many wayes vnto him againe. The substance of the Heart is as it were La∣zartus Flesh, but it is spermaticke, and an officiall member, and the beginning of life, and hée giveth to every member of the Body, both blood of life, and spirit of breath, and heate: for if the Heart were of Lazartus flesh, his mooving and stirring should be voluntary and not naturall, but the contrary is true: for it were impossible that the Heart should be ruled by Will onely, and not by Nature. The Heart hath the shape and forme of a Pine-apple, and the broad end thereof is vpwards, and the sharpe end is downewards: depending a little towards the left side. And hée it is to be noted, that the Heart hath blood in his
substance, whereas all other members haue it but in their Veines and Arteirs: Also the Heart is bound with certaine Ligaments to the backe part of the Breast, but these Lygaments touch not the substance of the Heart, but in the ouer-part they spring foorth of him, and is fastened as a aforesaid. Furthermore, the Heart hath two Ventricles, or Concavities, and the left is higher then the right, and the cause of his hollownesse, is this: For to kéepe the blood for his nourishing, and the ayre to abate and tem∣per the great heate that hée is in, the which is kept in Concavi∣ties. Now héere it is to be noted, that to the right Ventrickle of the Heart, commeth a Veyne from the great Veyne called Vena∣kelis, that receiveth all the substance of the blood from the Liver. And this Veyne that commeth from Venakelis, entreth into the heart of the right Ventricle, as I said before, and in him is brought a great portion of the thickest blood to nourish the heart with, and the residue that is left of this, is made subtill through the vertue of the Heart, and then this Blood is sent into a Concavi∣ty or pit in the midst of the Heart, betwéene the two Ventricles, and therein it is made hot and pured, and then it passeth into the left Ventricle, and there is ingendred in it, a Spirit, that is clée∣rer, brighter, and subtiller, then any Corporall or Bodily thing, that is engendred of the foure Elements: For it is a thing, that is a meane betwéene the Body and the Soule. Wherefore it is likened of the Philosophers to be more liker heavenly things, then earthly things. Also it is to be noted, that from the left Ventricle of the heart springeth two Arteirs: the one having but one Coate, and there∣fore it is called Arteria Venalis: And this Arteir carryeth Blood from the Heart to the Lungs, the which Blood is vaporous, that is tryed and left of the Heart, and is brought by this Artery to the Lungs, to giue him Nutriment, and there he receiveth of the Lungs ayre and bringeth it to the heart to refresh him with. Wherefore Galen sayth, that hée findeth that mans Heart is Naturall and friendly to the Lungs: For he giveth him of his owne Mutrimentall to nourish him with, and the Lungs reward
him with ayre, to refresh him with againe, &c. The other Artier that hath two Coates, is called Vena Arte∣rialis, or the Great Artery, that ascendeth and discendeth, and of him springeth all the other Arteirs that spred to euery member of the Body: for by him is vnited and quickned all the members of the Body. For the Spirit that is retained in them, is the in∣strument or treasure of all the vertue of the Soule. And thus it passeth vntill it come to the Braine, and there he is turned into a further digestion, and there hée taketh another Spirit, and so is made animall, and at the Liver nutrimentall, and at the Te∣stikles generatiue: and thus it is made a spirit of euery kind, so that hée being meane of all manner operations and workings, taketh effect. Two causes I find why these Arteirs haue two Coates. One is, that one Coate is not sufficient, nor able to withstand the violent mooving and stirring of the Spirit of life, that is carryed in them. The second cause is, that the thing that is carryed about from place to place, is of so precious a Treasure, that it had the more néed of good kéeping. And of some Doctors, this Artier is called the Pulsatiue Veyne, or the beating Veyne: for by him is percei∣ved the power and might of the Heart, &c. Wherefore God and Nature haue ordained, that the Arteirs haue two Coates. Also there is in the Heart thrée Pellikles, opening and closing the going in of the Heart blood, and spirit in convenient time. Also the Heart hath two little Eares, by whom commeth in and pas∣seth out the Ayre that is prepared for the Lungs. Also there is found in the Heart a Cartilaginous Auditament, to helpe and strengthen the selfe Heart. Also the Heart is covered with a strong Pannicle, which is called of some Capsula Cordes, or Paricordium, the which is a strong case, vnto whom commeth Nerues, as to other inward members. And this Pannicle Peri∣cordium, springeth of the vpper Pannicle of the Midriffe. And of him springeth another Pannicle called Mediastinum, the which departeth the Breast in the midst, and kéepeth that the Lungs fall not over the Heart. Also there is another Pannicle that co∣vereth
the Ribs inwardly, that is called Plura, of whom the Midriffe taketh his beginning. And it is said of many Doctors, that Duramater is the Originall of all the Pannicles within the Body: and thus one taketh of another. CHAP. VIII. The Anatomy of the Lungs. THE Lungs is a member Spermatick of the first Creation, and his naturall complexion is cold and dry, and in his acci∣dentall complexion he is cold and moyst, lapped in a Neruous Pannicle, because it should gather together the softer substance of the Lungs, and that the Lungs might féele by the meanes of the Pannicle, that which he might not féele in himselfe. Now to proue the Lungs to bée cold and dry of kind, it appeareth by his swift stirring. for hée lyeth ever waving ouer the Heart, and a∣bout the Heart. And that hée is cold and moyst in reward, it ap∣peareth well, that he receiveth of the Braine many cold matters, as Cataries and Rheumes, whose substance is thinne. Also I find in the Lungs thrée kinds of substance. One is a Veyne comming from the Liver, bringing with him the Crude or raw part of the Chylle, to féed the Lungs. Another is Arteria Venealis, comming from the Heart, bringing with him the spirit of life to nourish him with. The third is Trachia Arteria, that bringeth in ayre to the Lungs, and it passeth through all the left part of them to doe his Office. The Lungs is divided into fiue Lobbes or Pellikeles, or fiue portions (that is to say) thrée in the right side, and two in the left side. And this was done for this cause, that if there fell any hurt in the one part, the others should serue and doe their office. And thrée causes I find, why the Lungs were principally ordai∣ned. First, that they should draw cold wind, and refresh the Heart. The second, that they should change and alter, and pu∣rifie
the ayre before it come to the Heart, lest the heart were hurt and annoyed with the quantity of the ayre. The third cause is, that they should receiue from the heart the fumous superflui∣ties that he putteth foorth with his breathing, &c. Behind the Lungs, toward the Spondels, passeth Myre or Isofagus, of whom it is spoken of in the Anatomy of the Necke. And also there passeth both Veynes and Arteirs, and all these with Trachia Arteria, doe make a Stoke, replete vnto the Gullet, with the Pannicles, and strong Ligaments, and Glandulus flesh to fulfill the voyd places. And last of all: is the Midriffe, and it is an officiall member made of two Pannicles and Lazartus flesh, and his place is in the midst of the body, over-thwart or in breath vnder the region of the Spirituall members, departing them from the Matrix. And three causes I find, why the Midriffe was ordained. First, that it would divide the Spirituals from the Nutrates. The se∣cond, that it should kéepe the vitall colour or heat to descend down to the Nutrates. The last is, that the malicious fumes reared vp from the Nutrates, should not noy the Spirituals or vitals, &c. The wombe is the Region or the City of all the Intrails, the which reacheth from the Midriffe downe vnto the share inward∣ly and outwardly from the Reynes or Kidneyes, downe to the bone Peten, about the priuy parts. And this Wombe is compound and made of two things (that is to say) of Syfac, and Myrac; Syfac is a Pannicle, and a member spermaticke, offi∣ciall, sensible, Sinowie, compound of subtill Will, and in com∣plexion cold and dry, having his beginning in the inner Pan∣nicle of the Midriffe. And it was ordained, because it should containe and bind together all the Intrailes, and that he defend the Musculus, so that he oppresse not the Naturall members. And that he is strong and tough, it is because he should not be lightly broken, and not those things that are contained goe not foorth, as it happeneth to them that are broken, &c. Myrac is compound, and made of foure things (that is to say) of Skinne outwardly of
Fatnesse, of a Carnous Pannicle and of Musculus Flesh. And that it is to bée vnderstanded, that all the whole from Syfac outward, is called Myrac, it appeareth well (by the words of Galen) where hée commandeth, that in all wounds of the Wombe, to sewe the Syfac, with the Mirac, and by that it proveth, that there is nothing without the Syfac but Mirac. And in this Mirac, or vtter part of the Wombe, there is noted eight Muscles, two Longitudinals, procéeding from the shéeld of the stomacke, vnto▪ Os Pecten: two Latitudinals comming from the backwards to the Wombe: and foure Trans∣verse, of the which, two of them spring from the Ribbes on the right side, and goe to the left side, to the Bones of the Hanches, or of Pecten: and the other two spring from the Ribs on the left, and come over the wombe to the right parts, as the other before doth. Héere is to be noted, that by the vertue of the subtill will that is in the Musculus Longitudinall, is made perfect the vertue at∣tractiue: and by the Musculus Transverse, is made the vertue retentius: and by the Musculus Latitudinall, is made the vertue expulsiue. It is thus to be vnderstood, that by the vertue attrac∣tiue, is drawne downe into the Intrales, all superfluities, both water, winde, and dyet. By the vertue retentiue, all things are with-holden and kept, vntill Nature haue wrought his kind. And by the vertue expulsiue is put forth all things, when Nature pro∣voketh any thing to be done. Galen saith that wounds or incisions be more perilous in the midst of the wombe, then about the sides, for there the parts be more tractable then any other parts bée. Also he saith, that in wounds piercing the wombe there shall not bée made good incarnation, except Sifac be sewed with Mirac. Now to come to the parts contained within: First, that which appea∣reth next vnder the Sifac is Omentum or Zirbus, the which is a Pannicle covering the stomacke and the Intrailes, unylaie with many Veynes and Arteirs, and not a little fatnesse ordai∣ned to kéepe moyst the inward parts. This Zirbus is an officiall member, and is compound of a
Veyne and an Arteir, the which entreth and maketh a line of the vtter Tunicle of the stomacke, vnto which Tunicle hangeth the Zirbus, and covereth all the Guts downe to the share. Two causes I find, why they were ordained. One is, that they should defend the Nutratiues outwardly. The second is, that through his owne power and vertue, he should strengthen and comfort the digestion of all the Nutrates, because they are more féebler then other members bée, because they haue but a thinne wombe or Skin, &c. Next Zirbus appeareth the Intrails or guts of which Galen saith, that the Guts were ordained in the first Creation to convey the drosse of the meate and drinke, and to clense the body of their superfluities. And here it is to be noted, that there be fixe portions of one whole Gutte, which both in man and Beast beginneth at the nether mouth of the stomacke, and so containeth foorth to the end of the Fundament. Never∣thelesse hée hath divers shapes and formes, and divers operati∣ons in the Body, and therefore hée hath divers names. And here∣upon the Philosophers say, that the lower wombe of a man, is like vnto the wombe of a Swine. And like as the stomacke hath two Tunicles, in like manner haue all the Guts two Tunicles. The first portion of the Guts is called Duodenum; for he is 12. Inches of length, and covereth the nether part of the stomacke, and receiveth all the drosse of the stomacke: the second portion of the Guts is called Iejunium, for he is evermore empty, for to him lyeth evermore the Chest of the Gall, beating him sore, and draw∣eth forth of him all the drosse, and clenseth him cleane: the third portion or Gut, is called Yleon, or small Gut, and is in length fif∣téene or sixtéene Cubits. In this Gut oftentimes falleth a disease called Yleaca Passio. The fourth Gut is called Monoculus, or blind Gut, and it séemeth to haue but one hole or mouth, but it hath two, one néere vnto the other, for by the one all things goe in, and by the other they goe out againe. The fift is called Colon, and receiveth all the drosse deprived from all profitablenesse, and therefore there commeth not to him any Veynes Miseraices, as to the other. The sixt and last, is called Rectum or Longaon, and hée
heis ended in the Fundament, and hath in his nether end foure Muscles, to hold, to open, to shut, and to put out, &c. Next is to be noted of Mensenterium, the which is nothing else but a tex∣ture of inmunerable Veynes Miserices, ramefied of one Veyne called Porta Epates, covered and defended of Pannicles and Ly∣gaments comming to the Intrails, with the backe full of farnesse and Glandulus flesh, &c. The stomacke is a member compound and Spermaticke, sinwy and sensible, and therein is made perfect the first dige∣stion of Chile. This is a necessary member to all the Body, for if it faile in his working, all the members of the Body shall cor∣rupt. Wherefore Galen sayth, that the stomacke was ordained principally for two causes. The first, that it should be to all the members of the Body, as the earth is to all that are ingendred of the earth, that is, that it should desire sufficient meate for all the whole Body. The second is, that the stomacke should bée a sacke or Chest to all the Body for the meate; and as a Cooke to all the members of the Body. The stomacke is made of two Pannicles, of which the inner is Nerveous, and the vtter Carneous. This inner Pannicle hath Musculus Longitudinals, that stretcheth along from the stomacke to the mouth, by the which he draweth to him meate and drinke, as it were hands. And hée hath Trans∣verse will, for to with-hold or make retention. And also the vtter Pannicle hath Latitudinall will, to expulse and put out: and that by his heate he should kéepe the digestiue vertue of the stomacke, and by other heates given by his Neighbours, as thus. It hath the Liver on the right side, chasing and beating him with his lobes or figures: and the Splene on the left side, with his fatnesse and Veynes, sending to him Melancholy, to exercise his appe∣tites: and about him is the heart, quickning him with his rtiers: Also the Braine sending to him a Branch of Nerues to giue him féeling. And he hath on the hinder part, descending from the parts of the backe many Lygaments, with the Artiers joyned to the Spondels of the Backe. The forme or figure of this stomacke is
long, in likenesse of a Goorde, crooked: and that both holes bée in the vpper part of the body of it, because there should be no going out of it vnadvisedly of those things which are received into it. The quantity of the stomack commonly holdeth two Pitchers of water, and it may suffer many passions, and the nother mouth of the stomacke is narrower then the vpper, and that for thrée cau∣ses. The first cause is, that the vpper receiveth meate great and boysterous in substance, that there being made subtill, it might passe into the nether. The second is, for by him passeth all the meates, with their chilosity from the stomacke to the Liver. The third is, for that through him passeth all the drosse of the stomack to the guts. And this sufficeth for the stomacke, &c. The Liver is a principle member, and officiall, and of his first creation spermaticke, complete in quantity of blood, of himselfs in∣sensible, but by accidence he is insensible, and in him is made the second digestion, and is lapped in a sinowie Pannicle. And that he is a principle member, it appeareth onely by the Philosophers, by Avicen and Galen. And it is officiall as is the stomacke, and it is of spermatick matter, and sinowie of the which is ingendred his Veines. And because it was like in quantity, Nature hath added to it crudded blood, to the accomplishment of sufficient quantity, and is lapped in a sinowie Pannicle. And why the Liver is crudded, is because the Chile which commeth from the stomacke to the Liver, should be turned into the colour of blood. And why the Liver was ordained, was because that all the nutrimentall blood bée engendred in him. The proper place of the Liver is vnder the false Ribbes in the right side. The forme of the Liver is gibbous or bunchie on the backe side, and it is somewhat hollow like the inside of an hand. And why it is so shapen, is, that it should bée plyable to stomacke, like as a hand doth to an Apple, to comfort her digestion, for his heate is to the stomacke, as the heate of the fire is to the Pot or Cauldron that hangeth over it. Also the Lungs is bound with his Pellikles to the Diafrag∣ma,
and with strong Ligaments. And also hée hath Coliganes with the stomacke and the Intrailes, and with the Heart and the Reynes, the Testikles and other members. And there are in him fiue Pellikles, like fiue fingers. Galen calleth the Liver Messa Sanguinaria, containing in it selfe foure substances. Natu∣rall and Nutrimentall. The Naturals is sent with the blood to all parts of the body, to be engendred and nourished. And the Nu∣trimentals be sequestrate and sent to places ordained for some hel∣pings. These are the places of the Humours, the blood in the Li∣ver, Choller in the Chest or Gall, Melancholy to the Splene, Flegme to the Lungs and the Iunctures, the watery superflui∣ties to the Reynes and Vesike. And they goe with the Blood, and sometime they putrifie and make Fevers, and some bée put out to the Skinne, and bée rosolved by sweat, or by Scabs, by Pushes, or by Impostumes. And these foure naturall Humours (that is to say) Sanguine, Choler, Melancholy, and Flegme, be engendred and distributed in this manner: First, yée shall vnderstand, that from the Sper∣maticke matter of the Liver inwardly, there is engendred two great Veynes, of the which, the first and the greatest is called Porta, and commeth from the concavity of the Liver, of whom springeth all the small Veynes Miseraices: and these Miseraices, be to Vena Porta, as the branches of a Trée bée to the stocke of a Trée. For some of them bée contained with the bottome of the stomacke: some with Duodenum, some with Jejunium, some with Yleon, and some with Monoculus, or Saccus. And from all these Guts they bring to Vena Porta, the succosity of Chiley, going from the stomacke, and distribute it into the substance of the Liver. And these Veynes Miseraices, be innu∣merable. And in these Veynes begun the second Digestion, and ended in the Liver, like as it is in the stomacke the first Dige∣stion. So it proveth that Vena Porta, and Vena Miseraices, serue to bring all the succozity of all the meate and drink▪ that passeth the stomacke to the Liver, and they spread themselves thorough
the substance of the Liver inwardly, and all they stretch towards the gibous (or bowing part of the Liver,) and there they méete, and goe all into one Vnity, and make the second great Veyne, called Vena Ulis, or Concava, or Vena Ramosa: all is one, and he with his Rootes draweth out all the bloud engendred from the Liver, and with his branches Ramefying vpwards and downe∣wards, carryeth and convayeth it to all other Members of the Body to bée nourished with, where is made perfect the third di∣gestion. And also there goeth from the Liver Veynes, bearing the superfluites of the third Digestion to their proper places, as it shall be declared hereafter. Now to speake of the Gall, or of the Chest of the Gall: It is an officiall member, and it is super∣maticke and sinowie, and hath in it a subtiill Will, and it is a purse or a Panniculer Vesikle in the hollownesse of the Liver, about the middle Pericle or Lobe, ordained to receiue the Cho∣lericke superfluities which are engendred in the Liver: The which purse or bagge hath thrée holes or Neckes; By the first hée draweth to him from the Liuer the Choller, that the Blood be not hurt by the Choller. By the second Necke hée sendeth to the bottome of the stomacke Choler, the further the Digestion of the stomacke. And by the third▪ Necke hée sendeth the Choler regu∣larly from one Gut to another, to clense them of their superflui∣ties and Drosse: and the quantity of the purse, may containe in it halfe a pinte, &c. And next is the Splene, or the milte, the which is a superma∣ticke member, as are other members: and officiall, and is the receptory of the Melancholious superfluities that are engendred in the Liues: and his place is on the left side, transversly linked to the stomacke, and his substance is thinne. And two causes I finde, why he was ordained there. The first is, that by the Me∣lancholius superfluities which are engendred of the Liver which hée draweth to him hée is nourished with. The second cause is, that the nutritiue Blood should by him be made the more purer, and cleane, from the Drosse and thicking of the Melancho∣ly, &c.
And next of the Reynes and Kidneyes: It is to be vnderstood that within the Region of the Nutrites backwards, are ordained the Kidneyes to clense the Blood from the watery superfluities, and they haue each of them two passages or holes, or Neckes: By the one is drawne the water from Venakelis, by two Veyns, which are called Vencae Aemulgentes, the length of the finger of a man, and issueth from the Liver: and by the other is sent the same water to the Bladder, and is called Poros Uri∣thides. The substance of the Kidneyes is Lazartus Flesh, having Longitudinall will, and their place is behinde, on each side of the Spondels, and they are two in number, and the right Kid∣ney lyeth somewhat higher then the left, and is bound fast to the backe with Lygaments. The Philosopher saith that mans Kid∣neyes are like the Kidneyes of a Cow, full of hard Concavities, and therefore the sores of them are hard to cure. Also they are more harder in substance, then any other fleshly member, and that for two causes. One is, that hée bée not much hurt of the sharpenesse of the Vrine. The other is, that the same Vrine that passeth from him, might the better be altered and clensed through the same. Also there commeth from the heart to each of the Kid∣neyes, an Artier, that bringeth with him Blood, heat, spirit, and Life. And in the same manner there commeth a Veyne from the Liver, that bringeth blood to nourish the Kidneyes, called Blood Nutrimentall. The grease of the Kidneyes or Fatnesse, is as of other inward members, but it is an officiall member, made of thinne Blood, cn∣gealed and crudded through cold, and there is ordained the grea∣ter quantity in his place, because it should receiue and temper the heat of the Kidneyes, which they haue of the byting sharpenesse of the Water. Now by the Kidneyes vpon the Spondels, passeth Venakelis; or Venacua, which is a Veyne of great substance: for he receiveth all the Nutrimentall blood from the Liver, and from him passeth many small Pipes on every side, and at the Spondell betwéene
the shoulders, he divideth himselfe whole in two great branches, the one goeth into the one arme, and the other into the other, and there they divide themselves into many Veynes and branches, as is declared in the armes. CHAP. IX. The Anatomie of the Haunches and their parts. THE Haunches are the lower part of the Wombe, joyning to the Thighs and the secret members. And thrée things there are to be noted thereof. The first is of the parts containing: the second is of the parts contained, and the third is of the parts pro∣céeding outwards. The parts containing outwardly, be Myrac and Syfac, the Zirbus and the bones. The part contained outwardly, ae the Vezke, or Bladder: the Spermaticke vessels, the Matrix in women, Langaon. Nerues, Veynes, and Artiers, descending downewards; the parts procéeding outwards, are the Buttocks and the Muscles, descending to the Thighes, of which it is to bée spoken of in order. And first of the parts containing: as of My∣rac, Syfac, and Zirbus, there is enough spoken of in the Anatomy of the Wombe. But as for the Bones of the Hanches, there bée the parts of the backe thrée Spondels of Ossa sacri, or of the Han∣ches: and thrée Caitailiginis Spondels of Ossa Cande, called the Taile-bone. And thus it is proved, that there is in every man thirty Spon∣dels, and thus they are to be numbred: in the Necke seaven, in the Ridge twelue; in the Reynes fiue: and in the Hanches sixe: And it is to be noted, that every Spondell is hollow in the middest: through which hollownesse passeth Nuca from the Braine, or the Marrow of the Backe. And some Authors say, that Mynuca is of the substance that the Braine is of: For it is like in substance, and in it selfe giveth to the Nerues both the verue Mouing and Féeling.
And also every Spondell is holden on every side, through the which holes, both Arteirs and Veynes doe bring from the Heart and the Liver both Life and nourishment, like as they doe to the Braine: and from the Pannicle of Mynuca, or the Marrow of the backe, through the holes of the sides of the Spondels, sprin∣geth foorth Nerues motiues, and there they entermeddle them∣selues with the strong Lygaments that be insensible, and so the Lygaments receiue that féeling of the Nerue, which the Nerues taketh of Mynuca. And by this reason many Authors prooue, that Mynuca is of the same substance that the Braine is of, and the Pannicles of the Nuca is of the same substance of the Pannicles of the Braine, &c. And each of these Spondels bée bound fast one with another, so that one of them may not well bée named with∣out another. And so all these Spondels together, contained one by another are called the Ridge-bone, which is the foundation of all the shape of the Body. They with the last Spondell be con∣tained or joyned to the Bones of the Hanches, and they be the vpholders of all the Spondels. And these Bones bée small to∣wards the Tale bone, and abroad towards the Hanches, and be∣fore they joyne and make Os Pectinis. And so they bée broad in the parts of the Iles, and therefore some Authors calleth it Ilea. And each of these two Bones towards the Liver hath a great round hole, into which is received the Bone called Vertebra, or the Whorlebone. Also besides that place there is a great hole or way, thorow the which passeth from aboue Musculus Veynes and Artiers, and goe into the Thighes. And thus it is to bée noted, that of this Bone Pecten, and the Bone Vertebra, is made the juncture of the Thigh. Now to speake of the parts contained, the first thing that commeth to sight is the Bladder, the which is an officiall mem∣ber, compound of two Nervous Pannicles, in complexion cold and dry, whose Necke is carnous, and hath Muscles to with∣hold, and to let goe: and in man it is long, and is contained with the yard, passing through Peritoneum, but in women it is shor∣ter, and is contained with the Vulua. The place of the Blad∣der,
is betwéene the bone of the Share and the Tayle-gut, called Longaon, and in women, it is betwéene the aforesaid bone and the Matrix. And in it is implanted two long vessels comming from the Kidneyes, whose names be Porri Urikcides, bringing with them the Vrine or water from the Kidneys to the Bladder, which pri∣vily entreth into the holes of the Pannicles of the Bladder, by a naturall mooving betwéene Tunicle and Tunicle, and there the Vrine findeth the hole of the nether Tunicle, and there it entreth privily into the concavity of the bladder, and the more that the Bladder is filled with Vrine, the straiter bée the two Pannicles comprised together, for the holes of the Tunicles be not even one against another, and therefore if the bladder be never so full, there may none goe backe againe. The forme of it is round, the quan∣tity of it is a Pitcher full, in some more, in some lesse, &c. Also there is found two other vessels, called Vaza Seminaria, or the Spermaticke Vessels. And they come from Venakelis, bringing blood to the Tostikles, as well in man, as in woman, the which by his further digestion it is made sperme or nature in men: they be put outward, for the Testikles be without, but in women it abideth within, for there Testikles stand within: as it shall be declared hereafter. Next followeth the Matrix in women: the Matrix in women is an officiall member, compound and Nerveous, and in com∣plexion cold and dry: and it is the field of mans genertion, and it is an instrument susceptiue, that is to say, a thing receiving or taking: and her proper place is betwéne the Bladder and the Gut Longaon, the likenesse of it, is as it were a yard reversed and turned inward, having Testikles likewise, as aforesaid. Also the Matrix hath two Concavities or Selles, and no more, but all Beastes haue as many Selles as they haue Pappes heads. Also it hath a long Necke like an Vrinall, and in every Necke it hath a mouth, that is to say, one within, and another without. The inner in the time of conception is shut, and the vtter part is open as it was before: and it hath in the middest a Lazartus Panni∣cle,
which is called in Latine Tengito: And in the creation of this Pannicle, is found two vtilities. The first is, that by it goeth forth the Vrine, or else it should bée shed throughout all the Vulva: The second is, that when a woman doth set her Thighs abroad, it altereth the ayre that commeth to the Matrix for to temper the heate. Furthermore, the Necke that is betwéene these two aforesaid mouthes, in her concavity hath many involusions and pleates, joyned together in the manner of Rose leaues before they be fully spread or ripe, and so they be shut together as a purse mouth, so that nothing may passe forth but vrine, vntill the time of childing. Also about the middle of this necke be certaine Veynes in May∣dens, the which in time of deflowring, be corrupted and broken. Furthermore, in the sides of the vtter mouth, are two Testicles or Stones, and also two vessels of Sperme, shorter then mans vessels, and in time of Coyt the Womans sperme is shead downe in the bottome of the Matrix. Also from the Liver there commeth to the Matrix many Veynes, bringing to the Child nourishing at the time of a womans being with Child: and these Veynes, at such time as the Matrix is voyd, bring thereto superfluities from certaine members of the Body, whereof are engendred wo∣mans Flowers, &c. And forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God to giue the knowledge of these his Misteries and Workes vnto his Crea∣tures in this present World. Héere I ppose to declare what ting Embreon is, and his Creation. The noble Philosophers, as Galen, Avicen, Bartholmeus, and divers others, writing vpon this matter, say: That Embreon is a thing engendred in the Mothers wombe, the originall whereof is, the Sperme of the Man and of the Woman, of the which is made by the might and power of GOD, in the mothers wombe a Child: as hereafter more at large shall bée declared. First, the field of Generation called the Matrix, or the Mother, is knowne in the Anatomy, whose place is properly (betwixt the Bladder and Longaon) in the Woman, in which place is sowne by the Tillage of man, a
covenable matter of kindly heate: For kindly heate is cause offi∣cient both of doing and working, and Spirit that giveth vertue to the Body, and governeth and ruleth that vertue: the which Séed of generation commeth from all the parts of the Body, both of the Man and Woman, with consent and will of all Members, and is shead in the plac of Conceiving, where tho∣row the vertue of Nature, it is gathered together in the Celles of the Matrix or the Mother, in whom by the way of the wor∣king of mans Séede, and by the way of suffering of the Womans Séed mixt together, so that each of them worketh in other, and suffereth in other, there is engendred Embreon. And further it is to bée noted, that this Sperme that commeth both to man and woman, is made and gathered of the most best and purest drops of Blood in all the body, and by the labour and chaing of the Te∣stikles or Stones, this Blood is turned into another kind, and is made Sperme. And in man it is hot, white, and thicke: where∣fore it may not spread nor runne abroad of it selfe, but runneth and taketh temperance of the Womans sperme which hath con∣trary qualities: For the womans sperme is thinner, colder, and féebler. And as some Authors hold opinion, when this matter is ga∣thered into the right side of the Matrix, then it happeneth a Male kind, and likewise on the left the Female, and where the vertue is most, there it favoureth most. And further it is to bée noted, that like as the Renet of the Chéese hath by himselfe the way or vertue of working, so hath the Milke by way of suffering: and as the Renet and milke make the Chéese, so doth the sperme of Man and Woman make the generation of Embreon, of the which thing springeth (by the vertue of kindly heate) a certaine Skin or Caule, into the which it lappeth it selfe in, wherewith afterwards it is tyed to the Mothers wombe, the which covering commeth foorth with the byrth of the Childe: and if it happen that any of the Skinne remaine after the byrth of the Child, th is the Woman in perill of her life. Furthermore, (if is said) that of this Embreon is ingendred
the Heart, the Liver, the Braynes, Nerues, Veynes, Arteirs, Cords, Lygaments, Skins, Gristles, and Bones, receiving to them by kindly vertue the menstruall blood, of which is engen∣dred both flesh and fatnesse. And as writers say, the first thing that is shapen, be the principals: as is the Heart, Liver, and Braine. For of the Heart springeth the Artiers: of the Liver, the Veines: and of the Brain, the Nerues: and when these are made, Nature maketh and shapeth both Bones and Gristles to kéepe and saue them, as the bones of the head for the Brain: the Breast Bones, and the Ribbes, for the Heart and the Liver. And after these springeth all other members one after another: and thus is the Child bred forth in foure degrées, as thus. The first is, when the said Sperme or Séed is at the first as it were Milke. The second is, when it is turned from that kind into another kind, is yet but as a lumpe of Blood, and this is called of Ipo∣cras, Fettus. The third degrée is, when the principals be shapen as the Heart, Liver, and Brains. The fourth and last, as when all the other members bée perfectly shapen, then if receiveth the Soule, with Life and Breath, and then it beginneth to moue it selfe alone, Now in these foure degrées aforesaid, in the first as Milke, it continueth sevendayes: in the second as Fettus, nine dayes: in the third, as a lumpe of Flesh engendring the princi∣pals the space of nine dayes: and the fourth vnto the time fo full perfection of all the whole members, is the space of eightéene dayes: So is there sixe and forty dayes from the day of Concep∣tion, vnto the day of full perfection and receiving of the Soule, as God best knoweth. Now to come againe to the Anatomy of the Haunches: Then come wée to Longaon, otherwise called the Taile-gut, whose substance is Pannicular, as of all the other Bowels: the length of it is of a span long stretching nigh to the Reynes, his nether part is called Annis, (that is to say) the towell: and about him is found two Muscles, the one to open, the other to shut. Al∣so there is found in him fiue Veynes or Branches of Veynes, called Venae Emoraidales, and they haue Colliganes with the
Bladder: whereof they are partners in their grieues. And when this Longaon is raised vp, then yée may sée the Veynes and Artiers, and Sinewes, how they bée branched and bound down to the nether parts: the parts procéeding outward∣ly, are Didimus Peritoneum, the Yard, the Testlkles, and But∣tocks. And first, it shall be spoken of the Yard, or of mans gene∣ratiue members, the which dureth vnto that part that is called Pe∣ritoneum, the which place is from the Coddes, vnto the Funda∣ment, whereupon is a see. Wherefore saith the Philosopher, mans Yard is in the end and terme of the share. The Yard is an officiall member, and the Tiller of mans ge∣neration, compound, and made of Skin, Brawnes, Tendons, Veynes, Arteirs, Sinewes, and great Lygaments: and it hath in it two passages, or principall issue, one for the Sperme, and a∣nother for the Vrine. And as the Philosophers say, the quantity of a common yard, is eight or nine Inches, with measurable big∣nesse proportioned to the quantity of the Matrix. This member hath (as Avicen saith) thrée holes, through one passeth insensible polisions and wind, that causeth the Yard to rise: the other two holes is declared before. Also the yard hath a Skinne, and about the head thereof, it is double, and that men call Praeputium; and this Skinne is moueable, for through his consecration the Spermaticke matter is the better, and sooner ga∣thered together, and sooner cast foorth from the Testikles: for by him, is bad the most delectation in the dooing. And the foremost part of the head of the Yard before, is made of a brawny flesh, the which if it bée once lost, it is never restored againe, but it may be well skinned, &c. The Coddes is a compound member, and an officiall, and though it bée counted amongst the generatiue members, yet it is called a principall member, because of generation. This Purse was ordained for the custody and comfort of the Testikles and other Spermaticke vessels: and it is also made of two parts, of the inner and of the vtter. The vtter is compound and made of Skinne, and Lazartus.
Longitudinall and Transversall, in like manner as the Myrac. The inner part of the Cods is of the substance of the Sifac, and are in similitude as two pockets drawne together by themselues, and they differ not from the Syfac: and there bée two, because if there fall any hurt to the one, the other should serue. The Te∣stikles or stones bée two, made of Glandulus flesh, or Curnelly flesh. And furthermore, through the Didimus, commeth the Te∣stikles from the Braine, Sinewes, and from the Heart Artiers and from the Liver Veynes, bringing vnto them both féeling and stirring, Life, and Spirit, and Nutrimentall blood, and the most purest blood of all other members of the Body, whereof is made the Sperme by the labour of the Testikles, the which is put forth in due time, as is before rehearsed. The Groynes bée knowne: they bée the empty Iunctures, or purging place vnto the Liver, and they haue curnelly flesh in the plying or bowing of the Thighes. The Hippes haue great braw∣ny flesh on them, and from thence descend downwards, Brawns, Cordes, and Lygaments, mooving and binding together the Thighes, with the Haunches themselues. CHAP. X. The Anatomie of the Thighes, Legges, and Feete. THE Legge reacheth from the Ioynt of the Thigh vnto the extremity of the Toes, and I will divide it in parts, as the Armes were divided. One part is called Coxa, or Thigh, and that is all that is contained from the joynt of the Haunch vnto the Knée. The second part is called Tibia, and that reacheth from the Knée to the Ankle. The third is the little foote, and that is from the Ankle, vnto the end of the Toes. And héere it is to bée noted, that the Thigh, Leg, and foote, are compound, and made as the great Arme or hand, with Skin, Flesh, Veynes, Artiers,
Sinewes, Brawnes, Tendons, and Bones, whereof they are to be spoken of in order. Of the Skinne and Flesh there is enough spoken of before. And as of Veynes and Arteirs in their descending downwards, of the last Spondels they bée divided into two parts, whereof the one part goeth into the right Thigh, and the other into the Left: And when they come to the Thigh, they be divided in other two great Branches: the one of them spreadeth into the inner side of the Legge, and the other spreadeth into the vtter side, and so bran∣ching, descend downe to the Legge, to the Ankles, and Féete, and be brought into foure Veynes, which be commonly vsed in letting Blood, as hereafter followeth. One of them is vnder the inner Ankle toward the héele, called Soffena, and another vnder the vnder Ankle, called Siarica, and another vnder the Hamme, called Poplitica, the fourth, be∣twéene the little Toe. and next, called Renalis. And it is to be noted of these foure great Veynes in the Legges, of the manifold dangers that might fall of them as oft it happeneth. There bée many other branches which a Chirurgion néedeth not much to passe vpon. The Sinewes spring of the last Spondell, and of Os Sacrum, and passeth through the hole of the bone of the Hippe, and descendeth to the Brawnes, and mooveth the Knée and the Hamme, and these descend downe to the Ankle, and mooue the Foote, and the brawnes of the Féet mooue the Toes in like man∣ner, as is declared in the bones of the Hand. The first is called Coxa, that is the Thigh-bone, and he is without a fellow, and he is full of Marrow, and is round at either end. The roundnesse that is at the vpper end, is called Vertebrum, or Whyrlebone, and boweth inwards; and is received into the boxe or hole of the Haunch bone: and at the lower end towards the Knée, there it hath two rounds, which bée received into the Concavities of the bone of the Legge, at the Knée, called the great Fosels. There is also at the Knée a round bone, called the Knée-panne. Then followeth the Legge, wherein is two bones, called Focile Ma∣jor, and Focile Minor, the bigger of them passeth before, ma∣king
the shape of the shinne, and it is called the Shin-bone, and passeth downe, making the inner ankle. The lesse passeth from the Knee backwards, descending downe to the vtter An∣kle, and there formeth that Ankle, &c. The bones of the Féet are sixe and twenty: as thus. First, next the Ankle bone, is one called in Latine Orabalistus: Next vnder that, towards the Héele is one, called Calcani: and betwéene them is another bone, called Os Nauculare. In the second ward there be foure bones called Raceti, as be in the hands. In the third and fourth wards be foureteene, called Digitori: and five called Pectens, of the extremities of the Toes, next to the Nailes. And thus be there in the Foote, sixe and twenty bones, with the Legge from the Ankle to the Knée, two in the knée, and one round and flat bone, and in the Thigh, one. And thus you shall find in the whole Leg and Foote thirty bones. And this shall serue for young Practitioners. Thus farre the Anatomie.
DIVERS THINGS VERY necessary for every Chyrurgion to have in a readinesse. PART. II. ANd first, for Instruments: as, Novacula. Sealpellum. Forficis. Volsella. Specillum. Latum Specillum. Stylus. Acus. Canalicula Forata. Habena ad membra laqueo intercipienda. Fascia. Panniculi linei ad vulnera abliganda. Lintea concerpta. Auriscalpium. Forcipes ad dentes evellendos. Ferramentum quo eroli dentes, eraduntur. Uncinus, or (as Celsus calleth it) Hamulum retusum.
For Medicines. HE must haue in readinesse Powders, Vnguents, and Em∣plasters; they serve to stop Bléeding, to conglutinate Wounds, to clense foule and rotten Vlcers, to mollific hard∣nesse, to produce a Cicatrix, and Skinne, to remove away all excrescent and corrupt Flesh, to cease paine, to strengthen Fractures and Luxations. For Powders. THey are of thrée sorts: The first, is to stay Bléeding, as that which is framed of Bolus Armoniae, of Rosis, of Ma∣stiches, and Pollin. The second is, for Fractures of the Scull, and hurts of other Bones, and is called Pulvis Cephalicus, and is framed of Rdicibus ireos, of Aristolochiae, of Myrrhe, Aloes, and such like. The third is, to remove away excrescent and corrupt Flesh; as Alumen ustum, of Pul. praecipit. Mercurii, and such like. For Unguents. HE must have Unguentum Basilicon, which doth humect, digest, and cease paine. Unguentum album Rhasis, which doth Refrigerate, coole and dry. Unguentum Aureum, called of some Regis, which doth In∣carnate and conglutinate Wounds together. Unguentum Dialthea simplex, which doth Calefie, soften, humect, and also cease paine. Unguentum Apostolorum, which doth deterge, mollifie, dry, and remove away corrupt and superfluous Flesh: And of like faculty almost is Mundificativum ex apio, and Aegyptiacum.
For Emplasters. DIachilon compositum, which doth ripen Aostes, and doth mollifie and resolue hardnesse, and doth digest, and also absterge. Diacalciteos, commonly called Dipla, which doth conglu∣tinate Vlcers, produceth Cicatrix and ekians, and according to the opinion of Galen, is very fit for the curing of Phlegme. Emplstrum de Btnica, which is also called D nua, it doth vnite and joyne together the fractures of the skull, it co∣uereth the bones with flsh, it draweth out Spels and splinters of bones, it doth also absterge, digest and dry, with the like. Of five Hearbes which a good Chyrurgion ought alwayes to have. THere be five Herbes that a good Chirurgion ought to haue all the yeere, and they be good for wounded men, and these Herbes must be dryed and made into powder, and so kept all the yeare, viz. Mouse eare, Pimpernell, Avence, Valerian, and Gntian, of each a like quantity, but take of Mouse-eare the weight of all the other hearbes, when they be dryed, take demi▪ spoonefull in vntiment, or in some other liquor which is according to the sicknesse, and let him drinke it, and the Medi∣cine is as good as a Salve for any wounded man, as may be had for to heale him. Also the herbes that draweth the wound, are Occuis Christi, Mther, Buglosse, red Cole wort, and Orpine. Thse be the soveraigne pepper heathes for the Fe∣str, hearbe Robert, Buglosse, Sanacle, Hemropes, Mr∣rell, Rew, and Sav, but take good héed of these heabes, and yee shall worke the better.
OF WOVNDS. PART. III. A Definition of Wounds by their causes. A Wound is a solution, seueration and recent brech of vnity, of that that before was a con∣tinuity without putrified matter, which cor∣ruption giueth the name of an Vlcer in the solution, and no more a Wound The causes of Wounds  viz First by the violence of bo without  we simply call an Icsd wound as when it is  Instruments. Secondly, we call it a Stab or  by the force of Daggers and the like. Thirdly, we call  Contusd wounds, caused by violent vse of the object,  some weighty thing cast as a Stone, or strooke , or their similies) against the subject reng  forces, differing in their apellations be the diuersity of  caues. Or secondly, wounds are caused by  that is  Biting, scratching and the like,  for these  they differ in their apellations. so th  of Wounds, are taken  inflicted, or from th  of the place wherein they are
the place maketh difference thus: eyther they happen in the similar parts, as the Flesh, Artery, Veyne, &c. or in the orga∣nicall or instrumentall parts, as some intire and whole bulke, truncke, or fully compleat member, or limbe, viz. The Head, Necke, Brest, Belly, &c. Wounds of the Head grow more particular, because that parts belonging thereto be of more note; as the Face, Nose, Lippes, Eyes, and Eares: wounds of the limbes, are of the Shoulders, Armes, Thighes, and Lgs. Of the similar parts also, some are Sanguine, as the flesh, whose wounds are eyther simple, deepe, hollow, plaine, or proud with flesh. The Spermaticke likewise, are eyther hard or soft; the soft parts, as the Veynes, Arteries, and Sinewes, being wounded, we call them wounds of the hurt part; the hard are the Bones, a breach of which, we call a wound in the Bone. So Wounds deriue their Nominations from the cause, place and similitudes thereof. What Wounds are. VVOunds are these, which in Latine are called Vulnus, of the vulgar Vulner, and they are of two kinds, that is, Simple and Compound: the simple are those, that are onely in the Flesh: the compound are those, where are cut Sinewes, Veynes Muscles, and bones, and these are of diuers and sundry kinds, and the difference that is among them, is by the variety of the place where they are wounded, and by the difference of the weapon wherewith they were hurt. For some goe right, some ouerthwart, that offend diuers places of the body: the sim∣ple are of small importance, if they keepe them cleane and close shut Nature will heale them, without any kind of medecine: but those where veynes are cut, had néede of some Art or Practise, with the which they must stop the blood, and in any wise not to suffer the wound to remaine open but to sow it vp very close, so that the veyne may heale, and those where sinewes are hurt are of great importance, and would be healed with great spéed,
so the Sinewes may joyne with more ease. But those where bones are hurt, are of great importance, for if the Bone be se∣perated from the other, of necessity it must be taken foorth before the Wound be healed: So that by this meanes euery one may know, what Wounds are and their kinds. In the Curing of greene Wounds consists a five-fold scope or intention. THe first, is to draw out that which is sent into the Body, whether by Bullet, Wood, Bone, or Stone; or Arrowes, Darts and such like. The second, is a Conjunction and vniting of parts divided. The third, is a retaining of those parts vnited in their pro∣per seate. The fourth, is a Conservation of the parts of the substance. The fifth, is a Prohibition and mitigation of accidents. For the first intention, it is performed eyther with fit and convenient Instruments, or with attractive Medicines, where∣by things that are infixed are drawne out. Which Medicines are these: Radix Aristolochiae. Arundis. Anagallis. Thapsia. Ammoniacum. Saga Poenum. Dictamnum. Ranae combustae, Or Emplastrum Avicnae, so much commended by Gydo. The second and third intention, is performed by binding and Ligature, if the Wound be simple and small, and in a place where it may fitly be performed, yea, although it be la so it may be easily bound, as in the Muscles of the Arme, and such
like; but if it happen that Ligature will not serue, then must be added the helpe of the Needle, being very carefull to handle the party gently, and to place it in his due seate. The fourth intention, is performed and accomplished, by appointing of a fit and conuenient Dyet, according to the strength of the Patient, and greatnesse of the affect and dispo∣sition of the whole body: for a thin Dyet and cold, doth very much auaile in resisting of Symptoms, we also adde Blood-let∣ting and Purging of humors to avoide accidents, also the part is to be contained in his due place, and a Cataplasme fraed with the whites of Egges, and other cooling things, are to be applyed, and sometimes to be fomented with astringed Wine. The fift intention, is in the correcting of accidents, which is Flx of blood, Dolor, Tumr, Paralysis, Convulsion, Feuer, Syncope, Delerium, and Itching. But this is to be obserued in the Flure of blood: whether it hath flowne sufficiently or no; if otherwise the Fluxe is to be suffered; for after a sufficient Fluxe, the wound doth remaine dry, and is so much the nseacute;erer cured and the lesse Symptomes follow, as Phlegmon and such like: and if the wound bleed not sufficient, we must open a veyne for revulsion, according to the greatnesse of the affect, and the nature of the wound: especially when through paine or other cause we feare inflamation or a Feauer. How a sicke man should Dyet himselfe being Wounded. A Wounded man, or a man sore beaten being sicke, must be kept from Milke, Butter, Chéese, Hearbes, Fruites, Fish, (except fresh water Fish) Women, Garlicke, Onions, Leekes, Peason, &c. also diuers sorts of meate must hee not eate, as Béefe, water Fowles, Goose, or Ducke, nor drinke to much strong Wine. But may eate Porke, Mutton, Chicken, Henne, or Capon.
REMEDIES FOR all Captaines and Souldiers that Travell, eyther by Water or by Land. PART. IIII. THere are thée Infirmities that offend the Souldiers in the Campe, above all the rest, the which are these: Fevers, Wounds, and Fluxes of the body: the which thou mayest helpe in this order following, with these Medicines: That Quintessence of Wine, our Balsamo, Magno, Licore, Quintessentia, and Spice Imperiall: And the order to vse them is thus; When any hath a Fever or Fluxe, then present∣ly when the Disease beginneth, let him Blood in one of the two Veynes vnder the Tongue, cuffing it ouerthwart, and this thou shalt doe in the Evening: then the next morning, take a Doze of your Imperiall powder mixt with Wine, and this you may doe without any Dyet, or straigth order: that being done, giue him thrée mornings together, halfe an ounce of our Quin∣tessence solutive, with Broath: but if it bée a Fluxe, and that the Pattent is not cured, let him stand in a cold Bath of Salt
water of the Sea, thrée or foure houres or more, and he shall be perfectly holpe. Than as concerning Wounds, as well as Cuts as thrusts, and as well Galling with Arrowes, as Harquebush-shot, and other sorts, thou shalt cure them thus. The first thing that thou shalt doe to them is to wash them very cleane with Wine, and then dry them well, then put therein our Quintessence of Wine, and presently joyne the parts together, and sowe or stitch them close, then put thereupon fiue or sixe drops of our Balsamo, and vpon the wound lay a cloth wet in our Magno Licore as hote as yée may suffer it, and this yee shall do the first day: then the next day follow this order. First, put thereon our Quintessence and a little of our Balsamo, and then our Magno Licore very hote, and neuer change that medicine. And this done, the wound shall be whole with great spéed and in a quarter of the time that the common Chirurgions is able to doe it, by the grace of God. A rare secret, the which this Author did send to a very friend of his being in the Warres: the which helpeth all wounds eyther by Cut, Thrust, galling with Arrowes, or Hargubush-shot, or otherwise. THe first thing that yée shall doe, is to wash the Wounds very cleane with Vrine, and then dry it very well: then put therein Quintessence of Wine, and presently joyne the parts close together, and stitch or sow them well; but in any wise sowe nothing but the Skinne: for otherwise it will cause great paine: Then put thereon five or sixe drops of our Bal∣samo, and vpon the Wound, lay a cloth wet in our Magno Li∣core, as hote as they can suffer it, and this doe the first day. Then the next day follow this order. First, put thereon our Quintessence and then a little of our Balsamo: and then an∣noint it very well with our Magno Licore, as hot as it may be suffered: Never changing this Medicine vntill it be whole.
Of Wounds in the Head, with fracture of the Bone. VVOunds at the Head with fracture of the Bone, of the common Physitians and Chirurgions, are counted iicile to be healed, because thereunto belongeth great Art or Cunning: For they open the Flesh, and raise the Bone, with many other things, of which I count it superfluous to en∣treat of, because that many be holpen without them. For al∣wayes when the Physitians or Chirurgions doe offend the Wound for alteration or corruption, Nature it selfe will worke very well, and heale it without any ayde. But with our Medi∣cines they may be holpen with much more spéed, because they let the alteration, and defendeth them from Putrifaction, and mittigateth the paine. And the order to Cure those kind of wounds are thus. The first thing that is to be done in those Wounds, is to joyne the parts close together, and dresse them vpon the wound with our Oleum Benedictum, and vpon the Oyle lay cloathes wet in our Magno Licore, as hot as you can suffer it: And so with these Remedies thou shalt helpe them quickly: because our Oleo Benedicto taketh away the paine, and kéepeth it from putrifaction and creposueth. Our Magno Licore digesteth, mundifieth, and incarnateth and healeth. And therefore this is the best Medicine that can be vsed in these wounds. For hereof I haue had an infinite of Experiences, the which hath béene counted miracles: and therefore I haue let the world to vnderstand thereof, that they may helpe them∣selues it néed shall serue. Of Wounds in the Head, where the Bone is not offended. VVOunds in the Head, where the Bone is not hurt, are not of so much importance, but are easily to be holpen:
for you shall doe nothing, but to kéepe it from putrifaction, and defend it from inflamation, which are easie to be done, and so Nature will worke well with great spéed. To kéepe the wound from putrifaction, you must annoynt it round about with our Oleum Philosophorum, Deterebinthina, and Sera. And to kéepe it from inflamation, you shall wash it with our Quintessence, and upon the wound dresse it with our Magno Licore: thus do∣ing, thy cure shall prosper happily, and shall not néed to take away any blood, nor yet to kéepe any dyet, nor yet to kéepe the house, but to goe where you thinke good, without any perill or danger: and this order haue I vsed a long time, as diuers of my friends can testifie. Of Concussions or Bruises, as well in the Head as any other place, COncussion or Bruises in the head or any other place of the body, of the antient Physitians hath béene counted dange∣rous to heale, for they say, that Concussions must be brought to putrifaction, and turned into matter, which opinions I doe al∣low, for by me those Concussions or bruises is very easie to bée dissolved without maturation: And that I doe with our Oleo Benedicto, and Magno Licore, as much of the one as of the o∣ther mixt together, and made very hote as you can suffer it, and then wet cloathes twice a day, and in thrée or foure dayes at the most they shall be dissolved: and this it doth, because this Re∣medy assubtiliateth the humours, and openeth the Pores, and draweth foorth the matter that is runne into the place offended, and so by those meanes they shall be holpen with this remedy: I have cured hundreds, when I was in the warres of Africa, in Anno 1551. when the said City was taken and destroyed by the Campe of Charles the fifth, Emperour.
Of Wounds in the Necke and the order to be used in curing them. VVOunds in the necke are very hard so be cured, and long before they heale, and this commeth, because next are all the ligaments of the head, as bones, sinewes, veynes, flesh, and skinne, all instruments that hold the head and the body together, without the which a man cannot liue, and therefore those wounds are so perillous to be healed, séeing thereunto runneth so great a quantity of humours, that they will not suffe the wound to be healed. The true way therefore so helpe those wounds, is to stitch them well in his place, and dresse it vpon the wound, with clothes wet in Oleum Benedictum one part, and Magno Licore thrée parts, mixt together, as hote as you can suffer it. And vpon the cloath lay the powder of Mille-foyle, and this thou shalt doe once in 24 houres, and so that shall helpe them quickly: giving you great charge that you change not your Medicine; For it mundifieth, incarnateth, and healeth the wound without any further helpe, for I have proved it an infi∣nite and many times. Of Wounds in the Armes, and their importances and Medicines. VVOunds in the Armes are dangerous, for that there also are a great number of Sinewes, Cartylagines, Veynes, Musles, and other dangerous things, as it is well séene in wounds in the armes, how that thereunto runneth a∣bundance of Humours, and there commeth alteration. Infla∣mation, and Impostumation, which hurteth the Patient much. Therefore in this case, I will shew thée a rare secret, where∣with thn shalt helpe any sort of wound in the Arme, without any alteration, and with a little paine, and the secret is this,
Dresse the Wound vpon the vpper parts with our Magno Li∣core, very warm, without any tenting at all, and this doe once a day, and no more, and in no wise change your Medicine; for with this thou mayest helpe all Wounds in the Armes with great spéed, and it is one of the greatest secrets that can be v∣sed for the wounds in the armes: and proved by me infinite times. Of Wounds in the Legs, and their parts. VVOunds in the Legs are in a manner of the same qua∣lity as those in the armes, because the Legs are of their proper quality and nature, compounded of ye like substance that the armes are: that is, in Skinne, flesh, Muscles, veynes, sinewes, and Bones: And these, when they are offended or wounded, are very perillous, because vnto them runneth great quantity of humours, and in the Legges are certaine places deadly (as men say) as the hinder part of the calfe of the Leg, and the middle of the inner part of the thigh, the ankle, and the foote, are all places troublesome and curious to heale when they are wounded, and therefore to heale them according to the man∣ner of the Antients, it were great trouble to the Chirurgion: and pity to sée the paine of the Patient. Wherefore in any wise vse not the Medicines of the Antients. But when thou hast oc∣casion, joyne vnto the skill of thy Art the vse of these Medi∣cines, our Quintessentia, Balsamo, Magno Licore, Oleo di Rasa, Oleo Benedicto, Oleo Philosophorum. Any of these, or such like, which are incorruptible, which by their proper quality assubtiliateth concussions, pierceth to the bottome of the Wounds, kéepeth the flesh in his naturall Caliditie and humi∣dity, preserveth from Putrifaction, and naturally maketh the Flesh to joyne and grow together, and that in a short space. Therefore consider well, which worketh better Effect, ours; or the Antients, and vse them at thy discretion.
A Discourse upon old Wounds, which are not yet healed; with their Remedies. VVHen that Wounds are ill healed, and that therein commeth Impostumations, and that the part of the wounds be indurated and full of paine, then vse this secret of our Invention, which was never yet séene nor heard of the An∣tients, nor yet of our time, but of vs. When thou findest such a cause, wash the Wound well, and make it cleane round about, and then wash it with our Quintessentia Vegetabile, and Bathe it well thorow, for that the said Quintessentia doth open the Pores, and assubtiliateth the matter, and causeth the humour to come foorth. This being done, annoynt it all ouer with our Magno Licore, and this done, within thrée dayes the Patient shall féele great ease, and in short time after he shall be whole. This is one of the most noblest Medicines that can bée made: For it takes away the hardnesse, healeth the Wound, and comforteth the place offended. A rare secret to heale Wounds of Gunshot, Arrowes, or such like, in the Wars, when hast is required. IF thou wilt cure these Wounds, presently joyne the parts together, and wash it with our Aqua Coelestis, and Oleum Balsamo, of our invention, and lay a Cloath wet in the same thereon. To heale a Wound quickly. VVAsh the Wound well with our Aqua Balsamo, and close it vp, and thereupon lay the cloath of the Oyle Frankensence, and so by this meanes thou shalt heale any great Wound quickly: For I have proved it infinite times, to my great credit.
To heale a Wound quickly, that is in danger of any Accidents. VVOunds in some parts of the Body are very dangerous of Life, and especially where the Sinewes or Veynes bée (cut or pierced) or Veynes or Muscles be hurt, or Bones broken, and by an infinite of other particulars, which being open or ill-healed, the Patient may be in danger of life, be∣cause the winde entreth in, and causeth paines and inflama∣tion; and therefore to avoyd all these aforesaid matters, so that the wound shall haue no detriment, vse this remedy. First joyne the parts close together, and put therein our Quintes∣sence, and lay a cloth wet in our Baulme, and binde it fast that the ayre come not in, for it is very hurtfull. You shall vnder∣stand, that these be two of the best experienced Medicines that may be found: because our Quintessence doth assubtiliate the Blood, and taketh it foorth, and taketh away the paine. And the Baulme doth warme and comfort the place offended. And will not suffer any Matter to runne thereinto by any meanes: for this is most true, as I haue prooued diuers and sundry times, and alwayes haue had very good successe. To stay the fluxe of Bloud in Wounds. VVHen there is a fluxe of Blood in any wound by rea∣son of some veyne that is cut, and that the Chirurgion would stop it, it is necessary, that he put into it our Quintes∣sence, and then so stitch it by very close and hard, and vpon the wound strowe the blood of a Man dried, made in powder, and lay vpon the wound a cloath wet in our Baulme artificially, very warme, and vpon that binde the wound very straight with Ligaments, and twice a day wash it with our Quin∣tessentia, and round about it annoynt it with our Baulme, and also cast thereon our secret powder for wounds, and that doe,
Morning and Euening euery day without opening the wound, and in short time it will remaine well, giving you charge that the wounded person doe kéepe no straight Dyet, because Na∣ture being weake relaxeth the Veynes, and that causeth the fluxe of blood. Another for the same. FIrst, stitch the Wound close, then cast thereon mans blood, and binde it somewhat hard, so let it remaine foure and twenty houres: And when you vnbind it, take héed you re∣move nothing, and cast thereon more dryed blood, and annoynt it round about with Oleum Philosophorum Deteribinthina and Cera, and binde it againe other foure and twenty houres, and then binde it gently, and annoynt the wound with Oyle of Frankensence, and in short time it will be perfectly whole. A defence to be layd upon Wounds. TAke perfect Aqua Vitae of good Wine, what quantity you will, and put therein Hipericon, Mill-soyle, Viticella, and Bitonie, and then let it stand certaine dayes close stopped, and when yée will vss it, wet a cloth therein, and lay it round about the Wound, and thou shalt have thy intent, to the great satis∣faction of the Patient. A secret Powder for Wounds. TAke Hipericon flowers and leaves, Mill-soyle, and Viti∣cella, and stampe them well together, and strew it vpon the Wound, and round about the wound when it is dressed, and it doth defend it from accidents.
To make a resolutive Plaister of great vertue. This Playster is to resolve Tumours and hardnesse, if it bee layd thereon very hote, and when it is cold, to lay on another, and this you shall doe till the hardnesse be resolved: and it is made in this Order. TAke common Ashes, that are well burnt and white, and finely searced, one pound, Clay beaten in fine powder halfe a pound, Earab one ounce: mixe all these in an earthen dish on the fire with oyle of Roses, in forme of a liquid Vnguent, and that yée shall lay vpon the place grieved, as hot as yée may suffer it, and change it Morning and Evening, and yée shall sée it worke a marvellous effect. Moreover, when the Pelechie commeth foorth of a diseased, let him be folded in the same re∣medy very hote, and in foure and twenty houres yée shall be holpe, if yée be first well Purged: for this is a great secret which I have revealed. This word Pelechie, is (as it were certaine spots) like those which wée call Gods tokens, the which commonly come to those that haue the Pestilent Fe∣ver. To make a maturative Plaister of great vertue. This maturative doth open an Impostume without Instrument or paine: And the order to make it is this. TAke the yolke of Egges, two ounces, white Salt finely ground, one ounce, Hennes ung that is liquid and red like Honey, one ounce: Mixe all these well together without fire, and when you will bring an Impostume to superation, and breake it, lay on this Plaister morning and Euening, a little, and in short time it will draw foorth the Impostume, and breake it, and heale it without any other help. Kéepe this as a secret.
A Composition of great vertue against all Ulcers and Sores. TAke Oyle of Vyfrioll that is perfect, as much as you will, and put it into a Glasse, with as much Oyle of Tartar made by dissolution, and so let it stand tenne dayes: Then take one scruple of that, and one ounce of pure Aqua Vitae, and mixe them together, and therewith wash the hollow Vl∣cers, and they will heale in short time. It helpeth any crude kinde of Scab or sore that is caused of the evill quality or na∣ture. A Note of a certaine Spanyard, wounded in the head at Naples. There was a certaine Spanyard called Samora, of the age of foure and thirty yeares, of complexion Cholericke and San∣guine, the which was wounded in the left side of the head, with incision of the Bone. Also yée shall vnderstand, that in Naples the ayre is most ill for wounds in the Head, by reason that it is so subtill, and for that cause the Doctors did feare the Cure: Neverthelesse I dressed him with our Magno Licore, and Bal∣samo Artificio, kéeping the wound as close as was possible, a∣nointing it onely vpon the wound, and so in fouretéene dayes he was perfectly whole, to the great wonder of a number of Chirurgions in that City. For to heale Hurts and Wounds. TAke Mallowes and séeth them well, and when they be sodden, take and stampe them, and take old Barrowes grease and cleane Barley meale, and mingle the Iuyce, the Meale and the Greace all together, and make a Salve there∣of, it is a ready healer.
To stanch the blood of a Cut. TAke a good handfull of Nettles and bruise them, and then lay them vpon the wound hard bound with a cloth, and it will stint presently. Another for the same. TAke Hogs-dung hot from the Hog, mingle it with Suger, and lay it to the Wound. For to staunch the bloud of a Wound. TAke a Linnen cloth, and burne it to powder, and binde it to to the Wound or Veyne that is hurt. The Lord Capels Salve for Cuts or Rancklings, com∣ming of Rubbings: It is also good Lip-salve. TAke a pound of May-butter and clarifie it, then take the pu∣rest thereof: also take thrée ounces of English wax, and two ounces of Rozine, and clarifie them by themselves, then boyle them all together, when it is boyled, coole it, and after kéepe i in the Cake, or otherwise as your Salve. For to draw and heale a Cut. TAke the Iuice of Smalledge, the Iuyce of Bugle: of each a quantity: take also Waxe, Rozen vnwrought, Shéepes Suet, Déeres suet, of each a like quantity, Sallet oyle, Tur∣pentine, but a little; Fry them all, and scrape a little Lint, and lay a little salve vpon the Lint, and put it in the Cut, and then lay a Plaister over it.
A Salve for fresh Wounds. TAke Harts-grease and Turpentine, of each foure Ounces: oyle of Roses, Frankensence and Masticke, of each one ounce, and so make your Salve. A Salve that cleanseth a Wound and healeth it. TAke white Turpentine vnwashed foure ounces, the yolke of an Egge, and a little Barley meale and so make a Salve. To kill dead Flesh. TAke the Iuyce of Smalledge, and the yolke of an Egge. Wheaten flower, a spoonefull of Honey: and mingle all these together, and drop it into the Sore, or otherwise make a Plaister: Fine Suger scraped into powder will doe the ame. A Playster for old Sores. TAke Litarg of Gold, one pound, oyle of Roses two pound, white Wine a pinte, Vrine a pinte, Vineger halfe a pinte, Waxe, Frankensence, and Myrrhe, of each two Drams, and so make your Plaister according. For Canker, Fistula, Warts, or Wounds, new or old. TAke a Gallon and a halfe of running Water, and a peke of Ashen ashes, and séeth them, and make thereof a Gallon of Lie, and put thereto a gallon of Tanners woose, and powder of roch Allome, and Madder a pound: and séeth all these, and let your panne be so great, that it be little more then halfe full, and
when it riseth in the séething, stirre it downe with a ladle, that it runne not over, and let it stand thrée or foure houres till it be cléere, and all that is cléere straine it through a good thicke Can∣vasse, and then wet therein a ragged cloth, and long Lint, and lay it on the sore, and this is good for all the Diseases aforesaid. A Salve for any Wound. TAke Housléeke, Marigold leaues, Sage, Betonie, and garden Mallowes, of each one handfull, stampe them, and straine them, then take the juyce, halfe a pound of fresh But∣ter, one peny-worth of fine Turpentine very well washed, one peny-worth of Aqua Composita, and an Oxe-gall, mixe them all together, and boyle them moderately vpon the Imbers, and so make a Plaister. To helpe the Ach of a Wound. FOr Ache of a Wound, stampe Fennell. with old Swines Greace, and heate it and binde it thereto, Recip. the juyce of Smallage, Honey, old Swines grete, and Rye meale and apply it Plasterwise. To heale Wounds without Plaister, Tent, or Oyntment, except it be in the Head. STampe Fennell, Yarrow, Buglosse, ana. white Wine, and drinke it 2 or 3 times a day till you be well. Mixe Swines greace with Honey, Rye meale, and Wine, and boyle it and vse it, if it heale too fast, put in the juyce of Bryonie a little, bruise Isop and put in while the wound is raw is very good. To heale a Wound that no scarre or print thereof shall be seene. ROst Lilly roots, and grinde them with Swines greace, and when the wound is healed, anoynt it therewith often. Thus much concerning the Cure of Wounds.
OF THE BATH OF Bathe, in England. PART. V. The rare Treasure of the English Baths. Written by WILLIAM TVRNER, Doctor of Physicke. Gathered and set forth for the Benefit and Cure of the Poorer sort of people, who are not able to goe to the Physitians, by WILLIAM BREMER, Practitioner in Physicke, and Chyrurgerie. CHAP. I. ALthough there be a very excellent and whole∣some Bath within the Realme of England, yet for all that, I reckon that there are many in the North parts, which being diseased with sore diseases, would gladly come to the Bath of Bathe, if they knew that there were any there whereby they might be holpen, and yet know not whether there be any in the Realme or no.
Wherefore, séeing that I have writ of the Baths that are in forraigne Countries, therefore I thought good to shew the ver∣tues of our owne Bathes: For if they be able to helpe mens Diseases, what shall men néed to goe into farre Countries to séeke that remedy there which they might have at home. The Bath of England in the West Countrey, in Som∣merset-shirs, in a City called in Latine Bathoma, and Bathe in English, of the Bathes that are in it. This City of Bathe is fiftéene miles from Welles, and fiftéene miles from the Noble City of Bristowe. The chiefe matter whereof these Bathes in this City have their chiefe vertue and strength, af∣ter my judgement is Brimstone, and of my judgement are di∣vers other, which have examined them as I have done, when I was at the Bathes with a certaine man diseased of the Goute, I went into them my selfe with my Patient, and brought foorth of the place next vnto the Spring, and out of the bottome, flyme, mud, bones, and stones, which altogether smelled evidently of Brimstone, if that a man may judge the matter of the effect, may gather that Brimstone is the onely matter in these Bathes, or else the chiefe that beareth rule in them: for they dry vp wonderfully, and heale the Goute ex∣cellently, and that in a short time, as with divers others, one Miles Somelines, one of my Lord of Sommersets Players can beare witnesse: which things are no light tokens that Brim∣stone beareth the chiefe rule, séeing that neyther by smelling nor tasting, a man can féele no other matter or Mines to raigne there. If there be any thing lightly mingled with the Brimstone which I could not perceive, it must be Copper: for whilest I walked about the Mountaines, out of the which the Bathes doe spring, I found here and there little pieces of Marquesteth and stones, mingled with Copper, but I could by no sence or wit perceive, that the Bathes had any notable quality there∣of: then séeing that there cannot be found any other Minor or matter, to be the chiefe ruler in these Bathes then Brimstone,
we may gather, that these Bathes are good for all those disea∣ses, which all learned Physitians write, that all other Bathes, whose chiefe ruler is Brimstone, are good for. Aetius writing of naturall Bathes, wherein Brimstone is eyther the onely Minor, or matter of them, or chiefe matter thereof, sayth thus as followeth hereafter. The Bathes of brimstone soften the sinewes, swage the payne that a man hath in desiring to goe oft vnto the stoole, and when he commeth, he can eyther doe little or nothing. They scowre and cleanse the skinne: wherefore they are good for the white Morphew, and blacke, for the Leprosie, and for all Scabs and Scurffes, for old sores and bothes, for the falling of humors into the joynts, for an hardened Milt, or the Cake in the left side, for an harde∣ned Mother, for all kind of Palses, for the Sciatica, and for all kinde of Itch or itching. But the Bathes of Brimstone hurt the Stomacke and marre it: thus farre writeth A∣vicen. Agricola in his Bookes of those things which flow out of the earth, writeth thus of Bathes of Brimstone. The Bathes of Brimstone doe soften the sinewes and doe heate, they are good therefore for Palse, for places pulled in too much, or stretched too farre foorth: for the shaking or trembling of any member, and they swage ache, and draw out Swelling of the limmes, and driue and scatter them away. They are good therefore for the Gowte in the hands, for the Gowts in the féet, and for the Sciatica, and all other diseases in the ioynts: they swage also the paines in the Liuer and Milt, and driue away the swelling of them both: they scowre away freckles, and heale Morphewes, and Scabbes: but they vndoe and ouerthrow the Stomacke. Then séeing (as I said before) our Baths of Bathe, haue their vertue of Brimstone, they that are diseased in any of the aboue named diseases, may goe thither, and by the helpe of Almighty God be healed there. When those Bathes haue of long time béene knowne, euen about a thousand yeares, eyther the vnlearnednesse, or the enui∣ousnesse
of the Physitians, which haue béene in times past, is greatly to be rebuked, because either for lack of learning, knew not the vertues of these Bathes, or else for enuiousnesse, would not send the sicke folkes, whom they could not otherwise heale vnto the bathes, for all men can tell, very few in times past haue béene by the advise of the Physitians sent vnto the bathes, but now in this our light and learned time, after that so many learned Physitians haue so greatly commended these bathes, I doubt whether the niggardly liberality, or the vnnaturall vn∣kindnesse of the rich men of England is more to be dispraised which receiving so many good turnes at Almighty God, now after that they know that the bathes are so profitable, will not bestowe one halfe-penny for Gods sake vpon the bettering and amending of them, that the poore, sicke and diseased people that resort thither, might be better and sooner holpen when as they are there. There is money enough spent vpon Cockfightings, Tennis playes, Parkes, Banquettings, Pageants, Playes, and seruing onely for a short time, that pleasure of times, but of pri∣uate persons which haue no néed of them, but I haue not heard tell that any rich man hath spent vpon these notable bathes, be∣ing so profitable for the whole Common-wealth of England one groate these twentie yeares. Hée that hath béene in Italie and Germany, and had séene how costly and welfauoredly, the bathes are trimmed, and appointed there in divers and sundry places, would be asha∣med that any stranger which had séene the bathes in for∣raigne lands should looke vpon our Bathes, for he would thinke that the stranger would accuse vs Englishmen of thrée things, of grossenesse and brutish ignorance, because we cannot trim our Bathes no better: of vnkindnesse, because we doe so light∣ly regard so high and excellent gifts of Almighty God: of beastly filthinesse, because we make no partition betwéen the men and the women, whilst they are in bathing, but suffer them contrary both vnto the law of God and man, to goe toge∣ther like vnreasonable beasts, to the destruction both of body
and soule of very many. If there be any liberall Duke, Earle, Lord, Knight, Esquire, or other gentle, or no gentle honest man, that will bestow any cost vpon the bettering and amending of these Bathes, I will for my part, because I haue no store of other riches, helpe the matter as forward as I can with my counsell, which is this. First and before all other things, my counsell is, that every Bath haue an hole in the bottome, by the which, the stopple ta∣ken out, the Bath should be cleansed and scoured euery foure and twenty houres, at the least once, and that I would aduise to be done at eight a clock in the afternoone, that against the morning it might be full of fresh and wholesome water against the time the sicke folke come to it in the morning, and so should they be a great deale sooner healed of their old diseases, and in lesse jeopardie in taking of new, which may easily come vnto a man, if he goe into a Bath, wherein a sicke man, namely if hée be sicke in a smiting or infectiue disease, hath continued. It were also méete, that euery Bath had a Couering about it, or at the least it should be so builded, that in the time of foule weather it might be couered; Notwithstanding I would least such places should be open, that the Vapors might goe out, that they that haue ill Heads be hurt with the Vapors which are too much holden in. I thinke also that it were necessary that cer∣taine Lofts should be builded right over some part of the first or principall Bath, that honest women and other which would not gladly be séene in the Baths, might euer haue (as often as they need, Fresh water drawne vnto them) through an hole, wherewith they may haue to bathe themselues in Vessels of wood, made for that purpose: Provided with all foresight, that not one drop of the water which they in the Lofts haue occupi∣ed, fall in againe into the principall Bath, but be conveyed out by some other conuenient way. For the bringing of this matter surely to passe, it were best that the Lofts should be so builded, that onely a Bucket might goe downe into the hath, saving that little portion (whereby
water may be drawne vp through, to serue them that are in them, and such a fit place might be devised to draw water through, that it might serue for halfe a dozen Chambers aboue, or moe. This were also necessary, that in one of the Bathes, should be builded ouer the hottest place that there is, a little house, after the manner of a Seaffold, very néere vnto the Wa∣ter, after such a manner, that the hote Vapor might strike hote vpon certain places of mans body; For this manner of reser∣uing of the hote vapors, is much better for some kind of Drop∣sies or Govets, then the water it selfe is, therefore these things is not to be forgotten. This were also necessary, that not onely certaine seuerall bathing places should be appointed for wo∣men alone, but also that others should be appointed for such persons seuerally, as are sicke in smitting, infectious, or horri∣ble diseases. Furthermore, because Almighty GOD hath shapen and made Hearbs, Stones, Gummes, Mettals, and Medicines, of diuers other things, principally for Man. It is to be thought that his Will is, that the same should sometime serue such Creatures of his, as man cannot well want: wherefore as it is well done, that Hearbs and Medicines made of divers other things, should be giuen to the Beasts that serue us: so that I thinke it were not amisse, if that we made the Bathes after they haue served man, for whom they were principally made, serue also to helpe Horses: for performing whereof, I would wish that one or two Bathes in some convenient place, might be drawne out from one or two of the hottest Bathes, and then would I haue so deuised, that the Horses that haue diseases in the Legs and Ioynts, might stand in the Bath almost vnto the belly, and that other that haue other diseases, might stand higher in the water: which thing may easily be brought to passe; f that two holes be made with stopples, the one higher, and the other lower, that a man may set the Horses as déepe or as shallow as he list, the water increasing or decreasing, according to the holding in, or letting out of the water.
I thinke verily, that the Bathe of Brimstone within the space of a Moneth, healeth Splents, Spaes, and all  hard lumps, and swellings, if they be not very old,  and Founding farces, or Fashions, or all such like diseases that are without. If the Horses by the advice of a cunning Horse-leache, haue giuen the in a convenient drinke before they come to the Bathes, and ordaine for them such Emplasters and Powders as are méet for them to use in the Bathing time: but whilest they stand resting themselues out of the Bathe, my aduise is, that they that have not much money to bestow vpon Horse-leaches, that they lay in good quantity, the Slyme and Grounds of the Bath, vpon the sore places of the Horses, all that time that they are out of the Bath, resting them in the sta∣ble, betweene oe Bathing time and another. But I would not that the Horse should be exercised in the Bathing time, for that is not my meaning: For I would that a Horse should be as well exercised as a man, and so much more as hée is stron∣ger then a Man, except the diseases be in his Féet, and then are they more measurably to be exercised. And for the Dyet that men should kéepe at this, Bath of Bathe, hereafter ensueth, with divers other necessary Rules néedfull to be obserued of all those that enter the said Bath. CHAP. II. Certaine Rules to be obserued of all them that will enter into any Bath, or drinke the water of any Bathe. THe Counsell of learned and wise Physitians is, that they should not at any time goe into any Bath, to séeke remedy for any sicknesse, except it be such a one that almost the learned Physitians dispaire of the healing of it: if God haue smitten you with any disease, before you goe
to any Bath, for the healing of it, call to your remembrance, o  en and wherein you haue displeased GOD, and if any of your sinnes come to your remembrance, occupy the same no more, but be earnestly sorie for it, and aske GOD mercy for it, intending and promising by his mercy and grace, neuer to all into the same againe. This Counsell is agréeing with that which is written in the 38. Chapter of Ecclesiasticus; in this manner. My Sonne in the time of thy sickenesse, faile not (but that thou pray to Almighty GOD) for he will helpe thée: Leaue off all sinning, and shew out thy straight Hands, and cleanse thy Heart from all sinne, and deale Almes, and then giue place to the Physitian, and let him come vnto thée, as one that God hath sent vnto thée. And a little after he doth plainely de∣clare, that Sicknesse commeth from the punishment of sinne, where he sayth: Hée that will sinne against his Maker, vseth to fall into the hands of the Physitian. As Christ in the fift of John doth also meane, when he said unto the blind man he had healed, Goe and sinne no more, least worse things chance vnto thee. Howbeit, wée may judge no man to be a greater sinner then another, because he is oftner sick then common sort be: for God sendeth vnto good men oftentimes sicknesse, not for the sinnes they haue done more then other men, but to kéepe them in good order, that the flesh rebell not against the spirit. For if that many infirmities had béene a sure token that a man were a great sinner, then should Tothie, which had many infirmities and sicknesses, as Paul writeth, béene a very great sinner: but he was not so, therefore that argument is not true. But whether Sicknesse come for to punish sinne, or to hold a man in good nature and obedience, all Sicknesse commeth of God: Wherefore, for whatsoever cause it commeth of, be∣fore yée aske any helpe of any worldly Physitian, yée must make your Prayers to Almighty GOD; (as the good King Ezechias did,) and if it be méet for you to be healed, you shall be healed as he was. Then after yée haue confessed your selfe vnto Almighty
GOD, and to such as yée haue offended; in the Name of God Aske counsell of some learned Physitian who is sent of God, and not of some selfe-made Idoll, who is onely of himselfe: if hée can (vsing all the lawful meanes commonly wnt to heale such diseases as yée are sicke on) and if yée féele your griefe no better, then it shall be high time to goe to the Bathes as to the shot Anker. Before yée goe to the Bathes, in any wise yée must goe to some learned Physitian, and learne of him, by the helpe of the telling, what Complexion you be of, and what Humour or other thing is the cause of your disease, and there after his Counsell, vse such Dyet as shall be most fit for your Complexion and sick∣nesse. Let no man enter into any bath before his body be pur∣ged or cleansed after the aduice of some learned Physitian, for if any man goe into the bath purged, he may fortune neuer come home againe: or if hée come home againe, he commeth home most commonly with worse diseases then hée brought to the bath with him. Yée may not goe into the bath, the first day that you are cme to it, but you must rest a day or two, and then goe into the bathe. There is no time of the yeare that is more fit to goe into the most part of all the bathes, then are the Moneths of May and September: but the Spring time is better then any other time is. The best time of the day is an houre after the rising of the Sinne, or halfe an houre: but before yée goe into the bathe, if your disease will suffer you, yée must walke an houre, or at the least halfe an houre before you goe into the bath But you must at no time goe into the bath, except yée haue béene at the stoole, either by nature or by , yée may take a Suppository, or a Glister, and for a gr néed Savanorolla suffereth Pits, but he will not suffer that he that is so purged, enter into the bath, for the space of  houres.
The same also would at the least every Bather should haue a stoole once in thrée dayes: wherefore if any man be hard of na∣ture, and cannot abide Suppositories and Glisters, he pardo∣neth the Patient, if he be once purged, or goe to the stoole once in thrée daies, which thing scarcely any other writer that I haue read will doe, neither would I counsell to deferre the going to stoole so long, if there be any meanes possible to make a man goe to the stoole, without his great paine. If that he be counselled to goe twice on a day in the bathe, he must sée hée goe not into it, till seauen houres be past after your dinner, and tarry not so long in it in the afternoone as you did before. The common time of tarrying in the bath, is commonly al∣lowed to be an houre, or more or lesse, according to the nature both of the Bath, as also of the Patient. Let no man tarry so long in the Bath that he be faint or weak, but let him come out before that time. Yée must alwaies goe into the bath with an empty stomack, and as long as you are in it, you must neither eate nor drinke saving that for a great néed require the contrary. Some grant that a weake person may eate a little bread stée∣ped in the juyce of Pomegranats, Barberries, or Rilts, or in the Sys made of the same. Some Physitians suffer a man that cannot abide hunger so long, to take ere he goe in, two spoonfuls of raisons well washed oftentimes with two parts of water, one of wine, or so much of delaied or atred wine, as much as  holden in a spoon, or a few Prunes odden and stéeped in water  two spoonfuls of rummes of breas, washed oftentimes with water or wine, tem∣pered as I told before or a toe put into such water: but let no man drinke in the bath except he sw in the bath, or bée in danger of founding or else yée must all  time that yée be in the bath abstain from all  and drinke. As long as you  in the bath, you must  your head well that you take no cold, for it is very perilous to take cold
in the head in the Bath, as divers reasons may be laid to prove the same. When you come out of the Bath, sée that yée cover your self well that yée take no cold, and dry off the Water on your bode with warme cloathes, and goe by and by into a warme bed, and sweat there if you can, and wipe off the sweat diligently, and af∣terwards sléepe, but yée must not drinke any thing vntill dinner time, except yée be very faint: then yée may take a little Suger-candy, or a few Raisins, or any such thing in a small quantity that will slake thirst: for Galen in the 14 De Methodo meden∣di, commandeth that a man shall not eate nor drinke by and by after the Bathe, vntill he hath slept after his bathing. After that yée haue sweat and slept enough, and be clearely delivered from the heate that you had in the Bathe, and after∣wards in the Bed, then may you rest and walke a little, and then goe to dinner; for by measurable walking, the vapours and windinesse that is come in the Bath is driven away. If the Patient cannot walke, then let him be rubd quickly, and if he can suffer no rubbing, then at some time it were good to take a Suppositorie, either of roote or of a béete, with a lit∣tle Salt vpon it, or a Suppository of Honey, or a Suppositorie of a Flower deluce, or of salt Bacon, or white Sope. After all these things, then shall you goe to dinner, but you must neither eate very much good meate, nor any evill meate at all. Wherefore you must rise from the Table with some good appetite, so that you could eate more if you would. The meates that are commonly of all Physitians allowed that write of Dyet that belongeth to Bathes, are, Bread of one dayes baking, or two at the most, well leavened, and through∣ly baked, small Birds, and other birds of the fields and moun∣taines that are of easie digestion, but Waterechanters yée must not touch, Kids flesh, Veale and Mutton, of a Lambe of a yeare old, new laid Egges, Pheasants, Partriges, Capons, Chickens and young Géese. The meates that are forbidden, are salt Béefe and Bacon, Pidgeons, Quailes, Pyes, and Pasties, and
such like meates, Cherries, and all such fruits, Garlicke, O∣nions, and all hot spices, and all cold meates, as are the most part of Fishes: howbeit, divers may be well allowed, so they be well dressed. Milke is not to be allowed much: but if that the Patient be so greedy of it, that in a manner he long for it, then let him take it two houres or thereabout, before hée take any other meate, and he must drinke after it. White wine that is small is allowable, or Wine being de∣layed with the third or fourth part of sodden water, according to the Complexion of the Patient: Some vse to stéepe bread in strong Wine, when as they can get no other Wine. Beware that in no wise yée drinke any water, and especially cold water, and so should yée forbeare from all things that are presently cold, namely, when yée begin first to eate and drinke. Let therefore both your meate and drinke be in such temper, that they be not cold but warme, lest when as yée are hot with∣in by your bathing and sweating, the cold strike suddenly into some principall member and hurt it. They that are of a hote Complexion, and of an open nature, and not well fastened together, ought not to tarry so long in the bath, as other ought that are of colder and faster complexion. If that any man betwéene meale times be vexed with thirst, he may not drinke any thing, saving for a great néed he take a little Barley water, or Water sodden with the fourth part of the juyce either of sowre or milde swéet Pomgranates, with a little Suger: a man may vse for a néed, a little Vineger, with Water and Suger, if he have no disease in the Sinewes, nor in the Ioynts. A man that is very weake, or accustomed much to sléepe af∣ter dinner, an hours and a halfe after that he is risen from the Table, he may take a reasonable sléepe. All the time that a man is in them, he must kéepe himselfe chast from all women, and so he must doe a moneth after, after the counsell of divers learned Physitians, and some for the space
of forty dayes, as Pantheus and Aleardus would, namely, if they come out of the Chauldron. It were méete that in euery foure and twenty houres the Bath should be letten out, and fresh water received into the pit againe, for so shall you sooner be healed, and better abide with lesse jeopardy, abiding in the Bath. It is most méete for them that haue any disease in the head, as a Cathaire or Rhemne, comming of moyst cause and not very hot. For them that haue Palsies, or such like diseases, that they cause a bucket to be holden over their heads, with an hole in it, of the bignesss of a mans little finger, about foure foote above their heads, so that by the Réede or Pipe made for the nonce, the water may come downe with great might vpon the mould of the Head: if they haue the Cathaire, and vpon the nape of the necke, if the Patient be sicke of the Palsie, or any such like disease. The clay or grounds of the Bath is better for the Dropsie then is the water alone: it is also good for shrunken swelled, and hard places, and for all old and diseased places, which cannot well be healed with other medicines: The matter is, to lay the grounds vpon the place, and to hold the same against the hote Sunne, or a warme fire, vntill it be something had, and then to wash away the foulenesse of the Clay, with the water of the Bath: this may a man doe as oft as he lift. Some Physitians counsell, that betwéene the bathings, when a man is twice ba∣thed vpon one day, in the time that the Patient is out of the bath, to vse his plaistering with the Clay: but if the person be any thing weake, I counsell not to goe twice into the Bath, but either once, or else to be content with the plaistering of the mudde or grounds of the Bath. It were good wisedome for them that cannot tarry long at the Bathes, either for heate or for cold, to take home with them some of the grounds, and there occupie it as is afore-told. There are certaine learned men, which reckon that the hote breath or vapour that riseth vp from the Bathe, is much more
mightier then the water of the bath is, and it is true: therefore it ware well that they which haue any Dropsie, and especially a Tympanie, should sit over such a place of the Bath, that they might receiue into the moyst diseased place, the vapour of the bathe, either by an holed froole, or by some other such like man∣ner of thing, well devised for that purpose. If any poore man by the heate of the drynesse of the Bathe cannot sléepe enough, let him eate Lettice, or Purflaine, or the féedes of Poppy, called Chesbowle, in some places of Eng∣land, or let him eate Suger and Poppy séed together, let this be done at night. He may also if hóe cannot get the aforesaid things, séethe Violet leaves and Mallowes, and bathe the vtter-most parts with that they are sodden in. These are remedies for poore olke that are not able to have a Physitian with them to giue them counsell: Let the rich vse such remedies as their Physitians shall counsell them. If any poore man be vexed with any vnsufferable thirst, let him take a little Barley and séethe it long, and put a little Su∣ger vnto it: or let him take the juyce of Orange, or take a little of it with a little Suger. If any poore man catch the Head ache, let him take a little Wormelade if he can get it, or Coriander Comfits: or if hée can get none of these, let him take the white of an Enge, and beate it with Vineger and Rose water, or with the broath of Violets, or Nightshade, or with any of them, and a little Vi∣neger, and lay them in a cloath vnto the temples of his head, and forehead. If any poore man be burned soo much, let him take a Glitter made with Mallowes, Béetes, and Violet leaves, or let him séethe Prunes with Barley a good while, and Raisins, putting away the stones, and eate of them or let him vse Suppositories sometimes, made of rootes, either of Béetes, of Flower de-Luce, or of white Sope, or of salt Bacon. If any man sweat too much, let him vse colder meates than hée vsed before, with Vineger or Verjuyce; and let them also
eate Shéepes-féete, and Calves-féete, with Verjuyce or Vi∣neger. If any man haue the burning of his water when he maketh it, let him an houre after he is come out of the Bathe, annoynt his Kidneyes with some cold Oyntment, as is Infrigidus Ga∣leni▪ or if you cannot come by that, let him seethe Violet leaues. Poppy-heads, Raisins. Licorice and Mallowes together, straine them, and put some Suger in the broath, and drinke of it a draught before Supper. If any be troubled with the Rheume which he hath caught in the Bath, let him parch or britle at the fire Nigella Romana and hold it in a cloath to his Nose, and let him set cups or or∣ing glasses to his shoulders, without any scorching, and let him drinke sodden water with Barley, and with a little Suger. If any man haue any appetite to eate, let him vse the sirrups of Ribles or Barberian, or the sirrup of vnripe Graes; or vse Verjuyce or Vineger to provoke appetite in due measure, and now and then if yée can get it, let him take a little Marma∣lade, or of the sirrup of Mto or Wormewood Romane. (These have I written for poore, folke.) Those that are rich, by the aduice of the Physitians, may haue other Remedies e∣nough against the fore-named accidents, that chance in the time of their bathing. If thou be rid of thy disease by thy bathing, offer vnto Christ in thy pure members, such offering of Thankesgiving, as thou mayest spare, and giue him hearty thankes, both in word, urinde and déed, and sinne no more but walke in all kindnesse of life and honesty, as farre as thou shalt be able to doe, as long as thou shalt liue hereafter. But if thou be not healed the first time, be patient, and liue vertuously till the next bathing time, and then if it be to the glory of God, and for thée most profitable thou shalt the next bathing time be healed by the grace of God of whom commeth all health both of body and soule. Some if they be not healed whilest they be in the bathing,
cry out both vpon the Bath, which healeth many other of the same Diseases that they are sicke of, and of the Physitian also that counselled them to goe to the Bath, such men must learns, that they must not appoint God a time to heals them by the Bathe, and that when as the Bath hath dryed vp, and washeth vp by Sweating, and subtill through blowing the evill matter of the disease, that it is one dayes worke or two, to make good humours to occupie the place of such evill humours as haue béene in them before. Therefore let such be patient, and for the space of a Moneth kéepe the same dyet that they képt at the Bath, and if God will they shall haue their desire, but not one∣ly these, but all others that are heales for a moneth at the least, the longer the better, must kéepe the same dyet that they kept it the Bath, as touching meate and drinke, and if it be possible also from the vse of all Women When as you goe homewards, make but small Iourneyes, and beware of sursetting and of colde, and when you are at home, vse measurable Exercise daily, and honest mirth and pastime, with honest company, and be ware of too much study or carefulnesse. Thankes be to God for all his Guifts.
A Briefe Treatise of Vrines, as well of Mans Vrines as of Womans, to judge by the Colour which betokeneth Health, and which betokeneth Weaknesse, and also Death. PART. VI. IT is shewed, that in the fore-parts of the Body dwelleth Sicknesse and Health: That is, in the Wombe, in the Head, in the Liver, and in the Bladder, in what manner thou mayst know their properties, and thereof thou mayest learne. When Bubbles doe swim on the top of Vrine, they procéed of windy matter included in viscous humidity, and signifie wnesse and indigestion in the Head, Belly, Sides, eynes, and parts thereabouts, for in these especially, huours are multiplied and doe ascend to make paine in the Head. Resident Bubbles doth signifie ventositie in the Body, or else a Sicknesse that hath continued long and will continue, vnlesse remedy be found; but Bubbles not Resident but doth breake quickly, signifieth Debility or Weaknesse. Bubbles cleaing to the Vrinall, signifieth the body to be re∣pleat
with evill humours. Bubbles doth also signifie the Stone in the Reynes of the Backe. A Circle which is gréene of colour of Vrine, doth signifie wavering  the H, and  the stomacke. This co∣lour in a aver doth  oding of Choller. And if it continue it will cause an Impostume, the which will ingender the Frenzi. A blacke circle in Vrine, signifieth Mortification. If any filthy matter doe appeare in the Vrine, it commeth from the Lungs and sometimes from the Liver, and it may come from breaking of some Impostume, but for the most part it commeth from the Vlcers of the Bladder or the Reynes, or from the passages of the Vrine, then the vrine is troubled in the bottome and stinketh, he hath a paine in his lower parts and especially in the parts aforesaid, when he maketh water, and chiefly in the end of the yard, and commonly there is with this the Strangurie which is hardly to be cured, vnlesse it be in the beginning. If it come from the Reynes, there is paine in the Loynes, the Backe and the Flanke. If from the Liver the paine is onely in the right side. If in the Lungs, the paine tcom the Brost with a cough and the breath stinketh. If from the Bladder, the paine is about the share. If a mans vrine he white of morning, and red before meate, and white after meate, he is whole: and if it be fat and thicke it is not . And if the Vrine be ly thicke, it is not good to like: and if it be thicke as spice, it betokeneth Head ache. Vrine that is two dayes red, and at the tenth day white, be∣tokeneth very good health. Vrine that is fat, white, and mayst, betokeneth the Fever Quartaine. Vrine that is bloody, betokeneth that the Bladder is hurt by some rotting that is within.
A little Vrine all Fleshie, betokeneth of the Reynes: who pisseth Blood without sicknesse, hée hath ome Veyne broken in his Reynes. Vrine that is ponderous, betokeneth that the bladder is hurt. Vrine that is bloody in sicknesse, betokeneth great evill in the Body, and namely in the bladder. Vrine that falleth by drops, aboue, as it were great boules, betokeneth great sicknesse and long. If white gravell doth issue foorth with Vrine, it doth signifie that the Patient hath or shall haue the Stone ingendred in the Bladder, and there is paine about those parts. If the gravell be red, the Stone is ingendred in the Reynes of the Backe and Kidneyes, and there is great paine in the small of the Backe. If the gravell be blacke, it is ingendred of a Melancholly Humour. Note, that if the gravell goe away, and the Patient find no ease, it sheweth that the Stone is confirmed. Also know yée, that if the gravell goe away, and the paine goe away likewise, it signifieth that the Stone is broken and wydeth away. Womens Vrine that is cleare and shyning in the Vrinall like silver, if shée cast oft, and if she haue no talent to meate, it beto∣keneth she is with Child. Womens Vrine that is strong and white with stinking, be∣tokeneth sicknesse in the Reynes, in her secret Receipts, in her chambers full of evill humours, and of sicknesse of her selfe. Womens Vrine that is bloody and cleare as water vnder, betokeneth Head-ache. Womens vrine that is like to Gold cleare and mighty, beto∣keneth that she hath lust to man. Womens vrine that hath colour of stable cleansing, betoke∣neth her to haue the Fever Quartaine, and shée to dye the third day. Womens vrine that appeareth an colour of Leave, if shée be with Child, betokeneth that i is ad within her.
Hereafter followeth all the Vrines that betokeneth Death, as well the Vrine of Man as of Woman. IN a hot Axes, one part red, another blacke, another gréene, another blew, betokeneth Death. Vrine in hot axes, blacke, and little in quantity, betokeneth Death. Vrine coloured all over as Leade, betokeneth the prolong∣ing of death. Vrine that shineth raw and right bright, if the Skin in the bottome shine not, it betokeneth death. Vrine that in substance having Fléeting aboue (as it were a darke) Sky signifieth death. Vrine darkly shyning, and darke with a blacke Skin within, betokeneth a prolonging of death. Vrine that is the colour of water, if it haue a darke Sky in an Axes, it betokeneth death. Vrine that hath dregges in the bottome medled with blood, it betokeneth death. Vrine blacke and thicke, and if the sicke loath when he goeth to the Priuy, and when he speaketh overthwart, or that he vn∣derstandeth not aright, and these sicknesses goeth not from him, it betokeneth death.
Hereafter followeth sundry VVaters and Medicines, meete for Physicke, and Chyurgerie, As also Oyntments and Plaisters. PART. VII. A Man may governe himselfe, at foure times in the Yeare, so that hée shall have no néed of Letchcraft, as thus: Ver, beginneth the Eight Ides of March, and endeth the Eight Ides of May, at what time waxeth the good swéet juyce of Sanguine through good meates and drinkes, and good savours. Summer doth begin the Eight Ides of May, and endeth the Eight Ides of Iune, at which time begin∣neth the bitter juyce of Choller, then vse cold meates, and drinkes, and forbeare women. Autumne Harvest, beginneth the Eight Ides of Iune, and endeth the Eight Ides of November, at which time waxeth Melancholy, then bée purged by a Medicine Laxatiue, and after∣ward vse light and disgestible meates and drinkes, such as en∣crease Sanguine,
Hiemps Winter, beginneth the Eight Ides of November, and endeth the Eight Ides of March, at which time waxeth fleagme, through weakenesse of humours, and corruption of Ayre, then the pose beginneth to grow, then heate is in the veyn then is pricking in the sides, then vse hot meate and drinkes, as Pepper, Ginger, and wash not thy head. Letchcraft is Chirurgery, to heale man of all manner of sick∣nesse, and to kéeps him whole, so farre as craft may. Letchcraft is in two manners, that is both Physicke and Chirurgery. Letchcraft and Chirurgery each of them hath two parts, viz. Theoricke and Practique, Theoricke to know and practise to worke, the ground of Theorique, Theoricke is to know the Elements, and humours that commeth of them, which is for mans health or against it: Letchcraft teaches vs causes, effects, and Signes, Signes to know the causes and effects: and there∣fore I treate of signes, and many signes doth belong to Phy∣sicke and Chirurgery, as Crisses, Vrine, Pounces, Vomits, Sege, and other. Chirurgery is in Woundes, Impostumes, and Algebro, and Chirurgery holdeth foure parts, viz. wounds and Impostumes, Algebra and Anthonte. Antidotary is the fift: which is a kind of Salues against all kind of Sores that belongeth to Chyrurge∣ry: Algebra is broken bones, and bones out of joynt: Antido∣tory of Chirurgery is in Waters, Powders; Oyles, Oynt∣ments, and Emplaisters most principall, some must bée reper∣cussiue, some Molecatiue, some Maturatiue, some genera∣tiue, and some Corosiue: Anatomy is to know the Body of man, thorow-out, and all his members, within and without, two members hath every manner of man, viz. principall, and officiall, and foure principall every man hath, viz. Braine, and heart Liuer, and stones, the Brains hath the head and necke: the heart hath the Lungs, Breast, and Midriffe: the Liver hath the stomacke and other members downe to the Reynes, as Guts, Gauls, and the Kelle Veyne, and Milt, he Milt vpon the left side, and the Gaule vpon the Liver: the Stones hath
Raines, Bladders, and other Privities: and these are the foure principall members: Braine, Heart, Liver, and Stones and without Braine, Heart and Liver, no man may liue: and with∣out Stones may no man engender thrée things in the Stones is cause of engendring; Het, Wind, and Humors: Heat commeth from the Liuer, Spirit from the Heart, and Humors from the Braines, that man is made of, if any of these foure bée faulty, that man may not as hée should kindly engender: These sixe vertues are rooted in the Liver; viz. Attractiue, Dige∣stiue, Deminsiue, Expalsiue, Retentiue, and a Simulatiue, that is in the English, drawing, and breaking out, putting, holding, and liking; For first, Nature draweth in that which it néedeth to liue by, and then all to breake it, and then departeth the good from the bad, and holdeth to it the good, and then dea∣leth the good to all the members of the Body: Officiall mem∣bers bée those, that haue certaine Offices in mans body, where ever they bée, as the Eye to sée, the Eare to heare, the Hand to touch, the Mouth to speake, the Féet to goe, and many such o∣ther. Also such are called members as branches from the prin∣cipall to the officiall, as the Arme, or Legge, that rooteth in the principall and brancheth to the officialls: and so Nerues, Artiers, Veynes, Lygaments, Cords, Bones, Pannicles, and Gristles, Flesh and Skinne to teach them their Office: But Nerues, Veynes, and Artiers bée most needfull for they bée Welles and Rooes of all other Nerues comming from the Braine, and Artiers from the Heart, and Veynes from the Liver into all the body: Nerues giveth to the Body féeling, and mooving, and Arteirs leaving, and Veynes encreasing. A Veyne hath but one Tunacle and an Artier hath two, in the one runneth bloud, and in the other spirits and all beating Veynes bée Artiers, the which I call Pulses, and all other bée simple Veynes, and all such members saving Flesh alone are melancholieus, and their na∣ture is Sperme, but flesh is Sanguine, and therefore it may bée sodered bée it never so much cut, but the other said members be∣cause their matter is Sperme, may never be sodered if
they bée much cut. And thus much at this time I say of Anato∣my. And now will I speake of Wounds, which is the second part of Chirurgery, one of these foure intentions hath every Chirurgion. The first is, to containe that, that is evill, loosed: The second is, to loose that, that is evill contained: The third is, to take away that, that is too much: The fourth is, to in∣crease that, that is too little. In these foure entents standeth all Chirurgery. The first is in Wounds, the second is Im∣postumes, the third and fourth Algebra holdeth: Wounds be in many manners Simple, and Compound: Simple in the flesh alone, and compound in seven manners. There the vi. things that letteth a wound not lightly to heale, viz. Empostumes dis∣crased, hollownesse, or bitten by a venemous Beast, and these letteth a Chirurgion soone to heale a wound, and it a Sinew bée cut or pricked, or wound to the Bone, or if the wound bée hollow, or else dicrased with a Fever, or bruised, or made by venemous Beasts, then mayest thou not as thou wouldest close vp a wound, and if a wound lacke all these seven things, then it is simple. Medicine is Letchcraft, both Physicke and Chirurgery, to helpe and to kéepe mans body, as craft and nature may, and e∣very one of them hath first his Theoricke, perfectly to know and afterwards his Practique, cunningly to worke: the grounds of both his Qualities, Elements, and Humors, and signes most néedfull both of Vrine and Pulses. The Nine Tastes. SAlt, Sharpe, and Bitter; Sower, Savory, and Eager: Swéet, Walloweth, and Fatty: Thrée of them bée of Heat, thrée of Cold, and the last thrée be of temperature. A cut chaseth, heateth, and fleyeth: Temperature delighteth, Lycorise, Anis, Ginger, Worme wood, and Suger: these bée Ensamples: a cut raweth, heateth, and fleyeth, and Nature there against ri∣peth,
and twineth, and putteth out: make your Medicine such, that for one putting out, double twining, and foure-riping. Melancholy is dry and cold, sower, and earthly coloured, his Vrine is thinne and discoloured, his Pulse is straight, and short in digestion, and full stomacke, loathsomnesse, and sower belching, swelling wombe, and sides, heauy dead, and fluggy limbes, and Melancholious Vrine commeth of a young wench that faileth her flowers, or haue them not as shée ought to haue. Fleame, cold and moyst, white, and weake in colours, his Vrine is discoloured and thicke, his Pulse is short and broad, raw stomacke, and full, loathsome, and vnlusty, watry mouth, much spitting, heauy head, and fluggy, and slombry, and cold hands and féet, and namely in the Night: Sanguine is moyst, and hot, swéet, and ruddy coloured, alway his Body is full of heate, namely in the Veynes, and they bée swelling, and of face he is ruddy, and in fléepe bée séemeth fiery: Medicine for him is bloud let vpon the Currall or Liver Veyne, and simple dyet, as Tyson, Water-Grewell, and sower bread. Choller is hot, and dry, yellow, gréene and bitter, his Vrine is discoloured, and thinne, his Pulse is long and straight, much watch, heauy head-ache, and thirst, bitter mouth, ane dry singing eares, and much gnawing in the Wombe, and other while coffiffenesse, and burned Sege, and vomit, both yellow and gréene, as is that colour. Each Humour may cause a Fever or an Impostume, and then the Vrine is more coloured and the liquour thinner: and ever as that sicknesse deeth, the Vrine waxeth thicker, and the co∣lour lower till it come to Cytrin or subrufe. Melancholy causeth a Quartaine, and Fleame a Quotidian. Sinec and Causon haue ever Continewes, the other thrée may be so, and other while Interpolate, continue ever holdeth on, and Interpolate resteth other while; continue is with the Veynes, and Interpolate is without the Veynes, both two wayes may bée simple and also compound, simple of one matter, and one place, or compound of divers places,
The Tertians of these Fevers be such, as the same humors bée of, and also Vrine and Pulse: All saving they bée stronger in Fevers and Impostumes then they be without, and therefore their Medicine must bée more discréet, but generally Dyet thus: Sower bread, and Water grewell, and Tyson, and fleyed Fish and Wine, and Almond milke, and all white meate saving whay, generall digestiue in Summer, and in hot time as in Orizacia, and generall digestiue in Winter, and all cold time as Oxcineile: And generall expulsiue is, desuccarosarum, a cut with Turbit, and Scamony, ana. Scruple two, and generall doemary is insquiamany, and double-medled with Popu∣lions and fament him with Rose, ana. double Sugar slaketh thirst. Signes of Sicknesse by Egestion. IF the meate come from a man in manner as hée did eate it, the Stomacke is weake, and the Bowels bée lubricated, and it is an evill signe. If the Egestion looke like Earth, it is a signe of death. If the Egestion doe not stinke, it is an evill signe, If the Egestion doe looke like lead, it is an evill signe. If the Egestion bée blacke as Inke, it is an evill signe. If the Egestion bée blacke, and looke like Shéepes trickles, there is aboundance of adust Choller, and paine in the Spléene. If the Egestion be yell, and no Saffron eaten before, the body is repleaf with Choller and Een water. If the Egestion haue straines of bloud, there is impediment in the Liuer and the Bowels. If the Egestion bée bloudish, there is viceration in the . If the Egestion looke like shaving of Gut, beware then of  Fluxe and chiliry of the Body. If a man bée  Laxatius it is not good, for in such persons
can be no strength but much weaknesse. If a man be costiue and cannot haue a naturall gestion once a day, he cannot be long without Sicknesse. Signes of Life or Death by the Pulses. SPigmos is named the Pulses, and there be twelue Pulses the which doe take their Originall at the Vitall spirits: Thrée of which belong to the Heart, the one is vnder the left Pap, the other two doe lye in the Wrests of the armes directly against the Thumbs. The Braine hath respect to seaven Pulses, foure be prin∣cipall, and thrée be Minors, the foure principall are thus sci∣tuate, in the Temples two, and one going vnder the Bone called the right Furkcle, and the other doth lye in the corner of the right side of the Nose, one of the thrée Minor Pulses in the corner of the left side of the Nose: And the other two lye vpon the Mandibles of the two Iawes, the Liver hath respect to the two Pulses which lye vpon the Féet. By these Pulses, expert Physitions and Chyrurgions by their knocking and clapping, doe judge what principall mem∣ber is diseased or whether the Patient be in danger. If any of the principall pulses doe not beate truely, kéeping an equall course as the minute of a clocke, then there is no pe∣rill in the Patient so be it they kéepe a true course; or puise without any pause or stopping; which is to say, if the Pulse giue fiue knockes and cease at the sixth knocke: or else seuen and pause at eight, or else knocke tenne and leape ouer the eleuenth, and begin and the twelfth, the Patient is in perill, else not; for it is not in the agility, as t swift or tardie beating of the Pulse, but in the pausing of the same contrary to its course, that the Patient is in perill. In such causes let the Physitian be circumspect, and care∣full, for Sincopies in the Patient, let him sit vpright in his Bed with Pillowes, and let one fit at his backe to giue him
drinke and let the Patient smell to Amber gréece or Rose wa∣ter and Vineger, or else rub the Pulse with Aqua Vitae. Also, when you touch the Pulse, marke vnder which finger it strikes most strongest, as thus, If the Pulse vnder the little finger be féeble and weake, and vnder the rest more weake, it is a token of Death: But contrariwise, if vnder the little finger strong, and vnder every finger stronger, it is a good signe. Also, if the féele the Pulse vnder the fore finger vntill the eleventh stroke and it faile in it is a good signe, but if he beate swift and vnorderly an evill. OF WATERS. Here followeth ni precious Waters, and first to make Water of Philosophers. PART. VIII. TAke Isope, Pennyriall, Avence, Century, and breake them in a Morter, and put them vnder the cap of a Stillatorie, and distill them, and that water hath many vertues which may be proved by assayes. Take Pimpernell, Rew, Valerian, Sedwall, Aloes, and of the Stone called Lapis Calumniaris, and breake them, and lay them in the water of Philosphers, and let them be boyled together, vntill the third part be wa∣sted of the said Waters, and after the said water shall be strained thorow a linnen cloth, and then close all in a Viall of
glasse, nine dayes. This is a precious water to drinke foure dayes together with a fasting stomacke, for him that hath the Falling sicknesse, and let him be fasting sixe houres after, and this Madicine is in our judgement the truest medicine against all manner of Goutes, and against Palsies, as long as it is not dead in the limbes or member of a man. Item, this water drunke in the morning, is most helping to Wounds fettered, so that it be washed therewith. Item, this water drunke fa∣sting, will destroy all manner of Fevers or Aches, of what manner soever they come to a man. And trust to this Medi∣cine verily, for it is the best Water for these diseases afore∣said that may be, as proved by the Philosophers, for it is one of the nine Waters. The second Water is called Poetalis, & aqua Dulcedimus Occulorum, and it is made in this manner as here∣after followeth. TAke Egrimony, Saturion, Celendine, and the stone called Lapis Calumniaris, and beate it all to powder, and Tutty, and then put them vnder the Cap of the Stillatorie, and distill thereof water by an eae fire, and this water hath many ver∣tues in it; for be the Eyes never so sore, they shall be cured and healed with this water. Item, this water drunke with a fasting stomacke, destroyeth all manner of Venome or poyson, eate and drunke, and causeth it to be cast out of the mouth. Item, this water quencheth the holly fire, so that there be linnen cloathes wet therein, and layd on the sore, but you must also note, that this water in fire is of blacke disposition. To make Aqua Vitae TAke Isope, Rosemary, Violet, Verven, Bitony, Hearbe-Iohn, Mouseare, Planten, Avence, Sage, and Fetherfoy, of each a handfull, and wash them, and put them in a Gallon of
white Wine, and so let it stand all night cleane covered, and then on the morrow distill it, and kéepe the water well. This water is good for the Megrim in the Head, and for the Impo∣stume in the head, and for the Dropsie in the Head, and for the Fever in the head, and for all manner of Aches and sicknesse in the Head. To make Aqua Magistralis. TAke the rootes Pyonie, the rootes of Turpentine, the crops of Fennell, of Egrimonie, Honysuccle, Celon∣dine, Rewe, Chickwéed, Pimpernell, Phillippendula, the tender leaues of the Vine, Eufrase, Sowthistle, Redroses, Strawbery leaues, and Verven, of each alike quantity, and bray them in a Morter, and put therein good white Wine 9. dayes, and then put thereto a pinte of womans milke that doth nurse a Man-child, and as much Vrine of a manchild of a yeare old, and as much pured Honey, and put them all together, and let them stand thrée dayes so, and then distill as ye will in a Stillatorie, and kéepe well this water in a Glasse vessell, that no Ayre come thereto, and if you will occupie this wa∣ter, wash thine eyes therewith, and vse it, and if euer man be holpen of the disease of Eyes, this will helpe him in short time. A precious Water for Eyes that seeme faire, and yet be blind. TAke Smalledge, red Fennell, Rew, Verven, Byttony, Egrimony, Sinckfoile, Eufrase, Sage, Pimpernell, and Selondine, of each a quarterne, and wash them cleane, and stampe them small, and put them in a brasse Pan and powder of Tuttie, of Pepper, of Ceruse, and a pinte of white wine, and put it to the Hearbs, and two or thrée spoonefuls of Hony, and seuen spoonefuls of the Man-child, and temper them to∣gether,
and boyle them ouer the fire a little, and straine it thorow a cloth, and put it into a Glasse, and stop it well, till you will occupy it, and when you will vse it, put it into thine eyes with a Feather; and if it waxe thicke, temper it with white wine, and then vse it often. A Water that will make one to see, that did never see. TAke Rosemary, Smalledge, Rewe, Verven, Mather, Eu∣frase, Endiue, Houseléeke, Fulwort, red Fennell, Selan∣tine, of each a like halfe quarterne, and wash them cleane, and lay them in white Wine a day and a Night, and then distill them in a Stillatorie, the first water will be like Gold, the second like Siluer, and the third will be like Balme, and that is good for all sores of the eyes. To make another Aqua Vitae. TAke Nutmegs, Gallingale, Spikenard of Spaine, of each two penny-worth and of Cloues, Graines, Ginger, of each one penny worth, two penny worth of Annys, take and bray them all in a brasse Morter, and then take a handfull of wild Sage, and of the other Sage, Rosemary, Isope, Sauery puliall, royall puliall of the Mountaine, Sothernwood, Horehound, Wormewood, Egrimony, Bettony, Iuy leaues, of each a like handfull, and two penny worth of Quibebes, and bruse all these in a Morter, and then take thrée Gallons of good red Wine, and put it into a brazen pot, and then put the Spices and Hearbes therein, and set the Stillatory aboue, and close it well, and take faire Paste, and put it about the brinkes hard with thy hand, and make it cleane well and sadly thereto, and when it doth begin to waxe hot, put cold water aboue in the Stilla∣torie, and when it doth waxe bte, let the water runne out at the Conduite, and put in new cold water, and so doe as oft
as yée shall thinke good, but looke that the fire be not too great, for if it be, then will the water come vp, and if there come vp smoake of the Stillatorie with the Water, then is the fire too much, and if it be not, then it is well tempered. The vertue of the third Water. TAke Mustard séed Pimpernell, Crowoof, and the clote of Masticke, and all these well bruised, and medled together, with the blood of a Goate, and put thereto good Alleger a lit∣tle, and so let them stand thrée dayes, and then put them vnder the cap of a Stillatorie, and still it, and this water will helpe a man of the Stone if he drinke thereof: and if he drinke there∣of euery day fasting, the stone shall voyd from him as it were sand. Item, this water drunke fasting maketh good blood, good colour both in man and woman. Item, this Water drunke with Castorie, destroyeth all manner of palsie, if it be not dead, in the Sinewes or members. Item, it will heale ascald head, and make the haire to grow, if it be washt therewith. Item, if a man be scalded wash him with this water, and in 9. dayes he shall be whole, and of all other Medicines it comforteth best the Sinewes for the Palsie. The vertue of the fourth Water. TAke young Pigeons, and make them in powder, and med∣dle them well with Castorie in powder, and a little Aysell, and lay it vnder the Cap of the Stillatorie, and distill water thereof, this water drunke with a fasting stomack, helpeth the Frensie and the Tysicke, within 9. dayes it will make them whole. Item, this water drunke fasting, is a good true medicine against the falling Euill, if the Sicke haue had it but few yeares, it shall helpe in on warrantise: giue it him to drinke thrée dayes in the morning fasting, as is aforesaid, and he shall be whole by Gods grace, of what manner of kinde soever it
come. Item, this water drunke fasting, maketh good colour in the face of man or woman, and it cleanseth the wombe, the sto∣macke, and the breast of all euils that is congealed within them and comforteth all the veynes, and draweth the roote of the palsie out of the sinewes, and out of the joynts and nourish∣eth nature in him. Item, if a man or woman before called in a sinew or joynt it healeth them again. Item, this water being drunke fasting, healeth any man or woman of the continuall Fever, but take héed that no woman with child drinks of this Water. Item, this water drunke with Isope, putteth away all sorrow from thy heart, and causeth man or woman well to sléepe, well to digest his meate, well to make water, and well to doe his sege. Item, if a man will wash himselfe with this Water, it will draw away the haire from any place of man, and destroy it, that it shall not grow there any more on war∣rantise. The vertue of the fift Water called Aqua Lasta. TAke Isope, Gladion, Avence, Sothernwood, of each a like quantity, and stampe them in a Morter, and put them in a Stillatorie, and still them to water, and this water drunke in a morning fasting, is good against all manner of Fevere hote or cold. Item, this water being drunke fasting, is the best medi∣cine against the fluxe of the wombe, and clenseth the belly of all ill humours, and kéepeth a man in health, and helpeth the Pal∣sie, but it must be drunke fasting, and as hot as may be suffered. To make the sixt water called Dealbantiums. TAke Mole warpes and make them in a powder with Brim∣stone, and take the Iuyce of Selondine, and so let them stand certaine dayes, & after lay it in a Stillatorie, & still water of water of it, this water will make any black beast white, that is washed therewith nine times in nine dayes, or any place in
him, that a man will haue white: Also this water medled with Waxe and Aloes, it healeth all manner of Gouts, if the Pati∣ent be annoynted therewith. Also this water helpeth the sick∣nesse called Noli me tangere, but a plaister thereof must be laide to the sore. Also it helpeth a man of the Strangle, if a plaister thereof be laid to the sore. Item, it healeth scald Heads, if they apply a plaister thereof to the sore. Item, a plaister thereof healeth burning with fire. Item, this with Lapis Ca∣lumniaris, helpeth perfectly a sicknesse called the Wolfe, but the plaister must be changed two times in a day, but let no man nor woman drinke any of this Water. The seuenth Water called Aqua Consuitivae. TAke Pimpernell, and stampe it in a Morter, and lay it in a Stillatory, and still water thereof. Item, this Wa∣ter washeth away all Wounds in a mans body. Item, this water drunke fasting with Ginger, is a good Medicine against the Tysicke, and will cleanse the Breast from all euill Hu∣mours. The eight Water called Aqua Huplaciam, the double Water. TAke Mustard-séed, Pepper, and Sinamon, of each a like, and beate them in a Morter, and put thereto Aqua Con∣suetudo, and lay them vnder the Cap of the Stillatorie, and di∣still Water thereof, and these be the vertues thereof, and if it be drunke fasting it is the best Medicine against the Tysicke, and all diseases of the brest, and it must be drunke in the mor∣ning cold, and at Evening hot as yée may suffer it, and it will make him to sléepe and have good rest. Item, this water be∣ing drunke with Castorie is good against the Sicknesse called Epilentia, viz. the Morbus Caducus. Item, this water being drunke fasting, comforteth all the Members that be strucken
with the Palsie, and comforteth the sinewes of the Head and the braine. Water of Pimpernell, the ninth water. TAke the séed of Pimpernell, and put it in red wine, and then after put it in the Sunne, and then breake it in a Morter, and then presse out the Oyle through a cleane cloth, this water or oyle being drunke fasting, healeth a man of the sand or gra∣vell in the bladder, for it will breake the Stone within him. I∣tem, this water being drunke, sustaineth and lightneth all the members of man of what disease soever he be grieved with. To make water of Sage, the tenth Water. TAke Sage, and Pollyon, of each a like quantity, and breake them in a morter, and put them in a Stillatorie, and distill water thereof, this Water drunke fasting, eateth away all manner of sicknesse. Item, this water sodden with Casto∣ry and drunke fasting, of all Medicines in the world, if prolon∣geth most a mans life. Item, if a man before called, doe this nine dayes, and he shall be whole, but it must be taken with warme water. Item, this water being drunke fasting, draw∣eth away all evill in the stomacke or wombe. Item, it is good against the Scabbes, and causeth a man to haue good blood, and good colour in the face. Item, this water being drunke hote in the morning, or in the day, healeth any manner of evill in a man within thrée dayes, if the Patient be in any wise curable. The making of Waters, and first of greene Waters. TAke white Wine a pinte, the waters of Roses, and Plan∣ten, of each sixe ounces, Orpiment one ounce, Verdigreas halfe an ounce, &c.
Another greene Water. TAke the waters of Honey suckles, Planten, and Roses, of each halfe a pinte, Orpiment, Allome, Ceruse, and Ver∣digrease, of each two drams, white Wine, Iuyce of Planten, of each halfe an ounce, and it is done. Waters for old Ulcers. TAke white Wine, and running Water of each a pinte; Frankensence, and Allome, of each one ounce, Decoted in Balmarn for thrée houres space, and it is done. A good Drinke for the Gummorium Passio. TAke Bursa Pastoris, Planten, of each two handfuls, take the Iuyce thereof in a pinte of good Ale, and drinke if thrée times in a day, for thrée dayes. A water for old Vlcers in the Armes. TAke Smiths water a quart, burnt Allome one pound, Sa∣larmoniac one ounce, Galls two ounces, Tartary, Coppe∣ras, of each one ounce, distill all these with hreds, and so kéepe the water to your vse. A Water for a Canker. TAke Bugle, Fennell, and Rosa-Solis, of each a like, and take as much in quantity of Honey-suckle flowers, as also all the other hearbes, and let them be cleane picked and so di∣stilled in a Stillatorie, and so kéepe it close, for it is a precious water.
A Femicorie Water. IS to be drunke in the Morning, at Noone, and at night, it is much worth against Dropsies, and Sweating sicknesse, it purgeth Fleame and Choller, and Melancholy, and it brin∣geth foorth heate, and dry Sicknesse, and it is good for the paine of the Head, to wash it and drinke it. A Water of Rosemarie. IT hath more vertues in it then a man can tell, one is if a man haue an Arrow or Iron within him, wet a tent and put into the wound, and drinke the same water, and it shall avoyd out, and it helpeth all Wounds inward and outward, the Can∣ker the Fester, and it killeth the Wormes in man or Child, and all manner of Impostumes inward and outward, it helpeth the ysicke, and Fluxe white or bloody, it is a great helpe for a woman with Child to drinke thereof, it maketh cleane the Face, or any where it yée wash it therewith. Water of Verven. IF it be distilled in the later end of May, it hath vertue to spring Choller, and to heale Wounds, and to cléere the Eye∣sight, it is a principall thing to compound Medicines. A Locion for a sore Mouth. YOu must take of Honey-suckle-water halfe a pinte, Plan∣ten and Rose-water, of each foure ounces, Hony of Roses two ounces, Alloes one ounce, white Copperas and Vineger, of each halfe an ounce.
A Water for a sore mouth. TAke Lapis Calaminaris beaten into fine powder, and put in a pinte of white Wine, then take a pottle of water, and Rosemary, boyle it in the water till it be halfe sodden away, then straine the water from the Rosemary, and put it into the white Wine, and so it is done. A compound Water. TAke first Pimpernell, Rew, Valerian or Sedwall, Aloce∣lipis cap, and breake them, and lay them in this said water following: Take Isop, Pelyall, Ryall, Anyséedes and Cen∣forie, and beate them in a morter, and after put them in a Stillatory and distill water of them, which is vertuous: and let them boyle together, and after that straine them that the water may goe from them, and close this water in Vials of glasse, by the space of nine dayes, and give to him that hath the Falling evill foure dayes, fasting sixe houres: and this is the truest medicine for this Disease that wée can finde, except the mercy of God; and this Water drinking is good for the Palsie, if it be drunke fasting: also it is good for all Gowtes like wise, in the time that they be mortified in the members and limbs of a man: it is very helping to Wounds that are festered, it they be washed therewith, it destroyeth all manner of Fevers. Behly Water. TAke Water a pottle, Suger-Candy foure ounces, let them séethe: then put in foure ounces of Verdigrease in fine pow∣der, and let it séethe. A good Barley water for all Diseases of the Lungs, or Lights. TAke halfe a pound of faire Barley, a gallon of Water, halfe an ounce of Licorice, Fennell séed, Violets, and Parsly-séed,
of each a quarter of an ounce: red Roses a quarter of an ounce: dry Hysop and Sage, of each a penny weight, sixe leaues of Harts tongue, a quarter of an ounce of Figgs and Raysins: Séethe all these in a new pot of cold Water, and then straine them cleare from it and drinke it: the same cooleth the Liver, and all the members: driveth away all evill heate, slaketh thirst, causeth to cast out much, purgeth the Lights and Spléene, the Kidneyes and Bladder, and causeth to make water well: and especially, it is good for all Agues that come of heate, A good Drinke for the Poxe. TAke Selendine and English Saffron, the weight of a halfepeny, and a farthing worth of Graines, a quart of long Pepper, a penny weight of Mace and stale Ale, stampe your hearbe, and pound your Saffron, and mingle them together, and then drinke it. Doctor Stevens Water. TAke a Gallon of Gascoigne wine, then take Ginger, Ga∣lingall, Cammomill, Cynamon, Nutmegs, Graynes, Cloues, Mace, Anniséeds, Carraway séed, of every of them a dram, then take Sage, Mynts, red Roses, Tyme, Pellitory of the wall, wild Margerum, Rosemary, Peny-mountaine, otherwise wilde Tyme, Cammomill, Lavender, of every of them a handfull, then beate the Spices small, and bruise the hearbes, and put all into the Wine and let it stand 12, houres, stirring it divers times, then distill it in a Limbeck, and kéepe the first pinte of the water, for it is the best, and then will come a second water, which is not so good as the first. The vertues of this Water be these, it comforteth the spirits, and preserveth the youth of a man, and helpeth the inward dis∣eases comming of cold, against the shaking of the Palsie: it cu∣reth the contraction of Sinewes, and helpeth the conception of
women that be barren: it killeth the wormes in the belly: it helpeth cold Goutes: it helpeth the Tooth ach: it comforteth the stomack very much: it cureth the cold Dropsie: it helpeth the Stone in the Bladder, and the reines in the back: it cureth the Canker: it helpeth shortly a stinking breath, and whosoe∣er vseth this said Water, it shall preserue him long. Take but one spoonefull of it once in seauen dayes, for it is very hot in operation: it preserued Doctor Steven very long, who lived a hundreth yeares lacking but two, and tenne of them he lived bed rid A very good drinke for the Cough. TAke a quart of white Wyne, and boyle it with Lycorice, Anniséeds, and Sugar-candy, of each a like quantity, put∣ting therein tenne Figs of the best, till it be halfe consumed, and so preserue thereof to drinke Evening and morning thrée or foure spoonefuls warmed. A restorative made of the Herbe Rosa Solis, with other things, and gather it in June or Iuly. THis herve Rosa Solis, groweth in Marish ground, and in no other place, and it is of a hoary colour, and groweth very lows, and flat to the ground, and it hath a meane long stalke growing in the midst of it, and seaven branches springeth out of the roote round about the stalke with leaves coloured, and of a meane length and breadth, and in no wise when this Hearbe should be gathered, touch not the Hearbe it selfe with your hands, for then the vertue thereof is gone, yée must gather and plucke it out of the ground by the stalke, yée must lay it in a cleane basket, the Leaves of it is full of strength and nature, and gather so much of this hearbe as will fill apostle pot or glasse, but wash it not in any wise, then take a pottle af Aqua Composita, and put them both in a large pot or vessell, and let it stand hard and fast stopped, thrée dayes and thrée nights, and
on the fourth day open it, and straine it through a faire linnen∣cloath into a cleane glasse or pewter pot, and put thereto a pound of Sugar small beaten, demi. pound of Licorice beaten to pow∣der, and demi. pound of Dates, the stones taken out, and they cut in small péeces, and mingle them altogether, and stop the glasse or pewter yot well, so that no ayre come into it in any wise. Thus done yée may drinke of it at night when yée goe to bed, demi. spoonefull mixt with Aqua vitae, or stale Ale, and as much in the morning fasting, and there is not the weakest body in the world that is wasted by Consumption or otherwise, but it will restore him againe, and make him to be strong and lusty and to have a good stomacke, and that shortly, and hée of shée that vseth this thrée times together, shall finde great remedy or comfort thereby, and as the patient doth féele himselfe, so he may vse it. OF VNGVENTS. PART. IX. The making of Oyntments, and first of Ʋnguentum Basilicum. TAke Oyle halfe a pound, Waxe, Colophonie, of each two ounces, Turpentine, Pitch, Perosine, and Cowes suet, of each two pound and a halfe, Frankensence, Myrrhe, of each halfe an ounce, and so make your Vnguent.
The golden Unguent, called, Vnguentum Aureum. TAke yellow Waxe foure ounces, Oyle one pound, Tur∣pentine, Colophonie, and Rozen, of each one ounce, Fran∣kensence and Masticke, of each halfe an ounce, Saffron a dram, and so make an Vnguent. To make a drying Vnguent, called Vnguentum Calliminaris. TAke the Stone called Lapis Calaminaris, Déeres Suet, and Waxe, of each foure ounces, oyle of Roses halfe a pound, Camphere two drams, and so make your Vnguent according to Art. To make the white Oyntment called Vnguentum Album Rasis. TAke oyle of Roses halfe a pound, Waxe two ounces, Ce∣ruse sixe ounces, the whites of thrée Egges, and Cam∣phere a dram: and after these things be melted and commix∣ed together, you must wash it with Rose-water. To make Vngueutum Lytargerii. TAke oyle of Roses one pound, Litarge of Lead one pound, Vineger halfe a pound, Camphere two drams: and so make your Vnguent. To make Vnguentum Lypcione. TAke the juyce of Hony succles a quart, Hony a pinte, white Copperas halfe a pound: and so make your Vnguent. To make the Incarnative Vnguent. TAke oyle of gréene Balme two pound, Waxe, and Perofine, of each halfe a pound, Déeres suet foure ounces, Franken∣sence
and Myrrhe, of each two ounces, Turpentine of foure oun∣ces, the yolkes of foure Egges, and so make your Vnguent. Another Incarnatiue Unguent. TAke Déeres suet, oyle of Roses, Rosen, Pitche, Litarge of Gold, Frankensence and Myrhe: of each foure ounces. To make Unguentum Viride. TAke Offingie Porsine one pound, Verdigreace two ounces, Sall-gemme, halfe an ounce, and so make your Vnguent. Another Unguent. TAke burnt Allom and Vineger, of each two ounces, Offingie Porsine sixe ounces, and so make an Vnguent. A drying Unguent. TAke oyle of Roses one pound, Waxe sixe ounces, Litarge of Gold and Silver, Bdeltum, gum Armoniac, red Corall, Dragons bloud. Déeres suet, Masticke of each two ounces, Camphere halfe an ounce, and so make your Vnguent. An Vnguent against the Morphew. TAke quicke Brimstone sixe drams, oyle of Tartary foure drams, Ceruse, Vnguentum Cytrium, of each two drams, oyle of Roses, sixe drams, the white of an Egge, as much Vi∣neger as néeds, and so make your Vnguent. An Vnguent called Rosye. TAke Rozen, Turoentine, and Hony, of each halfe a pound, Linséed and Fenekriks, of each one ounce, Myrrhe one
ounce, Sercoll one ounce: let them all bée made in fine pow∣der, and so make an Vnguent thereof. An Vnguent for Vlcers in the Arme. TAke Litarge of Gold and silver, Ceruse, of each two oun∣ces: Balarmouiac halfe an ounce, Lapis, Calaminaris, Dragons blood, of each one ounce, Frankensence, Mastick, of each ale an ounce, Tartary, Sallgemme and Camphere, of each two drams: Turpentine washes in Rose-water, and Waxe, of each two ounces, oyle of elders, halfe an ounce, oyle of Bayes two drams, oyle of Violets and of Poppie, of each foure drams: and so make your Vnguent. An Vnguent against Cabes. TAke Storax liquide, two ounces, Bay-salt in fine powder, and oyle of Roses, of each one ounce, the juyce of Orenge, as much as shall néed, and so make your Vnguent according to Art. An Unguent called the gift of God. TAke Orras powder, Sall gemme, Sall, Nitrie, of each one ounce, a Stone called Lapis Magnates, two ounces, Lapis Calaminaris, two ounces, Waxe one pound, Oyle thrée pound: and so make your Vnguent according to Art. A precious Vnguent. TAke Ceruse washed one ounce, in an ounce of Vineger, burnt Lead foure ounces, Litarge two ounces, Myrrhe one ounce, Hony of Roses two ounces, oyle of Roses sixe ounces, the Yolkes of sixe Egges, and Waxe as much as needs, and so make your Vnguent.
Another Vnguent against Cabes. TAke the juyce of Salleme, Femitary, Borage, Scabius, and Dockes, of each thrée ounces, Litarge of gold washed, Ceruse, burt Brasse, Brimstone, Bay salt, burnt Allom, of each halfe an ounce, oyle of Roses two ounces, Storax liquide, Turpentine, of each one ounce, Vineger foure ounces, Ossin∣gie Perosine, one pound and a halfe: and so make your oynt∣ment. To make the greene Oyntment called Vnguen∣tum Viride. TAke Waxe one pound, Perosine one pound, Frankensence halfe a pound, gum Arabic halfe a pound, Verdigrease, two ounces, Hony foure ounces, oyle Olive two pound: and so make your Vnguent according to Art. An Vnguent to increase Flesh. TAke the gum Dragagant, and dissolve it in Rose-water, and so make it in forme of an Vnguent. An Vnguent to heale the Serpigo. TAke Pepper, Bay-salt, Tartary, Verdigreace, Allumines ynke, of each halfe an ounce, Ceruse, Litarge, and Quick∣silver well killed, of each two drams, of Osingie Perosie, as much as néeds. An Unguent for Fistuleas. TAke Myrrhe, Masticke, Alloes, and Epatike, of each two ounces, the juyce of Salendine, Planten, Hony of Roses, and Vineger, of each a like quantity: and make thereof an Vnguent. A cold Vnguent. TAke oyle of Roses, and Waxe, of each two ounces, the ue of red Gowrd leaves, Night shade leaves, of each two ces,
Ceruse washed, burnt Lead washed in Rose water, or Planten water, of each halfe an ounce, Feakensence two drams, melt all together, and decoct it a little: and then take it from the fire, and put it into a Leaden Morter, wherein you must labour it a good while, and so make your Vnguent. An Unguent for a sawse fleame Face. TAke May butter one pound, Hony-suckle flowers, thrée handfuls, stampe the flowers, and the butter together, and lay it in fuse for sixe dayes space: then melt it and straine it, and put thereto quicke Brimstone, the weight of twelue pence, finely powdered, and so reserue it. An Vnguent for the Piles. TAke Mollene, Archangell, red Fennell stamped small, of each like quantity, and as much Ossingie as of the Hearbes: Mixe all these together, and lay it a rotting a wéeke space: then strains it and kéepe it for that vse. Another Vnguent for the Piles. TAke arrow, and May butter, and stampe them together, and apply them as hot as may be suffered. To make Unguentum Lipcium. TAke a quart of Iuyce of Hony-sucles, and a pinte of Hony, and halfe a pound of white Coperas, and seethe them on the fire, and let them boyle till it waxe blacke: then put in your Copperas in fine powder. To make Vnguentum Fanscome. TAke Waxe one pound, Rozen, Colophonie, of each two pound, Pitch one pound, Cowes suet, one pound, May-butter
halfe a pound, Honey two pound, Oyle two pound, Turpentine foure Ounces, Verdigrease and Ceruse foure Ounces: and so according to Art worke it. To make Ʋnguentum Aegyptiacum. TAke Honey a pinte, Vineger a pinte, Allom halfe a pound, Verdigreace two Ounces, in fine powder: and so make your Vnguent. To make Ʋnguentum Dunfinnitive. TAke two Ounces of Litarge of Gold, two drams of Lapis Calumniaris, and foure ounces of Terra sigillata, and powder them small: then take a pinte of Oyle, and put thereto halfe a pound of Waxe, and melt it with your Oyle, and then take it off the fire, and put in your powders, and when it is cold almost, put in foure drams of Camphere in fine powder. To make an Unguent for the Skerby. TAke a Gallon of red Vineger, and one pound of the roote of Briony, and séeth therein till it bée consumed: then take the roote thereof and beats it with Oxsingie, and beat it very fine: then take one ounce of Arguentum vivum well killed, and labour them altogeter very fine, and so annoint therewith. To make an Vnguent for Vlcers in Childrens faces. TAke Litarge and Ceruse, of each fiue ounces: the leaues of Ashe, and Vine leaues, of each thrée ounces, oyle of Roses one ounce, Waxe halfe an ounce: relent your Oyle and Waxe together, and beate your Litarge and Ceruse, and mingle them with two yolkes of rotted Egges.
To make the Sinnitive Oyntment. TAke Turpentine foure Ounces, Harts greace, or the Marrow of a Heart two ounces, oyle of Roses one ounce, white Frankensence halfe an ounce, oyle of Spike two drams, and halfe a dram of Mynium: and so worke it. To make an Vnguent for the Itch. TAke thrée handfuls of Allecompany rootes, séethe them in thrée Gallons of water till they be soft: then take the Roots and scrape them, and take the white of them to the quantity of a pound, and beate them with one pound of Barrow hogges greace, and a quantity of Salt, and a little Saffron; and so bring them to an Oyntment. To make an Oyntment for the Morbus. TAke two ounces of Vermillion, two ounces of Quick-sil∣ver, two ounces of Oyle of Bay, two ounces of Bores, greace, halfe an ounce of Vineger, foure yolkes of Egges: and let them altogether be laboured. To make the Dunsymitive Vnguent. TAke Oyle Olive one pound, Rozen one pound, Lapis Ca∣laminaris one pound, Waxe halfe a pound, Turpentine and Shéepes suet, of each a quarter of a pound. To make Vnguentum Dulsum. TAke Shéepes suet five pound, Rozen in powder one pound, roch Allom in powder one pound, and a quart of white Wine, boyle them altogether: And if you will make it red, you may put into one ounce of Vermilion in powder.
To make Vnguentum Bassillicon. TAke Waxe one pound, the best Pitch one pound, Rozen halfe a pound, Colophonie one pound, Cowes suet one pound, Oyle two pound, May-butter halfe a pound, Turpentine foure ounces, yolkes of foure Egges: Make all these in an Vnguent according to Art. To make a Mundifigitive. TAke Smalledge a little bagge full, one pound of Exingie, thrée pound of Rozen, a quarter of a pound of Waxe: Stampe your Smalledge and Oxingie together in a stone Morter: then put it into a great Panne, and set them vpon the fire till it be hot: then straine them through a cloth into a faire panne, till they begin to waxe cold, then fleete it off with a slice, till you come to the water: then put in the Rose-water and Waxe all together vpon the fire, and let them boyle altogether, then straine them through a Linnen cloth: and so make your Mundifigitive. To make Vnguentum Rosine. TAke Honey two pound, Rosen one pound and a quarter, Turpentine two pound, Frankensence one ounce, Fene∣krike Semminis ben, of each two ounces, Myrrhe and Sercole, of each two ounces in fine powder. To make Gibsons Incarnative. TAke gréene Broome two pound, Waxe and Rosen, of each halfe a pound, Déere sust foure ounces, Frankensence, and Myrrhe, of each two ounces, Turpentine and the yolkes of Egges as much as néeds.
To make a yellow Incarnatiue. TAke one pound of Rosen, halfe a pound of Frankensence, a quarter of a pound of Waxe, halfe a pound of shéepes suet, halfe a pinte of oyle Oliue, halfe a pound of Turpentine, and so make your Vnguent. To make another Incarnative. TAke oyle of Roses twelve drams, Rosen two ounces, Tur∣pentine eight ounces, Waxe sixe ounces, melt the Waxe, Rosen, and Oyle together, and in the boyling put in your Tur∣pentine, and the Iuyce of Valerian, and so let it bée cold, and as you occupy it put in oyle of Turpentine, and so kéepe it. To make an Unguent for the Piles. TAke Barrowes grease halfe a pound, burnt Allome one ounce, and the yolke of an Egge hard rosted, put these toge∣ther, and make an oyntment, and annoynt your sore as hot as you can abide it. Another fumetive Ʋnguentum. TAke halfe a pound of Déere suet, halfe a pound of Waxe, one pound of oyle of Roses, halfe a pound of oyle Olive, of Lapis Caluminaris and Camphere two ounces, and so make your Vnguent according to Art. For the blacke Iaundies. TAke a quantity of great Wormes, a quantity of Herbe-grace, a quantity of Arsmart, and the gréene of a Goose turd. To make Vnguentum Foscovem. TAke oyle Olive one pound, Saffron foure drams, Co∣lophonie, Pitch. Naviles, Gumme, Seropine, of each two Ounces, Masticke, Oblibanon, and Turpentine of each one
ounce, Waxe a quarter of a pound, melt your oyle, and then your Waxe, and then put in the Colophonie, and after stire your Pitch, Naviles, and your Gumme, Serapine, and last your Turpentine, Masticke, and Olibanon, every thing being bruised, except your Pitch, and Turpentine, when you put in your powders, he ever stirring it with your spittle till it bée full dissolved. Vnguentum Veride. TAke Small-gemme two ounces, Verdigreace two ounces, Masticke one ounce, Olibanon one ounce, May-butter one pound, oyle Olive one pound, Waxe one pound, and so make your worke. Vnguent Posteleris. TAke Galbom one ounce, Gumme Armoniac one ounce, Mera one ounce, Masticke one ounce, Apopany one ounce, Litarge Aure foure ounces, Arestologia one ounce, Olibanon on ounce, Bidelion one ounce, Verdigreace halfe an ounce. An Oyntment for the Stone and Collicke to be made in May. TAke the buds of Broome-flowers, néere the shutting, halfe a pound of them picked from the staikes, and beate them in a morter very small: that done, mingle them with clarified May-butter, as much as you shall thinke méete; and so kéepe it close in a vessell eight dayes, then séethe it and straine it, as the other before, and there with annoynt the Patients griefe very warme, Evening and Morning.
OF PLAISTERS. PART. X. To make a resolutive Plaister of great vertue. This Plaister is to resolve Tumours and hardnesse, if it be laid thereon very hot, and when it is cold, to lay on another, and this you shall doe till the hardnesse be resolved: and it is made in this order. TAke common Ashes that are well burnt and white, and finely searced, one pound, Clay beaten in fine powder, halfe a pound, Carab one ounce: mixe all these in an Earthen dish, on the fire, with Oyle of Roses, in forme of a Liquid Vnguent, and that yée may suffer it, and change it Morning and Evening, and yée shall sée it worke a marvailous effect. Moreover, when the Pelechie commeth foorth of a diseased, let him bée folded in the same remedy very hot, and in foure and twenty houres yée shall bée holpe, if yée bée first well purged: for this is a great secret which I have revea∣led. This word Pelechie, is (as it were certaine spots) like those which wée call Gods tokens, the which commonly come to those that have the Pestilent Feaver.
To make a maturative Plaister of great vertue. This matura∣tive doth open an Impostume without Instrument and paine: And the order to make it, is this. TAke the yolkes of Egges, two ounces, white Salt finely ground, one ounce, Hens dung that is liquid and red like Honey, one ounce: Mixe all these well together without fire, and when you will bring an Impostume to superati∣on, and breake it, lay on this Plaister Morning and Evening, & little, and in short time it will draw foorth the Impostume, and breake it, and heale it without any other helpe, Kéepe this as a secret. A Plaister Bessilicon. TAke white Waxe, Rozen, Pine, Cowes suet, Stone pitch, Turpentine, Olibany, of each these one ounce, and of Oyle as much will serve the turne. Another Plaister. TAke Balme, Bittony, Pimperuell, of each of them a handfull, lay them in a Fuse in a pottle of white Vineger two dayes, then let them be boyled strongly, till the third part be consumed, put thereto Rozen one pound, white Waxe foure ounces, Ma∣sticke one ounce, Turpetine demi pound, and so make your Plaister. The Mellilote Plaister. TAke Mellilote tenne handfuls, let it be small stamped, and laid in Fuse foure dayes in a pottle of white Wine, and then boyle it strongly, till the third part bée consumed, then let it coole, and put thereto Rozen two pound, Perosine one pound demi, Waxe one pound, Déere suet demi pound, Masticke one ounce, Frankensence foure ounces, and is make your Plaister according to Art.
The Musiledge Plaister. TAke March Mallowes rootes, Fenekrike, and Lipséed, of each one pound, lay them in fuse in thrée quarts of water, thrée dayes, then boyle it over the fire a little, and so straine it to a Musilage, and take thereofore pound demi, and of Lytarge of Lead foure pound, of good Ole sixe pound, put all over the fire in a great vessell, and so let it boyle with a soft fire, ever stirring it till it come to the forme of a Plaister according. Another Plaister. TAke the the Iuyce of Bittany, Planten, and Smalledge, of each Demi pound, Waxe, Rozen, and Turpentine, of each demi pound, Pitch foure ounces, and so make your worke. A plaister of Camphere. TAke common Oyle demi pound, Waxe foure ounces, Se∣ruse one ounce, Camphers demi ounce, and so make your worke. A Spiced Plaister. TAke white Waxe one pound demi, Perosine one pound, Co∣lophony foure ounces, Rozen demi pound, Déere suet demi pound, Cloves and Mace foure ounces, Saffron demi ounce, red Wine and water of each a quart, boyle these together till they come to a Plaister. A Plaister called Apostolicum. TAke white Lead and red, of each one pound, Oyle foure pound, stirre them altogether, and boyle them with a soft fire, to the forme of a Plaister, according to Art.
A Drying Plaister. TAke Oyle of Roses, Déeres suet, of each one pound, Terra Sigillar, Lapis Caluminaris, Seruse, of each one pound, Sanguis Draconis, thrée ounces, and Incense of each one ounce: Turpentine foure ounces, Camphere halfe an ounce, and so make a Plaister. A Plaister for the Gowt Arteticke. TAke Oxium, Saffron of each one dram, in fine powder, tem∣pered in the yolkes of thrée Egges hard boyled, and oyle of Violets, or Roses, Plaister-wise, applyed to the painfull place, and it easeth. A Plaister to slake paine. TAke crummes of white Bread foure ounces, temper them with swéet Milke, and the yolkes of foure Egges hard boy∣led: and take of oyle of Roses thrée drams, and in the making put thereto a little Turpentine and Saffron two drams, in fine powder. A Plaister against the coldnesse of the Nerves. TAke Waxe two ounces, Euforbium, Castoris, of each halfe an ounce, Shéepes suet, and Pitch of each one ounce, Turpen∣tine  dram: and so make your worke according to Art. A good cold drying Plaister. TAke Oyle one pound, Waxe ten ounces, Seruse and Ly∣targe of Gold, of each foure ounces, boyled with a soft fire in Furnace wise. A red Plaister. TAke Waxe, Déeres suet, of each one ounce, Lapis Calami∣naris, Bolearmony of each one dram, Turpentine one ounce,
Camphere a dramme: put altogether, and so make a Plaister. A blacke Plaister. TAke Waxe and Oyle, of each a pound, Ceruse and Litarge, of each five ounces; Terra Sigillata, one ounce: boyle all toge∣ther till it be blacke, and like a Plaister. A blacke Plaister for old Sores. TAke Litarge of Gold, and Ceruse, of each one ounce: the Cinders of Iron. Quilled story fererie, sixe drams, Oyle of Roses foure ounces, new Waxe one ounce, strong Vineger two draws: and so make it according to Art. A Plaister to dissolve hard things. TAke Gum Armoniac, Serapine, Boelium, Oppopenacie: of each one ounce, oyle of Spike five drams, Turpentine two drams: the mell of Fennikrike, and Linséed: of each one ounce, the mell of Lupianes, as much as néeds, and so make your Plaister. Another blacke Plaister. TAke Oyle one pound, Waxe and Ceruse, of each halfe a pound, and so make a Plaister according to Art. A Plaister against old Sores. TAke Oyle twelve ounces, Litarge of Gold halfe a pound, Vineger sixe ounces, Ceruse Colophonie, Perosine, Pitch, Goates Suet, of each two ounces, Dragons bloud, Terra sigil∣lata, of each one ounce, Waxe two ounces and a halfe: and so make a Plaister.
A cold Plaister. TAke Litarge of Lead one pound, Oyle foure pound, Vine∣ger two pound, boyle them to a Plaister. A Plaister to draw an Apostume. TAke Galbanum, and Gum Armoniac, of each one pound dissolved in foure pound of Suger, for foure dayes together, and then boyled till the Vineger bée consumed with a soft fire, according to Art. A Plaister for the Lords marke de Wiser TAke Virgin Waxe two pound, Perosine two pound, Gal∣banum, and gum Armoniac, of each halfe a pound, Pitch foure ounces, Déeres Suet, Ceruse, of each halfe a pound: Clovas and Mace, foure ounces, Saffron, to the weight of twelve pence, red Wine and water of each two pintes: Boyle these things till the Licour bée wasted away, and so make a Plaister thereof according to Art. The white Musilage Plaister. TAke pure good Oyle eight pound, Litarge of Lead side pound and a halfe, Mussilage of March mallow Rootes, and of Fennekrike and Linséed two pound: Boyle all together, to the forme of a Plaister, with a soft fire, ever stirring it, then take and wash it in thrée or foure waters, and it will bée very white. A Spiced Plaister. TAke Waxe and Perosine, of each one pound, Crossine halfe a pound, Colophony two Ounces, Frankensence and Goates Suet of each foure ounces, Cloves and Mace, Oyle of Turpentine, and Oyle of Spike, of each one ounce, Saffron halfe an ounce, red Wine two pound: and so make pour Plai∣ster according to Art.
A Plaister for old Sores. TAke Litarge of Gold, one pound, oyle of Roses two pound, white Wine, a pinte, Vrine a pinte, Vineger halfe a pinte, Waxe, Frankensence, and Myrrhe, of each two drams, and so make your Plaister according. A Sparadrope. TAke Oyle a pound, white Waxe thrée ounces, Ceruse tenne ounces, Litarge of Gold, foure ounces, boyle all these in forme of a Plaister. A drying Plaister. TAke Iacobs Plaister, halfe a pound, Unguentum Lapis Ca∣luminaris, one pound, and so make a Plaister. Oliver Wilsons Plaister. TAke a pottle of Oyle, Waxe two pound and a quarter, white Leade in powder two pound, of Storax callamitic, one ounce, Bengawin one ounce, Labdanum, one ounce, Masticke, one ounce, of Camphere, foure drams, and so make a Plaister. To make a Sparadrope. TAke Oyle a quart, white Leade one pound, the grounds of Verine foure ounces, of white Copperas, two ounces, white Waxe thrée ounces, Vineger a pinte, Camphere, thrée peny∣worth: and so make your Plaister according. To make the Mellilote Plaister. TAke Rozen eight pound, Waxe two pound, Shéepes Suet demi pound, the Iuyce of Mellilote a gallon cleane strai∣ned,
let your Rozen, Waxe, and Shéepes Suet be molten, and cleane strained into a faire Pan, and then put to your Iuyce of Mellilote, and set it over the fire and stirre it well together till bée like a Plaister, then take it off the fire, and put to it a pot∣tle of red Wine, by a little and a little, ever stirring it, till it bée almost cold, and labour it well in your hands for heaving out the Wine, and so make it in roules and kéepe it. To make a Seare-cloth. TAke Waxe one ounce, and a dram of Euforbimn, and tem∣per it with oyle Olive at the fire, and make thereof a Sear∣cloth to comfort the sinewes. To make the Plaister called Flowesse. TAke Rozen, and Perosine, of each halfe a pound, virgin Waxe, and Frankensence, of each a quarter of a pound, Masticke one ounce, Harts tallow a quarter of a pound, Cam∣phere two drams, beat all these to a powder, and boyle them to∣gether, and straine it thorow a faire cloth into a pottle of white Wine, and boyle them all againe together, and then let it coole a little, and then put to it foure ounces of Turpentine, and stirre them all together till it be cold, and so make it in rowles accor∣ding to Art. Another Plaister. TAke two pound of Waxe, two pound of Rozen, foure pound of Perosine, a quarter of a pound of Déeres suet, two ounces of Cloes, two ounces of Mace, a quarter of an ounce of Saf∣fron, one pound and a halfe of Olibanon, and a Gallon of red Wine, and put all these into a faire Panne, and sét it over the fire. foure or fiue houres, till yée suppose that the Wine be sod∣den a war and then take it off the fire, and stirre it till it be cold, and rowle it.
To make the Playster Occinicione. TAke a quarter of a pound of Comin, as much Waxe, as much Pitch, as much Rozen, and of Saffron one ounce and a halfe, of Masticke one quarterne, Galbanum halfe a quarterne, Turpentine one ounce, Incense halfe an ounce, Myrrhe a quarter, Salarmoniac a little, first take the Salt, and let it lye in good Vineger, and stamped in a Morter till it be well moystned all Night and more, then take the Vineger, and the Gums therein and set it on the fire, till the Gummes bée well melted, then straine it and set it on the fire, and let it séeth vntill the Vineger the second part thereof be wasted, and so that there be but the third part left, then melt the Pitch and scumme it, put thereto the liquour that is left, then melt the Waxe and put it to the Rozen, and the Turpentine and then take the Masticke, Incense, and Myrrhe: but looke that all the Gums be beaten in powder, or that you cast it in, and sée that you stirre it fast, when that they be well molten and med¦led, looke that you haue a faire Bason of hot water, and sodainely cast it in, then wring it out of the water, then chafe it against the fire as if it were Waxe: and annoynt your hands with oyle of Bay, and looke yée have the Saffron in fine powder: and the other that was not put in before, and when you have put in all the eight powders, make it vp in Rowles. To make a Plaister Inplumhie. TAke Oyle one pound, Litarge halfe a pound: and looke that the Litarge bée fine, then set it on the fire: and let it boyle vntill it waxe browne, but not so long that it waxe blacke: then take it from the fire, and make it in Bowles.
A Plaister of Camphere. TAke Camomill oyle halfe a pound, white Waxe foure oun∣ces, Ceruse one pound, Camphere halfe an ounce, and so make your Plaister. To make a noble Plaister, for a soone as the Plaister is warme, the paine will be gone, and it is called a Spice-Plaister. TAke Waxe two pound, Déere Suet one pound, Perosine foure pound, Cloves and Mace two Ounces, Saffron one ounce, Rozen two pound, Pitch foure ounces, now melt that which is to be molten, and powder and serse that which is to bée powdered and sersed, and melted altogether over a soft fire, except your Clowes and Saffron, and then take a quart of red Wine, and by a little and a little poure it to the salve, stirring it well together, and when it is cleane molton, straine it into a cleane Pan, and then put to it your powder, Cloves, Mace, and Saffron, casting it abroad vpon the said Ingrediance, and stir∣ring it well till it be cold, then make it in rowles. To make a speciall Plaister for all manner of cold Aches. TAke Perosine foure pound, Rozen, and Waxe, of each two pound, Galbanum as much, Olibanon as much, Masticke, and Myrrhe, of each two ounces, red Wine foure pound, but your Masticke, Myrrhe and Wine▪ in the cooling, it hath béene prooved, and when you néed it, spread it on a Leather. To make a Plaister that Sir William Ferrington let a Squire that was his Prisoner goe for, quite without ransome. TAke one pound of Litarge of Gold, and make thereof small powder, and serse it well, then take a quart of oyle of Roses, &
a pinte of white Wine, and halfe an pinte of old Vrine, very well clarified, and halfe a pinte of Vineger, and boyle all these on the fire, but put in the Vrine last, this Plaister will heale a Marmele, and a Canker, and Fester, and Wounds, and all other sores, if thou put thereto one ounce of Waxe, Ollibanon, and Myrrhe, of each a dram. To make Coulman Plaister. TAke oyle Olive foure pound, red Lead, and white, of each one pound, boyle them together till it waxe blacke, and then put thereto Pitch one pound, and make it in rowles. To make the Mellilote Plaister. TAke the Iuyce of Mellilot, and Camomill, of each one pound, of Waxe one pound, Rozen three pound, Shéepes suet a pound and a halfe, white Wine two pound and a halfe, and so make them all in a Plaister according to Art, for it is good. To make the Deaguloune Plaister. TAke Oyle two pound, strong Vineger one pound and halfe. Litarge of Gold one pound, Verdigreace one ounce, boyle them together till they be red, and so make it in rowles. A Plaister for all manner of Sores, and especially for all greene Sores. TAke of fine Suger and Burnet, and each of them like much, and bruise them in a Morter, and wash the Wound with the juyce of the same, then take the Hearbes finely beaten, and min∣gle with them and the juyce a quantity of English Honey, and vnwrought Waxe so boyle them together till it be all of one co∣lour, then take them from the fire and let them stand a while: then put it into a Bason of faire water, and so worke it out into rowles, and lay it on Plaisters once or twice a day.
Another for the same approved. TAke the Hearb Salendine, and House looke, of each equall quantity, then bruise them in a Morter, and take the myre of them, and put it into the wound, and annoynt the same there∣with: that done, fill the wound with part of the bruised hearbs, and so bind it vp, and in short time it will heale the sore, as by proofe hath beene seene. A Plaister for the Stiche. ANnoynt your side with the oyle of Mellilote, then make a Plaister for the same Mellilote vpon a piece of Leather, and change it but one a wéeke. A Playster for the Phrifie. STampe well in a Morter, foure ounces of the rootes of wild Mallowes well sodden, put to it an ounce of Butter, and an ounce and a halfe of Honey, of Pigeons dung two drains min∣gle all together; and nt right hot vpon the paie, and soone after the corruption will breake. A Plaister for the Collicke and Stone. TAKe Peritory, Camomill, ground I vie leaves; Cummin: stampe them, and boyle them in white Wine, and make a Plaister thereof, and put it about the Reines  hot as may be suffered, and see that it lye close round about behind and be∣fore. A Plaister for the Head-ache, and for hot Agues. TAke red Mintes, Leavened Bread of Wheate, and white Vineger: Make thereof a Plaister and say it to your Fore∣head, for it helpeth ieases in the Head, and also hot Agues.
A hot drawing Plaister, called Flowis. TAke Rozen, Perosine, of each halfe a pound, white Waxe foure ounces, Frankensence, foure ounces, Masticke, one ounce, Déere suet foure ounces, Turpentine foure ounces, Camphere two drams, white Wine a Pottle: and so make a Plaister. A Plaister called the vertue of our Lord. TAke oyle Olive one pound, white Waxe two drams, Gal∣bum, Ermony, Opponacke two ounces, Litarge halfe a pound, Almons one dram, Verdigreace one ounce, Aristoligam Longuam one dram, Myrrhe, Masticke, of each one ounce, Lo∣rell bayes two Drams, Increse white one Dram: Make the Plaister in this manner: take and temper the Galbum, Oppo∣nacke, Ermony, in good Vineger, two dayes naturall, and the other things to bée provided each by himselfe: then take the Waxe, and melt it with Oyle in a Kettle, and the Gummes dissolved in Vineger, in another vessell vpon the fire, till the Vineger be sodden away: then straine it vpon the said Oyle, as strongly as you can stirre it well: and then put in the Ver∣digreace, the Astrologium, and the other Gummes that were not put in before, then it is made. It healeth all wounds new or old, and it doth heale more then all other Plaisters, or Oyntments. A Plaister for a sore Brest that must bee broken. TAke one handfull of Groundsill, a pinte of swéete Milke, and a handfull of Oatemeale, and séethe them together. Make a Plaister thereof, and lay it to it as hot as the Patient may suffer it, and at every Dressing put too more Milke: this vse no longer then it breakes.
A Plaister to heale it. TAke one pound of Bores-greace, and thrée Garlicke heads, stampe them in a Morter till they be fine, and put bath into a boxe, and put thereto Beane flower, to the quantity of two Egges: bray them together, and lay them to the Brest. To make a Seare-cloath. TAke Rozen, and Perosine, of each foure ounces, Waxe two ounces, Ollibanon two ounces, Masticke halfe an ounce, Tur∣pentine two ounces, and so make your Plaister. OF MEDICINES and Remedies. PART. XI. Here followeth divers Medicines and Remedies for to heale all Diseases curable, by the grace of God; as also the nature and property of certaine Hearbes and Plants belonging thereun∣to. And first a most excellent Remedy to helpe the Fluxe of the Body, with a certaine discourse thereon. THE Fluxe of the Body is caused of superflu∣ous heate conceived in the Stomacke, the which maketh a continuall solution inwardly, as yée may sée by experience of those that are troubled therewith: for so long as the cause is not taken away, all their meat doth runne into the matter, the which if it be so, that
is true which I do say, that the fluxes are a distemperance of the body, caused of hot and corrupt humours in the stomacke, and therefore if thou wilt cure it, it were necessary to extinguish the heate, and so take away the corruption, the which thou shalt doe with the rednesse of Marte Mylletare written in this Booke following, for that is the most soveraigne remedy that can bée found. But first yée shall take twelve graines of our Petra Phi∣losophalla, with halfe an ounce Mel Rosatum, and then take foure mornings together one scruple of the rednesse of Marte, with halfe an ounce of Sugar Rosate, and therewith thou shalt worke miracles. For Perbreaking, and for Fluxe. SEeth Roses in Vineger, or Tamarindes, or Gaules, and while it is hot wet therein Wooll, and lay it on the stomacke for Vomit, and on the Navill for Fluxe, and on the Reines for appetite. Aleanet, is to sooder Wounds. Aspaltum, is Tarre of Indie, it hath vertue to draw and soo∣der for if the powder thereof be strowed on a dry Wound, it will soone close it, though it be both broad and déepe. Oates, hath vertue to abate swelling, and to make things soft. Asarum, maketh women to haue their tearmes, openeth the Veynes of the Vrine, and maketh a man well to pisse. Asarum, with Honey sleyeth Wormes dissolveth Winds, and warmeth the stomacke, clenseth the Liver, and Veynes of the Guts, and reynes of the Mother, it putteth away Fever quoti∣dian, and helpeth the stinking of venomous Wormes. Bolle, if it be good is as it were white redded. Ballestianes, is the flow of the Powgraner, and Psidia, is the rinde, and it hath vertue to restraine as Bolle hath. Brancha Urona, hath vertue to make soft, or to rypen Em∣postumes.
Bistorta, or Tormentill, hath vertue to straine together, com∣fort, and confound. Bedellion, hath vertue to constraine together, it helpeth the Empostume, both within and without, it breaketh the stone, and beateth the Cough. Cadamen, is the rootes of Parcely, that hath vertue to dis∣solve, to consume and to draw. Camfere, ought to bée kept in Marble, Alablaster, Lynt∣séed, or Anyséed: it is good for the Gomora, and to abate a mans courage. Coloquintida, hath vertue to purge Flegme and Melancho∣ly, and for the Tooth-ache, séethe it in Vineger. Cassia fistula, a Gargarisme made thereof, and of the Iuyce of Morell, dissolveth the Empostume in the Wezend, and also for swelling in the Chéekes. Ceruse, is good to engender good flesh, and to fret away evill flesh. Capers, is good to dete cold Humours, in the mouth and sto∣macke. Concube and Quibebes, the powder héereof with the juyce Borage is good for the cold Rhume and to comfort the Braine. Dragagant, is of three kindes, and the white is the best in cold Medicines, and the red in hot. Euphorbium, his vertue is to dissolve, to draw, to alae, to consume, to purge Fleame, and Melancholly. Esula, is the rinde of Eleberus Albus, or Peritory of Spaine, it hath vertue to purge Fleame and Melancholly, and it is the best that purgeth next to Scamonie. Take Esula, five drams, Canell, Fennell-séedes, Anyséedes, and vse this with warme Wine, or other broth, Gum Arabic, the white is cold, the red is hot in Medicines. Gariofiolate, is Adee his vertue is to open, dissolve, and consume, whilest hée is gréene, the Gollicia passie. Hermadactilus, the whitest is the best, it hath vertue to dis∣solve, consume, and draw, and they principally purge Fleame.
Jarus, Barba, Aron Calves féete, Cuckoo pintell, the leaves, and the rootes, and the gobbets about the rootes bée of good ver∣tue, and the Roote should be cloven, and dryed, they haue vertue to dissolve and lake. Ipaguistidos, is Gobbets, that are found by the roote of the Dog bryer, it hath vertue to straine together. Jempus, is the fruit thereof, it hath vertue to dissolve, and consume: for the Strangury Illiaco, drinke Wine wherein it was sodden. Licium, is good with the juyce of Fennell for sore Eyes. Litarge, is good to close together and to clense. Lovage séed with Cinamon, is good for the Liver, and Spléen, and wind in the Guts and stomacke. Mamia, is good to make Bloud cleane. Mumia, hath vertue to straine together. Medeswece, gréene or dry, bringeth Menstruum, and clenseth the Mother. Mora, is the fruit of the Cicomore Trée, it hath vertue to dis∣solue, consume, and make cleane, it is good for the Ovinffe, and for costiuenesse. Nitrum, the whiter the better, it hath vertue to dissolve, and wipe away filth. Opponax, if it be cléere, and draw to Cytrin colour, it is good, it hath vertue to dissolve and consume. Oppium, that is not hard nor soft, is good, it hath vertue to make one fléepe. Organum flowers, is good powdered to make Luxe, to dis∣solue, and to consume, and the powder put within and without, abateth blowne chéekes, Oxificentia, Phenicon, Dactilus Indie, Tamarindus, they that bée good, be neyther too moyst nor too hard, and be some what blacke, and some what sower, the Ryne nor the Séed shall not be vsed in Medicines, it hath vertue to purge Choller, to make Bloud cleane, and to abate vnkind heate. Os de corde Cervi, is the bone of the Hearts heart, on the left
sidé, it is good to purge Melancholy Bloud, and Cardiacle, and Sinicapos, or Sincapos, with the Iuyce of Borage, and Os Sexi, will make the Téeth white. Periatory, or Pellatory, shall be gathered in Winter, and his vertue is to dissolue, consume, and draw. Dog Fennell, the roote is good for the Strangury, Oissury, and stopping of the Liver and Spléene. Pineapples, the Kernels doe moysten and open, and is good for the Disease in the Brest, or Cough, or Etike, or Consumpti∣on, and to increase good bloud. Damsons, bée cold and moyst, in the third degrée; gather them when they bée ripe, and cleane them in the Sunne, and spring them with Vineger aboue, and then yée may kéepe them two yeare in a vessell: their vertue is to coole a man, and make his Guts light, and therefore they be good in Fevers, against the costivenesse that commeth of drynesse, or of Cholericke hu∣mors in the Guts, when they be ripe to cut, and when they be dry, soake them in water, and eate the Prune, and drinke the water. Psilium is cold and moyst in the third degrée; his vertue is to make soft and light, and to coole a Mans body, and to straine together. Periatory, while it is gréens hath vertue to dissolve and con∣sume the windes in the stomacke. Purslene, is good both raw and sodden, to abate vnkind heate in Chollericke men. Pitch liquide, hath vertue to dissolue and consume. Ponticum, is good for the stopping of the Liver, and Spléene, that commeth of cold. Storax, hath vertue both to comfort, and consume, and to fa∣sten Teeth, and comfort the Gummes. Squilla, is a Sea Onion, and that is found by himselfe is deadly, his vertue is to purge, and to dissolue, but the outer, and Inner parts shall be cast away, for they be deadly, and that which is in the middest, shall be put in Medicines, and it hath
more vertue rawe than sodden. Sedes within the berries of Elder, is good to purge Fleame. Sravisacre, hath vertue to dissolve, consume, draw, and purge, Fleame and Lytarge and to put away heavinesse of the heart, and if it be put in his nose. Seapium, is good, and hath vertue to dissolve, consume, draw, and laxe, and heale, it is good for fallins downe of the Mother, with suffumigation, or supositor, and for the tearmes of secon∣dine dead Childe. Saracoll, if it bée with sad, it is good it hath vertue to straine together and to sooder. Drinke Calamint sodden in Wine, for coldnesse of the stomacke, and stopping of the Liver and Spléen, Reynes and Bladder, and Illaco passie. Saterion, his root is gréen, hath vertue to vnloose mans nature. Saligem, his vertue is to dissolve, and consume. Scabiouse, while he is gréene, hath vertue to dissolve, consume, and cleanse. Dragons, take the roote, and cleave it, and dry it in the Sun, yée may kéepe it two yeares, meddle the powder of Dragons with Sope, and wet a Tent therein, and put it déepe into a fest∣er, and it will clense and enlarge it, and if there bée a bone in it, it will draw it out, or else loose it that yée may take it out lightly. Sene, is to purge Melancholy and Epilencie, and Fever quartaine, and Emerodes for the Spléene, Liver, and Cardia∣cle sodden in water, and put to Sage, and make a Syrope, or the Iuyce of Borage and Suger. Terra sigillata, terra sarasincia, trara argenta, is all one manner of earth, his vertue is to constraine together. Turbith, if it be hollow, small and of an Ash-colour, and gum∣mie, it is good, it hath vertue to dissolve, and draw humours from the vttermost part of a mans body, and namely Fleame, for the Gout and Illiaca, and Podegra, and Chiragra, giue him fours scruples of Turbith mingled with some other Medicine.
Taplia, or faiters Hearbe, his vertue is to purge aboue and beneath both gréene and dry, for it is never given by himselfe, hée that stampeth it let him hide his Face and eyes that hée sée not. Also heale or kéepe close his Testacles, or else they will swell, with this Hearbe beggers doe make them séme on the Dropsie, and be nothing like. Tartar is the Lées of Wine, and hath vertue to dissolve, and wipe away filth, and to abate away a mans fatnesse. Take small powder halfe of foure drams, and cast thereto the powder of Masticke, to abate his egernesse, and give the pow∣der with Dia Penedion, or with same other delicate electuary. Terbentine, a fugimation thereof, is good for the subfumiga∣tion of the Mother. Virga Pastoris, or Shéepeheards rod, hath vertue to straine together, to coole, and to fill that is empty, and is good for the Fluxe. Bryona, or wild Neppe, is hot and dry, the roote thereof ma∣keth a woman to haue her tearmes, and delivereth a dead Child or secondine. Ginger, comforteth the heart, and make good digestion. Sugar, is temperate, hot, and moyst, his vertue is to moysten and nourish, and to loose, if it be mingled with cold things to coole. The excellent vertues of Cardus Benedictus. IT is very good for the Headach and the Megrim: For the vse of the juyce of the powder of the Leaues, preserveth and kée∣peth a man from the Head-ach, and healeth it being present, it quickneth the sight if the Iuyce of it be laid on the Eyes. The Powder staches blood that flowes out of the Nose, or commeth out of the Lungs: the breath of it taken with Wine, maketh an appetyte. It is good for any Ache in the body: it strengtheneth the members of the body, and fasteneth loose sinewes and weak. It is also good for the Dropsie: it breaketh also the Stone, and
breaketh an Impostume: it preserveth one from the Pestilence, if the powder be taken in water foure and twenty houres before a man come to the infected place. It is good for the dizzinesse of the Head: It helpeth the memory: It helpeth thicke hearing: It is good for short winds, and the diseases of the Lungs: Some write that it strengtheneth the Téeth: others write that it brin∣geth down Flowers, and provoketh sléepe, and helpeth the Fal∣ling sicknesse. It is also good for falls and bruises: the Leaves provoke sléepe: the powder is good against all poyson, the same put into the Guts by a Glyster: It helpeth the Collicke, and other diseases of the Guts, and the wounds of the same. They write also that the water of Cardus Benedictus helpeth rednesse, and the ching of the Eyes, and the Iuyce doth the same: the Leaves bruised are good for the byting of Serpents: for Bur∣nings, and for Carbunckles. There is nothing better for the Canker, and old festering sores: the Leaves are good for Fo∣mentations: and to be sitten over, being sodden in water, that the Vapour may come to the diseased places, against the stones and stopping of flowers. A discourse as concerning Cornes in the feete or elsewhere with their remedies. THis Callowes matter is a certaine hot humour, the which nature would discharge her selfe of, and when that humour is driven forth of nature, it goeth into the lower parts into the end of the Toes, for in that part of the Toes that skin is called E∣pidarma; is hard, and will not suffer if to passe or exalars, and there many times it engendreth a Tumor in the skin with great hardnesse, and many times that Tumor doth increase and cause such paine, that it doth not onely hinder their going, but hinder them from their sléepe in the Night, and this kind of Tumor is called commonly Callo, or Cornes in English; and I thought it good to call them crest, because they are alwayes growing and is of great importance among Chirurgions, for an infinite number of persons are troubled therewith, and therefore I will shew
thée our secret to helpe them quickly and with great ease, which secret was never knowne of any. First yée shall pare them with a sharpe Knife vnto the bottome, and there yée shall find a cer∣taine thing like matter, but if yee find no matter, yée shall pare it vntill bloud doth appeare, then touch it with the Oyle of Sul∣phure, and then dresse it without Balsamo Artificiato, once a day vntill it be whole, Képe this as a secret. An experimented Science for hoarsenesse, though it hath long lasted. TAke a soft Nightkerchiffe, and warme it, take also a Head-pillow, warme the same also, and bind it with the Kerchiffe about the Head all Night: doe this thrée Nights o after the other, and kéepe thy selfe warme, and beware of Cold Drinks, and Ayre, and it shall furely goe from thée without hurt, this same is also good for the Flixe and Cough: give the Patient al∣so Lycorice in his mouth. Against Hoarsenesse, goe into the Hot-houss, and when thou hast halfe Bathed, drinke a good draught of warme water: this is oft proved. Garlicke sodden and eaten, maketh a cleare voyce, and dri∣veth away Hoarsenesse and the old Cough. If a man stand in feare of the Palsie. LEt him eat every Morning two or thrée graines of Mustar séedes, and two Pepper cornes: the same is assured for the same disease. Of the cause of our Sciatica, and how yee may helpe it. THE Sciatica is a Disease so called, because it commeth in that place of the Body called Scio, and it is caused of an evill quality and grosse Humors that are strayed in that place, because they cannot passe downe. And this is séene by expe∣rience
dayly: for where that paine is, there is alteration, and the cure thereof is with Glysters, Vomits, Purgations, and Vnctions, because the Glysters doth evacuate those places next vnto it, and so easeth the Humour: the Vomit cleanseth the sto∣macke, the Purgation doth evacuate the body downwards, the Vnctions dissolve the winde, and by these meanes thou mayest helpe the Sciatica, as I have done many times to my great cre∣dit and satisfaction of my Patient. A Medicine for the Gowte. TAke a pinte of white Wine, a quart of running water, a quantity of Barley flower and let them boyle together: then put thereo halfe a pound of blacke Soape, and let all séethe till it be thicke, then put thereto the yolkes of foure Egges, and when yée will vse it, driue it on a cloth Plaister-wise, hot. A speciall Remedy against the Gowt. TAke Turbit chosen, a groate weight, Ginger chosen, and pared, two penny weight, Setwall, Hermodatill, of each thrée penny-weight: Powder Benedicta, foure penny weight: and make it in powder, and vse it when you begin to waxe con∣stipaty or bound: Vse these Hearbes dayly in your Pottage or Broath: take Herbon two handfuls, Scabious, Mectfellen, Borage, of each one handfull: Aven, Planten, Langdebéefe, of each a quarter of a handfull, wash them and bind them, and cast them into the Pot. A Plaister for the same. TAke Vnguentum Merciatum, Agrippe Dialée, Oli Ge∣nesti Lauxi, an ounce: Emplaistrum Oxi croxi one ounce, Tero pariter, Rin pim parissimi pariter sed resolvenda dis∣soluentur,
Et fac magdalione: take your powder in dayes and times convenient, at the first time two penny-weight, and af∣ter as you thinke expedient. Stubbes Medicine for the Gowte. TAke a quart of red Wine Lées, a quarter of a pound of beane flower, halfe a quarter of a pound of Commine fine beaten, a spoonefull of Bole Armoniacke, halfe an ounce of Camphere, which must be put in at twice, and boyle them all together, till they be somewhat thicke: then make it Plaister-wise, and lay it to the paine. Another Plaister for the Goute. TAke Occycronium Galbanum, and Melitonum, of each one a penny-worth and still them: take a pound of stone Pitch, and another pound of fine Rozen, one halfe ounce of Camphere, one quarterne of Déeres Suet, halfe a quarter of a pound of Commin, and boyle them on a soft fire together, and thereof make a Plaister vpon a péece of Leather, vsing it as the other. Another for the same. TAke the Gall of an Oxe, and Aqua Compositia, of each a like quantity, as much of Oyle of Exeter, as of both the o∣ther, and labour them all together in a pot with a sticke, the space of halfe an houre: When you haue so done, annoynt your palme therewith, then wet a linnen cloth therein, and as hot as you can suffer it, bind it to the sore. For apricke of a Thorne, or any other thing. TAke Honey, and a good quantity of Chalke, and of the Gall of a Beast into it, and boyle them together, and make a Plai∣ster of it, and as hot as you can suffer it; lay it thereunto. Let the Chalke be scraped very small. Approved,
A Remedy for burning and Scalding. TAke the white Wooll of the belly of an Hare, and if it be raw, lay it thereto, and it will never away till such time it bée whole. Another for the same. TAke a Thistle called S. Mary Thistle, stampe it and strain it, and take thereof two spoonefuls, and put to this thrée spoonefuls of Creame, and mixe them together, and an∣noynt the Patient therewith. To kill a Tetter or Ring-worme. TAke the root of a red Dock, the roote is very red, and slice it, and lay it in Vineger a Night, and after lay it vpon the Tetter, and tye it with a cloth hard, and it will kill the Tetter. Approved. For a winde or a Collicke in the belly. TAke a Rose Cake and toast it at the fire, with Vineger throwen vpon it, and lay it as hot to your belly as you may suffer it. For the Collicke. TAke Mustard, Figges, and Vineger, stamped together, and lay it to the belly of the diseased, cold, in manner of a Plaister, and it shall helpe. Against the Shingles. ANnoynt the Shingles with the juyce of Mynts, and it will heale them. To heale a wound in ten dayes, as by proofe hath beene seene. STampe Camphere with Barrowes greace, and put it into the wound, and it will heale it. Approved.
For ache in the Backe. TAke Egremont and Mugwort, both Leaues, and Rootes, and stampe them small, then mingle them well with old Déeres Sewet, then sméere or annoynt the grieved place there∣with very warme, and after rowle it by hard. For to heale in foure dayes the scalding with water or any other thing, without Plaister or Oyntment, it hath beene tryed and found true. TAke an Onyon and cut him overthwart, and wring out the juyce vpon the scalded place doing so every day ise, it will heale it quickly. To heale the Itch. TAke of Lapacinum Acutum, or of Sorell, and boyle it in water, and wash therewith the diseased person: or else take the rootes of Lawrell, and being well brayed with Salt and bread, annoynt therewith the body. The like effect is done with the decoction of Egrimony and Sage, made with Raine water, and washing therewith the sicke person. To heale Sores or Tetters. TAke of Waxe of Ganabrinum, in powder, and of Oyle of Ro∣ses, as much as shall be sufficient? Make thereof an Oynt∣ment. Or else bray Cockle and Brimstone, and mixe them with Vineger, and make an Oyntment. To remedy the swelling of the Legges. TAke the Iuyce of Walwort, of Waxe, of Vineger, of Barley, Meale, of each a like quantity: Boyle it, and make a Plai∣ster, and bind it vpon the sore.
A good Drinke to strengthen the heart and all the members, if a man drinke halfe an Egge shell full of it morning and eve∣ning, with as much good wine. TAke the best Aqua Vitae that you can get, and take a piece of fine Gold, and make it glowing hot ten times, and squench it againe, the more you squench it, the stronger waxeth the water and better. Then put it into the same Aqua Vitae, and halfe a quarter of an ounce of Saffron, and a quarter of an ounce of Cy∣namon, both beaten: let them stand foure dayes well opped, and stirre it every day once: but when you will take it, then let it stand  nsirted that it may be cleare. This water war∣meth the cold stomacke, giveth strength to all the members, specially to agee folkes that haue béene over long sicke, whose strength is consumed  for it comforteth and strengthneth the heart out of measure. A speciall Medicine to cause sleepe. TAke a spoonefull of Oyle of Roses & spoonefull of Rose water, and halfe a spoonefull of red Vineger, and temper them all together; then with a fine linnen cloth annoynt the Patients head. An sie Remedy for the Tooth-ache. TAke a sice of the Roote Acorus, of some called in English Gladen, of other Galanga, which groweth in waters and marishes, this must be laid gréene vpon the Tooth. A piece of the gréene roote of Tormntill doth it likewise. For swelling in the Throate. TAke white Frankensence, and cast a piece of it vpon hot coales, then put a Thimble over it, and let the smoake thereof
goe into the Throate: that helpeth, and is oft times experimen∣ted and proved. For the Canker in the mouth. TAke halfe a pinte of Ale, and a sprig of Rosemary, and séeth them together, and skim your Ale. And then put in a piece of Allom as much as a Nut, and a spoonefull of Honey, and two spoonefuls of Honey suckle water. To make the Face faire and the Breath sweet. TAke the Flowers of Rose-mary, and boyle them in white Wine, then wash your face with it, and vse it for o drinke, and so shall you make your Face faire, and your breath swéet. A Remedy for a red face or a red nose. TAke Litarge of Silver, and Brimstone, of each like much, and seeth them in Rose water, and Vineger, and then with a lin∣nen cloath wet in the said Vineger, lay it to the sore. A Remedy to qualifie the Coppered Face that is ucurable. MAke a Bath with the flowers of Cammomell, Violets, Roses, and Flowers of water Lillies, then annoynt the place with Anguentum Album, Campherarius, and mixe that oyntment with a little yellow Brimstone, and Quicksilver kil∣led with fasting spittle, and annoynt the Face withall. A speciall good dyet for all copperous Faces. ABstaine from all salt things, spiced, fryed, meates, and ro∣sted meates: also from drinking of Wine, for it is very e∣vill: also Onyons, Mustard, and Garlicke are very naught: in std of which, you mst take Pursaine, Sorrell, Lettice, Hops of Borrage, with Succor or endiue in Portage, or otherwise: Also it is necessary to be laxatiue, and in sléeping to lay your head hye.
An easie Remedy to make the Teeth white. TAke Vineger of Squiles, and dip a little piece of Cloth in it; and rub the Téeth or Gummes withall: the said Vine∣ger fastneth the Gummes, comforteth rootes of the Téeth, and maketh a swéet breath. To take away the stinking of the mouth. YEe must wash your mouth with Water and Vineger, and chew Masticke a good while, and then wash thy mouth with the decoction of Annis-séeds, Mints, and Cloues, sodden in Wine. If the stincking of thy mouth commeth of a rotten tooth the best is  haue it drawne out. A Remedy for sore Eyes. TAke the Iuyce of Fennell, and drop thereof into the Eyes, E∣vening and Morning, and it shall heale the griefe and paine. A proved Medicine for the bleeding at the Nose, called the Ladie Maries Medicine. TAke the shell of an Egge, the meate being very cleane out, and put it into the fire till it be burnt very blacke and ready to breake, then take it out, and make thereof fine Powder, whereof yée shall blow through a Quill part thereof into the Nose that bléedeth, and it shall stanch. Against a stinking Breath. MElt Hony, Salt, and Rye flower well together, and there∣with rubbe the Gummes twice or thrice, then wash it with faire water, and it will helpe thée. Eor an evill breath. SEeth two ounces of Commin in fine Powder, in a pottle of white Wine, vnto a quart: Then kéepe it, vsing to drinke a little thereof warme at Night, the space of fiftéene dayes, and it will helpe.
For the Head-ache, and clensing of the same. CHew Pellitory of Spaine in thy mouth, it will cleanse the Head, and also take away the Ache or paine. To heale a swolne Face, that is hurt or marred by reason of some strange Scorching, which onely chanceth when the Sublime is not good. TAke the Iuyce of Barba Iovis, (in English Singréene) and rub your face with it twice or thrice a day. You may doe the like with the Iuyce of Pursains: but if your Face were too much marred or hurt, take forty or fifty yolkes of Egges, and put them in a frying Pan vpon a great fire, and get se Oyle out of them, wherewith you shall annoynt your Face. To make an aking Tooth fall out of himselfe, without any Instrument or Iron Tooles. TAke wheate flower, and mixe it with the milke of the hearb called in Latine Herba Lactaria, in French Tintemaille, or Herbe Alerte, in English Spurge, that hath milke in it: in Gréeke, Tithimales, which is an Hearbe well enough knowne, and thereof make as it were a paste or dow, with the which you shall fill the hole of the Tooth, and leaue it in a certaine time, and the tooth will fall out of it selfe. Also if you wash your mouth every moneth once with Wine wherein the roote o the said hearbe hath béene sodden, you shall never haue paine in your Téeth. Also the decoction or powder of the flowers of a Pomegranate Trée, being put in your mouth and betwéene your Gums fasteneth Téeth. To kill Lice and Nits in the Head. TAke the powder or scraping of Harts horne, and make the Patient to drinke it, and there will not Lice nor Nits bréed in his head, but if you will straw the said power vpon his head, all the Lice and Nits will dye.
To remedy or to helpe Blood-shotten eyes, comming by any Rheume, Fluxion, or such other like cause. TAke the tops or ends of Wormewood, which is an hea well enough knowne, and stampe it, mixing it with the white of an Egge and Rose water, and make thereof as it were a Plaister, and syred it vpon a linnen cloth, which you may lay vpon the eye where the blood is, or else vpon both, and doe this at night when you goe to bed, and the next morning take it off, and you shall sée that this Plaister shall haue drawne to it selfe all the bloud, and all the redsse that was in your Eyes, and so you shall be quit of it. For the Tooth-ache. TAke the Rootes and Leaues of Chickwéede, and boyle them in water, with the which you shall wash your mouth well, and hold it in your mouth a certaine space, and it will take away your paine. To fasten the Gummes and loose Teeth. TAke a little Myrthe, and temper it with Wine and Oyle, and wash your mouth withall, and you shall see a wonderfull expe∣rience. The Myrthe also killeth the wormes in mans body, and being chewed in the mouth, maketh a swéete breath. To take away the Tooth-ache. TAke Hysope, and make thereof a decoction with Vineger, and it being hot, wash your mouth withall, and the paine of the Téeth shall goe away. The Hysope also being stampt and incor∣porated with Honey, and a little Niina, killeth the Wormes in a mane body. Against the Crampe. TAke and beat Brimstone and Vervine together, and so binde it to your Arme, or other place grieved, and it shall kill it, for having the paine againe.
A Remedy for the Collicke. TAke Siuet, and rubbe your Navill therewith, and champe Rosemary in your mouth, and it easeth the Collicke straight way. A Powder for the Collicke and Stone. TAke Parcely-séed, Saxifrage, Alisander, Coryander, the Ker∣nels of Cherry-stones, Smalledge séedes, Lovage, the rootes of Phillipendula, of each a dram: Bay-berries, Iuy-berries, of each a dram: put to all these as much Ginger as they all weigh, and adde thereto halfe an ounce of Commin: this Powder is to be taken in Ale, halfe a dram of once, thrice a day. A Remedy for the Collicke. TAke a quantity of Brme-séed, Grouncell-séde, Parcely-séed, Alisander séed, Asen-keyséed, Lepthorne séed, or Ber∣ries, Phillipendula dryed, Saxifrage dryed, Mouscare dryed, Growobicke dried, mixe them together in drinke, and drinke it Morning and Evening, fasting. A Medicine for the Collicke. TAke Pimpernell, Musterd, Croweoote, Gauropre, Ma∣sticke, and bruise them together well, and mingle them to∣gether with the blood of a Goate, and put thereto good Alligre a little, and let them stand certaine dayes after your discretion, and put them under a stilatory, and distill a water thereof, this water is good for the Stone, whether that it be red or white, plaine or sharpe, or if it bée hardened: If the Patient doe drinke thereof every day fasting, the stone shall breake and goe out like sand. Also if scald Heads be washed therewith, it will heale them, and there shall grow new haire and if the scabbes e washt therewith, of what manner soer it  he shall be whole within thr dayes or nine at the furthest. Also  wa∣ter drunke fasting, makes a man to haue a good colour, and good
blood aboue all other Medicines. Also this water drunke with Caforie twice in one day, destroyeth all Palsies, which is not dead in the sinewes and members, for it comforteth sinewes principally. For the Collicke and Stone. TAke halfe a pinte of white Wine, and a good quantity of white Sope, scrape it, and put it into the white Wine, and make it luke warme, and drinke it once, twice, or thrice, as the Patient néeds, prooved. A Powder for the Stone. TAke the Séede of Gromell, Broome, Saxifrage, Alisander, Parceley and Fennell, of all these séedes like quantity, beate them very finely together, and so drink halfe a spoonfull of pow∣der, or a spoonefull at a time in a draught of good Ale, and let it bée luke warme in any wise. For the Collicke. TAke Parceley, Water-cresses, Pellatory of the Wall, vn∣set Time, of each a handfull, a dish of swéete Btter let the hearbes be cleane washed, and séeth them in a quart of running water, let your water be taken vp against the streame, let them séeth till you may make a Plaister thereof, then temper them to∣gether with a handfull of Wheate branne, and make a Plaister, and let it be laid to the Patients belly beneath the Navill, and let him put in his pottage, Pellatory of the Wall, and let the Patient make water, strained thorow a faire cloth, and thereby yée shall know and peceine, whether it doth him good or not, and let him vse this thrée or foure times.
A Medicine to purge the Head. TAke Masticke, Peritory of Spaine, tame Cressis Séede, Cockle-séede, Stavisacre, both the kindes of néeing pow∣der, white and blacke, Ginger, Sinamond, of each halfe a dram in fine powder, and mixed together, and put it in a little bagge of fine linnen cloth, and let the Patient hold one of these bagges in his mouth a good space, but these bagges must first lye in Fuse a pretty while in Vineger, and it will draw out Rheums from the head wonderfully, and when he hath done, he must wash his mouth well with Wine or Ale. A Medicine for a scald Head. TAke Daysie Rootes, and Ale, and stampe them with as much May-butter as néeds, and annoynt the sore head therewith. For the Head-Ache. TAke a good handfull of Red-Rose leaues dryed, and a good quantity of Cummin grossely bruised, and a good handfull of Camomill grosely shred, and a quantity of browne leavened Bread: then mixe them, and put it into a Linnen cloth, then quilt it, and set it into a hot Dish, vpon a Chasing dish, and sprinckle the bagge with Rose water and Vineger, and turne it in the dish till it be as hot as may be suffered, to be laid to the noddle of the Necke: and let it lye till it be cold, and so vse ano∣ther, and kéepe his head so hot as hée may sweats. For paine of the Head. TAke Marromand presse out the Iuyce of it, and let me Pa∣tient take of it in his Nose. For deafenesse in the Eares. TAke the Iuyce of Coleworts, and mixe it with warme wa∣ter, and droppe it into thine Eares, and it will help.
To make Honey of Roses, called Mel Rosarum. TAke foure pound foure ounces of Honey clarified, and two pound of the Iuyce of Red-Roses: and let them boyle toge∣ther till it be like a Sirrope. Another making thereof. TAke a pottle and halfe a pinte of Honey well clarified, with a pottle of white or red Wine, two pound of Red-Rose leaues: Boyle the Rose Leaues and Wine till halfe be wasted, and then put in your Honey: and let it boyle till it be somewhat thicke, and in colour like a Syrrope. For the Pockes. TAke the Iuyce of Peny-Roall, and young Tausie, and giue the sicke party to drinke. A true Medicine for the Jaundies. TAke a handfull of Chery Leaues, séeth them in a pinte of Milke, and let them boyle well: Then straine it, and drinke agood draught thereof to Bedwards, and in the morning fasting, and the Iaundies shall avoyd from you by siege: or else drinke in the morning this following. Take the wood Bayberries, pill the vpper shell with the leaues from it, and take the second shell that is yellow, put thereof as much as a Walnut into a cloth, and séeth it with a pinte of water, let it be well boyled, and let it coole, and then drinke it, this hath béene experimented. A Remedy for the Stone. TAke the Stones of Medlers, and lay them vpon a hot Te∣stone: after that you haue rubbed and dryed them in a faire cloth, then being dryed vpon the tilstone, beate them into pow∣der, then take a parcell of Tyme and parsy and place it vpon the fire with Béere and Butter, and throw in halfe a spoonefull of the said powder: and hereof you must drinke a good draught fa∣sting
in the morning, and eate nor drinke nothing else for thrée houres after. For the Liver that is corrupted and wasted. TAke a good quantity of Liverwrt and bruse it a little, and then séeth it in good strong Woort, with a quantity of Ru∣beth, and vse this medicine, and thou shalt be whole. For heate in the Liver. TAke the Iuyce of sower Apples and swéet Apples, of each a pound or more, as much as you thinke best, and two pounds of Sugar, mingle these things together, and lettheth boyle on a simple fire till it bée thicke as a Syrrope, and vse this course every day fasting, with luke warme water. For to make haire grow. TAke and séeth Mallowes rootes and all, and wash the place where Haire lacketh, and it shall grow. For to take away Haire. Take Horsse aches and burne them to powder, and mingle it with Eysell, and touch the place where the Haire groweth, and it shall grow no more there. Approved. To know whether a woman shall conceive or no. TAke of the ruyne of Hare, and having fryed and consumed it in hot water, giue it to the woman to drinke in the morning at her breakfast, then let her stand in a hot Bath, and if there come a griefe or a paine in her belly, she may very well conceiue. To make a barren woman beare Children. TAke of these little Sea fishes called in Latine Pollipodes, and roste them vpon the coales with our Oyle, and let the woman eate of them, and it shall profit and helps very much, having in the meane time the company of a man.
To make a woman have a quicke Birth. TAke leaues of Dictarij, and stampe them, or else make pow∣der of them, and giue the woman that laboureth drinke of it with a little water, and she shall be delivered incontinent with∣out any great paine or griefe. For all manner of Lamenesse or swellings. TAke a handfull of Time, a handfull of Lavender cotton, and a handfull of running Strawberries that be like to a string, and so cut them small, then beat them in a Morter, with foure or fiue young Swallowes taken out of the nest very fligge and quicke,  them together vntill yée sée never a feather of them whole. hat done, take a penny worth of May butter clarified, and mingle it in the Morter with Hearbes, and so let it stand foure and twenty houres before they séeth: when you haue sod∣den it, vse it as before you are taught, as well in preserving of it, as in vsing of it. Eor to stay the Laxe or Fluxe. TAke Plantine, otherwise called Weybred-leaues and rootes, and wash them in faire water, and then stampe them, and take a good quantity of the Iuyce and put it to old ale, and make a Posset therewith, and after take the ale Posset, and clarifie it vpon the fire perfectly, and then let the Patient drinke it blood warme, in the morning and evening, without taking of o∣ther drinke, the space of two houres either before or after. A speciall Remedy for the Stone. TAke a quantity of Anniséedes, Lycorice, Fennell rootes, and Parsley rootes, Reysons, and Currants, and let all these be boyled in Whay, from a pottle to a quart. For the sweating Sicknesse. YEe must take a good spoonefull of Treacle, thrée spoonefuls of Vineger, fiue spoonefuls of water, and two spoonefuls of
the Iuyce of sinckfoyle, swing them all together, and drinke them luke warme. For him that pisseth Blood. TAke a good quantity of Rew, otherwise called hearbe Grace, and dry it so that you may beate it to powder, and then take the powder and drinke it with Ale: and it will change the rine. For the Canker in the Mouth. TAke white Wine, and a penny-worth of Ginger in powder, and let them séeth a walme together, and wash the  place with a feather, and drinke not in one houre after, and yée shall haue ease in seven dayes, on warrantise. A powder for the same. TAke Sage Pimpernell of each a like quantity, and halfe so much Parcely, as of them both, shred them and stampe them small, and put thereto a little burnt Allome, and then take it vp, and drie it, and beate it to powder and kéepe it, for it never failed. To know the Fester and Canker. HEere you may learne whereof, and of what manner the Fester commeth, and also the Canker, it commeth of a sore that was ill healed, and breaketh out againe, and if it bée in the flesh, there doth come out water, if it be in the inews, there commeth out browne lie: and if it be in the bone, there com∣meth out as it were thicke blood. A Fester hath a narrow hole without and within, and a Fester is seldome séene, but it hath more holes then one, and the Canker hath alwayes but one hole.
For a Canker in the body. TAke the rootes at Dragons and cut them in small pieces, and lay them to dry, and make powder thereof, and take a penny weight of that powder, and put it in water all Night, and on the morrow powre out that water, and put thereto white-wine and then séeth it well, and let the Patient drinke thereof warme, and in thrée dayes he shall be whole. For a Canker in a womans Pappes. TAke th Dung of a white Goose, and the juyce of Salendine, and bay them together, and lay them to the sore, and it will kill the Canker, and heale the Pappe. A good powder for the Canker. TAke Copperas, and Roch Saunders, and Verdigreace, and Salarmoniac, and beate them to powder in a brasen Morter, of each a like quantity by weight, and put the powder in a ves∣sell, and séethe it on a charcole fire till it glowe, and then take it downe, and let it coole, and after make powder thereof and that powder shall destroy the Canker, on warrantise. A good feate for the Canker, Fester, Botches and Sores, old and new. TAke Virgins waxe, Barrowes greace molten, ana one pound, Peroien demi. ounce, and of Masticke, and Ollibanon ana one ounce, of Veride demi. ounce, Pitch demi. pound, beate all these▪ and put them in a Panne, and melt them, and when it is molten looke that the Veride be ready beaten, and put it in and stirre it fast for cleaving to the bottome of the vessell, and then take it downe, and set it coole, and so yee may straine it, and wet
the panne that it shall be strained into for cleaving thereto, and with a feather put away the corruption, and take héed to a sore that is ill healed, and that the place breaketh not out againe, for being fiue wéeks old and more, it is both perilous and doubt∣full of a Canker. To slea the Canker or Marmoale. TAke a pecke of the Ashes made of Ashen-wood, and ashes of Oate straw, and put hot water on them, and make a gallon of Lie, and put thereto two handfuls of Barkedust, and let it stand a day and a night, and then clense it thorow a canvasse, and then take the same dust, and put it in againe, and put there∣to as much Allome, and halfe as much of Madder crops; and put them in a pot, and let them boyle almost to halfe, and ever stirre it, that it grow not to the bottome, nor rue over, and after clense it through a cloath, and let it coole, and when it is cold take a quantity thereof, and wet a linnen cloath therein and lay it to the sore. For the Canker in the mouth. TAke seven spoonefuls of Honey, and clarifie it in a pewter Dish, and then put it demi pinte of white Vineger, and roch Allome, the quantity of a Hasell nut, and a spoonefull of Bay-salt, and let all these boyle together, a quarter of an houre, and then take of dryes Rose leaues, and Sage, ana a handfull, let them séeth together the space of a quarter of an houre, and let the Patient wash his mouth therewith, and lay the ues to the sore, and if the liquour bée too thicke to wash your mouth with, then take running Water and white Vineger, and a spoonefull of Honey, and boyle them well as before. To make a red Water to slea the Canker. TAke thrée handfuls of Rew, bray it in a Morter, and put there∣to a quart of Vineger, and Madder one ounce, and take halfe a penny worth of Allome, and beate it to powder and put thereto,
and let it so rest nine dayes or more, and then take them out, and then straine them through a cloth into a cleane glasse, and stop the vessell close, and keepe it. To take away the Canker. TAke Martlemasse Bfe that hangeth in the Roofe, and burne it to powder, and put the powder into the Sore, and it will slea the Canker. For the Canker in the mouth. TAke Hearbe Gace, Lavender, Cotton, Sage, Honysuckle leau  Rosemary, and ana, wash them and stampe them with a little roch Allome, and a little English Honey, and put them into a faire Dish, and when yée dresse a sore mouth therewith, take as much as yée thinke will serue, and take a few Sage leaues and wash thy mouth, and lay it to thy Gummes, and i yée put thereto a little Pepper, and Bay salt, it will be the bet∣ter. A powder for the Canker. TAke one quarter of a pound of Roch Allome, and burne it in an earthen vessell, that there come no ashes thereto: then take Argo, one halfe ounce, and one quarter of an ounce of Bole∣armoniacke, and make all these in fine powder alone, and then mixe them altogether, and put them into a Bladder, and kéepe it close: and when yée will minister it, wash well the sore with the water, and then lay on the Powder, and so dresse it once in the day, and it shall helpe him. For Canker, Fistula, Warts, or Wounds, new or old. TAke a gallon and a halfe of running Water, and a pecke of Ashen-ashes, and séeth them, and make thereof a gallon of Lye, and put thereto a gallon of Tanners wooe, and powder of Roch Allome, and Madder, a pound: and séeth all these, and let your panne be so great, that it be little more then halfe full, and
when it riseth in the séething stirre it downe with a ladle, that it runne not over, and let it stand thrée or foure houres till it bée cléere, and all that is cléere straine it thorow a good thick Can∣vas, and then wet therein a ragged cloath and long lint, and lay it on the sore, and this is good for all the diseases aforesaid. A good Medicine for the Canker and Sores. TAke a pottle of cleane running water, or white wine, Sage, Rosemary, and Sink foyle, of each a handfull, Allome one ounce, boyle all together till halfe a quarter be consumed, and for the Canker put in a little white Coperas and Camphere. For the Canker in the mouth. TAke Plantine, Bittony, Egrimony, Violets, and Wood-bind, and boyle them in Wine or Water, with Isope, Pyo∣ny, Pimpernell, and gréene Walnuts, and therewith wash foure times in a day, and hold it in your mouth hot, and therewith wash. For Canker old or new, or Marmole. TAke Smalledge, Wormewood-gréene, Walnuts, Lillies, Broome Crappes, white Hazell, red Nettle, Sage, Selfe-eale, Pimpernell, the roote of Floure-deluce, Planten, ground Ivie, Wallwoort, Mouse-eare, Celondine, Mintes, Bittony, Egrimony, Violets, Charvell, Colwortes, Avence, stampe all these, and rot them, and fry them in Barrowes grease, Shéepes tallow, and Honey, and make thereof an oyntment with Tur∣pentine, Waxe, Rozen, Pitch, Gum, Frankensence, burnt Allome, and powder of Tanners barke. For the Canker. TAke the powder of Saden, Hony, and creame, and white wine, and mixe them altogether, and melt them over the fire, and
when it is hot, with a linnen cloath wash therewith thy mouth, and when the Sore is well washed, put thereof into the griefe, with Lint, as hot as may bée suffered two times a day, and bée whole. For a Canker in a mans body, and save the man. TAke the rootes of Dragons, and cut them, and dry them in gobbets, and make powder of them, and take a 9. d. weight of that powder, and séeth it in white Wine, and let the sicke drink thereof warme, fasting, and in thrée dayes he shall be whole. For the Head-ache. TAke Hemlockes, and séeth them, till they be as thicke as Pappe, and lay them where the paine is: Let them lye all Night and on the morrow lay another of the same heat, and doe so thrée or foure times, and it is done. Another for the same. ALso take and make Lye of Veruen, or Bytton, or Worme-wood, and therewith wash thy Head thrice a wéeke, and it shall doe thée much good, and take away the Ache. Another for the same. TAke the Hearbe called Bursa Pactoris, and bruise it, and lay it to the hart of thy Foote, and it helpeth both the Head-ache, and the Toothache. Another for the same. TAke Bitton, Veruen, Selndine, Waphroade, Rewe, Wall∣woort and Sage, and a quantity of Pepper, and Hony, and séeth them all together in water, and straine it through a cloath, and drinke it Fasting.
Another for the same. STampe Bittony, and lay it on thy Head vnder the Cappe or bind it to thy head. Another for the same. TAke Sage, Bittony, and Rewe, with Wormewood, ana, séeth these in faire water, and then put out the same water into a vessell, and then grind the same Hearbs in a Morter small, a then take of them and of the liquor, and eper them with Wheate Branne, and with the rest of the liquor wsh thy head, and then lay a Plaister thereof vpon the Mould, and let it lye there a day and a night, and do so thrée or foure times. Item, yée may take rootes and leaues of Primroses, fresh Butter, and Tarre boyled together. Another for the ssame. TAke Avence, Pigeons dung, and Wheate flower, ana one ounce, and temper them with the white of an Egge, and bind to thy griefe. Another for the same. TAke Bittonic and Camomill, ana a handfull, and séeth it in a pottle of Wine to a quart, and wash thy head with the liquor, and if it be the Megrim, it shall helpe thée. Another for the same. TAke Frankensence, Doues dung, and flower of Wheate, ana one ounce, and temper them together with the white of an Egge, and lay a Plaister thereof where the griefe is,
Another for the same. TAke the white of an Egge and beate it well, and take away the froth, and put thereto Rose-water, and the powder of Alablaster: then take Flaxe and wet therein, and lay it to the Temples, and when it is dry, wet it againe: vse it thrée or foure times. Another for the same. TAke, Verven, Bittony, Wormewood, séeth them well, and wash the Patients head, and after that make a Plaister, and lay on the over part of the Head on this manner: take the same Hearbes bforesaid when they are sodden, and wring out the Iuyce  them, then take the Hearbes and stampe them in a Morter, and temper them with the water they were sodden in, and put thereto Wheate branne to cover the Iuyce of the hearbes that it goe not out, then take a garland of Linnen cloth, that will goe about thy head and bind the Plaisters in it, as hot as the Patient may abide it, and then put on a cappe over that. Another for the same. IF the paine come of hot humours, take a quantity of House-léeke, and distill it as much as you please, and with the same water wash thy Temples, and the Forehead, and then dippe a linnen cloth therein, and lay it on thy Forehead, or thy temples. Another for the same. TAke Margerom, and gréene Iuy leaues, Bittony, and Ver∣ven, of every one two handfuls, cut them small, and beate them in a Morter and séeth it in two penny worth of fresh But∣ter, and stirre it till it waxe very gréene, and so let it stand nine dayes in an earthen pot, then séeth it againe, and stirre it well and straine it, and kéepe it in a faire vessell, and when you néed warme a little thereof in a Sawcer, and annoynt your Temples therewith.
Another for the same. TAke a quart of white Wine, and Horehound, two handfuls, and Camomill, one handfull, and boyle them together, and therewith wash thy Head: then take Wheate bran, and put to the hearbes, and boyle it, and make a Plaister and lay it to thy head. Another for the same. TAke the Iuyce of Salondine, and good Vineger, mingled, and made hot, and with a spunge or a linnen cloth lay it to thy forehead, it quencheth great heate, and purgeth it that it come no more. Another for the same. TAke the Iuyce of Pimpernell, and put thereto May butter, and frye them together with a soft fire, and keepe it, and therewith annoynt the Head and Temples. To cleanse the Head. TAke Alloes one ounce, Myrrhe halfe an ounce, Garlicke foure drams, Saffron in powder, halfe a penny worth, and mingle them together in fine powder: then take the Iuyce of Cole∣worts, and put them to your powder, and make it as thicke as pappe, and somewhat more stiffer, and make Pils thereof, as bigge as small Pease, and when you goe to Bed, take foure of them, and roll them in fine powder of Lycorice, and cast them into your mouth, and swallow them downe. For the Head-ache comming of the stomacke. TAke Fumitory, Camomill, and Roses, and séethe them in white Wine, and make a Plaister, and lay it hot thereto. For Ache in the hinder part of the Head. STampe Sage with the white of an Egge, and temper it with Vineger, and lay it thereto.
A principall Medicine for the Head. TAke Commin a quantity, and lay it in Vineger one night, and on the Morrow put out all the Vinegr, saving a little o kéepe moyst, and fry it in a pan, and bind it in a linnen cloath a∣bout thy head, and by the grace of God, yée shall be whole. For a man diseased in the Liver and Spleene. TAke Barrowes grease, and Ashes make of Ashenwood, ana one pound, and running water a Gallon, and éeth them till they be half wasted, and then straine them thorow a cloth into a vessell and let it stand so all night, and then on the morrow, fléete of the grease, and cast away the water, and melt the grease, and stirre it oft, and put it into Boxes, and when you néed an∣noynt the Spléene therewith. A Drinke to be used after this Oyntment. TAke the rootes of young Ashen plants, cleane washed, one handfull and Wormewood, ana and let them séeth in Wine, from a gallon to a pottle, and let the Patient drinke thereof, at Morning cold, and Evening hot. Probatum. A Plaister for the Spleene. TAke dry Lillies, March Mallow rootes, Alexander séed, of each one ounce, of the barke of Elme, the barke of Ashe, Broome oode, of each two ounces: all these being in powder, let them be sodden in strong Vineger, and so let them séeth, till they be sodden dry: then put thereto powder of Cummin demi. Dram: powder of the barke of Capers, one ounce demi. Pow∣der of Rewe, three drams, then afterward put thereto Gum Armoniac one ounce thrée drams, dissolved in Vineger, and then with waxe Turpentine, as much as shall suffice, and make thereof a Plaister for the Spléene.
A principall Medicine for the Head. TAke Commin a quantity, and lay it in Vineger one night, and on the morrow put out all the Vineger, saving a little to éepe it moyst, and fry it in a pan, and bind it in a linnen cloth about thy head, and by the grace of God, yée shall be whole. For a man diseased in the Liver and Spleene. TAke Barrowes grease, and Ashes made of Ashen wood, ana one pound, and running water a Gallon, and seth them till they be halfe wasted, and then straine them thorow a oth into a vessell, and let it stand so all Night, and then on the morrow, fléet off the grease, and cast away the water, and melt the grease, and stirre it oft, and put it into Boxes, and when you néed an∣noynt the Spléene therewith. A Drinke to be used after this Oyntment. TAke the rootes of young Ashen plants, cleane washed, one handfull, and Wormewood, ana, and let them séeth in Wine, from a Gallon to a pottle, and let the Patient drinke thereof, at Morning cold, and Evening hot. A Playster for the Spleene. TAke dry Lillies, March Malow rootes, Alexander séed, of each one ounce, of the barke of Elme, the barke of Ashe, Broome séede, of each two ounces: all these being powder, let them be sodden in strong Vineger, and so let them séeth till they be sodden dry: then put thereto powder of Cummin demi. Dram. powder of the Barke of Capers, one ounce demi. Pow∣der of Rewe, thrée drams, then afterward put thereto Gum Armoiac, one ounce thrée drams, dissolved in Vineger, and then with Waxe, Turpentine, as much as shall suffice, and make thereof a Plaister for the Spléene.
Another for the same. TAke the toppes of Acornes, Rose leaues, Elander-séede, Commin séede preparated, of each one ounce, Strado Arabiae, Galanga, of each two ounces, Salinter, I. Saltéeter demi ounce terrified, mixe them and put them in a bagge, quadrant, quilted, or basted. A Drinke for the same. TAke the Iuyce of Licoris, one ounce, Fennell-séed, Anis-séde, and Iuniper, ana demi ounce, pownd it in a Morter, and drinke . For the Spleene. TAke thrée spoonefuls of the Iuyce of Iuy leaues, in white Wine or else of the Iuyce of Egrimony, and drinke it thrée or foure mornings fasting, and yée shall be whole. To purge and amend the Heart, Liver, Spleene, Stomacke, Lunges, and Braine. TAke Lagde-béefe, Alexander, Water-cresses, young Mal∣lowes, Bourage, red Fennell rootes, Parcely rootes, Mercu∣ry, Hearts tongue, Nippe, and Clar, and make thereof pottage, or else stw a Coue, with a piece of Surloyne of Béefe chopped, in small pieces, with Retsons, or Currans, and a little Suger, and colour them with Sders, and kéepe the ew pot close, vse this Medicine, when the Mooe is in signes expulsiue. To dissolve the hardnesse of the Spleene. AMoniacum dissolved in very sharpe Vineger, and stroken vpon Leather Plaister-wise, and applyed to the Spléene, will llifie the hardnesse thereof, and it may lye thereto seven weekes and never be removed.
A Soveraigne Medicine for the Spleene, and to clense the body. TAke Harts-tongue, wilde Hoppes, Lettice, Bourage, with the flowers of Fumitory, Parcely rootes, seethe all these in Whay, and clarifie it with whites of Egges, and straine it, and drinke it first and last, during a moneth, and it shall helpe your Spleene, and clense your blood, and comfort you many wayes for your health. For the Spleene. TAke Camomill flowers, wheatebranne, and a pinte of white Wine, boyle them together, and put them in a bag, then take oyles of Violets, of Linséed, of Lillies, ana a penny-worth, annoynt therewith, and put your bagge hot thereto. For Ache in the Backe. TAke a great Onion, or two id roast them in the imbers, then stampe them, and straine them out of the Iuyce, and mixe it with as much Malmesse as Iuyes, and drinke thereof blood-warms, first and last: Probatum. To stay the Backe, and helpe him that consumeth. TAke the rootes of Parcely, Fennell, Camfire, and of Bou∣rage, Planten, Bursa Pastoris, and Knot-grasse, and make broth with them of young Hens, Capon, and Mutton, Rab∣bets Veale, and put thereto a Date or two, and yée may séeth them in posset Ale made of white Wine. Another for the same. TAke white Archangell, Comtry flowers, white Lillies, white Roses, white Holly hocks, Knot-grasse, Clary, and stampe them, and take a pottle of Mushadine, and a pinte
of Ale, with the pith of an Oxe backe, and thrée capped Dates, the stones taken out, and beate them in a Morter small, and then put in some of your Muskadine, and grinde it, and some of your Ale, and stirre it, and séeth the rest thereof, also the yolkes of thrée new laid Egges, the strings taken out, and beat them well, and put thereto Sinamon, two penny-worth, and hol Mace, one penny-worth, and séeth all these to a quart. For the Bladder and the Reynes. TAke the sées of Planten beaton in a Morter, and séeth them in Wine, and drinke thereof alone. To stay the Backe. TAke the pith of an Oxe backe and scald it, and then straine it out of the skin, and hred Nippe, and beate it in a Mor∣ter with the said pith very small, and then put thereto a quart of Milke, and straine it, and then séeth it with fiue or sixe Dates, and a graine of Amber-gréece, and powder of Ginger, and let the Patient vse it often. For Ache in the Backe and Legge. TAke the marrow of an Oxe, and oyle Oliue thrée spoonefuls, and the yolkes of Egges, and Butter, ana, Pepper one ounce then take the milke of a woman, and mingle it together, and an∣noynt the sicke therewith. To take away the paine of the Reynes of one that is low brought. TAke thrée quarts of white Wine, and boyle therein a red Cocke, and put thereto a handfull of red Nip, a quantity of Clary, and the rootes of red Fennell, Harts-tongue, a sticke of
Synamon bruised, Dates, great and small Raisins, with a few Prunes, séeth all these together, till the strength of the Cocke be in the broth, and put therein one ounce of Manus Christi, and vse this Morning and Evening luke warme. A Plaister for the Reynes. TAke Callamint, Camomill, Wormewood, Peritory, Hockes, and bray them in a Morter, with Oyle, or Butter, or Déeres and Shéepes suet, and grease of a Boare, or Barrow-hogge, with a quantity of Commin, and lay it in a Plaister both behind and before. For all Diseases in the Backe. TAke the rootes of Dasies, of Planten, of Bursa pastoris, of Centimodum, and the Cups of Acorns, ana a handfull, and of Bolearmoniac two ounces, and of Harts-horne burnt, ana, and also a Bucke Conie that is fat, and let all these be sodden toge∣ther in white Wine and water, as much Wine as water, till the Cony be conumed, from the bones of the flesh, then take a∣way the flesh and the bones from the broth, and so let the broth stand till it come to a Ielly, and when you are in your bed, cause your Backe to be therewith annoynted by a Chafingdish of coales, thrée nights together, and lay thereon a warme linnen cloth, and it shall helpe you by Gods grace. For paine in the bladder, and to make it whole for ever. TAke thrée rootes of Smalledge, and wash them faire and cleane, and cut them small, and séeth them in a quart of faire water, till three parts of the water be consumed, then straine it, and take foure drams of the powder of Bittony, and put thereto, and drinke the said water.
Against running of the Reynes. TAke one pound of Iordaine Almonds, and blanch them, and parch them, and grind them right small and make Almond milke thereof, with a pinte of Rose-water, and a pinte of Planten water, and then séethe it with Suger, and Sinamond, and when it is cold put thereto a dramme of Masticke in fine powder, and vse thereof to eate and be whole, Probatum est. A Syrope for the Backe, TAke the rootes of Emila Compana cleane scraped, and slice them thin, and lay them in faire running water thrée dayes, and shift them every day, then at thrée dayes and take them out, and put them in a gallon of faire running water, with a quart of Hony, of Lycorice one ounce, scraped cleane and sliced, and of Anniséed one ounce, cleane rubbed from the dust, let all these be boyled with a soft fire, and take out the rootes out of the liquour, washing them one by one, and when they be cut lay them on a faire dish, and so let them lye 24. houres, and then take the rootes and weigh them, and for every pound of your rootes, take a pottle of Muskadine, and white atard, and put your roots therein, and put thereto two pound of fine white Su∣ger, two or thrée whole Maces, boyle all these to a Syrope, with your roote, and then put it into a pot, and when you occupy it, let the Patient eate of the rootes, and drinke a spoonefull of Sy∣rope, with your rootes, and then put it into a Pot, and when you occupy it, let the Patient eate of the rootes and drinke a spoon∣full of Syrope after if, Morning and Evening. Probatum est. To provoke Menstruum Mulieris. TAke powder of Péeter, Bittony, Yarrow-séed, in white Wine and drinke it.
Another. TAke Mgwort, Selondine, Marigold, Vernen, Nippe, ana nine crops thrée dayes before the change, and thrée dayes before the full of the Moone. Another. TAke Germander, and the rootes of red Madder, and séethe it in Ale, and giue it her to drinke or else take Radices, Et fe∣mem pionae, red Sanders and Suger, and vse it as aforesaid. Another. TAke Cotula Fetuda, the which is like Camomill, but it in∣keth, and make a fomentation thereof. Another. TAke the Iuyce of Mercury, and Hony, and flower of Cockle, as much as will incorporate it, and make thereof little balls, and giue her one or two of them, and she shall haue Menstrum, also it shall after dispose her to conceiue, for it hath seldome failed, and is well proved. Another. TAke the blacke séed of Pione, and bruise them one by one to the number of nine, and picke the blacke buskes, and in a Morter breake them to powder, eate and drinke the said pow∣der at times aboue said in the second Medicine. Pro cadem. Another. TAke the rootes of Gladion, and Arsmart, and séethe them in good white Wine, or Vineger, and when they be well sod∣den, take them from the fire, & let the woman sit ouer it, so that the ayre may strike vy, and none got away, for this is proved.
Another. TAke Bittonie, Puliall, Riall, Centory, ana a handfull, séethe them with Wine or water, till the two parts be wasted, and then clense it thorow a cloth and drinke it. Another. TAke Balme, Margerom, Isope, Marigolds, ana a handfull, and séethe them from a pottle to a quart vpon a soft fire, and so take it and drinke it every morning fasting, and if it be bitter, put thereto Suger, and vse it. To stop Menstruum Mulieris. TAke the blackest holly-hocks that yée can get, and take the flowers thereof, and mae them in powder, and drinke them, and wash the place with the water of Lovage. Another. TAke the water of Oake leaue distilled, halfe a pinte of Rose water, ana and Syrrupe of Quinces sixe ounces, and let her drinke thereof first and last. Another. TAke Horse-dung, and séeth it in good Vineger, and put it into little bagges of linnen cloth, and lay the one vpon the Reines of the backe, and the other betwéene the Nauill, and the privie place, as warme as she may suffer it, and let her drinke every Morning and Euening Synamon till shée be whole. Another. TAke the rootes of Gladn, and séeth them well in Wine, or water, and receiue the fume thereof: It never failed.
To stop white Menstruum and red. TAke the Iuyce of Planten, and of Bursa Pastoris, and w whites of Egges well beaten among the Iuyce, and put thereto Bolearmoniac one ounce, and of Terra sigillata, demi ounce, and a portion of Beane flower, and make it thicke vpon the fire, and draw thereof a Plaister vpon thin cloth, and lay it to her Backe and Navill. Another for the whie. TAke the inner rinde of the Slotrée, Sumatch, Balestianes, the rinde of the Pomegranate, Planten, Knot-grasse, the inner rinde of the red Bryer, and a little French-Bolearmoniac, and boyle all these in red Wine, till halfe be consumed, and let her drinke it fasting, Et restringer fluxum Menstruum. Another for the same. TAke the foote and Legge of Hare, and bake it to powder haire and all, and drinke it, and it restraineth the same. Of Fearne. THe roote is good to be drunke, and laid too Plaister-wise, for Wounds that are made with Réedes, and in like manner, the roote of the Réede drunke, and laid Plaister-wise to the re, where Fearne sticketh, the powder is good to be strowed vpon moyst , which are har to be covered with in, and ill to be healed; the juyce pressed out of the Fearne roote, laid too with Rose-water, or other cold water, is good for all manner of burning or scalding, perfectly and sure. To take away heate and inflamation of a Member. TAke the waters of Planten and Purslaine, of each two oun∣ces, and the water of a little hearbe called Vernsenlarie, two ounces, Liturge and eruts in fine powder, of uch foure drams, Camphere thrée  all .
A Locion for inflamation of Balam. THe waters of Planten and Roses, of each two ounces, Tu∣thers, prepriat a dram, Verdigreace sixe drams, Allome halfe a dram, Camphere two drams, Honey of Roses two oun∣ces, burnt Lead sixe drams weight: and it is done. A Locion for a sore Mouth. TAke running water a pinte, Vineger halfe a pinte, Honey foure ounces, Bay leanes one ounce, Galingale one dram: Let all these be decocted to the forme of a Syrope. A preparative. TAke Syrope of Violets, Endiffe, and of Femitory, of each two ounces, and of common Decoction foure ounces, To make Vergent milke. TAke Litarge of Leade one pound, with Vineger a pinte,  in Fuse thrée dayes, and then drawne with woollen shreds, and so kéepe it in a Viall by it selfe close: then take foure ounces of Conduit-water, and one ounce of Allome, and one dram of Camphere: and melt all over the fire, and kéepe the water by it selfe in another Viall, and when you will vse it put both these waters together, of each like quantity, and it will be like milke, Another of M. Doctor axleys. TAke Litarge of Silver halfe a pound, with Vineger a quart: Boyle these together till halfe be wasted, and then draw the Liquor, from the Litarge with woollen hreds: and so kéepe it
to your vse in a Viall close; take also of Camphere thrée drams. Muske foure graines: against all these things put one ounce and a halfe of Oyle of Tartary, and put all in a pinte of Rose-water, and boyle it till the third part be consumed: and then draw the rest with woollen hreddes, and kéepe it to your vse, in a Viall close, and when you will vse it, take a very little bot∣tle-Glasse, and fill it halfe full of the first Water, and fill it vp with the second Water and it will coagulate together, straight wayes marvellously as white as Milke, and also it taketh away the spottes and Feeckles in the Face, if it be often applyed thereto. A Plaister for the Collicke and Stone. TAke Peritory, Camomill, ground Iuy-leaues, Cummin: stampe them, and boyle them in white Wine, and make a Plaister thereof, and put it about the Reines as hot as may be suffered, and sée that it lye close round about behind and before. A Plaister for the Headache, and for hot Agues. TAke red Myntes, Leavened Bread of Wheate, and white Vineger: Make thereof a Plaister, and lay it to your Fore∣head, for it helpeth diseases in the Head, and also fo hot A∣gues. A comfortable Powder for the Heart. TAke Synamon, Ginger, of each thrée ounces, graines of Pa∣radice, long Pepper, of each two drams: Saffron one dram, Suger foure ounces: and so make your Powder. Another Remedy that breaketh the stone, which being used a certaine time; will cause the stone broken, never after to harden in the bladder. TAke a pound of Gromwell, a pound of Saxefrage séede: and a pound of Coliander, with a quarter of a pound of Soras,
white and red, and grinde all these in a Morter very small, and so kéep it, vsing to eate thereof in your Pottage, every day a spoonefull. Another proved Medicine for the Stone. TAke Time, Damons, Beane Cods, Pellitory of the wall, Saxefrage, like quantities, and stéepe them one night in white Wine, then distill them, and vse to drinke thereof. Another remedy for the Stone, and to cause the voydance of Urine. TAke Pellitorie of the Wall, Sothernwood, and séeth them in Water or white Wine, with a quantity of Shéepes Suet: till it be tender, then put the hearbes and fallow in a linnen bag, and lay it warme to the bottome of the belly, vsing this, you shall finde remedy. A proved Medicine to avoid the Urine that hath beene long stopped, also for the Stone. TAke Radish rootes, one if it be of bignesse and strong, is suffi∣cient, and scrape it very cleane, and lay it in white Wine, a night in stéepe, then straine the Wine, and giue the Patient to drinke, and he shall voyd water. A very good water for the stone, proved. THe water of Strawberries, with the leaues distilled, and so vsed by draughts, as other drinke. To breake the Stone. DRye the stones of a Cock a yeare old, and beate them into fine powder, and giue the diseased thereof to drinke in white Wine, but if he haue the Charward, then giue it to drink with good water.
The Lady Gath, her Medicine against the Plague. TAke Abaunce, Turmintell, Sage, Spermint, and Violet leaues, of each one handfull, and stampe them in a Morter very small, when you haue so done, straine them through a strai∣ner with red wine, claret or white, whether you can most easily get, and luke warme, giue of this water to the diseased to drink. Against the new Ague, by D. Langdon. TAke Sortell, Sowthistill, Endiue, Dandelion, Succore, croppes of Fennell with Mallowes, with Violet leaues of each one handfull, and séeth them all in a gallon of stale Ale, to a pottle, with skimming, that done, straine out the liquor, and make thereof an Ale posset, and let the Patient drinke thereof as oft as he is a thirst, putting into every draught as much Treacle as the bignesse of a Beane, and yée shall be healed. To kill the Paulsie. DRinke the roote of Valerian in powder, and it will destroy the Palsey, so that ye eate no Hogge flesh. A remedy for the Dropsie. SCrape an Elder roote very cleane, and breake it in many pie∣ces, or shred it into white Wine, and let it stéepe therein, then drinke the Wine, and it will heale your Disease. Against stopping of the Pipes. TAke Hisope, Mintes, Rose-mary, Daisies, and Consond, of each like quantity, and séeth them with Ale in Lycorice, and vse it Morning and Evening. Against Hoarsenesse. TAke a good quantity of a Verveine, and séeth it with Lycorice in faire water, then straine the water, and vse no other drink with your meate vntill you find remedy.
To cause good fasting of meate. DRinke wine sodden with Sentory, and Plantins, Euening and Morning, and it shall helpe you. For the yellow Jaundise. TAke the reddeft Docke rootes that ye can get, and being wa∣shed cleane, put them into a vessell of good Ale, and when it is stale, let the diseased drinke no other drinke to his meate but ale, and it shall helpe. Doctor Argentines Medicine for the Stone. TAke the red barke of an Ivie trée dryed, and beaten into fine powder, and after searse it through a fine Searse: also take a like quantity of blacke Ieat, beaten and searsed in like man∣ner, and being mingled together, drinke thereof with Wine or Ale, blood warme, fiue or sixe times. For Wormes in the Bellie. AGainst the Wormes in the Bellie, take Onyons and pill them, cut or slice them small, powre Spring-water over them: Let it stand all Night, and in the morning drinke that water, and it driveth away all wormes: powre the same water vpon the Earth where the Wormes are, and within halfe an houre, they will all créepe out of the Earth. Another for the same. LIkewise if one eate Garlicke Fasting, it killeth and driveth out Wormes out of the Body. Or else drinke distilled wa∣ter of Knot-grasse, or Shanie-grasse. The same killeth wormes also: how beit it worketh more in young then in old folkes. An approved Remedy for a Woman that hath her Throwes before her time. SEeth a good handfull of whole Cheruill in a quart of Claret Wine, and when the Hearbes be well sodden, wring them
into the Wine, and clense it, and make thereof an Hypocras with Sugar, Cynamon and Ginger, of Smouane, and give her thereof warme at times néedfull. And it shall expulse the paine. Approved. A Drying Powder for old Sores. TAke the round Astrologia, Frankensence, and Allome: of each two drams in fine Powder. A Powder for the Strangury. TAke Ivie Berries dryed ouer the Fire betwéen two stones, and Alisander séedes, of each a like quantity: and make a Powder thereof to be vsed in a draught of good Ale. For Gomora Passie. R. Cassia extracted halfe an ounce, Venice Turpentine, thrée drams, washed, in Rose-water oftentimes, the powder of Ru∣barbe one dram and a halfe, and with sufficient of Sugar, make it in round Bales. For a sore Legge that is swolne with the Axis or Ague. TAke Bare leaues and binde them vpon your Legges, and it will make them water. For the Collicke and Stone. TAke vnset Léekes, vnset Time, and Parcely, and make pot∣tage of it with Mutton: it is also good for the Mother. Eor a Megrim in the Head. TAke a cloath and warme it very hot, and chae the nape of your necke, and your temples, a mornings.
For the Ague or Axis. TAke a quart of Red wine, and a quart of Milke, and still them, and giue it to the Patient to drinke, when the Axis come vpon him, but the milke must be taken as it commeth from the Cowe. For the Tooth-ache. TAke nine Pepper cornes, and fiue Cornes of Bay-salt, and some English honey, and breake your Pepper cornes, and beate them ll in an Oyster shell, then make little balls of lint, and dippe them in the Honey, and lay it vnto your tooth, or rub your teeth with Allome heaten. For a sore Brest. TAke a Red rose cake, and white Wine in a dish, and set it on a Changdish of coales, and turne the cake vp and downe in the dish, and lay it to the brest as hot as may bée suffered and vse this thrée or foure times, till it be whole. For a sore eye that burneth and is watrie. TAke Hemockes and distill them, and take the water and lay it to your eyes, and take a little Lint, and dippe it in the wa∣ter, and so lay it vnto your eyes as you lye vpright in your bed. For to stoppe the Bloody Fluxe. TAke a pinte of Milke, and a pinte of water, and let them boyle together ouer the Fire, vntill it come all to a pinte: and let the Patient drinke it Morning and Evening.
For the Strangulion. TAke Reddish leaues, and séethe them in Ale, and giue it to the Patient to drinke, and it will cause him to make water. For a Fellon. TAke Rew, and Soape, Salt, Sooe, and Boares greace: and stampe them together, and lay it to the Fellon. For the Stone. BEate the stones of Medlers into powder, and drinke it with stild Milke, or with white Wine. A Medicine well proved for the Megrim. TAke the Iuye of Night-shade, and as much Vineger, with crummes of leavened Bread, and the white of two Egges, a quantity of Bolearmoniac, a quantity of Sage, and Dragons tayle: All these are to be made Plaister-wise vpon Flaxe, and lay it vpon your griefe; also Village to be stilled is very good. A Medicine for the Ague. TAke a quart of good Ale, and a quantity of Bay leaues, and séethe them from a quart vnto a pinte, and giue the Patient to drinke halfe an houre before the Fit come vpon him. For to heale a sore Eye, that is hurt with a small Pocke. TAke the Marrow of the pinions of a Gse-ing cold, a quan∣tity of Honey, new taken out of the Combe, in the blue, and mingle it together, and lay it on the Patients Eye-idde, and it will heale it. For a sore Eye with a Pinne and a Web. TAke white Allome, and Running-water, and boyle it toge∣ther in an Egge-shell, till it be halfe consumed.
For a sore Eye that Itcheth and pricketh. TAke Running water a quart, and put in white Copperas, a Rosemary sprigge, and a spoonefull of Hony, and let it boyle to a pinte, and then drop a little into the Eye: and kéepe it after him Rubbing or touching. For a Ciatica or Ache in the Bones. TAke Rew , and of red Nettles, of each a handfull, Commin, blacke Sope, and Frankensence, of each a quantity, boyle all these together, and make a Plaister thereof, and lay it to the griefe. Another for the same. TAke a lafull of Nettles, another of Neppe, séethe them in Chamber-lye, and put therein a handfull of Bay-salt, and a quantity of blacke Soape, and let them boyle well together, and lay it to the griefe. For the Stone. TAke Turpentine of Ieane, make it in little balls, and rowle it in fine Suger, and swallow it downe whole. For the Collicke. TAke a thinne Ashencuppe, and lay therein a laine of Rew in the bottome, and powre a few hot mbers vpon that, and so laine vpon laine, vntill the Cuppe be full, and then clappe ano∣ther thinne Cuppe vpon it, and lay it vnto the Collicke, and it will immediately take away the griefe. For Sore Eyes. TAke Fennell rootes, white Daisie rootes and leaues, and lay it in white Wine, and wash your Eyes with it.
To stoppe a great Laske. TAke a pottle of faire water, and put therein a Cony fleade, well washed, and quartered, & let it be well skimmed when it doth séeth: then take a good handfull of Almonds vnblanched, and the stones of great Raisins, and beat them in a Morter with some of the broth in the Pot; and vnstrained put them in: then take halfe an ounce of whole Cinamon, a handfull of Blackber∣ry leaues, a handfull of Planten with the rootes thereof, the Pot being cleane skimmed; put the aforesaid gredience therein, and let the Patient drinke thereof Morning and Evening, or at other convenient times in the day. Analliter, if the aforesaid Broth be warmed with a god of Stéele, when it is cold, it is so much the better. To cause one to make Water. TAke Parceley and séethe it in white Wine, and drinks it Morning and Evening. For the Wind Collicke. TAke Commin-séede, or fine Cod séede, and beat them to Powder, and put it into Ale, Béere, or white Wine, and drinke it, and it will make one Luskatiue. For to make Water for the same. TAke Broomeséed, and beate it to Powder, and drinke it with Muskadine, any other Wine. For to bind one from the Laske. TAke a penny-worth of Roch Allome, and séeth it in a pinte of white Wine, and drinke it. To kill the Tooth-ache, or a Ring-worme, or a Tetter. TAke Oyle of Broome, and annoynt the Gums at the roote of the Tooth where the paine is: It must bée vsed after this
manner: Take a piece of ol Broomesticke, the older the bet∣ter, and light it, and hold it downeward, and it will drop that which is yellow, and annoynt your Gummes with it, or put it in the hollow Tooth. For a broken Head. TAke vnwrought Waxe, and a little Sugar, and running Wa∣water, and boyle it in a Sawcer, and make a Plaister, and be whole. For Chilblaines in the Feet or Hands. TAke Shéepes Suet, and vnwrought Waxe, and Rozen: and boyle it in a Sawcer, and make a Sal, and it will heale them. For a Stitch. TAke Ground sill, and dry it, and put swéet Butter into it, and put it where the paine is, as hot as may be suffered: Or take Oates (the blackest that you can get) and fry them with red Vineger, and lay it as hot as may be suffered where the pain is. For an Ache or a Bruise. TAke oyle of Péeter, it must be vsed after this manner: Take a stoole, and when that you are Rising or going to Bed, sit with your Backe towards the fire, you must haue a great fire, and where the paine is, you must rub it with some of the Oyle all downewards, and they that doe dresse you, must dry their hands well against the fire and chafe it. For to skin a sore Finger, or broken Skinne. TAke Neruall Oyle, or Rose Oyle, or Camomill Oyle, or Pompilion, and annoynt your Finger or shinne with it, and it will be whole.
For a cold Ague. TAke a spoonefull of Vineger a spoonefull of Aqua-Vitae, and a little Treacle with long Pepper, and warme this blood-warme, and so let the sicke person drinke it, when the cold com∣meth, and let him walke if he be able, if not, laid downe and made to sweate. For a vehement Cough in young Children. TAke the Iuyce of Parcely, powder of Cummin, Womens milke, and mixe them together; then giue the Child to drinke thereof, and afterward make this Oyntment following: Take the séed of Hepe or Flaxe, and Vennycrite, and séethe them in common water, then presse out with your hands the substance of the Hearbs, which you shall mingle with Butter, and so annoynt the Childes brest with it as hot as may be. A singular Oyntment which healeth all Burning with Fire, not leaving Circratis or Scarre where it hath beene. TAke the white of two Egges, two ounces of Lucia Alexan∣drina, two ounces of Quicke Lime washed in nine waters, one ounce of new Waxe, with as much oyle Roset as shall suffice: and make-thereof an Oyntment. A perfect Remedy against the Collicke, and to make a man pisse, that hath beene three or foure dayes without making water, and that in the space of halfe an houre, and it will breake the Stone within tenne or twelve dayes. TAke fine powder of Virgo Aurea, and put a spoonefull of it in a new lae Egge soft roasted, and giue the Patient to drinke thereof in the Morning at his Breakefast, and let him not eate at the least in foure houres after, and then shall he make water in halfe an houre: If he use this continually, the space of tenne or twelue dayes, as is aforesaid, he shall pisse out the Stone without paine or griefe.
To make white Teeth. TAke Lemmons and make stild water of them, and wash your Téeth with it, for it is a soveraigne thing: Or if you will not make the water, take the Liquor of them, which is also good for the same purpose, but the water is better, because it is finer: so that in the Stilling it lose not his force. To make a cleere voyce. TAke Elder berries, and dry them in the Sunne, but take héed they take no moysture: then make powder of them, and drinke it every Morning Fasting with white Wine. To make a Perfume suddenly in a Chamber where a sicke man lyeth. TAke a little Earthen Pot, and put into it a Nutmeg, two scruples of the sticke of Cloues, and two of the sticke of Ci∣namon, and foure of storax Calamity, Rose-water, or water of Spike, or some other swéet water, and séethe it: then put it into a pot-shar, with a few hot Ashes, and coales vnder it, and set it in the Chamber, and the smoake thereof shall giue a swéet, ami∣able, and hearty savour. A very soveraigne Salve for old Sores. TAke Waxe foure pound, May butter one pound, Pitch one pound, Rozen a pound, Snailes in the shell a quart, Pim∣pernell, Chickwéede, Smalledge, Ragworth, Alehouthe, Ma∣rigolds, Red crosse Campians, Valerian, Tutson, Selfe-heale, red Archangell, Sage, and Planten: of each of all these two handfuls; this Salue is to be made in May, when these hearbs are best to be gotten. First stampe the Hearbs and the Snailes in a stone Morter, then set them ouer the fire, and séethe them with the Butter, then straine them through a cloth, and set it on the fire againe, and put in the Rzin, the Pitch, and the Waxe, and boyle them: and then put it into an Earthen pan, and when
it is cold, take the crust that standeth vpon it, and put it vp, and vse it when there is néed, and the thinnest water beneath you may cast away. A Medicine for a swelling in the Cheeke. TAke a handfull of wilde Mallowes, and séeth them in running water till they be very tender, then take it out of the water, and swing it in a cloth vntill it bée dry, then shred it vpon a Trencher with a Knife, and take a handfull of Camomill flowers, and bruise them in a morfer, then mixe the flowers and the Mallowes together, and put some oyle of Roses to it, then make two little bagges of fine linnen cloth, and fill them with the geare aforesaid, and lay it to the griefe as warm as yée can suffer it, and so change the bagge as you shall haue cause, and alwayes kéepe it warme, and by the grace of God it will helpe you. Another for the same. TAken pinte of white Wine, and halfe a handfull of Camomill flowers, and séethe them in the white Wine, and wash your chéeke, both within and without the same, as hot as you can suffer it, which is very good also. A Medicine for the Mother. TAke a pinte of Malmsie, a little curie of Commin-séede and Coliander séed, and a Nutmegge, beate these together, and then séethe them to halfe a pinte, with a little white Suger-can∣die, you must take a spoonefull at a time. A Medicine for a Stitch or Bruise. TAke thrée quarts of small Ale, and one penny-worth of Figs, and one penny-worth of great Reisons, and cut the stones out of them, and one penny-worth of Licorice, of Isope, of Violet leaues, and of Lettice, of each one handfull, and séethe
them from thrée quarts to thrée pints, and straine it, and so let the person drinke it, and after make this Plaister following, ae a quantity of horse-dung, and a quantity of Tar, fry it, and put a little Butter and Vineger into it, and make a Plai∣ster, and lay it to the side. A Remedy for Wartes. FIrst, with a paire of Sizers cut off the heads of the Warts, and then rub them with Garlicke and Bay-salt stamped both together, doe this sixe or seven times, and lay ouer them a little plate of Leade, or rub them with Allome water, and Bay-salt, nine times, this infirmity doth come of grosse and euill hu∣mours. A Remedy for a wild or running Scabbe. TAke Mercury mortified with Fasting spittle thrée ounces, incorporate it with oyle of Bayes, and annoynt the body, or else take Mercury mortified thrée ounces, of the powder of Brimstone two ounces, of the powder of Enula Campana two ounces, confect these together with Barrowes grease, and an∣noynt the body oft. A Remedy for a Fellon. THis infirmity doth come of a venemous matter, and other while it commeth of an inferiall cause, or of an exteriall, the interiall cause commeth of some euill humour, the exteriall cause doth come of some venemous stinging of a Worms, if it doe come of an euill humour eate Treacle, and make a Plaister of Treacle and lay it vpon the place: or take the white of a rawe Egge, and put in salt to it, and beate it well together, and make a Plaister thereof and lay it to the same,
A remedy for Wormes in the belly. TAke the juyce of Lauender-Cotton, and put to it the powder of Worme-séed, and drinke it thrée times euery Morning fa∣sting, and drinke not one houre or two after, the vsage of ea∣ting Garlicke killeth all Wormes in the body. A remedy for sore Eyes. TAke the white of two Egges, and make a Plaister with it, put to it a little Honey, and after that, put to it flaxe or towe, and to bedward lay it ouer thine Eyes, and let it lye all night and in the Morneing wash thine eyes with cold water, and a n cloute, doe this thrée nights one after another. A remedy for Scalding with Water. TAke the juyce of House léeke, and dip a linnen cloath in it, and lay it vpon the place: Also boyle Armoniac, and Cam∣phere is good when it is dissolued in the Oyle of Roses, and lay vpon the place, the water of Purslaine, and Myrtils, Ceruse, and the white of rawe Egges, and such like, be very good for all manner of scalding. A remedy for Burning with fire. TAke the white of a rawe Egge, and beate it with Oyle of Roses one ounce, then put to it the juyce of Housléeke one ounce, of Night-shade, and of Planten of each of them halfe an ounce, of the rust that is vnder the Anvile of a Smith, two oun∣ces, compound all these together and wash the place oft: and then take Popilion, and noe to it a little of the oyle of Roses, as much of Planten juyce, and incorporate all together and make Plaisters, or else take the oyntment of Ceruse, and oynt∣ment
of Seracine, named in Latine, Vnguentum scricinum, and Popillion is good, and such other like. A remedy for the Tooth-ache. ANd if it come of any colde cause, chewe often in thy mouth the roote of Horeound, and if it come by Wormes, make a candle of Waxe with Henbane séeds, and light it, and let the perfume of the Candle, enter into the Tooth, and gape ouer a dish of cold water, and then may you take Wormes out of the water & kill them on your naile; the Wormes is little greater then a worme in a mans hand, and beware of pulling out any tooth, for pull out one and pull out moe; to mundise the Téethe, wash them euery morning with cold water and roche Allome. A Remedy for the Fluxe. TAke of Suger rosset made of drie Roses, of Trissindall of each one ounce and a halfe, mixe these together, and eate it with meate, or drinke it with drinkes, but the best remedy that I could finde, is to take thrée handfuls of Saint Johns Woort, as much Planten, and as much Creis, and séeth these in a gallon of Raine water or red Wine to a pottle, and straine it, and then put to it two ounces of Sinamon beaten, and drinke thereof often. A remedy for the Cappes. TAke the oyle of swéet Almonds one ounce, and annoynt the place, and any of these things following is good, the powder of the rinde of Pomegranets, the Marrow of a Calfe, or a Hart, the fatnesse of a Capon, Goose, or Ducke, and such like. A Remedy for the Shingles. OF Rose-water, and Planten water, take of either of them halfe a pinte, of white Wine asmuch, put these together and wash the place oft: or else take of red Wormes that come out of the Earth, and bray them in a morter, and put to them a
little Vineger, and make plaisters, &c. Or else take flowers of Camomill, of Rose leaues, of Violets, the weight of either of them one ounce, of Myrtles, of Sumake, of either of them one ounce and a halfe, séethe all these in white Wine and make a Plaister, and lay it to the place, or else make the oyntment of Ceruse: I haue taken House léeke and haue stampt it with a little Camphere, and put to it white Wine, and haue laid it to the place and haue healed the Patient; and the Oyle of Roses, or the Oyle of Violets is good for this impediment, mixt toge∣ther with the white of Egges, and the juyce of Planten. A Remedy for a Tetter. TRose de Arsmeg is good, and if it come of blood, exhaust two or thrée ounces of blood, or more if néed shall require, and that Age, time and strength will permit, and if it be Lupte, cut off the heads of them, and rub them with Salt and Garlicke stampt together, and lay over them a plate of Lead. Another Remedy for a Tetter. TAke Oyle of Wheat, and mixe it with the Oyle of Egges, and with a mans vrine wash and annoynt the skin, or else take the water of Burres, or séethe Burres in water, and leas the body. A Remedy for the Kibes. FOr the ibes beware the Snow doe not come to the héeles, and beware of cold, and neither pricke nor picke the Kibes, but keepe them warme with Woollen clothes, and to bedward wash them with Vrine or Neates-foote oyle. A Remedy for Hoarsenesse. TAke the water of Scabious, Fennell, Licorice, Buglosse, of ch of them a pinte, of Sugar-Candy a pound, and séethe the together: and Morning and Euening drinke nine spoon∣fuls  a time.
A Remedie for the Mother. TAke of Bittonie leaues halfe an ounce, stampe it small, and drinke it with white Wine, & smell to Galbanum and Sa∣rapine, and make perfume of Iuniper or old Leather, and sit ouer it: Or else take Pyony séeds thrée drams, drinke it with Mellicrate. If the Mother doe fall out, first wash the place twice or thrice with white Wine: Or else take of Iuniper cut in pieces thrée ounces, of Myrtles thrée ounces; Séethe therein Running water, and wash the place two or thrée times: then take of Galbanum thrée drams, drinke it with red wine: Eue∣ry thing that will helpe the falling out of the Fundment, will helpe this impediment alo. A Remedie for the Itche. TAke of salt water a gallon, and séethe it with thrée handfuls of Wheaten bread crums that is leauened, and wash the bo∣dy with the water twice or thrice: Or else wash the Body in the Sea two or thrée times: Or else take the bran made of Co∣cle séeds thrée handfuls, of the powder of Brimstone two oun∣ces: Séeth these in a pottle of white wine Vineger, and wash the body therewith thrée or foure times. A Remedy for the Fluxe. TAke a Spunge, and séethe it in a pinte of Muscadine, and wring it out, and let the patient sit ouer it, as hot as they can suffer it, and couer them warme. A Remedie for falling out of the Fundament. FIrst beware of taking cold in that place, and beware of Co∣stiffnesse and kéepe the Arse and Buttocks warme, and sit not on the cold Earth, nor vpon stone or stones, nor vpon any
hard thing, but take somewhat vnder thy Buttockes, not onely for falling out of the Logation or Arsegut, but for all other in∣firmities that may be in the Longation engendred. A Remedy for the same. TAke of Myrtles thrée ounces, of Iuniper cut in small pie∣ces foure ounces: séethe them in water, and wash the place, and after that, make a perfume of Iuniper, and it ouer it: Or else make a Perfume of Bengain, Myrrhe, or Franken∣sence: or else take the inward rinde or barke of an Oke, séethe it in water with Galles, and wash the place, and drinke of Gal∣anum with stale Ale, and lay the substance of it to the Navill: It is good for falling of the Mother: Also for these Impedi∣ments in a mans Fundament or Arse, it is good to annoynt the place with Oyle of Lineséeds. A Remedy for the Ache. TAke of Balms, Camomill, Horehound, Pennyriall, garden Bittony, Mother of Time, Marigold, leaves, and House∣téekes: of each of them a handfull, stampe them all together in a morter, and strain them through a faire cloth, and so boyle them with a pinte of Sallet oye moderately vpon the Embers, and when you doe annoynt the Patient, put to the salve a little Oye-gall, and a little Aqua-vitae. A Remedy for the Itch. TAke a quantity of Brimstone, and a quantity of Allome, and burne them on a fire-shoell over the re, and beate them very small and boyle them with Bores grese, and so an∣noynt the Itch. A precious Powder for a Web in the Eye. TAke two drams of Thty Neporate, and of Sadrangon two drams, of Suger one dram: and bray them well toge∣ther,
till hey be very small, and cast a little of that Powder into the eye at once, and be whole. Another for the same. TAke ground Ivy beaten, for it destroyeth the Web in the Eye well and soberly, if it be put in once a day. A precious Medicine for sore Eyes. TAke Violets, Myrrhe, and Saffron, and make of them a plaister, and lay it to the sore Eyes: if they be great or swolne, it will ease the Ache and swelling. A Medicine for the Head-ache TAken spoonefull of the juyce of Bittonis, mingled with as much Wine, and as much Honey: and put nine Pepper cornes in it, and drinke foure dayes, and it will driue it away for ever. A profitable Medicine for Deafenesse of the Eares. TAke Bittonie and Hore-hound, and stampe them both in a Morter, and wring out the juyce, and let the Patient lie on his side, and powre it into his Eare: for this a prooved Me∣dicine. A Medicine to staunch bleeding at the Nose. TAke Bittonie and Salt mingled together, and put it in the Nose, and it will staunch the blood. A Medicine for the Tooth-ache, or for Wormes in the Teeth. TAke Pepper and stampe it, and temper it with good Wine, and suppe thereof warme, and hold it in the mouth till it be colde, and then spit it out, vs this often.
A Medicine for stinking Teeth or a stinking Breath. TAke two fuls of Cuin, stampe it small, and séeth it it in Wine, and drinke if fiftéene dayes together. A Medicine to make Teeth white. TAke Honey, Salt, and Ri-meale: mingle them together,  froth the Téeth therewith. A Medicine for the Cough. TAke age, Rew, and Pepper, and séethe them with Honey and eate thereof a spoonefull first and last. A Medicine for diseases in the side. TAke little Balls sodden of Redwortes, and burne them in a new Earthen pot: and then grind them to powder: after that gather it together with Honey, and mingle them together, and plaister it to the sore. A Medicine for the Morphew. TAke water of Burrage, and water of Femitorie, mingled together by even portions: and let the sicks drinke it at morning and evening, and hée shall be whole within fourtéene dayes. Another for the Morphew TAke Mustard séed, and Salt, and stampe them together, and temper them with Vineger, and annoynt therewith. For the heate in the Kidnies. TAke Housléeke and Planten, and doe not wash them, but wipe them with a cloath, and beate them, and put to juyce
water, and Wine-vineger, and Womans , and take the Hearbes and put them into clothes, and dye the clothes with thred like a couple of Bals, and you must  when you doe vse it) haue one to doe it for you in the morning when you are in your Bed: and the party must take the Bals and dip them in this liquor, and so bathe your idnies; and as soone as one of the Bals is vote with doing of them, take the other, and is vse it an hour euery morning. A Medicine for one that bloodeth often. MAke a , and take off the Cur, and take Lie-wort and beats it, and put the juyce thereof into the posset∣take, and drinke it morning and euening warme. Another to staunch bleeding at the Nose. TAke learmola, and the white of an Egge, and Vine∣ger and beate them together, and make Plaisters thereof, and lay them to your Temples. Another to staunch the bleeding of a Cut or Wound. TAke Hogs-dung te from the Hog, mingle it with Sugr, and lay it to the wound. For to kill Wormes in the belly. TAke Mares-milke, and white it as te us you can have it from the Mare, in the morning fasting. For one that is bruised with a Fall. TAke Stone-pitch and beats it, and drinke it with white Wine, Sacke, or Mlmesey; and if you haue none, then take some other liour: then melt Parmit, and annoint the place where the Bruise is.
To make a Poultis for swelling. TAke the crum of white Manchet, and séethe it in milke till it be thicke: then put in a piece of new Butter about the quantity of a walnut, or somewhat more. A Medicine for one that is broken. TAke a quantity a Comfrey, a quantity of Knéehome, a quantity of Knotted grasse, a quantity of Ribervorum, and a quantity of Polipody: stampe them all together, and straine them in Ale, and then giue the patient the same to drinks cold, and trusse him vp with some boster, and let his dyet be but competent, eschewing all slippery meats, as Butter and such like; provided alwaies, that the patient kéepe his bed sixe or seuen dayes, lying vpon his Backe, and sometimes hold his belly with his hand. For the shrinking of the Sinewes. TAke the marrowe of a Horse bone and the crops of Elders, & as much of Sage, and chop them together, and boyle them in the Marrow, and then straine out the Hearbes, and put to the liquor one spoonefull of Honey, two spoonefuls of Aqua-Composit, and a quantity of Pepper, and boyle it againe, and kéepe it for your vse. A Salve to take dead flesh out of a Sore. TAke a spoonefull of Vineger, and a spoonefull of Honey, and a quantity of Verdigreace, and as much Allome, and boyle all these together, and kéepe it for your vse.
For the staying of the fluxe. TAke a new layd Egge, and take off a little of the top of it, and powre out a little of the white, and fill vp the Egge with Aqua-composita, and stirre it together, and rst it, and sup up the Egge in the morning fasting: till you be well vse this. For the Piles. TAke Marilmasse béefe, and dry it, and beate it to powder, and then put it into a chafing-dish of coales, and set it in a chaire, and sit ouer it. For the falling of the Evalow, or other paine in the Throat. TAke a handfull of red Sage, a spoonfull of Dill-séed, apiece of leaven: boyle these in a little new milke till it be thicke: then lay it on foure fine clothes, and lay one cloth to the nape of the Necke, and another to the throats, and to each temple one, and bind the clothes, and doe this as often as néed shall require: for it hath bin proued. A Medicine for a sore Throat. TAke a pinte of Milke halfe a handfull of Collumbine leaues, halfe a handfull of Gasell▪ a dozen leaues of Sinkefoyle, and two Iewes eares; (and boyle them) and so the partie must vse it euening and morning, and gargale it in his throate. For weakenesse in the Backe. TAke Clary and Dates, and the pith of an Oxe, and put them together, and then put to them Creame, and Egges, and
grated bread, and fry them together, and strew Sugr on it, and eate it in the Morning fasting, and you must put some white Sanders in it also, when you temper it together. For all manner of euill in the Head. TAke Rew and stampe it with strong Ayill; mingle it and wash thy head therewith. For the Carbunckle or Impostume in the Head. TAke Wormewood, Origanum, Mayron, by euen portions, and séeth them in swéet Wine, and after that wring out the jue, and lay it to the Eares of the sicke, with two spunges as hot as e may suffer it; vse this two or thrée times, and he shall be whole. To take away Pock-holes or any spot in the face. TAke white Rose water and wet a fine cloth etherein, and set it all night to fréeze, and then lay it vpon your face till it be dry: also take thrée Puppies the reddest you can get, and quar∣ter them, taking out the Garbage: then distill them in a quart of new milke of a red Cow, and with the water thereof wash your face. For the Sciatica. TAke the gall of a Bull, a quart of Woort: boyle it to a pint, then put in a pinte of Vineger, Franinsence, one ounce in pow∣der, of Hony halfe a pound, of Commine halfe a pound in powder; boyle it thicke: spread it on leather; lay it too very hot two or thrée dayes: and lay a linnen cloth betwéen the skinne and the plaister, this plaister will serue many times, proued.
To restore a man to Nature, that is in a Consumption. TAke the eldest Cocke you can get: sald him, draw him, and cut him all in pieces, and put it in a glasse pot: stop him as fast as you can, and put among these pieces Cloes, Mace, small Raisons, and Salt: then put this Glasse into a great pot, and let all these séethe together till they be a gelly: then straine it into a cleane vessell, and giue it to the Sicke, first and last, bloud-warme. To restore the Braine. TAke powder of Bittonie, and vse it in your Pottage: it will restore the braine, and destroy the stone. Another for the same TAke an Egge and roast him hard, péele him, and cleae him in two, and as hot as you are able to suffer it to lay it to your Temples. A good medicine to clarifie the Head and purge the evill Humors cleane away. TAke vnset Hysop, vnset Time, and pound them, and wring them into your drinke, and drinke thereof every day. Pro∣batum est. For a Fellon. TAke Hearbgrace, rusty Bacon, sowrs leauen, and Snales with shels on their backes, taking them out of their shells, and beats all these together, and lay it to the griefe.
A Medicine to stop the Fluxe. TAke halfe a pound of Almonds and blanch them, and stampe them in a Morter small, and then take twelue yolkes of new layd Egges rosted hard, and put them in a morter and bray all together, and then take a pinte of strong red Vineger, for it is best, and put it into the same, and mingle them well together, and then put all into a faire pot of Earth, and stamp it well, and take thereof fiue or sixe spooneful at once, warmed in a pewter dish, and drinke it thrée or foure times a day, if it be néedfull. A Medicine for an Impostume in the Body. TAke Centorie, Rosemary, Worme-wood, and Horehound and make them in a syrrup with white Wine, and let the sicke drinke thereof, and it shall cause the Impostume to goe downe, and when it is broken, let him drinke of the said syr∣rup warme. A Medicine for the yellow Jaundies. TAke white Spanish Sope, and a little stale Ale in a Cup, and rub the Sope against the cups bottome till the Ale be white, then shane in a halfe penny weight of Ivorie, and let the sicke drinke it at Morning, and last at Euening till they be whole. A Medicine for all manner of Aches. TAke Sage, Row, Wormwood, Sorell leaues, Horehound red Nettles, & stampe them all together, and mingle them with May-butter, and let it stand so ten dayes, oft fry them, & straine them cleane, and then melt therewith Incense, and this serueth for all manner of Aches.
A Medicine for the Wind collicke. TAke halfe a spoonefull of dry Oreng Pilles beaten to powder, and halfe a spoonefull of Anniséeds beaten to pow∣der, and put them into Ale or Béere, and drinke it when the pain doth take you, walke vpon it, and by Gods helpe it will driue it away. For faintnesse in the Stomacke, or the Morphew. TAke a quantity of Amb beaten to powder, and a quantitie of English Saffron in powder likewise, and put it into white Wine, and drinke it seuen or eight times. A Medicine for the Collicke and Stone. TAke of ovage, Smalledge, Pellitorie, Feitrie, and Stone-woort, or Sone crop, of each of all these one handfull, and two groats-worth of Stone-powder, or of the Oxe-gall: boyle all these with a pottle of white Wine: and make thrée bagges, and put these Hearbes in the bagges, and lay them as ote as may be from the Huckle-bone forwards, and so apply them hote still with the broth of the Wine, and then you must drinke Possets of white Wine abundantly, made with Parce∣ley rootes and Mother of Time. Another Medicine for the same. TAke a black Flint stone, and let it be red hot, and let it breake, and put it into a pinte of white Wine, and then there will be on the top white foame: so let it stand for halfe an houre, and then drinke it, and it will by Gods grace helpe you. For the paine at the Stomacke. TAke a peny-pot of Malmesey, and a little Butter, and heate it, annoynt your stomacke with it: then take a Rose cake, and dip it in the Malmesey, with the Butter, and lay it where the paine is.
For to stay one from Vomitting. TAke a quarter of a pinte of Rose-water, and thrée spoonefuls of white Wine, and put them both into a Posnet with a few sops of white bread, a piece of Suger, and a piece of Butter: and eate thereof first and last. A Medicine for one that is in a Consumption, or for any disease at the Heart, or any part of the Body. TAke a quart of Sacke, and put into it a Nutmeg, a Race of white Ginger, a few Graines, and halfe a graine of Long Pepper, and beate them all to powder: thrée Bittony leaues, thrée tops of Rosemary, and a few Cloues bruised; Set all these to the fire, with a Date finely cut into it, and so burne it: and in the meane time get a new layd Egge, and beate it fine, with thrée spoonfuls of Rose water and when that the Wine is well burnt, then brew them together out of one Pot into another, with a little Sallet oyle, and a good péece of Suger. A Medicine for the Stone and Strangulion. TAke a quart of Milke, and a handfull  Bay leaues, another of Time, another of red Sage, another of Parcely, and a quart of Malmy, and a little Rosemary▪ and boyle them all together, from a quart to a pinte: But yet let the Milke and the Hearbes be boyled all whole together, from a quart to a pinte: before the Malmesey come in. For the Stomacke that is bound. TAke Sage, Neppe, vnset-Time, Violet leaues, Iso of each one handfull: and three pintes of Ale, and séethe the Hearbe and the Ale together, and skim it cleane, till it come to quart; then take it off the fire, and straine it together through a faire Linnen cloth: then take a pinte of Malmesey, and séeth that that was strained and the Wine together a little, and put ther∣to a quarterne of Suger, thrée penny-worth of Cloues and Mace, and then drinke it.
Another for the same. TAke of Harts-tongue, of Liuer-wort, of Penny-ryall, of toppes of young Rosemary, and of Charnell, of these one handfull, halfe an ounce of Graines, two peny-worth of Mace, and a Nutmeg. For the Wind-Collicke. TAke two new layd Egges, & beate the white and the yolk to∣gether, with a quantity of Pepper bruised, and lay it vpon a piece of Fle, both at your backe, as also at your belly where the paine is, and this is apresent remedy. An excellent Medicine for the Wind-collicke. TAke a quart of white Wine, two ounces of Parcely sóede, Time, Phillippendulo, Charnell, Saxifrage, of each two handfuls, and boyle all these together from a quart to a pinte, and then drinke thereof, morning, noone, and euening. An inward Medicine for the paine in the bottome of the belly. TAke Scuruy-grasse, and Scabby-arse, wash them and picke them very cleane, and stampe them, and drinke it luke-warms with white Wine, or any other drinke that you like best at morning and euening, first, and last, also you must annoynt your body with Oyle of Masticke. An outward Medicine for the same, being taken both together. TAke Gardus Benedictus, called the Blessed Thistle, two handfuls cleane picked, shred and washt, and halfe a pound of vnwashen Butter, and vnalted as if commeth out of the Chearne, a quantity of French Mallowes shred, two penny-worth
of Rose water, and boyle all these together in a new Earthen pot, and let it be close stopt, and then put it in a cleane linnen cloth, and lay it where your paine is, and let it be the thicker spread where the paine is most, then take a red cloth and put it thereto aloft of all as hote as euer you can suffer it, this must be taken at seuen, eight, or nine of the clock going to bed, and let it tarry on till the same time that you goe to bed a∣gaine, then lay more of the same. Good-man Murfords Medicine for the paine in the stomacke concerning lacking of winde: Davis. TAke the Light, the Liuer, the Heart, the Kidnies, or the Milt of a Foxe, wash them with water, and then lay them in a quantity of Rose water, the space of halfe a day or thereabouts, and turne them vp and downe, and day the water out of them with a linnen cloth, then put them in an Earthen panne, and put some white Sugar-Candie, Ayséeds, and gréene Lice-rice being beaten, and so strained vpon it, and so let it be put in∣to an Ouen and dryed, then beate it to powder, and mingle all these aforesaid things with it, and drinke it with white Wine, or any other drinke luke-warme. For the Cough. TAke Brimstone beaten in powder halfe an ounce, and put it in a new layd Egge soft rested, mingle it well together, then put to it Bengawin, the bignesse of a Pease, lightly stamped and drinke it in the morning at your break-fast: make as much againe at night when you goe to bed, and you shall be whole at the second or third time, if it he holden you long, take it the oftner. For the Cough. TAke two or thrée Garlicke heads, well made cleane, stampe, them well, then put to them Hogges st, and stampe them
well anew; and at night when you goe to bed-wme well the oales of your féet, and annoynt them well with the sid confe∣tion and then warme them againe as hote as you may endure, rubbing them well a pretty space, and being a bed, let your féet be bound with a wae Linnen cloth. and rubbe also the mal of your Leges with the said Oyntment: By this meanes you shall be healed in thrée Nights, be it never so great. An Oyntment for the Collicke and Stone. IN May when Broome-flowers bee néere the shooting foorth then take halfe a pound of them, and picke them cleane from the stalkes, and beate them in a Morter very small, and mingle them with May, butter, and so kéepe it close eight dayes in a Vessell: and then sée he  and straine it, and annoynt the place gréeved where it is, and so rest with thy Oyntment warmed. Another for the same. TAke two handfuls of Time, and pownd it, and straine it to¦gether with a pinte of Maey, and a little of an Egge, and a little new Butter, two penyweight of English Saffron: and let it be Milke warme, and drinke the one halfe in the Morning, and the other in the Euening, and kéepe you warme. A Medicine for the Stone and Strangulion. TAke red Bramble berries before they be blacke, and Iuice berries, and Acornes, and put them in a Pot, and dry them vntill they be ready to be beaten to powder: and take Ca-erséed, and Plyséed, and roeséed, and Cornder∣séed, Broomeseed, and the séed of the Nut-trée, and the inner pith of Ash-keyed: and take of all these a like portion, and beate them to powder, and mingle them together with Liour of double quntity and so vse to drinke it Euening and Morning,
sodden in Posset-Ale, made with white Wine: and put of the powder often in your Pottage when you eate them, and so vse it continually till you finds ease. Take not this water following, till the Stone breake away by Shivers. TAke Rosemary and wilde Time, and séethe them with run∣ning water and Sugar, from a quart to a pinte; and so drink it till your water be cléere. For the Stone. TAke Safrage, and Rosemary, of each a like quantity, and séethe it in white Wine, till all the hearbes bee throughly sodden: then straine it, and drinke it cold Euening and Mor∣ning. Another for the same. TAke oell, Parcly, red Nettle, Violets, and put them into a Morter, and bray them: and take the Kernels of Cher∣rystones, and bray it by it selfe, and séethe all together in white Wine, and drinke it Morning and Euening. A Salve for any Wound. TAke Snailes with shels, and sprinkle a little salt on them, and let them soowre themselues in the salt all night, and in the Morning beat them small to powder, and a handfull of House-léeke, and beate it by it selfe, and put the Iuyce into the powder: and then take a spoonfull of fine Hony, and a little fresh Butter, and boyle them moderately vpon the Ibers, and annynt with it, and make a Plaister of it, and if the flesh waxe proud, you must wash it with a little white Wine: or with Allome, fresh Butter, and Béere boyled together.
A Drinke for the Head which is out of course. TAke a pottle of strong Ale, éeth it and skimme it: then put in Lauender Cotten, Sothernwood, Scuruigrasse, Scabbiarse, of each one handfull: Boyle all these from a pottle to a quart, and strain it, & put in two ounces of the sirrope of Roses, and drinke euery morning a dozen spoonfuls, and if you haue any Ache in your Necke, take Oyle of Dyll, oyle of Veruen, and oyle of bitter Almonds: of each one ounce, and mingle them altogether, and annoint your selfe euening and morning. To stop a Laske, or the Flixe. TAke thrée or foure new layd Egges, and roste them hard, and take out the yolkes, and lay them in a Dish, and strew them ouer with beaten Cinamon, as much as the partie can abide to eate, and put thereto a little red Wine vineger; and so let the Patient eate it. If you cannot get red vineger, take Claret. To make Oyle of Elder flowers, good for a fall, or a Bruise. TAke Sallet oyle, and put therein a good sort of lder flow∣ers, and set them in the Sunne in the Summer time, and so kéepe it. To heale the Dimnesse of the Eyes. TAke Rosewater, and Sugar; tempered with it, and let it fall by drops into the Eyes, and it will helpe the Dimnesse of them. For a stroake in the Eye. TAke the juyce of Smalledge, and of Fennell, and the white of an Egge, and mingle them together, and put them in the Eye,
For a Bruise. TAke a handfull of Mallowes and séeth them in fresh Gree, and strains them, and put thereto after they bée strained a quantity of Aqua-ite, and annoynt the bruised place before the fire therewith. For a ore Mouth. Take a Cuttle-bone, and Masticke, and make powder there∣of, and put it in Vineger and white Wine, and séethe it, and wash thy mouth therewith. For the watering of the Eyes, and Darknesse thereof. TAke May butter Honey, by euen portions, and séethe them together, and after put in the white of an Egge, and put it cold into the Eye. For an olde Sore. TAke white leauened Bread, and Hearbe-grace, and stampe them alone fine, and then stampe them both together: and so make a Plaister. For a Fellon. TAke Honey and the yolke of an Egge, and Wheate flower and mixe all together, and then stamp Rew and put the juyce thereto. For an Itche. Take Planten, and Sorrell, as much of the one as the other, make Iuyce thereof, and put thereto as much Vineger, as the quantity, of the said Iuyce, and so annoynt the place. Another for the same. TAke Quick-siluer two peny-worth, and kill it with fasting-spittle in a dish, beating it well together, and put thereto
foure penny-worth of Oyle of Bayes, and to annoynt the place, this Receipt will also kill Lice in the Head or body. A Medicine for a sore Leqqe. TAke vnwrought Waxe, and as much Shéepe allow, and séethe them together with a little quantity of white Coppe∣ras, and so make a plaister thereof. Master Arthur Edwards Receipt for the precious Oynt∣ment which came from Persia and Muscovia, which is bood for all Aches. INprimis, Ba-leaues young ps, Rosemary tops, Spikene, Knotgrasse, Rbworth, Planten, young Elder tops, Lauen∣dercotten, Valeriane, Woodbine, Strawberrystrings, ut∣sonleaues, Walnutleaues, the tops of Burrage, Sage ver∣tue, Romane worme wood, Water-ittonie, Cardus Benedi∣ctus, Smalledge, Camomill eight ounces, Red Risi eight ounces, vnset Tims fiue ounces, of all these Hearbes let there be taken foure ounces of every hearbe, which may be two hand∣fuls of every one when they be picked cleane, for all these hearbes the best time is in May, or Iune, and being gathered cleane picked and stamped, you are to put them into thrée quarts of Neates fte Oyle, eight ounces of Sle oyle, which is halfe a pinte, eight ounces of May-butter, foure ounces of Cloues to make it smell, this being one, let them stand a fortnight or thrée Wéekes, till you may get twenty foure liue Swallowes-young or old, and as soons as you haue them kill them, and cut off the top of the taile feathers, and wing fea∣thers, and then stpe them, and put them into your Oyle, this being done, take a close Kettle of Copper with a close Co∣ver, and put in all these things, and then the said Kettle with all before written, to be set on the fire in another Kettle of boyling Water, and to boyle in the water the spr of fenn
haures: Then take it off and straine it hard through a strong Caas cloth, as hard as may be, being hote from the fire, but better it were to have a Presse for the same purpose: This being prest out, put it againe ouer the fire as before, then boyle it fiue or sixe houres, then take a pound of vnwrought Waxe, cut it and shred it fine, and boyling ouer the fire, put in the Waxe to the rest, and so boyle it two houres, and in the boyling you may take  some with a spoone, and put it into a Sawer till it be cold, so shall you sée if it be thicke enough by tasting it in your fingers, if it be too thinne, put in more Waxe at your pleasure, and being boyled the time aforesaid, then powre it foorth into a faire large Earthen pot to le, then take it and cut it in pieces, and take it out that the water in the bottome may be powred out, then boyle it once more, an houre or a little more and so powre it into Gally pots and kéepe it, for it is good for all Aches. A Remedy for Deafenesse of the Eares. TAke old Sallet oyle of Olies, and take young Mice that be naked, fresh cast without haire, and put them in the same Oyle, and let them lye  in the same till they be rotten, and take a piece of bombaste and dippe the same in the Oyle, and put it in the Patents ares. A Medicine for the Collicke and Stone. TAke Nettles, the leaues, and stalkes of the same Nettles, séethe the same vnto the third part in a new Pot, and then straine the same liquor through a fine linnen cloth, and drinke of the same every Morning and Night, a Cup or Glasse full, for the space of nine dayes: After the same, take the bloud of a  Gte, and distill the same, and drinke of it nine dayes as beforesaid,
A Remedy for a Cold. TAke a pound of Raisons of the Sunne, and stone them, foure ounces of white Sugar, and beate them in a mor∣ter of stone, and in the beating you must cast in some fine Li∣corice powder, and halfe a spoonfull of Rosewater, and then it will be like a Marmelade, and eate it at sundry times. A Medicine for the Cough. TAke two spoonefuls of Aqua-vitae, one spoonefull of Honey, halfe a spoonefull of White Sugr-Candy, a little Sinamon, and thrée cornes of long Pepper, beaten altogether and boyled, till it be like a Treacle. An Oyntment that will drive away Lice from a mans body. TAke an ounce of the groundings of oyle Oliue, and two oun∣ces of the groundings of Renish-wine, and one ounce of Aruement, and sure are thy body with it. A very good Drink for an Ague, if one shake. TAke a quart of strong Ale, and put therein nine Bay-leaues, and séethe it till come to a pinte and then take out the Bay-leaues, and put therein one pennyworth of Trea∣cle, a halfe-penny worth of Pepper, stirring it well together, and let it then séethe againe one walme, and so take it off the , and let the Patient drinke it as hote as he can, and be couered as warme as be may abide, the space of sixe or uen houres. Probatum est.
Another Drinke for the Ague. TAke a pinte of Ale and put therein one penny-worth of long Pepper, and foure or fiue field Daysie rootes and then séethe the same well together, and then let the Patient drinke the same as hote as he may suffer it, and walke till he sweat it he be able, or else layd downe and covered very warme that he may sweat well. Also Burreleaues, and Baysalt beaten together and bound about the wrist of the Patient is good for the same. A drinke for one which is troubled with a paine in his Backe and maketh water that one may cut it with a knife, which the Doctor saith, is by reason he is trou∣bled with a Worme in the bottome of his belly. TAke the tender tops of Broome, the rootes of Parcely. Fen∣nell and Smalledge, of each one handfull, a handfull of Pur∣selaine, wash them leane, and then séethe them in a gallon of new Ale, till a quart thereof be cousumed, the which being so done, take it off the fire and straine it into a vessell, and kéepe it close stopped three or foure dayes, and then let the Patient drinke no other drinke for the space of a wéeke. For an Ague. By Doctor Turner TAke Featherfew, Wormewood, and Sorrell, of each a good great handfull, stampe them and straine them hard, and put thereto as much Suger in weight as the juyce weigh∣eth, and put them in a strong Glasse in a Skillet of warme wator, the space of foure and twenty houres before you giue it to the Patient, and their giue it twice a day two spoonefuls at a time in Ale or Posset-ale.
For the Backe. CLarie is good for the Back, and pills named Pillula agreti∣va majores, & pillula de serapino. And these oyles be good for the backe, Olium de piperibus, Olium philosophorum, & ce∣rotum Andromachi. And I haue prooved these Oyles to be good, the oyle of Mardine, the Oyle of Alablaster, and the oyle of wa∣ter Lillies, in hote causes: the oyle of Poppy is very good in cold causes. For a Scurffe in the Body. THis infirmity doth come of a chollericke and Melancholy humour. For this matter, I take two ounces of Boares grease, then I doe put in one ounce of the powder of Oyster∣shells burnt, and of the powder of Brimstone, and thrée ounces of Mercury mortified with fasting spittle, compound all these together, and annoynt the body thrée or foure times, and take an easie Purgation. A worthy Balme. REcipe Aqua-ite foure ounces, Terobinthine one pound, oleum vitre Romane foure ounces, and draw this Balme well in Limbecke glasse, for this will doe much pleasure in wounds. For sucking Children having the Morbogallico. REcipe Elecompane, the rootes of red Docke, Epithemie, the leaues and flowers of the Violets, boyle all these in water till the strength of the Hearbs be in the water, then take a Spnge and wet it in this decoction, and wash the Childes body, especially the sore places, and giue to the Nurse this fol∣lowing: Take Epitime, Polipodie, Violet flowers, Borage, Langdebéefe; and then boyle all these hearbs in a perfect oyle, and let her drinke this all day and no other, and this shall dis∣charge, as it hath done, thankes be to God, &c.
A Sare-cloth for Aches. REcipe oyle two pound, white Leae and red Leae tenne ounces, Waxe sixe ounces, Goose grease, and Capons grease, halfe an ounce: séethe all till it be blacke. To make a Poultis. TAke Mallowes and stampe them and séeth them in Fennell, and Camomill, and oyle of Roses, and crums of Bread. An oyle for the Gowte, and for the Sinewes that be shrunke vp. TAke me thrée ounces of Turpentine, and two ounces of Yel∣tate Brimstone, and foure new-laid Egges, the yolkes of them: A quantity of red Nettles, of the tops of the séeds of them: take me a young Whelpe of an ebrage Hound, the fat∣test you can get, take and scald him, and draw out of his Guts as much of the Fat as you can, and rost him and the oyle is good for the disease aforesaid: Approved very good vers times. To take away Wars. TAke Sauen and Orpiment, and Corks vevie, and powder them together, and this shall take away the Warts. To make a cold Oyntment. TAke Litarge of Lead one pound and a halfe, and a pinte of oyle Oliffe, and a quart of Vineger. Another cold Oyntment. TAke a little Salt and Verdigrease, and the white of an Egge, and grind them together in a morter of Brasse. For the Ague. P. Bucke. TAke Sentorie flowers two spoonfuls, Cammill, Tansie, and red Coleworts, of each two handfuls, two peny-worth of Treacle, a little Saffron in powder, and foure or fiue spoonfuls
of English Hone: Boyle all these in thrée pintes of white Wine, and a pottle of Running Water, till the third part be consumed: then straine it hard, and Drinke none other all the while the heate holdeth you, thrée or foure times very warme, if néed require. For the Ague. TAke vnset Isope and Camomill of each two handfuls, Vio∣lets, Strawberies, Sinkefoyle, Endiffe, and Planten root and all; of each a handfull, a penyworth of French barley, and so much Currans; Boyle these in thrée quarts of running wa∣ter to thrée pintes: straine it, make Almond milke with it, put in Sugar, let the Child drinke while it lasteth warme. For the Collicke and gripings in the Belly. TAke and giue the Patient Ieane Treakle, and powder of Cloues, well sodden in good Wine, and let them drinke it warme. Another for the same. TAke the roote of Lilly, and Horehound, and séeth it in Wine, and giue the Patient to drinke thereof warme: for Proba∣tum est. A plaister for the same. TAke Lynséed, and stampe them, and Docke lees: and séeth them well in water and make a Plaister, and lay it to the griefe very warme. Probatum est. For the Stone in the Reines or in the Bladder. TAke and make a Bath with Parcely and Alysanders, Poli∣torie, Fennell, Saxfrage: and let the Patient sit therein vp
to the Nll: and let them drinke the Powder of these séeds, and the Hearbs, with warme white Wine, for this is a prin∣cipall practise for this disease. Probatum est. Another for a grosse, or a strong Person. TAke and séethe seuen heads of Garlicke, in faire water, a good while, and let the Patient drinke thereof, thrée or foure dayes together: Probatum est. For the Stone. TAke and drinke the Iuyce of Saxifrage, vse it in the Morning fasting thrée or foure dayes, and it shall away. For evill in the Bladder. TAke A, Parcely and Fennell, of all alike: put them and temper them with water and drinke it, and it shall help thée well to Pisse, and it shall ast out the Stone, and heate well thy stomacke. Powder to breake the Stone. TAke the blood of the heart of a Kid, and of a Foxe the blood of the heart, of both a like quantity: take the bladder of a Boare, and all that is therein, and put this blood thereto, take the juyce of Saxifrage, and juyce of Parcely, of each like quan∣tity: and put these in the Bladder also, and hng vp the Bladder in the smoake over the fire, vntill, such time it be congealed to∣gether as hard as a stone, and make power thereof: and drink it with hote Licour, when thou wilt, first and last: and this shall breake the stone to powder. For the Stone. TAke Perstone, vnset Léekes, and Ramsos, of all a like quantity: Boyle them and clarifie them with the tes
of Egges, and then take the juyce, and drinke it with Wine or Ale, in double so much in Wine or Ale as she juyce is. Another for the same Disease. TAke a handfull of Bay-berries, and the shell of an Egge, when the Chicken is new hatcht out of it, and bray them together: then take the powder, and put it into Ale or Wine, and giue sicke to drinke, and with the grace of God it shall make him whole. For to make a man pisse that cannot. TAke a quart of Renish wine, and a piece of Venice soape, as much as a Walnut, and séethe them well together, from a quart to a pinte, and drinke it, and it shall make thée pisse lu∣stily, by Gods grace. A Medicine for to keepe Teeth from stinking, and to make them white. TAke Salmitio, Roch-Allome, distill them together, and with a cloth or Cotton wet in this water, rub your Téeth. For the Tooth-ache. TAke a little long Pepper, and beate it small, and take a little Hony, and a little Ale or Béere, and boyle them together, and put a little All vnto it: and when it is boyled, put it in a cloth, and lay it to your Gmes. A Medicine that the Tooth-ache shall never vexe you more. TAke twenty leaues of Iuie, a little long Pepper, and boyle them with a handfull of Salt in old Wine, and then put the Licour when it is well boyled, into your mouth, on that
that is vexed with the Ache, and you shall proue that the Ache shall be destroyed, in Sempiterna Secula. To make a Powder to whiten Teeth, and fasten them, and to heale the Tooth-ache. TAke the fourth part of a red Corall, and that which the French-men doe call Pyrote, and cut it small, and dry it on the Harth with small heate: then make powder of it, putting thereto one part of Masticke, and a little fine Sugar; All which things being beaten into powder, you must mingle them toge∣ther, and kéepe it for your vsage, and rub thy Téeth, therewith when it pleaseth thée. Also when your Téeth doe ake or waxe loose, rub it with the same powder, and kéepe it a while in your mouth, and you shall sée marvellous operation. For all manner of Tooth-ache. TAke the juyce of ground Iuy, and put thereof in thine Eare, on the same side that thy Tth aketh, and it shall ake a while, but it shall soone leaue aking, and be well. Another, and if thy Tooth be hollow. TAke the inner-side of the Elder barke, and shred it fine, and take a little grosse Pepper, and good Mustard, and mingle them together, and put them in a little Linnen clte, and make little balles or pellets of them, and boyle them in Vin∣ger, and as hote as then canst suffer it lay it to thy Tooth: and if thy Tooth be hollow, put it into thy Tooth, and when it is cold take another: and this vse till the paine be gone, Probatum est. A Medicine for Teeth. TAke the leaues of H, a pot full, and séethe them in water till they be all to sodden: then powre it in a aire Bason, and
hold over thy mouth, gasping, and if thy Chéekes be too much swollen, it shall slake, looke that thou haue clothes over thy Head, and all about the Bason, that no ayre passe out, but into thy mouth, Probatum est. Another for the Tooth-ache. TAke a peny-worth of Sanguis Draconis: Item, Ob Oti Terra Sigilaro wij Ragd Gallis: Beate them single by themselues, as they be written afore: After that mingle them with good Vineger: then take foure toasts of a Rye loafe of the bottome, and let them be made hollow, and let the Medi∣cine be mingled together, and let two of them be layd, one to the Temples of thy head, another to the Lyt of thy Eare, and when they be dry, lay the other vnto it, and it shall helpe you, Probatum est. Another for the same. TAke a Bricke and burne it red hote, and put it in a Pase of water: So that it be halfe couered in the same: then take Hebane-séed, and cast it vpon the vpper part of the Bricke, and hold your Head over it, casting a Cloth, or coue∣ring ouer your head, that no steame of the smoake goe out, when you open your mouth over it, and it will helpe you for euer, Probatum est. A Powder to make white Teeth. TAke Rosemary, two ounces and a halfe, and Date stones, Harts-borne, of eyther a dram, red Corall, two stones, of Roch Allome one ounce: a piece of Scarlet or Linnen cloth, and rub your Téeth with the same: But all these aforesaid must be beaten to small powder, before yée lay the Scarlet to rub your Téeth with it, which if you try, yée shall proue that the ope∣ration thereof shall make your Téeth as white as Snow.
For smarting or pricking in the Eyes. TAke the white or an Egge, and the juyce of House-léeke, and womans milke, beate them well together, and straine it tho∣row a cloth, and then drop thereof in thine Eyes. For blood-shotten Eyes, and other diseases in the Eyes. TAke the juyce of Wormewood and Planten, Rose water, and Womans milke, the white of an Egge, and beate them well together: and dresse thine Eyes therewith, for it is very good therefore. For eyes that be red, and full of blood. TAke the white of an Egge, and swing it in a Dish, heaue out the streame thereof, then take Waxe and wet in the white, and lay it aboue thine Eye to kéepe the sight: After take Fen∣nell and Houseléek and stampe them together, and make a plai∣ster, and lay it from thy Nose to thy Forehead, all about thy temples: Vse it thrée nights or foure, and it shall heale thée. For the Eyes that be red with Itching. TAke fiue drops of cléere water, and so much white Copperas; Make it small, and put it in the water, and let in stand and rest a while, then take halfe a drop, and annoynt thine eye ther∣with, if it be strong put to more water. A precious water for Eyes. TAke Smalledge, and red Fennell, Rew, Veren, Bittonie, Egrimonie; Sinckefoyle, Pimpernell, Eufras, Sage, Se∣londine, of each a quarterne, wash them cleane and stampe
them, put them in a faire Brasen pan, and take the powder of two and twenty Pepper cornes fairely scarced, and a pinte of good white Wine, and put the Hearbs thereto, and thrée spoon∣fuls of liffe Honey, and fiue spoonfuls of knaue Child Vrine of an Innocent, and meddle them together well, and boyle them a little ouer the fire, and strain them through a cloth, and put it in a vessell of Glasse, and stop it fast with Leather. For eyes that be Running. TAke the water of Roses, and Camphere well ground, and meddle them together, and let them stand together thrée dayes naturall and with it wash thine eyes cleers and it is pro∣fitable for many other diseases for the Eyes. For eyes that be Blasted. TAke water of Planten, water of Roses, the white of an Egge, and mingle them together, and wash your eyes there with, and againe laying it vpon your Eye, this will surely helpe. A Medicine for sore Eyes. TAke an Egge that is hard roasted and pluck out the yolke, in whose place yée shall put Sugar, that is small beaten as hote as yée can suffer it, and when yée haue taken away the Egge∣shell cut the Egge the longest way in parts, and within a little while after take a cloth, and straine out the juyce of the same Egge, and therewith annoynt thine eye with a feather, or else let it drop into your eyes in the morning, and at night when yée goe to bed, and your paine shall be cleane taken away. An excellent good Water to make cleare eyes and sight, if your eyes be not pure and cleane. TAke Slondine, Eye bright, red Fennell, red Roses, Sin greene, Maiden-haire, Rew, of every of these hearbs two
ounces, then put thereto halfe an ounce of Aloes, and still all these together in your stillatorie, then take the water when it is stilled, and wash your eyes therewith, and yée shall haue a very cléere eye sight. Probatum est. A precious Medicine to take away the Web in your eyes. TAke the gall of a Hare, and a little quantity of purified Ho∣ny, and temper them together, then take a feather, and an∣noynt your eyes where the Web hurteth you, and yée shall féele amendment. A very good Medicine for a Pearle in the Eye, or Pin and Web. TAke fine white Ginger and grind it vpon a Whetstone, and beat fine a little white Coperas, and put to it, and when the Patient goeth to bed, put some of it with a quill into your eye, and when it hath béene there a while, take ground Iuie beaten and strained with womans milke, and put thrée or foure drops into the eye euening and morning, after the Ginger and white Coperas hath béene in the eye halfe an houre. For watering of your eyes. TAke the juyce of Planten tempered with Rosewater, and drop it warme into your eyes, the same office worketh Rose∣water, the Iuyce of Lilly rootes, with the Iuyce of Planten. For the Pin and the Web. TAke a newlaid Egge, and rost it blew hard, and picke him, then cut him in sunder and take out the yolke, and take as much Roch Allome to the quantity of a Nut, and put it in the Egge, and two drops of Hony, then take the Egge, the Allome and the Hony, and put it in a fine linnen cloth, and hold it fast
together till the Hony and the Allome be dissolued, and straine it through into a vessell, and so drop it into your Eyes. To make a stinking Breath sweet. TAke the juyce of Mints or else the water of Rew, Commin, Coriander, Licorice, Sinamon, ana. z. foure, séethe these in Wine, and giue him to drinke that hath a stinking breath, and certainly it will be swéet. A Medicine to make one to have a sweet breath. TAke the power of Sage an ounce, Rosemary blossomes thrée ounces, Gilliseres fiue drams, Sinamon one dram, Nutmeg a dram, Muske a little quantity, then take so much Honey as is sufficient to make these foresaid Compositions into a corporation like to a Marmalade, eate of this fasting and at night a little quantity at a time, so shall your breath bée marvellous swéet, and it yée goe into any suspected place of the Pestilence, or any other corrupt ayre, if yee eate a little of this Medicine next your heart, it shall defend you from all man∣ner of jeopardy. A Medicine to destroy a stinking Breath. TAke thrée handfuls of Commin, beate them in a brazen mor∣ter to powder, then take a pottle of Wine, and put this powder into it, and let it séethe till it come to a quart, then drinke first and last of this Wine, as hote as yée may suffer it, for the space of fiftéene dayes, and your breath shall be as swéet as a Nut. For a stinking Breath. TAke Puon of the Mountaine, that is called Hill-wort, a good handfull, and wash it cleane, and shred it small, and grind it
in a Morter, and put thereto halfe an ounce of powder of Pep∣per, and one ounce of powder of Commin, and mingle them to∣gether, and put them in a pottle of good Wine, and séethe them till the halfe be wasted, and let the sicke vse this after meate, and not before One in the afternoone. A Medicine for a Canker. TAke a handfull of Woodbine, Time, Isope, Sage, of each a like, two or thrée crops of Rosemary, and then take a spoon∣full of Honey, and put all these into a pottle of fair water, and séethe them all together, and in this séething, put thereto a good stone of Rock-Allome, as big as a pretty Walnut, amd with this water wash well your mouth, this is also very good for the Tooth-ache, For a Canker in the mouth. TAke the Iuyce of Planten, Woodbine, a little Roch allome, Vineger, Rosewater, and wash thy mouth where the Can∣ker is, and it shall be whole within a few washings. For a dry Canker. TAke Hart-orne, and Egge-shels, and burne them to pow∣der, then wash whereas the Canker groweth, and after that yáe haue washed it, cast into it of this powder, and it shall be remedied. For a Canker in the Mouth. TAke the powder of the roote of Clondine, of dry Roses, Vine∣ger, water of Hony-suckles, and séethe all these together till they be thick, and therewith annoynt the place where the Can∣ker is, and it shall be whole in short space.
For the Canker in a womans Pappe. TAke Coluer-dung, powder of Borrot, Wheate, Hony, Vir∣gin-waxe, flower of Barly, and of Beanes, and Linséed, seacute;eth all these together in white Wine or Vineger, putting thereto Rams fallow, and make a Plaister thereof, and it shall be whole in short space, if yée lay it to the Pappe. For the Canker. TAke a oue that will wind about thy Leg, and put there∣in thy fasting digestion, and bind it to the soare, till it stinke ouly two dayes, then change it, and doe so twice or thrice, till the Worme come out, and lye on the clouts. Another for the same. TAke Hearbe-water, Scabious, Canker-wort, and séethe them in stale Ale, and drinke it Euen and Morne hote. Another. TAke the Féet, the Head, and the guts of a Crane, dryed in an Ouen to powder, and put that powder vpon the Canker and it will kill it. For the Quotidian Feaver or Ague. TAke and giue the Patient a Vomit purgation, euen when you thinke his fit will come, and when the fit is cleane gone, giue him a little supping made with these Hearbs, Suc∣corie, Endiffe, Fennell-rootes, Parcely rootes, a little Time and Sauorie, made with a Chicken or a little Mution: for this comforaeth Nature well after this Purgation.
Another for the same. TAke and giue the Patient before the fit doe come vpon them, two peny weight of the powder of Bay-berries, with a soft Egge, or in stead thereof grosse Pepper, for it is very good therefore. For the Feaver Quartaine which taketh one every third day with a sore fit. TAke Parcely the rootes and all, wash it faire and cleane, and take out the pithe in the middest, and then stampe it well, and put thereto new layd Egges, and halfe a peund of Hgges blood, seasoned with Salt, and take a good Hen and stuffe her therewith, and then bake her in a Pie, and let the Patient eate thereof. For it taketh away the Quartain Ague by little and little, and doth comfort the heart, and doth prouoke good appetite, Probatum est. Another proved Medicine for this Disease. TAke Camomill, or Centory, stampe them, and drinke them with Wine: for these two Hearbs hath often helpen this and of Ague, Probatum est. A Medicine for an Ague o Quartaine. TAke Sothernwood and mice ti small, and put a little Sallet oyle into a Saucer, and put thereto this foresaid Hearbe, and let it lye an houre or two in it, and set it on the fire, and there let it simper a little, and annoynt thy wrists and the soles of thy Féet, and the nape of thy Necke, and downe betwéen thy shoulders, and this must be done before the fit comes, and in thrée times this doing you shall be whole.
A Plaister to take the Ague or any other ache out of a Womans Brest in the time of her Child-bearing, if it come. TAke the yolke of an Egge, and a little quantity of Wheate flower, and a quantity of Honey, as much as the yolke of the Egge, and beat those together, till it be like a Salue: then make a Plaister thereof, and lay it to the Brest that is grieued, and it will heale it without doubt. Probatum est. A Principall water for the Palsie. TAke a pinte of water of Iuniper, and of Ambrose, as much Fennell water, and of Parcely, and Lawrell leaues a pinte, of Cowslip water as much, Rosemary and Lauender wa∣ter, fiue peny-worth of the best Aqua vite, a pinte of white-Wine, foure ounces of the powder of Sinamon: Mingle all these together, laying them a night in a vessell of earth, or Timber, and in the morning after, still them with a soft and ea∣sie fire; this water is excéeding good, and of great efficacie, to purge steame, and to confort a cold stomacke, and for rising and swelling at the heart, and especially it is a helping and relieving against the Palsie, if it be drunke ere yée wash, and chafe the limmes therewith, of him or her that is vexed with the Palsie, and it will ease them. For the Palsie. TAke Rosemary, Sage, hearbe Magdalen, of either of them a handfull, of Camomill flowers thrée handfuls, and make white Sallet oyle, as yée make Oyle of Roses. For the dry Coughe. TAke Herselue, and Comfrey, and eate therof thrée dayes or foure with Hony.
A good Fumigation forth French Poxe confirmed. TAke Synaper two ounces, of Frankensence, of Liquid St∣rax, ana a dram and a halfe, and mingle them: the manner how to minister this suffumigation is this; You must set your Patient naked vnder a straight Canopie, and you must lay vpon the Coales the first part of your foresaid Receipt, and the Patient must enforce himselfe to receiue the smoake, kée∣ping the fire betwéene his Legges till be begin to sweate: and so doing the space of foure dayes, till his Téeth begin to ake. Pilles against Morbo. TAke of all the Mirabulines ana threée drams, of Troskes, of Colloquintida, of Masticke, of Digredium, ana two drams of Nigula, of Organy, of Cummin, ana two drams, of blacke Elibore, one dram, of Spike, of Euphorium, of Harts-horne burnt, of Sall-gemme, ana halfe a dram of Mayden haire, of the Coddes of Seney, of Pollytricon, of Galitricon, of the flowers of Rosemary, of Harts-horne, of Epithiam, ana one dram, of Coryanders, of Annséed, of Polipodium, ana sixe drams, of good Triacle sixe drams, of Agaricke in Traskes, and of washed Aloes, ana tenne drams, of the Spices of Hieta, De octo Rubijs of the spices of Diarodam Albatis, ana eight drams: Make a pase of Pilles, with the juyce of Femitory, and honey of Ro∣ses, one dram. To make your Drinke. TAke twenty ounces of Pockwood, being turned of a Tur∣ner very small, which put into an Earthen Pot of two Gal∣lons,
and put thereto eight pound of Running water, the best you can get, and let it stand in soake foure and twenty houres, the Pot being covered, then take and stop the Pot with Paste, so close that no ayre may goe out, you must kéepe the strength in it, and that is your chiefest helpe, and with the point of your Knife make a hole in the Paste, and therein put a peg of wood, which is to giue it ayre, at times in the boyling, for breaking of the pot: and thus lt it boyle on a soft fire of Coales, the space of sixe houres, in which time it will be consumed to a pottle; and that will serue you for your Drinke, to take Morning and Eve∣ning for foure dayes, against which time you must make more. After the firt séething, séeth the same wood againe, with the like quantity of water and time likewise: and that is for your common Drinke, to serue at all times till you make new. To make your Bisket. TAke foure and twenty pound of the purest Wheat-flower, which you can get, and put thereto one pound of fine Su∣gar, and so make your Bisket, which will serue for your turne all the time of your Dyet. A Receipt, and a Soveraigne Dyet for the French Poxe. Proved. FIrst, prepare a Chamber, which make so close that no ayre come into it, and defend all ill savours out of it, and therein to bée twelue dayes together, before you doe begin your Dyet, every day forbearing of eating and drinking Flesh and lese▪ on the thirtéenth day you must begin your Dyet, & then to take a Purgation of Cassia Fisula, or of Scamonia, to make your Body empty, kéeping your Bed, sweating temperately, with∣out any provking: which sweating is your greatest remedy, in the which your Sweate, you shall drinke of your second
drinke as often and as much as you lift: and of your first drinke you must drinke every Morning at fiue a clocke, and Evening at eight a clocke, eight ounces at a gulpe warme, saving on the dayes you take your Purgation: On which dayes, drinke all of your second Drinke, desiring alwayes to be merry and light-harted, in occuping to smell to dryed Orenges, hot Bread, Vineger of Roses, Mustard, and Apples: and after this man∣ner, you must kéepe your Chamber thirty dayes together, and never to take Ayre, and at fiftéene dayes you must take ano∣ther Purgation like to the first, and that day to drinke all of your second Drinke: and in like manner, another Purgation the thirtieth day: on which day, you may take Broth of a Chic∣ken, or of Mutton, and by little and little take the Ayre, and drinke good drinke. The order of your Fare. EVery day take a quantity of a Chicken, and séethe it in wa∣ter, and put thereto Borage leaues, or Borage Flowers without other Spices or Salt, or any other thing: which Chicken eate to thy Dinner, and every day eate thrée ounces of Bisket, and no more; that which you leaue of your Bisket, eate at night, with a few Raisins of the Sunne, and your Din∣ner must bée at tenne a clocke before noone, and your Supper at fiue a clocke at after noone: and at your Dinner you may dippe your Bisket in your Broth (if you will) and so drinke your Drinke as aforesaid, and this is your Fare and Dyet for the space of thirty dayes, and no other. A marvailous secret to preserve a man from the Plague, and hath beene proved in England of all the physiti∣ans, in that great and vehement Plague in the yeare 1348. which crept through all the VVorld: and there was never any which used this secret, but hee was preserved from the Plague. TAke Aloe Epaticum, or Sicotrine, fine Sinamon and Myrrhe, of each of them thrée Drams, Cloues, Mace, Lig∣num
Aloes, Masticke, Bole-armoniack, of each of them halfe a dram: let all these things be well stamped in a cleane Morter, then mingle them together, and after kéepe them in some close vessell, and take of it every Morning two penny-weight, in halfe a glasse of white Wine, with a little water, and drinke it in the Morning at the dawning of the day: and so may you (by the grace of God) goe holdly into all infection of the ayre and Plague. A soveraigne Drinke to preserve one against the Plague or Pestilence. TAke the quantity of a Dram and an halfe of Powder Impe∣riall, a dram of Triakle and of Dragon water, and Sorrell water, of each of them an ounce, and drinke it with Ale in the Morning Fasting, and if one haue taken the Infection within 24. houres before, yet by Gods grace he shall escape it. This hath béene truely proved in the last great Visitatin. Another for the same. TAke a dram of Methridatum, and giue it the Patient with Dragon water, white Wine, or some other liquor to drinke, when he supposeth himselfe infected first. Another Preservative against the Plague. TAke seven or eight leaues of Sorrell, and wash them in faire Water and Vineger, and stéepe them in the said Water and Vineger a good while, and eate them Fasting
A good Drinke to be used to those that are infected with the Plague. TAke Berries of Idle (that are ripe, gathered on the North side of the Trée) and dry them in the shadow: then stampe them to powder, then take a dram of the same Powder, and temper it well with two ounces of Planten-water, or white Wine, and let the sicke person drinke a good draught thereof, and remaine in his Bed, and sweate as much and as often as he can, after hée hath taken it, then warme a clane shirt for him to put on, (and if his shirts may be shifted often, it will bée the better after his sweating) and like wise his shéets and Bed-cloathes, if it may be, if not, at the least his shéetes and shirt: and in vsing of this for the space of thrée dayes together, he will dye or mend without all doubt, (by Gods helpe.) This hath beene often and truely proved. To provoke sléepe to the sicke person: Take a good quan∣tity of Womans brest Milke, and put thereto a little quantity of Aqua-Vitae, stirre them well together, and moysten the Temples of the Head of the Patient, and the Nostrils well therewith, and let it be laid on with some Feather, or some fine linnen cloth, and this will doe much good. It is proved. And if it happen, that the sicke person find himselfe greatly grieved, and that any Swelling begin in any place to grow sore, then take Elder leaues, red Bramble eaues, and Mustard séed, and stampe them all together, and make a Plaister thereof, and lay the same to the Sore, and this will both draw and heale. Or take two handfuls of Scabious, and stampe it in a Morter, then temper it well with two ounces of Swines greace, that is salted, and the yolke of an Egge, then stampe them all together, and laid thereto, will draw excéeding well.
For all Aches or paines in the Ioynts where ever they be a very true and well approved Medicine. TAke all the whole horne of a Bucke, that he casteth of the later, the better, take away the Scalpe, and take nothing but the Horne, cut it in Shivers or pieces, then boyle it in a gallon of faire water vntill it come to a pinte or some thing more, then cast away the pieces of Horne, and let that in the vessell stand till it be cold, which will then be like a Ielley, and when you will make vse thereof, warme some of it in a Sawer or other convenient thing, and annoynt the grieved place therewith by the fire, Morning and Evening, and let it soake in by the heat of the fire, vsing it nine or ten times: Thus (God willing) it will throughly cure it for ever. To make a Seare-cloth for all manner of Aches. TAke halfe a pinte of Sallet Oyle, a quarter of a pound of white lead, an ounce & a quarter of white Cerues, boyle the Lead in the Oyle till it is cleare, then put in the Cerues, and boyle it till it is stiffe, and so make it in Rowles, and kéepe it for your vse. A most excellent and approved Cure for the Sciatica. TAke a pinte of the best Aqua Composita you can get, an Oxes Gall, and an ounce of Pepper beaten into Powder, boyle them all together till halfe the Aqua Composita be consumed, apply the same on a Cloath as a Plaister to the place, and so let
it continue there for the space of 12. houres, vse it 4. or 5. times if néed be for it will giue helpe. An approved and incomparable Cure for the Palsie. TAke Lavender and boyle it in faire Water, then straine it, and then drinke halfe a pinte thereof daily first and last for the space of a Fortnight together, and it will cure you. An excellent Receipt for the Strangury. TAke a good pinte of Aqua Composita, put therein a handfull of Ivie leaues, kéepe the Vessell well stopped, and the Ivie Leaues will consume therein, vse to drinke thereof thrée or foure spoonefuls at a time Morning and Evening first and lass fiue or sixe dayes together; and you shall find a marvailous helpe thereof. A compleate Cure for a Tetter or Ring-worme. STampe Celadine, and apply it to any Tettar or Ring-worme shifting it twice every Day with new for the space of a Fortnight; and it will kill it quite. An excellent Cure for the Rheume. RVbbe the leafe of a Marigold betwéene your fingers, and put the same into your nose, and let it stay there a pretty
while, and it will bring forth aboundance of humours out of your Head, and if you vse it, you shall be much eased of the Rheume in a short time. A Medicine for the Mother. TAke white Wine, heat therein a Brionge rootes; Let the Woman troubled with the paines of the Mother, drinke thereof going to Bed, once a Wéeke vse it, for it will helpe you vndoutedly. Probatum est. An Exquisite Remedy for the Spleene. TAke the rinde of an Ashen Trée, and boyle it in Wine, let the party tormented with the Spléene drinke thereof Fa∣sting, sixe or seven Mornings together, and it will perfectly helpe them; and if you annoynt the grieved place so long with an Oyntmet called Deathea every Morning and Evening. It is an excellent Remedy likewise. An excellent Medicine for the Gowte, and to draw out all Evill Humours out of the Head, or for paine in the Eyes or Eares, or Impostumes. TAke halfe a pound of Pitch, and halfe a pound of Rozen fine∣ly beaten, and cleane searsed, halfe a pound of the best Fran∣kensence, beaten and searsed also, a quarter of a pound of Shéepes Tallow, an ounce of Mace, and a quarter of a pound of Cummin séede: All these made into fine powderand an
ounce of Lapadanum: All these put together must boyle an houre, the Pitch must be first put in, and then the rest of your Stuffe: when it is boyled take Shéepe Skinnes finely towed, make Soles thereof for your Féete, and we are them within your stockins a moneth or sixe wéekes, and then make new againe. An excellent Dyet drunke for all inward Diseases. TO the first boyling. Sasafrase, of each one ounce. TO the first boyling. Salsaperrilla, of each one ounce. TO the first boyling. Pollipodum▪ of each one ounce. Liquorice one ounce. For the second Boyling. Harmodactile — one quarter of an ounce. For the second Boyling. Egrimont, of each a handfull. For the second Boyling. Bettony and of each a handfull. For the second Boyling. Campithy. of each a handfull. For the third Boyling. Sena, two ounces. For the third Boyling. Stihados, demi ounce. For the third Boyling. Epithimum. thrée drams. Swéet Fennell Séeds. two ounces. For the fourth Boyling. Mayden haire a quarter of an ounce. For the fourth Boyling. Ceerach demi ounce. If the Body be cold and moyst you may put toth woods, an ounce of China, and among the Hearbs a quarter of a handfull of Cardus Benedictus. Slice a China and Salsafrasse, and Salsaperrilla, and bruise
the Polipodium in a Morter and infuse them in a gallon of Spring water 24, houres. The first Boyling. THen boyle the Sassafrase and Salsaperilla and Polipodum first alone, an houre and a halfe in an Earthen Pipkin close covered. The second Boyling. THen put in the Hearbs and the Lycorice and the Hermoda∣tile, and boyle them with the Woods an houre. The third Boyling. THen restore the Water to her first quantity, including in quantity a pint of white Wine or Muskadine, if you will haue it purge more; and so let it boyle an houre longer. Then put in the Sena Sticados, Epithinium, Maydenhais, Ceterach, and swéet Fennell Séeds, and boyle them with all therein a quarter of an houre. Then take it from the fire, and let it settle thrée or foure houres. Then strayne it out, and put the Drinke into a Bottle or o∣ther close Vessell, and drinke thereof halfe a pinte at a time in the Morning. In the Summer time it will not kéepe good aboue 4. dayes and in the Winter not past sixe dayes. Another excellent good Dyet Drinke. TAke a pecke and halfe of Seascurbut grasse, picke it and wash it, and dry it well; take also Scabias, Bittany, and water
Crosses of each a good handfull, stampe them and straine them and let the Iuyce thereof stand in a Glasse all Night, then take two good handfuls of yellow Dock rootes, two ounces of China rootes sliced, one ounce and a halfe of swéet Fennell séeds brui∣sed, and a stick of Lycorice sliced. Put all these Ingredients in a Boulter Bag, and bind a flint stone to the Bag to make it sincke. Then take a Rundlet of sixe gallons and put the Bag into it, then put the juyce of those Hearbs aforesaid into the Rundlet with sixe gallons of new Béere, and let it worke; and when it worketh ouer, let that which is wrought ouer be put into the Vessell againe. Another excellent Physicke Drinke. TAke Cardus Benedictus, Wormewood, and Scabias, of each foure handfuls, Succory, Scabias, Marigold flowers, and the leaues of Angelica tops and rootes, Turmentile and Pimper∣nell, of each thrée handfuls, Sage 6. handfuls, Iuniper berries bruised 8. ounces: all these to be brued with 36. Gallons of Béere, and when it is a wéeke old, drinke a draught thereof in the Morning. An excellent Medicine for the Iaundise. TAke sixe Earth-wormes, it them and scoure them from their filth and limy matter, cut them in pieces or chop them, make pottage of them with water and Datmeale: eate the same for 12. dayes together, and it will perfectly cure the Iaundize. A rare Medicine for the sharpnesse of the Vrine. TAke a quart of new Milke from the Cow, and the whites of 18. Egges, beaten very thinne, mingle those Whites and the Milke together, distill them with a ot fire, but let it not be too néerly stilled, but that it may have a good deale of moysture in it, when you haue done stilling it, then put into it
as much Sugar-Candy as you shall thinke good to swéten it, and a sticke of Lycorice scraped and bruised, then drinke thereof the quantity of a wine pinte in the Morning Fasting, and if it be in the heate of Summer, drinke as much also about foure of the Clocke in the Afternoone. An excellent Fomentation for the Stone. TAke a Platter full of Pigeons Dung, of the newest you can get, and a good handfull of Feather few bruised in your hands, fry them together in a Frying Pan, putting thereto a little Honey (let that be last) let it Fry a good while, then put it in a Canvas bagge about halfe an Ell long, and a handfull broad, and lay it as hot as you can suffer if along your side from the Backe to the priuy parts; and if it helpe not at the first, take it againe, and it shall by Gods grace make you well, An excellent and approved Remedy for the Cough of the Lungs. TAke two Gallons of faire running water, to which quantity take two handfuls of cleane Barley well picked, 24. Resons of the Sunne stoned, and of Currans, of each a quarter o a pound, Lycorish shred, Ginger shred, and Sugar-Candy of each two ounces, Anniséeds, Fennell-seeds, Coriander-séeds, and Cummin-séeds, of all together, a quarter of a pound beaten in a Morter, Isope rootes, Parcely rootes, and red Fennell roots, of each a handfull, boyle all thse together in the gallon of water a∣bouesaid, till halfe the water be wasted, then straine it well, and drinke thereof a good draught first and last. An excellent and sure Remedy for a swelling or sore Throate. NOte the place of the Trée, or poast, Hogs Trough, or any thing where a Swine rubs it selfe, rub your hand thereon
and presently rub your throate with that hand twice or thrice, or rub your hand vpon the bare ground, and then presently rub your Throate with that hand, doe it thrée times together, and it will helpe you, or if you can get a piece of that part of the Trée hogge Trough or stone where the Hog hath rubbed, and rubbe your Throate with it. An excellent Salve to cleanse and to heale Wounds. TAke Smalledge, Petty-morrell, and Whay bread, of the Iuyce of each of them a like quantity, take also of life Honey, and of the whites of Egges, of each a like quantity of the Iuyce of the Hearbs; then take fine Wheate flower and mingle them well till they be as thicke as Pappe, these will swage the, bur∣ning or ranckning of Sores or Wounds in any case. But let not this Medicine or the Sore come neare the fire. An excellent Remedy to stanch vomiting Incorporated. TAke the Leaven of white past, a good quantity of Speare Mints, and the quantity of a Nutmegge, of the Oyls of Mace, beate them in a Morter, and when you haue incorporated or made it into Passe spread it on a cloath, and heat it hot at the fire, and lay it to the mouth of the stomacke. An excellent Remedy for the Head-ache or Megram. TAke Frankensence, put it in a Chafingdish with coales, take also a handfull of fine Towe or Flaxe, and tost it in the smoake of the Frankensence, and as the smoake ceaseth, put in more Frankensence, and open the Towe in the Smoake, till it
be warme, then lay the Towe to the Temples of the head and on the Browes, bind a Kerchiefe over it and so goe to Bed, vse this and it will helpe you. Another for the Head-ache, A Medicine worth Gold. TAke the Iuyce of Ground Ivie, and out of a spoone or sawcer snuffe it vp into your Nose with a Quill. An excellent Medicine for the Spleene. TAke Wormewood, Mallowes, Camomill, and Melitots of each a handfull, boyle them in faire water till halfe the Li∣quour be wasted, then put thereto a good dfull of wheaten Bra, and boyle it to the thicknesse of a Plaister, quilt it on a linnen cloath and apply it to the side as hot as you can suffer it, and removing it often. An excellent helpe for sore Eyes. TAke Ground Ivie, otherwise called Alehoose Celadine, and aisies, of each a like quantity, stampt and strayned with a little Sugar, Rose-wter, put thereunto and dropped with a Feather into the Eyes, taketh away all manner of Inflamati∣ons spots, Webs, Itchings, smartings, or any griefe whatsoe∣ver in the Eyes, yea, though the sight were well nigh gone. An excellent Remedy for an old paine or griefe, in the Head. TAke Bay-salt and Cummin séeds, of each a like quantity, stampe them well severally by themselues, and as much browne Fennellséeds as either of them, stampe that with the
rest altogether, then with pure Vineger of Rose water mixe and stirre them altoghether in a dish over the Chasing-dish with hot Coales, then lay some of the same hot vpon a linnen cloth, and so apply to the hinder parts of the head at Night, when you goe to bed, bind it fast on that it fall not off, vse this in the same manner 8. or 9. Nights together; it will not onely helpe the same perhaps with 3. or 4. times so doing, but also it will cleare the sight and draw the Humours clean away, that runs out of the Head into the Eyes, and try of the same, this is a pretious Medicine. An excellent Remedy for heat in the Backe. TAke a good handfull of Henbane, and so much Towe as will serue to wrap the Henbane in, wt the Towe in water, and then wrap the Henbane in the Towe, and rake it vp in Em∣bers till it be well coasted: then take it out and mingle it with a little Vineger of Roses and the white of an Egge; mingle them all well together, then spread it on a Cloath and lay it warme to your Backe. An excellent Remedy for the swelling in the Stomacke. TAke of Century and Wormewood of each a quarter of a handfull, Sage and red Mints, of each a great handfull; Séeth them in Béer from a Pottle to a quart, drinke thereof Morning and Euening. A Remedy for the Tooth-ache. TAke Frankensence, Onyon séeds, and Henbane séeds, burne them together in a Changdish with Coales, let the sake thereof be conveyed through a Tunnell to the aking Tooth.
An excellent Purgation and very gentle. TAke eight or ten Prunes, halfe a sawcerfull of Reisons of the Sunne stoned, the tops of Rosemary, and Bay leaues, of each a few, a little Mace, and thrée Crownes weight of Sena, boyle all these in faire water, with a good big Chicken, vntill it be boyled enough, then straine it, and take a spoonefull of it, and mingle it with an ounce and a halfe of Syrope of Roses, Salu∣tine, and so drinke it blood-warme, the Sena must not be put in till the rest be boyled enough, and it may not boyle too much. An excellent Remedy for the Lungs that are perished. BOyle gréene Broome in Ale, and when you meane to drink it, put thereto the quantity of a Haste nutshell of Treacle, a halfe pennyworth of long Pepper bruised, and a spoonefull of Aqua Composita, drinke thereof twelue dayes together first and last every Spring time; Also, Long-wort boyled in new Milke doth well. An excellent Remedy to kill and heale a Cankar. BOyle the leaues of wild Idle in Wine, and lay it on the Cankar, is a sure Bemedy. An excellent Cure for the biting of a Mad Dogge. TAke wild Sage, Maifellon, otherwise called Knot-rasse, arrow, otherwise called Mitteolium night shade, which
hath the purple flowers, and Lilly rootes, of each of all these a handfull, distill them in May, and to euery fiue spoonefuls of water thereof, put one spoonfull of Treacle, and let the party bitten drinke thereof. An excellent Medicine for an Ache or griefe in any Limbe. TAke Raisins of the Sunne, and the stones being taken out stampe the Raisins, and apply them as a Plaister to the grieved parts and it will soone procure ease, and if you vse it in the same manner fiue or sixe times, it will throughly cure you of that Ache. A very good remedy for an Ache in the bones, or any part of the body. ANnoint the place with good Aqua Composita by the fire, and let it drinke in, doe it three or foure times together, then at the last time while it is wet cast vpon the wet place the Powder of Olanum, then lay a linnen cloath vpon it and few it fast, and o let it ye on three or foure dayes, and in that time (God willing) it will be well. An excellent cure for the Crampe. MAke a King of an Oxes borne, or of a Cowes, or of a Sea horse tooth, or of the pisle of a Sea horse, and weare it.
A Cure for a Scald Head. TAke the leaues, branches, and buds of Brambles, boyle them in faire Running water till the halfe be consumed, then take it from the fire and wash the sore Head therewith Morning and Evening, then dip the cloth in the water and lay to it, vse this and in short space it shall heale it with Gods grace. An absolute and approved Medicine to Cure the rednesse of the face. BOyle the rootes of Lillies in faire water, and therewith wash and rub the face Morning and Evening, and it will helpe it. An excellent Medicine for the Falling sick∣nesse. TAke thrée Nayles made in the Vigill of St. John the Baptist, commonly called Midsomer Eve, driue them into the ground so déepe, that they be not séene in the place where the sicke party fell naming the parties name while it is in do∣ing, it will driue away the disease, which Misaldus credibly reported. An Admirable remedy for benummed Limbes. CAuse an Earthen pot of a Gallon to be made with foure Féete, thrée ynches long, which pot must be full of
small holes both bottome and sides like a Garden watering Pot, it must be so wide in the Mouth, as you may easily put in your hand, cause also another pot to be made, into the which you may set the pot full of holes, in this pot full of holes must be very well nealed and Leaded within for that no Liquor may soake into it, then take Cick-wéede in June when she stalke waxeth hard, take the leaues, flowers, and séeds there∣of, cut them small together so many as will fill the pot full of holes, put them therein, and in the middest of the Hearbs put three Oxegalls, and into every Gall put thrée Cloues, then put the same pot with the Hearbes into the other pot without holes and cover them both very close round about that no Ayre get into any of them, then bury them in the ground for the space of forty dayes, then take them out, and you shall haue a perfect oyle distilled from the Hearbes which Oyle preserue to annoynt the benummed Lymbes with it, and they shall with Gods helpe recover their former strength, approved to be ve∣ry true. To stanch bleeding in any place. STampe Primrose-leaues and apply it to the place that blée∣deth, and it will stanch the bléeding. A Remedy for the Bloody Fluxe. TAke the floxe that is shorne from Scarlet, dry it and make it into Powder, drinke halfe a spoonefull thereof in red Wine, vse this fiue or sixe times, it will certainly and soone helpe you of the bloody Fluxe.
For paine or swelling in the Throat, a very good remedy. TAke Iewes-Eares that groweth vpon old Elder, and is to be had at the Apothecaries, let it lye in stéepe in Ale a whole night, drinke thereof once or twice a day till you be a∣mended. An excellent Remedy for a Pin or Web in the Eye. TAke two Egges, rost them blew hard, slit them in halfe, long-wise, take out the yolkes and put as much white Cop∣peris as a hazell nut betwéene the halfes of the whites, then close them together againe, and lay them in the Embers till the Copperis e melted, then take them out and wring them be∣twéene two trenchers, let the water that commeth out drop vpon a cleane Whetstone, and euer as it drops rub vpon the whetstone a race of Ginger, kéepe that water in a Vyall glasse, and lying vpon your backe drop some of it into the Eye with a feather, this in twice doing will helpe it. An excellent Dyet-drinke for the Dropsie. TAke Scurbut grasse, a pecke of Brooklime, and water Cres∣ses, of each twelue handfuls, Wormewood, and horse Ra∣dish, of each two handfuls, Scabious, and Hysop, of each sixe handfuls, Graines and Long Pepper of each an ounce, and put them into a boulter bagge, and put it into fiue Gallons of Eight shilling Béere, and when it is Eight dayes old, drinke thereof and of no other.
An excellent Remedy for a Loosnesse in the body. TAke the Gelly of an Egge, and mingle it with the water of red Oake buds and Sinamon, bake it on a Tile stone, and eate that Cake at any time of the day, this will stay any loose∣nesse though it be bred to the bloody fluxe, if the party bée so weake that he cannot eate the Cake, then let him boyle the Oake buds water in Milke and ever as it riseth vp put in a spoonfull of the Oake buds water, and let the party drinke of the same at any time of the day. A Remedy for an Impostume. TAke Barley, dry Beanes, and of Liquorice sliced, of each a like quantity, boyle them in faire water, drink a good draught thereof with Sugar every Morning fasting, and at night going to bed, fiue or sixe dayes together or more. It will draw out any Impostume, and cause you to avoyd or cast out the same. An excellent Cure and Remedy for a sore▪ Breast BOyle two or 3 handfuls of Mallowes in water till they be tender, then take them out of the water, and put in a quart of thick Ale grounds, and a pinte of white Wine, let it so boyle a good while, then thicken it with Crums of leavened wheaten bread, and when it is almost ready put in of Mutton suet, the quantity of a Hens Egge, and so apply the same very warme to the Breast.
An excellent remedy for the Feaver or Ague, especially in a body of a weake Constitution. TAke a pinte of the best Muskadine, make a tost of such bread as you doe most affect, put your tost into the Musca∣dine and eate the tost, then drinke a little of the Muscadine, so as the tost and the Muscadine be eaten and drunke together, and take a spoonfull of grosse Pepper, take a little in a spoone to swallow downe with the Muscadine till you haue taken all the Pepper, and so eate and drinke so long as your stomacke will well receiue it, though it be with striving to drinke the whole pinte off, this must be done about thrée houres before the fit do come, and abstaine the next meale before the fit, and after the taking of this Medicine, goe to bed and sweat vpon it. This may be giuen to any man or woman that hath the Ague, yea though a woman with Child or that giues sucke. Another for an Ague in one that hath a strong body TAke of the best Venice Treacle, or pure Methridate the quantity of a Hazill Nut, or for want thereof asmuch of London Treacle as a Wall nut; take also 6 or 7 spoonfuls of the best Aqua-vite, and according to the age and strength of the partie, one spoonfull of grosse Pepper, and as much of the powder of red Sage, mixe all these together, let the party eate this with a spoone by little and little an houre before the fi, and sweat vpon it by walking if he be able, or else goe to bed and sweat there, to dry vp the viseous or ymie humour which is the cause of the Diseases, let the party abstaine the next meale before to starue the Disease.
Another for the Ague. TAke the juyce of a rosted Orenge, with a little burnt Sacke before the fit. An excellent Remedy for the Stone in the Blad∣der, to provoke Vrine from one that ma∣keth water but by drops. TAke life Hony and Renish wine, of each a quart, Saxifrage, Philapendula, and Pellitory of the wall, of each a handfull, still all these in Balma Maria, with a very flow fire, kéepe it in a cold place in Pwer or Earthen vessels, and drinke thereof the quantity of halfe a pinte euery morning fasting, and after∣wards eate the quantity of a Walnut, of life Hony and use to fast, and walke an houre after it. Another excellent Remedy for the Stone. TAke a pinte of Milke, and put into it a pinte of wilde Mal∣low leaues let them boyle together a quarter of an houre, then make Posset-drinke of Ale or Béere, take of the Curds and the Mallow leaues, then set your Posset to boyle again, and put into it a good stick of Liquorish well bruised, one spoonfull of An∣niféeds, and halfe a spoonfull of Parcelyéeds well bruised, and so of Sugar Candy the quantity of & small Wallnut, boyle all these to the quantity of halfe a pinte or lesse, then straine it, and at your going to bed drinke it bloodwarme, putting into it a quarter of a grated Nutmeg. An Injection for the Stone. TAke a quart of Barley-water, and boyle therein a handfull of Mallow-leaues, and as much of Violet
leaues till halfe the water be consumed, then put thereto 3. spoonfuls of Mel-rosarum, let the party take it as an Injection with a Searinge. An easie yet approved Medicine for the Stone. TAke a pottle of Ale and a flint stone taken from the Chalke and beaten to powder, and a peny-worth of Reddish rootes, boyle all these together to a quart, then strain it thrice and drink thereof evening and morning. An excellent Remedy for the Cough of the Lungs, for the Liver, and for a Con∣sumption. TAke of Long wort 6 good handfuls with both your hands, and of Liver wort 5 handfuls, Mayden-haire a pound and a halfe, beat these seuerally, and take of each Iuyce a like quantity, then mixe them together and then put thereto halfe a pound of white Sugar Candy finely beaten, put thereto also a quarter of a pinte of the best Sallet oyle you can get, then put all these into a glasse, and shake it together every day for the space of a wéeke that it may Concet together, take 2. spoonfuls of ye same every Morning fasting, and likewise before dinner and before Supper, and also at other times betwéene meales if you will with a stick of Liquorice spunged all the end, and so to sucke it from the Liquorice. An excellent Cure for a sore Throat. TAke Sage, Rosemary, Woodbine-leaues, red Fennell and Peny-royall of each a handfull, boyle all these in a pottle of running water till it be halfe wasted, then put into it halfe a pinte of Vineger and a good piece of Allome, then let all these
be boyled together till the Liquor be wasted to a pinte, then let the Patient wash his mouth warme, and if it be for a sore Throat, take a stick of Liquorice and springe the end of it very soft, and binde a soft rag about it, and therewith being dipped in the abouesaid water, wash the oe and it shall cleanse it, and heale it, by the grace of God. Another for a swolne or sore Throat, a sure remedy. BOyle fiue leaued Grasse in Spring water, and gargle it warme, it is an excellent and an approved remedy. An excellent Medicine for an Ache, swelling, Spraines, and for the strengthning of any Sinew in any part of the body. TAke Butter vnwasht, and vnsalted, and Hony, of each a like quantity to every quarter of a pound of each of them, put so much Saffron, finely beaten as will lye vpon a great, melt them together, and dip therein a piece of white vnshorne Bayse, wring it a little, and so apply it warme to the place grieved. For a stripe in the Eye, or an humour falne into the eyes. TAke a new laid Egge, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white, and beat it into a water, then take a spooufull of the Iuyce of Houséek, and put into the Egge-shell, & as much of the white of the Egge, and halfe as much Rose water, and a little Sugar, set it on the Imbers, and let it séeth, then strain it through a faire linnen cloth, and with a feather drop therof into the eye. Another for dimme-sighted eyes▪ TAke a dish over a hot séething pot, and there will be a dewye water on the inside of the dish, which water kéepe in a glasse,
and when you haue occasion to vse it, drop a little thereof into the Eyes, and it will helpe it marvailously. Another for watering Eyes of paines in them, or distillations that comes from the Head. TAke a piece of raw Béefe, not too thick nor too thin, stéepe it all Night in good Aqua vite, apply it to the Temples or fore∣head, till the next day without removing it all night, vse this thrée or foure nights. For one that vseth to Swound or faint at the heart, an excellent remedy. TAke Rosemary, Sage, Bittony, and Margerom, of each a handfull, séethe them in a Gallon or more of faire-water, till halfe the water be consumed, then take away the Hearbes, and put to the said water a good pinte of Hony, then scumme it well, then put thereto an ounce of Sticado tyed in a faire linnen cloth, so let it séeth a little while, and then take it out of the said water, and put in an ounce of Sinamon, thrée quarters of an ounce of Nutmegs, and as much Ginger in Powder, drinke a good draught thereof warme, first and last, for the space of sixe or seuen dayes together, and then it helpes perfectly. To draw out a Splinter of Wood or Iron, or other things out of the Flesh. DIp a tent in the Iuyce of Valerian, and put into the Wound or sore as déepe as you can, and tye the Hearbe Valerian being stamped vpon the sore with a lynnen cloth that it remove not off, this will not onely draw out the Wood, Iron, or other things out of the Flesh, but will also cure the sore.
An excellent remedy for one that is Broken bel∣lyed or burst. TAke 9 red Snayles, put them betwéens two tyles, so that they slide not away, so dry them in an Oven, then make them into Powder, then give the quantity of that powder of one of those Snayles in a draught of white Wine to the party grieved every other morning fasting, till it be all done, and let the party neither eate nor drinke for two houres after, if these first nine Snayles, doe not throughly helpe, let the party begin againe in the same manner. An excellent helpe for those that cannot hold their Water. TAke the Bladder of a Shéepe, dry it throughly and beate it into powder, put it into foure or fiue spoonfuls of Vinege or water, giue it the party going to bedward to drinke that can∣not hold their waer, and it will remedy it. Certaine tokens of Death in a sicke Man. IF the Fore-head of the sicke party waxe red, his Browes fall downe, his nose waxe sharpe and cold, his left eye be∣come little, the corner of his eye runne, if he turne to the wall, if his Eares be cold, if he may suffer no brightnesse, if he pull strawes or cloathes of the bed, if he picke his Nostrils often with his fingers, if he wake much, being a young man, or sléepe much being an old man, these are most certaine tokens of Death.
An excellent remedy for the removing of a Wenne. BInde fast the Wen, then take verdigrease. Brimstone, ope, Oyle of Egges, Allome, and Hony, of each a like quanti∣ty, temper them well together and apply it thereto; it will both driue away the Wen and heale it. For a Timpany. TAke a pinte of Broome Ashes, eyther of gréene or dry, and a quarter of an ounce of Sinamon bruised, it the Ashes, and let a pinte thereof and the bruised Sinamon lye in stéepe all night in a pottle of White Wine, then let it run through a gel∣ly bag twice or thrice till it run cleere, put in some Sugar, and a tost vnto it, drinke thereof thrice a day, in the Morning fasting, and an houre before Supper, and an houre after Sup∣per. For one that is in a Consumption. TAke foure ounces of Shavings of Harts-horne, one ounce of the Shavings of Ivory, put in a Pipkin with a Gallon of faire water, let it stand on the fixe twelue houres in fusing and boyling softly close covered, then take twenty Egges in their Shells, crack their Shells, and put them in a dish with Salt, and let them stand an houre, and purge themselues, then pull them from their shells, washing them till they be cleane, then put them in the Pipkin to the Harts-horne, and let it boyle two houres, then put in a good handfull of Raisons of the Sun stoned, halfe an ounce of Liquorie scraped and sliced, and a blade or two of Mace, boyle all these till it come to a quart of Liquor, then put in halfe a pinte of white-Wine, sixe spoonfuls of Rosewater, two peny-worth of Saffron powdered, boyle
all a little while, then straine if, or run it through a gelly bag, if you please you may swéeten it as you like it, put a little Salt in it, when it is cold it will be a Ielly, you may take it cold or warme thrée or foure spoonfuls at a time, in the Morning fasting, at foure of the clock in the afternoone, and when you goe to bed. If you doe thing this too troublesome you may boyle the Egges in Broth or Milke, so you boyle them a good while and so drink the Broth or Milke as you like best, they are excéeding strength∣ning and will doe you great good if it please God to giue blessing to it. To make a womans Dugs little round and hard. LEt a woman that hath her Dugs or Pays over great flag∣ing or hanging downe, annoynt them often with the Iuyce of Savory it will draw them vp; and make them little, round and hard, and séeme as the Dugs of a Maid. For Lamenesse in the Ioynts. TAke of good Aqua Composita and Oyle of Roses, of each a like quantity, and mixe them well together, and annoynt the grieved therewith Morning and Euening, vntill he be well which will be within a little after, but rub the place with warme clothes well before. An excellent Antidote against the Plague or Poyson. TAke two Walnuts, two Figs, twenty leaves of Rew, and one graine of Salt, stampe them and mixe them all toge∣ther, eate it in the morning fasting, and you shall be safe from the Plague or poyson that day.
An excellent Preservative against the Plague. TAke Sage, Hearbe grace, Elder leaues, and Bramble leaues, of each a handfull, take also a quart of white Wine, and a good race of Ginger beaten small or grated, stampe the Hearbs with the Wine and the Ginger, then strain it through a cloth, take a spoonfull of this Medicine every morning fasting, for nine dayes together, after the first spoonfull you shall be safe for twenty foure dayes, and after the nynth spoonfull, you shall be safe for two moneths. But if it shall happen that you be stricken ere you drinke of this, then take a spoonfull of the water of Bittony, with a spoonfull mingled altogether and drink it, it will expell the venome, and if the sore doe appeare, then take Bramble leaues and Elder leaues, of each a like quanti∣ty, stampe them and make a Plaister thereof, and lay it to the sore, and it will heale it with Gods helpe. How to breake a Plague sore. TAke black Snayles and leauened Bread, stampe them to∣gether make a plaister thereof and apply it to the sore, and it will breake. For a paine or swelling in the Privy parts. TAke or white Wine, Vineger, and Cow-ung, boyle them to a Poultis, and when it is ready, put thereto a little oyle of Roses, and if the griefe doe procéed of a cold cause, put thereto some Camomile flowers and apply it hote. Another for the Cods that are swolne. BEate Comminséeds into Powder, Barley Meale, and Ho∣ny, of each a like quantity, fry them together with a little
Shéepes suet, heate it and binde it as a plaister about the Cods. For the paine of the Mother. BEate Nettleséeds into Powder, and drinke a spoonefull thereof, or some what more, in good Wine asswageth all pain of the Matrix and griefe of the Mother. For an Ache in the Ioynts, a Plaister. TAke a good quantity of the Inner barke of Elder, boyle it in your owne Vrine, make a plaister thereof, and apply it to the place grieved, as hote as you can suffer it. For the Ache in the Backe. TAke Camomill and Mallowes, of each a handfull, séethe them in running water till they be soft, then chop them small and put thereto a handfull of Damaske Rose leaues, then boyle all in a pinte of the Oyle of Roses, and being warmed annoynt the Back therewith Morning and Euening, then make a plaister of the Hearbs and apply it to the Backe. Another speciall good Medicine for the same. TAke a pound of new Waxe vnwrought, Stone pitch and Ro∣sen, of each a quarter of a pound, Venice Turpetine, or other ordinary Turpetine two spoonfuls, white Lead halfe a pound, Shéepes suet, and Déere suet, of each halfe an ounce finely chopt, boyle all these together, with a pinte of Oyle Oliue till it come to a Salue, then spread it on the fleshy side of white leather, and so apply it very warme.
For a Burning or Scalding. TAke fiue or sixe spoonefuls of Sallet-oyle, and as much of Running water, beate them together till they be well in∣corporated, then annoynt the place therewith, and then lay thereon a Wort lease, it will both ake it, and heale it. Another being a most excellent Medicine for the same. TAke of the hearbe Periwikle, fry it in a panne with fresh Butter, or fresh Grease and Shéepes dung newly made, when it is well fryed straine it through a cloath, and it will bée like Salve, then spread it on a Linnen cloath as broad as the sore is, and apply it thereto. It will cure it, though it were scalded or burnt to the guts, if it be taken in time, and renew the plaister Morning and Evening. An excellent helpe for the Piles. BVrne two or thrée Brickes red hote, and put them into a Panne in a close Stove, sprinkle Vineger vpon them and let the party sit vpon the Stove that he may receive the fume thereof into his fundament, vse this thrée or foure times if néed require. Where Medicines effect, give God the glory.
A necessary and briefe Relation of the Contagious disease of the Pestilence, with the Causes, Signes, and Cures of the same. By W. BORASTON of Salop, Practitioner in Physicke and Chyrurgerie. PART. XII. Wherein is shewed the Causes with most certaine Pre∣servatives against the Infection thereof. THis contagious Sicknesse called the Pesti∣lence, is no other thing then a pressure, Contagion and Whip, which GOD out of his indignation vseth to chastise men for their Transgressions, as it is written in the 28 of Deut. saying; If thou wilt not obey the voyce of the Lord thy GOD, and keepe and doe his Commandements; the Lord shall make the Pesti∣lence to cleave unto thee. For God the Creator of all things is the chiefe and principall moouer of all things created, and v∣seth them as secondary meanes to execute Punishment against the offenders. So that the Pestilence is either Supernaturall, and immediately commeth from God to Man: or Naturall, as
when God punisheth Man, he performeth it by his Creatures. Also the Pestilence supernaturall, is to be vnderstood two manner of wayes, that is to say; either when God doth it whol∣ly from himselfe, or else permissiuely hée suffereth Sathan to punish Man, for the reasons aforesayd: Hée being the most cruell Enemy both of God and Man, who grieveth and re∣pineth at mans felicity, and enviously séeketh to extirpate and roote out all Mankind. Euen as the Historie of Job testi∣fieth. So that his power is also two-fold, viz. Hée eyther doth this office of himselfe, or else by Inchanters or Witches, (Exodus. 7, Chap. and 8,) of whom Christ spake, Act. 8. Math. 7. The Pestilence naturall, is also taken two manner of wayes: Then one generated from an Astrall Impression, the other, from the Microcosmus or little worlds Imagination. The Pestilence of Impression, procéedeth from the Firma∣ment of Heaven, when God punisheth man by second causes, hée vseth the Conjunction of Saturne and Mars, and other Starres, and Eclipses for correction; euen as a Father cha∣stifeth his Child with the rodde. The arsenicall Sulphurious, Antimoniall, Napellosous, and Cicutosous beames of the Starres, infects the nutriment both Spirituall and Corporall. This is the generation of Pestilence, procéeding from the in∣fluence Astrall. Lastly, Paracelsus in his Booke De occulta Phylosophia, sayth; That of Imagination springeth the Pestilence, as is there instanced betwéene two Brothers. Also it is reported, that a man having the Hemehodes and the Pestilence together, aspecting another being found, infec∣teth him also; yea, very many much more, by the intuition and earnest beholding of women, Que simul Menstruorum & Peste laborant. Moreover, by the breath, heate, sweate, smell, habi∣tation, and garments from the Sicke, the Pestilence is pro∣pogated, and créepeth from one house vnto another, and in∣fecteth the Inhabitants thereof, so that i procéedeth of an in∣visible
essence, Spirituall and Astrall or not of any humour or Liquor onely. Presages and Judgements, taken from the Superiour bodies, and Constellations of the Heavens. AMongst all other bodies Celestiall, there are two, called euill and malicious, which are Saturne and Mars, as afore∣said; by whose bad influence manifold infirmities, especially of the Pestilence ariseth: For Saturne through Cold, causeth Rheumes, Elephantia, &c. Mars by reason of Heat, bringeth forth Feavers Pestilentiall, spitting of Blood, Plurisies and such like. Consider well, the entring of the Sun into Aries, by true Equation of the houses and Planets, for that influence hath more domination, then haue all other influences of the whole yéere beside, (except the superiour Conjunctions of the Planets, or some great Eclipses.) And this entring of the Sun into Aries, passeth all entrings of the Sunne into any other signe. Therefore, consider how the Lord of the sixt house in the figure disposed, for he is the Lord of the Sicknesse viz. You must consider, whether hée be impedite or no. And if hee be impedite, there shall be many Sicknesses according to his na∣ture and his house, that is the sixt house. As for example, be it in case that Saturne is Lord of the sixt house, and some Earthy signe is in the same house, the most commonly the sicknesse of that yéere, shall be of like nature, that is cold and dry. And ouer this you must consider, whether the Lord of the sixt house hath any aspect with the Lord of the house of Death; to him, then most commonly the end of those sicknesses that are cold and dry, shall be death. And likewise, as it is declared of the entring of the Sunne into Aries. So must it be sayd of the conjunction of the Sunne and Moone through all the yéere, marking euery nature of the
Planet being in the sixt house. If there be any, and the aspects to those two houses aforesaid▪ Also consider, whether this entring of the Sun into Aries or any of the conjunctions of the Luminaries, be in the eight house or no, for then it shall be much worse. Note also, that if the E∣clipse of the Sunne or Moone be in any Angles of the Nativity of any person, or in any of the Angles of the revolusion of his Natiuity, then he shall suffer sicknesse according to the nature of the same Angles. And if the Eclipse be in Medio Cli, hée shall suffer hurt in his honor and fame. And if it be in the Ascen∣dent, he shall be grieued in his body, and so forth of the other houses. But it shall be the worser in case the Eclipse be in the ascendent, especially if it be the Eclipse of the Sunne, for that is the more dangerous of the two. For asmuch as the effect of the Eclipses of the Moon is alwaies finished in the space of one yéere at the most, sometime in lesse, and for the most part in thrée moneths. But the effects of the Eclipse of the Sunne is very long or it come to passe. Sometimes twelue yéeres, as Ptolome in his Centiloquio witnesseth. The Astrologians take the judgement of the yéere, by the entring of the Sunne into Aries in the first minute. And if it then happen, that all the ill Planets be in the eight house, which is the house of Death, they say; that yéere shall arise a Pesti∣lence and divers other sicknesses, according to the nature and conditions of those Planets. And if the Moone in the same en∣tring, be néere vnto the conjunction of the Sunne, that is to say, within two, or thrée, or foure degrées: That yéere shall be a death of Pestilence Vniversall, and that shortly after that Con∣junction; especially at the comming of the Moone and evill Pla∣nets to infortunes: and as the infortunes be, the effects shall so appeare, be they more or lesse. Furthermore, you must consider the great conjunction of Sa∣turne and Jupiter, in the 13 degrée of Scorpio, as it was in the yéere 1625, in the last of August, which coniunction changed from an Ayrie triplicity into a watery, and it was in a watery
Signe, whereof there chanced very much raine, and thereupon followed excessiue humectation and moystning of mans body, which by and by turned to putrifaction, and thereupon ensued many perillous and corrupt Feauers, Pestilence and Agues, as Philerus and many others haue related, specially because the coniunction of Saturne was exalted in the North aboue Jupiter, which Saturne is of ill influence. Furthermore, there are assigned seaven Prognosticks, presa∣ges, or signes of the Pestilence, more common and vsually ob∣served, as hereafter follow: viz. FIrst, when in a Summer day, the Weather is often chan∣ged, as in the morning like to raine, and after standeth still cloudy, and at last, the winde turneth into the South. The second is, when often in the time of Summer, the dayes sheweth wholly obscured, as if it would Raine and yet not raine, and then if it doe so continue long, it is to be feared a great Pestilence will after ensue. The third Signe is, when there are many Flyes vpon the Earth, for this signifieth that the ayre may be venomous and infected. The fourth Signe is, when the Stars doe sée me often to fall, for it is a token that the ayre is corrupted by many venomous vapours, which ascendeth. The fift signe is, when Comets doe séeme to flys in the ayre as it appeareth in Meteors, and that those happeneth, when the Comet appeareth, it signifieth Blood-shed, Warres, &c. Vnde versus. Mors furit, urbs rapitur, Sevit mare, Sol operitur. Regnum mutatur plebs pefte fame ruciatur. The sixt signe is, when many Thunders and Lightnings happeneth, and especially from the South part. The seaventh is, when many Winds procéedeth from the
South part, for they be foule and vncleane: when these signes appeare, a great Pestilence is much to be feared, except our Lord Omnipotent avert it. Meanes to prevent Infection, the Causes and Prog∣nosticks, being already declared. NOw shall it be directed, by what meanes every man ought to preserue himselfe from this infection. And according to the spéech of David saying, that a man ought Divertee a malo, ad bonum, to turne from evill and doe good. And most humbly, Peecata sui confiteri, to confesse his sinnes; for in the time of Pestilence, Penitency and Confession are to be preferred be∣fore all other Medicaments, and withall to change the place for a more ayre. But if it cannot be done conveniently, in as much as possible may be, let all causes of corruption be euitated and avoyded, and consequently Venerie. Also the Wind procéeding from the Meridian or South poynt, is contagious and infectiue naturally: Therefore in the time of the Pestilence, the Win∣dowes on the same side the house ought to be shut vntill one of the clock in the afternoone, and let the Windowes bée open towards the North-part. For the same cause, let there bée no evill sents or smels, as from Stables, stréets, and fields, where dead carkasses corrupted and putrified may annoy you, and chiefly putrified Waters, as from sinckes and houses of Office, for Paracelsus saith; Omne putrifactum mere est vene∣num. And most commonly we find they dye in greatest num∣ber, where the ayre is corrupted with those annoyances; For Sicut per odorem, aromaticam cor & spus recreantur, ita ex no∣civo fetore debilitantur. Therefore the house is to be kept, that no infectiue ayre enter therein, especially that which is hu∣mide and moist, which naturally causeth putrifaction in the house or places where one sléepeth: For prevention thereof, the same house or places ought to be ayred with fires, of Wood, yéelding cleare flame, and withall to fumigate the roomes with
these Hearbs and séeds subscribed, Bayberries, Iniper, Vbery, Organy, Wormewood, Isope, Rue, Mug wort, and of Lignum Ales, let these fumes be inspired and taken at the mouth and Nosthrils, so that it may penetrate into the inferior and inward parts. Let alll Superfluity and overmuch repletions be refrained, for Avicen in 4 Canonis, saith; Illi qui repletionem semper curant priodum & finem vitae suae abreviam. Likewise, the common Bath is to be avoyded; for Modicum fermentum totam massam corrumpi. Finally, communities and concourses of people are also to be left off, as much as possi∣ble may be; least the breath of the infected be receiued. But in case they cannot be shunned, let these Remedies bée vsed which hereafter follow. The first Preservative. VVHen one ariseth in the Morning, by and by let him eate a little Rue, washt in cleane water, and sprink∣led with Salt, with one or two Walnuts well clensed. If that can not be had, let him eate some Bread or a toast intinted with Vineger, especially in a Turbid or cloudy day. Also in the time of Pestilence, it is better to stay within doores, then to goe abroad into any Towne or City, and let the house espe∣cially in the Summer, be sprinkled with Vineger, Roses, and Vine leaues; also it shall be good oftentimes in the day, to wash the hands with water and Vineger, and afterward to clense the face, and to smll vnto the hands washed, as aforesaid. It shall be also a wholesome course as well in Summer as Win∣ter to smell vnto sowre things. And for those that are visitors of the sicke, to take a spunge or piece of bread stéeped in Vine∣ger, and to hold to the Nose or Mouth; for all Acetosus and sow∣er things doe so close the powers, and passages of the humors, that no venomous ayre can enter therein, as by experience I haue often found. Also if you take Rue, Wormewood, Sage,
Marigolde, of each thrée handfuls, infuse them wholly in a gal∣lon of Ale newly ed vp, and paste it close that no ayre breath out, and after that is ed for 12 houres, take sixe or seaven spoonefuls thereof mixed with the best Venice Tre in quan∣tity of a Beane, and moderately walke thereon, and doe thus euery Morning before you goe oorth of your house, as long as the Sicknesse continueth, and renew your Drinke as occasion requireth to prevent the impression of the contagions ayre. Another Preservative. TAke Aloes cleane washed in Rose-water halfe an ounce, of good Myrrhe, of Saffron, of each two drains, of Bole-Armoniack prepared one scruple, of Séed-pearle one scruple, of the syrrup of Lemons as much as will make it in forme of paste made in Pills, and take thereof euery Morning the weight of a groat, fasting; and within one houre after, to take a little thin Broth, Ale berry, or white Wine, and fast thereon thrée houres after, and then to vse your accustomed dyet. Another. BVt if the body be very costive and distempered therewith, thn may yée vse these Pils in quantity as aforesaid; E∣uery morning for foure of five dayes together if néed require, and prepared as thus: Take of Rheubarbe, Myrrhe, of each one dram, Aloes two drams, Zeadorie roote, Saffron, of each one scruple, syrrup of Roses solutive, as much as will suffice to make it in forme of Pills, and to take them in manner as afore directed. Another Preservative. TAke of Methridate, conserve of Roses, of each halfe all ounce, Bole Armoniack prepared two drams, mixe them together, and take thereof as much as a Nut at once, and fast thereon two or thrée houres after.
Or else you may take of Treacle of Andromachus, and of Methridate, of eyther two drams, of conserue of Roses, thrée drams, Bole Armoniack prepared two scruples, of the séeds or rootes of Angelica two scruples, of the séeds of Citrons halfe a dram, of the sirrupe of Lemons, halfe an ounce, mixe all toge∣ther, and take thereof the quantity of a Hassell nut, in the mor∣ning or at any time of the day, else (if you goe into any throng of people) and fast a while after it. There are also many other preservatiues more costly, yet far more powerfull in their effects, which may be had at the hands of the Chymists, as Potus Pestilentialis Paracelsus, whereof one dram being taken in the morning fasting, and to sweat thereon, is a preservatiue for the Pestilence for sixe dayes. The second preseruatiue is, Sulphur sublimed with Myrrhe and Aloes, halfe a dram with Sugar thereof being taken in the morning, preserueth a man all that day from all Astrall impression. The third preservatiue is, Zenechthon Paracelsi, which be∣ing hanged about the necke, hindereth the attractiue power of the Microcosmus, or little World, which is Man. The fourth, against the intuition or venomous aspects of women, and men as aforesaid. Is Chelidonia gathered in the full of the Moone, and carried about one. The fift, for them which are visitors of the sicke, let them hold in their mouth Frankensence, and withall let the infected at the same instant hold also in their mouth of the rootes of Im∣peritoria. The sixt, is the essence of Harts and Sorkes blood. The seaventh which is most potent and powerfull, is Alexi∣pharmacum Spagiricum, whereof being taken in a morning, the quantity of a Beane or lesse, with Sugar or in any other con∣venient liquor, hath a marvellous effect. Also for correction of the ayre, R. Sulphuris lib. ss. Thuris zi. ss. Assa fetidae z. ss. Pulverizantur & misceantur. To this Powder adde a double quantity of the Cortex or
shels of Bayberries, of white Amber halfe a quart. Take of this Powder two drams, and cast it vpon coales, and make a perfume thereof daily twice or thrice. For want of this Powder you may take the wood of Iuni∣per, and vse it in like manner, but it is nothing so good as the powder. Rules to be observed in Common Communities. SVch things as doe rarifie and subtile the spirit inferior, are Saffron, Cassia, Fistula, Planten, with mirth in measure, these doe specially serue in common communities, and Compa∣nies, where quickly one is infected of another. The eyes are obscured and darkned by an infectiue ayre, if a man carry not the foresaid things or such like in his hand. Therefore it shall be a safe course to wash the eyes, mouth and hands oftentimes in the day, with Rose water mixt with Vineger as aforesaid, but if both cannot be had, let Vineger alone be vsed. This be∣ing observed, thou mayst with more security enter into any company. To kéepe the body soluble is thought to be an effectual re∣medy, if it be not laxatiue naturally, let it be provoked artifici∣ally by suppositors, for which purpose also serueth the Pillulae Pestilentiales which may be had at the Apothecaries. Let there be also fire made in the house, because it much hindereth Celesti∣all impression, and clarifieth the ayre. To take Treacle is also profitable and good, as well for the sicke as whole. I meane the right Venice Treacle, or Treacle of Andromachus (or Ieane-Treacle) if it be administred twice in a day with pure and cléere Wine, Béere, or Rose water, in quantity of a small Beane or Pease at each time, mixt with two spoonfuls of any of the foresaid Liquors: Let Dinner bée deferred vntill Midday, whereby the Treacle, may haue its o∣peration in the body. Then chuse a good messe of meate with pure Wine, drinke is to be taken oft in the day, but not much at once, because, Nimia Superabundantia putrifactionem humo∣rum inducit.
Beware of all hote things in meates, as Pepper and Garlick; for although Pepper purgeth the braine of Flegme, and like∣wise of Spirituall Members from Viscous and clammy humors, yet it heateth overmuch, and Calefaction and heate causeth Putrifaction. Bitternesse is more wholsome then hote Odours or Sa∣vours: Garlicke, although it purgeth also Flegme and casteth forth evill humors, provoketh appetite to Meate, and permit∣teth not any dry ayre to enter; because it perturbateth and vexeth the eyes, and heateth the Head of every one which of∣ten vseth the same; therefore it cannot proue agréeable: For the Pestilence through the vse of hot things is oftentimes aug∣mented and increased. All kind of meates by so much easie they are of digestion, so much better they are. In the morning boy∣led meates are more to be commended, but in the evening roa∣sted. Brothes and Pulps are to be eschewed, except they haue some pleasant sowernesse; for sower meates in time of Pesti∣lence serveth to all Medicines. In like manner all fruits must be refrained, except those of a sower taste, as Cherries, Pom∣granuts, or little quantity of a Peare or Apple in place of Me∣dicine, for most fruits commonly induceth putrifaction. As for Spices which are commonly vsed, and convenient, are Ginger, Sinamon, Cumin, Mace and Saffron, with these are made sauces for the richer sort. The poorer folkes may eate Rue, Sage, Walnuts, Parcely minced and mixed together with Vi∣neger. These doe hinder putrifaction. Likewise, beware yée dread not death overmuch, but thinke well to liue: For he that dreads ouermuch, shall imagine hee féeles pricking and moving thereof at the cleansing places in his owne conceit, when he féeles nothing. Having set downe sundry meanes for prevention. It shall be convenient to speake of some signes and tokens, whereby a man may judge whether he be infected with the Pestilence or no, and they are these that follow.
THe first, is great paine and heavinesse in the Head. The second, when the body is inwardly affected with heate, and the outward parts cold and ready to shake, and is thirsty and dry withall. The third is, difficulty of breathing, and that with paine. The fourth signe is, he hath a great desire to sléepe and can hardly refraine it: Sometime want of sléepe and cannot ob∣taine it. The fift is, paine and swelling in the stomacke, breaking forthwith stinking Sweats. The sixt signe is, divers, and heauy lookes of the Eyes, séeing all things of one colour; as gréene, or yellow, and the colour of the eyes are also changed, The seaventh signe is, losse of appetite, vnsavory taste, bit∣ternesse of the mouth, sower and stinking. The eight is, wambling of the stomacke, and a desire to vo∣mit, and sometime vomitting humors bitter & of divers colours. The ninth is, the Pulse beateth swift and déepe. The tenth is, heavinesse and dulnesse in all the body, and faint, and weake limbes. The eleaventh is, the Vrine most commonly is troubled, thicke like Beasts water, and stinketh, but smell it not if you loue your health; but oftentimes the water doth not shew at all, especially in the beginning of the sicknesse. The twelfth and last signe and surest of all other is, there ariseth in the Neeke, vnder the Arme, or in the flanke a tumor or swelling, or in some other part of the body, there appeareth a red, gréenish, or blackish coloured sore: This is an apparent signe of infection with the Pestilence. Assoone as by the signes and tokens aforesaid, if any one per∣ceiueth himselfe to be infected with the venomous quality of the Pestilence, let him take of the foresaid Potus Pestilentialis Pa∣racelli, in quantity agréeable vnto the age of the Patient, that is to say; If he be aboue Fourtéene, he may take there of at a time, halfe an ounce or a good spoonefull; But if he be of youn∣ger
yeares, two drams, or more or lesse according to the condi∣tion and respect of the Patient, and let him be well couered in his bed with cloathes, and sweat thereon for foure or 5 houres after. Within sixe houres after that, let him take the like dosse, and againe let him sweat. After sixe houres are past, let him take the third dosse; especially, if the Patient féeleth and per∣ceiueth any punctions or prickings remaining: For which the third dosse (God willing) all the venome will be expelled and driven forth. For thrée dayes following (the venome expulsed,) every mor∣ning the Patient shall take one dosse of the said liquor or drink, whereby nature may be corroborated and comforted. Alexi∣pharmacum Spagiricum will performe the same, of which you may giue vnto them that are aboue Fourtéen yeares one dram, but vnto them that are younger halfe a dram, and that thrice in foure and twenty houres space. And for thrée dayes one dosse every Morning in Wine, Rose-vineger, or other appropriate waters. And when the Apostumation of the Pestilence commeth forth, a Cataplasme of Figges, and the fruit of Alkakengie, of each a like quantity bruised together, shall be applyed thereon, and it will breake it presently; For Venenum, venenum attrahi. And this you must remember, that if the Botch arise néere vnto the heart before you sweate, that then you apply this de∣fensatiue vnto the heart vpon a fine linnen cloath thinly spread, as broad as will cover the heart, which Medicine is thus pre∣pared. Take of good Treacle of Andromachus, halfe a dram, red Sanders, of Terra lemnia, halfe a scruple, Rose-water and of Vineger, of each as much as will suffice to make an Vnguent, and let it be applyed as aboue directed. When the Apostume first appeareth, you may (if you please) take Walnuts, or Filberdnuts, Figges and Rue beaten to∣gether, and apply it thereto. Also, when the said Apostume breaketh and the venome pe∣netrateth.
the heart, whose signe is perceiued by the lyne from the Center or middest poynt of the Apostume leading to the heart: Bruise then some of the gréene plant called Vua in∣versa, or Leopards bane, and apply thereto; but if it cannot be gotten gréene but withered, then macerate it in Wine or Vine∣ger, and apply it after the same sort, and let it be repeated twice or thrice ouer: for this doth extract and draw out the venome mightily, the Patient being in an agony; and doe revoke and call him back as from the Graue, and driveth many into admi∣ration thereof. Against the Symptomes of the Pestilence. IN Constipations and Costiuenesse of the belly, the Patient may vse some Purgative Medicine; except it be at such time when the Botch or Carbuncle appeareth, or any other Sores of the Pestilence growing towards ripenesse, for if it be done, then it will contrary to nature proue her intention. But the second day after Sweating, if no Botch or sore ap∣peareth, then may he vse eyther Sena or Rhewbarb, or the ex∣tract of eyther. They that haue any of the Fluxes of the bowels, called Diarthea, or Disenteria, joyned with the Pestilence, mor∣ning, Noone and at night, they may take halfe a scruple of Cro∣cus Martis, in the extract of Acorus Luteus, to the full effecting of the cure. They that are vexed with burning heates, let them dip linnen cloathes in Rosewater vitriol, and with the juyce of Semper vive, and apply to the pulses, & when the same cloathes are dryed, let them be wet againe in the same liquor and applyed in like manner. And if the Patient be very dry and thirsty, giue him of this Iulip thrée or foure spoonfuls at once, viz. Take of Rosewater, of the waters of Endiue, Buglasse, Sorrell, sharpe Vineger, and of the juyce of Lemons of each foure ounces, of Sugar one pound, boyle them a little with a gentle fire, and when it is cold,
giue thereof to drinke thrée or 4 spoonfuls at once. Or else, take of the waters of Roses and of Buglasse, of each thrée ounces, of the Sirrup of Endiue and Lemons, of each two ounces, of the Oyle of Vitriol one scruple, mixe them, and take them as aforesaid. If the Patient cannot sléepe, if after vomitting Bo∣zoardicks, and other meanes fit to evacuate grosse humours, a man may giue the Patient Laudanum Paracelsi, thrée graines thereof in Cardus Benedictus water, or for want thereof the Temples of the Patient may be annoynted with this Oynt∣ment. Take of Vnguentum Populionis, of Vnguentum Rosa∣rum, of Vnguentum Alabastrinum, of each halfe an ounce, of the Oyles of Violets and of water Lillies, of eyther two drams, of Opinm one scruple or two, first dissolved in Rose water, and then together mixed; annoynting the Temples therewith, will both cause sléepe and stay raging. Or if you will you may vse this. Take of the sirrup of Violets, of the Sirrup of Lemons, of the sirrup of Poppie, of each one ounce, of Diascordium thrée drams, let them be mingled together, and giue thereof sometime to the Patient to drinke for the foresaid purposes. If through the heate of the stomack, the Mouth, Throate and Tongue be hot, dry and furod. Take French Barly, Sinckfoyle, Violet and Strawberry leaues of each one handfull, of Wood∣bine and Columbine leaues, halfe an handfull: Boyle all these in a quart of faire water, and to the same Liquor strained out put, thereto of Diamor and of Mel rosarum, of either two oun∣ces, of the Oyle of Sulphur as much as will a little sharpen it, and let the Patient with some of the same liquor warmed, gar∣garize and wash his Mouth, Tongue and Throat. Of Fleubotomie. FLeubotomie may be vsed once in a moneth, exceptage or any other cause prohibite it, as in women with Child, or on them that are brought low by sicknesse, or on them that are
subiect to any fluxe of the Belly, or on them which are already infected with the Pestilence, and the Botch or Sore groweth towards ripenesse. Let Blood-letting be done vpon the veyne Basilica, whether it be in the right or left Arme, before hée eate or drinke, and after the opening of the same let the Patient be jocund, merry, and chéerefull, and to drinke Wine or Béere, but alwayes emperately. Neither is it lawfull nor convenient to sléepe the same day that the Veyne is opened, if any féeleth himselfe infe∣cted with an Impostume, then let him altogether refraine sléepe and prevent it by walking, for in sléepe, heate inwardly induceth the Venome vnto the Heart, and other Spirituall Members, in such sort, that scarce any Hearbe may revoke the same ve∣nome vnto its former estate, which thing hapneth not, as long as a man is in motion. But it may bée some men will aske, of whom is sléepe to be avoyded? What if he should haue a continuall sléepe? To this I briefly answer, that in the time of Pestilence, if any haue an appetite to sléepe presently after he haue eaten any thing, then such desires ought to be vindered for a space, eyther in the Gar∣den or Fields for an houre, and then with naturall sléepe the body may haue for one houre its naturall refection and rest. Therefore Avicen saith; That if a man will sléepe, he ought to drinke a good draught before his sléeping, because in sléepe he attracteth and draweth many humours, and those euill hu∣mours are repelled by the humour of a good draught: But a∣gaine, if a man shall aske, when a man is Infected how hée ought to know it. To this I say and answer, that a man that is infected, the same day he shall not eate much; because he is repleat with euill humours, and presently after Dinner he hath a desire to sléepe, and perceiueth a great heate with coldnesse, hée hath great paine with coldnesse, and hath great paine in the former part of the head, but all these are put away by mooving hither and thither, and for to walke hée is not able by reason of ouermuch vnweldinesse and sluggishnesse of body, for a man in∣fected
hath alwaies a desire to sléepe, because the venome inter∣nall doth perturbate and trouble the spirits vitall, so that it al∣waies tendeth to rest, by these sines and all others before re∣lated, a man may alwaies perceiue himselfe to be infected. If he will not giue credit vnto it, let him make tryall for halfe a dayes space, and presently he shall féele the Apostume vnder his Armes or about the groine, or else about the Eares. Therefore the chie∣fest remedy is, if a man perceiue all these tokens in the time of Pestilence, that he shake off sléepe as I haue said before, for as by the reasons before also alleadged it is manifest, that in sleepe the Spirits vitall doth rest, but the venome is scattered, through the membrands from one place vnto another, as I haue often observed. This being truly marked, when a man findeth him∣selfe infected, as soone as possible may be, let him let blood in as ample manner that he almost faint thereon; for the taking of small quantity of blood stirreth vp the venomous quality more forcibly. If a man will not cut many veines at once, then hée shall suffer to goe over the same veine incided as before said, e∣uen vnto the retardation and staying of the Blood. Also he that is let blood, whether he be infected or not, hée must also shunne sléepe the whole day even till midnight. And alwaies in the same part of the body that the Apostume shall appeare, shall be made the incision of a veyne. As for Example. If the Apostume shall appeare vnder the right Arme, Phle∣botomie shall be made in the middle part of the same Arme, from the veyne Mediana; but if vnder the left arme the Apostume sheweth it selfe, then must you open the Mediana, as aforesaid, in the same Arme, or the Hepatica, that is to say; in the veyne about the middle finger. If the Impostume be about the Groyn, let a veyne be opened in the Foot, about the Héele on the same side. If the Apostume be in the Neck, Phlebotomize the Copha∣lica, about the Thumbe in the hand of the same side, or the Me∣diana
of the same Arme, or in the hand on the same side about the lesser finger. If it shall appeare about the the Eare, incide the Cophalica on the same side, or the veyne which is betwéene the fore-finger and the thumbe, least many venomous vapours invade the braine. Or the veyne which is about the lesser fin∣ger, or about the Article, which of Physitians is called Basilica. If the tumour shall appeare about the shoulder blades, heart and Throat: Vse scarifications with applicaton of Venosits; And first let blood on the Median. If the Apostume appeare on the backe, open the veyne called Pedia Magna. And all these may be let blood, if a man haue not slept before the knowledge of the Apostumation: But if he féele such Apostumations after slée∣ping, then bléeding ought to be made on the contrary part, as if the Apostume appeared in the right arme, the Basilica or Liver veyne; or Mediana in the left arme, shall be opened. And if the Apostume sheweth vnder the right arme, let it be as it is spoken of the left arme, and so of other places in which the Apostumation appeareth, and whensoever blood-letting is to be vsed, let it be alwaies done in opposite manner: And if he that haue béene let blood be very weake, then may he sléepe after the midst of the day, and before the midst of the day, hée ought to be in continuall motion, either riding or moderately walking. And if afterward, the Botch increaseth feare not: For it is a token, that nature putteth out the venomous quality, and re∣storeth a man to soundnesse, then may you apply such remedies thereto as is aboue mentioned. And if any there be, that shall receiue benefit and recovery by these directions; First let him thanke God that hath crea∣ted Medicine of the Earth to heale his people: and secondly, pray for me a sinner, the writer of this little Treatise, for to that intent I tooke the paines.
A Medicine for the Plague, or for sicknesse of the Soule. TAke a quart of Repentance of Ninevie, and put thereto both your handfuls of fervent Faith in Christs Blood, with as much Hope and Charity, of the purest you can get in Gods shop; a little quantity of each, and put it into the vessell of a cléere Conscience, and let it boyle well in the fire of Loue, so long till thou séest (by the Eye of Faith) the blacke foame of the loue of this World stinke in thy stomacke: then skim it cleane with the spoone of faithfull Prayers: that done, put in the powder of Patience, and take the Immaculate cloath of CHRISTS pure Innocencie, and straine all together through it, into Christs Cup: then drinke it burning hote betimes next thy Heart: this done, rest from the beastly Conversation vsed in times past, vpon the Bed of Christs pure Innocency, and co∣ver thée warme, with as many clothes of Amendment of life; as God shall strengthen thée to beare, that thou mayst sweate out all the vile poyson of Covetousnesse, Idolatry, and the par∣ticipation thereof, with all kinde of Whoredome, beggerly Pride, Oppression, Extortion, Vsury, Prodigality, Swea∣ring, Lying, and Slandering, Envying, Wrath, Sedition, Sects, Theft, Murther, Drunkennesse, Gluttony, Sloth, with such like, sweat cleane out of thy Heart, thy Head, thy Bones, and thy Body: with all the other powers or parts of thée: and ever wash thy Heart, and Eyes, with pure Humility, mix∣ed with the Feare of God, and lay the swéet Camon-ill of good Conversation hard to thy Nose, least then shouldst smell more
then thine own. And when thou féelest thy selfe altered from all those afore-named vices, take the powder of Say well, and lay it vpon the top of thy Tongue, to savour thy mouth withall, and the Eares of the hearer: but drinke thrice as much Doe well daily: And then take the Oyle of Good workes, mixed with the same Mercy that God hath willed vs to vse, and annoynt therewith thine Eyes, thine Eares, and thy Lips, thine heart, and thy Hands throughly: that they may be light, nimble, quik and ready, to minister vnto the poore, and dispersed members of Iesus Christ, ever as you are able, and sée occasion, but beware thou takest not Wind in the ministring therof, least deadly dust of Vaine glory, and Hypocrysie, doe thée much harme, and to kéep a dyet for thy Heads sake, vse the hot Broth of Holinesse; and Righteousnesse continually, and féed thy selfe well, with the spoone of godly Meditations in Gods holy Word; then an∣noynt thy selfe with the Oyle of Gods peace; this done arise from Sinne willingly, and take vp Christs Crosse boldly, beare it thankfully, and walke the course worthily, and thou shalt liue everlastingly, &c. A Prayer. O Eternall God, and most sure comfort and consolation in all Afflictions, which healest the sicke Soules oppressed with Sin, which ministrest mercifull Medicines to the repentant Heart, and doest refresh the sinfull sinners, that thirst after thy precious goodnesse, most humbly we beséech thée haue respect to our deadly diseases, & purge them with that spilling of thy most precious Blood, that we may be made cleane and sound in thy sight, to receiue thy healthfull salvation of our Soules, and to rest with thy holy Congregation, and heavenly Fellowship in thy glorious and everlasting Kingdome, already purchased for vs, Amen. FINIS.
A very necessary Table, wherein the Reader may finde out very readily any Medicines or Cures, contayned in this Booke. PART. I. OF Chyrurgerie and what it is. Containing also the Anatomie of Mans Body, with all the severall Parts thereunto belonging very diligently treated on; by Mr. Thomas Vicary Esquire, Sergeant Chyrurgion to King Henry 8. K. Edward 6. Q. Mary, Q. Elizabeth, &c. di∣vided into ten Chapters. Fol. 1 PART. II. Of things necessary and usefull for every Chyrurgion to have in a readinesse; as Instruments, Medicines, Powders, Vn∣guents, Emplaisters, Hearbes, &c. Fol. 58 PART. III. Of Wounds; as first, a Definition by their Causes. Secondly, what they are. Thirdly, their Cure, consisting of a five-fold scope or intention. Lastly, how one wounded, should bee re∣strained from divers meaes in his Dye. Fol. 61 PART. IV. Of Remedies very usefull and necessary for all Captaines and Souldiers that travell eyther by Land or Waer, to heale all Wounds of what kind soever they bee of, or in any part of the body (by Gods grace) if they be curable. Fol. 65
PART. V. Of the rare Treasure of the English Bathes, written by W. Turner Doctor of Physicke. And set forth, for the benefit and Cure of the Poorer sor of people, who are not able to goe to the Physitians: by W. Brmer, Practitioner in Physicke and Chyrurgerie. Fol. 79 PART. VI. A briefe Treatise of Urines, as well of Mans urine as of Womans, to judge by the Colour which betokeneth Health, which betokeneth Weaknesse, as also Death. Fol. 95 PART. VII. A Physicall Discourse, shewing how a man may governs himselfe at Foure times of the yeare, &c. Of the Nine Tastes. As also, signes of Sicknesse by Egestion, with judgement of the Pulses by their disorderly beating. Fol. 99 PART. VIII. Of the making and vertue of divers and sundry Waters, ve∣ry usefull and necessary both for Physicke and Surgerie, for the curing of many Diseases. Fol. 106 PART. IX. Of the making of divers and sundry Unguents, or Oynt∣ments, for many severall Diseases, &c. Fol. 119 PART. X. Of the making of many, divers and sundry Emplaisters, for the Curing of severall Diseases, &c. Fol. 130 PART. XI. Of Medicines and Remedies for to heale all Diseases curea∣ble (by the grace of God); And first, a most excellent Reme∣dy to helpe the Fluxe of the Body, with a Discourse thereon. Fol. 143 For Perbreaking and for Fluxe; As also, the Property and vertue of certaine and divers Hearbes, Plants, and Drugs for se∣verall uses, tending both to Physicke and Surgery. Fol. 144
A FOr Ache in the Backe and limbes, Fol. 180 Against the new Ague, by D. Langton, 189 For the Ague or Axis, 192 A medicine for the Ague, 193 For an Ache or a bruise, 196 For a cold Ague. 197 A Medicine for all manner of Aches. 213 Master Arthur Edwards Re∣ceipt for the precious Oyntment which came from Persia and Musco∣via, which is good for all Aches. 222 A very good Drinke for an Ague if one shake. 224 Another drinke for the Ague. 225 For an Ague. By Doctor Tur∣ner. Ibid. For the Ague, by P. Buck, 227 For the Ague. 228 A Medicine for an Ague or Quartaine. 239 B A Remedy for Burning and Scalding, fol. 154. & 201 For ache in the Backe. 155 A proved Medicine for Blee∣ding at the Nose, called the Lady Maries Medicine. 158 Another for the same. 206 To helpe a stinking Breath, 6 severall, fol. 158, ibid. & 236, ibid, &c. For him that pisseth Blood. 167 For Ache in the Back. 179 To stay the Backe, and helpe him that consumeth Ibid. For the Bladder and the Reines. 180 To stay the Backe. Ibid. For all diseases in the Backe. 181 For paine in the Bladder, and to make it whole for ever. Ibid. A Syrope for the Backe. 182 A Locion for inflamation of Balam. 186 For a sore Brest. 192 To stop the Bloody-Fluxe. ibid. For a Ciatica or Ache in the Bones. 194 A Medicine for one that blee∣deth often. 208 Another to stanch the blee∣ding of a Cut or Wound. Ib. A Medicine for one that is broken. 209 For weakenesse in the Backe. 210 To restore the Braine. 212
An inward Medicine for the paine in the bottome of the Belly, fol. 216 An outward Medicine for the same, being taken both to∣gether, Ibid. A Drinke for one that is trou∣bled with a paine in his Backe & maketh water that one may cut it with a knife which the Doctor saith, is by reason hee is troubled with a Worme in the bot∣tome of his Belly, 225 For the Backe, 226 A worthy Balme, Ibid. For evill in the Bladder. 229 C THe excellent vertues of Cardus Benedictus, 149 For Cornes in the feet, or else∣where, with their remedies, 150 For a winde or Collick in the belly, twelve severall remedies. Fol. 154, ibid. & 161, ibid. ibid. & 162, ibid. & 194, & 195. 214, 216, ibid. A Water for the same, 159 For the Canker in the mouth, eight. fol. 157. 167. 169. 170, ibid. & 171. 237, ibid. Powders for the same, three. fol. 167. 238. 170 Against the Crampe, 160 A Powder for the Collick and Stone, 161 For the Collicke and Stone, three, fol. 162. 214. 223 An Oyntment for the Collick and Stone, 218 To know the fster and Can∣ker, 167 For a Canker in the body, 168 For the Canker in a womans Paps, Ibid. & 238 A good freate for the Canker, Foster, Botches and Sores, old and new, 168 For Canker, Fistula, Warts, or Wounds, new or old. ibid. To slea the Canker or Mar∣mole. 169 To make a red Water to slea the same, ibid. A good medicine for the Can∣ker and Sores, fol. 171 For a Canker old or new, or Marmole, ibid. For the Canker, five. fol, ibid. & 237, 238, ibid. &c. For a Canker in a mans body, and save the man. 172 For a dry Canker. 237 For Chilblaines in the Feet or hands. 196
For a vehement Cough in young Children, 197 A perfect remedy against the Collick, and to make a man psse that hath beene 3 or 4 dayes without making water, and it will also brake the Stone within ten or 12 dayes, 197 A Medicine for a swelling in the Cheeke, 199 A Remedy for Chappes, 202 Medicines for a Cough, 207 Another for the same, 217 Another, ibid. Another, 224 For the dry Cough, 240 To restore a man to nature, that is in a Consumption, 212 A Medicine for one that is in a Consumption, or for any disease at the Heart, or any part of the body, 215 A remedy for a Cold, 224 For the Collick and gripings in the belly, 228 Another, Ibid. A plaister for the same, Ibid. D A Good Drinke to streng∣then the Heart and all the Members, if a man drinke halfe an Egge-shell full of it morning and eve∣ning, with as much good Wine. 156 Medicines for Deafenesse in the Eares. fol. 163 Another. 206 Another. 223 A Remedy for the Dropsie, 189 A drinke for the Head which is out of course, 220 E REmedies for sore Eyes, fol 158 Another, 194 Another, 201 Another, 206 Another, 234 A Remedy to helpe blood∣shotten Eyes, comming by any Rheume, fluxion, &c. 160 For a sore Eye that burneth and is watry, 192 To heale a sore Eye that is hurt with a small Pocke, 193 For a sore Eye with a Pin and a Web, ibid. For a sore eye that itcheth and pricketh, 194
A precious powder for a Web in the Eye, fol. 205 Another for the same. 206 To heale dimnesse of the Eyes. 220 For a stroke in the Eye. Ibid. For the watering of Eyes and darknesse thereof. 221 For smarting or pricking in the Eyes. 233 For blood-shotten Eyes, and other diseases in the Eyes. Ibid. For eyes that be red and full of blood. Ibid, For Eyes that b red with it∣ching, Ibid. A precious Water for Eyes. ibid. For eyes that be running. 234 For eyes that be blasted. ibid. An excellent good Water for to make cleere the Eyes and sight. ibid. A precious Medicine to take away the Web or Pin in the Eye. 235 A very good Medicine for a Pearle in the Eye, a Pin or Web, and eyes that water. Ibid. F. TO make the face faire, and the breath sweet. 157 For a red Face, or red Nose, Ibid. A remedy to qualifie the cop∣pered Face. ibid. A speciall good Dyet for all coppered faces. ibid. To heale a swolne face, &c. 195 Of Fearne, and its quality. 185 For a Fellon, fol, 193 Another for the same, 200 Another, 205 Another, 212 Another, 221 A singular Oyntment, which healeth all burning with Fire, &c. 197 For the Fluxe, 202 A Remedy for the Mother, 204 Remedies for falling out of the Fundament, ibid. Another for the same, 205 A Remedy for the Ache, ibid. For one that is bruised with a Fall, 208 For staying of the Flux, 210 To stop the Flux, 213 To make Oyle of Elder flow∣ers, good for a Fall, &c. 220 For the Quotidian Feaver or Ague, 238 For the Feaver Quartaine that
taketh one every third day with a sore fit, 239 Another for the same, ibid, G A Medicine for the Goute, 152 A speciall remedy against the Goute. ibid. A plaister for the same, ibid. Stubbes his Medicine for the Goute, 153 Another plaister for the Goute, Ibid. For Gomora Passio, 191 An Oyle for the Goute, and for the Sinewes that bee shrunke vp, 227 H AN experimented science for Hoarsnesse, though it hath long lasted, fol. 151 Another for the same, 189 A Medicine to purge the Head, 163 For the Head-Ache, ibid, For paine of the Head, Ibid. To make Hony of Roses, called Mel. Rosarum, 164 Another making thereof, ibid. For to make Haire grow, Ibid. For to take away Haire, ibid. For the Head-ache, fol. 172 Another, Ibid. Another, ibid. Another, ibid. Another for the same, 173 Another, Ibid. Another. Ibid. Another. Ibid. Another, Ibid. For the Headach, 174 Another, Ibid. Another, Ibid. Another, ibid. Another, ibid. Another for the same, 175 Another, Ibid. Another, ibid. To cleanse the Head, 175 For the Head-ache comming of the stomacke, Ibid. For Ache in the hinder part of the Head, ibid. A principall Medicine for the Head, 176 To purge & amend the Heart, Liver, Spleene, Stomacke, Lungs, and Braine, 178 For Megrim in the Head , 191 For a broken Head, 196 A remedy for Hoarsenesse, 203 For all manner of evill in the Head, 211 For the Carbuncle or Impo∣stume in the Head, Ibid.
A good Medicine to clarifie the Head and purge the e∣vill Humours cleane away, 212 I. TO heale the Itch, 155 Another, Ibid. For an Itch, 221 Another for the same, Ibid. A true Medicine for the Iaun∣dies, 264 A Medicine for an Impostume in the Body, 213 A Medicine for the yellow Iaundies, Ibid, For the blacke Iaundies, 128 K. A Remedy for the Kibes, 203 For the heate in the Kidnies, 208 L. TO remedy the swelling of the Legges, 155 To kill Lice and Nits in the Head, 159 For the Liver that is corrupt and wasted, 165 For the heate in the Liver, Ibid. For all manner of Lamenesse or swellings, 166 For to stay the Laxe or Fluxe, ibid. For a man diseased in the Li∣ver or Spleene, 176. A drinke to be vsed after this Oyntment, ibid. For a sore Legge that is swolne with the Axis or Ague, 191 For to binde one from the Laske, 195 To stop a Laske, or the Fluxe, 220 A Medicine for a sore Legge, 222 An Oyntment that will drive away Lice from a mans body, 224 M. TO provoke Menstruum Mulieris, fol. 182 Another, 183 Another, Ibid. Another, Ibid. Another, ibid. Another, Ibid. Another, ibid. Another for the same, 184 Another, ibid. To stop Menstruum Mulie∣ris, 184 Another, ibid. Another, Ibid. Another, Ibid. To stop white Menstruum and red, 185 Another for the White, Ibid. Another, Ibid.
To take away heate and infla∣mation of a Member, ibid. A Locion for a sore Mouth, 186 A Preparative, ibid. To make Vergent milke, ibid. Another of M. Doctor Yax∣leys, Ibid. To cause good tasting of meat 190 A Medicine well proved for the Megrim. 193 A Medicine for the Mother, 199 Another for the Mother, 204 A Medicine for the Morphew, 207 Another, ibid. For a sore Mouth, 221 For sucking Children having the Morbo gallico, 226 O TO make a cold Oynt∣ment. Fol. 227 Another for the same, ibid. P IF a man stand in feate of the Palsie, 151 For the Pox, 164 A Plaister for the Collick and stone, 187 A Plaister for the Head-ache, and hot agues, ibid. A comfortable Powder for the Heart, ibid. The Lady Gath her Medicine against the Plague, 189 To kill the Palsie, ibid. Against the stopping of the Pipes, ibid. To make a Perfume suddenly in a Chamber where a sicke man lyeth, 198 For the Piles, 210 To take away Pockholes, ora∣y spot in the face, 211 To make a Poultis, 227 For to make a man pisse that cannot, 230 Another, 195 To make a Powder to whiten Teeth, and fasten them, &c. 231 Another for the same, 232 A plaister to take the Ague, or ache out of a womans Brest in the time of her Child-bearing, if it come. 240 A Water for the Palsie, ibid. For the palsie, Ibid. Remedies for the French Poxe, looke folio 241, 242, 243. &c.
Preservatives for the Plague, looke folio 243, 244, 245, &c. R TO take away the paine of the Reines, of one that is low brought, 180 A plaister for the same, 181 For running of the Reines, 182 S AGainst the Shingles, 154 Another, 202 To heale in 4 dayes the Scal∣ding with water, &c. 155 To heale Sores or Tetters, ibid. A Medicine to cause sleep, 156 To take away the stinking of the mouth, 158 For a Scald-head, 163 A powder for old Sores, 191 Powders and remedies for the Stone, looke fol. 164, 166. 188, 190, 191, 193, 194, 215, 218, 219, 228, 229, 230 For the Sweating sicknesse, 166 Remedies for the Spleene, looke fol. 177, 178, 179 A powder for the Strangurie Ibid. For the Strangulion, 193 For a Stitch, fol, 196, 199 A Salve for all Sores, 198 For a Bruise, 221 For a wild running Scab, 200 For Scalding with water, 201 For diseases in the Side, 207 For shrinking of Sinews, 209 A Salve to take dead flesh out of a Sore, Ibid. For the Sciatica, 151, 211 For faintnesse and pain in the Stomacke, fol. 214, Ibid. 215, 216, 217 For a Scuffe in the Body, 226 A Seare-cloth for Aches, 227 T FOr a pricke of a Thorne, fol. 153 To kill Tetters or Ring∣wormes. fol. 154, 155, 195, 203 For swelling in the Throate, fol. 156 Remedies for the Tooth-ache, fol, 160, 192, 202, 206, 231 To whiten Teeth, to sweeten and to fasten them, folio 151, 160, 198, 207, Ibid 232 For Wormes in the Belly, fol. 190. 201, 208, &c.
☞ Hereunto is added almost 100 of especiall Receipts and Medicines approved by a Noble Lady and Countesse of this Kingdome, whereof she made experience and practise for the good and benefit of others, beginning at folio 246, &c. FOr all Aches or paines in the Joynts where ever they bee, a very true and well approved Medicine, Fol. 246 To make a Seare-cloath for all manner of Aches, Ibid. A most excellent and appro∣ved cure for the Sciatica, ibid. An approved and incompara∣ble cure for the Palsie, 247 An excellent Receipt for the Strangurie, ibid. A compleat cure for a Tetter or Ring-worme, ibid. An excellent cure for the Rheume, ibid. A medicine for the Mother, 248 An exquisite remedy for the Spleene, ibid. An excellent medicine for the Gowt, and to draw out all evill Humours out of the Head, or for paine in the Eyes or Eares, or Impo∣stumes, ibid. An excellent Dyet drinke for for all inward Diseases, 247 Another excellent good Dye drinke, 250 Another excellent Physicke drinke, 251 A medicine for the Jaundise, ibid. A rare Medicine for the sharp of the Vrine, ibid. An excellent Fomentation for the Stone, 252 For the Cough in the Lungs, ibid. An excellent and sure Reme∣dy for a swelling or sore Throat, ibid
An excellent Salve to cleanse and to heale Wounds, Fol. 253 A good Remedy to staunch Vomiting incorporated, ibid. For the Head-ache or Me∣grim, ibid. Another remedy for the Head ache, a medicine worth gold, 254 An excellent Medicine for the Spleene, ibid. A good helpe for sore Eyes, ibid. An excellent Remedy for an old paint or griefe in the Head, ibid. A remedy for heate in the Backe, 255 An excellent Remedy for the swelling in the Stomacke, ibid. A remedy for the Tooth-ache ibid. An excellent Purgation and very gentle, 256 An approved remedy for the Lungs that are perished, ibid. An excellent remedy to kill and heale a Canker, ibid. An very good Cure for the biting of a mad Dog, ibid. An excellent Medicine for an Ache or griefe in any limbe fol. 257 A very good remedy for an Ache in the Bones or any part of the body, ibid. An excellent cure for the Crampe, ibid. For a Scald Head, 258 An absolute and approved Medicine to cure the Red∣nesse of the face, ibid. An excellent Medicine for the Falling sicknesse, ibid. An admirable remedy for be∣nummed Limbes, ibid. To staunch bleeding in any place, 259 A good remedy for the bloody Fluxe, ibid. For paine or swelling in the Throat, an approved good remedy, 260 An excellent remedy for a Pin or Web in the Eye, ibid. An excellent Dyet drinke for the Dropsie, ibid. An excellent remedy for a loosnesse in the Belly, 261 A remedy for an Impostume, ibid. An excellent Cure and reme∣dy for a sore Brest, ibid. For an Ague in one that hath a strong body, 262
An excellent Remedy for the Fever or Ague, especially in a body of a weake Con∣stitution. 262 Another for the Ague, 263 An excellent Remedy for the Stone in the Bladder, to provoke Vrine from one that maketh water but by drops, Ibid. Another excellent Remedy for the Stone, ibid. An Injection for the Stone, Ibid. An easie yet approved Medi∣cine for the Stone, 264 An excellent Remedy for the Cough of the Lungs, for the Liver, and for a Con∣sumption, Ibid. An excellent Cure for a sore Throat, ibid. Another for a swolne or sore Throat, a sure Remedy, 265 An excellent Medicine for an Ache, swelling, , and for the strength  of any Sinew in any par the body, ibid. For a stripe in the Eye, or an humour fallen into the Eyes, Ibid. Another for dimme sighted eyes, ibid. Another for watering Eyes of paines in them, or di∣stillations that comes from the Head, 266 For one that vseth to Swound or faint at the Heart, an ex∣cellent Remedy, ibid. To draw out a Splinter of Wood or Iron, or other things out of the Flesh, ibid. An excellent remedy for one that is Broken bellyed or Burst, 267 An excellent helpe for those that cannot hold their Wa∣ter, ibid. Certaine tokens of Death in a sicke Man, ibid. An excellent remedy for the removing of a Wenne 268 For a Timpany, Ibid. For one that is in a Comsump∣tion, Ibid. To make a womans Dugs lit∣tle, round and hard, 269 For Lamenesse in the Ioynts, ibid. An excellent Antidote against the Plague or Poyson. ibid. An excellent Preservative a∣gainst the Plague, 270 to breake a Plague sore, Ibid. For a paine or swelling in the Privie parts, ibid.
Another for the Cods that are swolne, 270 For the paine of the Mother, 271 For an Ache in the Ioynts, a Plaister, Ibid. For the Ache in the Backe. Ibid. Another speciall good Medi∣cine for the same, ibid. For a Burning of Scalding, 272 Another being a most excel∣len Medicine for the same, Ibid. An excellent helpe for the Piles, Ibid. PART. XII. Being a Treatise of the Pestilence, by W. B. FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP and THO: FAVVCET, dwelling in Grubstreet, neere to the lower Pumpe. 1641.
