W2674 R222610 99833764 38242
Imprimatur. Ex Aed. Sab. 30. Jun. 1662. Geo: Stradling, S. Th. P. Rev. in Christo Patri Dno GILBERT, Episc. Lond. à Sac. Domest.
TRUTH VINDICATED, AGAINST Sacriledge, Atheism, and Prophaneness, And likewise against the Common Invaders OF THE RIGHTS of KINGS, AND DEMONSTRATING THE VANITY of MAN in General. By GRYFFITH WILLIAMS now Lord Bishop of OSSORY. LONDON, Printed for Randall Taylor at the Three Crowns in Little-Britain, and in Westminster-Hall, M.DC.LXVI.
TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY. Most Gracious Sovereign, I Do most humbly beseech your Majesty, to give leave unto your Father's most faithful servant, and Your most Loyal Subject, to tell you, of what you cannot choose but know, and what I assure thy self you do most thankfully remember, that, besides the many-many great blessings, which the great and good God hath often shewed unto your Majesty; He hath confer∣red and fastened two Extraordinary signal Favours upon you, 1. To preserve your life, after Worster-fight, from those Vulturs that did so greedily thirst after your blood. 2. To render unto Caesar what was Caesar's, that is, by taking away from those many potent and tenacious Tyrants, and Ʋsurpers, what they unjustly held, and restoring your Kingdoms, and setting your Crown upon your Majestie's head; where, our daily prayers are, that it may long and long flourish. And, as the Prophet David, that had received the like blessings, and favours from God, saith, Quid retri∣buam
Domino? So let me, as the Embassador of God, most humbly supplicate your Majesty, To render unto God what is God's. And as your Majesty, beyond exam∣ple, to the exceeding comfort of us all, hath most gra∣ciously and Religiously, like the Son of your most pi∣ous, and now most glorious, Father, so freely and so bountifully rendered the Revenues of Jesus Christ, ve∣sted in your Majesty, to his Church; So, by your Royal Edicts, to do what in you lieth, to cause all others to do the like; that is, To render unto God what is Gods; which is but the duty of all, and is now neglected al∣most of all; for, besides the other things, which we owe, and render not to God, Manus auferendi, the Sacrile∣gious hands, have laid fast hold upon Gods right: And not only so, but the great Leviathan maketh it his pastime, to cause his whelps, to swallow up whole Chur∣ches, and, as it were Lege agraria, to take away the Lands, and Houses of the Lord into their possessions: and to make the poor Levite, that serveth at Gods Al∣tar, to lye in the streets, or to lodge in an Irish Cab∣bin; like the Israelites in the Wilderness, when they dwelt in booths, covered over with a few boughs. I know, your Majesty knoweth, what the Prophet saith of many, that speak friendly unto their neigh∣bours, but imagine mischief in their hearts; so, many Gentlemen, Souldiers, and others will speak very fair, and say to your Majesty, and to us; God forbid, that they should wrong the Church of God, or take any thing from the Church: and yet the mischief that they will do, if they may have their minds, is more than I can divine; For their Covetousness and greedy desire of the Ecclesiastical Revenues, projecteth no less, then that this your Kingdom of Ireland should be full of darkness, and that the poor people should cry for bread, even the Bread of Life, and there should be none, as now we have but few, or few able, to give it them; when they, that should give it them, have scarce bread enough to put into their own mouths; and less shall have, if
the nefarious Violators of Holy things shall have the least countenance from your Majesty to effect their Sacrile∣gious wils. But to let your Majesty see how earnestly, and eager∣ly, your Commissioned-Officers in 49. do strive to take away the Houses and Lands of the Church and Pre∣bends, I thought good to insert their Letters in this place. To our very good Friends the Commissioners, appointed for Setting the forfeited-Houses &c. in the City of KILKENNY. Gentlemen, YOurs of the 16th. Instant we have Received, ac∣quainting us that the Corporations in your Com∣mission mentioned, do persist to Claim more then their right. And propounding that (for better distinguish∣ing our Interest therein) you may be by us Impowered to set the same to such a number of your selves, as you shall think fittest, in order to the due Trial, and Ascer∣taining our said Interest, and as are best able to manage that Affair; As also signifying, that the Clergy in the said Corporations, do equally refuse and disappear; and therefore desiring our Resolves, and like Order concerning both: which having duely considered; We do hereby ac∣quaint you, that it is our Ʋnanimous Resolve and Dire∣ction, both for the Corporation and Clergy-part, wherein you are Concerned; That you forthwith give notice to the Inhabitants, and Tenants respectively; That if they will not Treat with you, and take out Leases of their se∣veral Holdings (at moderate Rents to be by you impo∣sed) within two daies after such your notice, that then you have (And we do hereby give, and grant unto you, or such a fitting number of you, as shall be amongst your selves agreed upon) full power to become Tenants to such Holdings, and to enter upon, and possess the same, or other∣wise
dispose thereof agreeable to your Instructions, and as may be for our best advantage; And as to the Clergy-part refusing, or opposing as aforesaid, you are to Sett and Lett all Fee-farms,And we must believe them what Houses were set in Fee-farm. by the Church formerly granted of any the premises, or to Impose a Considerable Rent as you see fittest, reserving to the Church the chief Rents, payable there∣out respectively; And of the Rents by you reserved, and other particulars relating to the premises, you are to give an exact and speedy Account unto Your very loving Friends Hen. Tichburn. Joh. Stephens. Hans. Hamilton. Ran. Clayton. Alex. Piggot. According to the purport of the above Letter; We do hereby give notice unto all persons Concerned, that Fryday next being the 30th. of this Instant May, We do intend to sett, and dispose of, all such Houses, &c. Which Letter, we have thought fit to publish, that so none might plead Ignorance, Dated the 26th. of May. 1662. Tho. Evans. Rob. Lloyd. Ol. Wheeler. Will. Hamilton. Hen. Brenn. Whereby, all men may see how the Church, and poor Bishop of Ossory, do seem to stand in the hands of Scyron and Procrustes: The Souldiers of the Ʋsurpers, that fought against their King, and do still detain the Church-land from the Bishop; And now (like that in the Canticles, wounded in the house of our friends.) the Souldiers in 49. that were most faithful unto your Majesty, do still seek to take away our Houses from the Church. And if we lose both House and Land, we may go to live in the Church, and lie with the Levite in the Streets. But, as your Majesty hath been most Gracious to the
Bishops, and to all the Clergy so bountifull, as to grant them almost as much as we could desire; so our hope and humble Request is, that you will not suf∣fer these men to take from us, so much as they de∣sire. For the preventing of which desire of theirs, if it may be; I have endeavoured to arm my self with a resolution, neither to fear nor flatter any man; : for they that fear the smoak, may fall into the fire, Et qui timet pruinam, opprimetur à nive; that is, as S. Gregory moralizeth it, He that fears the frost of mans anger, which he may tread under his feet, may be overwhelmed with the hail and snow of God's wrath, which shall fall upon his head, so that he can not escape it: And I have studied not to prepare sweet and savory meat unto my Readers, but salubria medicamenta, those medicines, that shall be most wholesome for their Souls. And because the ears of all Church-robbers, are like the ears of the deaf Adder, that will not be charmed, and the walls of this sin of Sacriledge are like the walls of Jericho, that cannot be tumbled down, without the shrill sound of Trumpets and Rams horns; I have sharpned my Pen, and, in the bitterness of my soul, for the havock that I see made of the Patrimony of God's Church, I have indeavoured to speak, not in the mild voice of El to his sons; but with the rough speeches of Joseph unto his brethren, that had slept so many years in their sins, as our people have done in their Sacriledge; and yet think it to be no sin. And I doubt not, but that this my Discourse will prove as the waters of gall, and as bitter as wormwood unto those mens stomacks, that are so greedy, as we see men are, to get away the lands and possessions of the Church, and my self to be maligned and envyed to the full; But I assure them, Non flocci facio, I weigh it not a rush; for I have hardened my face like an Adamant, and as the Lord saith to Ezechiel, Whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, I will speak what I conceive
to be truth; and nothing but what my Conscience tells me is truth. And if in any thing I shall mistake, it is not amor erroris, the love of error, or the hatred of any of those Sacrilegious persons that rob the Church; but it is error amoris, the error of my love to the Church of Christ, and unfaigned desire, to promote the service of God, and the good of the poor and honest Irish of this Kingdom; and so if I have offended, I shall humbly crave your Majesties pardon, and most willingly submit my self to the censure of the Church; and with my morning, eve∣ning, and noon-daies prayers for your Majestie's long-life, and much happiness, I rest. Your Majestie's most humble, devoted, and most faithful Loyal Subject, Gryffith Ossory.
To all the COMMISSIONED OFFICERS of the KINGS ARMY, in the year 1649. Noble and Worthy Gentlemen, WHose true faithfulness to your King, and great Valour in the Wars under∣taken to defend the best King on Earth,And to say the truth, I blame not all the Souldiers, and Commissioned Officers, when I found very many of them very honest, & very religious men; and some of them have told me, they would not me∣dle and wish∣ed that the rest of the Soul∣diers would not meddle, with the lands or houses of the Church. and to preserve his undubitable Right unsnatched from him, by wicked Rebels; doth undoubtedly merit, in the judgement of all wise and honest men, no small Reward, far more than the reach of my under∣standing can express. Yet, ye must give me leave to tell you, That I should be heartily sorry, that any man could justly say, That your great Deserts were any wayes stained with the tincture of Sacriledge; which, I assure my self, you would never permit, if you conceived any thing that you do, to have the least affinity with that ugly Bastard-Brat. Therefore I have undertaken, in the sincerity of my Conscience, and according to the best and uttermost of my knowledge, without the least ill thought of any of you all, or the least covetous desire, to take any thing from you, that is inoffensively your due: but to discharge the du∣ty,
that I owe to God, and his Church, to compose this subse∣quent Treatise, concerning Sacriledge, and to shew, how hor∣rible & how odious a sin it is in the sight of God; how dero∣gatory and prejudicial it is to the Honour and Service of Jesus Christ; and how dangerous, and how it damnifieth those that commit it; the same being a Canker, that will eat, and consume, all that they have, before many Generations pass away; a sword, that will cut down their posterity from off the earth, and a sin that obligeth them to eternal damnation; without the great mercy of God to accept their great and unfeigned repentance for the same. And what you imagin I do herein against you, I do assure you, if you will believe me, it is not so much to get either lands or hou∣ses from you, as to hinder you, as I conceive, so deeply to wound your own selves: For, Better is a little that is duly gotten, without blame, and brings a blessing with it; than a great deal, that is unjustly obtained, with a curse at the heels of it. But you will say, That you do nothing but what you justly may do by the Laws of our Land, and what others do, and have done before you. And truly I do think so too: But I have fully answered this Allegation, and, as I suppose, whatsoever else can be said, in this Treatise; And I ask of you, Whether you conceive, that Humane Laws, and Acts of Parliament, made by powerful Com∣mands, and either through fear or errour; can make that which is against the Will, and contrary to the Law of God, to be no sin? or free the sinner from God's wrath? Or, do you think, that I stand against so many well-deserving Gentlemen, of such means and friends, and power, as you are, only for covetousness, to gain the Rent of a few hou∣ses; and no longer, than the remainder of a poor old man's life? Surely, not any one, that had but the least inch of worldly wisdom, would do so: For, besides my pains and labour, I have spent already, and shall spend yet, before the Church shall lose them, perhaps ten times more than my span-long life shall gain by them: And what of that? I have done my best, when I have lost them, Et liberavi animam meam, and shall leave to God Causam suam, Let
him arise and defend his own Cause; but let men take heed, how they strive against God, or seek to obstruct his Service, and cause the diminution of his Worship: which, I hope, your Piety will never suffer any one of you to do. And I shall pray for you all, and assuredly remain, Your affectionate friend, and servant, Gryffith Ossory.
THE CONTENTS of the Chapters. Chap. I. AN Introduction, shewing the occasion of this Treatise, and what the Author doth therein. Page 1. Chap. II. Of Sacriledge, what it is; how manifold it is; and how it hath been alwayes punished, and never escaped the Hand of the Divine Vengeance. p. 4. Chap. III. The divers sorts and kinds of Sacrilegious persons: And first, of those that do it under colour of Law, and upon the pretence of Reformation, whereby they suppose their Sacriledge to be no Sacriledge at all, p. 15. Chap. IV. Of two sorts of Sacrilegious persons, that rob the Church of Christ, without any colour or pretence of Law; but in∣deed contrary to all Law. p. 21. Chap. V. The words of King David, in the 2 Sam. 7.1, 2. and their divisions; When they were spoken; And how, or in what sense Sitting and Standing are commonly taken in the Scrip∣tures: And of the two Persons that are here conferring to∣gether. p. 27. Chap. VI. What the Rest, and peaceable times of King David wrought. The Prince's authority in causes Ecclesiastical; and how they should be zealous to see that God should be justly and re∣ligiously served. p. 31. Chap. VII. The Objections of the Divines of Lovain, and other Jesuites, against the former Doctrine, of the Prince his Authority over the Bishops and Priests, in Causes Ecclesiastical, answered; And the foresaid truth sufficiently proved, by the clear testimony of the Fathers and Councils, and divers of the Popes and Papists themselves. p. 37. Chap. VIII. That it is the Office and Duty of Kings and Prin∣ces, though not to execute the Function, and to do the Office of the Bishops and Priests; yet, to have a special care of Religion, and the true Worship of God, and to cause both the Priests and Bi∣shops, and all others, to discharge the duties of God's Service. And how the good and godly Emperours and Kings, have former∣ly done the same from time to time. p. 41.
Chap. IX. Of the iefest Parts and Duties of Kings and Prin∣ces, which they are to discharge for the maintenance of Gods Service, and the True Religion; and the necessity of Cathedral-Churches and Chappels, for the people of God to meet in, for the Worship and Service of God. p. 46. Chap. X. The Answer to the Two Objections that the Fanatick-Sectaries do make. 1. Against the necessity. And 2ly against the Sanctity, or Holiness of our Material Churches, which in deri∣sion, and contemptuously, they call Steeple-houses. p. 53. Chap. XI. The Answer to another Objection, that our Fanatick-Sectaries do make against the Beauty, and Glorious Adorning of our Churches; which we say should be done with such decent Or∣naments, and Implements, as are befitting the House and Service of God. The Reasons why we should Honour God with our goods: and how liberal, and bountiful both the Fathers of the Old Testa∣ment, and the Christians of the New Testament, were to the Church of God. p. 58. Chap. XII. The Answer to another Objection, that our brain-sick Sectaries do make for the utter overthrow of our Cathedrals and Churches, as being so fowly stained and profaned with Popish Superstitions; and therefore being no better than the Temples of Baal, they should rather be quite demolished, than any wayes a∣dorned and beautified. p. 63. Chap. XIII. That it is a part of the Office and Duty of Pious Kings and Princes, as they are God's Substitutes, to have a care of his Church, to see, that, when such Cathedrals and Churches, are built and beautified as is fitting for his Service, there be Able, Religious, and Honest, painful, and faithful Bishops, placed in those Cathedrals, that should likewise see Able and Religious Ministers placed in all Parochial Churches; and all negligent, unworthy, and dissolute men, Bishops or Priests reproved, correct∣ed and amended; or removed and excluded from their places and dignities, if they amend not. p. 67. Chap. XIV. Of the maintenance due to the Bishops and Mini∣sters of God's Church, how large and liberal it ought to be. p. 75. Chap. XV. That the payment of Tythes unto the Church, is not a case of Custom, but of Conscience; Whenas the tenth by a Di∣vine right, is the Teacher's tribute, and the very first part of the wages that God appointed to be paid unto his Workmen; and therefore, that it is as heynous a sin, and as foul an offence, to defraud the Ministers of this due; as it is to detain the meat, or money of the labouring-man, which is one of the four Crying-sins. p. 82. Chap. XVI. The Answer to the choisest and chiefest Objections that the School of Anabaptists have made, and do urge against the payment of Tythes now, in the time of the Gospel. p. 91. Chap. XVII. What the ancient Fathers of the Church, and the Councils (collected of most Learned and Pious Bishops) have left
written concerning Tythes: And of the three-fold cause, that detains them from the Church. p. 98. Chap. XVIII. Of the second part of the Stipend, Wages, and Mainte∣nance of the Ministers of the Gospel; which is, the Oblation, Dona∣tion, or Free-wil-offering of the people, for to uphold, and continue the true service of God, and to obtain the blessings of God, upon themselves, and upon their labours; which Donations ought not to be impropriated, and alienated from the Church, by any means. p. 105. Chap. XIX. That it is the duty of all Christian Kings and Princes, to do their best endevours, to have all the Impropriations restored to their former Institution; to hinder the taking away, and the alienation of the Lands, Houses, and other the Religious Donations of our Ancestors from the Church of Christ; and to suppress and root out all the Ʋnjust and Covetous suttle customs and frauds, that are so generally used, and are so derogatory to the service of God, from amongst the people, and especially from this Kingdom of Ireland, where most corruption is used, and most need of Instruction unto the people. p. 114. Chap. XX. The Authour's supplication to Jesus Christ, that he would arise and maintain his own cause, which we his weak ser∣vants cannot do, against so many rich, powerful, and many-frien∣ded adversaries of his Church. p. 117.
A DECLARATION Against SACRILEDGE. CHAP. I. The Declaration of the Bishop of Ossory, exhibited to the High Court of Justice before Jesus Christ, the righteous Judge, against the most horrible sin of Sacriledge and all sacrilegious persons, that detain the Tythes, rob the Church, and take the Lands and Houses of God into their own possessions. Together, with his most humble Petition, to the Eter∣nall and Almighty God, his most gratious Redeemer, and his most loving Master, Jesus Christ, that he would a∣rise and maintain his own cause, and smite all his Ene∣mies upon their cheek-bone, and put them to perpetual shame, and root out their memorial from off the earth. Sheweth, THAT, by Your most glorious Martyr, the stre∣nuous defender of the true Christian Faith and his most gratious Master, Charles the I. of ever blessed memory; he was called and appointed to be the Bishop of Ossory; and to inable him the better to discharge his duty in the service of God, the instructing of his people, and the governing of that Diocess commended to his care, he was invested and admitted to have, and to injoy, all the rights, interests, priviledges and prerogatives of that Bishoprick. But the Irish Rebells, through the perswasions of their Popish Priests, and suggestions of Satan, have expelled him, and detained all his dues and rights from him, about 19 years together; And when the goodness of God
was pleased to restore the gratious Son of that glorious Martyr, unto his Crown and Dignity, his Majestie imitating the pious steps of his most Reli∣gious Father, restored all the Reverend Bishops, and the rest of the Lear∣ned and Loyall Clergy, unto their ancient rights and pristine dignities; the malicious enemy of all goodness,Satan now deals with the Church of Christ, as he did with the Church of the Jews after their capti∣vity. Ezra. 4.7. Neh. 6.1. the Devill and Satanas still envying the Honour of God, and by all means striving to obscure the Glory of his Church, and the happy Restauration of his service; As formerly, after the captivity of the children of Israel, the Jews in Babylon, when, they were happily returned unto their own Land, which the God of their Fathers had bestowed upon them and their posterities for ever, and were now be∣ginning to re-edify their Temple for the honour of their God, and the place of his Worship for his people, he stirred up Bishlam, Mithredath, Ta∣beel, Samballat, Tobiah, Geshem, and the rest of their companions, the enemies of Gods people, to hinder all their proceedings in setting forwards the true service of their God, by writing false Letters unto the King; and upon their unjust informations, procuring letters from the King, to ob∣struct the building, and working of Gods House, to the great prejudice and grief of those Holy men, that aimed at nothing more then to promote the glory of God, and the good of his people; So now, he stirred up many Armed men, or men of Arms, and Commanders of men, men of Renown, that in the year 49 shewed themselves very active, and serviceable for their and our undubitable King, his now gratious Majesty, and whom his Maje∣sty for that their faithfulness and service, did most gratiously, and justly according as they had deserved, most Royally, and like a King, reward them, with Cities, Lands, Houses, Gardens, and the like evidences of his Royall bounty, under the pretence of this his Majesties grant and gift, to labour and strive to swallow down the Lands and Houses, which I am sure do of right belong unto the Church of God, and am confident his Maje∣sty is so pious that he never intended to reward his servants with any of those goods,Why Lands dedicated for the service of God should not be aliena∣ted. Rom. 2.22. of what nature soever they are, that were dedicated and set apart for the service of God; because the alienating of any things set apart and consecrated for Gods service, and dedicated to that end, is no less then sacriledge; and Sacriledge is a sin of such a transcendent nature, as is far more odious and abominable in the sight of God then most of all other sins: for St. Paul demandeth, If thou, that abhorrest Idols, wilt commit sa∣criledge? And you all know, what a horrible sin Idolatry is: and how high∣ly the Lord God was offended, and how grievously he punished and plagu∣ed the Israelites for the same,Exod. 32.28. as when he slue 3000 men, for their Idolatry in worshipping the golden Calfe. Why sacri∣ledge is more abominable and a greater sin then ido∣latry.And yet St. Paul sheweth herein, that sacriledge is far more odious and a more abominable sin in the sight of God; because by Idolatry, we do but give the honour of God to that which is no god; but by our sacriledge, we rob the true God of that honour which is due unto him, and we deprive him of that worship, and service, and thanks, that he should have from ma∣ny men, if they were not deprived, and robbed of their estates by that sa∣criledge, which makes them unable to do that service, and to bring others to do that service unto God, which they ought to do. And therefore most justly hath that sacriledge, which is the diminution of the revenues of the Church, been ever accounted the highest, the bold∣est and the most damnable sin in the World. For our Religion is the very ground of all our happiness, and the chiefest of all our comforts: and the riches, honours, and Revenues of the Church, the Tythes, Oblations, and Donations of Religious men, are, as I shall fully shew unto you in this Treatise, the very main outward props of our Religion; and if with Samp∣son you take away the pillars, you overthrow the House, & sublatis studio∣rum
praemiis ipsa studia pereunt, saith Seneca; so, take away the props of Reli∣gion, and your Religion, like a tottering wall, will soon fall unto the ground; and when you have supplanted our Religion, yo have dissolved all the tyes and associations betwixt God and men, and left us all as aliens and strangers, and which is worse, enemies unto God. And therefore when other mischiefes have their limits, and so hurt but one or other, and there is an end, yet this sin of Sacriledge strikes at Goodness and Godliness it self, it sets the world besides its hindges, and sweeps away our peace and all our happiness from off the earth, when as God, and the King, and all of us are thereby unexpressibly damnified. And therefore he is no better then a savage beast, and hath a heart of iron, and Cyclopick breasts, quae genuere ferae, that can invade heaven, and rob God, and put down the Prerogatives of his King, and spoil mankind of all safety: which made the very Heathens themselves to have alwaies an exceeding great reverence of the things, that were dedicated unto their gods; and, to violate the Religion of other Countries, which they thought much more vain then their own, they conceived to be so monstrous, that it was alwaies accounted inauspicious: and the wrongs done to a false deity carried an horror with it, and was usually revenged by the true God. Yet these men, being many, rich and powerfull, both in wealth, wit,What the men of the year 49 do say. and Friends, would perswade our good King and all others, but not aright, that they are most zealous for the Church of Christ and the service of God, and what lands and houses they seek to take from us belong not to us, nor to the Church of God; and therefore that it is no sacriledge, nor any waies unjust in them, to take from us what the King hath justly bestowed on them; but it is a soul imputation most uncharitably cast upon them by me, to blemish their sincerity in the service, and for the honour of God. And therefore seeing that in foro poli, I am, like Troylus,What the Au∣thor doth in this c nflict a∣bout the ights of the Church. 1. Thing. impar congres∣sus A hilli, Infoelix puer, too weak every way to contest with so many mag∣nanimous men of Arms, that are incompassed with so many heroick friends, I must 1. Appeal to thee, O my God, and sweet Saviour Jesus Christ; and de∣sire thee with the words of, the Psalmist, Arise, O God, maintain thine own cause; or, as our last Translation hath it, plead thine own cause;Psal. 74.23. for I am not able to maintain it, unless thou wilt arise to plead the cause of the helpless, and pluck thy right hand out of thy bosom to consume the enemy, and let not man have the upper hand, but do thou to them, as thou didst unto the Midianites, unto Sisera, and unto Jabin, at the brook of Kison, which perished at Endor, and became as the dung of the earth, which say, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession; and especially to them that not only say, but also do violently and sacrilegiously mis-inform good and pious Princes, and take both the houses of God and the lands of the Church into their possessions. O my God, make them like a wheel, that is alwaies tottering and turning, and as the stubble before the wind,Psal. 83.12. that is ever sha∣king and never at rest, and like as the fire that burneth up the wood, and as the flame that consumeth the mountains; persecute them even so with thy tempest, and make them affraid with thy storms, that they may under∣stand, what a heynous sin it is to commit Sacriledge and to rob the living God, by hindering and disinabling his servants to do him service, and to ascribe the honour due unto his name. 2 I must and will, to the uttermost of mine ability,2. Thing. demonstrate unto all Church-robbers the heynousness of this sin, and the fearfull punishment there∣of; and to that end, 1. I will here set down what I have written, above 45 years agone,
concerning sacriledge, and what you may find in the True Church l. 3. c. 2. pag. 429. with some amplification and explication thereof. 2d. Thing.2. I will, upon the resolution, and religious intention of the good and godly King David, to build God an House for his servants to meet in it to worship him, shew unto you the necessity and use of Cathedrals, and Chur∣ches for Gods Worship, and the duty of all Christian Kings and Princes therein; and the full description and detestation of this horrible and most odious sin of Sacriledge. And I will do my best, to enlarge this point un∣to the full; that so, my Reader may reap the full benefit of this my Dis∣course, and the easier retain in his memory, what he readeth in it: and that the same good Doctrines and Instructions, the oftner, and the more usually they are published, and in the more large Volums they are printed, may the more likely have their fate to continue, when as small Treatises, espe∣cially not methodically digested, are the sooner neglected, and do suffer, through the iniquity of time, to be buried in oblivion. CHAP. II. Of Sacriledge, what it is; How manifold it is, and how it hath been alwayes punished, and never escaped the Hand of the Divine Vengeance. Sacriledge, what it is. Ri sacrae vio∣latio aut usur∣patio.1. SAcriledge which the Greeks call , and the sacrilegious per∣son , is, the usurpation, or the violation of any sacred thing: and this violation of it, is to be understood for any kind of irre∣verence or dishonouring of it; & Sacrilegium dicitur qua si sacrilaedium, saith Innocentius:Thom. primae secundae q 99. Prov. 20.25. and as Aquinas saith, All that is sacriledge, which is done to the irreverence of any sacred thing. And Solomon saith, It is an abomina∣tion to the Lord to devour things that are sanctified: Et, non omne quod displi∣cet dicitur abominatio; And not all things that displease God are said to be abominations; sed quod valde dsplicet, but the things which do most highly and exceedingly displease the Lord,Peraldus, Sum∣ma Vitiorum. is said to be an abomination, saith Peraldus. 2. You may observe, that this high displeasing sin of Sacriledge, is mani∣fold;Sacriledge threefold, and committed 3. wayes. 1. Way, against sacred persons. but especially it consisteth in these three things: 1. The violation and abuse offered to Sacred persons, such as are Kings and Queens, that are called and appointed by God to be nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers unto the Church of Christ, and the Bishops, Priests, and other Ministers, that are consecrated to serve God at his Altar. Who∣soever doth irreverently abuse any of them, either in word or deed, com∣mitteth sacriledge, because they are sacred persons. And so Agesilaus was wont to say, That he did greatly wonder, why any man should think, that they are not worthily accounted in the number of sacrilegious persons, qui laederent eos, qui diis supplicarent, vel Deos venerarentur, which did any wayes hurt or wrong those which did supplicate or intercede for us, and worship∣ped God; whereby that most prudent Prince signified, Eos non tantum sacrilegos esse,Aemilius Pro∣bus. qui Deos ipsos aut Templorum ornatum spoliarent; sed eos maxi∣me, qui Deorum minitros & praeones contumeliis affierent, saith Aeili Pro∣bus;Luke 10.16. because, that as our Saviour saith, He that despiseth you, despiseth me; and be that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me. 2. Way, against sacred places.2. The prophaning of the Church, or the abuse of any places consecra∣ted for to be the places of Gods service, is no lesse than sacriledge.
3. That is sacriledge, and he is a sacrilegious person,3. Way, against sacred things. 1. Sacraments. 2. Vessels. 3 Ornaments. 4. Goods (1) Lands, Houses, &c. which not only disonoureth and irreverently useth the sacred persons, or prophaneth the holy places, but doth take away any sacred thing, or any other thing felo∣niously, by way of stealth, from any sacred place; Quia tale furtum Sacri∣legium est. Because such a theft is termed sacriledge; which every other stealth, or unjust taking, or detaining of our neighbours goods is not so. Nam undecunque tollere, non est Sacrilegium committere; for all stealth, and every unjust taking away of goods, is not sacriledge; but he that taketh away any thing that is sacred, or consecrated and dedicated for the ser∣vice of God, is a robber of God, and a sacrilegious person, saith S. Augu∣stine; and so S. Hierom saith, Amico rapere furtum est,Augustine super Johan. & ha∣betur. 23. q. 4. Sacriledge, how different from Theft. Hierom. Ep. 34. sed Ecclesiam frau∣dare Sacrilegium est, To steal and take away the goods of our friend or neighbour, is theft; but to take away the goods, or to defraud or cheat the Church of Christ of any thing that belongs unto the Church, is Sacri∣ledge: Yea, voluntas sola quoad ecclesiam punitur. As he that looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed Adultery, and as the intention of Treason against the King is Treason; So he that hath a will and a sa∣crilegious intent, or but an itching desire, to defraud the Church, is a sacrilegious person, and shall no wayes escape unpunished. And here I will briefly examine Doctor Burges his Description of Sacri∣ledge, whereby he would fain prove, That the taking away,Doctor Burges his Description of Sacriledge, and his infer∣ence thereupon discussed; and the iniquity thereof plain∣ly shewed. or selling of the Donations of holy men unto Christ and his Church, is neither Sa∣criledge, nor Sin; especially the Lands of the Cathedral Churches: be∣cause, saith he, Sacriledge is the robbing of God, either by alienating, detain∣ing, purloyning, diverting, or perverting, that which is Gods own by Divine rght, and therefore due to Christ, and thereby to his Ministers, whether the things be set apart by express Command, or voluntarily given according to Gods special Warrant and Direction: But, saith he, The Lands given to the Bi∣shop, and Cathedrals, are not Commanded by God to be given,Page 8. neither had the Givers any special Warrant or Direction from God to bestow them: therefore no Sacriledge nor sin to take them away. Where I beseech you to observe, 1. The errour and mistake of the man;1. The igno∣rance of Do∣ctor Burges. for I need not have any special Warrant to do that which God gives a Generall allowance for any man to do. 2. Mark the malice and the madnesse of the man against the Bishops,2. The malice of the Doctor aginst the Bishops. and the Cathedral Lands; for he would perswade you to believe, that these were not given according to Gods will, but without his Warrant and Di∣rection: But I have, and shall shew unto you, That those holy men, which vowed and dedicated them to God,The speciall ends for which the lands were given to the Bishops and Cathedrals; which being taken away, alienated, and sold, these ser∣vices of God cannot be per∣formed. Wher∣by you may perceive the great dishonor that is done to God by this Sacriledge. gave them not only for the proper use of the Bishops, to make themselves, like Dives, to be cloathed in Scarlet, and to fare deliciously every day, and to make their wives like Ladies, and their children great in this world: but they bestowed them for these four special ends: 1. To maintain the Bishops and their families in a fair and competent manner, and to furnish themselves with those necessaries whereby they might be inabled to preach and publish the Gospel of Christ every way, by words, writing, and printing it unto his people. 2. To edifie, repair, and beautifie, Synagogues, Temples, and Churches, for the people of God to meet in, to serve God, and to be instructed in the Faith and Doctrine of Christ. 3. To relieve the poor, clothe the naked, feed the hungry, help the fa∣therlesse and widows, and the like. 4. To keep hospitality, to relieve Strangers, to redeem Captives, and to do other works of piety and charity, which the Bishops in their wisdoms
shall think fit and requisite to be done, according to the will and good pleasure of God: And the Bishops are but intrusted as Gods Stewards to see these things faithfully discharged. And I would gladly understand, Was it ignorance or malice, in this fel∣low, to amuse and stagger the simple Readers of his Pamphlet, and to make them doubt, whether Lands given to Cathedrals, to these ends, and for these purposes, have any allowance from God, and Warrant to be agree∣able to his will? when as all men know how often and how earnestly God commandeth all and every one of these things to be done: especially con∣sidering that his Grand Master, Cartwright, confesseth, That now in the time of the Gospel, whatsoever is either established by Law, or conferred by man's libe∣rality for the uses of Gods service, is all to be accounted sacred or holy; and for this cause, both the taking away of the whole, or the diminishing of any part of such holy things, is sacriledge condemned in Deut. 23.21, 22, 23. and never any honest man said otherwise. And this sin of Sacriledge, being so abominable, and so hateful in the sight of God,Distinct. 19. Q. Curtius l. 7. it must needs be plagued with intolerable punishments: and no marvel; for as Q. Curtius saith, Cum diis pugnant sacrilegi, The sacrilegi∣ous persons do fight and wage war with God himself, and by all means seek to deprive him of his honour and service:Lucan Phars. l. 3. And as Lucan saith, —Quis enim laesos impunè putaret Esse deos? Who can imagine that sacrilegious persons shall escape unpunished? For if the gods should not revenge their own wrongs, Who should do it? saith the Heathen Poet: but they that were the Idols of the Heathens have done it among the Gentiles, and the true God will do it among the Christians: For as Juvenal saith, Juvenal aty∣ra. 4.Nemo malus foelix, minime corruptor & idem Incestus, cum quo nuper vittata jacebat Sanguine adhuc vivo terram subitura sacerdos. The sacrilegious Nuns were to be interr'd, and thrown alive into the pit. Gods usuall dealing with men.And this is the usual course and practice of God, to cause those that by the sweet promises of his mercies cannot be allured to pay their duties unto his Church, and to use a good conscience, to be frighted from robbing and abusing his Church, by the terrour of his most fearful vengeance exe∣cuted upon the like offenders; that such as will not be led by his mer∣cies, might be drawn by his judgements: Because that, as Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore. Good men will not wrong the Church, for the love of God; So many times, Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae. Many evil men, at least not very good, will forbear to rob and destroy the Church for fear of the punishment of Church-robbers. And therefore as Absolom,2 Sam. 10. when he could not by promises and perswasions win Joah to be of his side; by firing his barly-fields, he forced him to do what he pleased: So, when the still and sweet voice of God can do no good to make Jonah to obey the Lord's command, a tempestuous whirl-wind, tumbling him to the bottom of the Sea, will bring him back to his obedience. So it may be
when the promising of Gods blessings can work no Reformation, nor get any satisfaction for wrongs done unto the Church, Gods coming to visit them with the Rod, and to whip their sacriledge with scourges, to fill their faces with shaeme and confusion, and to give them fine and brimstone, stormes and tempest to be their portion to drink, may a little frighten the sacrile∣gious Souldiers, from laying an insupportable weight of miseries, or commit∣ting a most intolerable Sacriledge against the Church of Christ. Therefore, I thought good, to shew unto all sacrilegious persons, That as the Lords mouth hath very often, and very much spoken against this sin of Sacriledge; So the Lords hand hath neither a little, nor seldom struck∣en it; and that very few men have fostered Sacriledge in their heart, and laid hold of it with their hands, but they have also born and felt heavy judgements upon their backs, either in this life, or in that which is to come. As the Sacriledge of Achan was the Beesom that swept away the whole House of Achan,The punish∣ment of Sacri∣legious per∣sons. Josh. 7. and the Axe that hath cut down both him and all his posterity in one day. So the Sacriledge of Gebei, that must needs have Silver and Rayment from Naaman, for the favour that his Master had done unto him,2 Reg. 5. was the Porter that brought the incurable loathsome scab of Leprosie upon him, and upon all his seed for ever. And so the Sacriledge of Shishak, King of Egypt, that came up against Hierusalem, and took a∣way the Treasures of the House of the Lord; and the Treasures of the Kings House, and the Shields of Gold that Solomon had made, was suffi∣ciently recompensed by the Thracians, that invaded, subdued,1 Reg. 14.25, 26. and harra∣sed, all his Dominions, So likewise, the Sacriledge of Johash King of Israel, that drew a great booty out of Gods Temple,2 Reg. 14.14. brought such a vengeance upon him, as ended his accursed life with deadly poison. And Sennaherib that came with a full intent to rob and plunder the Lords House in the dayes of Hezechias, was sent home with a hook in his nose, and a bridle in his lips, by the same way that he came: And, as if this was not punishment e∣nough for emptying the Lords Exchequer, and his purpose to take away all the Treasure of the Temple; not long after his arrival home, his own sons Adramelec and Sharezzar,2 Reg. 19.37. slew him in the Temple of his god Nisroch. And Belshazzars Sacriledge, in abusing the holy vessels of Gods House, that his father had taken away from the Temple, was well enough recompensed,Dan. 5.23, 25, & 31. as you find in Dan. 5.31. These things are Registred in the Holy Scrip∣tures. And it is recorded in the Gentile-Writers, how that the Grecians, which of all others formerly were most Victorious; yet after they had once become sacrilegious, and offered violence to the Temple of Palla, they lost all their hope, and never thrived any more. For so Virgil saith, Corripuere sacram Effigiem,Virgil. l. 2. manibusque cruentis Virgineas ausi divae contingere vittas. And thereupon he inferreth, what I do now inforce, and what Carulus set∣teth down more generally: Ex illo fluere, ac retro dilapsa referri Spes Danaûm — They ever slid and slipt and failed, after that impious Tydides, scelerum∣que inventor Ʋlysses, and Ʋlysses the inventor of mischiefs, had taken a∣way the Palladium, and killed the Ministers of the Temple.Justin. trist. l. 4. And so Ju∣stin saith, That Philomenes, a most brave and valiant Captain, after he be∣came
Sacrilegious, Primus inter confertissimos dmicans, cecidit, Fighting first amongst the most excellent souldiers, he was killed; and so, saith mine Au∣thor, Sacrilegii poenas impio sanguine lut, he paid for his Sacriledge with his ungodly blood; and let other Sacrilegious Captains and Souldiers fear the like fate.Lactant. de origine error. c. 4. &c. 8. Lactantius also reporteth how Fulvius, the Censor, for taking away Marmoreas tegulas, Marble-tiles from the Temple of Juno Lacinia, as the long-Parliament men took away the Tiles of the Cathedrall Church of St. Keney; And Appius Claudius for alienating things dedicated to Her∣cules, were most miserably plagued by the gods; the one lost both his ears, and the other was distracted of his wits: a heavy punishment! therefore for no leight sin, you may be sure. But the time would be too long, and my papers too short for me to de∣clare at large unto you,Aulus Gell. noct. Artic. l. 3. c. 9. what Aulus Gellius setteth down, how that when Quintus Cepio the Consul had taken and spoiled the Town of Tolouse in France, and found there very much gold in the Churches and Temples of that City; it so fell out by the just judgment of God, that whosoever laid hands or lightly touched the gold that was taken in that spoil, mise∣ro cruciabilique exitu periit, saith mine Author, he perished most misera∣bly, so that it grew to be a proverb among all Nations, when any generall plague and grievous destruction happened for any sin, it was Sicut aurum Tolosanum, like the gold of Tolouse, that destroyed all that medled with it: Or to shew unto you, how Pyrrhus and all his men were drowned for rob∣bing the Treasury of Proserpina; Or of the 400 souldiers of King Xerxes, that were burnt with thunder and lightning, just as they were spoyling the Temple of Delphos; Or of Brennius, that ever before was most victorious and had sacked Rome, but had his whole Army most miserably spoiled af∣ter the ransacking of the same Temple, Et Dei voluntate in se manus vertit, as Valerius Max. saith.Val. Max. l. 1. c. 2. Or of the Scythians, that were most miserably plagu∣ed with many and most grievous diseases, called Enareas, that is execra∣ble and accursed, for their Sacriledge in sacking the Temple of Venus Ʋ∣rania.Vide Theat. judicii divini p. 439. Or of Alexander the great; that, for abusing the consecrated ves∣sels of Hercules, in the very same City, and in the self same manner, as Belshezzar had abused the vessels of Gods Temple in Jerusalem, before him;Herodotus l. 1. p 51. Agl. fol. 33. 2. p. was so suddenly stricken in the midst of his banquet, even as he was drinking, that he groaned and cried out so as if he had been shot with a most deadly dart. Or of Antiochus Epiphanes, that died most miserably, and at his death confessed it was for his sin of Sacriledge, because he had ta∣ken away the vessels of gold and the vessels of silver,Dan. 5.2, 3, 4. that were in the Church and House of God in Jerusalem,Q. Curtius. l. 10. p 415. 1 Mach. 6. Or of Heliodorus, that being sent to rob the Temple, there appeared unto him two men, sent from Heaven, which whipped him continually so long and so much, that he fell down in the Temple, and there lay groveling and destitute of all help, untill at the request of his souldiers, the Priests of God prayed for him: Or of Pompeius Magnus,Mach. 2.3. who is noted by Titus Livius and Cicero, to be one of the most fortunate and most successfull Souldiers in the World; yet af∣ter he had robbed the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem, and spoiled those sacred things, that belonged unto the Church, he never prospered; but, sicut unda supervenit undam, as one wave followeth after another, so ill successes, losses, and misfortunes followed and succeeded one after another to him, untill at last he made an end of an unhappy life by a miserable death, when he was most perfidiously slain by Achillas: Or of Ananias and Saphira who, because they did secretly withhold some part of thar, which they had voluntarily once resolved to dedicate for Gods service, and the mainte∣nance of his servants, they were presently stricken with sudden death: Or, if I should speak of many more, whose tragicall ends Eusebius, Jose∣phus
and other writers both Ecclesiasticall and prophane have set down,Aulus Gellius l 3. c 9. Sacrum sacróve commendatum qui dempserit rapueit{que} par∣ricida esto: we shall find, that whatsoever they got and pillaged from the Church and Temples of the gods, it is like aurum Tolossanum, the gold of Tolossa, the which whosoever touched did most miserably perish, as I shewed to you before; for it fares with them as it did of old with the Eagle, whereof the Christian Poet saith, Victima sacra Deo comburitur, abripit offam Hinc aquil, ad pullos fertque benigna suos. Fatali igniculus praedae imperceptus adhaesit, Sacrilegaeque sacer devorat ignis opes. The which my Countrey-man thus excellently translates; The sacred Offering broyles the Eagle spies,Roberts in his book of tythos. A gobb she lurcht, and to her young she flies: A spark unseen lurkt in the fatall stealth, Befir'd her neast, and burnt up all her wealth. And so the gain of a little, unjustly gotten, proved to be the loss of all that she might justly have injoyed. Sic metuat quicunque Dei violare ministros Et sacras audet despoliare domos. So let him fear who e're he be that dare Purloyn God's tribute, and the Churches share. And, as the best Poet, in the best Verse of all his works, by the testimo∣ny of Apollo his Oracle, saith Discite justitiam moniti, & non temnere divos.Virgil. Aeneid. l. 6. The sacrilegious persons were best to learn to be just, and not to despise the gods, and spoile the goods, that are dedicated to their service; because, as Seneca saith, Sacrilegi dant poenas,Seneca de bene∣fic. l. 5. c. 12. quamvis nemo usque ad Deos manus porri∣gat; the sacrilegious persons and robbers of the Church-rights shall never escape unpunished, though no man should lift up his hands and cry to the gods against them, as it appeareth sufficiently by the examples before cited. But it may be some will say,  they were no gods whose examples you fore∣cited, and their Temples were no Churches, nor houses of the true God, but of mortall wicked men and women, whom the Gentiles, that knew not God, deified and adored them for gods; and therefore that could be no sacriledge, to take away things dedicated to Idols, and consecrated for the service of Devils, and not of God; and their punishment, for whatsoever it was, was not, and could not be supposed to be for sacriledge, when as the robbing of those Temples and those false gods cannot be said to be sacri∣ledge: Which is rei sacrae violatio, as I said before. I answer, That,  as St. Paul would not have the Christians to eat of that which is offered in Sacrifice unto Idols,1 Cor. 10.28. because it was consecrated for the Idol, and so dedicated to the false god,The Temples of the false gods not to be violated, and why. which the Apostle saith was none other then the Devil, vers. 20. whom notwithstanding they deemed and worshipped for the true God; So Lactantius saith that the true God would not have those things, that belonged any waies to any, taken for a deity,
though they were but false gods, and no gods, but only supposed deities, as all those aforenamed were supposed and believed to be by the Gentiles to be any waies prophaned and abused by wicked men, especially by those, that took those idols to be gods, as all those sacrilegious persons afore-named, Tydides, Ʋlysses, Philomenes, Fulvius, Appius, Cepio, and the rest, took Pal∣las, Venus, Juno, Jupiter, Apollo, and the like, for their gods and goddesses to be worshipped; therefore, whatsoever the robbing of those Temples had been unto the Christians, that knew them to be the houses of Devils and not of God; yet, to these men, and to all others, that believed them to be gods, the robbing of them and their Temples, could be judged no less then Sacriledge; and therefore that they ought to suffer the just and severe pu∣nishment of Sacriledge: And besides, God would not suffer these men to escape the hands of justice for their Sacriledge, and the spoiling of these false gods, lest that by the like robbers, his own Church and servants might be oppressed and spoiled, as they are in many places under this pretence, that our Churches are not the Houses of God, nor we the true servants of Jesus Christ. But let these men take heed, lest the like judgments fall on them, as have befallen on the like Sacrilegious persons; for God is still the same, and hath still the same care of his service and servants: and I have heard his name,A true story very remark∣able. that, riding through Saint Pauls Church yard, in the daies of King Henry the 8th. looked up towards the top of the Church, and said, I hope I shall see that lead turned into silver and gold into my purse, ere it be long. And a poor woman said, I hope, I shall see thee hanged first. A rash speech, and a harsh hope; yet, it happened right; for within a few years after, the gentleman was executed and ended his life at Tiburn; and Saint Pauls Church stands yet unbestript of her cloathing: Sic pereant inimici tui Domine; So let all thine enemies perish, O God, that say unto them∣selves, let us take the Houses of God in possession; make them (O Lord) like Oreb and Zeb,Ps. 74.10, 11. and like unto the dung of the earth, as the Holy Prophet speaketh. In the life of St. Elzear. p. 26.And I say to these Sacrilegious persons as the holy woman Delphina said to her husband Saint Elzear, Count of Sabran, Take heed that you at∣tempt not to lay your hands on that which is vowed to God; or dedicated to his service: because God will not be mocked, he cannot endure to be robbed, or suffer his service to be prejudiced and abated, by taking away the means that should maintain it; but he will punish them, and powre down vengeance upon the heads both of them and of their posterity, that take away the Lands, Houses, and Possessions of the Church, that were vowed and dedicated to Jesus Christ to relieve his members, and to uphold his service: as you may well understand, if you do but consider it by that memorable example ofAs I remem∣ber. William Earl Marshall of this Kingdom of Ire∣land;Dr. Hanmer in the History of Ireland. who, when he had appeased the Rebellion, that then rose in his time, took a great deal of the lands of the Church into his own hands; and the Bishop, because he would not restore it unto the Church, excom∣municated him for the same, and he went to the King and complained; but before the Bishop could come to his answer he died, and was buried in that Excommunicated estate; yet, his son entreated the King to cause the Bishop to absolve him, which he did conditionally, that his son would restore those lands unto the Church, which the son denying, God denied his bles∣sing to his posterity, that there is not one heir Male of him left upon the face of the earth, to injoy those lands, that he Sacrilegiously took away from the Church. Neither do I see, how it can be otherwise; for the very Heathens that had not the knowledge of Gods laws, nor of Jesus Christ, could say, that
vulgò creditum est, it was generally by all men believed, some fatall and fearfull punishment must needs be imminent to that man, qui sacris rebus ac Deo dicatis manus injiceret, aut qui pios homines, aut certè fungentes sacris ministeriis, oppugnaret; which should lay his hands to take away any sacred thing, or offer any injury to any godly man, or oppose and wrong them es∣pecially that administer holy things: and to that end, to confirm this truth they did proverbially recite that Homerical distich, ,Homer Il. . . Which in effect, signifieth thus much, that,Cùm divo ter∣tare viro simul at{que} cpit quis, Cu{que} deus bene vult; damnum certè huic im∣minet ingens. Pro mensura delicti, erit pla∣garum modus. although God wisheth well to every man, and takes no pleasure in the destruction of his Creatures, which he made, that they might have their being, and be happy, if they did not offend; yet, if any man will be so wicked, as by his Sacrilegious do∣ings, to strive with God, to despise his maker, and to spoil his servants, whom God wisheth well unto; then certainly, damnum huic imminet ingens; a mighty mischief, and some fearfull evil doth hang over such a mans head, and he shall not escape it. And therefore, let all men take heed and beware of Sacriledge, for though it may seem a sweet spoil; yet,Josh. 7.25. it will prove at last to be as perni∣tious, as Achan's wedge, or as fatall as Turnus his luckless belt, that be∣reaved him of his life, which otherwise, he might have injoyed, and have received pardon; when Christ, beholding the stollen cognizance of his beloved spouse, shall take away his mercy, and shut up his loving kindness in displeasure, (which otherwise he would have gratiously shewed);Infoelix humero cum apparuit ingens Balteus, & no∣tis fulserunt cingula bullit Pallanti puert. Virgil. l. 12. and shall adde some further vengeance, saying, as Aeneas did to Turnus, when he beheld the belt, —Pallas te hoc vulnere, pallas Immolat, & poenam scelerato ex sanguine sumit. This is laid on thee for thy Sacriledge, one torture more for that; for I would heartily wish, that all Sacrilegious persons Lords, Souldiers, Knights, or Gentlemen, would diligently mark and weigh, and never for∣get the manner of Christ his behaviour, when he came into the Temple,Joh. 2.14. how different it was from his usual carriage at all other times; for he that was the Instrument of Mercy, and descended from Heaven, cum amore, non fla∣gello, and came to pardon, and not to punish; yet he, that was so ready, and so willing and well-pleased to pardon Theeves, Adulterers, and other wicked nefarious fellows, and called all such as were weary and heavy laden with the burden of their sins, and promised that he would ease them; When he saw how his Sanctuary was abused,Matth. 11.28. by those sacrilegious Mer∣chants that bought and sold therein, He puts on Justice and Severity; and, as it appears, more angerly than ever he seemed to be, while he walked here on earth, tumbled down the tables of those Money-changers, and the violators of holy things, and chaced them with a whip-cord, both from Himself, and from his Temple; And he tells them the reason why he was so exceedingly angry, which was, because they had so highly, and so vildly transgressed, in making his House, which was the House of prayer, to be∣come, by their sacriledge, a den of Theeves. O consider this, all ye that commit Sacriledge, and forget God; lest he tear you in pieces, while there is none to help you. And you that are brave Souldiers, and commit Sa∣criledge, consider also, what Charles the Great, that was as great, and as brave a Souldier, as any that was in the World in his dayes, saith to you
all:Verba Caroli Magni, in ca∣pital. Catul. tit. 7. c. 104. Novimus multa regna & reges eorum propterea cecidisse, quia Ecclesias spoliaverunt, resque earum vastaverunt, alienaverunt vel diripuerunt; Epis∣copisque & Sacerdotibus, atque, quod majus est, Ecclesiis eorum abstulerunt & pugnantibus dederunt; quapropter nec fortes in bello, nec in fide stabiles fue∣runt, nec victores extiterunt, sed terga multi vulnerati & plures interfecti ver∣terunt, regnaque & regiones, & quod pejus est regna coelestia perdiderunt, at∣que propriis haereditatibus caruerunt & hactenus carent. And it will be worth your labour, to remember, what commands that wise and strenuous Earl of Strafford delivered for his children,The Earl of Straffords speech at his death. (i. e.) to his son William Went∣worth, commends himself, Gives him charge, to serve his God, to submit to his King, with all faith and alleagiance in things temporal, to the Church in things spiritual; Gives him charge, as he will answer it to him in Heaven, never to meddle with the Patrimony of the Church, for it will be the canker that will eat up the rest of his estate: Again, chargeth him, as he will answer him in Heaven, never to meddle with it. And yet notwithstanding all the sayings and perswasions of wise men, and the severe punishments threatned against all, and executed upon so ma∣ny sacrilegious persons, as we read of in all Histories; we find, as S. Ber∣nard saith,Bernard Epist. 2. The houses of the Bishops, and the Revenues of Gods servants, have, against all Law and Right, been heretofore given to Souldiers, and others,Vict. Vticen. de Hist. Vandale∣rum. l. 1. that were Rebels, to be inhabited. And as Victor Ʋticensis saith, The richest Robes and Furnitures of the Church and Church-ministers, were taken to make shirts and breeches for wicked and most bloody men: And the Church it self, which is Domus orationis, the House of prayer, the House of God,Psal. Polycrat. l. 7. c. 21. Stipendium militum, dispen∣dium innocen∣tium. and the place where his Honour dwelleth, to be made Stabulum opilionis, a store-house for the wool, and a stable for the horses of the Church-robbers: as Johannes Sarisbur, saith. And have we not seen all this, and much more done, now of late, during the reign of the Great Antichrist, the long Parliament, and that vile Usur∣per Crumwells time? Nay, Have I not my self seen, the Chancel of a Church made a kitchen to dress meat in it? and the Church it self an Ale-house, to intertain Drunkards; and the children digging up their fathers bones out of their Sepulchres? Which Suidas calleth , The removing of such things, that should by no meanes be removed. Let the lamentable and most shameful devastation, throwing down of Tombs, and digging up of Sepulchres of the most stately, and formerly beautiful Cathedral-Church of Kilkeny, and the dilacerating of the Bishops Lands, and distributing it among the Souldiers, that still detain it from the Church to this very day, and the greedy desire of the Souldiers to take more and more from it, be a witness of the Sacriledge of these times. And yet, as Dionysius Senior, that Arch-robber of Temples, when he had taken away the Golden beard of Aesculapius, said, It was unfit that Apollo should be without a beard, and Aesculapius his son to have one; when, according to the Gentiles divinity, they feigned Apollo beardless, and Aesculapius with a long grave beard, because every good Physitian should be a man of great experience, and of much knowledge in many things.Vide Valer. Max. l. 1. c. 2. de Potitio non observante sa∣cra. &c. Justin. l. 21. And when he took away the golden Coat from Jupiter Olympius, and instead thereof bestowed upon him a wollen cloak, he said, That a golden Coat was too heavy for the Summer, and too cold for Winter; but his cloath Coat would fit both times far better. And so when he spoiled the Temple of Proserpina, and immediatly after had a very prosperous wind for his Navy to sail withal, he jeeringly said, You see what a prosperous sail the gods do grant to sacrilegious persons: thereby signifying, that either he believed, that there was no god, or that god cared not what Sacriledge should be committed; and yet he thrived and prospered in all his wicked
courses. Even so our Church-robbers do spend their dayes in wealth, and pass their times in pleasure, and their seed seemeth to be established after them; and therefore thinking themselves sure, and their Sacriledge to be no sin, and so neither caring for Gods Service,Et hoc modo sa∣crilegia minuta puniuntur, mag∣na vero in tri∣umphis ferun∣tu. Ʋt ait Se∣neca Epist. 87. nor fearing any of Gods threatnings, nor regarding the examples of Gods vengeance, executed for lesse Sacriledge, they go on in their purposes, to devise new sleights, and by a strong hand, and great friends, to rob Gods Church, and to impoverish his servants, by taking away their lands, houses, and possessions from them, and threatning them, if once they dare say, that this their doings is any Sacriledge, or any wayes amiss. And thus, as the Harlot commits Adultery, and then wipes her mouth and is clean; so these men commit this horrible sin, and prospering in the world, they think themselves safe and free from all blame. But I will an∣swer these men with holy Job, that it is very true, that many times the ta∣bernacles of robbers do prosper, and wicked men continue rich,Job 12 6. &c. 21. vers. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. as the rich Glut∣ton did to his dying day: their Bull gendereth and faileth not, their Cow calveth and casteth not her Calf, they send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance; they take the Timbrell and Harp, and rejoyce at the sound of the Organ; and so they spend their dayes in mirth, and have all the felicity that this world can afford them; health, wealth, ho∣nour, and prosperity. And the Prophet David, speaking of the same kind of people, saith, They are inclosed in their own fat,Psal. 17.10, 14. and their mouth speak∣eth proud things, they have children at their desire, and they leave the rest of their substance for their babes. And in another place he saith, They are in no peril of death, but are lusty and strong, and are victorious over their ene∣mies; Yea, they come in no misfortune like other folk, neither are they plagued like other men; but their eyes swell with fatness, and they do even what they list; Lo, these are the ungodly, these prosper in the world,Psal. 73.4, 5, 7, 12. and these have ri∣ches, Yea, and our lands and houses, even the lands of the poor innocents, that never offended, in possession. And so you see, how many times, the most wicked worldlings, hypocrites, idolaters, and sacrilegious persons, may have exemption and freedom from all evil, for thy come in no misfortune like other folk; and may have an accumulation of all good things; for they prosper in themselves, in their off-spring, and in their fortunes. And the experience of all times, and especially of our own time, in what we see, doth make this plain unto us, that for a time they do, and may prosper. But do you think,The prosperity of the wicked a most heavy judgement of God. that this prosperity in their wickedness is any happiness unto them? No sure, it is the heaviest judgement that could fall upon them, to be freed from punishments, when they have so highly transgressed God's Commandments; because, all this time of their flourishing prosperity, God forgets not their impiety, but hath it sealed up among his treasures, and re∣mits not their punishment, but transfers it to another time: When, as the usurer makes his debter pay dear for his forbearance; so these tran∣scendent offenders shall reap no benefit by God's patience, unless that brings them to repentance: But, as it had been far better for Dives to have had his punishment in this life, than to be here in perpetual happiness for a short time, and after that, to be eternally tormented: So it were far better for Murderers, Oppressors, and Church-robbers, to have their punishment in this life, than pay so deer for the use of their prosperity, and the deferring of their just deserved punishment for the life to come. And therefore we ought to distinguish,Hesiodus, l. 1. and to put a difference as Hesiod saith, betwixt , and : that is riches and possessions taken by violence, and riches given by Gods benevolence.Alciat. Erubl. 128. pag. 461. And as another saith, ; It is good to be
rich by Gods gift, that needs not fear Gods curse; But it is very evil, to grow great, and to become rich by rapine, and snatching goods and lands from God and man; for that shall never escape the just deserved punish∣ment: And therefore Euripides saith, . That is in effect, Procure not to thy self any wealth, by any unjust means, if thou wouldst have them to continue with thee without punishment; be∣cause that whatsoever thou gatherest unjustly and bringest to thy house wrongfully, either from God or man, Prince or peasant, it can not be safe; Yea, though thou shouldst seem for a long time to be in peace and free from all danger; for, as Optatus saith against the Donatists, An quia csst talis modò vindicta, ideo tibi cum tuis vindicas innocentiam? Are you therefore innocent; because God doth not presently punish you? so may I say to all Sacrilegious persons, and to all other oppessors and unjust men whatsoever; Do you think your selves happy, and free from all blame and deserve no punishment, because you do injoy your spoils and Church-goods or lands peaceably? by no means: Quia aliud misericorditer dat Deus, aliud habere sinit iratus,Glossa ordinar: in Job 12. because it is one thing when God bestoweth Wealth, Ho∣nours, and Lands upon us in mercy, and out of his love to us; and it is another thing when he suffereth us to injoy them, when he is angry, and most wrathfully displeased with us; and though we may and ought to be glad and rejoyce for the one, yet ought we to be sad and sorrowfull for the others; because all the wealth in the World is not answerable to the wrath of God, but I had rather be a beggar with his love, then to possess the wealth of Croesus and the honours of Augustus with his anger; and angry he must needs be with them, that take away the Lands and Houses of his ser∣vants, that serve him at his Altar; whereby they are disabled, either to serve him, or to teach his people, which must therefore perish, because thou doest rob the Church, and unjustly take away that, which is none of thine; for seeing, as S. Augustine saith, Hoc jure possidetur quod justè, & hoc justè quod bene; igitur omne quod malè possidetur alienum est; That is rightly pos∣sessed, which is justly gotten; and that is justly gotten, which is well gotten, without fraud without violence: therefore all whatsoever is naughtily got∣ten, that is unjustly possessed, and is none of thine; and whatsoever we do hold and enjoy, that is none of our own, though we should possess it ne∣ver so long, and enjoy it never so peaceably without punishment, and with∣out being once questioned for it; yet at last, the just God, that useth to bear with offences long,Quia saepe Deus hic parci, ut illic saeviat. will require a strict account for our unjust taking, and more unjust detaining thereof; and he will then recompense his long forbearance with severity of vengeance, and our punishment shall be the sorer in the next life, because that, like Dives, we have escaped all punish∣ment in this life.De male quae∣sitis vix gau∣det tertius haeres. And for those lands and goods thus sacrilegiously got∣ten, and unjustly possessed, we may truly say, That his posterity, for whose inriching he underwent the wrath of God, shall not likely enjoy them long. But as the Ark of God, when it was taken from the Levites, could find no resting place among the Philistines, but was removed from Asdod to Gath, and from Gath to Ekron, and so from one place to another, till it came to its own proper place; so God may deal, and commonly doth use to deal, with them that take away the goods,Petrus Blesen∣sis Epist. 10. lands, and houses of his Church, Quae malignè contraxit pater, pejori luxu refundet filius. That which the
father hath sacrilegiously snatched, and most wickedly scraped together,And were it not that I am loath to disgrace the present posteri∣ty of sacrilegi∣ous parents, I could shew you many brave fa∣milies in Eng∣land that came to utter ruine, since the time of Henry the Eighth, for this very sin of Sa∣criledge. the son, or at least the grand-child, shall as loosely scatter it abroad; and so it shall passe and repasse from one to another, until it be far enough from him and his, for whom it was at first collected: and the sacrilegious father shall gain nothing by his wicked sacriledge, but the wrath and judgement of God against himself, and the curse of God to remain upon his posterity: be∣cause God hath threatned, to visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate him: and I think none hates him, if the sacrilegious persons love him, that do both rob, and as I shewed before, war against him. CHAP. III. The divers sorts and kinds of Sacrilegious persons: And first, of those that do it under colour of Law, and upon the pretence of Reformation, whereby they suppose their Sacriledge to be no Sacriledge at all. BUt having heard of the odiousness, and punishment of this horrible sin of Sacriledge, we may do well to take notice of the divers kinds of sa∣crilegious persons; and I find them specially to be of two sorts:2 Sorts of sa∣crilegious per∣sons. That is 1. They that do it under the colour of Law, and upon pretence of Reformation of the Church, and abuses crept into the Church. 2. They that do it against all Law, without any colour of right, and to the rooting out of all Piety and Religion. 1. It is reported, that when Constantine became a Christian,1. Legal sacri∣legious persons and indow∣ed the Church of Christ with large Revenues, a voice was heard from Hea∣ven, saying, Hodiè venenum intravit in Ecclesiam;How thy say, Poison entred into the Church; and how ill it is now cured. This day is poison pour∣ed out into the Church, which was indeed from Hell, when the envious man, that holds it for a Maxim, Quod non oportet Christum ditescere; That Christ which was born poor, should not become rich: and much less, should the servants become wealthy, when the Master is alwayes poor. But he might have as well said, This day is honey entred into the Church; for, as of wealth, if you have too much, it may prejudice you; so of honey, if you eat too much, it will make you to vomit, saith Solomon:Prov. 25.16. When as a competency of either, may do much good, and no hurt: but his poison is alwayes bad, and seldom doth any good, unlesse it be very well and wisely tempered with good ingredients. But howsoever, so it happened to the Church, and to the servants of Christ, that the world and worldly men said, how truly I cannot judge, This wealth and promotion, brought ease, and pride and luxury amongst them; which might be so to some of them, but questionless not to all, nor to most of them: yet however, as swelling waters, when they are at the highest, must needs fall and be scattered; so say the men that either envied at the Prosperity of the Church, or desired the Reformation of what they conceived amiss, This poison must be purged, or the honey vomi∣ted, before the Church could be healed of her infective tumours, or the Clergy cleansed from their pride, and luxury. And therefore an Antidote must be sought, and a Remedy must be found, to allay that evil, which the Good abused had produced forth: but how this should be done, the Physi∣tians, either through ignorance knew not, or through envy and malice to the Church and Church-men, would not know, what was best, for the good of
the Church, or the Glory of God, and the propagation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, but what through Pride, Ambition, and Covetousness, they thought best and most available for themselves. Vstrum oculm malevolus error insulam pleum inducit: nam & cum ibi cito videretur, si & esse veletis. Aug. contra Faust. Man. l. 5. c. 22.And therefore, as the Manichees condemned all Christianity, because there were some evil men, that went under the name of Christians; to whom Saint Augustine answereth, that if their malice did not blind them, they might have seen wheat as well as chaffe upon the floor of Gods Church; so might the Reformers have seen many pious Bishops, and other famous Clergy-men that had done very many good deeds, erecting Colledges, build∣ing Churches and Hospitals, and relieving many of the members of Christ, with the revenues of the Church, as well as some few proud and ambitious Prelates. Or else, as the Donatists refused the blessed Sacraments, because some of the Priests that administred them were wicked;Hom contr lit. Petiliani. l. 2. c. 30. to whom also, the same Saint Augustine answereth, that they must needs erre, when they will violate the Sacraments of God for the sins of men, or refuse his gifts, be∣cause they like not the bearers; for who would reject a pretious Jewel sent him from his Majesty,What the Re¦formers did in the Usurpers time. because he liked not the messenger that brought it? Or rather, as Lycargus rooted up all the Vines in his Countrey, because he saw many men were made drunk and mad with wine, to whom Plutarch answereth, that he might have seen many more good men, without any of∣fence, cherished and refreshed with wine; and therefore he should have ra∣ther digged some wells neer unto the Vines, to mix the wine with some water, and so to take away the abuse of the wine, and to prevent drun∣kenness, and not to root up the Vines, to deprive the good and sober men from the use and benefit thereof: Even so did the pretended Reformers of the Church imitate Lycurgus to a hair, rob the Church and left her a beg∣gar,Paupertatem smis ingeniis obesse, ne pro∣vehantur. to take away as they said her pride; they did not wash away the stains of her garment, but took her cloathes quite away, and left her na∣ked unto the World, in steed of pride for her former glory, to be now a∣shamed for her present misery, when she is rather scorned then respected or reverenced, by all worldlings and the enemies of the Church, as are also both her Ministers and her Children;Alciat. Embl. 120. And as Juve∣nal saith. Nil habet in∣foelix paupertas durius in se, Quàm quod ri∣diculos homines facit. Neither 1. G d, nor 2. Christ, nor 3. Reason, teach us to re∣form abuses, as Sacrilegious persons do. whereby they might say with Alciat, Dextra tenet lapidem, manus altera sustinet alas Ʋt me pluma levat, sic grave mergit onus. Ingenio poteram superas volitare per arces, Me nisi paupertas invida deprimeret. But to this we do answer, that neither God, which is the God of justice; nor Christ, which left his actions for our instructions; nor ratio sana, Reason it self, which should guide all wise men, in all their doings; have ever taught us this preposterous course, and most impious lesson, For the abuse of good things, especially in Gods service, to take away the things themselves that should preserve and uphold the service of God. For 1. When Saul abused his state and his whole Kingdom, Samuel saith not,1 Sam. 15. the Lord will annihilate and bring to nought the Kingdom of Israel; but he saith,1 Sam. 31.35. He hath rent thy Kingdom from thee, and he hath given it to thy neighbour which is better then thou: And when Eli the Priest, abused his place and neglected his office and the service of God,1. How God dealeth with things that are abused. the Lord saith not, I will cut off the Priest-hood from Israel, or I will deface the glory and beau∣ty of it; but, I will out off thine arm, and the arm of thy Fathers house, and I will raise me up a faithfull Priest, that shall do according to that, which is in mine heart, and in my mind, and I will build him a sure house, and he shall walk
before mine Anointed for ever. And I would to God the reformers of abuses in Religion would have imitated the doings of God herein, when they can never have a better pattern, that is, to remove those Bishops of Priests that do indeed neglect their duties or abuse their Offices; (and not take away the means and maintenances of their places) and put other better, and more carefull men in their rooms: for here you see we are taught, that God doth not, as the Romans did, alter the whole state of their Government for the wickedness of Tarquinius, and the rest of their tyrannous Kings,Titus Livius l. 1. I say God doth not for the sins, either of Prince or Priest, change the manner of Go∣vernment, or abrogate the Priviledges, or lessen the demaines of either Of∣fice, but he Translateth the Office with all the dignities and appurtenances to a worthier person, that should bring forth more and better fruits to the glory of God; and I wish King Henry the 8th. had done, and all other Kings and Princes would do, the like. 2. When our Saviour found such gross abuses in the Temple,2 How Christ dealt with the Temple when it was propha∣ned. Matth. 21.12.13. so that they had made the House of God a den of thieves; yea, Sacrilegious thieves; yet he doth not offer to pull down the Temple, and to turn it to Prophane uses, though they had prophaned it; or transfer it to build them houses, as our men do, with the ruines of Gods House; or to take away the lands, tythes, and revenues of those Priests, by whose neglect and default, the Holy Tem∣ple became thus grossly abused, either to maintain their lawfull Wars, or to continue their unlawfull delights; but he dealeth better and taketh away the abuse, by driving away the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, and out of the Courts of the Lords House, and overthrowing the tables of the money changers, and the seats of them that sold Doves; and so he restored the House of Prayer to its old use and Pristine Dignity, to be a fit House for Gods service: and so should we restore things abused, to their old and good former use; and not take them to our selves, or give them away to others. 3. Reason it self teacheth us to take this course,3. What Reason teacheth us in this case, of good things abused. and to distinguish be∣twixt that fault, which proceedeth, ex natura facti, out of the nature of the fact, and that which springeth, ex abusu boni, from the abuse of that which is good; for if the thing be simply evil, no circumstance, no dispen∣sation can make it good; and therefore it should be wholly rejected and abolished; because, as Aristotle saith, Cujus usus simpliciter malus est,Arist. Topic. 1. Si usus princi∣palis alicujus rei sit mortifer, mortiferam quo∣que rem ipsam efficiet. ipsum quodque malum esse, necesse est; that thing, whose use is simply evil, must needs be likewise evil of it self; but if the fault be not in the thing it self; but adventitious, in usu agentis, in the use, or rather in the abuse, of the agent; then certainly the thing it self, as being good, ought to be retained, and the abuse only is to be removed or amended. And therefore the endowing of Gods Church with means to maintain Gods service, or the giving of our goods to the use of Gods Worship, whe∣ther it be praying to him, or preaching to his people,Navar. En∣chiid. c. 14. or relieving his members; being not only simply good, but also most excellently good, both commanded, and commended by God himself, it is a Maxime,Things once dedicated to God, may not at any time, by any body, be alienated from the Church. even in na∣ture, and confirmed by meer reason, that Semel Deo dicatum, non est ad usus humanos ulterius transferendum, that which is once given and dedicated for, and to Gods service, which is a service acceptable to God, ought not afterwards by any means be any more transferred to mans uses; because, as Plato saith, Quae rectè data sunt, eripi non licet; those things, that are well given, ought not to be taken back again; and because, as the Fathers say, Bis Dei sunt, quae sic Dei sunt; God hath in all dedicated things, that are given to uphold his service, a double right and interest. 1. As his own Creatures, and gift given to man. And 2. As in a thankfull acknowledgment of Gods goodness, the gift of man
back again to God; which twofold cord tieth them so strong, that this sin deserves no less, than the heavy curse of Anathema, for any one, not conse∣crated, to do the service of God, to challenge them and to take them away from Gods service, and the donors first institution; whereupon, not only the Divines but also the Philosophers and Canonists have concluded,6. Decret. de reg. juris. Plato Phileb. 1 Chron. 29.14. Plin. 2. Ep. l. 10. Epist. 74, 75. that, Si facta aedes sit, licet collapsa sit jam, religio tamen ejus occupavit locum: If an house be once dedicated to God, though afterwards it should fall down, and be utterly demolished, so that the ruines of it could scarce be seen; yet, the soil and ground of it is still holy and religious, and not to be imployed to any civill or prophane uses. And therefore I say that those men, which have or do or shall, under the colour of Reforming the Church, and the pretence of any law, rob the Church, and deprive either the Bishops or Ministers of their houses, lands, or tythes, or any other portion, which hath been given to the Church, and for the service of God, are Thieves, and Sacrilegious thieves, be they who you will, and their pretences what they will. Two sorts of men guilty of Sacriledge un∣der pretence of law.And here I must tell you, that I find two sorts of men, that may be que∣stioned for being guilty of this sin of Sacriledge. 1. The Spirituall-men, the Bishops and other Priests, the Ministers of Gods Church, that have made away the lands, houses, and goods of the Church. 2. The Lay-Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, and others that take away the goods, lands, and houses of the Church; and all, as both these sorts of men pretend, by the right and benefit of the Law, and therefore no waies offending, and so not to be taxed for any Sacriledge. But to discuss these points, and to find out the truth, I say, that al∣though the Pope be not the , the great Antichrist that was ex∣pected to come into the Church, as I have fully shewed in my book de Antichristo: yet, I doubt not, but that he is , the great Sacrile∣gus, and the chiefest Sacrilegious person, that ever these Kingdoms saw; as hereafter, I shall more fully declare unto you. 1 Spirituall men Sacrilegi∣ous, and how.Next I say, that others, Bishops and Priests especially of his Church; may be as indeed many of them have been, very Sacrilegious, and robbers of the Church of Christ; as when they let out either by Lease or fee-farm, to their children, friends, or for fine, the lands, houses, or any other goods and possessions of the Church, to the loss and prejudice of the Church, and to disinable their successors, to discharge their duties and the service of God as they ought to do. But they will say with St. Paul that, Where no Law is, there is no trans∣gression;Rom. 4.15. and there was no Law to inhibite them to lease out their lands to whom they would; nay, the Law gave them leave and impowred them to do it; and therefore no Sacriledge nor offence in them in all that they did, when they did nothing but according to Law. I answer, that the Human law must not intrench, nor can infringe the law of God, nor any waies allow the thing, that should prejudice the ser∣vice of God; neither do I believe, that the laws of our Christian Kings, and Princes ever intended so to do; for it is an old rule in law, that, Prae∣latus ecclesiae statum, & possessiones meliorare potest, sed deteriorare non potest, nec debet. But when it was alledged and manifested in Parliaments that the houses belonging to the Church, being ruined or far out of reparation, and the lands either wast or not well managed, could not be improved to the best advantage and benefit of the Church, without the Tenants and present Occupiers thereof had some competent time therein: therefore the pious Kings enacted their laws, not to force but to licence Cathedrals and Col∣ledges
to lease out their lands and possessions,Why Bishope and Clergy∣men wee per∣mitted to grant leses of the lands and re∣venues of the Church. not to make their children and friends Knights and Ladies, or to fill their own coffers with fines, to the great prejudice of their successors, and the neglect and treading down of Gods service, but that the revenue, and the inheritance of the Church might be improved, and the best advantage made of it for the glory of God and the furtherance of Gods service, by the instruction of his people, and relieving his poor members, for which ends it was first dedicated unto God. Therefore, when either Bishop or any other Clergy man, from the letter of the law, doth pervert the end and abuse the meaning of the law; I make it a case of Conscience and demand, Whether such men, as do let out the lands and houses of the Church for their own private gain, and not for the benefit of Gods Church and the advancement of Gods service, do not commit this horrible sin of Sacriledge? For my part, I conceive them to be the worst and most Sacrilegious persons of all others, that should know the truth, and not give such ill examples both of Covetousness and Sacriledge unto their neighbours:How the Bis∣hops and other Clergy-men may lease their Lands without Sacriledge. but let them lease what they will for the benefit of Gods Church, the furtherance of Religion, and the no-prejudice of their successors, and they shall never find me to oppose them; But otherwise, to lease the lands of the Church, that is better worth then a 100 l. per annum, for less then a 100 s. for to make our children great and the Church poor, to benefit our selves and to prejudice Gods service, and to say, We have a law, that warrants us to do it; We have Acts of Parliament that allow it, and have the practice and presidents of other Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, that have done it; is but to say, as the Jews said to Pilate, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die. And ought he therefore to die, think you, be∣cause, these Jews had such a law? I verily think, not so; and I think like∣wise, that though you have, or should have, a law to take away and alienate the rights of the Church; yet you should not do it, if you love the Church, or do any waies fear God. And for the practice of some other Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, I con∣fess heretofore many of them have done bad enough, and worse, in my mind, then the worst of lay men; for them to sell the rights of the Church, and so, with Judas, to betray their Master Christ; but Vivitur praeceptis non exemplis; if the practice and presidents of others, would or could excuse our faults, then Drunkards, Whore-masters, and Murderers might easily find presidents enough to excuse their wickedness: and so I know the Sacri∣legious persons may as easily find the like. But I shall hereafter shew you how and by whose power and by what means, these our Laws and Acts of Parliament, for the alienating,By whose power the laws for leasing and passing away the Church-lands came to be made. Consider that. leasing and selling of the revenues of the Church came to be made, and leave it to any pious mind, and conscientious man to consider, Whether they ought, in the strictness thereof, to be observed or not: and not rather commend the care and great piety of our late most gratious King, and now glorious Martyr Charles the I. Who a little to curb the extravagancies and large extent of our laws, by his regall Authority wrote his letters to all Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, that they should lease out their lands for no longer term, then 21 years, as it appeareth by this his most gratious and pious Letter, direct∣ed unto my self, the Dean, and Chapter of the Cathedrall Church of Ban∣gor; which, for the honour and praise and our thankfulness to so pious and so Religious a King, for his care and love to the Church and service of God, I thought it my duty to insert it in this place.
To our Trusty, and wel-beloved, the Dean of Bangor. Charles Rex. TRusty and welbeloved, We greet you well. We have lately ta∣ken the State of our Cathedral and Collegiat Churches into our Princely Consideration, that We may be the better able to preserve that livelyhood, which as yet is left unto them. Ʋpon this deliberation We find, that of later times, there hath not risen a greater inconvenience, then by turning Leases of one and twenty years into Lives; for by that means, the present Dean and Chapter put great Fines into their Purses, to enrich themselves, their wives and children, and leave their Successors, of what deserts soever, to Ʋs, and the Church, destitute of that growing means, which else would come in to help them. By which course, should it continue, scarce any of them could be able to live and keep house, according to their Place and Callings. We know the Statute makes it alike lawful for a Dean and Chapter to let their Leases for the Term of one and twenty years, or three Lives; but time and experience have made it apparent, that there is a great deal of difference between them, especially in Church-Leases, where men are commonly in years before they come to those Places. These are therefore to will and command you, upon peril of Our utmost displeasure, and what shall follow thereon, that notwithstanding any Statute, or any other pre∣tence whatsoever, you presume not to let and Lease belonging to your Church into Lives, that is not in Lives already. And further, where any fair opportunity is offered you, if any such be, you fail not to reduce such as are in Lives into Years. And We do likewise will and require, that these our Letters may remain upon Record in your own Register-Books, and in the Register of the Lord Bishop of that Dioces, that he may take notice of these our Commands unto you, and give Ʋs and our Royal Successors knowledge, if you presume in any sort to disobey them.O that the mind and pie∣ty of this most godly King, ex∣pressed in this Letter, had bin observed by all our Predeces∣sors, Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters; the which I will do, and pun∣ctually observe it, by the grace of God. And further, whereas in Our late In∣structions, We have commanded all our Bishops respectively, not to lett any Lease, after We have named any of them to a better Bishop∣rick, but did not in those Instructions name the Deans, who yet were intended by Ʋs: These are therefore to declare unto you, that no Dean shall presume to renew any Lease, either into Lives or Years, after such time as We have nominated him either to a better Dena∣ry, or a Bishoprick, having observed, that at such times of remove, many men care not what, or how they lett, to the prejudice of the Church and their Successors. And this is Our expresse Command to you, your Chapter, and your Successors, which in any case We require both you, and them, strictly to observe, upon pain of Our high dis∣pleasure, and as you and they will answer the contrary at your and their utmost perils. Given under Our Signet at Our Mannor of Greenwich, the Two and Twentieth day of June, in the Tenth year of our Reign.
Whereby you may perceive, that the same holy Spirit that led this blessed King to be of this mind, doth now likewise lead me to be of the same mind; that no Bishop, Dean, or Chapter, ought to Lease ou the Lands and Revenues of the Church, for any longer Term than 21. years; For if they could not Lease them for three Lives, though set to the utmost value, without a great deal of wrong and prejudice to their Suc∣cessors, as this Blessed and most Pious King, did most rightly conceive, then certainly, they might not Set and Lease those Lands for a 100. shillings, that were well worth a 100 pounds per annum, and that for a 100. or a 1000. years, without much more wrong and prejudice done unto their Suc∣cessors, and a very ill example of covetousness and injustice unto all others. 2.2. The lay sa∣crilegious per∣sons: and why. The other sort of sacrilegious persons that do commit this horrible sin, and yet shelter themselves under the shadow of Law, are those lay Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, that have received these Ecclesiastical Rights and Revenues, from the former sacrilegious persons, and these think themselves most innocent, because they have both Law to countenance them, and the Church-men to confirm them in what they do: Yet you know, that, if the Thief which stealeth the goods, cannot be freed, the Receiver of those stolen goods cannot be justified. But I shall, by Gods help, hereafter more fully shew the Sacriledge of these men, that have so unjustly received these goods and possessions of the Church from those that were far more unjust than themselves, and are therefore like Simeon and Levi, brethren in this evil, and so liable to the like punishment. CHAP. IV. Of two sorts of sacrilegious persons that rob the Church of Christ, without any colour or pretence of Law, but indeed contrary to all Law. SEcondly, for the other sort of Thieves and Sacrilegious persons,2. The sacrile∣gious persons contrary to all Law, of two kinds. that rob the Church of God, without any the least pretence of Right or Law, but apparently contrary to the Law both of God and man; I find them to be of two special kinds: That is, 1. Impious Patrons, whether Clergy or Laity, that do sell the Ecclesiastical Dignities, or any wages sinisterly bestow them. 2. Ʋnjst Parishioners, that do fraudulently detain, or most maliciously deny the Tythes, and other just Duties of the Church. 1. In former times, Patrons were appointed to be,1. Patrons. as their names im∣port, Fathers and Guardians unto the Church of Christ; to see good men and able schollers placed and planted in all Parishes,Impious Pa∣trons, to whom likened. to teach the people of God; and so they were, as the Ecclesiastical Stories do record unto us: But now, such is the corruption of our times, that our Patrons, for the most part, I fear, cannot be said to be, like Augustus Caesar, that found Rome a City of Bricks, and left it of Marble, to cause their Parishes to be supplied with better & abler men than they were. But they are rather like Rehboam,1 Reg. 14.27. the son of Solomon, that found in the Temple of God, Shields of Gold, but left in it Shields of Brasse: So do many Patrons, present men worse and worse;What they do. for when any golden-mouthed Chrysostome is banished, or any learned Au∣gustine is dead, or pious Bernard removed, they will presently name Priests
of Brasse, and brazen-faced Priests unto the Churches, that deserve no better than Brasse for their Ministery, and the Gld they will reserve for themselves.Numbers 22. And Balaams asse, if he can but speak, and come laden with Coin, shall be preferred: And, as the Poet saith, Si nihil attuleris, ibis, Homere, foras. Though Homer comes to seek the Place that shall be void, if he comes with nothing to give, he shall get nothing of them. For, who knows not the pra∣ctice of our times to be,The usual pra∣ctice in these times: for the Priest, that seeks the Living, either to pay some good sum of money for it, or to compound for the greater, or some part of the Tythes, or to marry either kinswoman or servant, before the poor Clerk, or rather simple Clerk, can be presented to any Church. Exod. 5.11.The Aegyptians took away the straw from the Israelites, and yet requi∣red of them, the whole tale of Bricks as formerly; which was a hard task, and a great tyranny: But these Patrons take away the corn, and leave for the poor Priests nothing but the straw. They will have all the Gleab∣lands, and the Priests shall glean for their maintenance; and these Grand Masters commonly must have the greater Tythes, or at least some part or parcel thereof,Virgil. Aeneid. l. 2. and the Priest shall have but Reliquias Danaûm atque im∣mitis Achillis, what these Canker-worms shall leave them, a cloud for Juno, and a shadow instead of a Water-Nymph. And yet they must exceed in the tale of their Bricks, and bring far more than their Predecessors brought, they must study more, and preach oftner, than ever was done in former times; which is a hard case, and yet as true a case as any that you shall find in all Sir Edward Cook's Reports. But though, like Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that erected an Altar a∣gainst the Altar of God, and made Priests, to serve at that Altar, of the lowest, the meanest, and basest of the people, that the greatest gain might redound into his own hands, because none buyes deerer, and gives larger, than the greater dunse: So our Patrons of Ecclesiastical preferments, in many, I dare not say in most places, are resolved to sell their Churches, as Judas sold his Christ, and his Saviour, to them that will give most for them; yet because,Gregor. & ha∣betur 1. q. 1. Qisquis. as S. Gregory saith, Partem habebit cum Simone, qui contra Simo∣naicos, pro officii sui loco vehementer non exarserit: He shall have his por∣tion with Simon Magus, the Proto-Simonist, the first unlawful buyer of holy graces, which, according to his place, doth not do his best to suppresse the sin of Simonie, that is, the buying and selling of spiritual graces and pro∣motions; I will a little unfold the heynousness of this sin, that, as many of them, I fear, are settled in their resolutions, to continue the doing of it, so they may the better know hereby, what they do, and what a horrible sin they do commit, to the great dishonour of God, and the damage of the Church of Christ. Simonie usual∣ly practised in Rome, and by former Popes.And I say, that the Pope is the prime and principal father of this Bastard-brood, and that nothing was wont to be rifer at Rome than this sin of Si∣monie, which did therefore seem the lesse sinful, because it was acted by the more powerful Patron. And though we read it in their own Decrees, that, Tolerabilior est Macedonii haeresis, qui asserit Spiritum Sanctum esse ser∣vum patris & filii, quàm haec Symonaica pactio; quia isti faciunt Spiritum Sanctum servum suum: ut ait Terasius, Patriarcha Constantinopolitanus: This selling of Church-Livings is more intolerable than the heresie of Macedo∣nius, who said, That the Holy Ghost was the servant of the Father and of the Son,Bern. in Con∣vers. Pauli, Ser∣mone 1. because they make the Holy Ghost to become their servant, as Terasius saith to Pope Adrian. Yet S. Bernard, that saw much, but not all, saith, Sacri gradus dati sunt in occasionem turpis lucri, & quaestum aesti∣mant
pietatem, Holy Orders are now become the occasion of filthy lucre, and gain is counted godliness: And this Simonie is Sacriledge indeed; and not only Musculus citeth these Verses that were made of Pope Alexander,Musculus in cap. 6. Johan. Vendit Alexander claves, altaria, Christum; Vendere jure potest, emerat ille prius. but Durandus also saith, That Simonie doth so reign in the Church of Rome,Durand. de mo∣do celebrandi Concilii. Extra de officio judicis delegati ex parte N. in Glossâ. as if it were no sin at all: And their Canonists, as Bartolus, Felinus, Theodoricus, and some others of the Pope's parasites, are so impudent as to averr, that the selling of these things, and taking monie for Ecclesiastical promotions, can be neither Sacriledge nor Simonie in the Pope, because he is the Lord of them all, and accounteth them all his own. But since we have bidden Adieu to him and his corruptions; his Simonie and his Sacriledge, blessed be God for it, doth not so much prejudice us: and therefore, letting him to do what he will with his own, and either to stand or fall to his own Master; I will address my self to shew the manifold evils and wickednesse of our own Sacrilegious and Simonaical Patrons, that sell those Benefices, which they should freely bestow. And I say, 1.The selling of Ecclesiastical-Livings, a∣gainst all Laws. 1. Of Moses: Gen. 47.22. That this buying and selling of Church-goods (for both these acts are relatives, and to be put in the same predicament, when as nothing is sold that is not bought, & è contra) is a thing contrary to all Laws, and to the judgement of all good men; for, 1. The Laws of Moses provided so liberally for the Priests and Levites, that the buying and selling of Priests places was never known nor heard of among the Jews, until Jeroboam's time; who, as he sold them, so he sold himself to do evil, and to commit wickedness. 2. Pharaoh was so religious, that when in the great Dearth,2. Of the Gen∣tiles. all the land of Aegypt was sold, the Priests had such a portion of Corn allotted them, that they needed not to sell one foot of their land; and therefore I doubt not but Pharaoh will rise in judgement against all those that take away the lands of the Priests, as our Gentlemen, and Souldiers strive to do, or do sell the Spiritual promotions unto the Priests, as our Simonaical Pa∣trons do. 3. The Law of Grace saith, Freely have you received, that is,3 Of grace. all the graces and gifts of God, therefore, freely give,Math. 10.8. especially what you give to God, and for the Service of God, and sell it not. 4. The Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws forbid nothing more,4. Of the Civil and Canon-Law. and with greater care, than the buying and selling Of Spiritual Offices: And the ancient Fathers, learned Schoolmen, and all the later Classes of Casuists, Jesuites, and of our zealous purest Protestant Writers, together with the wisest Princes and Statesmen, that have established many Statute-Laws a∣gainst this sin, are all infinitely deceived, if this buying and selling of Ec∣clesiastical preferments, be not infinitely prejudicial to the Church of God, and therefore a most heynous and a horrible sin against the Law of God. 2. I say, that this buying and selling of Church-Livings,2. This selling and buying of Church-Li∣vings will be the decay of Learning and Religion. will be the di∣minution of all Learning, and the lessening of the number of Learned men: for when the world seeth, that after a man hath spent his time, first in School, where he suffereth a great deal of sorrows, and thinks no creature more miserable than himself, when he seeth all others free, and himself only (as he supposeth) bound under the rod; then in the Ʋniver∣sity, where most of the Schollers are, as Phalaris saith to Leon∣tides,
, needy of all things but of hunger and fear;How difficult it is to become a Scholar. or else, if they escape these rocks, the better part, do, with conti∣nuall watching and studying wear their bodies, and tyre their spirits, and spend all the means they can procure from their friends for many years to∣gether, and in the end, after all this, cannot get a poor Parsonage or Vica∣rage, unless they pay for the lease of their wearied and almost worn out life, to the hazarding of their soules, and all other Preferments when the truth of their buying is made known; What Fathers will be so provident; I had almost said, so irreligious, I may truly say, so unworldly wise, or so lit∣tle prudent in managing of their estates, as to cast away their means and their sons upon such sourges? I think I may say with the Poet, Invitatus ad haec aliquis de ponte negabit. A beggars brat, knowing these inconveniencies, would scarce accept these Offices, and discharge those duties they do owe, upon these condi∣tions. But you will say, that we must not, and ought not, to respect our own gain, and look after our own profit; but, as the Apostles and servants of Christ, our chiefest care should be for the peoples good; because our reward shall be great in Heaven. I answer, that as in the Common-wealth, we owe our selves and our ser∣vice wholly unto our Prince, and to our Countrey; yet, some convenient reward will make us the more willing to serve. So in the Church of God; though I must preach willingly, and wo is me, being called to that office, if I preach not so, and discharge all other Priestly offices cheerfully, rather for the gain of Souls then for any other the greatest gain in the World; yet, necessary maintenance will inable me, or any other, to do my duty the more cheerfully, and with the more incouragement: no man can deny the same;Luk. 10.17. Matth. 10.10. and our Saviour tels us, The workman is worthy of his hire: and there∣fore, as the Ministers of Christ do give unto you spirituall things, so reason sheweth, what the Apostle setteth down, that you should give unto them, and not sell unto them, these temporall things: that so not only we which are already entred into this calling, may discharge our duties the more joyfully;The reward of learning, is the best means to increase, and to continue learning. but also others, which as yet are not of this calling, may, by the reward of learning, be induced to undertake the Ministry, that otherwise is despicable enough in the world, the more willingly; because, as Symma∣chus saith, Virtus aemula alitur exemplo honoris alieni; virtue is cherished, and set forward, with the example and sight of other mens honour; as Alci∣biades, with the glory and honour given to Miltiades, was spurred for∣ward to the like atchievements, that he might attain unto the like glory; whereas otherwise, as it is a Maxime in warlike Affairs that exprobrata mi∣litia creditur,Take away the reward, and learning pe∣risheth. quae irremunerata transitur; that service is thought base, and that warfare not worth the following, which is unworthy of any reward; so it is true in Academical sciences and all other Arts whatsoever, that Inhonorata virtus languescit, Virtue despised and left unrewarded will soon faint and languish; and all good Arts, even of themselves without pres∣sure, will speedily decay; which was the only course, and the most spite∣full, that Julian took, to root out Christianity, to take away the mainte∣nance of the Ministers; for he knew that, as both Seneca and Tacitus saith, Sublatis studiorum praemiis, ipsa studia pereunt. 3. The buying and selling of Church li∣vings, will be the decay of all hospitality.3. I say that this buying and selling of spiritual promotions in the Church of God, will be, (as it is indeed, and hath been of a long time, ever since the birth of this bastard brat) the extirpation of all hospitality among the Clergy: The Apostle tells us that a Bishop should be given to hospitality, and
Saint Augustine to inforce this duty, the sooner to be observed; saith,Aug. de verbis Domini sermone. 25. Foe∣cundus est ager pauperum, citò reddit dominantibus fructum. Dei est pro par∣vis magna pensare: the field of the poor is very profitable, and yieldeth his fruit very quickly, and that plentifully, because it is the property of God,How our god works do fur∣ther Faith in others. to render great things to us, for the small things that we give to him. And Saint Gregory saith, Egentis mentem doctrinae sermo non penetrat, si hunc (vel illum sermonem) apud ejus animum manus m sericordiae non commendat: the Word of God Preached doth not pierce the heart of a needy man,If they take a∣way our lands, and sell our livings, how can we relieve the poor? unless the hand of mercy doth commend that Word and reach it home unto him; which is a very excellent, true, and most worthy saying; worthy, to be re∣membred, and to be practised of all Divines: And yet now, in these times, and amongst us, that, I fear, is true, which the poor complain of; That there is but small hospitality among the Clergy. But they ought to consider, what the Philosopher saith, Nihil dat quod non habet, he that hath but scarce enough to maintain himself, can spare but very little to relieve others: and therefore, seeing a Minister must not get his living by any other means, then by the means of his Ministry; and that, by his calling to be a Minister, and all his pains and diligence in his cal∣ling, he can get no means, unless he buyes his living; and when he buyes it, he is commonly set so far in debt, that, in haste,The poor are not able, to relieve the poor. he shall not be able to re∣cover himself out of his creditors books; How is it possible that a Minister, Parson or Vicar, should be able to be hospitable unto others, when, as the Popish Priests were wont to say dirge's for their dinners; So these poor Preachers must read Lectures for their maintenance; which is many times, as I have seen it, in some places, made up out of the poor mens box; and the Lecturer must preach placentia, lest his voluntary benefactors, if he be too bold in their reproofs, should substract the pittance of their con∣tribution. A most lamentable thing, that a Preacher of Gods Word, that ought freely to speak the truth, must be thus fettered, for want of means; and that they,Ministers in some places, and at some times relieved out of the poor mens box. which should have plenty that they might be inabled to re∣lieve the poor, should be brought to that scantling and penury, as to be for∣ced to be relieved themselves, out of the portion of the poor: O consider this, all ye Sacrilegious patrons, that sell your livings, and forget God, lest he remember you, and tear you to pieces, while there is none to help you. 4. If the observation of precedent things may presage any future thing,4. The buying and slling of Church li∣vings, is the presage of some great evil unto th Church. I say that this buying and selling of Church-livings doth portend and fore-signify some great and imminent evil, both to the Church and state; for Socrates in his Eccles. Hist. tell us, that when some wicked Souldiers had prophaned the Church, and had Sacrilegiously robbed her Priests; as now our souldiers strive and study how to do the like: one standing by, said : This abuse of Gods house fore-sheweth no good thing to come: and Socrates saith, he was not deceived, because that in a very short time after, it happened according as he feared; and Alphon∣sus de castro saith, as he is cited by the Bishop of Oxford, that the flourish∣ing Churches of Greece and Armenia were forsaken of God, and had their Candle-sticks that upheld the light of the Gospel removed, when they began to maintain, that it Was lawfull to buy and sell the lands, goods, and reve∣nues of the Church. And therefore I advise and wish all that hunger and thirst after the Church-lands, houses, and goods, and all covetous Patrons to take heed of this sin, of buying and selling what belongs unto the Church; or to take a∣way the lands or houses of the Church, which is a sin, so dangerous to them∣selves, so prejudiciall to the Church, and so ominous to the Common-wealth▪ And let them remember what I said before, that if Pharaoh, in the time of
that great famine which was in Aegypt,Gen. 47. made such provision for the Priests, that although all the other his subjects were constrained to sell their lands for sustenance; yet, the lands of the Priests were not sold, neither had any of them any need to sell them: and if Popish Priests that either preach∣ed not at all, or preached their own traditions, or some fabulous narrati∣ons and fictions out of their legends, were so richly kept, and still are, in France, Spaine, and Italy, on Saint Peters patrimony; Why should they deal so hardly and so niggardly with the Ministers of the Gospel, that do sincerely Preach the truth of Jesus Christ unto their people, as to sell unto them or take away from them that little, which is left and is most due un∣to them. Or if all this will not serve to withdraw them from this sin, let them take heed of the Prophets woe, that crieth out against all such dealers, saying Vae accumulanti non sua: Woe be to him that heapeth together those things that are none of his own;Hab. 2.6. and especially those things, that are the Churches goods; for he shall find that this gain doth ever bring a rod at its back. When as Zophar saith, God shall cause him to vomit up that, which he hath devoured,Job. 20.15. and shall cast them out of his belly; and render vengeance to him, for the detriment and injury, that he hath done to his Church and servants. The punish∣ment of Sacri∣ledge greater then the pu∣nishment of Idolatry. Exod 20. 2 Reg. 5.27.And this vengeance, Saint Augustine noteth to be more grievous than the punishment of Idolatry: for whereas God threateneth to punish Idola∣ters but to the third and fourth Generation; we find that the Sacriledge of Jeroboam, in selling the Priests Office, provoked God to root out his house, and all his posterity from off the earth; and the simony of Gehezi was pu∣nished with such a Leprosy, as stuck both upon himself, and upon all his whole seed for ever. Why Sacri∣ledge is so odi∣ous to God, and so preju∣diciall and in∣festuous to man.And no marvell that this sin of Sacriledge should be so odious unto God, and so infestuous and pernitious unto man; because that, although other, sins, as Idolatry, Murder, Adultery, Theft, and the like, may be be said to be but, as it were, private and particular sins, that infect none, or but few, besides the doers of them; yet, this sin of Sacriledge is a publick and a far-spreading sin, not only against some particular persons, but against a mul∣titude of men and against the whole body of Religion, when by defrauding and taking away the maintenance of the Ministers, the whole Ministry of Gods service is impaired, and suffered, nay caused, to be neglected and de∣cayed;How Sacri∣ledge bringeth forth theism, Idolatry and all Wicked∣ness. whereby not only Idolatry, and false worship hath an open gap, and a broad way of entrance into Gods Church, but also Atheism; and no wor∣ship of God, but all corruption and lewdness must be the chiefest fruit that can grow upon this accursed tree of Sacriledge; when either the Souldiers or any others, of the Lords or Gentry, take the lands and houses of God in∣to their possessions, or the covetous Patrons do sell and make Merchandize of any Ecclesiastical preferment. 2. The Sacri∣ledge of the people.2. As the irreligious Patrons do offend in selling the Ministers living, that he should freely bestow upon him; so the Parishioners are as ready and as greedy to detain and keep back that right, which is due to the Priest by Gods law, and the Minister hath also bought from his Patron, as the Pa∣tron was to sell what he should give; And it is strange to think, how witty they are to go to Hell, if God be not the more mercifull unto them, to hold them from it! What shifts and tricks they have to hold back their hands from paying their Tythes; and how loath they are to set out their Tythes and think all that lost that is laid out for the Priest. But alas, they should know, that herein they deceive not us alone that are the Priests, but their own souls also, that are more damnified by this their Sacriledge, then the Priests can be by the loss of their Tythes; be∣cause
that hereby they rob not men, but God himself; for that the Priests  but the Lords Receivers and his Rent gatherers,The Ministers are Gods Rent gatherers. of that small acknow∣ldgment, which he requires from us, his Tenants at will for all the great things he gives to us, to be repaid to him again, as the testimony of our du∣ty and thankfulness, and the stipend that he hath allotted to them, that are to serve him at his Altar; And therefore, when the Israelites gave unto their Levites, as our people in many places do give unto their Preachers, the blind, the lame, and the maymed, the leanest Lamb and the leightest Sheave, the Lord complaineth,Mal. 3.8, 10. Lev. 27.30. that they robbed and spoiled him in Tythes and Offer∣ings; because the Lord saith directly, that all the Tythe of the Land, is the Lrds: and all that, is Holy unto the Lord. But seeing that this Sacrilegious Age, hath produced and brought forth tot manus auferendi, so many hands to take away the rights of the Church, and so many tongues to speak against, and adversaries to oppose the truth of the Doctrine of Tythes, and to take away the Lands, Houses, and Pos∣sessions of the Church: I shall leave it to be more fully handled towards the latter end of this discourse and Declaration against Sacriledge. CHAP. V. The words of King David, in the 2 Sam. 7.1, 2. and their divi∣sion; when they were spoken: And how, or in what sense Sitting and Standing are commonly taken in the Scriptures: And of the two persons that are here conferring together. IF you look into the 2 of Sam. 7.1, 2. verses, you shall find it thus written. Afterward, When the King sate in his House, and the Lord had given him rest round about from all his enemies: The King said unto Nathan the Prophet, Behold, now I dwell in a house of Cedar trees, and the Ark of God remaeineth in the Curtains: and so forth. For the better understanding of which words, you may observe that the sum of this whole Chapter is 3. fold, and containeth these 3. parts. 1. Davids deliberation.The summ of the Chapter 3. fold. 2. Nathans replication. 3. Davids gratulation. 1. The Deliberation is about an Oratory and Temple,1. The Delibe∣ration. or House to be Erected and Dedicad to God, for his servants to meet in, to worship him, and this is delivered unto us in the two first verses here set down. 2. The Replication of the Prophet is two fold. 1. Affirmative, and erronious or mistaken, vers. 3.2. The Repli∣cation. 2. Negative, and right; from the 3. vers. to the 18. 3. The gratulation is in an humble acknowledgement,3. The Gratu∣lation. and a grateful re∣membrance of the fore-passed benefits of God, with an earnest, and hearty prayer, put up to God for the continuance of his favour unto him, from the 18. verse, to the end of the Chapter.
And I shall here treat of no more than of the deliberation, or the P¦phets consideration, what he intended to do; touching which, we are to observe these three things: The 3. things observable in the delibera∣tion.1. The time, which hath a twofold manifestation of it, 1. When he sate in his house. 2. When he was safe from his enemies. 2. The Persons deliberating, and they are 2. 1. David, the King. 2. Nathan, the Pro∣phet. 3. The matter deliberated, and considered of, betwixt the Prince and the Prophet; and that was, the meanness and baseness of the then House of God; and therefore he would be at the cost and charges to make it beautiful, and to erect him an House befitting the Majesty and greatness of God. And this his good intention he justifieth and confirmeth, the same to be both honest and good, by the consequent of Congruity, that it was fit it should be so, in respect of a double comparison. 1. Of himself with God. 2. Of his Court with God's Ark. 1. I that am but a poor creature, have an house to dwell in, and God that is the Creator of all the World, hath not an House to put his Ark in and for his servants to meet in, to hear his Laws, and to 'do him service. 2. My Court is stately covered over with Cedars, but the Ark of God is but very meanly and basely covered over with a Canopie of skins, to shel∣ter it from the wind and the weather. And therefore, conceiving this to be very preposterous, and a far unbe∣seeming thing, for him to be better provided for, than his God, he confer∣reth with the Prophet, and tells him, he intends to rectifie this obliquity, and to build God an House, more agreeable to his Majesty. These are the parts and parcels of the Kings deliberation and conference with the Pro∣phet and his Bishop Nathan. And 1. The time of this delibera∣tion. How Sitting & Standing are commonly in∣terpreted.1. For the time; It is said, when the King sate in his house, and the Lord had given him rest round about, from all his enemies. So you see, 1. It was when the King sate in his house; and these relative words sit∣ting and standing, are noted by Divines to have some difference of sense and acceptation: As, standing being commonly taken in good part, and sitting in the evil and worser sense: as in these places, where standing is well spoken of,Ezech. 3.24. 1 Cor. 10.12. 2 Cor. 1.24. Ephes. 6.14. 1 Pet. 5.12. Ps. 135.1, 2. Ps. 122.2. 2 Reg. 3.14. The Spirit entred into me and set me upon my feet; and he that thinketh he standeth, let him take heed lest he fall; and stand in the Lord as dear children; and by faith ye stand; and, stand having your loynes girt about with truth; and, this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand; and, praise the Lord, all ye his servants, ye that stand in the courts of the Lords House; and, our feet shall stand in thy gates, O Hierusalem; and, the Lord of Hosts liveth, before whom I stand. In all which quotations, and the like, the word standing, hath reference unto good, and is taken in the better sense, and so to be interpreted. And in these places, and the like, where the name of sitting runneth into obloquie, and is attributed to iniquity: Iniquity sitteth on a talent of lead;Zach: 5.7. Ps. 119. Ps. 1. and, Princes sit and speak against me; and Blessed is the man that hath not sate in the seat of the scornful; and the ungodly person sitteth lurking in the theevish corners of the streets; and so in may other places, it is interpreted in the worse sense. How the word sate, is here ta∣ke.But here the word, sate in his house, is of a milder meaning, and of indif∣ferent acceptation, and rather to be interpreted in the better sense, as be∣tokening the government of the King: for so [the King sate in his house] sig∣nifieth,
that he sate in his Seat of Government; and this sense hath been ancient and obvious in our reading, as, where the Poet saith, — Celsa sedet Aeolus arce. King Aeolus fitteth in his high Tower, and manageth his State-matters; and in the Germane speech, they say, that to sit, signifieth to reign: as the Emperour sate, that is, reigned so many years. And this is the moderne meaning of this phrase even amongst us; for when we would shew, how long any one hath exercised the Office, and discharged the Place of a Bi∣shop, Judge, or Prefect amongst us, we are wont to say, he sate in that place so long. And to sit, commonly signifieth to be in rest and quiet; and is opposite to, affairs and businesse: As where it is said, Shall your bre∣thren go to battle, and you sit still? And, where the Poet saith, — Sedeant spectentque Latini: Let the Latines sit still and look on. And in both these sences, King David may be said to sit in his house, without any great matter in which sense we understand the word; though I rather take it in the later way, because, that 2. The next adjunct of the time is,2. When wa the time, that David had rest from all his e∣nemies. when the Lord had given him rest from all his enemies: for this varieth little or nothing from the former, when he sate in his house: And therefore we may very well compose them, and confound them together, and put than to signifie the same thing. But about this rest that is here spoken of, the Expositors cannot all a∣gree, when it was: whilest they do consider the many Battels that he fought after this conference that he had with Nathan; and therefore, though some take it for the peace he had at this present time, yet others, of a quicker sight, do assign it after the second Victory he had against the Phi∣listines, when he was such an hammer, so terrible to all the neighbour-Na∣tions, as that the very name of David and his doings, made them afraid, and glad to sue unto him for peace, and to take bands of resolution with themselves, to be of good behaviour towards him, and never to provoke him any more. And of this we read in 1 Chron. 14.11. when the Philistines came up to Baal-Perazim, and David smote them, and said, God hath bro∣ken in upon mine enemies by mine hand, like the breaking forth of waters; and afterward when they spread themselves abroad in the valley,1 Chron. 14. v. 16, 17. and David smote them from Gibeon even to Gazer, and the fame of David went out into all Lands, and the Lord brought the fear of him upon all Nations. 2. For the persons, that are here conferring together,2. The persons deliberating and conferring together. they are said to be David and Nathan, the King, and the Prophet; two great Persons, and high Offices, that formerly were contained in one Person, as Melchisedech was the Priest of the Most High GOD, and King of Salem. And as the Poet saith, Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum, Phoebique Sacerdos.Virgil. l. 3. And when God divided and distributed these several Offices to several per∣sons, he conferred them upon two brothers, that is, Moses and Aaron; that so the King and the Priest might live and love one another like brethren, as I have more amply shewed in my Treatise of The Grand Rebellion. And so King David here dischargeth that his duty accordingly: And so like∣wise, not only the Heathen Kings, but also the Jewish Kings, the Kings of
Israel, and all good Christian Kings disdained not the friendly familiarity and conference with their Bishops and Priests,The greatest Kngs and Pinces were most familiar with the Priests Otors, and Philosophers. especially when they consult and deliberate of Religion, or any point that concerns the Worship and Service of God. For as King Croesus conferred with Solon the Philosopher: and Alexander King of Macedon consulted often with Aristotle, and sometimes with Diogenes the Cynick: and King Pyrrhus with his dear friend Cineas: So Pharaoh King of Egypt called and consulted with his Priests, that were the Magicians, and deemed the wise men of Egypt, when Moses came to treat of God's Service. And though Moses appointed 70. men of the choicest, gravest, and wisest men, that could be found of all the Elders of Israel to be the Sanhedrim, and as it were a standing Parliament to end all controversies, and all the civil affairs of the Kingdom; Yet, when the Case of Religion came in question, and the differences about God's Worship came to be decided, neither the Kings of Israel, nor the Kings of Juda, to whom the principal care and custody of God's Laws and Service was commit∣ted, did ever commend the same unto the Sanhedrim to be concluded and setled. But, as King David here calleth and consulteth with Nathan the Prophet, about the building of God's House; so when Religion was cor∣rupted, and the Service of the True God neglected, in the time of King Ahab, he calleth not the Sanhedrim to rectifie and redress the same; but he leaves the same to be determined and adjudged, betwixt the Priests of Baal,1. Reg. 18.17, 18.19, 20. 2 Chron. 15.2. & 8, &c. and Elias the true Prophet of the Lord; And so did King Asa, Je∣hosaphat, and Ezechias, consulted not with their lay Lords, or the Sanhe∣drim, but with Azariah the son of Oded the Prophet, and with Esay, and the rest of God's Prophets. Nay, when the Wise-men came to inquire for Christ;Mth. 2.4. Herod, that sought to destroy Him, and his Religion, inquireth not of any, but of the Chief Priests and Scribes, Where Christ should be born. And so all the Wise and Christian Emperours, Constantine, Theodosius, Justini∣an, and the rest, as you may find it in Eusebius, Socrates, Zozomen, and other Ecclesiastical Historians, had always some special Bishops, with whom they conferred and consulted about matters of Religion; as Charles the Fifth did with Cassander; and Henry the Eighth with Bishop Crammer. For they conceived that their Crowns had the greater Lustre when it was in conjunction with the Miter: And therefore in no great Councel was the Man of God ever baulked; but, that they might be sure to serve God be∣fore themselves, and he assured, that while the Church prospered, the Bi∣shops directed, and they had God and his Messengers amongst them, all would go right and be safe; and therefore in all, or most Courts of Con∣science, where the Law reached not, they thought none so fit as these men of conscience, to decide all differences. Neither could I ever find, that the Church of God was so much pestered with miseries, and poisoned with Errors, Heresies, and Sects, or Divisions, until the lay Lords and Gentlemen, like the Long Parliament, neglected their proper Offices; to look into the affairs of the Common-wealth, and to see Justice and Judgement truly executed among the people, and be∣gan, immittere falcem in alienam messem, to thrust their sickles into other mens harvest,Esay. 1.12. The Church of God never be∣came more mi∣serable, then when the lay-people under∣took to con∣clude and de∣termine points of Religion. and to intermeddle with that, which concerns them not; as to chop and change Articles of Religion, and to set down and compose points of faith, when the Lord saith, Quis requisivit haec? Who hath requi∣red these things at your hands? It is your duty to come into the Temple, and to perform the service, that David and Nathan, the King and the Bishops shall prescribe unto you; and to confirm those Articles of Reli∣gion, and cause them in all things to be observed, as the Parliament did in Queen Elizabeth's dayes, the 39. Articles of our Religion, when they are, as those were, setled and concluded by the Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy
in their Convocation: for the Lord tells us plainly, That the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they, (that is, the people, be they what, and whom you will, Sanhedrim of the Jews, or Parliament of any other Na∣tion) should seek the Law, that is, the Law of God, at his mouth; because he is the Mssenger of the Lrd of Hosts, that is, to declare his will, and to ex∣pound his Laws unto the people. But what saith the Lord in this Case when the people, be they what you will, shall usurpe the Priests Office, and begin to make new Orders and Ordinances, for the Service of God, that never required such things at their hands? He tells them plainly, You are departed out of the way, and you have caused many to stumble at the Law, that is, by your false glosses, and injoyned observations thereof; and you have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, saith the Lord of Hosts; that is, you have wronged, and quite thrown out, the Bishops and Priests from their Offices, which is, to consult with the King to see God rightly worshipped. And therefore, saith the Lord,Malach. 2.7, 8, 9. I have also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as you have not kept my wayes, but have been partial in the Law, that is, by making Religion and my Service, like a nose of wax, to turn which way you please, when as every one should do the duties that belong unto him; Curabit prae∣lia Conon. CHAP. VI. What the Rest, and peaceable times, of King David wrought. The Prince's authority in causes Ecclesiastical; and how they should be zealous to see that God should be justly and religiously served. THirdly, having seen the times, and the persons,3. The matter about which they consulted. that consulted and con∣ferred together, we are now to consider the fruits, and effects that this quiet sitting at rest, and peaceable times, wrought in David, and what was the matter, that these two grave and great Persons do so seriously deli∣berate and consult about; And most commonly we find,What peace & prosperity usu∣ally produce. that rest and peace have been the bane, and surfeit of the mind, to puff it up with pride; and prosperity hath often choaked piety, and plenty hath made Religion to pine away, and to be cast upon a bed of security, as Jezabel was cast upon a bed of fornication. For so Moses saith of the Israelites, Dilectus meus impin∣guatus recalcitravit; My beloved, fed, fatted, and inlarged,Deut. 32.15. kicked with their heels; or, Jesurun waxed fat and kicked, and then he forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation. And as the Poet saith, Luxuriant animi rebus plerumque secundis,Ovid de arte Am. l. 2. Nec facile est aequâ commoda mente pati. Our hearts do swell, and our minds grow luxurious and riotous, when our affairs do prosper, and all things succeed as our hearts desire,Our peace and plenty made us wanton; and our wanton∣ness brought our wars upon us. and have rest and peace, as now David had, round about us. And so indeed it fell out with our selves in these Kingdoms now of late; our peace and our plenty, hath undone us, by making us too wanton, to rebell against our King, to provoke our God to scourge us for that our Wantonness and Rebellion. And therefore S. Augustine saith most truly, Magnae virtutis est cum faelici∣tate
luctari, ne illiciat, ne corrumpat, ne ipsa subvertat foelicitas; it is a point of great virtue, to strive with felicity; lest, it inticeth us, corrupteth us, and overthroweth us; and so it is a great felicity and happiness, not to be overcome with felicity, or, not to be undone with prosperity; as many Men, Towns, and Kingdoms have been many times: for as the said Poet saith, Tum, cum tristis erat, defensa est Ilion armis, Troy in her adversity was well defended; but alas Militibus gravidum laeta recepit equum. Quam facile tadunt splendi∣dae fortunae.But sitting and jocond she was destroyed. And so it is with many, ; Their fair fortunes makes them to fall. How king Da∣vids peace and plenty increa∣sed his Piety.But it was not thus now with King David; for his Rest begat Religion in him; and his peace, plenty, and prosperity increased his Piety: and as he delighteth to recount Gods benefits, so he considereth how he may show his thankfulness for them; and therefore he thus museth and meditateth on the matter. Th summ and substance of Davids delibe∣ration.God hath given me a Kingdom, and a Royall stately House; built of Ce∣dars in that Kingdom. Therefore I will build an House for him, and he hath given me rest round about; therefore I will prepare a place for his Ark, which he ordained to be the sign and symbole of his presence; and which hitherto hath had no resting place, but many a sad and wearisome perambu∣lations, that now at last it may rest and be more forced to be transported and carried from place to place. For though, Enter, praesenter, Deus est, & ubi{que} potenter, God himself, hath an ubiquity of presence, being essentially full, and filling all places, Supra coelos non elatus, & subter terram non depressus; non exclusus, nec circumscriptus; yet because his gratious and his powerfull presence is promised to be,2 Chron. 6.41. and to be shewed and extended in a speciall manner in some places more, and rather, then in other places, and that place specially is,Exod. 30.26. where his Ark resideth, and which is called the Ark of his strength, and the Ark of his Covenant, and the Ark of the Testimony: be∣cause he Covenanted and promised by the tables of that Covenant,Hebr. 9.4. and the other symbols of his presence, that were kept in that Ark, to be present and assistant, and most powerfully to bless, and protect, all those that kept the Covenant, and observed those Testimonies that were preserved in that Ark; therefore saith David, In requital of Gods favours shewed unto me, I will build a House for Gods Ark; that so, the tables of the Covenant, betwixt God and his people, and the Manna, and the rod of Aaron, which were to be kept in the Ark, might be the more safely preserved, and rest in one place without any more wandering, and the people and servants of God which are obliged and commanded to come to serve God, and to bring their of∣ferings and oblations to offer unto God before the Ark where it should be, might be the more certain of the place of its residence, and might with the more conveniency, and in a far better manner, perform their duties, and dis∣charge their service unto God; then while the Ark wandered from place to place. And this was the result and summ of Davids deliberation, and conference with the Prophet Nathan. The excellency of Religion, which is the preserver of all happiness.And it is no wounder, that King David was so Religious, and so punctual, in all particulars appertaining to Religion and the service of God; because Religion, as one truly saith, is, as the Poles of the World, the Arctick and Antarctick, or that Mount Atlas, which (the Poets say) holds up Heaven
for it stands on earth, and it reacheth to God in Heaven, and it is that which poyseth all Societies, and all states here below; for, without the faith and belief of Gods Providence, to oversee our actions, and then to reckon for our transgressions, and to punish the delinquents, might, craft, and fals∣hood would sway in the World alike with men, as it is with the Beasts of the field, and the Fishes of the Sea; and the Conscience of good and evil would be all one: and Religion, is that which enbleth the noblest man, erects his affections, and estates him in a state of happiness, far above nature; and, in a word, this procures all blessings to light upon us. So that whether you aime at the spiritual, true, and eternal felicity, or the civill-Weale and temporall happiness only; yet, Religion is, and ought, mainly to be magnified and preserved; and therfore the King did most wisely and Reli∣giously call the Prophet, to consult about the building of an House for the Ark, and for the service of God.What Davids example should teach all other Princes. And this practice of King David is a pattern and a looking-glass for all Kings and Princes, whereby they may see, how to spend the times of peace and prosperity to their best profit and advantage; and that is, 1. Not to spend their whole time, either in idleness, or vain pastimes, because, as Hesiod saith, Illi pariter indignantur dii & homines, quisquis otio∣sus  est; both the gods and men detest him that is idle,Matth. 20.6. and therefore Christ demandeth of them that did nothing, Why stand ye here all day idle? and for pastimes and recreations, Ludendi modus retinendus est; a mean or mea∣sure, and certain ends and rules, ought to be observed therein. Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere virtus.Horat. For so do we read of the Roman Scevola, he used to recreate his spirits,Valer. Max. l. 8. c. 8. after he had wearied himself in the weighty Affairs of the Common-wealth; but, as it is said of Scipio Africanus that he was,Not to spend all their time in pleasures. Non minus otiosus quàm cum otiosus, never less idle then when he was idle; Quia semper in otio de negotio cogitavit; because, that when he had nothing to do, he was stil thinking and considering what he should do, even as King David here When he sate in his house and was at rest, and took his ease, and was quiet from all Wars, he bethinks himself of building Gods House; So should all other Kins and Princes do: to give unto the very times of tranquillity their proner task and share of their Affairs; because, as Homer bringeth in God telling Agamemnon, that Non decet principem solidam dormire noctem.Homer. Il. . It beseems not a Prince to take a sound sleep all night long,Quint. Curt. as Alexander did on that night, when he was on the next very day to fight with Darius. Which might have lost him the field,Ezech. 2.9. had not his fortune been better then his fore-sight. For God puts a Scroule into every Prince his hand, sembla∣ble to that schedule of Ezechiel, wherein all their charge and duties are set down at large, with this inscription, Gesta illos in sinu; Bear all these alwaies in thy bosome, and let them never depart one of thy mind; and as the Egyptians Hieroglyphic painted, Oculum cum Sceptro, an Eye with the Crown or Scepter, to betoken a prudent Prince; so should every King have an eye in his head, as well as a Scepter in his hand, or a Crown upon his head, and to use Vigilance as well as Authority over his people. And so Augustus Caesar, that found Rome of brick, and left it of Marble,The great care of August Caesar for the good of the Common-welth. is made famous by the Historians for his great and extraordinary care and vigilancy which he alwaies used for the good of his Empire; when as he gave himself no rest, nor suffered any one day to pass over his head, in quo non aliquid legeret, aut scriberet, aut declamaret, but he either read, or
writ, or made some speech unto the people; and when he heard of a cer∣tain Gentleman of Rome, that was very deeply indebted, and yet slept most securely, without care to pay his debts, and without fear of any danger, he desired that he might buy the bed,A careless Gentleman. whereupon he rested, because the debts that he stood bound for, both to God and to the Common-wealth would never suffer him to sleep so secure, when as it is ars artium the chiefest of all arts, and the heardest of all things, to Rule and Govern an unruly people; so difficult, that the Prophet David compares it to the appeasing of the raging Seas; saying, Thou stillest the rage of the Sea, and the noise of his waves, and the madness of his people; because, as Seneca saith, Nullum morosius ani∣mal, nec majori arte tractandum, quàm subtilis homo; There is not any living creature so froward, and so hard to be tamed and ruled, as a suttle and crafty man. Reges fatui quibus similes.But those Kings and Princes, that think the Common-wealth to be made for them, and not themselves for the Common-wealth; and do spend their time, not much better, then that Romans Emperour; who, when he was in his privy Chamber, sported himself in catching flies, and to pull out their eyes with a pin; for which he became so ridiculous, that otentimes, when any demanded Who was with the Emperour? his servants would answer, ne musca quidem, truely not a flie, they are said to be tanquam simiae in tecto, like Apes on the top of a house, that delight themselves to spoil, and to untile the house. And God made them Kings and appointed them for other ends, and not to destroy his people, as many Tirants do; which we deserved, for being so unthankfull to God, and so undutifull to our King, that was so pious and so gentle, like King David, and so good as the best that ever England had. 2. As King David spent not his time like Domitian in catching of flies, nor like Heliogabalus in following after his pleasures,That king Da∣vids chiefest care was for Religion and to promote the service of God. but like Scipio and Augustus for the good of his Kingdom; So here you may see the chiefest good he aimed at was to erect an House, and a House of Beauty and Majesty for the Majesty of the God of Heaven; for his thoughts conceived it not a sufficient discharge of his duty, to provide for the peace of his Kingdom, and the happiness of the Civill State, unless he did also take a speciall care for the honor and service of God, and see the works of Piety performed, as well and rather then the duties of equity and civility: for he understood it full well, that God ordained Kings to be, not only Reges murorum, for the preservation and defence of walls and Cities, and the outward prospe∣rity of their people; but also Reges sacrorum, to see the holy duties of Reli∣gion, and Gods worship duly performed. And therefore, as God had made him a Monarch over men, and had gi∣ven him an House of Cedars, so he was desirous to become the Priest of God, and to build him an House for his service. What all kings and Princes ought to do.And this should be a good lesson for all other Kings and Princes, to imi∣tate this good and godly King in the like sweet harmony of pollicy and pie∣ty, and to have a greater care to provide for the Ark of God then for the Kings Court; because Religion is the basis and pillar that must bear up their Kingdoms. And therefore all good Kings ought not only, with Mo∣ses, to rescue their people and to set them at liberty from the Egyptian bondage, and out of the hands of Ʋsurping Tyrants, as our gratious King hath now done; or with Sampson to fight for them against the forces of the Philistines;Judges 15. or with Augustus to make their Cities abound with all kind of prosperity; or with Ezechias to set up an exchequer for silver and gold, and pretious stones,2 Chron. 32.27. and for shields, and store-houses, for to keep Wheat and Wine, and Oyl, and stables for Horses and all Beasts of service; that is to strengthen their Kingdoms, with Meat, Money, and Ammunition, and all other necessaries both for War and Peace: but they ought also with David
to bring home the Ark of the Lord into the House of God,2 Sam. 6.17. and to set Le∣vites to do the servce of the Tabernacle; that is, good and godly Ministers and Bishop  attend the Church, and to teach the people;1 Chron. 16.4. and 37 &c. and with King Asa to overthrow the Idols and Altars, and all other monuments of Idola∣try, and false worship of God;1 Reg. 15.12. and with Jehu to slaughter all the Priests of Baal, and to root out all Heretical, Schismatical, and false teachers from the Church of Christ.2 Reg. 10.25. And to make this more apparant and clear,That all good kings & Prin∣ces ought to preserve and to promote Gods true Re∣ligion. that all good Kings and Princes ought to take care of Religion, and to see that Gods service should be duly exercised within their Dominions; you shall find that, when through the profaneness and negligence of King Saul to discharge his du∣ty, and the desidiousness and carelesseness of the Priests and Levites, many abuses crept into the Church, as the Tabernacle was broken and lost, the Ark of God was out of the Temple, out of the proper place of it, and was obscured and hemmed, and, as it were, imprisoned in private houses, so that the people had no publique place of Assembly; to here the law and to offer Sacrifice unto God, but every one had his Chappell of ease, and his private Oratory by himself; to serve God as he listed; as now of late it hath been with us; David, assoon as ever he was chosen to be King in Hebron, the first work he did, was to consult with his Captains, and all the Congre∣gations of Israel, to cite and summon the Priests and Levites, and all the Clergy that were for the service of the Tabernacle, to appear before him,1 Chron. 13.1. & 3. and to cause the Ark of God to be brought again unto them, that they might inquire at it, which they did not, nor could do, in the daies of Saul; and when he had assembled the Children of Aaron and the Levites,1 Chron. 15.4. & 12. Vers. 11. he shewed them the abuses, that Religion had sustained in the daies of Saul, and he caused the Ark to be carried upon the shoulders of the Levites, unto the place that he had prepared for it: and when he had called for Zaedok and Abiathar the Priests, and for the Levites, for Ʋriel, Asaiah, and Joel, She∣maiah, and Eliol, and Aminidab; he did set down which of the Levites should serve, and in what order they should Minister before the Ark,1 Chron. 16.39.41. & 42. and he in∣joyned the sons of Aaron that were Priests, how they should go forward eve∣ry one in their course. And so, according to this Practice of King David, King Solomon his son, and all the succeeding Kings, that were good and godly, did the like; for of Slomon it is recorded, that he appointed according to the order of Da∣vid his father, the courses of the Priests to their service, and the Levites to their charges to praise and Minister before the Priests,2 Chron. 8.14. as the duty of eve∣ry day required; the Porters also, by their courses at every gate; for so David the man of God commanded. And it is further Chronicled of King Solomon, that what his father here projected, and consulted about, the building of an House to the Lord, he really performed;2 Chron c. 5. &c. 6. &c. 7. and when he had built it, he made a very godly speech, and a most excellent Oration un∣to the people, touching the Worship of God and his Religion; and he depo∣sed Abiathar, and set up Sadoc in his place, and Sanctified the Temple, and placed the Ark of God therein; and offered burnt offerings and Sacri∣fices, and directed the Priests and Levites in all their proceedings, even as his father David had done before him; and that which is very observeable, it is said, that the Priests and Levites left nothing unobserved, but did all things, according as they had received in commandment from the King. So likewise King Jehosophat is highly commended for his piety and Re∣ligious care of Gods Worship; for it is recorded of him, that he appointed and disposed the Priests and Levites to do the service of the Tabernacle; and that by order of his Authority the Woods, and Groves, and High places, which were the lets and hinderances of the true Religion, were quite re∣moved
and taken away, because the people by their private Meetings and Conventicles in those places to serve God, as they now adayes: do with us, wholly neglected the Cathedral and Mother-Church, which as at Hie∣rusalem,2 Chron. 17.7, 8, 9. and to which they were, from every corner of the Kingdom, year∣ly to repair. And when the Service of God was corrupted, and the Temple most fil∣thily defiled, through the negligence and sinfulness of the Priests, King Ezechias commanded it to be purged,2 Chron. 29. per totum. and he caused lights to be set up, in∣cense to be burned, Sacrifices to be performed, and the Brazen Serpent, that was become an Idol and worshipped by the people, to be broken down, and consumed to ashes. So King Joas reproved the Priests, of his time, for their excessive abuses, and the insolent behaviour that was seen in them; for he sequestred the oblations of the people, which the Priests had unjustly and wantonly taken, and appropriated to themselves,2 Reg. 12.7. and by his Royal Authority, caused them to be converted for the reparation of the Temple. And King Josias, to his everlasting praise, shewed himself most careful to suppresse the Idolatrous Priests, to purge the Church from all Idolatry and Superstition, and to put the Priests and Levites in mind of their duties; as you may see in 2 Reg. 23.2 Reg. 23. Obj. per totum. And if our adversaries of the Roman Church, do object and say, Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? What hath the Emperour or any lay-Prince to do with the Church? let him rule the Common wealth, and leave Religion and what belongs to God's Worship, to be ordered and observed by the Pope, Bishops, and Priests, whose Office and Calling is, to take care, and to see the Church of God should be sufficiently served, and all holy duties holi∣ly performed. And the examples alleaged, infringe not the force of this Objection: because David was a Prophet, even as Moses was; and his ordering the affairs of the Temple, and setling the Service of the Church, was done by vertue of his Prophetical, and not of his Princely-Office. And Solomon was Divinely inspired by God's holy Spirit, both for the building of the Temple, and the ordering of the Priests and Levites for the Service of the Temple. And as Jehu had the direction of the Prophet Elisha, for the suppression of the Priests of Baal, so had Ezechias the prophet Esay to direct him in the purging of the Temple, and Reformation of those abuses, that had crept in into the Service of God. To this we answer, That as Joshua the Prince, was required to go in and out at the word of Eleazar the Priest, so we yield, that the King ought to hearken to the counsel and direction of his Bishop and Priest, as David here did consult with Nathan, and Ezechias with the Prophet Esay. And while Religion is purely maintained, the people truly instructed, and the Church rightly and orderly governed by the Bishops, and the rest of the Ecclesiastical Governours, the Prince needs not to trouble himself with any Reformation, or to meddle with the matters of Religion: But the King, Prince, and Supreme Magistrate ought to see, that all the aforesaid things are so; and if they be not, to correct the Priest, when he is careless, and to cause all the abuses, that he seeth in the Church, and in Religion, to be Reformed:Augustin. con∣tra Cresconium l. 3, c. 51. Because, as S. Augustine saith, In hoc reges Deo serviunt, sicut iis divinitùs praecipitur, in quantum sunt reges, si in suis regnis bonae jubeant, & mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum∣etiam quae ad Divinam religionem. In this Kings and Princes do serve God, as they are commanded by God, if they do command, as they are Kings in their Kingdoms, those things that are good and honest, and prohibit the things that are evil, not only in causes, that do properly appertain to civil society, but also in such thngs as belong and have reference to Religion and Piety. And when they do so, the Bishops and Priests, be they whom you
will, should observe their Commands,That the Bi∣shops & Priests ought to sub∣mit themselves to the lawful commands & diections of their Kings & civil Govern∣ours. and submitt themselves in all o∣bedience to their Determinations and censures. For Moses was the civil Magistrate, and the Governour of the people, and, as he received them from God, so he delivered unto the people all the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances that appertained to Religion, and to the Service of God: And when Aaron erected, and set up the golden Calf, to be worshipped, and so violated the true Religion and Service of God, Moses reproved and censured him; and Aaron, though he was the High Priest of God, and the Bishop of the people, yet as a good example for all other Priests, and Bishops, he submitted himself most submissively unto Moses the chief Magistrate, and said, Let not the anger of my Lord wax hot.Exod. 32.22. And I would the Pope would do so likewise. And therefore, though we say the Judge is to be preferred before the Prince, in the knowledge of the Laws; and the Doctor of Physick in pre∣scribing potions for our health, and the Pilot in guiding his Ship, which the King perhaps cannot do: Yet it cannot be denied, but the King hath the commanding power to cause all these to do their duties; and to punish them, if they neglect it. So, though the King cannot preach, and may not ad∣minister the holy Sacraments, nor intrude himself with Saul and Ʋzzia to execute the Office of the Priest or Bishop; yet he may and ought to require and command both Priests and Bishops to do their duties, and to uphold the true Religion, and the Service of God, as they ought to do, and both to censure them, as Moses did Aaron, and also to punish them, as Solomon did Abiathar, if their offence so deserve, when they neglect to do it; and both Priests and Bishops ought, like Aaron and Abiathar, to submit themselves unto their censures. CHAP. VII. The Objections of the Divines of Lovaine, and other Jesuites, a∣gainst the former Doctrine, of the Prince his authority over the Bishops and Priests, in causes Ecclesiastical, answered; And the foresaid truth sufficiently proved by the clear testimony of the Fathers and Councils, and divers of the Popes and Papists themselves. BUt against this Doctrine of the Prince his authority to rectifie the things that are amisse, and out of order in the Church of God,  the Je∣suites and their followers tell us, Spirituales dignitates praestantiores ess se∣cularibus seu mundanis dignitatibus; That the Spiritual Dignities are more excellent than those that are worldly. When as these two Governments,Gen. 1.16. Rom. 13 1. And though the light of the Church be the greater; yet that proves nor but that the King should be the prime and chief Gover∣nor of the Church. the one of the Church, and the other, of the Common-wealth, are like the two great Lights, that God hath made, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night; and the Government of the Church must needs be acknowledged to be the Day, and to have the greater light to guide and to direct it. The Apostle telling us plainly, that now the Gospel being come, and the Church of Christ established, the night is past, or far spent, and the day is at hand, and come amongst us. And the Government of the Secular State, is like the Moon, that ruleth the Night, and receiveth her cleerest light from the Sun; as all Christian Kingdoms do receive their best light, and surest Rules of Government from the Church of God, which is the pillar and the ground of truth: But, To these, that thus make the Civil Government subordinate to that,
which is Spiritual, as both the Papists and our Fanatick-Sectaries here a∣mongst us, like the old doting Donatists, would do; and so abridge and de∣prive the Christian Prince of his just right and jurisdiction over the affairs and persons of the Church: I answer, 1. That Symbolical propositions, examples, parables, comparisons, and similitudes, can prove nothing; they may serve for some illustrations, but for no infallible demonstrations of truth. Isidorus in Glos∣sa in Gen. ut citatur. In the Scourge of Sacriledge.2. I say, that Isidorus, a popish Doctor, preferreth the Government of the Kingdom, before the Priesthood, by comparing the Kingdom unto the Sun, and the Priesthood unto the Moon. 3. I say, that Theodore Balsamon, a good School-man, saith, Nota Ca∣nonem: Dicit Spirituales dignitates esse praestantiores secularibus; sed ne hoc eò traxeris, ut Ecclesiasticae dignitates praeferantur Imperatriis, quia illis subjiciuntur. You must note, that when the Canon saith, the Spiritual dig∣nities are more excellent than the Secular,Balsamon in Sexta Synodo Canone 7. you must not so understand it, as to prefer the Ecclesiastical Rule or Dignities, before the Imperial State, because they are subject unto it, and so to be ruled by it. 4. And lastly, I say, that the Regal Government, or Temporal State, and civil Government of the Common-wealth, is not meerly secular and worldly, as if Kings and Princes, and other civil Magistrates, were to take no care of mens souls, and future happiness, which they are bound to do; and not to say with Cain, Nunquid ego custos fratris, Am I obliged to look what shall become of their souls? But they are called Secular States, and civil Government, because the greatest, though not the chiefest part of their time and imployment, is spent about Civil affairs, and the outward happi∣ness of the Kingdom, even as the Ecclesiastical persons are bound to pro∣vide for the poor, and to procure peace, and compose differences among neighbours, and the like civil offices; though the most and chiefest part of their time and labour is to be spent in the Service of God, and for the good of the souls of their people. And so Johannes de Parisiis, another man of the Roman Church,Johannes de Parisiis Can. 18. doth very honestly say, Falluntur qui supponunt, quod potestas regalis, sit Corporalis, & non Spiritualis, & quod habeat curam corpo∣rum & non animarum, quod est falsissimum: They are deceived, which sup∣pose that the Rega power is only corporal, and not spiritual, and that it hath but the care and charge over the bodies of his Subjects, and not of their souls; Which is most false. 2. They say, as I have said even now, that similitudes, and examples nihil ponunt in esse, and are no apodictical proofs for any weighty matters, especially the examples of the od Testament, to confirm the doing of the like things under the new Testament; because, that for us to be guided and directed by the examples of the old Law, is the high-way to lead us to in∣finite inconveniences. Therefore it followeth not, that because the Kings of Israel and Juda did such things, as are fore-shewed, unto the Priests and Levites, and the setling of the Service in the Temple; therefore our Moderne Princes should have the like Authority, to do the like things unto the Bishops and Priests of the new Testament, about the Worship of God, and the Govern∣ment of his Church; and especially in the censuring of them, that are ap∣pointed by Christ to be the Prime Governours, of the same. To this I answer 1. That this is, as the Schooles say, Petitio principii, and a begging of the Question; for we say, that although, for the perfecting of the Saints,Ephes. 4.12. for the work of the Ministery, for the edifying or building up of the body of Christ, that is, the Church, God hath set in his Church, first Apostles,1 Cor. 12.28. secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers; and so Bishops and Priests primarily and principally, to discharge the aforesaid Offices and Duties: yet this proveth not that they are simply and absolutely the Prime Governours,
and Chief Rulers of the Church; but that the Kings and Princes;In what sense the Bishops & Priests, and in what sense Kings & Prin∣ces may be said to be the prime Governours of the Church. Esay 49.23. in the other respect aforenamed, may be justly said to be the Prime and Supreme Governours, as well in all causes Ecclesiastical, as Temporal; for the Pro∣phet Esay, speaking of the Church of the Gospel, saith, That Kings should be her nursing fathers, and Queens her nursing mothers. And I hope you will yield, that the fathers and mothers, are the Prime and Supremest Governours of their children, rather than their School-masters and Teachers. But, though the progeny of the Pope, and our frantick Sectaries, would fain thrust out the eyes of the politick Prince, and make him just like Po∣lyphemus, that had a body of vast dimensions, but of a single sight, scarce able to see his wayes, and to govern himself; yet I shall, by God's assistance, make it most apparent unto you, by the testimony of the Fathers, Councils, and some Popish Authors, that the Soveraign Prince hath, and ought to have, alwayes a peremptory Supreme power, as well over the Ecclesiastical per∣sons, and causes of the Church, as over the Civil persons and causes of the Temporal State and Common-wealth; For, 1. S. Augustine writing against Parmenian, the Donatist, that would,1. The testi∣mony of the Fathers. Aug. p. 1. Cont. Epistolam Par∣mon. with our Disciplinarians, that are the very brood of those Donatists, unarme the King of his Spiritual Sword, saith, An forte de Religione fas non est ut di∣cat Imperator, vel quos miserit Imperator? Cur ergo ad Imperatorem vestri venerunt legati? Cur eum fecerunt causae suae judicem? Is it not lawful for the Emperour, (and so the Prince) or whomsoever he shall send, to treat and determine matters of Religion? If you think it is not, Why did your Messengers then come unto the Emperour? And why did they make him thy Judge of their cause? Whereby you see S. Augustine judgeth the Em∣perour, or any other Supreme Prince, to have a lawful power to hear, and to determine the points and matters controverted among the Bishops, and so to have a Spiritual jurisdiction as well as a Temporal. Nicephorus also, in his Preface to the Emperour Immanuel, saith,Nicephorus in praefatione ad Immanuel. Im∣perat. Tu es Dux professionis fidei nostrae, tu restituisti Catholicam Ecclesiam, & reformasti Ecclesiam Dei à mercatoribus coelestis Doctrinae, & ab haereticis, per verbum veritatis: Thou art the Captain of our Profession, and of the Christian Faith, and thou hast Restored or Reformed the Catholick Church, and cleansed it from those Merchants of the heavenly Doctrine, and from all the Hereticks by the word of Truth. And I think nothing can be said fuller and clearer than this, to justifie the Spiritual jurisdiction of the Prince, and Supreme Magistrate in causes Ecclesiastical.Theodoretus l. 1 c. 7. Yet Theodoret and Eusebius say as much of Constantine the Great. 2. You may read in the Council of Chalcedon,2. The testi∣mony of the Councils. That all the Bishops and Clergy, that were gathered together to that place, (as the Members of our Parliament use to do) were wont to lay down the Canons they had agreed upon in the Council, until the Emperour should come to confirm them with his Royal assent; and when the Emperour came, they said, These Decrees seem good unto us, if they seem so to your Sacred Majesty. And the Bishops of the Council of Constantinople, that was after the first Council of Ephesus,Concil. Chalce∣don. Artic. 1. pag. 831. wrote thus submissively unto the Emperour Theodosius, We humbly beseech your Clemency, that as you have honoured the Church with your Letters, by which you have called us together, Ita finalem conclusionem decretorum nostrorum corrobores sententia tua & sigillo, So you would be pleased to strengthen and confirm the last conclusion of our Decrees, by your Royal Sentence and Seal. 3.3. The testi∣mony of Popes and Papists. As the Fathers and Councils do thus acknowledge the Emperours right in the Spiritual jurisdiction; So many of the Popes and Papists them∣selves have confest the same truth, and yielded the same right unto the Em∣perour, and other Soveraign Magistrate, in the Church and Church-matters,
and over all the parsos beloning unto the Church; for Platina, that was Library-keeper unto the Pope,Iaira in severino papa saith, that, Without the Letters pattents of the Emperour to confirm him, the Pope is no lawfull Pope; and Zabarel, a great Scholar, saith, The Pope may be accused before the Emperour, of, and for any notorious crime,Zbarella de Schismate & Concilus. and publick scandalous offence; & Imperator potest à papa requirere rationem fidei; and the Emperour may inquire, and call the Pope, to yield an account of his faith and Religion. And so many of the better Popes were not ashamed to confess the same: for Saint Gregory, who for his great learning and piety was sirnamed, the Great, writing unto Mauritius, the Emperour, saith, Imperatori obedientiam praebui,Theodoret l. 2. c. 16. & pro Deo quod sensi minimè tacui; I have yielded all obedience unto the Emperour, and what I conceived to be truth and for God, I concealed it not:2 q. 4. Manda∣stis. and, before Saint Gregories time, Pope Liberius, being convented to appear before Constantius, denied not most readily to obey his summons. So did Pope Sixtus upon the like complaint, appear to purge himself be∣fore Valentinian;2. q. 7. Nos si. and Pope Leo the third, before Charles the Great. And it is registred that Pope Leo the 4th. wrote unto the Emperour Lodo∣uick saying,Epist. Eleuth. inter leges. Edovard. Si incompetenter aliquid egimus, & justae legis tramitem non con∣servavimus, admissorum nostrorum cuncta vestro judicio volumus emendare; If we have done any thing unseemly and amiss; and have not observed and walked in the right path of the just law, we are most ready and willing to amend all our admissions, or whatsoever we have done amiss according to your judgment;Theodoretus, l. 2. c. 1. and Pope Eleutherius saith to Edward the I. of England, V s est is Vicarius Dei in Regno vestro, that he (and so every other King) is Gods Vicar in his Kingdom. This was the mind and sense of these Popes, and many other Popes in former ages were of the same mind, until pride, avarice and ambition corrupted them, to be as now they are. How the Em∣perour and Kn execu∣ted the power that God had given thm.And, as God hath given this power and required this duty of Kings and Princes, to have a care of his Church, and to reform Religion, and the Fathers and Councels have confirmed this truth, and divers of the very Popes themselves, and Ppists have yielded, and submitted themselves un∣to their spiritual jurisdiction even in the Ecclesiastical causes; so the Emperours and Kings omitted not to execute the same from time to time, es∣pecially those that had the master power and ability to discharge their du∣ties:Idm. l. 1. c 7. for Theodoret writes that Constantine was wont to say, Si episcopus trbas det, mea manu coercebitur, If any Bishop shall be turbulent and trouble∣some, he shall be refrained and censured by my hands: and both Theodoret and Eusebius tels us how he came in his own person unto the Councell of Nice,Sozm. l. 4. c. 16. Et omnibus exsurgentibus, ipse ingressus est medius, tanquam aliquis Dei coelestis Angelus, the whole company of the Bishops and all the rest arising, he came into the midst amongst them, as it were an Heavenly Angel of God; And Sozomen writeth how that ten Bishops of the East, and ten others of the West,Conciliorum, Tom 2. In vita Sylvani, & vigila. were required by Constantine to be chosen out by the Convocation, and to be sent to his Court, to declare unto him the decrees and canons of the Councell, that he might examine them, and consider whether they were consonant to the Holy Scriptures. And the Emperour Constantius de∣posed Pope Liberius of his Bishoprick, and then again he deprived Pope Foelix, and restored Liberius unto the Popedom; and in the third Coun∣cell, at Costantinople, he did not only sit among the Bishops, but also subscri∣bed,Concil. Boni. 3. c. 2. with the Bishops, to such bills as passed in that Councell, saying, Vidi∣mus & Subscripsimus, we have seen these canons and have subscribed our approbation of them. And King Odoacer, touching the Affairs of the Church saith, Miramur quicquam tentatum fuisse sine nobis, We do admire, that you should attempt to do any thing without us: for, while our Bishop lived, (that is the Pope) sine Nobis nihil tentari oportuit, Nothing ought to be done without us; much less ought it to be done, now, when he is dead.
And the Emperour Justinian doth very often in Ecclesiastical causes,Authent. Coliat. 1 tit. 6. use to say, Definimus & jubemus, We determine and command, and we will and require, that none of the Bishops be absent from his Church,Quomodo opor∣tet Episcop. above the space of a year; and he saith further, Nullum genus rerum est quod non sit peni∣tus quaerendum Authoritate Imperatoris; there is no kind of matter, that may not, or is not to be inquired into, by the Authority of the Emperour;Authent. Collat. Tit. 133. be∣cause he hath received from the hands of God the common government and principality over all men. And the same Emperour, as Balsamon saith,Balsamon de Peccat Tit. 9. Idem in Calced. Concil c. 12. Idem de fide Tit. 1. gave power to the Bishop to absolve a Priest from pennance, and to restore him to his Church: And the same Author saith, that the Emperours dis∣posed of Patriarchal seats, and that this power was given them from above: and he saith further, that the Emperour Michael, that ruled in the East, made a law, against the order of the Church, that no Monk should serve in the Ministry, in any Church whatsoever. And we read further, how that divers of the Emperours have put down and deposed divers Popes, as Otho deposed John 13.Evodius inter decreta Bonifa∣c. Ʋsergen anno 1045. Honorius deposed Bo∣niface, Theodoricus deposed Symmahus, and Henry removed three Popes that had been all unlawfully chosen: and in the Councel of Chalcedon, the Supreme Civil Magistrate adjudged Dioscorus, Juvenalis, and Thalassus, three Bishops of Heresie, and therefore to be degraded, and to be thrust out of the Church. And so you see how the Emperours; ings, and Civil Magistrates behaved themselves in the Church of God, and used their power and the Autho∣rity that God had given them, as well in the Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Affairs of the Church, and points of Faith, as in the Civil Government of the Common-wealth. CHAP. VIII. That it is the Office and Duty of Kings, and Princes, though not to execute the function, and to do the Offices of the Bishops and Priests; yet, to have a speciall care of Religion, and the true Worship of God, and to cause both the Priests and Bishops, and all others; to discharge their duties of Gods service. And how the good and godly Emperours, and Kings have formerly done the same from time to time. BUt, as God hath given unto the Kings and Princes of this world, a Power and Authority as well over his Church, and Church-men, be they Prophets, Apostles, Bishops, Priests, or what you will; as over the Com∣mon wealth, and all the lay persons of their Dominions; So they ought and are bound to have a special care of Religion, and to discharge their duties for the glory of God, the good of his Church, the promoting of the Chri∣stian Faith, and the rooting up of all Sects and Heresies, that defile and cor∣rupt the same: for, as Saint Augustine saith, and I shewed you before, In hoc Reges Deo serviunt, herein Kings and Princes do serve God; if,Aug. contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 51. as they are Kings, they injoyn the things that are good, and inhibit those things that are evil, and that Non solum in iis quae pertinent ad humanam Societatem, sed etiam ad divinam Religionem; and again he saith,Idem Epist. 48. that Kings do serve Christ here on earth, when they do make good laws for Christ: and Atha∣nasius said unto the Emperour Jovinian, Conveniens est pro principe studium & amor rerum divinarum, It is meet and convenient for a good Prince to
study and love Heavenly things, because that in so doing, his heart shall be alwaies,Theodoret, l. 4. c. 3. as Solomon saith, in manu Dei, in the hand of God; and Saint Cyrill tells the Emperours Theodosius and Valentinian, that Ab ea quae erga Deum est pietate,Prov. 21.1. reipublicae vestrae status pendet, the state and condition of their Common-wealth doth wholly depend, according to that piety and Re∣ligion which they bear towards God.Cardanus de sapientia lib. 3. Because, as Cardan truely saith, Summum praesidium Regni est justitia ob apertos tumultus, & Religio ob occultos, Justice is the best defence of a Kingdom, and the suppressor of open tumults, because, righteousness exalteth a Nation; and Religion is the only Protector and safely against all secret and privy Machinations;Minut. Fael. in Otav. because, as Minu∣tius Foelix saith, What the Civil Magistrate doth with the sword of justice, to suppress the nefarious doers and actours of wickedness, Religion root∣eth out and suppresseth the very thought of evil,The want of the fear of God the only thing that maketh Re∣bells. which a Godly and a Religious man feareth as much, and more then a wicked and prophane man doth dread the punishment of his offence; and so Religion, Piety, and the fear of God keepeth the very hearts and souls of the subjects from swelling against their Soveraign, and from the least evil thought of Rebellion; and it is the want of the fear of God, and true Religion, whatsoever men pre∣tend, that makes Rebels and Traytors in every place; because the true Re∣ligion tels us plainly,Rom. 13.1. that every soul, that is, every man, unfainedly from his heart, should be subject to the gher Powers; And the true Religion teacheth us as Tertull,Tertul. ad Sca∣pul. saith, Colere Imperatorem, ut hominem à Deo secundum & solo Deo minorem, To acknowledge, and to serve the Emperour, and so our King and our Prince, as the next person to God, and inferior to none, but to God. When as he is Omnibus major & solo Deo minor, above all men, and below none, but only God. How requisite it is for Kings to have a care to preserve Religion.And therefore it is most requisite, that all Kings and Princes should have care of the true Religion and the service of God; and with the Prophet David to build Temples and Churches for him, that hath given their Crowns and Thrones unto them: and to provide maintenance for those ser∣vants of God, that serve at his Temple, as they do for those that serve themselves; and so, both to be Religious themselves, and to see that their subjects, so far as it lieth in them, should be so likewise; and this their own piety and goodness in the service of God, will make them famous a∣mongst all posterities, and their names to shine as the Sun; when, as Saint Ambrose saith,Ambrosius Epist. 32. Nihil honorificentius quàm ut Imperator filius Dei dicatur, no∣thing can be more honorable, then that the Emperour or King should be named and called the Son of God;The fruits and benefits of maintaining true Religion in a kingdom. which is a more glorious Eulogie, then Ho∣mer could give to the best Heroes of all Greece; or that Alexander, Julius Caesar, or the like, could atchieve, by all their military exploits, or the best domestick actions that they have done; and their making provision for the Teachers of the true Religion, and the promoters of Gods service, the Bishops and Ministers of Christ his Church, which makes their subjects both Loyall and obedient unto them, and also Religious towards God, will preserve the peace and procure the happiness of their Kingdoms. How many former kings were very zea∣lous to uphold Religion.And according as God hath given this Authority, and laid this charge upon all Kings and Princes, to have a care of his Religion, and the Mini∣sters of his Church; so we find very very many, both in former times, and also of latter years, and so both of Gentiles, Jews, and Christians that were exceeding zealous for the Honor of God, and the upholding of them that served at his Altar;1. Gentile kings. as, 1. The Gentile Kings, as Pharaoh King of Egypt, that in the extremity of that dearth, which swallowed the whole Land, he made provision for Gods Priests,The great bounty of king Croesus to the god Apollo and to his Priests. so that they neither wanted means, nor were driven to sell their Lands. And so Croesus King of Lydia, was so wounderfull zealous of the Honor
and the worship of the god of Delphos, and so bountifull to Apollo's Priests that Herodotus saith, that he made oblation of three thousand choice Cattel, such as might lawfully be offered; and caused a great stack of wood to be made; wherein he burnt Bedsteads of Silver and Gold, and Golden May∣sors with purple rayment, and Coats of exceeding value; and he laid the like charge upon the Lydians, that every man should consecrate those Jew∣els, which he possessed most costly and pretious; from which their Sacri∣fice, when as the streams of liquid and molten Gold distrained in great a∣bundance, he caused thereof to be framed half flates, or sheards, the lon∣ger sort, as he intituled them, of six handfull; the shorter of three and a hand breadth in thickness; amounting to the number of an hundred and seventeen. Whereof four were of fined Gold weighing two Talents and a half; and the rest of whiter Gold, that weighed two Talents like∣wise; he gave also the similitude of a Lion, in tried and purged Gold, and two Books very fair and stately to see to, the one framed of Gold, weighing eight Talents and a half, with the additionall of twenty four pounds; and the other of Silver: And he presented likewise four silver Tunns, two drinking Cups, the one of Gold and the other of Silver; and silver Rings, with the shape and form of a woman three Cubits high; and withall he offered the Chains, Girdles, and Wastbands of the Queen, his wife; and to the Priests of Amphiaraus he gave a shield, and a speare of solid Gold, and a quiver of the same metall: all which, saith mine Author, he offered in hope to purchase thereby unto himself the gracious favour and good-will of that god: and,Herodotus, l. 1 clio. if he was so magnificent and bountifull to the Priests and Temple of that god, which was no god; how Royall, think you, would he have been, if he had known the true God and our Saviour Jesus Christ. So Cyrus and Darius KingS of Persia and of Babylon, made such royall de∣crees for the re-edifying of the Temple at Jerusalem,Ezra. 1.7. &c. 6.5. &c. 8.9. and the Worshipping of the God of Daniel, and his three companions Sidrac, Misach, and Abed∣nego, which was the true God, that they are registred in the Book for their perpetuall honour and praise, to this very day; and shall continue longer then the stately Piramides of Egypt, even to the end of the World; when as most others of their laws and actions are shut up in silence, and buried in the grave of forgetfulness. So Artaxerxes Mnemon, the son of Darius Nothus, formerly called Ochus or Achus, that in the Persian language signifieth a Prince; was very zea∣lous for the building of Gods House, and the inabling of the builders there∣of with all things necessary for the work; and as his father Darius said, Let the work of this House of God alone, and let the Governour of the Jews and the elders of them, build this House of God in his place: Moreover I make a decree, (and it was a most Royall decree) what you shall do to the Elders of these Jews, for the building of this House of God, that of the Kings goods, even of the tribute beyond the River, forthwith expences be given to these men that they be not hindered: and that which they have need of, both young Bullocks and Rams, and Lambs for the burnt offerings of the God of Heaven; Wheat,Here is a glo∣rious zeal and a brave Reso∣lution for the honour and service of God. Salt, Wine, and Oyl, according to the appointment of the Priests; let it be gi∣ven them day by day without faile, that they may offer Sacrifices of sweet sa∣vours unto the God of Heaven, and pray for the life of the King and of his Sons, that were four, 1. Artaxerxes. 2. Cyrus, the younger. 3. Atossa, called also Arsacas. 4. Oxendra. And I have also made a decree that Whosoever shall alter this word,Ezra. 6.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. let Timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him be hanged thereon,
and his house be made a dunghill for this: So the son, following the steps of his father (as our Most gracious King doth, in like manner) made a De∣cree to all the Treasurers that were beyond the River, That whatsoever Ezra the Priest shall require of you, it be done speedily; Also, we certifie you, that touching any of the Priests and Levites, Singers, Porters, Nethinims or Ministers of the House of God,Ezra. c. 7. 21.24. it shall not be lawful to impose Tolle, Tribute, or Custom upon them: a thing clean contrary to the practice of our times, when the greatest Tolle, Tax, and Imposition, is usually laid upon the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ: to shew unto you, how far short our Christians now are in piety and zeal of Gods Worship, to these Heathens that knew not Christ: and therefore no doubt, but that they shall shall rise in judgement against us, that profess to honour Christ, and yet think we can never take enough from his Church, nor lay Taxes and Loads enough upon his Ministers; And how this will be answered before Christ at the last Day, let the sacrilegious persons that labour so much, and strive so eagerly to take our houses from us consider it; for I know not how to do it. 2. The Kings of Israel and Juda.2. As these Heathen Kings and Monarchs were thus zealously affected to the House & Service of God, and thus religiously given to provide main∣tenance for the Priests and Ministers of the Temple; So the Kings of Israel and Juda were no whit inferiour unto them: but in a far righter way, and to a truer God than most of the Heathens did: For here you see King Da∣vid adjudged it to be as needful to build a Temple for God, as to erect an house for himself. And so the Books of the Kings, and the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel and Juda, do sufficiently set down, how Solomon did most religously build God's House, and offered Royal Sacrifices in that House, and most orderly setled the Priests and Levites, to do the Service of God in this Temple, that he had built. And so Jehosophat, Ezechias, Josias, and all the rest of the good Kings of Juda, did execute the power that God had given them, in the setling and establishing of His Religion, and the True Worship of God, as you may most amply read in their lives: And those Kings that did not care for the preservation of the True Religion, and Gods Service, and his Houses, as Jeroboam, Baasha, Ahab, and the like, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against them, that he rooted them and their posterity out of their own house, because they neglected the Service and the House of God. And so he will do to all those Kings and Princes, that will imitate them in prophaning his House, neglecting his Service, and abusing his servants, because that with Him there is no respect of persons, but He will bind Kings in fetters,Psalm. 148. and their Nobles with links of iron. 3. The Chri∣stian Kings.3. The Christian Emperours and Kings, are not left un-Chronicled for their great zeal, extraordinary care, and Royal bounty towards the Bishops and Ministers of Christ, to propagate and uphold the Christian Religion. For it is Registred in the Writings of those times, that Constantius the fa∣ther of Constantine the Great, was wont to say, That he respected the Prea∣chers of the Gospel, more than the Treasures of his Exchequer. And his son Constantine was called Great, as well for his Piety, that made him like John Baptist to be Magnus coram Domino, Great in the sight of the Lord, as for his Potency, that made him Great among men. And Eusebius, (that wrote the Life of Constantine, and sets down his Piety) saith, The Court of the Emperour Valerian, was so replenished with godly men, and religious Christians, that it seemed to be the Church of God rather than the Kings Court: So great a care had he of Religion and the Service of God, that, as the Prophet David saith,Psal. 101.9. saith, none should be his servants, that served not God, but whoso leadeth a godly life, he shall be my servant, said this good Em∣perour, as good King David said before him. And the Emperour Jovinian, that succeeded Julian the Apostate, who
withdrew very many from the Christian Religion, to imbrace the idolatrous service and superstitions of the Heathens, when he attained unto the Em∣pire, said to the people, That he would be a King of Christians, or he would be no King at all. And Alphonsus, King of Arragon, is made Fa∣mous in all Chronicles, for the great love he bare to Learning, and especi∣ally for the great zeal he had to the Christian Religion, and the great care he took to promote the Gospel of Christ, and to pro∣vide for his servants: and when some other King said unto him, That it was too base an office for a King to trouble himself with such affairs; Alphonsus answered, Vox ovis ista est potius quam regis, That voice seemed to him to be the voice of an Oxe, rather than of a King. And as Theodosius and Valentinian, very Christian like, called themselves the assls of Christ; so Constantine was wont to say, That he gloried more to be the servant of Christ, than in being the Emperour of the World. And as those pious Kings, and godly Emperours were thus zealous to maintain the Christian Religion, which bare up the Pillars of their Domi∣nions, and makes their names now, to live glorious, though they are dead; So the Throne of this Empire and Kingdom of Great Britaine,That this our kingdom had many zealous, and most god∣ly Kings. hath not wanted devout Princes, and most worthy Kings, that have trod in the steps of King David, to provide Houses for God's Service, and to imitate the examples of the best of the aforesaid pious Princes, to see the Religion of Christ, and the True Faith purely maintained within their Kingdoms: as you may find it in our Chronicles, and the Statutes of King Inas, King Alfred, King Edward, that for his devotion and zeal to the Christian Reli∣gion, was rightly called Saint Edward, King Ethelstane,Vide Speed. lib. 8. c. 3. and King Canutus the Dane, that laid the foundation of his Building, to compose the differ∣ences of Religion, and to rectifie whatsoever he found amisse therein, before he entred upon the causes of the Common-wealth; For I read it Registred, that after sundry Laws inacted, touching our Religion, and the Faith of Christ, as the celebration of certain Holy-dayes, the right form of Baptism, the duty of Fasting, the teaching of the Lords Prayer unto the people, the administration of the Cmmon-prayer, and the celebration of the blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ thrice every year, and some other Duties of our Religion, this Title followeth, Jam sequitur institutio legum saecularium, which, as Speed sheweth,Speed quo su∣pra, pag. 384. are most excellent for the exe∣cution of Justice. And it is Recorded, that William the Conqueror, in one of his Parliaments, said, That he being Vice-gerent to the King of kings, holdeth his Kingdom to this end, to defend his people, and especially the people of God, and his holy Church, that is, the Bishops and Priests to teach the people, and to performe the Worship and Service of God in his Church. And even, in our own dayes, (the Holy Name of God be for ever blessed and praised for it) we have had such pious Kings, as, I believe, I may justly say, The Christian World, for Piety and Religion, for love to God's Mini∣sters, and the care of God's Worship, could shew but very few like them, and none to precede them therein; and that is, King James, and King Charles the First, whose glorious name, above all other Kings, since Christ,The rare and just commen∣dation of King Charles the First. I shall ever honour and extoll, as the most constant Defender of the Christian Faith, the most loving Patron of God's Ministers, the Bishops and Prea∣chers of his Word, and the most faithful Witness and Martyr, that lost his life for the preservation of God's Church, and the Religion of Jesus Christ, with whom I do alwayes, when I think of him, behold and see him Crowned with Eternal Glory: The most Blessed of all our Kings, and the Best of all our Saints.
CHAP. IX. Of the chiefest Parts and Duties of Kings and Princes, which they are to discharge for the maintenance of God's Service, and the True Religion; and the necessity of Cathedral-Churches and Chappels for the people of God to meet in, for the Worship and Service of God. YOu have heard, how that God hath given the Power and Authority unto Kings and Princes, to be the Supervisors, Directors, and Repro∣vers of things amiss, as well in the Church, as in the Common-wealth: And how he requireth and commandeth them, to discharge those Duties accor∣dingly; and to have a care to preserve his Religion, as they do regard their own Salvation. You have likewise heard, how all Kings, both Hea∣thens, Jews, and Christians, did execute that power, and, according to their ability, discharged their Duties, as well in the Spiritual jurisdiction of Ec∣clesiastical causes, as in the decision of Civil causes. It resteth, that I should shew unto you, the chiefest Parts and Duties, that they owe to God, and are to discharge, for the promoting of his Service, and the Religion of Jesus Christ. And I conceive them principally to consist in these Four Points,The four chief∣est things that Kings & Prin∣ces ought to do for the uphol∣ding of God's Religion, and the Service of Jesus Christ. which may be like the four Rivers of Paradise, to water the Garden of God's Church, to make it to bring forth plenty of fruits, to the glory of God, and the salvation of mens souls. And they are, 1. To take care, and to cause, that there should be Cathedral-Churches and Chappels fairly built, and decently trimmed and adorned, as befits the Houses of God, for his people to meet in, for the Worship and Service of God. 2. To see that able, honest, and religious Bishops be placed in those Ca∣thedrals, and others the like pious and painful Ministers, be appointed in all the Parochial Churches and Chappels, to perform the true Service of God as they ought to do; and to see those Drones that neglect it, and those factious Sectaries and Hereticks that defile and corrupt it, and those scandalous livers, that do much prejudice unto their holy Calling, to be punished, and removed, if they amend not, for their negligence and trans∣gressions. 3. To provide, by their good Laws such maintenance, revenues, and means for the Reverend, and godly Bishops, and the rest of the worthy Clergy, whereby they may be inabled with joy and comfort, to dis∣charge their duties in God's Service, to his glory, and the good of his people. 4. To put a bar, and to hinder by their Regal power and authority all the sacrilegious violaters of holy things to rob the Church of Christ, and his servants, and to commit the horrible sin of Sacriledge, which is so tran∣scendently abominable in the sight of God, and so infinitely destructive to the souls of men. 1. The neces∣sity of Cathe∣dral-Churches and other Pa∣rochial Chap∣pels for the Srvice of God.These things ought to be done, as I conceive, by all good and godly Kings and Princes; and whoso doth these things shall never fail. And. 1. In defence of Cathedral-Churches, we have to alleadge, that till the time of Euaristus and Dionysius, Popes of Rome, no other kind of ministe∣rial Church was ever heard of, from the beginning of the World; for from Adam unto Moses, men did call upon the Name of the Lord, and offered
Sacrifices, but without any ministerial Church at all. And in Moses time,Platina de vi∣tis Pontif. Carrion annal. Monarch. Exod. 25.46. Acts 7.44. 2 Sam. 7.6. Acts 7.47. God commanded him to erect a Tabernacle, which stood instead of a Church for all the Land of Judea, and that was Templum portatile, as Josephus calls it, to be carried up and down, until the dayes of Solomon. But Solomon erected a Temple, as a standing Church at Hierusalem, to be in the place of the Tabernacle. And then, until the time of the Gospel, there was no other Church for God's people, (I speak not of the Gentiles idolatrous Temples) throughout the whole World. And that Metropolitan Church of Hierusalem was more than Diocesan or Provincial, for it was National, for the whole Kingdom of Jury. And after the Gospel was preached un∣to the Gentiles, and all Nations began to be converted, then sundry mini∣sterial Churches were erected, according to the number of their Bishops, so that every particular Bishop had his particular Church, after the manner and in imitation of the Jews, which having but one Bishoprick, and one High Priest, or Bishop, had likewise but one Cathedral-Church for that whole Nation. And afterwards, when the Bishops saw the multitude of Christians exceedingly increasing, Evaristus first, Titulos seu Paraesias in urbe Roma presbyteris divisit, & post eum Dionysius idem fecit; And after him Dio∣nysius the Pope, devised Parochial Congregations, and divided every Bi∣shoprick into particular constant Congregations, which were but Members, and their Churches but the Chappels, of the Diocesan and Provincial Churches. And the use for which both the Cathedral and Parochial Chur∣ches do serve, was and is, for the servas of God to meet in them for to worship God; and this, besides the practice of all times ab origine to this very day, do sufficiently conclude the necessity of them. 1. For as the body politick, or the whole multitude of the Common-wealth, is to be divided into his several Limits, Provinces, Counties,1. Publick prayers are more preva∣lent with God than the pri∣vate prayers. Baro∣nies, and the like; so the collective and mystical body of God's Church, is to be distributed into several Congregations, as the body natural is to be distinguished by the several parts and parcells thereof: and though as we are private and particular men, the place, and time, and form of prayer and service of God are in the choice of every particular man, according to the condition of his necessity and private occasion; yet as every particular man is a member of the publick State, either Temporal or Ecclesiastical, Church or Common-wealth; so the service that he oweth, and ought to perform, either to the King, or to God, must needs be publick, and together with the rest of the members of the State; and so the publick Service is so much worthier than the private, and excelleth the same, as much as a Society or Congregation of men, is worthier and excelleth one particular man. And S. Chrysostom, to shew the excellency of the publick Service of God,S. Chrysostomes example to shew the bene∣fit of publick prayer, and how it excel∣leth the pri∣vate. and Common-prayer before and above any private prayer or service, saith, That as the coals of fire being scattered do yield but little heat, and will soon die; but when they are close heaped together, they'l yield much heat, and the fire continueth long; So a multitude of devout and faithful men gathered together, and with one heart and one soul pouring forth their prayers and petitions unto God, their prayers are a great deal more pre∣valent, and more likely to obtain their request from God, then when they are severed, and offered up by every single person; as a twisted thred, like a threefold cord, is far stronger than any two single ones: So, though the prayers of one man be but weak, yet the supplications of many men are very mighty, and like unto the loud sound of thunder, or the noise of many wa∣ters, as S. Basil saith; and the consent of desires, the concord betwixt them, and the united love of joynt Assemblies, are so well-pleasing unto God, that as a hoy Father saith, Impossibile est multorum preces non exaudiri, It is almost impossible, but that the prayers of such associated Congregations
should be heard; because, as S. Ambrose saith, The publick meeting of Gods people hath a special promise of Gods presence to be with them, as where Christ saith,Matth. 18.20. When two or three are gathered together in his Name, he will be there in the midst of them. And therefore the King of Niniveh called his people together, to joyn with him in prayer to God, that they might not be destroyed; and so besetting God,Jonas 4.11. or besieging God, as Tertullian saith, like an Hoste of men, their prayer was heard, and they were received into grace. And S. Paul, though he might have confidence his prayer should speed with God assoon, and obtain as much, as any other; yet doth he confess, that the prayers of the Church of Corinth,2 Cor. 1.11. together with his own prayers, did much help and further his deliverance from those great troubles that he suffered in Asia. 2. Publick prayers more justifiab e then the pri∣vate.2. The publick prayers and service of God hath this prerogative above the private, that they do assure us they are more lawfull, and shall sooner be heard of God; because the things prayed for, and deprecated, are judged to be good and needfull, and are so approved of by the general judgment of the whole Congregation, when we hear them deprecated or desired by the common consent of all the people. 3 Our devo∣tion and zeal are more and more strength∣ned in the pub∣lick Congrega∣tion.3. The convention or meeting of the people in such publick places to serve God, doth sharpen the edge, and as it were give life and strength to every particular mans devotion; for when, through the frailty of our flesh, our spirit waxeth dull, and our zeal beginneth to grow sloggish to perform these Holy duties, the fervor, that we see in the rest of the Congregation, will mightily serve to stir up our thoughts, and to quicken our devotion to sail along with our brethren to the conclusion of those godly exer∣cises. 4. They are helped by the good examples of others.4. As every particular man is bettered, and much furthered in his devo∣tion and service of God, by the good examples that all the Congregation doth shew unto him; so the whole company that considereth it, is not a litle damnified and offended at the waywardness, and neglect of those particular persons, that come not unto the publick service of God: and so, whereas the neglect of our private devotion is only hurtfull to our selves, our refu∣sall or remissness to come to the publick exercises of our Religion, doth prejudice many, and gives offence to the whole Church; and you know what our Saviour saith,Matth. 18.7. Woe to that man by whom offence cometh; and therefore woe to him that despiseth the publick exercises of Gods Church, and refu∣seth to come unto them. And for the preventing of this woe, and the rest of the reasons formerly shewed,Psal. 26.12. the Prophet David did so earnestly desire to praise the Lord in the Congregations; yea, in the great Congregations, and among much people and so affectionately to say,Psal. 35.18. One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require,Psal. 27.4. even that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the daies of my life, to behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to visite his Temple. And therefore, seeing it is so necessary, that the people of God should publickly meet, and be gathered together to serve God; it is most requisite and necessary, there should be Cathedralls and Parochiall Churches, for them to meet in, for to do the publick service of God. But against this it may be objected, that the necessity of publick meet∣ings, and the benefits that may be reaped from those Assemblies, rather then from any private serving of God, doth no waies prove the necessity of having Cathedralls and materiall Churches: because the presence of a company of Christian people, wheresoever Assembled, and the offices of Religion, as Preaching, Prayer, and Administring the Sacraments, per∣formed; makes the meeting publick: and the peoples exercising these
duties makes them to be a Church of God. As the presence of the Prince, and his followers; maketh any mans private house to be the Kings Court. To this Objection I have fully, and very largely answered,  in my second book of the Great Anti-Christ revealed, pag. 84. & deinceps. And there∣fore I shall referr my Reader thither to be fully satisfied; yet, here I say, that it is not the Assembly, or the popular conflux of a multitude of men, or the duties that they do though they be the very duties of Religion, that makes the meeting lawfully publick, or the place of Gods publick service; but it must be a Convention, and a gathering together of the people, into such a place, that is assigned and Consecrated for Gods publick service, which makes the publick meeting justifiable and lawfull; otherwise, it is but a private conventicle, altogether unlawfull, though it should consist of never so great a company of men: unless it be, as it was in the Apostles time, in the daies of persecution, or that the people have such lawfull lets and hinderances to come to the Consecrated place of Gods service, as I have set down in the book afore-cited. At all other times, the publick ser∣vice of God must be performed in a publick Consecrated place, as it is meet the Holy service should be done in a Holy place; and you must know, that the ubiquity of Gods presence in every place makes not all places alike sa∣cred; even as the Lord sheweth unto Moses, when he bids him to pull off his shes from his feet, because the place, where thou standest is Holy ground;Exod. 3.15. for the presence of God is either, 1. Ordinary,The presence of God two∣fold. or 2. Extraordinary. And as the extraordinary works of God have distinguished the times, to make some times more Holy then other, so the extraordinary presence of God hath sanctified some places more then others; and the place that he Sanctifieth with his most speciall presence, is the place, which he appoin∣teth to his servants, for their publick meeting, to do his service; and he hath not left it in the liberty of every man to run at random, to serve the Lord where he pleased; but, as he designed the time, when they should serve him, so he appointed the place, where they should come to serve him. And so Adam in that short time, which he had in Paradise, wanted not a place (appointed, no doubt, and usuall) to stand before the Lord and to Com∣municate with him; and the sons of Adam, being out of Paradise,Gen. 3.8. knew the place, where God appointed, and expected they should repair to offer their Sacrifices and oblations unto him; and so the Lord tells the Children of Israel that they should not discharge their duties and perform his service in any place that they pleased,Deut. 12.5. & 14. but they should seek the place which the Lord their God should choose, out of all their Tribes, to put his name there to dwell; and there they should come, with their oblations and offerings to serve him. And so, when the Israelites had quite vanquished the Canaanites, and subdued the Philistines, and the other their enemies round about; and, as the Text saith, given rest unto his people, the time was come, that the Lord God thought fit to choose the place, to put his name there, and where all the people should publickly meet, to do him service; and the Lord marked out Jerusalem for himself, and in Jerusalem he chose Mount Moriah,2 Chron. 6.7. the very place where Abraham was to sacrifice his son Isaac, to be a standing and a permanent place for his name, saying, This shall be my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein and there David now resolveth to build his Temple, to be a Cathedrall and the Metropolitan Church for the High Priest, to offer Sacrifice and burnt Offerings unto God, and for the rest of the people there publickly to meet to serve the Lord; and his heart was mightily inflamed with zeal and desire to do it; but the Lord accep∣ted
of his resolution, and by Nathan his Prophet told him, that, because he was a man of War, and had shed much blood, (and his Church must not have her foundation laid, nor her walls erected in blood) he should not build his Temple, but Solomon his son, that was a Prince of Peace, should erect it in the Place that he appointed, and with the materialls that he had provided; and so he did, as you may see 2 Chron. c. 3. 4, & 5. And when this Temple was destroyed, and the people, for their sins and neglect of Gods service, and prophanation of this House of God, were led Captives into Babylon, and when, after the time of their Captivity was expired, that is, the full space of 70. years, they were permitted to return into their own Land, the Lord did put it into the heart of Cyrus King of Persia, (as the Prophet Esay fore-shewed he should do, long before the birth of Cyrus) to cause Ezra, Zerubbabel, Nehemiah, and the rest of the Elders of the Jews, to build another House and Temple unto God, in the same place, where Salomons Temple did stand; and when the enemies of Gods people, and the prophaners of Gods House, like our malignants, sought to hinder the building of it, the Lord put it in the heart of Darius and his son Artaxerxes to cause it to be finished,Ezra 6.15. according to the decree of King Cyrus. And the Jews were so zealous to do it, that they made an end of the work in five years: and so, by reason of their enemies and their haste, it was far disproportionable and different from the former, which made the old men, that had seen the glory and beauty of the first, to weep and la∣ment at the mean aspect of the second. And yet it was not so mean, but that it might be admired for the beauty and majesty of it,Josephus Antiq. l. 15. c. ult. especially after that Herod, sirnamed the Great, had repaired, inlarged, and so magnifi∣cently beautified the same;Mark. 13.1. so that one of his disciples, in admiration of the work, saith to Christ, Master, See what manner of stones and what buildings are here!Matth. 24.1. And the Jews tell him, that it was forty six years in building,Joh. 2.20. before it was brought to that perfection, which Zorobabel did unto it. Joseph. Antiq. l. 11. c. 4.Cum inchoatum erat in secundo anno Cyri, qui regnavit annis 30. Et post eum Cambyses, regnavit annis 8. Et absolutum erat Darii Histaspis anno 9. Et sic dempto primo anno Cyri, remanent anni sicut Judaei dicunt. 46. For of this Temple the Jewes here do speak, as Theophlact, Tolet, and Cal∣vin do observe. Exod. 23.17. & 34.23. & 24.To this Temple and Metropolitan-Church, the Jews were all required to meet, and to appear before the Lord, to do him service, three times eve∣ry year: and because these times were too seldom, and the waies too far for them to come, from all the parts of Jury any oftner, they had from time to time many Synagogues and Chappels,Act. 13.27. &c. 15.21. like our Parochiall Churches, wherein they might publickly meet, as they did, every Sabbath to serve the Lord; and because this Cathedrall Church, the Temple of the High Priest, though very large and spacious,Origo earum tempore capti∣vitatis Babylo∣nicae cepit. Sigon. de rep. l. . c. 8. yet was not sufficient to contain the many thousands of people that were in the great City of Jerusalem, they had very many Synagogues set up in this City, and Paulus Phagius recoun∣teth no less then 400 of them. And Sigonius saith, there were 480. And out of Jerusalem, they had many Synagogues in other Cities and Provinces, as there were Synagogues in Galilee, Matth. 4.23. Synagogues in Damas∣cus,Sigon. de repuh. Heb l. 2. c. 8. Maimon. in Typhil. c. 11. Sect. 1. ex Goodw. Act. 9.2. Synagogues at Salamis, Act. 13.5. Synagogues at Anti∣och, Act. 13.14. And their Tradition is, saith Maimonides, that where∣soever ten men of Israel were, there ought to be built a Synagogue: and the Jews acknowledged it a great favour, and were very thankfull to any man, that built them any of these Synagogues; as the Elders of the Jews besought Christ to heal the servant of the Centurion,Luk. 7.5. because He loved
their Nation and had built them a Synagogue. And I would our men would be as glad and as desirous to have our decayed Churches built, and not to make such havock to destroy them, as they do, and that without any cause in the World: For You may see how Christ himself and his Apostles, came and taught very often not only in the Temple, but also in these lsser Synagogues of the Jews: and it is admirable to consider how the primitive Christians,Euseb. l. 10. c. 3. & 4. as Eusebius recordeth, erected such Oratories and Basilicaes, that is, Royall-houses and Churches, as stately as any Kings Palace, and beautified the same with ex∣cessive charges, to make them fit places for the publick meetings of the Chri∣stians, to serve their God; and so the Church of Saint Paul in London, and of Saint Peter in Westminster, and the rest of the Cathedrall Churches throughout England, and Ireland, (to pass no further) can bear sufficient witness of the zeal and devotion of our Christian predecessors to erect such Great, and adorn such Beautifull Houses unto God,Magnos magna decent. as became so great and so glorious a God, (as our God is) to have. And as the number of the Christians waxed daily beyond number, and increased more and more, as you may conceive, by the increase, which a few weeks time hath wrought after the ascention of Christ; when St. Peter's sermon converted 3000. souls in one day; so it caused the distinction of Assemblies, and the number of Churches to be increased and multiplied in all Countreys and Cities more and more. So that in Rome, about a hun∣dred year after Christ, the Congregation of the Christians, became so huge great, that Evaristus then Bishop of Rome, for the avoiding of confusion, and the easier and better instruction of them, caused them to be distributed and parted into fifteen particular Parishes, and assigned fifteen severall Presbyters to instruct and govern them: the Presbyters then being honest men, and no waies contradicting Evaristus. And to prove that the first Christians, who lived under persecutions,The fist Chri∣stians had some kind of Churches. even from the Apostles time, had some kind of Churches; though as then not so magnificent, you may see in 1 Cor. 12.18. & 22. &c. 14.19. & 23. And so the most ancient of the Fathers do bear witness, as Clemens, Tertul∣lian, Socrates, and Eusebius, proves the same out of the book of Philo Judaeus, lib. 2. cap. 17. And Lactantius, In carminibus de passione Domini: saith, Quisquis ades, mediusque subis in limina Templi, Siste parum.— Whosoever thou art, that comest to the House of God, stay a white, that is, to consider whither thou goest, and, as Salomon saith, To keep and look to thy foot, when thou goest to the House of God, which is, as God himself expoun∣deth the meaning thereof unto Moses, saying,Exod. 3. Put off thy shooes from thy feet; that is, to make clean thy waies, and bring no filth, nor any carnall affections, nor worldly desires into the House of God; because, The place whereon thou standest is Holy ground; that is, by reason of Gods gracious and speciall presence in that place, where Moses stood, and where God is prayed unto, and praised by the Minister, and Worshipped by the rest of his faith∣full servants. And if any man desires fuller proofs of this truth, I refer him to Cardinall Bellarmin, and to that excellent and Learned Sermon of Master Mede upon the 1 Cor. 11.22. Yet I deny not, but the prime Primitive Christians,The prime pri∣mitive Chri∣stians had no stately Chur∣ches: and why. and the Church which was at Jerusalem, and received that Religion, that is, the Faith of Christ, which the Scribes and Pharisees and their laws did not allow of, were constrained, many times, to hide their heads in desolate places, and were inforced by stealth to exercise and discharge the duties of their pro∣fession
in vaults and private houses, where they might be most safe, though the places were not sutable to their service; the swords of their enemies were so sore against them. But at length, between times, by sufferance and connivency, and some∣times through favour and protection, they began to be imboldened, and to reare up Oratories and Churches, though but simple and of mean aspect, because the estates of most of them were but mean and very low, as S. Paul sheweth,1 Cor. 1.26. Not many Rich, not many Noble are called; which was indeed a good way to suppress the danger of malignity, that looks not so much after poor estates; and a good way to increase their number, and propagate their design with more safety. And as by this means the Church began to take root, and to grow stronger; and the wealthier, nobler, and wiser men be∣gan to be in love with the Christian Religion; So then they loved nothing more than to build Churches answerable for their beauty,How zealously the fi st Chri∣stians were af∣fected, & how bountifully they contribu∣ted towards the building of their Chur∣ches. to the dignity of their Religion, and for their greatness to the number of their Professors; And the devotion of these Christians was so large, and did so liberally con∣tribute towards the erecting of their Churches, as the Israelites in the dayes of Bezaliel did chearfully present their Gifts and Free-will-offerings to∣wards the setting up of the Tabernacle: no man was backward, and no man a niggard in this work, which they conceived to be so profitable and so necessary for them to do: and that in two special respects. 1. The good that is effected, 2. The evils that are prevented by the publick meeting of the people in these Churches. The double benefit that we reap by our coming to the Publick meet∣ing in the Church.1. The meeting of the Congregation publickly in a lawful place, and a consecrated Church, assures them they offend not the Laws, either of God or man, and so secures them from all blame, and prevents the occasion to traduce, and to suspect the lawfulnesse of the holy Duties, that we per∣form; when as Veritas non quaerit angulos, Truth and the performance of just things and holy actions, need not run and hide themselves in private, hidden,1. Benefit. and unlawful places, but may shew themselves and appear so publickly, as they might not be subject to any, the least unjust impu∣tation. 2. Benefit.2. The meeting in a publick consecrated Church, and not in a private Conventicle, escapes those dangerous plots and machinations, that are very often invented and contrived in those Conventicles, that are vailed for that purpose, under the mantle and pretence of Religion; And it freeth the comers unto the Church from those seditious Doctrines and damnable Divi∣nity, which the Sectaries and Hereticks do scatter and broach in those un∣lawful Conventicles, which are the fittest places for them, to effect their wicked purpose, and must needs be sinful, and offend both God and man: because, they are contrary to the Laws, both of God and man; Whenas the coming unto the Church quits my conscience from all fear of offend∣ing, because that herein I do obey, and do agreeable to the Laws both of God and man. And who then that hath any dram of wit, would not a∣void private and forbidden meetings, and go to serve God, unto the pub∣lick Church, which is the House of God, erected and dedicated for his Service?
CHAP. X. The Answer to the Two Objections that the Fanatick-Sectaries do make. 1. Against the Necessity. And 2ly against the Sanctity, or Holiness of our Material Churches, which in derision, and con∣temptuously, they call Steeple-houses. ANd yet for all this, and all that we can say for the Church of God, I find Four sorts of Objections,4 Sorts of Ob∣jections against our Material Churches. that are made by our Fanaticks and Skenimastices against our Material Churches. As, 1. Against the Necessity. 2. Against the Sanctity. 3. Against the Beauty & Glory 4. Against the impurity & Impiety of them. 1. They do object,1. Objection against the ne∣cessity; that we have no need of Churches. there is no Necessity of any Material House or Church of God for his servants to meet in to serve God; because the woman of Samaria, discoursing with Christ about the place where God would be worshipped, Whether in that Mountain, where the Fathers worshipped, or in Hierusalem, which, as the Jews said, was the place where men ought to worship; Our Saviour tells her plainly, They worshipped they knew not what; for the hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet in Hierusalem, worship the Father; but the true worshippers shall worship the Fa∣ther in spirit and in truth; because, God is a Spirit,John 4.20, 23. and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in truth; and such worshippers the Father seeks, and such he loves. And therefore, so we have clean hearts, and pure consciences, and wor∣ship God with our souls and spirits, faithfully to pray unto him, and to praise his Name, it is no matter for the place where we do it, in a Church, or in a Barn; because God looks rather to the inward heart, than to the out∣ward place where we stand. To this I answer, Maledicta glossa quae corrumpit textum,  and our Saviours words gives them no colour to extort such consequences, and to draw such conclusions from them; for the words are plain enough, that although for∣merly, before Moses his time, Jacob had a Well near Sichar, and he with the other Fathers, worshipped God in that Mountain, and afterwards God required them to worship him in the place, that he should chuse to put his Name there, which, after the time of David, and the building of his Tem∣ple by Solomon, was to be Hierusalem, and no where else, to perform the commanded Publick Service of God, under the punishment of cutting off that soul from his people, that should do otherwise. Yet the hour cometh, and now is, that is, coming, or beginning to come, that the partition-Wall betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles shall be broken down, and the bounds and borders of Gods Church, and the true worship∣pers of God, shall be inlarged, and they may lawfully, without offence, wor∣ship God, not only in Jury, where God was only formerly known aright; but also in all the Nations, and in any Kingdom of the World, so they wor∣ship him in spirit and in truth, as they ought to do: But here is not one syllable, intimating, that they should not, or needed not, to meet to serve God in the Publick Church, but that whensoever, and wheresoever, in any Kingdom of the Earth, they should gather themselves together in the Pub∣lick Church, to worship God, they should worship him in spirit and in truth, otherwise, their worship is to no purpose, and will avail them nothing, though they should do it publickly in the Church. This is the true meaning of our Saviours words.
2. We have another sort of Sectaries, that yield it requisite and conve∣nient for the Saints and servants of God to meet and gather themselves to∣gether for the Service of God, and do acknowledg the great benefits, that may accrew and be obtained in a Congregation, rather than by any single person; but they think there is no necessity of their meeting in a Material Church, or a Steeple-house, as they call it, rather than in a house, or a cham∣ber, or a barn, or any other place, where they shall appoint to meet; be∣cause God hath made all places, and there is no reall Sanctity in any one place, more than in any other; but the sanctity or holiness must be in the hearts of the men, and not in the place, which is not capable of any sanctity; and therefore, it is rather our superstition, than Gods injunction, to require and command men to come to such Material Churches, as to the more san∣ctified places, rather than to such private houses, where these Saints do pub∣lickly meet to serve God. To make a full Answer to this their Objection, you must understand, that the word , holy, is derived from the privative particle, α and , which signifieth the Earth, as if to be holy, were nothing else, but to be pure and clean, and separated from all earthly touch: And it is taken two wayes. Holiness taken two wayes.1. . Simply. 2.  In some respects: And, 1. Way: God only is Holy, and the Author of all Holiness; and as the Blessed Virgin saith, Holy is his Name: And therefore those Seraphims, which Esaias saw,Esay 6.3. and those wonderous creatures which S. John saw, did cry,Apoc. 4.8. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, three times together, which we do not read of any other Attribute of God. And the Lord himself, in that golden Plate, that was to be on Aarons forehead, caused these words to be ingraven, , Holiness is of the Lord, as Tremellius reads it; or, Sanctum Domino, Holiness belongeth to the Lord, as the Vulgar hath it. 2. Way: Many other things are stiled holy, by communication of holiness, and receiving their holiness from this Fountain of Holiness: And so, 1. The Man Christ Jesus, 2. The faithful Members of Christ, 3. The Outward Professors of the Christian Religion, 4. All things Dedicated, and that have relation to Gods Service; as Times, Persons, Places, and Things, are termed holy, san∣ctitate re∣lativa. 1. The Man Christ is perfectly, and singularly Holy, as Beda saith; And that, 1. By reason of his Hypostatical union with the Godhead. 2. By reason of the most perfect qualtity of Holiness impressed by the Holy Ghost into his Humanity. 2. The true Members of Christ are truly styled holy, by reason of that holiness which the Holy Spirit of God worketh in them, and they practise in their lives and conversations. 3. All those that do outwardly profess the holy Religion of Jesus Christ, are called Saints by the holy Apostles:Rom. 1. and so they are in respect of all others, that either do prophane, abuse, or neglect the same. 4. All the things, that are Consecrated by the prayers of the Bishop for the Service of God, and those things that are Dedicated and given for the furtherance, and maintenance of God's Worship, as Lands, Houses, and the like, are by a relative sanctity, rightly termed holy things; because, they are separated and set apart, as S. Paul saith of himself, (.) for holy uses, to bring men to holiness, to honour, serve, and worship God that is Holiness it self. And in this respect, we say, that the very ground, walls, windows, and timber, of the Material Church, that are set forth, Dedicated, and Conse∣crated
for God's Service, are holy things; not by any inherent reall sanctity infused into them; but by a relative holiness ascribed and appropriated unto them, by their Dedication and Consecration for God's Worship, which makes them more holy, and so to be deemed, than all other earthly things whatsoever. And though I will not lose my time, and waste my paper, to shew the folly and vanity of that ridiculous deduction of the Confuter of Will. Apol∣lonius, in the 29. page of his Grallae,Grallae pag 29. against secondary or dependent holi∣ness; yet I will justifie the holiness, and religious reverence, that we owe, and should render, unto all the Material Churches, that are Consecrated for Divine-Service, against all prophaners of them, Independents, and Fa∣naticks, whatsoever. And for the satisfaction of every good and sober man, that is not drunk with a prejudicate conceit against God's House, I shall desire him to look into 2 Chron. 3.1. and chap. 6. where he may find the Consecration of God's House, and the prayer that Solomon made at the Consecration of it, and the benefits, the manifold benefits, that they should reap which served God in that House: And if he reads over that Chapter at his leisure, and read it often, and then seriously consider it, and withal remember, that of this House, and the like Consecrated places, that are Dedicated for God's Worship, the Lord himself saith,Esay 56.7. Matth. 21.13. Jerem. 7.10. Psal. 132.15. My House shall be called the House of prayer for all people: and our Saviour Christ confirm∣eth the same, that the Church, which is the Publick place, or place of Pub∣lick Prayers, is rightly called, the House of God, and the House, which is called by his Name; and of which he saith, This shall be my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein; Will he not confess, that Gods House, and the Place where he dwelleth is Holy? The Confuter of Apollonius confesseth, That so long as a Prince is,Grallae pag. 26. and remaineth in his house, because of his Majesty and pompe, there is nothing in the house, which derives not thence some dignitie and splendor; and will you deny that priviledge to Gods House, which you will yield to the Palace of an earthly Prince? No, certainly it is an holy place.Vide the Great ntichrist Re∣vealed. l. 2. c. 5. pag. 88. Therefore, as God will be served in the time that he appointeth, and by the persons that he chuseth, and after the manner that himself prescri∣beth; so he will be worshipped, not where every one pleaseth, but in the place, which is Consecrated and Sanctified for our Holy God to come and to be present with us: as you may see in Levit. 17 8. Exod. 23.19. and chap. 25. 8. where the Lord chargeth his people, to make him a Sanctuarie,Exod. 25.8. or a Tabernacle, that is, an holy House or Temple, that he might dwell a∣mong them. And therefore the Prophet David desired, that he might dwell in Gods Tabernacle, and was glad, when the people said,Psal. 27.4. Psal. 122.1. Joh. 18.20. We will go into the House of the Lord. And Christ saith, I ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, that is, for the most part, and ordinarily, and alwayes when he came to the Temple, and opportunitie offered him occasion so to do. And S. Matthew saith, The blind and the lame came unto him in the Temple,Matth. 21.14. and he healed them. And so must we come unto him into his Temple, if we desire to be healed of our infirmities. And so the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, after his Ascension into Heaven, met and worshipped God in the Temple. And when the Christians began to be multplied, they presently erected Oratories and Churches, and consecrated them, as Solomon did the Temple, for God's Service; as you may see in 1 Cor. 11.22. and from the 14. Chapter of the said Epistle, where the Apostle bids the women to be silent in the Church; for that must not be understood of any other private house or meetings of men, where the women may as lawfully speak as men, or the Apostle had laid too great a burden upon them, and such as they neither could, nor would have born; but his meaning is, that the women
should be silent in the Congregation, that publickly meeteth in Gods  for the service of God. And because That material house was erected and set a part from  Prophane uses, for to pray to God, to Preach unto the people, and to do all other exercises of Religion, as, Administring the Sacraments, Cateci∣sing the Youths, Collecting the Alms for the Poor, and the like services of the Lord, and was hallowed and Santified by the prayers and Consecra∣tion of the Bishop, Chron. 6 to be used only for that end, and that God hath promi∣sed his more speciall presence for our help and assistance, in a most speciall manner in that House,Matth 18.10. more and rather then in any other place, as you may see by Solomons prayer, and by the words of Christ; therefore the true Saints and servants of God, that understood the difference betwixt Holy and Prophane things, did ever Honor and shew a great deal of respect and Reverence to this very place, of Gods Worship; more then to any Chamber of presence of the greatest Monarch of the World: And why not? For if we must be Bare-headed in the Kings Chamber, or the Lord Lieftenants Chamber of Presence, why should not Gods Chamber of Presence have the like Reverence? Surely none, but prophane Atheists, wicked Hereticks, and the members of the beast, that is, the Great Anti-Christ; that are worse then the worst of worldlings, have ever denied it, or abused, prophaned, or blasphemed these, or any of these, material Churches, whereof the Pro∣phet saith,sal. 93.6. Holiness becometh thy House for ever. For, Though, as I said before, originally and in respect of their own nature, there is no inherent or innate Sanctity in one place more then in another,In what sense all things are aike Holy. but all places are alike Holy, and so are all daies, and all meats, and all other things, that are ejusdem speciei, of the same kind; they are all alike Holy, and there is no difference, nor any more Sanctity in any one than in the o∣ther,Gen. 1.31. they being all alike created Holily by God, who beheld All the things that he made, and behold, they were all exceeding good: In what sense some things are more Holy then other things.Yet, if we consider Gods designation of any of these things, and the San∣ctification of the same, by Gods own appointment, for such and such ends and uses in the service of God; then you shall find a great deal of diffe∣rence betwixt the one and the other, and a great deal of a relative and ac∣cidental Holiness in and belonging to the one more then to the other: o∣therwise,And for the further clear∣ing of this point, you may look into Mr. Medes learned discourse De Sanctitate rela∣tiva; and his answer to Dr. Twisse, p. 660. and in Levit. 19.30. what difference will you make betwixt the common bread that we ear of the finest Wheat-flower, and the most Holy and blessed bread of the Holy Eucharist, or the Lords Supper? But the Sanctifying of this bread by our prayers to this end, and for this use, to be the body and blood of Christ, makes all the difference; so that now after the words of Consecration of it, which are the words of Christ, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body; we cannot, without prophaneness and a mighty offence, give the same to dogs, or unbelieving Jews, or to any other, whom we do know to be altogether unworthy of it, as we can give the other bread, that is made of the same lump to either of these, without any fault or offence at all. Or what diffe∣rence is there betwixt one day and another? but because the Lord hath de∣signed the seventh day to be set apart for his service, and hallowed it for that end; therefore it is more Holy then the other six daies: and so are the daies and feasts, that are appointed by the Church to Honor God in them, as the commemoration of Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Resurrection, Ascen∣tion and other daies of Thanks-giving for some speciall blessings and extraor∣dinary favours, which, as on those daies, we have received from God; which daies none will prophane, but the neglecters of Gods Honor, and the pro∣phaneners of his service. So what difference, or what holiness is there natu∣rally in one man more then in another? none, or little at all: but when the Lord calleth and chooseth one man before another, to be his servant and to be sent, and his Embassadour, to Preach his Word, to Administer his Sa∣craments,
and causeth him to be Consecrated by prayers, and imposition of hands for that purpose, as he called Simon Peter, before Simon Magus; then there is a great deal of difference betwixt them, and much relative and additionall Holiness in the one more then in the other, insomuch that our Saviour saith of these men, which he saith not of all other men,Luk. 10.16. He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that despiseth you despiseth me, and the Lord saith of them, which he saith not of all other men,Zach. 2.8. He that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of mine eye. And you may see this d fference in the Embassadours, and other Officers of Kings, Princes, and Potentates, whom we Honor and Reverence more then others; because, they are deputed and Authorized to be our Judges, Sheriffes, or other Officers of the Kingdom, where they are designed so to be. And so likewise, what difference, or what Holiness is there in one place more then in another? In a Stone-Church ground, more than in a Thatch∣barn-floor? Surely, not any at all originally, in respect of themselves, simply considered; but, when such a piece of ground is designed, and dedicated for the Worship of God, and Consecrated by prayers for that purpose, and God promiseth his presence, and favour, to be more especially shewed there for our Instruction and Consolation, than in any other ordinary place what∣soever; Then certainly there is a great deal of difference, and a great deal of Holiness in that place, and much more Reverence ought to be shewed to it, and in it, than in any other place or common ground; though it were the Kings Pallace. And I say this is but a sign and a point of true Religion and no branch of Superstition. Therefore Jacob, that was no waies Superstitious, said of that place, where God shewed his presence to him, This is Gods House and the gate of Heaven;Gen. 28.17. and the Lord said unto Moses, Put off thy shooes from thy feet, for the place where thou standest is Holy ground;Exod. 3.5. and why was that ground more Holy than any other ground? Not in respect of any innate holiness, but because the Lord reveiled himself there to Moses, more visibly and more graciously than in any other place. And I pray you look what the Spirit of God adviseth, and injoyneth us to do, when we come into the House of God; To keep thy foot,Eccl 5.1. For this phrase is a Synechdo∣che of the part for the whole, of the foot for all the mem∣bers of the bo∣dy which in the Church of God ought to be framed to a Religious de∣cency, as to bend the knee, lift up our eyes, uncover the head, and the like. and much more thy heart, and thy head, as thou oughtest to do; decently and Reve∣rently, when thou goest to the House of God; and therefore much more Reve∣rently, when thou art and standest in Gods House; And be more ready to hear, then to give the Sacrifice of Fools; which they do, that despise this House of God, which none but fools will do; for if we make no difference of these things, but that every man that will, may intrude himself to do the service, which God requireth to be done by another, and he may do that service any where, in any one place as well as in another, in a common barn, as well as in an Holy Church; then surely we need not observe any time, when any one day is as good, and as Holy as another, the Munday as well as the Lords-day; and so confounding persons, times, and places, we shall confound all Religion, and we shall suddenly bring Atheism, and all Prophaneness among the people.
CHAP. XI. The answer to another Objection, that our Fanatick-Sectaries do make against the Beauty, and Glorious Adorning of our Chur∣ches; which we say should be done with such decent Ornaments, and Implements, as are besitting the House and Service of God; The reasons why, we should Honor God with our goods: and how liberal, and bountiful both the Fathers of the Old Testament, and the Christians of the New Testament, were to the Church of God. Against the beautifying of our Churches.THirdly, There be another sort of close-handed, and covetous-hearted Fanatick Sectaries; that are much offended at our Beautifying, and Adorning our Churches, so as is fitting and meet for the Houses of God; And they do Object, that God is a Spirit, and will be served in spirit and in truth; and therefore he requireth not our goods, our gold, and our silver, which he hath no need of,Psal. 50.10. or our Cattle, when as all the beasts of the Forrest are his, and so are the Cattle upon a 1000. hills, and he delighteth not in burnt offering: and so the Prophet sheweth, when he demandeth, Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of Oyl? No, no, the Lord careth for no such things, we may keep them all to our selves:Mich. 6.7. for he hath Shewed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord doth require of thee, and that is, To do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. And therefore the Lord saith not, Give me your gold, to make me Palaces; or your silver, to adorn my house, wherein I dwell not; but give me your hearts, wherein I delight to dwell, if they be pure and clean, and void of the filthiness of sin and corruption, Quia de∣liciae meae cum filiis hominum; because, my delights are, to be with the sons of men: and I desire no more of them, but, To fear the Lord their God, to walk in all his waies,Deut. 10.12. and to love him, and to serve the Lord their God withall their heart, and withall their soul. And from these and the like premises our Fanaticks do conclude, that as God was never better served, then when his Churches and Oratories were no better then poor mens Cottages; and when the Christians answered their persecuters, in the time of Julian; who said, their service was not so So∣lemn, nor their Temples answerable to the Majesty of God, that the best Temples which they could dedicate unto God, wer their Sanctified souls, and clean hearts; so they would have our times to be the like, and our Churches to be no fairer, nor any otherwise beautified then they were in those times of poverty and persecution. To this I answer and confess, that God delighteth more in the Holiness of the hearts of them that serve him, then in the honor and beauty of the place where he is served.In the time of necessity God accepteth our service any where. But, though Moses in the mountain, Job on the dunghill, Jeremy in the mire, Daniel in the Lions den, Ezechias in his bed, and the Apostles in the stocks, called upon the name of the Lord and he heard them, and so Christ preached on the Mount, and in the Valley, on the Sea-shore, and in the Ship; and Saint Paul did the like in an upper Cham∣ber, and the people heard them, as well then as in the Temple, and God accepted of their service. Yet, as Saint Paul demands of the Corinthians, whether they thought it seemly, that a woman should be bare-headed in the Church; so I demand
of these men, as the Prophet Haggai demandeth of the Jews, Is it fit that you should dwell in sieled houses, and let the House of God lye wast? or, is it meet and Religious that the Church of Christ should be no better beautified then a husband-mans barn? And I may ask of any rational man, if the Sanctity, and Celebrity of the place where God is usually and publickly ser∣ved, doth not animate the devotion, and stir up pious thoughts in all good Christians,Psal. 56.9. when they come there to Worship their Saviour in that beauty of Holiness, as the Prophet speaketh. Therefore the good and godly King David, when he intended to build God an House, saith, That because the Palace was not for man, but for the Lord God; I prepared with all my might for the House of my God,1 Chron. 29.1, 2, 3. the Gold for the things that were to be made of Gold, the Silver for things of Silver, and the Brass for things of Brass, the Iron for things of Iron, and Wood for things of Wood, Onyx stones, and stones to be set,How liberally King David gave to build and beautify Gods House. glistering stones and of divers colours, and all manner of Pretious-stones, and Marble-stones in abundance; moreover, because I have set my affection to the House of my God, I have of mine own proper goods, of Gold and Silver which I have given to the House of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for the holy House, even three thousand Talents of Gold, of the Gold of Ophir, and seven thousand Talents of refined Silver, to over-lay the walls of the house withall; The Gold for things of Gold, and the Silver for things of Silver, and for all manner of work to be made by the hands of the Artificers. And so the chief of the Fathers and Princes of the tribes, and Captains also offered most willingly and gave for the service, the building and beautifying of the House of God, of Gold five thousand Talents, and ten thousand drams, and of Silver ten thousand Talents,1 Chron. 39 7: and of Brass eighteen thousand Talents, and one hundred Talents of Iron. And not only this good Kings heart, and his people,The Fathers before Davids time did the like. were thus inlarged so freely to offer their goods for the building, beautifying, and adorning of Gods House; but also all other faithfull servants of God, that were zea∣lous of Gods Worship, both afore and after Davids time did the like: for, if you consider the building of the Tabernacle, and the furniture that be∣long'd unto it, in the time of Moses; you shall find, that, although the peo∣ple were but wanderers in the wilderness, and therefore could not be very wealthy, nor have any more riches, but only what they brought out of E∣gypt; yet this was the free and voluntary dedication of the Altar (in the day when it was anointed) by the Princes of Israel: Twelve Chargers of sil∣ver, twelve silver Bouls, twelve Spoons of Gold; each Charger of silver weigh∣ing one hundred and thirty shekels; each Boul seventy cicles, or shekels; all the silver vessels weighed two thousand and four hundred shekels, after the she∣kel of the Sanctuary; the golden Spoons were twelve, full of incense, weighing ten shekels a piece, after the shekel of the Sanctuary;Numb. 7.84, 85, 86. All the Gold of the Spoons was one hundred and twenty shekels: every shekel weighing half an ounce. Whereby you may perceive, what care they took in that in∣fancy of the Church, to have all the appurtenances of the House of God so fair and so specious as they could possibly make it, even to the uttermost of their abilities. And so after Davids time, besides the foresaid moneys, that David left for the use of Gods House, (which came to the rate of eight thousand Ta∣lents of Gold; and of Silver, seventeen thousand chikars: and every chi∣kar containing one thousand and eight hundred cicles, and weighing nine hundred ounces,) King Solomon was so bountifull, and his donation so ex∣ceeding large, that it can very hardly be valued; for, besides the stuffes that he laid in of Timber, Marble, Stone, Brass, Iron, Copes, and Pretious-stones, he overlayed the greater House, which he sieled with Firr-trees, with fine Gold, and the garnishing of the House with Pretious-stones for beau∣ty, and the Gold was the Gold of Parvaim; and he overlayed the House,
the beams, the posts, and the walls thereof, and the doors thereof with Gold▪ and graved Cherubims on the walls; and he over-laid the most hoy House with fine Gold, amounting to six hundred Talents, and the weight of the nailes was fifty Shekels of Gold; and he over-laid the upper Chambers with Gold, and the two Cherubims he over-laid with Gold; and he made ten Candlesticks of Gold, and a hundred Basins of Gold; and the Flowers, and the Lamps,2 Chron. 3. & 4. and the Tongs, made he of Gold, and that perfect Gold; and the Snffrs, and the Censers of pure Gold; and the Entry of the House, the Inner-doors, and the doors of the House of the Temple, were of Gold. And when all these unvaluable Treasures and Furnitures of this House of God were ransacked and carried away by Nebuchadnezzar King of Ba∣bylon; and Cyrus, after their 70. years Captivity, gave the Jews leave to Return, and gave them power and licence, to re-edifie and to build the House of God again; these captive Jews, newly returned out of bondage, beyond their ability, were most bountiful in their contributions for the setting up of another Temple: which though for Beauty and Majesty it was not cor∣respondent to the former Temple, yet was it very glorious, and finished most readily, and the free Donations of the people were so large, that when all the work was finished, the surplusage of their Gifts, that remained to beau∣tifie the same and provide ornaments for it, and to defray other future rec∣konings, amounted to 650. Chichars of Silver, and a 100. Chichars of Gold. And to this Nehemias the Tyrshatha gave to the Treasure a thousand drams of Gold,Nehem. 7.70. fifty Basins, and five hundred and thirty Priests Garments. And so likewise some of the chief of the Fathers and Heads of houses were not be∣hind,Verse 71.72. to build and beautifie this House of God, but gave to the Treasure of the work twentie thousand drams of God, and two thousand and two hun∣dred pound of Silver; and that which the rest of the people gave, was twentie thousand drams of Gold, and two thousand pound of Silver, and sixty seven Priests Garments. Thus you see how the Jews, both in the time of David, and before Da∣vid, and after David, and both in their prosperitie and in their adversitie; when they were full, in the dayes of Solomon, and when they were emptie and weak, after their return from Captivity; were most zealously affected to build and beautifie the House of God, and to spare neither Gold nor Silver to adorne the same, as it ought to be. And what do we? Surely change the case, instead of giving to build and beautifie the Church, and the maintenance of the Service of God's House, we take away the states and timber, and all the Furniture of the Church, and, as the Psalmist prophesied of our times, all the carved works thereof; and the goodly Monuments of our pious forefathers, we break down with axes and hammers: and instead of providing the Priests Vestures for the Church-service, we are more ready to take their garments from their backs, and their bread out of their mouths. But you will say, they were Jews, which so adorned their Temple, as you shewed before, and their Religion consisted in outward pomp, and carnal Service, whereas we are Christians; and the Kings Daughter, which is the Church of Christ, is all glorious within; and her service to God consisteth not, either in carnal Ceremonies, or external Glory, but, as Christ faith, in spirit and in truth. I answer, That I confess the chiefest Glory of the Kings Daughter, is within, in a pure heart, and a sanctified soul; but her clothing is of wrought Gold, and her outward rayment is of needle work, and her vesture is of pure Gold, wrought about with divers colours, very fair and glorious to behold. So our Religion and our zeal to God's Worship, must not only rest and re∣side in the heart, but it must bud forth, and appear in all our outward
actions; and God will be served, not only inwardly with our hearts, but also outwardly with all the other parts of our bodies, Quia per exteriora cog∣noscuntur interiora, and our zeal to Gods Honour must shew it self by our zeal to God's House; for so King David said, and so Christ said,Psal. 69.9. John 2.17. The zeal of thine House hath eaten me up. And therefore, not only the Jews, but the Christians also, were most li∣beral and bountiful in their gifts and contributions for the erecting of Oratories, and the adorning of Gods Church; And although, that while they were under the Sword of persecuting Tyrants, their state and condi∣tion permitted them not to have stately Churches, yet when their persecu∣tion ceased, and they became into a better case, and had rest, their Chur∣ches became sumptuous, and no cost was spared to make them both fair and beautiful. And we find, that before the time of Constantine, in the reign of Severus,Euseb. l. 8. c. 1. & 2. Idem. l. 9. c. 1. Gordian, Philip, and Galienus, there were many goodly and spatious Chur∣ches builded, which Dioclesian by a publick Proclamation caused to be thrown down; but Mximinus hypocritically permitteth them to be re∣edified, and made up in a greater heighth, and more beautiful than they were before, as they were indeed exceedingly bettered, immediately after the death of Maximinus, as it appeareth by that Solemn Sermon, that was made in praise of the building of Churches,Idem. l. 10. c. . and expressely directed to Pau∣linus Bishop of Tyrus. And Theodoret saith, That the Emperours Con∣stantine, and his son Constantius, bestowed many rich and precious vessels upon the Church. And when S. Basil had converted Valens to become a Christian, he bestowed certain lands and possessions unto the Church. And Nicephorus saith, That Theodosius and his Wife Eudoche, sent monies very bountifully to the Bishop and Church of Rome. And Valentinian and Gratian, are exceedingly praised in the Chronicles of the Church, for their care, and the provision that they made for the Churches of Christ. And Sozomen relates, how Constantius bestowed upon the holy Church, great summes of monies that did arise to him, out of the Images that were mol∣ten, and otherwise by way of Taxes and Tributes; And divers of the Christian Emperours provided, that the lands, houses, and possessions of the Church, and the goods of other Christians that had been taken from them, in the times of persecution, should be restored and re-delivered unto the Bishops and Church again. And I hope our most gracious and religious King, will do the like, that, as he is not inferiour to them in piety, so he will be no lesse in the Rules of Equity, and as, blessed be God for it, he hath most graciously restored very much, and more than any other hath done, already. And what shall I say more? It is most apparant to any one, that will read Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomen, and other Ecclesiastical Wri∣ters, how the first and best Christians, as they grew in strength, wealth, and power, so they studied and strived to exceed both Jews and Gentiles, in their care and zeal to promote the Honour of God, and to manifest the same unto the World by all the possible wayes they could devise; And be∣cause that, as nature teacheth us, to provide good things, so wisdom and policy sheweth how we should do our best to procure the permanent state and perpetuity of those good things. And so Religion likewise teacheth us, to follow the same course, to perpetuate the Service and the Honour we yield unto our God: and the Saints and servants of God conceiving no Donation of honour to be more permanent and lasting than Churches and Temples, magnificently erected, and sumptuously maintained; therefore, they were no niggards, and spared no cost to build their Oratories and Churches, that the Worship and Honour of God, might be perpetually continued.
Reasons to prove that we sh uld honour God with our riches.And very many Reasons might be produced to shew, that they should, to the uttermost of their power, honour God with their riches, and to make the benefits they bestow for his Honour, to be permanent and du∣rable: For, 1. Where any true Religion resteth in the heart, it requireth the utter∣most extent that unfaigned love and affections can afford and shew to∣wards God; And, as S. Gregory saith, Probatio dilectionis exhibitio est ope∣ris, Our inward love and affections are to be opened and manifested by the outward effects: And therefore, wheresoever the true Religion swayeth in the hearts of men, as it ought, the outward devotion and zeal towards God's Church, and the Service of God in his Church, will be shewed, so far forth as they are inabled to do. 2. As Religion requireth, so Nature teacheth us to honour God with our goods: which is, not only honestly and inoffensively to use them; but also to alienate, separate, and set apart some portion of them from our own occa∣sions,Quia fferimus Deo bona nostra ut signa grati∣tudinis pro illis donis quaed Deo recepimus. Irenaeus. l. 4. c. 34. to the use and service of God, not as gifts or supplies of his wants, that is the Lord of all things, but as the signs of our thankfulness and ac∣knowledgement, that he is the Donor and Giver of them all to us, and as the means to set up, and to shew forth his Honour, by the erecting and beau∣tifying his Churches, and the maintenance of his Worship and Ministery in those Churches: For why should any man think, that God hath given us such variety of all good things, as Gold, Silver, Cattel, Wine, Oil, and abundance of most excellent beauty, to be imployed only upon our selves, and for our pleasures, and, it may be, in meer vanities, without any regard or reservation of any of them to be bestowed, for the upholding of his Honour,Prov. 3.9: Malach. 3.20. and the Duties of his Service? When as Solomon saith, That he will be served with the chief of thine increase: And the Lord himself bids thee to bring all the Tythes, or Tythes of all kinds into his House: And therefore Origen, the greatest Clerk that lived in his dayes, saith, Qui colit Deum,Origen. in Numb. c. 18. Hom. 11. debet donis & oblationibus agnoscere eum esse Deum omnium, He that worshippeth God, must by his gifts and oblations unto God, acknow∣ledge him to be the God and Giver of all things. 3. Seeing God requireth to be honoured with thy substance, and with the first fruites of all thine increase,Prov. 3.9. and to testifie thine inward love, by thine outward gifts and oblations to him; you know then, that the greatness and goodness of our gifts doth set forth and shew the greatness of our love, and the sincerity of our affection towards God: For, Juxta mensuram honoris erit mensura donationis, According to the quality and condition of the per∣son, whom we honour, so should our gifts and our presents that we offer him be; as the greater they are, whom we honour, the greater regard we should make of the gifts and oblations that we offer unto him: As it is unseemly, and a shame for us, to present unto our Kings and Princes, or any other person of Honour, any poor, mean, base, or paltry present; So it is, if we do the like to God: And therefore the Prophet Malachy de∣mandeth, If you offer unto God the blind for Sacrifice, is it not evil? and if you offer the lame and the sick,Malach. 1.8. is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy Governour, will he be pleased with thee? saith the Lord of Hosts. So, the Lord was no wayes pleased with Cains offering, because, that having enough, and all good things from God, he kept the best for himself, and gave a little of the meanest and worst unto God: And you know what God saith, Cursed be the deceiver, which hath in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing, and so, like unto Cain, keepeth the best for himself; for I am a Great King, saith the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadful a∣mong the Heathen,Verse 14. and therefore you should not offer unto me the poorest and the basest things you have, but the best and the greatest of all your substance.
Therefore the Gentiles, by the light of nature, and the Jews,How that the Heathens, Jews & Christians, eected great and glorious Houses for the Geat & Glo∣rious God. And Plutarch setteth down what an infi∣nite charge it cost Tarquinius Sylla, Vespasian and Domitian, to build the Temple of Ju∣piter Capitoli∣nus in Rome. Plutarch in the Life of Publi∣cola. pag. 107. & 108. by the ex∣ample of Moses, David, Solomon, and the rest of Gods Prophets, that were inspired by Gods Spirit, and all the godly and zealous Christians, that were illuminated by the light of truth, considering the greatness and the glori∣ous Majesty of our Great God, that is Optimus Maximus, The Best and the Greatest of all the things that you can imagine, and is most wonderful in all his Works, conceived it fitting to erect and build such great, magnificent, and most glorious Temples, and Churches, as might seem fitting, and, so far as they were able, to make them correspondent to the Greatness, and the Glorious Majesty of that Great God, for whose Honour, Worship, and Service, they erected and dedicated the same. And such were the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, of Diana at Ephesus, of Amphiaraus, and Jupiter Olympus, and the Temple of Solomon in Hierusalem, and the Churches of S. Paul in London, and S. Peter in Westminster, and abundance more, which you may see in these Kingdoms, that our most zealous, religious, and god∣ly forefathers built, and spared no cost nor charges to adorne and beautifie them most gloriously with all necessary Furnitures, for the Honour and Wo¦ship of their God, and the Service of Jesus Christ. And shall we throw down these Houses, and lay waste these Temples of God, or think much to bestow a little of our wealth, that God hath so li∣berally bestowed upon us, to keep them up, and to have them competently trimed and beautified? God forbid, that our love to God's Honour, and our thankfulness to Jesus Christ, should be so little, as to do so. CHAP. XII. The Answer to another Objection, that our brain-sick Sectaries do make for the utter overthrow of our Cathedrals and Churches, as being so fowly stained and prophaned with popish Supersti∣tions; and therefore being no better than the Temples of Baal, they should rather be quite demolished, than any wayes adorned and beautified. FOurthly,4. Objection a∣gainst the be∣ing of our Churches. Psal. 137.7. we have some other Sectaries more brain-sick than the for∣mer; and these, under the pretence of zeal to the purity of Religion, do hotly plead for the destruction of our Churches, and cry out in the lan∣guage of the Edomites, Down with them, down with them, even to the very ground; for they have been defiled and prophaned by the Idolatries and superstitions of the Popish Bishops, and their Mass-Priests: and therefore as the Lord, by a flat Precept, commanded the Israelites, saying, You shall ut∣terly destroy all the places, wherein the Nations, which ye shall possess, served their gods, upon the high Mountains, and upon the Hills, and under every green Tree; and you shall overthrow their Altars, and break their Pillars,Deut. 12 2, 3. 2 Chron. 17 6. 2 Reg. 18.4. and burn their Groves with fire; and you shall hew down the graven Images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of the place: And as Jehosaphat, accord∣ing to this Precept, took away the High-places, and Groves out of Juda; and Hezechias also, removed the High-places, and brake the Images, and cut down the Groves, and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent that Moses had made, be∣cause the children of Israel did burn incense to it: So should we subvert, and throw down all the Monuments of Idolatry and Superstition, and all the places where the true Religion, and the Service of God have been abused: And accordingly, these frantick Zelots have, wheresoever they came, and
could do it, thrown down many of our Churches, and brake in pieces the Fonts wherein they were Baptized, and threw down the Tombs and Monu∣ments of their Fore-fathers, and made such havock of Gods Houses, and de∣stroyed all Holy places so, as is lamentable to consider it: And they tell us most impudently, that to hold up such places to serve God therein is no∣thing else but with King Saul, to reserve the execrable and accursed things for Gods Worship, which is abominable in the sight of God. Sol. 1.To this I Answer, 1. That it is better to serve God in those places that have been superstitiously abused, (as formerly all places were Idolatrously defiled by the Heathens) than not to serve him in any place; for as when certain Christians found a vacant and a voyd place in the City of Rome, where they thought they might conveniently build a Church, and certain loose companions, that were Victuallers, made claim, and pretended a Title unto it, and told Alexander Severus, it was not so fit, to make a House to serve God in, as it was for them to sell and vent their commodities; the Emperour,The discreet answer of A∣lexander Se∣verus. led by the light of nature, being no Christian, answered most Christian-like, that he thought it better, God should be Worshipped any way, and in any place, rather then that they should have their way, to make it a place for their shambles: so say I, that it is a great deal fitter, to serve God in these Houses, that were so Zealously erected and so Religiously Con∣secrated for Gods service, howsoever they were afterwards soyled with some vanities, and perhaps defiled with some Idolatries, then that they should be thrown down, or be made a Stable for their Horses, or a Kitchin to dress meat for their tables, as some of these Sectaries have made these Houses of God to be. 2. I say that there is no more affinity or likeness between those times of the Israelites and our times, and betwixt that people, who were Jews, and us, that are Christians, then is betwixt Simon Peter, and Simon Magus, or Philip the Apostle, and Philip King of Macedon; for we are not comman∣ded, to do against Idolaters, as they were commanded to do against the Canaanites: as, they were forbidden to make Covenants of peace, or to have any commerce with the inhabitants of that place, and they were commn∣ded to root out and to destroy all that people, and we have no such injun∣ction, to prohibite us to trade and traffick, either with Papists, Jews, or Gentiles; neither may the Reformed Churches and Protestants put others their neighbours to the sword, only because they are Idolaters, or of a contrary Religion, but they are rather to labour for their Conversion, as St. Paul did the Idolaters of Athens, and not to work their destru∣ction. 3. I say, that the examples of Jehosaphat and Hezechias, are no comman∣ding precepts, and have not the force of laws, and you know that Vivitur praeceptis non exemplis, men are to live by laws, and not by examples, where∣of we have more bad then good; but were they never so good and so god∣ly, yet are they no Commanders but Councellors, and no laws to injoyn us, but less ns to direct us, and that in the like cases; for where the propor∣tion and the equality, betwixt the example and the following of it, faileth, there we must likewise fail to follow it; and we find a great deal of dispro∣portion and inequality betwixt the groves and high places of the Jews, and our Cathedrals and Churches, that were the Papists; because their groves and high places were very dangerous to be left, for the just fear of a secret access and coming unto them, by the superstitious Jews, that were alwaies so apt and so ready to fall into Idolatry; and our Cathedralls and Chur∣ches are freed from this fear, when as they are throughly cleansed and purged from all the former superstitions by the pure Preaching of the Word of God, and no Idolatrous Papist comes unto them, nor any
other, but only those that professe themselves to be of the pure Re∣ligion. And therefore learned Zanchius saith,Hieron. Zanch. de operibus re∣demptionis. l. 1. c. 12. that Ʋbique locorum in omnibus ferè Regnis & Provinciis, quae amplexae sunt evangelium, Templa ipsa in quibus Idola∣tria admissa fuit, tot annos retenta sunt; In every place, and in all Kingdoms and Provinces wel-nigh, which have imbraced the Gospel, the Churches themselves, where Idolatry hath been committed, have been retained so many years together. And why should they not be still used? For what evil have the Churches committed, that they, which were dedicated to such an Holy use, as is the true service of God; should be now so severely handled, as to be either quite demolished, or diverted and turned to any other purpose? For the senseless creatures cannot be said to be sinful and so not to be censured; and there∣fore the Leprous mans house was rather to be purged then to be pulled down; and where the malady is uncurable, there, as the Poet saith, —immedicabile vulnus Ense recidendum, ne pars syncera trahatur. The part only infected and putrified, is to be cut off, and not to cast away the whole; and so the wiser Divines threw down the Altars of those Chur∣ches, where Idolatry and superstition were most used, but they thought good to keep the Churches still to their former uses. And so, when the two hundred and fifty men offered incense unto the Lord, in the Rebellion of Kora; God himself bade Eleazar the High Priest, not to throw away those brasen Censers, which those men offered, but to imploy them for his service,Numb. 16.38. and to make of them Broad plates for a covering of the Altar. And when Jericho was taken by the Israelites, Joshua cau∣sed the Gold, Silver, Brass, and Iron that were execrable goods, not to be thrown away, but to be brought into the House of the Lord, and put into the Treasury of Gods House. And it is very well worth your observation,Josh. 6.26. to consider what the Lord himself commandeth Gedeon to do; namely, to take his Fathers young Bullock, even the second Bullock of seven years old, (that was fed to be offered unto Baal) and throw down the Altar of Baal, and cut down the grove that is by it,Judg. 6.26. and Build an Altar unto the Lord thy God, upon the top of this rock: and Take the second Bullock and offer a burnt Sacrifie, with the wood of the grove, which thou shalt cut down. And according to these Presidents the Law provided,Cod. l. 1. tit 8. Valent. Mart. tit. 12. leg. 11. Honor. that the houses wherein the Hereticks did meet, and broached their damnable Divinity, should be adjudged to be united to the Orthodoxal Churches, as were also the houses and habitations of the Caelicoles that were Hereticks so called: and in Saint Augustines time, the Churches that the Donatists possessed, were not destroyd but they were taken from them, (as we took ours from the Ro∣man-Priests) and were given to the Catholick Bishops. And therefore, why should not we use those Churches, that were Religi∣ously dedicated, and Holily Consecrated for Gods service, and could not themselves commit any ffence, nor be so Prophaned, as the accursed things of Jericho, or the Bullock and groves of Baal, or the Churches of the Ari∣ans and Donatists, to be the Temples and Sanctified Houses, wherein our people should meet to hear Gods Word, to pray unto him, and to receive his Holy Sacrament? But I remember Plutarch,Plutarch. in vit. Publicolae. pag. 113. & Tit. Livius. l. 2. pag. 57. and Titus Livius tell us how that the Romans after they had expelled Tarquinius Superous, when his son Sextus Tarqui∣nius had most shamefully ravished Lucretia, they all took a Solemn oath, they would never suffer any King to Reign over them; and because this was not sufficient to free them from the fear of a Regal Government, the
Consul Butu, in the behalf of the people, make a solemn Oration to his fellow Consul Tarquinius Collanius, to give over his Consulp, and to de∣part the City, to free the people from that fear; because that, although he was a very honest man, and was a principal actor, in expelling  quinus Super∣bus, and they could lay nothing to his charge, that ever he did or said against the liberty of the people, or for the Government of Kings▪ yet seeing his name was Tarquinius, the freedom of the City could not be fully secured, nor the men free from the fear of Tyranny so long as a person of that name, how just and innocent so ever he were, continued within the City: So I be∣lieve, it is not for any evil, that these men can, or could ever espy in our Churches, they cry so much, and yell like Wolves against them; but only for the name, that they are said to be built by Roman Catholicks, and that Po∣pish Priests have served in them: but it is nothing to us, who built them, or who served in them, so we serve God aright in them; this is all that we are to look unto. For so we find, that our Saviour Christ and his Apostles, in their time frequented the Temple, not that which Solomon built, nor that which Zo∣robabel erected;ph. Antiq. l. 15. c. 14. but that which Herod, that sought our Saviours life, buil∣d d and beautifid; and that which the Scribes and Pharisees had, as much as in them lay, defiled with their false-glsses, and the other Jews had made it a den of Thieves:Matth 21.13. and though Castor and Pollux were become Idols, and worshipped as gods among the Heathens; yet Saint Paul refused not to sail in a Ship, whose badge was Castor and Pollux; and Saint Luke is not affraid to set down those itles of the Paganish Idols. ocrat. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 33.And therefore, as Eunomius was most foolish for refusing to enter into the Temples of th Martyrs, lest he should be thought to worship the dead; and Estathius was most fantastical, for detesting all publick Churches, and leading his Schollers to private Conventicles in ordinary houses, for fear they should be defiled with the memorial of the Saints, that were mentioned in the Churches; so these our brethren of the Separation are most simple, for disclaiming our Churches, Prayers, and Ministry; and, like the Elder bro∣ther in the Parable, hearing afar off, the melody of our prayers, and under∣standing of our intertainment into our Fathers House, are very angry, and will not come into Gods House for fear of infection, but will convene in pri∣vate houses, and run abroad into the fields like Esan, to hunt there for the blessing, which with Jab, they might get nearer home, in their Fathers House; and when we would, according to our injnction, seek to compel them to come, out of the High-waies and Hedges, to the marriage of the Kings son, they will waste their wealth, leave their mansions, and, like He∣liodorus the fool of Athens, sail beyond the Straights of Gibraltar, and make Ship-rack before the Tempest; rather then they will come into Gods House, whereby they might fit still, under their own Vnes, injoy the food of their Fathers House, the safe-gard of their wealth, and the safety of their soules: which they do hazard, by their own simplicity, in being like the Jews, zealous, but not according to knowledge.
CHAP. XIII. That it is a part of the Office and Duty of Pious Kings and Princes, as they are God's Substitutes to have a care of his Church, to see, that, when such Cathedralls and Churches, are built and beauti∣fied as is fitting for his service, there be Able, Religious, and Honest, painful and faithful Bishops placed in those Cathedrals, that should likewise see able and Religious Ministers placed in all Parochiall Churches; and all negligent, unworthy, and dissolute men, Bishops or Priests reproved, corrected, and amended; or removed and excluded from their places and dig∣nities if they amend not. IT is well and truly observed, as the holy Scripture sheweth; That al∣though the wise God hath most mercifully decreed, and accordingly ex∣hibited and gave a Saviour, in himself altogether sufficient, for the saying of all Man-kind, and all the lost sons of Adam; and he hath most wisely and graciously taken a course, on his own part, and in it self also, fully sufficient; and appointed a course and order on mans part, that, being duly observed, might make the same sufficiently effectuall unto all: yet, it so fals out,Mens destru∣ction. that very many men attain not to that end, for which God did send his Son, to save them, but are seized on by Gods Justice, and cast to eternal condem∣nation. And that chiefly by mans own default, and, partly in some respects, through the default of his Rulers and Teachers; yet so, that he dies and suf∣fers only for his own sins. 1. Through their own default, when Kings and Princes,1. By their own fault. whom God hath appointed and set to be their Governors and Rulers, do by their under-Ma∣gistrates, and their just laws prohibite them from all evil and wickedness; and require them to imbrace all virtues and godliness of life, and to this end, do appoint their substitutes, the Bish ps and other Teachers to guide them, and to instruct them, to let them know what is good and what is evil; and so what they ought to believe, and what not: and these do faithfully discharge these Offices, as Moses and Aaron, David and Nathan, and many other godly Kings and Bishops did; yet, men will not obey their Governors, but Rebel like Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and, as of late, we have done;Jer. 11.21. they will not hearken to the voyce of their Teachers, but say to the Pro∣phets, Prophesy not unto us, and say to God himself, Depart from us,Job. 21.14. for we desire not the knowledge of thy Laws: or they relye upon their own wisdom, and account the Preaching of the Gospel of the cross of Christ foolishness;1 Cor. 1.18. or they follow the ill examples of their Fathers, and do worse than their Fa∣thers;Jer. 18.12. &c. 16.12. or they do addict themselves to the pleasures and vanities of this World, that do choak the seed of Gods Word in them; or when crosses, af∣flictions, and persecution come, they are offended,Matth. 13.2. and start aside like a bro∣ken bow. Then, God seeing these courses that they take, contrary to the course, that he had set down for their Salvation; he complaineth of them, that His people would not hear his voyce, and Israel would not obey him, therefore He gave them up unto their own hearts lusts,Ps. 81.12, 15. and let them follow their own ima∣ginations.
2. Mens destru∣ction much fur¦thered, by the default of their Governours.2. Though all wicked men do thus chiefly work their own destruction, yet many times, their fall and ruine is much furthered by the default and apostasie of their Prime-Governours, or at least through their neglect, and the neglect of their subordinate Magistrates and Ministers, the Bishops and Preachers that are under the Kings and Princes, the Governours of God's Church. For God, having set these Rulers, the Supreme and subordinate, to be the Watchmen and Shepherds over his people, to govern them, and teach them, how to live justly and holily, that they might attain to eternal life: if by their default, their misleading of them out of the way, or neglect to shew them the right way, the people do miscarry, the men, so misguided, and not instructed,Ezech. 33.8. shall die in their iniquity, and God will require their blood at the Shepherds and Watchmens bands. And yet Cain, a principal Ruler of, and over his Posterity, misleading, and not teaching them the right Worship of God, perished himself, and brought all them that followed him, and his wayes, to the like perdition. And so Nimrod, Esau, and Ismael, falling away from God, and Jeroboam setting up his golden gods, and many other Kings and Princes, neglecting their duties, apostatizing from God, and misleading their people, brought them in like manner to their utter ruine; And as many times the people are brought to their ruine, by the evil example,Scilicet in vul∣gus manant ex∣emplaregentum, utque ducum li∣tuos, sic mores castra sequun∣tur. Claud. 1. Stilic. and wicked Government of their Prime-Leaders, when as the Poet saith, Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. And the Souldiers would imitate Alexander in his stoopings, and in his vices, as well, and sooner, than in his vertues; So many times, and oftner too, they are brought to the same pass, the same pathes of perdition, through the lewd examples and neglect of the subordinate Magistrates of the Com∣mon-wealth, and the Governours and Ministers of the Church of God: As, when the Princes,Esay 1.23. Zephant 3.3. or Nobility, are rebellious, and companions of Thieves, or, as Zephany saith, like Lions, and the Judges are evening-Wolves, that judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widdow come unto them: And when the Prophets are leight and treacherous persons, and the Priests have pol∣luted the Sanctuary, and have done violence to the Law, either by corrupting it,Prov. 29.18. with their false glosses, or locking it up in prison, and not publishing the same unto the people; for, where there is no vision, the people perish, saith the Wise-man. And so by their false teaching, or no teaching, they thrust forward the poor people into perdition. And therefore, Kings and Princes, to whom God, in the first place, hath committed the Soveraignty and Charge both of Church and Common-wealth,Exod. 18.21. ought, not only to chuse such Judges and Magistrates, as Jethro described unto Moses, Able men, fearing God, men of truth, and hating cove∣tousness: But, when the Cathedrals and Parochial-Churches are built and beautified for God's Worship, and for the people of God to meet in them, to serve God,What manner of Judges and Bishops, Kings ought to chuse as they ought to be, they should also take care and see, that such Bishops and Priests, as S. Paul describeth, in 1 Tim. 3.2, &c. be setled in those Churches, to worship God, and to bring the people to do their du∣ties, that they may attain to eternal life: Lest that which S. Hierom com∣plained of in his time, should be true in our time, That the Altars shined with Gold and pretious Stones,Bernard. ad Ab∣bat. Cluniacen. Sed ministrorum nulla erat electio, There was no good choice made of good Ministers; whereby it was said, That they had golden Chalices, but woodden Priests, as S. Bernard saith, it was, not much better in his dayes; there was not such care taken for good Ministers as they should do. For as in Nature, we see every thing for its Creation requires a Divine hand, and a Miraculous power to produce it;
but the same being once produced, God's hand is not so conspicuous, but he leaves it to the soyl, as it were, to stand and grow by the innate vertue planted in it; So it seems to fare with Religion it self, which is such a su∣perstructure above Nature, that although it be planted by God, as both the Jewish and Christian Religion were, with signs and wonders, and a strong miraculous hand, yet men must now conserve it by those ordinary means, that God appointed: the Church of Christ, being like the Garden of God in Eden, which the Lord made, and then set it to our Parents, to keep it, and to dress it. And, though this Religion, which at first is thus powerfully planted by God, and is the principal Pillar that upholdeth States, and makes all King∣doms happy; yet, after the inward vertue of the Doctrine of Christ, the Bishops and Priests, are the main props, and the ordinary means, that God hath appointed to uphold his Religion, and to continue his Service in his Church; because, Religion can neither plant it self, nor sustain it self alone, and what support soever it hath from the Prince or the Laws of any Nation; yet the Bishps and Priests are, as it were, the soul of that power, in the execution thereof, when as all the substance, circumstance and ceremonies, have their life from them; and our consent and belief in their holy Calling, is that, which doth, and should keep us, from the singularity of our own misguided imaginations. And therefore that Prince, that is truly religious,Kings ought to have a special care to chuse good Bishops. and hath a special care of God's Service, must likewise with King David, (and as good King Charles ever had) have a special care to see that godly and learned Bishops and Priests, be appointed in God's Church to instruct his people. And you know what S. Paul saith, That a Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient, not a brawler, not covetous, one that ruleth well his own house, having his chil∣dren in subjection with all gravity, not a novice, (or a young new Divine) lest being lifted up with pride (as young men commonly are) he fall into the condemnation of the Devil: Moreover,1 Tim 2.1.2.2, 4, 5, 6, 7. he must have a good report of them that are without, lest be fall into reproach, and the snare of the Devil. All which large description of those parts and vertues, that every Bishop, and faith∣ful Minister of God's Church ought to have, may for order and method sake, be reduced into these two Heads,Levit. 8.8. which are the Ʋrim and the Thum∣mim, that Moses put upon the Breast-plate of Aaron, and for which he did so earnestly pray that God would grant them unto all the Tribe of Levi, saying, Let thine Ʋrim and thy Thummim be with thy holy one, or with the man of thy mercy: And they signifie,The two speci∣al vertues that ought to be in every Bishop and Priest. 1. The uprightness of his life and conversation. 2. The sincerity of his doctrine & teaching of his people. For so Moses sheweth, that Levi did, as every Bishop and Priest should do. 1. Carry himself most dutifully and obedient in his life, and all his actions  towards God, as, when God proved him at Massa, and strove with him at the waters of Meriba, he said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children;Verse 9. but he observed Gods word, and kept his Covenant, and preferred the keeping of God's Laws, and walking dutifully according to his will, before father or mother, wife or children, which every Christian, and especially every Christian Bishop, and true Levite, ought to do. 2. To tech Jacob the judgements of God, and Israel his Laws, to put  incense before the Lord, and whole burnt-Sacrifices upon his Altar; which is the second duty of every Bishop, and every faithful Minister of Christ,Verse 10. to teach the people of God, and to administer his holy Sacraments: For his
first care and chiefest duty should be to look to himself, , to be blameless;1 Tim. 3.2. And his second care is , to be apt and able to teach the people: And so S. Paul tells, and adviseth all the Clergy of Ephesus, that they should first look and take heed unto themselves, and then to all the flock, whereof the Holy Ghost hath made them Overseers, to feed the Church of God,Acts 20.28. which he hath purchased with his own blood; And therefore, 1. How blame∣less Bishops and Ministers should be. Luke 1.6.1. A Bishop, and a Minister of Christ, must have a special care to carry, and behave himself so, as that his life and conversation may seem blame∣less in the World, like unto Zacharias, the father of John Baptist, that wal∣ked in all the Commandments of God without reproof. And S. Hierom saith, That talis, & tanta, debet esse conversatio & eruditio Pontificis, ut omnes motus & egressus, & universa ejus opera notabilia sint, veritatem mente concipiat, & eam toto habitu resonet & ornatu;Hierom. in E∣pist 43. ut, quicquid agit, quicquid loquitur, do∣ctrina sit populorum: The life and conversation of a Bishop, and so likewise of every Minister of the Gospel, should be such, so grave, and so holy, that all his motions, and progressions, and all other his works, should be no∣table and worthy to be observed; he should conceive the truth in his mind, and sound out the same by his habit and ornament, that whatsoever he doth,The mischief that the evil examples of Bishops and Ministers do produce. and whatsoever he saith, may be a lesson of instruction unto the peo∣ple, who do look more unto the examples that we give them, and the actions that we do, than to the Precepts that we preach, or the Doctrine that we declare unto them. And another Father saith, that, Nemo plus in Ecclesia nocet, quàm qui perversè agens, nomen vel ordinem sanctitatis habet: delinquen∣tem nam{que} hunc redarguere nullus praesumit; & in exemplum vehementer culpa extenditur, cum pro reverentia ordinis peccator honoratur: No man doth, or indeed can do, more hurt in the Church of God, than he that doth wicked∣ly, and lives dissolutely, and hath the name or order of holiness, that is, holy Orders; because no man presumeth, or dares to reprove such an one, when he offendeth, and his fault exceedingly reacheth to the example of others to do the like, when, for the reverence of his Order, they see such a wick∣ed man so honoured; And therefore, I may say to such a one, as Claudian saith to Honorius, changing only but one word, Hoc te praeterea crebro sermone monebo, Cladian. de 4. Cnsolat. Hono∣rii.Ʋt te totius medio telluris in orbe Vivere cognoscas; cunctis tua gentibus esse, Facta palam, nec posse dari praesulibus unquam Secretum vitiis; nam lux altissama fati Occultum nil esse sinit, latebras{que} per omnes Intrat, & abstrusos implorat fama recessus. For such men are like a City that is set upon a Hill, and all mens eyes are upon them: and therefore, their lives and their actions, cannot be concealed; but their doings are more conspicuous, and their danger far greater, than any other men: And that, as Aquinas saith, in a threefold respect. First because, the Dispensers of the holy Sacraments and the holy Word of God, which ought not to be handled but by holy men, in which respect a holy Father saith, Mallem sustinere poenam Caiphae, Pilati, & Herodis, quàm Sacerdotis indignè celebrantis, That he would rather chuse to suffer the pu∣nishment of Caiphas, and of Pilate, and of Herod, than of a wicked Bishop, or Priest, that doth unworthily administer the Blessed Sacrament. Secondly, because these men are to render their account more strictly, being looked into more narrowly than other men; because, as S. Bernard
saith, Those faults and transgressions, quae in aliis nugae sunt,Cujs vita des∣pictu resta ut ejus praedicatio contemnatur. Gregor. super Evangel. l. 1. Hom. 6. in Sacerdotibus sunt blasphemiae; And those is that in others seem to be but steps, and triffles, & veni digna, and may easily be pardoned; yet in Bishops, and the Ministers of God's word, they are heynous offences, and worthy to be punished heavily, with many stripes, seeing they knew their Masters will, and did it not. And thirdly, because that by their Places, and Offies, they are to teach other men, not to offend; and to answer for then sins, if through their neglect they do offend: and yet by their ill lives and examples, they teach them to offend. 2. As they are, in these respects,2. How careful the Bishops & Priests ought to be to teach the people. Ezech. 3.17. &c. 3.7. to have a special care of their own lives and conversations, to live justly and holily, as the servants of Christ ought to do; so they are likewise obliged to be sedulous and diligent in the in∣struction and tuition of the people committed under their charge; for they are made the Watchmen and Shepherds over God's people, to teach them and instruct them, what they should do, and what they should believe; even as our Saviour saith unto his Apostles, Go ye and teach all Nations, baptizing them, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,Matth. ult. 19.20. and of the Holy Ghost, and teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commnded you. And therefore S. Paul chargeth Bishop Timothy before God, and before Jesus Christ, that he preach the word, and be instant in season,2 Tim. 4 1, 2. 1 Cor. 9.16. and out of season, reprove, rebuke, and exhort, with all long sffering and doctrine: and he saith, Wo is me if I preach not the Gospel. And S. Gregory saith, Oportet ut praedicatores sint fortes in praeceptis, compatientes infirmis,Greg. in Mor. 30. super Job 39. terri∣biles in minis, in exhortationibus blandi, in ostendndo magisterio bumiles, in rerum temporalium contemptu dominantes, & in tolerandis adversitatibus ri∣gidi: It behoves, that Preachers should be strong and strict in their pre∣cepts, compassionate and pitiful to the weak, terrible in their threatnings to the impenitent, smooth and gentle in their exhortations; in shewing their power and authority, humble; in despising the world, and all worldly things, stout and domineering; and in suffering and bearing adversities firm and constant; And the same S. Gregory saith also,Idem. Moral: l. 17. that Non debet praedica∣tor infirmis insinnare cuncta quae sentit, nec debet praedicare rudibus quanta cog∣noscit; which is a very good lesson. And so you see partly, what the Bishops and Ministers of Christ ought to do, and how to behave themselves in the Church of God. Yet I must confesse, we and our Predecessors,Dan 9.5. the Bishops of God's Church, have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wick∣edly, and have rebelled, even by departing from God's Precepts, and neg∣lecting the performance of our duties; for whereas, Exemplar vitae populis est vita regentis. And as S. Gregory saith, Lux gregis est flamma doctoris, The light whereby the flock walketh, is the shining flame of the Shepherds life; Yet many of our Predecess rs, I am sure, and I pray God that none of our present Pre∣lates may do the like, have given very evil examples unto the people, if the example of covetousness, in justice, and the obstructing and neglect of Gods Service, and the furtherance of mens salvation be evil examples; for, let∣ting passe what we find written of Pope Sixtus the Fourth, of whom this Epitaph was made: Sixte, jaces tandem, fidei contemptor & aequi, Pacis ut hostis eras, pace peremptus obis.
And of Alexander the sixth, that made a league with the Devil, as Ba∣laeus saith, to obtain his Papacy, and of whom it was said, as I shewed be∣fore. Vendit Alexander, cruces, altaria, Christum, Emerat ille prius, vendere jure potest. And of Boniface the eighth, and divers others wicked Popes, that preten∣ded to be the Bishops and Vicars of Christ, but were indeed the limbs of Anti-Christ: We find nearer home that what pious men and good Christians had formerly most zealously bestowed upon the Church and Churchmen for the Honor of God, the relieving of the poor, and the promoting of the Christian faith, many of our own Bishops most wickedly and Sacrilegiously, either through Covetousness for some fine, or for love and affection to their Children, friends or servants, have alienated and made away the same from their Successors, in Fee-farm, or long leases, some for one thousand, some for one hundred years; and some for other longer term, reserving only some small rent for the succeeding Bishops, as in my Diocess of Ossory, that Lordship was set for ten pound yearly, that is well nigh worth two hun∣dred pound; and that was set for four pound, which is better worth then fifty pound, with many others in the like sort; whereby we that come af∣ter them, and they that shall come after us, are neither able to keep Hos∣pitality, nor to feed the poor, nor scarce our selves, and our own families; nor indeed to do any other work of piety and service of God, which the Scripture requireth us to do. And if these things be not wickedness and a high degree of abominable Sacriledge; mine understanding fails me; and this, being Sacriledge, I know not what laws can make it good. Let them have what Laws and what Acts of Parliament soever they please to justify their doings, I know not how those Laws and Acts of Parliament will or can justify them, before the Throne of the just God. And therefore, not to do my self, what I blame in others, lest God should condemn me out of mine own mouth: as my good God hath hitherto preser∣ved me, and kept my hands clean from all Corruption, and from taking any the least bribe or gift from any man, or any service, but what I paid for, e∣ven in my poorest state, and meanest condition, when I had not for many years together twenty pound per annum to maintain me; so I have resolved, and do pray to God continually to give his grace to perform it, and do hope that God will grant it me, that I will never take either bribe for any thing, or gift from any man, or fine for any House, Land, or Lordship, that belongs either to my Deanery, or Bishoprick, while I live, if, I should live a thousand years: but, what shall be for the repaire of the Church. And besides all this, and many other faults in their own lives, of less moment, I have often bemoaned one offence of some of my brethren above all the rest, when I considered how they, not following the Counsel of St. Paul in the Ordination of Priests and Deacons, To lay hands on no man rashly; but to see that the persons that are to be admitted to holy Orders, should be no novices, that is, no young Divines, because as Saint Gregory saith, Nequaquam debent homines in aetate infirma praedicare, Men ought not to Preach in their young and tender years; Quia juxta rationis usum, sermo do∣ctrinae non suppetit, nisi in perfecta aetate, because that according to the use of Reason, Learning, and Wisdom, is not attained unto, but in perfect age; Et Redemptor noster,Greg. sup. Ezech. Ho. 2. & in Pastor. cum Coeli sit conditor & Angelorum Doctor, ante tricennale tempus, in terra magister noluit fieri hominum; ut videlicet praecipitatis vim sa∣luberrimi timoris infunderet, cum ipse etiam qui labi non posset, perfectae vitae gratiam, non nisi perfecta aetate praedicaret: And our Redeemer, that is the
Creator of the Heavens and Teacher of Angels, would not be made the Teacher of men here on Earth before he was thirty years of age; that so he might powre forth the force and fruit of wholesome fr to them that are fallen, when as he also, that could not fall, did not preach the grace and waies of a perfect life, but in a perfect age; and to see likewise that they should be no waies unworthy of so high a calling, but every way qualified, both for life and doctrine, so, as the Word of God doth require: have notwithstanding, either by the solicitation of friends, or for some other respects, and perhaps worser Corruption, many times made young novices, illiterate men; and, which is far worse, men of corrupt minds, and of bad lives, of loose dissolute carriage, the Priests of the most High God, to wait at his Altar, that were not worthy to wait on our Table. And therefore, as those Bishops that did thus, did herein falsify their Faith to God, and betrayed his service to these unworthy men; So, the just God hath most just∣ly suffered these perfidious men, to betray their makers, to spit in their Fa∣thers faces, and to combine themselves with the enemies of Christ, to de∣stroy the Bishops of Gods Church, and so, as the Poet saith in another kind, Ignavum fucos pecus à praesepibus arcent. This wicked brood that we our selves begat and made, would drive their Sires from their hives, and from our offices. And I know not by what fatality, unless it be by the just wrath of God, to intail the wickedness of the Fathers, like the Leprosy of Gehezi, unto the Children, for the sins and injustice of the Fathers that are so well known, and ingraven in the consciences of the Children; yet, so it is most gene∣rally found, that the Children of the precedent Bishops, that have most wronged the Church and their Successors,Why the sons of Bishops are most spitefull unto the Suc∣ceeding Bi∣shops. are in all things most contra∣riant and opposites, I will not say spiteful, or envious to the succeeding Bishops: because, as I conceive, their hearts tell them, what injuries their Fathers did them, for their sakes, and themselves continue therein; and therefore do conceive, that the present Bishops cannot think well nor love them, that have so much wronged, both them and the Church of God, and to requite them, according to their own thoughts, with hate for hate, they are of all others most spiteful crossing and prejudiciall unto them: or else, because they do imagine, that the present and succeeding Bishops, will be as wicked and as unjust, as their Fathers, and their predecessors were, and therefore deserve neither love nor favour from them;As Alexander the Copper∣smith with∣stood S. Paul; So the last Bishops son withstandeth me, to recover the rights of the Church, And I heard many Parliament men say that in the Long Anti-Christian Parliament, none were more violent against the Bishops, then the sons and posterity of Prece∣dent Bishops: I found it so. And I have espied another fault in some of our former Bishops, not a lit∣tle prejudiciall to the Honor of God, and the good of the Church of Christ; and that is, not only to give Orders to unworthy men, but also to bestow livings, upon unworthy Priests; for, as the old saying was, Rector eris praesto, de sanguine praesulis esto, Or, as another saith, Quatuor ecclesias portis intratur in omnes: Prima patet magnis, nummatis altera, tertia charis, Sed paucis solet quarta patere Dei. So it was their practice to bestow Livings, Rectories, Prebends, and other
Preferments, not on them that best deserved them; but, either upon their Children, friends, or servants, or on them that could, as the story goeth, tell them,And so to the lessor and to the lessee of the Church-Lands, to the prejudice of the Church, the like curse and Anathe∣ma is due. who was Melchisedecks Father, that is, to say St. Peters lesson, Aurum & argentum non est mihi, in the affirmative way; which is a fault worthy to be punished by the Judges. For as it is most truely said, Qi∣cunque sacra vel sacros ordines vendunt aut emunt, sacerdotes esse non possunt, whosoever do buy or sell holy orders, or any holy things, cannot be Priests, Ʋnde scriptum est Anathema danti, Anathema accipienti, whence it is writ∣ten, Let Gods curse be to the buyer, and the curse of God to the receiver; because this buying and selling of Holy things, and things dedicated for the service of God, is the Simoniacal Heresie, or Heresie of Simon Mgus; Qomodo ergo, si Anathematizati sunt, & sancti non sunt, sanctificare alios pos∣sunt?Habetur 1. q. 1. Can. Quicun∣que. How then, if they be accursed and no Saints, can they make others Saints, or sanctify them? Et, cum in corpore Christi non sint, quomodo Chri∣sti corpus tradere vel accipere possunt? Et qui maledictus est, benedicere quomo∣do potest? And seeing such men are not in the body of Christ, how can they deliver or receive the body of Christ? and how can he that is accursed him∣self, bless any other? And therefore, seeing the Word of God requireth, the Bishops and Mi∣nisters of Christ should be so Holy in their lives, and so qualified, with know∣ledge and learning, for the instruction of the people, as I shewed to you be∣fore, and is typified by those Golden Bels, and the Pomegranats, that were to be set in the skirts of Aarons robes round about, the Bels signifying the teaching of the people; and the Pomegranats the sweet smelling fruits of a good and godly life; It behoves the Kings and Princes, to whom God hath given the prime Soveraignty, and commandeth them to have a care of his Honor and the service of his Church, to see, so far as they can, that the Bishops and Prelates, which they place over Gods people, be so qualified, as God requireth, and to injoyn these, their prime Substitutes, to look that those Priests and Deacons, which they make, and place in the Church, be likewise such, as I have fore-shewed; for this, God requireth at their hands; and this, David, Jehosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, and all the good and god∣ly Kings of Israel, and Juda, and all the pious Christian Kings and Emperors did; and I do know, how zealously and carefully our late most gracious King Charles the I. was, to place Able, Religious, and Godly Bishops over Gods Church; which is a special duty of every King. And because also the Prelates and Bishops are not all, or may not all be, no more then the Apostles were all, such as they should be, but some of them may be such, as I have shewed to you before, either like Simon Magus sel∣ling what they should freely give; or like Demas imbracing this present World, or like Baalam, loving the wages of unrighteousness, or perhaps do∣ing worse then those, Apostatizing like Julian, and starting aside like Ece∣bolius, or devising wicked Heresies, like Arius, or renting the unity of the Church like Donatus, then, as Solomon deposed Abiathar, and divers of the good Emperours deposed wicked Popes, and the godly Kings have pull'd down ungodly Bishops, as our late Queen Elizabeth did degrade Bishop Bon∣ner, and divers other Popish Prelates; so should all good and godly Kings reprove and correct, and if they amend not, expel and remove all scanda∣lous and ungodly Bishops; and the Bishops do the like to all deboyst and dissolute Ministers: that so the old and sowre leaven may be purged out of Gods Church, and the builders of Gods Tabernacle be like Bezaliel, and Aholiab, such as can and will do the work of the Lord carefully and Re∣ligiously.
CHAP. XIV. Of the maintenance due to the Bishops and Ministers of Gods Church, how large and liberal it ought to be. THirdly, When the Kings and Princes,3. To provide sufficient means for the Church-men. which are the Supreme Magi∣strates, and, as Tertullian saith, Homines à Deo secundi, & solo Deo mino∣res, are the men, that are next to God in power and Authority, and there∣fore ought to have the prime and chiefest care of Gods Honour, and his worship in the Church of Christ; have, as I have formerly shewed, with King David and Solomon,Colimus impe∣ratorem ut ho∣minem à Deo secundum & so lo De minorem, Tertul. ad Sca∣pulam. provided that Temples and Churches be erected and beautified, as fit houses of God, for his people and servants to convene and meet in them to Worship God, and have likewise taken care, in the next place, to see that good men and godly Bishops be appointed over those Churches as their substitutes, to Rule, Govern, and Teach the people of God, how to live and to believe as they ought to do, and to require the Bishops and Prelates also to see, that all the inferiour Clergy do the like: then, that they may be inabled, with joy and comfort, to discharge their duties, and to perform Gods service aright; they should do their best indevour to see, that there should be large and liberal maintenance provided, and set out sufficiently for them, to sustain and keep themselves and their families, to keep Hospitality, to relieve the poor, and to do all the other works of piety and charity, which they are injoyned to do, and which, without such means and maintenance, they are no waies able, possibly, to discharge. For if such liberal maintenance be not provided for them, the want thereof will make the whole company of the Clergy men to be contemptible, their names in obloquy, and their unworthy and poor condition will fright away the better sort of men from imbracing this calling, that in it self is so Ho∣norable a function, as to be the Embassadours of Jesus Christ: for though the name of a Bishop, and the Priest or Minister of Jesus Christ, be great,And Jvenal saith, Quis e∣nim virtuem amplectitur ip∣sam, Pramia si tllas? Juvenal. l. 4. Satyr. 10. and of great account in Gods book, and with the Saints of God; yet men are but flesh and blood, whose nature is to be inticed and toled on with re∣wards, as the best Sollicitors and mediators, to spur them forward to un∣dertake any profession; and they are most apt and ready, to undertake that, which they see most profitable, and makes them best able to live in the world. And therefore Cicero, the best of the Orators, said, Honos alit artes, That Reward and Honor is the nourisher of Arts and Sciences, and makes the Schollars to fall to their Study; and Aristotle, the chiefest of all the Phi∣losophers, confirmeth what the Orator said, and addeth, that, Honos est praemium Virtutis, Virtue and learning ought to be honored and rewarded; and when it is rewarded it will flourish and be increased; and Martial the best Epigrammatist justifieth, what the others affirmed, saying. Sint Mecoenates, non deerunt, Flacce, Marones; Virgiliumque tibi vel tua rura dabunt. Which I may (with leave) thus Translate, Where Patrons well present their Clerks, there Preachers will abound, In every Town and Village then, good Prophets shall be found.
And therefore the wisest men, have alwayes promised great Rewards to all that would attempt any great Service; as Caleb said, He that smiteth Kiriath sepher,Josh. 15.16. 1 Sam. 17.25. 1 Sam. 5.8. and taketh it, to him will I give my daughter Achsa to wife. And Saul promised to do the like, to him that vanquished Gelias: And so King David promised no small Reward to him, that got up to the gut∣ter, and smote the Jebuzites in the siege of Hierusalem; because the wages and reward, that men expect for their labour, are as the spurs that drive and prick them forward, to every profession, and to every work and great Exploit. And on the other side, when the World seeth the Ministers of the Gos∣pel rewarded none otherwise now, when we have a gracious King, than the Levite in the old Testament was, when there was no King in Israel, with bare meat and drink,Judg. 17.10. and a single simple suite of apparel, and ten Shekels of Silver, which was his yearly pension, for all his pains, then, as Juvenal saith, —Quis, quis virtutem amplectitur ipsam, Praemia si tollas? — Who will be willing to enter into the Ministery, and to imbrace this high Cal∣ling? especially when they do throughly perceive, how this inexcusable cove∣tousness, & the unresistable power of the men of War, doth still increase more and more, to eat up, and, like a canker, to waste and consume the possessions of the Church, and the maintenance of God's Ministers; whereby the Honour of God is blemished, his Worship obstructed, the people deprived of the spiritual food of their souls, and the poor of their relief and food of their bodies; which the Bishops and Ministers of Christ, if they were made able, are bound to bestow upon them, as the men that best know the duty of cha∣rity, how acceptable it is in the sight of God. Why there were no Physi∣tians in Athens.For, as, when it was demanded, Why there were no Professors of Physick in the City of Athens, whereby the whole Art and Profession was decayed; the answer was made, It was because there was no Reward or Stipend set out and allotted for the Teachers of that Science: So when the reward and maintenance of the Bishops and Ministers, is purloyned and taken away by Souldiers,For they are the men that hold our lands and seek to take our hou∣ses from us. or any others, then certainly, the Ministery of the Gospel of Jesus Christ will insensibly decay: And how the Church-robbers will answer this to God, or defend themselves with their swords before him, let them look unto it; I would not be in their case, for all the lands and houses that they have. For, as when Antigonus asked the Philosopher Cleanthes, that was Zeno's Scholler, and had learnedly written of the Sun and Moon and Stars, and other points of Astronomy, Why he carried water in the night, and did grinde at the Quern or Mill? Cleanthes answered, He was inforced to be thus occupied, to get his living, when he had no other means to maintain himself. So, when God shall demand of the Bishops and Ministers, Why they do not study to teach his people, and bestow alms on his poor creatures, but look after their husbandry, and follow after the affairs of the world, and to do, as many times my self have been inforced to do, many base and servile works, for want of means to hire other labourers, and we shall an∣swer as Cleanthes did, This strange indignity is done unto us, that we have no money to buy Books to study, and to relieve the poor, and to repair thy ruinous House, nor scarce meanes to maintain our selves, but by these un∣worthy wayes to get some small means of subsistance, lest otherwise we should be forced, with the Levite and his wife, to lodge in the streets. And when God shall reply again, and demand, How cometh this to passe? when as the Kings, Princes, and other Noble men of the World, the more excel∣lent,
powerful, and illustrious they are, the more excellent and beneficial are the Places and Offices of their servants; from whence it became a Pro∣verb, That no fishing to the Sea, and no service to the Court. And I, that am the Great and Almighty God of Heaven, and the King of all Kings, that do take pleasure in the prosperity of my servants,Psal. 35.27. Prov 3.16. &c. 22.4. and have promised riches and honour to them that serve me, and accordingly have allowed and comman∣ded my Tythes and Oblations, and the free gifts and will-offerings of my people, to be inviolably set our, and preserved for them that serve at mine Altar; and yet, notwithstanding all this, that my Servants and Embassa∣dors, that are legati à latere, should be in a poorer and a sadder condition, than the servants of many mean Gentlemen? and we shall answer; It is true, O Lord, that thou art the Best Master in the World, thy service is the most Honourable, and the allowance that thou hast appointed for them, is very ample and large, and a most pentiful Royal Reward, and we know, that they which will faithfully serve thee shall want no manner of thing that is good.Psal. 34.10. But the sons of Belial, the off-spring of Baalam, that loved the wages of unrighteousnesse, have violated the covenant of Levi, and rose up against him, and being too strong for him, have taken away the Tythes and Obla∣tions, the lands and the houses of thee our God, into their possession; and left the Church of Christ bare and naked, to cry out, Pllis & ossa sum mi∣ser; and that is the reason, why we do not, and cannot, perform and do the service that thou requirest, and we desire to do. And then, let the sacrilegious persons, and the violaters of holy things,The Souldiers that take away. the goods and lands of the Church, see, what the Prophet saith of Levi, and of his enemies; for of Levi he saith, Blesse, O Lord, his substance, and ac∣cept the work of his hands: And of his enemies, he saith, Smite thorough the loynes of them that rise up against him, and of them that hate him,Deut. 33.11. smite them thorough and thorow, that they rise not again. And I do wonder, that this prayer of Moses doth not make the hearts of all Church-robbers to shake and tremble when they do consider it. But the enemies of God's Church, that care not how much they pill and pluck from the Patrimony thereof, and would have the Ministers and Bi∣shops, that are like fixed Stars in God's right hand, to be like the Planets in the Zodiack, that have no setled place; but are carried about by an erratical and uncertain motion: Yet cannot they endure to be termed sacrilegious; but they cry out, and say, No, and God forbid, that they should take away any thing from the Church, that belongs unto the Church; So, like the Jews, that cried, Templum Domini, Templum Domini, when they prophaned the same most of all; their words are smoother than oil, when in very deed, they are very swords, and will not be kept back, from piercing us, and Christ himself through our sides. Therefore I will endeavour to shew unto them the truth,The equity of the large and liberal main∣tenance of the Clergy. and the equity of that large and liberal maintenance, that God alloweth, and is therefore due, and not to be denied, to the Bishops and the Ministers of the Gospel: and this truth the Holy Scripture confirmeth many wayes: As, 1. That they should have maintenance, it is manifest, and few but mad men will deny it; because the labourer is worthy of his hire;Luke 10.7. and the Apostle demandeth, Who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or, Who feedeth a flock, and doth not taste of the milk thereof?1 Cor. 5.7. And no man can deny, but the Bishops and Ministers of God's Word are the Husband∣men, and the Dressers of God's Vineyard, and the Shepherds of his Flock. And the same Apostle saith, That they which minister about holy things live of the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar: Even so, hath the Lord ordained,1 Cor. 9.13.14. that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: And the other reasons, that this our Apostle produceth, are,
1. A minori, the mouth of the Oxe, that treadeth out the corn, is not to be muzled. 2. A majori, the Preachers of God's Word do minister unto the people spiritual graces; therefore the people should not muzzle the mouths of their Preachers, and keep back their carnal things from them. They are so plain and so pregnant to prove, that Ministers should have maintenance, that our very adversaries cannot contradict it. Yet for all this, some fanatick spirits, void of all reason do object, That as Nehemiah, because he feared God, spared the people from those exa∣ctions of money and corn and wine, which other Governours had taken from them,Nehem. 5.15, 16. & v. 10, 12. and prayed the Nobility, that they should exact no such things from their brethren, and called the Priests also, and took an oath of them, that they should do accordingly. So, the Bishops and Ministers of Christ should much rather spare their people, and not exact such parts and portions from them, as they do. To this I answer, That Nehemiah was a potent and a powerful man, that was able to maintain at his Table an hundred and fifty of the Jews and Ru∣lers,Verse 17. besides those that came unto him from among the Heathen round a∣bout him: and the people, newly returned from their Captivity, were very poor and miserable,Verse 3, 4, 5. and the exactions that were taken from them were too heavy, and very unjust; therefore this godly Governour took pity upon them, and in piety forgave it them. But this particular example, is no Precept for us to obey, or Rule to fol∣low it; especially considering the disparity betwixt us, and Nehemiah, and betwixt our people now, and the Jews at that time; and the great difference that is betwixt their taking of most unjust taxations, and our requiring the just reward and wages of them that are far better able to pay it, than we to forbear it, for our just and great pains: Yet, 2. They do object the example of the Apostles, and especially of S. Paul, who made the labour of his hands, the porter that brought in his living; and protested before the Bishops and Clergy,Act. 0.33.34. that he coveted no mans Silver, or Gold,2 Cor. 11.9. or Apparel, but his hands ministered to, his necessities: and tells the Corinthians, That in all things be kept himself from being burdensome unto them. It is answered. 1. That our Ministers cannot possibly do as the Apostles did, unless they had the same spirit, the same grace, and the same extra∣ordinary gifts of inspiration, and in the same measure as the Apostles had; for they were immediately and extraordinarily inspired with abilities, to preach, and to answer, whatsoever should be demanded of them in illa hora, even in an instant, and to do miracles, when need required: But we can∣not attain to any learning or knowledge, without industry and study, and great pains-taking: And therefore we cannot be Preachers of Gods Word, if we be forced to be Traders in the World, to work with our hands, and to live by our works. 2. S. Paul doth not say, That he never took wages of any Church; but that he coveted no mans Silver, and forbore to charge the Churches, when he found it was meet and best to do so, for the Churches edification, which he spared; otherwise he tells the Corinthins, That he robbed other Churches, taking wages of them,2 Cor. 11.8. to do the Corinthians service. And to shew, that their maintenance should not be sparing and niggard∣ly, but large, bountiful, and honourable; S. Paul saith, Let the Elders, that is, the Bishops, and Ministers of Christ, that rule well, be counted worthy of double honour,1 Tim. 5.7. especially they which labour in the word and doctrine: By which double honour, S. Chrysostom understandeth. 1. A respect and reve∣rence unto their persons: And 2ly a liberal maintenance for their lively∣hood, because honour signifieth all necessary provision, needful for the person
that is to be honoured: As where the Lord saith,1 Pet. 3 7. Honour thy father and thy mother, and Honour the King: And where the Apostle saith, Honour wi∣dows that are widows indeed; that is have such a care of them, that a suf∣fiient, and a liberal maintenance be provided for them. And so should they do for the Bishps and Ministers, answerable to their Dignity, Places, and Calling. But all this while, we walk about the bush, and are in generals, Et in universalibus latet error: And so, though it should be granted, that our maintenance should be very large and liberal; yet it is not agreed, how far it should extend, and what the same should be: But, as the enemies of the Church, and the haters of the Bishops, do think any thing that they have, too much; and would have them, as S. Bernard saith, aedibus & sedibus effu∣gari, to be chased out of house and home, and have their lands sowed th salt, that they might never bring forth fruits to them, or their successors, while the world lasteth: So the best friends of ur Presbyterians do think, some standing Salary or stipend, which their people conceive to be compe∣tent for them, is to be understood by this double honour, and by all that is re∣quired in the new Testament to be given unto them. To this I say,God is the best Judge to deter∣mine what wa∣ges is fit for his servants to have. That for the provision and proportion that is to be given to the Rulers and Teachers of the people, we yield not, that it should be arbitrated and set out by the covetous hearts and shallow heads of them, that would rob the Church, and denude the Spouse of Christ of her precious Garment; and with Dionysius, give her a base woollen coat, instead of her golden Vesture: But we refer the decision of this case to the heavenly Oracle of God himself, who best knoweth what is fit for his servants to have, and what is the maintenance, that he alloweth them, and admitts not other Ma∣sters, to set down the wages of his servants, which is not usual nor tolera∣ble among men: And therefore, 1. Let us consider what maintenance he thought meet to be sufficient for the Lvites, and the Ministers of the Law; and by that, you may guesse what is fit for the Ministers of the Gospel: And you shall find, 1. That they had 48. Cities to dwell in, out of all the other 11.What wages God appointed for the Mini∣sters of the Law. Tribes of Israel; as you may see how many they had from every Tribe in Josh. 21. per totum. And the children of Israel were commanded to set out for glebe-lands, to be consecrated for the Church, to every City by measure from without the wall of it on the East side, 2000. cubits; and so on every  side round about, and the suburbs of their Cities should be for their cattel,Numb. 35.4, 5. for their goods, and for all their beasts, which in a Kingdom, not so big as Great Britain, being not above 300. miles in length from Dan to Beer∣sheba, as S. Hierom saith, was a very great proportion. 2. They were to have the Tythes, that is, the tenth part of all profits of  all their yearly increase, either of cattel, fruits of trees, or lands,Vide Godwin. l. 6. c. 3. Matth. 23.23. of all which they were to pay their Tythes, even to Mint, Anise, and Cummin, which, as Christ saith, they ought not to leave undone; And the Husbandman paid two sorts of Tythes: For, 1. When the Harvest was ended, he laid aside his great Theruma,Numb. 15.20. called the first fruits of his threshing-floor; and this was of, 1. Wheat. 2. Bar∣ley. 3. Grapes. 4. Figs. 5. Pomegranates. 6. Olives. 7. Dates: which the Talmudists called Biccurim: And then under the same head of the first fruits of the threshing-floore, was paid the Tythe of Corn, Wine, Oil,Deut. 18.4. Numb. 18.2. and the Fleece, yea, and of all things else, that the earth brought forth for mans food. And when the first fruits of the threshing floore was paid them; 1.Tob. 1.7. Out of the remainder, he paid a tenth part unto the Levites; and this they termed, the first Tythe, and this was alwayes paid in kind, and,Nehem. 10.37 as it seem∣eth, not brought to Hierusalem by the Husbandman, but paid unto the Levites in the several Cities of tillage.
2. When this first tythe was paid, the Husbandman paid out of that which remained a second tythe,Moses Kotsens. in tractatu de decima secun∣da. Fol. 199. which he might either pay in kind, or by commutation in money, and which for two years he was to make a Love∣feast at Jerusalem with it, and every third year still at home; but in each place to invite the Levite, the Fatherless, the Widdow, and the Poor, unto it. Deut. 14.18. They paid likewise the tythes of their Cattel, their Bullocks, Sheep; and of all that passed under the Rod, the tenth was Holy unto the Lord. Levit 27.32.And that our Husbandmen may see what the Jews paid out of the Fruits of the Earth; this Synopsis, taken out of Scaliger, as Goodwin saith, will de∣clare unto them, Videlicet The Husband∣man had grow∣ing 6000. Bushels of Corn in one year, whereof 100. Bushels was the least that could be paid by the Husbandman to the Priests for the first-fruits of the threshing floore. So 5900. Bushels remained to the Husbandman; whereof he paid two tythes. First 590. Bushels were the first tythes that he paid to the Levites; whereof, they paid 59. Bushels to the Priests; which was called, decimae deci∣marum, the tythe of tythes. So 5310. Bushels remained to the Husband-man, whereof 531. Bushels, were paid for his second Tythe, to the Levite, Fatherless, Widdow, and other poor men. So 4770. Bushels remained to the Husbandman, as his own when he had paid all that was upon him to be paid; and so 1121. Bushels are the sum of both tythes, joyned toge∣ther; which is above a sixth part of the whole, and no less then 19. out of a hundred, which the Husbandman hath paid. And what would our men say if they were in joyned to pay so much? And yet, besides all the tythes, that the Priests, and Levites were to have, with∣out any diminution, you may 3. Note, that the Priests and Levites were to have a special share of all the first fruits, of their Cattel of all kinds, as of Bullocks, Sheep, Goats, and the Fruits of their Trees, and of their Corn, both the Therumoth, and Thenuphoth,Exod. 13. their Heave-offering, and Wave-offering; and the firstlings or first-born of every man, the Lord challenged as his own; and they were to be redeemed, for five silver shekels of the Sanctuary, which were to be paid unto the Priests for each of them.Num. 18.15, 16. And so you see, how God would be Honored, and how great was the portion of the Priests, which received Gods part by the firstlings of men, and of Cattel, and by the first fruits of the Trees, and of the Earth, in the Sheafe, in the Threshing-floor, in the Dough, and in the Loaves: which should teach us, to Consecrate the prime of our years, and of all that is good unto the service of the Lord.3. The divers kinds of Sacri∣fices and Ob∣lations of the Jews, whereof the Priests had their part. 3. Besides all this, you must observe that the Jews had divers kinds of Sacrifices, and Ceremoniall oblations, instituted by God, and administred by the Priests, which were either
1. , Prpitiatory and Piacular, that was also two fold. 1. , Reconciling, which the Grecians cal∣led Holocaust, because it was wholly burnt. 2. , Redeeming, 1. Pro peccato 2. Pro delicto. The 1. A sin-offering. The 2. A trespass offering. 2. , Gratulatory, for the manifold benefits that they had received from God: and this their thankfulness they attested three manner of waies. 1. By their Peace-offering. 2. By their Oblations. 3. By their Sacrifice of praise. And out of all these things, and whatsoever things were devoted to God, in any waies, by Oblations or Vowes, for their sin-offering,Numb. 18.9, 10, 11, 12. or trespass-of∣fering, and all the gifts of the Children of Israel, which were heaved, waved or shaken, and the Shew bread,Ezech. 44.29. & 30. and all that was sacred and sequestred from the Common use, the portion of the Priests must indispensably be laid out for them; Because God had given it unto them by a Covenant of Salt for ever; and so out of every Eucharistical Sacrifice,Levit. 24.9. the breast and the right shoul∣der, were the Levites fees, and from every Holocaust, or whole-burnt Sa∣crifice they had the skin. And whensoever they detained any of these, either in whole or in part,Levit. 7 8. Levit. 5.15. the Lord required them to make a plenary satisfaction, and to offer up a Ram for that detention. Out of all which, it is most evident, that the maintenance of these Mini∣sters of the law was both liberal and honorable; and so much the better, because it was perpetual and entailed to their posterity: whereas our means is transient, and dieth from our children when we die. Yet you know how Saint Paul reasoneth, if the Ministration of death, written and ingraven in stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses,2 Cor. 3.7. for the glory of his counte∣nance; which glory was to be done away: How shall not the Ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious? For if the Ministration of Condemnation be glory, much more doth the Ministration of Righteousness exceed in glo∣ry; So, if their Ministry, which was the Ministration of the Law, and of Death, had such glorious allowance for their service, I wonder how our Ministry, which is the Ministration of the Gospel should be so meanly reward∣ed; and our maintenance so far short of theirs; when, in respect of our more glorious service, and far more beneficial unto our people, it should ex∣ceed theirs in all glory.
CHAP. XV. That the payment of Tythes unto the Church, is not a case of cu∣stome but of Conscience; When as the tenth by a Divine right is the Teacher's tribute, and the very first part of the wages that God appointed to be paid unto his Work men; and therefore, that it is as haynous a sin, and as foul an offence, to defraud the Minister of this due; as it is to detain the meat, or money, of the Labouring-man, which is one of the four crying sins. HAving seen, that it is a part of the duty and charge of all Christian Kings and Princes, to have a special care to uphold Gods service and the true Religion; and to that end, 1. To cause Churches to be built and Beautified, for the people to meet in them, to serve God. And 2. To appoint Worthy men, Bishops and Priests, to supply those Churches, and to instruct the people. And then 3. To see that those servants of God should have that allowance and wages, which God himself hath appointed and commanded to be paid unto them, for their pains and service of his Church. We are now to examine what their means and maintenance should be, that God appointed for their wages: And I say that he is a most bountiful Master, that takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, as King David speaketh;The two speci∣all portions of the Clergy. 1. Tythes. 2. Donations. and therefore gives them a very large reward, which doth chief∣ly consist in these two things. 1. The Tythes, or tenth part, of his peoples goods. 2. The Free-will-offerings, Oblations, and Donations of the people. The 1. He commandeth to be paid them. And the 2. He alloweth to be given them; and being given, he requireth that they should not be alienated and taken from them; no, not by the givers themselves; therefore much less by any other. 1. That tythes are due to our Ministers.1. That Tythes, or the tenth part of our goods and substance are due to them, that discharge the service of God, by the instruction of his people, to Worship God, as well under the New Testament as the Old; it may be manifested by these Reasons. 1. Whatsoever nature and Humane Reason teacheth to be justly due to any man or society of men,Ant legem da∣tam, acrificio∣rum impensis & rebus aliis ad exernum Dei cultum conservandum pertinentibus, decimae applica∣ban u Fran. Sylvius. the same doth the Scripture, both the Law and Gospel, teach to be due, and ought to be paid unto them; Nam, sicut Deus est Scripturae, it a Deus est Naturae, for as God is the Author of the Scripture, so he is the God of nature; and whatsoever is true in nature, I speak not of defiled nature, but of pure nature, the same is true in Scripture; And therefore Saint Augustine saith, that as, Contra Scripturas nemo Chri∣stianus, & contra Ecclesiam nemo Catholicus, No Christian will speak a∣gainst the Scripture, and no Catholick will gain-say the Church; so Con∣tra rationem nemo sobrius, No sober man will deny, what Reason a vouch∣eth. But the law of Nature and Reason teacheth, that no pension which is indif∣ferent and tolerable ought to be denied and detained from the Common
use and the good of publick weale; for so Plato, and Cicero, and many more, that knew no more, but what the light of nature shewed them, do say, We are born on that condition, not only to provide for our selves, and our off∣spring; but also for our private friends,That every man is to do his best for the publick good. and especially for the publick good of our Countrey; which is the common parent of us all, and the examples of Theseus the Athenian, Demaratus the Lacedemonian, Epaminondas the The∣ban; Curtius, Decius, and Coriolanus the Romans; and among the Jews, Mo∣ses, Aaron, Gideon, Sampson, David, Zorobabel, and abundance more in all Nations, that underwent all charge, and exposed themselves to endure all adventures, for the furtherance of the common good; do sufficiently confirm this truth unto us. But the tenth part or portion,The tenth the most indiffe∣rent part. that we have from the Fruits and com∣modities that we receive from the earth, is of the most indifferent condi∣tion, competent for the receiver, and tolerable for the giver, as being of a middle size, neither too little for the one to take, nor too much for the other to pay, for the publick service of God. And this will easily be confirmed, if we compare this tenth part with the taxes and impositions, that are of other nature, and are required and payable in very many Nations; for the men of Cholchi, beside their subsidy of mo∣ney, were forced to deliver a hundred male Children, and as many mai∣dens, by way of task or tribute, unto their Princes; And Heredotus writeth of very strange distributions that do arise from the waters of Nilus, to the proper use of the Inhabitants about that River; and of the mighty subsidies, that do grow from thence unto the Kings. And the Egyptians have been forced to pay the fift part of their estate unto their Kings:The tenth compared with the taxes im∣posed upon the people, in di∣vers Nations. and Diodorus Si∣culus saith, that a certain King of Egypt gave the yearly custome of the fishes, which were taken out of the pooles of his subjects, to find rayment and other Ornaments for his Queen, and that the same amounted to a Talent of silver, for every day in the year. And Dion, in the life of Augustus, relateth how he levied the twentieth part of every mans estate, and of such Donations, Legacies, and Gifts, as were bequeathed at the time of their death, and said, that he found some Records of that custome, formerly used in the Re∣gisters of Caesar, and it is written that the Thuringi exceeded this payment, in the taxes that were imposed upon them: For they were forced to pay yearly to the Kings of Hungary, not only the tenth part of their goods, but also the tenth number of their children; and yet they that are under the Ty∣ranny of the Turks must indre a Heavier yoke, and a far greater slavery; for they pay the fourth part of all their fruits and increase of the earth, and of their labours in their several trades; and they pay tole-money for every servant that they keep: the which, if their estates be not able to do, yet must they make it good, or sell themselves for slaves to do it. And now judge you, what rational man comparing the tythes, with these tributes and the taxes of other Nations, will not conclude that the tenth part is the most equal, just, and indifferent portion, that can be allotted, and adjudged fit, to be given and paid, for such a publick good, as is the service of God, and the Ministry of the Gospel, without pres∣sing too heavy upon the giver, or paying too slight a portion, to the re∣ceiver. 2. Whatsoever things have their foundation, and introduction,What natural Reason shew∣eth. 1. That pub∣lick Ministers should be by the publick State main∣ained. in the  Law of Nature, the same things ought still to be observed and continued; but natural Reason suggesteth and telleth every man, that is not voyd of Reason; 1. That, as they which serve the Common-wealth, Kings, Magistrates, and Governours, should live upon the taxes and Contributions of the Common-wealth; so they that serve the Church of God as Bishops and
Priests, should be maintained by the Church: and the Histories of the Gen∣tiles do bear witness, that all the Nations of the World have alwayes fully and sufficiently provided maintenance for their Priests.Judg. 17.5. For so Mha, ha∣ving set up his Temple, and made an Ephod, and his Teraphim, consecravit ministerium unius è filtis suis, he made one of his sons to be his Priest, and implevit manum ejus, which [consecravit ministerium] signifieth, saith Tremel∣lius, in his notes upon that place, that is, to give him an estate, and the main∣tenance of a Priest: and so he did to the Levite, that succeeded him, conse∣cravit ministerium ejus, id est, implevit manum ejus, He filled his hand, and satisfied him with a certainty of maintenance. And Pharaoh, and the rest of the Egyptians allowed lands and possessions, and other sufficient main∣tenance unto their Priests and Magicians. And the Babylonians were very bountiful to their Wise-men, and the Professors of the Mysteries of their re∣ligion. And so was Jezabel also to the Priests of Baal, making them to sit at her own Table. 2. That the Tythes are the fittest part to maintain these publick Mini∣sters, and were so given by Jews and Gen∣tiles before Moses time.2. That the Tythes or tenth part of our goods and fruits of the earth is the fittest part, and the most ind fferent proportion, that we can assign and lay out for the maintenane and allowance of the Priests and Ministers of Religion: for not only Moses, by the instinct and inspiration of God's Spirit, appointed and commanded the tenth part to be paid unto the Priests; but also, many good and godly men before Moses time, were by the secret instigaion of the same Spirit, and the innate light of their na∣tural reason, directed, before God commanded the same, to give the Tythes of their whole Estate unto God, and to deliver it into the hands of his Re∣ceivers, the Priests:Veteres ex una¦quaque re deci mam ffere diis solebant. Fran. Sylvius Insul. And Plautus saith, U deci∣mam solveret Herculi. As among the people of God, Abraham, and Jacob, paid Tythes of all, and that long before Moses time. And among the Gen∣tiles, Plutarch recordeth, that when Hercules had vanquished Geryn, King of Spain, and by a strong hand, had taken away his Oxen from him, he made an oblation of every tenth Bullock unto God. And it is said, that Cartalus was sent by the Carthaginians unto Tyrus, to offer unto Hercules the tenth part of the spoils, that he had gotten in the Isle of Sicly. And the Histories do relate further, That the Tythes of the prey, that was ta∣ken in the Platean Wars, were dedicated, and offered up unto the ods. And Socrates, in his Ecclesiastical Histories, saith, That the Famous Wri∣ter Xenophon, both in the sixth Book of Cyrus his Expedition, and in the first Book of the Acts of the Grecians,Socrates Scho∣last. l. 7. c. 25. Titus Livius. l. 5. pag. 159. maketh mention of a Town called Chysophle; which Alcibiades walled about, and assigned a place therein for the payment of Tythes and Tribute; and so, all that loose out of the main Sea, and sail from Pontus, and do arrive at that place, did use there to pay their Tythes, saith mine Author. And Titus Livius writeth, That when the rich City of the Veii, was besieged by Furius Camillus, he spake these words, and said, By thy conduct, and the instinct of thy divine power, O Pythius Apollo, I set forward to the winning of the Town of Veii, and now to thee I vow, the tenth part of the spoils thereof; and after the Veii were captivated, and peace concluded with the Volscian, and the spoils of the City brought to Rome, Camillus said, There was one thing, that his conscience would not suffer him to hold his peace, That out of that booty only which was of moveable things, the tenth part was appointed to be levyed; but as for the City and ground, that was won, which also was comprised within the vow, there were no words at all made of them: where∣upon, the debating of this matter, (which to the Senate seemed doubtful and hard) was put over to the Priests, and Prelates; and their Colledge, calling to them Camillus, thought good that whatsoever the Veentians had before the vow was made, and whatsoever, after the vow was made, came into the hands of the people of Rome, the tenth part thereof should be consecrated to Apollo; and so, both the City, and the lands were va∣lued,
and money taken out of the City-Chamber, for the payment of this tenth; and because there was not ore enough to do it, the Dames of the City consulted thereabouts, and by a common Decree made promise unto the Tribunes Military, to supply their want; and to that end they brought into the Exchequer their own Gold, and all the Ornaments and Jewels that they had, for the payment of this tenth unto the god Apollo; And this was as acceptable a thing, and as well taken of the Senate, as ever any thing had been, saith Titus Livius. And it is reported by Plinius,Plinius. l. 12. c. 14. That the A∣rabians worshipped a god, whom they sirnamed Sabis, and that they used to pay the Tythes of all their goods unto that imaginary god. And what is the cause, that these Heathens, which knew not the True God, did these things? but that the light of reason, which the God of Na∣ture, imprinted in their minds, informed them, that the tenth part of their fruits and increase, should appertain to the provision of those Priests that served their god: And the reason,Why the 10th is the most pro∣per number that belongeth to God. why they conceived the tenth part to be more properly due to their gods, rather than the eighth, ninth, eleventh, twelfth, or thirteenth, or any other number more or less, was because the tenth number is the perfectest, and the greatest number that is, beyond which, there is no other number, but by the addition and re-iteration of the same former numbers thereunto, which you may observe in all Lan∣guages; and in the Arithmetical explanation thereof, you have no figures, as Aquinas well observeth, that reach any further than 9. to which you add the cypher 0 to make up 10. and that cypher 0, being circular and round, is the Hieroglyphic expressing the Eternal God, which, like unto this cy∣pher, 0, hath neither beginning nor ending, and doth therefore challenge this number, that is like himself, unto himself. And the highest reach of mans natural reason, could not any better way acknowledge the Power and E∣ternity of the God of Nature, than by assigning that quantity of their goods which they offered to him, by this number 10. which is the highest, and the most perfect number that is, and containeth all other numbers within it; when as after 9. you have no more figures, but adding this cypher 0. And the re-iteration of the same figures from 1. to 9. with the cyphers unto them, it makes up all numbers from 10. to 10. thousand thousands. And therefore this payment of the Tythes unto the Priests, being a truth which Nature teacheth, and which I believe was the proportion of the of∣fering and oblation that Cain and Abel brought to God, it must needs be the truth of God, that the Tythes are due unto the Priests by a Natural and Divine Right, and so never to be altered nor repealed. 3. That the Priests of God, which serve at his Altar, and the Ministers  of the Gospel, that publish the glad tydings of Salvation unto the people,Of what things the hire of the Priests should be paid. none will seem so unjust, as to deny but that they ought to have their Re∣ward, and be sufficiently maintained: The Scripture is plain enough for that, the labourer is worthy of his hire. But the question is, What that hire should be. And I say, 1. That the fittest course, the most agreeable to reason, and the most ac∣ceptable  to God is, that his hire and pension should be paid him, of that which is justly and honestly gotten, and with the least stain of unlawful pro∣curement; for, as the Lord saith, Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the House of the Lord thy God; and the reason is,Deut 33.28. Eccles. 34.18, 21. be∣cause, these are an abomination unto him. And the son of Sirach saith, Who∣so bringeth an offering of unrighteous goods, or of the goods of the poor, doth, as one that sacrificeth the son before the fathers eyes: So he that out of his monies gotten by usury, extortion, or any fraudulent wayes, would pay for God's Service, must needs be an abomination to the Lord; because that, as the very Heathens were wont to say, Nothing ought to be given and con∣secrated for the Service and Worship of God, quod prophanum, quod non
purum, aut quod non suum est, which is not pur and hnst, an which is no justly his own that gives it: But the fruits and increase of the earth, that ariseth to the honest Hus∣bandman, that tills his ground, fenceth his fields, and dressth his Vineyard, and looks for Gods blessing upon his labours, for all his pains; are free from those corruptions, and therefore fittest to be given to God, and for the Service of God. 2. I say, That because the value and prices of all other commodities, do vary and change, either according as they are esteemed, or as they are plen∣tiful or rare; but the increase and fruits of the earth, being alwayes of the same nature, the portion of the Priest, given out of that increase, will be cor∣respondent to the portion of the Husbandman, more or lesse, as the Corn in his Barn, and the abundance or penury of his Wine-presse and fruits shall be; and according to God's blessing upon the earth, so shall the Priest and the Husbandman be both alike partakers of God's blessings, that both might be alike thankful unto God: Whereas, if the Priest receives a portion al∣wayes alike in money, when the fruits and increase of the earth are plentiful the Priest hath more than his due, and when scarce, then lesse then is due, according to the proportion of God's blessing. And therefore it is apparant, that the most eeven and equallest way con∣tinually to pay the Minister his hire, and the most acceptable unto God, is, to give it out of Gods blessing of the increase and fruits of the earth. And, 3. I say, that out of the increase and fruits of the earth, the tenth part thereof, is, not only by the dictate of Nature, and the light of Reason, as I have already shewed, but also by the Law of Moses, and by the Rules of Christ,The Tythes are due under the Gospel. and the Gospel, the right and due proportion, that should be set forth and paid, for the hire and maintenance of the Priest and Minister of the Gospel: For, 1. The Tythes are due to Christ as he is a Priest.1. The Priesthood of Christ, is an everlasting Priesthood, both, ex parte ante, and ex parte post, before his incarnation, and after his incarnation: and Christ, as he was Priest, did alwayes receive Tythes before his incar∣nation; therefore as he is Priest, he is alwayes to receive the Tythes after his incarnation. That the Priesthood of Christ, is an everlasting Priesthood, as well ex parte ante, as ex parte post, the Scripture is plain enough to prove it; for the Prophet David prophesying of Christ, saith, The Lord sware, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec. And the Apostle commenting upon this oath and promise of God concerning Christ, proveth these two things that I speak of: 1. That he was a Priest continually, as well before, as after his Incarnation.2. Points pro∣ved. 2. That he received the Tythes alwayes, as he was this Eternal Priest. 1. That Christ was a Priest before his in∣carnation, and after his incar∣nation. 2. That Christ was the Melchi∣sedec which re∣ceive ythes from Abraham.The 1. Point he proveth; First because, that Melchisedec, which received the Tythes from Abraham, is said to be, without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of dayes, nor end of life, but abiding a Priest continually. And 2ly, Because, that Melchisedec, which is there spoken of, and re∣ceived those Tythes from the Patriarch Abraham, was none other person, than Christ himself, in an assumed shape and manhood for a season, though not hypostatically united to the Divine Nature, so to remain for ever: which may easily be proved. 1. Reason to 1. Because the Apostle saith, That he was greater than the Patriarch Abraham, who is termed, the friend of God, and the father of the faithful; which Epithete, with the words, .
. Without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the better,Heb. 7.7. or of the greater, as the Geneva Translator reads it, doth sufficiently shew Him to be Divinioris cujusdam naturae, of a far more excellent, and Divine nature than Abraham was. 2. Because the Apostle, going about to speak of this Melchisedec,2. Reason. and to let them understand, who he was, saith, , concerning whom, we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered,Heb. 5.11. or explained: which certainly, so great an Apostle, and so expert in all the Jewish Rites, would never have said, had he not understood this Mel∣chisedec to be , some excellent and ineffable Person; because he doth never say thus, when he speaks, either of the Angels, or of any other of the Types and Figures of Jesus Christ. Which you shou d mark. 3.3. Reason. Because the Apostle doth not say of this Melchisedec [Whose death is not set down or mentioned by Moses]; for so he might be dead, though his death were not spoken of; but he saith,  that Da∣vid testifieth or witnesseth, that he liveth; to shew the difference betwixt this Priest that alwayes liveth, and those Levitical Priests, that ever died; and therefore, comparing the Priesthood of Aaron, and of the Levites, and the Priesthood of Christ together, he saith, . And here, that is, among the Levitical Priests, men that die receive Tythes; but there he, that is, Melchi∣sedec, or Christ receiveth them; of whom it is witnessed, that he liveth: Where∣in I would have you diligently to observe, that the Apostle would have us to understand, 1. That Aaron and the Levites were , men. 2. That they were , mortal men, that died: But this Priest, by the Antithesis, must be neither man, that is, simply a man, and no more but a man; nor mortal after the manner of other men, because the Prophet testifieth , that he liveth; and therefore going to prove the necessity of the change of the Law, he saith, it is evident, because our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which Tribe Moses spake nothing concerning the Priesthood: And he addeth, that it is yet far more evident,Verse 14. because that after the similitude of Melchisedec, there ariseth another Priest who is made, , not after the Law, of a carnal com∣mandment, ; but after the power of an endlesse life: and, Who hath the power of an endlesse life, but Jesus Christ? Therefore this Melchisedec can be none other than Jesus Christ, because the Apostle saith, he was of an endlesse life; or otherwise the similitude doth not hold, that Christ was of an endlesse life, , after the likeness of Melchisedec, if his life was none otherwise endlesse, than what is, or may be, collected out of Moses, touching the endlesse life of Melchisedec; but the Apostle proveth Christ to be so, of an endlesse life, not by what Moses said, or said not, of Melchisedec; but by the testimony of the Prophet David, which saith, The Lord sware, that He (i. e.) Christ, is a Priest for ever, and so is of an endlesse life, which cannot be said of that Melchisedec, spoken of by Moses, unless that Melchisedec be Jesus Christ: Because, that if he was not Jesus Christ, we are sure that he died, and there∣fore could not be of an endlesse life. 4.4. Reason. Because the Apostle (to answer and prevent an Objection that might be made, because, he had said, that Melchisedec. , was made like unto the Son of God) meanes no otherwise by this , made like unto the Son of God, but that he was indeed the Son of God.Hebr. 7 3. Even as Nebuchadnezzar saith, The fourth man, that walked with the three children in the fiery-Furnace, was like unto the Son of God;Dan. 3.25. whereby he meant, that he was none other than the Son of God, that came there to preserve his servants: So here the Apostle, in saying that he was
, made like unto the Son of God; meaneth (without question) that this Melchisedec, or, this Christ, that met Abraham, assu∣med now a body of the same likeness, habit, and countenance, as afterward he meant to unite personally unto himself: for that it is un usual thing in Scripture, to say, that he, which is, is like unto himself; as that Saint Paul is like Saint Paul: as where the Apostle saith, that Christ Was found in shape or fashion,Phil. 2.7, 8. as a man, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: that is, he was made indeed, a true, perfect, and a natural man. 5. Reason.5. Because Abraham did give unto this Melchisedec, the Tythe of all that was taken from four Kings, a great booty, as perceiving under that visible shape and form of man, an invisible deity to subsist; to whom, the tythe of all things, is only due, and everlastingly due to him, and to none but to him (as the Lord saith himself,Levit. 27.30. All the tythe of the land is the Lords, that is the Lord Christ's) because he is the everlasting Priest, which Melchisedec, if he was a mortal man and not Christ, could not be. 6. Reason.6. Because Saint Paul, confirmeth the perpetuity and eternity of Christ his Priest-hood, with the testimony of the Prophet David, who, speaking of Christ, saith, Thou art a Priest forever, , according to the or∣der of Melchisedec saith the Greek copy;Petrus Cunaeus de Repub Heb. l. 3. c. 3. pag. 402. but, Sicut vel quemad modum Mel∣chisedecus, even as, or in like manner, as Melchisedec is a Priest forever, saith the Hebrew text, as Aben Ezra doth expound it; and so makes it clear that that Melchisedec was Jesus Christ. 7. Reason.7. And lastly, Because all they, which do affirm this Melchisedec, to be either Shem, the son of Noah, or any other King of Salem, and a Mortal man, Fateri coguntur ea omnia, quae de illo Apostolus dixit, etiam Mssiae con∣venire, saith Cunaeus, are compell'd to confess, that all those things which the Apostle speaks of Melchisededec, do very well and literally agree with Christ, but cannot agree with any other mortal man, without admitting many mystical and figurative interpretations thereof. And therefore I do say, that this Melchisedec, which received these tythes was no mortal man, but the immortal son of God, to whom all tythes are due; and he, assuming a visible shape, did appear unto Abraham, after his great victory, which he had over his enemies; and is the first victory that we read of in the Holy Scripture: and may typifie the spiritual Conquest of our ene∣mies by our Saviour Christ, who offered unto Abraham, bread and wine, as the type of our blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and it is probable, that our Saviour had respect hereunto, when he said unto the Jews, that Abraham saw his day and rejoyced,Joh. 8.15. that is, not only with the eyes of faith, (as all the rest of the Patriarchs, and Prophets did see him) but also in a vi∣sible shape,This point is more fully handled in my book of The best Religion in the Treatise of the Incar∣nation of Christ. which he assumed; like unto that, whereunto he was afterward to be united, and which many Prophets and just men desired to see, and have not seen; God yielding not such a special favour unto them, as herein he did unto faithful Abraham. And so you see the first point sufficiently cleared, that Christ was al∣waies and continually an eternal Priest, as well before as after his Incar∣nation. And 2. Point, that Christ received tythes as he was Priest.2. For the other point, that he alwaies received the Tythes, as he was this eternal Priest, the Scriptures make it plain; for here you see, this Mel∣chisedec, which is Christ, receiveth the tythes of Abraham: and Saint Pal saith, that he, whose descent is not counted from them, that is from the po∣sterity of Aaron, that is Christ, received tythes of Abraham; and all the Le∣vitical Priests, that were as then in the loyns of Abraham paid tythes to Him, to whom only all tythes are due; and the Levites to whom Moses, under the law, commanded the tythes to be paid, were but his substituts and Tythe gatherers, and receiving what is due to him, unto themselves, for his service.
And seeing Christ himself received tythes, as due to him before the law, and received them, by his servants, the Levites under the law,More reason to pay Tythes now to Chist, then in the time of the Law, proved at large. Why should he now be deprived of them, and not receive them also by his Ministers un∣der the Gospel? Especially considering he hath now accomplished, fulfilled, and wholly discharged, the Office of his Priest-hood, which was to offer that propitiatory Sacrifice unto God; which should fully satisfy and appease his wrath for the sins of the people, which as then he had but only promised, and shadowed out the same, in types and figures, unto the fathers: Or, is it possible to imagin that they which paid him their tythes under the law, were more obliged to him for those shadows, and the expectation of accomplishing his promises, than we should be, for having already obtain∣ed the real substance? Or, shall we believe the whole generation of men to be such, as will promise any thing, and do any thing, that they can, to obtain what they desire, and when they have obtained their desires, will do and perform just nothing. So while Christ was desired and expected to come; men duely paid their tythes unto him; but now being come, and having done his work, and discharged his Priestly Office, they will pay him no tythes at all; which is the propertie of ill natures, To promise any thing, while they seek, and to do nothing, when they obtain their desires. But the consideration of the persons, that paid their tythes to Christ, be∣fore his Incarnation, is an unanswerable argument to prove, that all Chri∣stians should much rather now pay their Tythes to Him after his Incarna∣tion; for if they, that had all things more imperfect then we have them, and but in shadows under a vail and curtains, that were drawn over them, did then so fully and so readily pay their Tythes to Christ, and to his ser∣vants that gathered them; How can we now, when the night is past, and the Curtains of those Types are drawn aside, and the substance of those their shadows are perfectly shewed unto us, be any waies excused, if we refuse and deny to pay our Tythes to him, and to his Ministers, that gather them? Because it is an uncontroulable Maxim, To whom much is given, of them much shall be required: And God having given us far better, and far more perfect things, then he gave unto the Jews; he looks that we should be more thankful, and more ready to pay our Tythes, and to do him service, then they were; and therefore Christ saith, That except our righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,Matth. 5. we shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And yet you know what they did, fast twice every week, and pay Tythes of all that they had even of the smallest things, mint, and annise, and the least herbs they had; and How doth our righteousness exceed their righte∣ousness, if we deny our Tythes to Gods Ministers? I would we were as righteous as they were. And as the Consideration of the Persons paying their Tythes, so the con∣sideration of the Persons, to whom they were paid, as to the substitutes of Christ, as well before as after the coming of Christ, doth sufficiently prove, that we Christians have more reasn to pay our Tythes now under the Gos∣pel, then the Jews had to pay them under the law; for, if the Tythes were payable, and to be given to those servants of Christ, that were of the lower degree, and did the meaner offices, and brought least benefit unto the peo∣ple of Christ; then certainly they should be much rather payable to those Ministers of Christ, that are of a far higher degree, and do the more honorable offices, and bring the rarest and the greatest benefits unto the people; but the Ministers of the Gospel, in all the foresaid respects, do far exceed and excel the Priest-hood of the law; because, as Saint Paul sheweth, the Levi∣tical Priests were but Lecturers of the letter, which killeth; but the Mini∣nisters of the Gospel, are the Interpreters of the Spirit, which giveth life;2 Cor. 3 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. they expounded the shadows, these the substance of Religion; and they had
committed unto them the Ministration of Condemnation, and these have the Ministration of Righteousness and Glorification delivered unto their charge. Therefore, seeing the Ministers of the Gospel, do thus far and in these re∣pects excel the Priests of the Law, there is no reason their hire and main∣tenance should be less then the hire and maintenance of the Levitical Priests but that the Tythes should be as well paid to these as the other. §. 1. de deci∣mis.  est portio una ex decem. Extra de deci∣mis. Cum non sit. Augustinus de doctrina Chri∣stiana.And the Civilians tell you, that, Decima est omnium bonorum mobilium licite quaesitorum, pars decima; Deo data, & Divinae constitutione debita: The Tythe is the tenth part of all moveable goods, lawfully gotten, given unto God, and due to be paid unto the Priests by the Ordinance of God. And Innocentius saith, that God by a special title hath reserved the Tythes unto himself, in token of his Ʋniversal Dominion, Power, and Right that he hath over all. And therefore Saint Augustine saith, that the Tythes, being thus due to God, Ii qui dare nolunt, alienas res invadunt, They that will not pay their Tythes do take away others right, and hold that which is none of their own. And therefore Cum decimas dando, coelestia & terrena possis promereri, pro avaritia tua denegando,The dammage of detayning our Tythes. duplici benedictione fraudaris; When by paying thy Tythes to Gods Ministers, thou mayst gain both Celestial and Terrestrial blessings, according as the Prophet sheweth; thou by thy Covetousness in denying thy Tythes, doest deprive thy self of this double benefit: because this is the most usual proceeding of the just God, That, Qui decimam non de∣derit, ad decimam reducetur; that many times, the man that will not pay his Tythes, shall be reduced unto the Tythe when either the fire, or canker-worm and Caterpiller, shall consume thy store, or the wicked Souldier will Plun∣der, and take from thee, what thou wouldst not give to Gods Mi∣nister. Therefore it is apparant, that no wise man, which loveth his own good, will deny the payment of his Tythes unto the Ministers of Jesus Christ: and that you may rightly understand this case concerning Tythes, you must ob∣serve that they are of three sorts. That all tyths are of three sorts.1. Predial. 2. Personal. 3. Neutral. 1. They are called Predial, which do naturally arise out of the fruits and increase of the Earth. 2. They are styled Personal, which do accrew out of the fruits, gain, and labour of the person, that getteth them, either by Traffick, Warfare, Hunting, or any other exercise of his hands. 3. They are termed Neutral, that are not simply of either of the two former kinds, but do partly accrew from the increase and fruits of the Earth, or the Cattle that are increased, by their feeding thereon; or o∣therwise are brought up under the care of mens hands. And all these are the Tythes that are due, and properly due to our High Priest Jesus Christ, and ought to be justly paid to the Ministers of Christ for the Worship and Service of God.
CHAP. XVI. The Answer to the choicest, and chiefest Objection that the Schoole of Anabaptists have made, and do urge against the payment of Tythes now, in the time of the Gospel. BUt, though the truth of this point, that all Tythes, as well in the time of the Gospel, as under the Law, and before the law, are continually due to Christ, our eternal Priest; and so at all times payable, and to be given to his Substitutes and under-Priests, is as clear as the Sun: yet, such hath been and is the malice of Satan against Christ and his Church, that he hath raised up, and stirred a whole Army of Sectaries, Anabaptists, and Worldlings, that with might and main do fight against this Truth, and labour with all their wits, to suppress the same, and to drive it quite out of the World: And to that end, they do Object. 1. If all Tythes be thus due, as you say, by the Law of God,  then they are every where due, and all they do sin, and grievously offend that do de∣tain them. But many Countreys, and some Christian Common-wealthes, no doubt, pay no Tythes at all, and are not acquainted with this fashion of paying Tythes, and yet do sufficiently and honorably maintain their Ministers for the service of God. Therefore, questionless, the payment of Tythes is not due by the Divine Law. To this Objection, I conceive Dr. Gardiner doth reasonably well answer,So. though, I think, not fully sufficient to take away the strength of this Argu∣ment, in his large and rational discourse, which he makes in answer to this their Objection; for he saith, and that truly, That many things are of such Nature,1. Answer. (though I think Tythes are not so) as will not be fitting to every place, or all places, alike; but may, in some places, be well performed, and in some other places be prohibited; be∣cause, as Cicero saith,Cicero in Orat. pro Balbo. the different state of Cities inforceth a necessity of different Laws: for, as all meats are not alike pleasant to all Palats, and every air agreeth not with all Constitutions; so all manners belong not to all men: but some Laws are sutable to some people; and some other Laws are more convenient for some other; and all, or the same, are not expedient for all. And as every shooe will not be drawn on every foot,We may alter the Ceremo∣nies of the Church, as the times and state of the Church do require. and one kind of Me∣dicine, is not to be Administred to every Stomack, but that Physick, which may fit the younger age, may be unkind for the same disease when old age hath seised upon us: So one discipline may be fitting for a City, which may not be so fitting, either for another City, or especially for a Kingdom; and one Ceremony may sort with the Church, in times of peace and pros∣perity, which holdeth no correspondency with the seasons of War and Persecution. Neither should we look, that the same uniform regiment is to be obser∣ved, In ecclesia Constituta, as in Ecclesia Constituenda, as well in an infant-Church, as in a Church of riper age; or in a Church persecuted, when she flyeth with the woman into the Wilderness, or is faign to lie desolate in the caves of the earth, and a Church in peace when she sitteth as a Queen in
her Throne; or in a Church under Hathen Emperours, and a Church un∣der Christian Governours, when she so journeth as a captive in Bbylon, and when she dwelleth at liberty in Jerusalem; for as no one garment can fit the Moon,It is hard to make a fit coat for the Moon. which is subject by nature to an often-change, and is sometimes in the Full, and afterward in the Wayn, and never continuing in one stay; So the Church of Christ, being like the Moon, sometimes high, and some∣time low, often in the Full, and as often in the Wayn; it cannot be, that the same uniform Government should fit the Church in all places, and at all times. And therefore, the Prophet speaking of the Kings Daughter, that signifieth the Church of Christ, saith, That although her chiefest glory is within, yet her outward Attire is likewise glorious, and it is of divers co∣lours; and so are the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, of divers sorts, as the times and places do admit them. And Musculus to the same purpose, saith, Si illorum temporum mores revocas, tum conditiones & statum quoque il∣lorum temporum primum revoca. If thou wilt call back again, the manners, customes, and practise of those times, wherein the Apostles and primitive Christians lived; then first call back again the state and conditions of those times; that both the times and the manners may agree; when, as I told you before, many things may serve at one time, that will not serve at ano∣ther time; Ʋt musica in luctu est importuna narratio, As Musick is unsea∣sonable in the time of mourning, saith the Wise-man. And indeed, what Tertullian saith, is beyond all contradiction, Regula fidei immobilis & irreformabilis est, The Rule and Canon of our Faith is, and must alwayes be, unmoveable, and unreformable, not to be altered; at caetera disciplinae & conversationis novtatem correctionis admittunt;Tertull. in l. De veland Vir∣gin. but all other things, that appertain to discipline, and government, and con∣versation, may admit the newness and change of a Reformation: And so the Eucharist, the holy Communion, being to succeed for our Sacrament, in the room of the Passeover, it was most convenient, that it should be ce∣lebrated by Christ at Supper-time, in the evening, because the P sseover was commanded by the Law, to be eaten between the two evenings: And yet the Church thought it more convenient to alter that fashion,The first Chri∣stians did ma∣ny things that we are not bound to do; and we do ma∣ny ood thin s that they did not. and to take it in the morning. So likewise, Christ was baptized in Jordan, and the Apostles baptized men in Rivers, and Fountains of waters; and would you have us to imitate their example, to forsake the Christian Assembly in the holy Church, and to carry our Infants, with the fanatick Anabaptists, to be baptized in the Rivers? But seeing that in the Apostles time, the good Christians sold their lands and possessions, and laid down the prices and monies, that they re∣ceived for them, at the Apostles feet; I demand, Why do not our Ana∣baptists, that would have all things reduced to the Primitive time, imitate them in this their Devotion, and lay the prices of their lands at their Prea∣chers feet? I know they will answer, That this extraordinary Devotion, is not of necessity to be drawn into imitation: and I confess it; But in the Apostles time, there were no Ʋniversities, no Schools of Lear∣ning, no Hospitals, nor Alms-houses, no Book of the Holy Scriptures divi∣ded into Chapters, nor Chapters into Verses, no distinction of Parishes, and many other good things were not then in being; And shall we now cast them all away, because the Apostles and the first Christians had them not? Or will not the giddy-heads understand, that, as the Sun in the firmament, go∣eth higher and higher, unto the noon and perfect day; so the truth, and knowledge of the Sun of Righteousness, and the perfection of his Service, groweth more and more unto the fulness of the knowledge of Christ: and even as Christ himself increased in wisdom and knowledge, .52. and in favour with God and men; so doth the Church of Christ. And so to return, and to apply our selves to the case of Tythes, though some
places, as it may be in the Low-Countries, and the Reformed Churches in France, have their immunities by themselves, and are not charged with the payment of Tythes, (their state and condition not admitting it) yet in lieu of their Tythes, their Ministers are maintained with as sufficient supplies: and necessity excuseth even in greater matters, as in not praying, and not re∣ceiving the Sacraments, as well as in not paying Tythes, when the case can∣not be otherwise. As S. Paul, for some special exigency, took no stipend of some Churches for his labours, in the preaching of the Gospel; Yet, he tells them, that by right he might have claimed it; and therefore inferreth, that what he did for some special causes, should not be drawn into an example, to prejudice and defraud others of that which was their due. So we say, That in those Churches, which pay not their Tythes in kind, there is an allowance, equivalent to the Tythes,The Ministers of the Refor∣med Churches in the other Countrys have no cause to complain. given to those Ministers that have no Tythes. And as the Kings of Persia imposed no Tribute upon those subjects, that brought in their voluntary contributions, that increased their Exchequer more than their Tribute; So their Preachers have no cause to complain, for not receiving their Tythes, when they have as much, or more, than their Tythes are worth: And the example of these, that live by their set and certain stipend, ought not to be alleadged and pleaded, to the hurt and prejudice of them, that are sustained by their Tythes. And though all this that I have said be very true; yet, because, as I conceive, it taketh not away the strength of the foresaid Argument, which is, That if it be a Moral Precept, that doth oblige us to observe it, semper & ad semper, then it obligeth all men, and in all places, to pay their Tythes, and they sin, that pay them not, though they do pay some other stipend, be it more or less in lieu of them; because it lieth not in man to alter or change the Commandment of God, but to do what he commandeth them; Therefore, 2. I say, and yield,2. Answer more fully. That the Precept of paying Tythes for the Service of God, being a Moral, perpetual, and universal Precept, it obligeth all men, in all places, and at all times, as well, before the Law, as after the Law, and as well after the incarnation of Christ, as before his incarnation, to observe and to obey the same, and that they sinned which did it not: for as God hath imprinted it in the heart of man, and the light of nature teacheth him, that God must be served, and a set time must be appointed for that Service,What all the generations of men are bound to do. and a standing proportion of our goods allotted for them, that do him ser∣vice, and teach others so to do: and God hath shewed unto us, that the set time for his Service should be every seventh day, which we should San∣ctifie, and keep Holy for that end; and the standing quantity and proportion of our goods, that we ought to set forth for his Service, should be our Tythes: So accordingly, every man, among all the generations of men, ought to do; to sanctifie the Seventh day, to serve God, and to pay their Tythes, for the performance and continuance of his Service. And if man, by his transgression, hath obscured this light of nature, and obliterated that impression, which God had imprinted in his heart, and through his own negligence or forgetfulness remembreth neither the day that he should keep holy, nor that part that he should pay for his Service: Shall that make the Commandment of God of none effect, or acquit man, for the not performance of his duty? By no means; for you know, what the Prophet saith, of the children of Israel,Psal. 78.11. when God had done his wonderful works for them in Egypt, and fearful things by the Red Sea;Psal. 106.13. they soon for∣gat what he had done, and were not mindful of his Covenant: So did all the sons of Adam forget not only these, but also all other the Command∣ments of God, especially in many, if not the chief points thereof; and nei∣ther their negligence, nor forgetfulness, can excuse them herein from sin, in the breach of his Commandment.
eplicatio.But you will say, This Commandment of keeping the Seventh day, and giving the tenth part of our goods for his Service, was never directly, and precisely, or expresly given in terminis, until Moses time; and where there is no Law, there is no transgression: therefore they did not sin, when they had no Commandment. Responsio. Gen. 4.3. Chap. 4. 26. Chap. 8. 20.I answer, That when Cain and Abel brought their Oblation unto the Lord, and when children were born unto Sheth, and men began to call up∣on the Name of the Lord; and when Noah built an Altar unto the Lord, and offered burnt-offerings upon the Altar: And so likewise, when Abra∣ham did the like,Else these Ser∣vices had been but , a Will-worship, and no wayes ac∣ceptable unto God. and called on the Name of the Lord, the everlasting God, we read of no Command in terminis that they had, to do these things; but God had written these Commandments in their hearts, with the Pen of Nature: And so, as the Apostle saith, having no Law, they were a law unto themselves, and having no Commandment, they were commandments un∣to themselves; and whosoever transgresse the same, transgresse the Com∣mandments of God. And therefore, these things being imprinted in mans heart by the Pen of Nature, I say, that what Nation soever, and what Church soever have not, or do not serve God, and pay their Tythes to Christ and his servants, for the Service of God, and the continuance of his Service, they do trans∣gresse the Commandment of God. But I do not say, it must be precisely the tenth part of our goods, and no more; for as we may keep holy some other day, besides the Seventh day, so we miss not to keep the Seventh day; So, we may give more than the tenth for the Service of God, if we please, so we neglect not to give the tenth. And as the Jews having a Commandment, that they should not punish any Offender with any more than 40. stripes, did not transgresse, when for fear of misreckoning, they never gave but 39; So when God commandeth us to give the tenth, we do not break his Commandment, when for fear of giving too little, we give more than the tenth: But, 2. They do object, That what neither Christ, nor his Apostles have com∣manded us to do, we are no wayes oblged to do; but neither Christ nor his Apostles have commanded us to pay Tythes: for Christ biddeth his A∣postles to teach the Nations and people,Matth 28.20. Act. 20.27. to observe all things that he comman∣ded them: And S. Paul saith, That he had shewed unto the people the whole counsel of G d: and yet in all the Sermons of Christ, and in all the Writings of the Apostles, there is not any Precept given for the Christians to pay Tythes. Therefore the Christians ought not to be compelled to pay Tythes. To this I answer. 1. That the payment of Tythes, is a Precept, imprin∣ted in our hearts by the Law of Nature, and afterwards confirmed and ex∣plained unto us by the Law of Moses,Matth. 5.17. and practised by many Nations of the Gentiles, as I shewd to you before. And our Saviour saith, Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, that is, to give liberty, and to free men from the obedience and performance of either of these Laws, that is, the Law of Nature, and the Moral Law, as the 19. and 20. verses do shew the same most plainly. And when John Baptist would have hindred him to be baptized, he telleth John, That it behoved them, not only him∣self, but John also, and so all others, as well as John, to fulfil all righteous∣nesse: And how shall we fulfil all righteousnesse, unless we render to Caesar what is Caesars, and to God what is God's? And as S. Paul saith, To owe no∣thing to any man, but to yield Honour to whom Honour belongeth, Tribute to whom Tribute; and so Tythes to whom the Tythes do be∣long. 2. I say, That Christ and his Apostles do plainly enough enjoyn us to pay our Tythes; for Christ, reproving the preciseness of the Scribes and
Pharisees in paying Tythes of Mint, Anise, and Cummin, and neglecting the greater matters of the Law, saith, These things ye ought to have done,Matth. 23.25. and not to leave the other undone: And if you say, These words are to be restrain∣ed to that time, wherein the Ceremonial Law was in force, and not to the times of the Christians; I answer, Not so: but they are rather to be referred to the Christians, than to the Jews; for all Tythes being due to Christ, as he is our Eternal Priest, as I have fully proved to you before, Who should now have most right unto the Tythes, the Preachers that are followers of Christ, or the Scribes and Pharisees that rejected him? But now, when Christ and his Apostles preached, the Scribes and Pharisees had all the Tythes in their own hands, and would not suffer Christ and his Apostles to take them from them; and therefore, seeing they would neither believe and follow Christ, nor yield the Tythes, to them that preached the Gospel of Christ, it fell out by the just judgement of God, that when Nero sent Fe∣lix to be the Governour of Jury, the Priests were deprived of their Tythes,Josephus l. 20. c 13. and many of them perished with Famine, as Josephus witnesseth. 3. I say, That Christ by these words, teaching them to observe all things  whatsoever I commanded, meaneth not,And it was he that comman∣ded all that they comman∣ded. that they should only observe what he commanded, and no more; but that they should likewise observe what Moses, and David, and the rest of the Prophets, yea, and what the Scribes and Pharisees commanded them to do, while they sate in Moses Chair, and whatsoever he commanded them to do, besides all, that was formerly com∣manded; because he commanded a great deal more, to make his people more perfect then ever was commanded before his time; for you heard it was said of old, Thou shalt not commit Adultery, but I say unto you, Whoso∣ever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath committed Adultery:Matth. 5.27. &c. And you heard it was said of old, Thou shalt not forswear thy self; but I say un∣to you, Swear not at all: So you heard it was said of old, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto you, Resist not evil: And so you heard, it was said of old, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine ene∣my; but I say unto you, Love your enemies, and so forth. And therefore the meaning of Christ's words in the 28th of S. Matthew and the 20th verse, is as I said, That they should observe and do, not only what was commanded them before, but also whatsoever he, and his Apo∣stles by his Spirit, commanded them besides; as, to believe in him, and to follow him, and so forth. 4. I say, That S. Paul in saying, that, as they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple, and they that wait at the Alter, are partakers with the Altar; even so hath the Lord ordained,1 Cor. 9.13, 14 that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; doth herein fully and plainly prove, that the Tythes should be as duly, and us justly paid to the Ministers of the G spel, as they were to the Priests and Levites under the Law: For by the Altar, and they that wait at it, the Priesthood is understood, and by the fruits and profits of the Altar, the Tythes and Oblations are plainly meant; and then adding, , Even so, that is, in like manner, or by the like means, which  signifieth, the Lord hath ordained, that the Ministers of the Gospel, should have all the fruits, profits, and be∣nefits of the Altar, which are the Tythes and Oblations, as well, and in like manner, as the Priests of the Law have had them. 3. They do object, if we compel the Christians to pay Tythes, we make  their yokes more grievous, and their burden more intolerable than the bur∣den of those Fathers, that lived before the Law was given; for that in the time of the first Patriarchs, the Tythes were never demanded as a duty, but Abraham freely, and not forcedly, gave them to Melchisedec: and Jacob conditionally, and not absolutely, made his vow to pay them unto God: but we ought not to make the yoke and burden of our people now in the
time of grace, more intolerable then they were in the time of nature: there∣fore Tythes ought not to be required as a duty. To this I answer, 1. That although, in those Primitive times, the Tythes were not demanded, nor by any Positive Law, commanded by God; and therefore not paid, until Abraham and Jacob had paid them: yet this proveth not, that it was not due because it was not paid; as it is no consequent, that because God commanded not Cain and Abel to offer Sa∣crifice, nor the sons of Sheth, To call upon the name of the Lrd; therefore it was not their duty to do it; for it is our duty, to do many things that we do not. And so I have proved, It was their duty to pay Tythes, though they paid them not. 2. I say, that before the Law was given, the Fathers of the first age, had many things in use, which were not answerable to that Perfection, which Christ requireth in his followers; and therefore he injoyned us to do many things that they did not; and so did the Law it self, both inhibite them to do some things, that they did amiss, and commanded many things to be observed, which they neglected: and therefore that first age of the World, being but the Infancy of Gods Church, and the daies of Initia∣tion, they are not to be alleadged, as examples for our imitation: For, when I was a Child, I did as a Child; but when I was a man, I put away childish things: saith the Apostle. 3. I say, there was no such need nor reason, for the payment of Tythes then, though they were due, to maintain the Priests and Ministers of God, as afterwards, and especially, as now, in our times; because then the first born of every family was the Priest, and he, by the prerogative of his Birth-right, was to have a double part and portion of inheritance; and there∣fore, 4. And lastly I say, that if the Patriarchs, in those times, when there was no Positive commandment, to pay Tythes, did notwithstanding pay them even to those Priests, that had means enough of their own to live by it, and had no need of Tythes to sustain them: then much rather should we now pay them, to those Ministers of Christ, that have no other mainte∣nance, and therefore can not labour in Gods Vine-yard, and discharge the duties of their calling without them, especially considering, how often, and how earnestly Christ and his Apostles do command us, and exhort us to do it, and with such promises of Blessings, if we do it; and Cursings, if we refuse it. 4. They do Object, That the Commandment for paying Tythes is not Moral, but either Judicial or Ceremonial: and we that are Christians are not obliged to observe either the Ceremonial or the Judicial Laws of the Jews; because all the Ceremonial Laws were but shadows, types, and predi∣ctions, shewing the coming, doings, and sufferings of Jesus Christ, and when the true light and substance of those shadows, the Sun of Righteousness was come, all those shadows were at an end, and vanished away; and the Judicial Laws of the Jews were only proper, and peculiar to that people, and do not oblige other Nations to observe them. And therefore the Chri∣stians are no wayes obliged to the payment of Tythes. To this Objection, which some of our opposers think, to be invincible, I answer (and it may be contrary to the opinion of many Divines, of no mean or usual Learning) and I say for Tythes, 1. That they are due to Christ, as he is a Priest for ever, by a Divine, Natural, and Moral right, as I hope, I have sufficiently proved to you before. And if they do Object and say, that if the precept of paying Tythes be of a Natural right, and a Moral precept, then the payment thereo is, or ought to be, commanded, within one of the ten Commandments of the
Moral Law; because, all Moral precepts are comprehended within those ten Commandments: but the precept of paying Tythes, is not in any one of the ten Commandments of the Moral Law; and therefore it is no Moral precept. I answer, That the payment of Tythes is commanded, in four special Commandments of the Moral Law, as, in the first, the fourth, the sixth, the eighth. For as the Prophet David saith, Thy Commandments, O Lord, are exceeding broad; and do comprehend abundance of things more then you see prima facie, in the outward letter of the Commandment; as when the Commandment sayeth, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, it injoyneth thee, to feed him, and to maintain him, as Joseph did his Father Jacob, when he wants, and is not able to maintain himself; and when it saith, Thou shalt do no murder, it forbids us to hate, or to be angry with our neigh∣bour; So when the Lord saith, Thou shalt have none other gods but me, he commands us to render unto God, what is God's; as well, to maintain his out∣ward service, by tythes and offerings unto his Priests, and alms unto his poor members, as by serving him with our inward service of faith, hope, love, fear, and the like; So when he commands us To keep Holy the Sabbath day, he commands us, to do all things, that do further and do appertain to the Sanctifying of the Sabbath and, Who can deny, but that the payment of our Tythes to the Preacher and Minister of Christ, is one of the most principal means to further and cause the Sanctifying of the Lords day? When, as the Artist cannot work without his tools;Many things are included that are not so clearly expres∣sed in the ten Command∣ments. so the Minister cannot discharge his service, on the Sabbath, unless he is maintained all the week: And so when he bids us to Honor our Father and Mother, he means that we should as well, or rather in the first place, Reverence, and with our Tythes and Offerings relieve and maintain our spiritual Fathers, the Ministers of Christ, and the Church our Mother, as our natural Father and Mother: and so likewise, when he saith, Thou shalt not steal, he commands us, not to detain and keep back the Tythes, and Offerings from Gods Ministers: Whereby you may see, that this commandment of paying our Tythes is a Moral pre∣cept, and implicitely contained and comprehended in the Moral Law. And if you say,  The maintenance of the Ministers may be included in those Moral commandments, to be commanded, for the performance of Gods outward service, and to uphold and further the Sanctifying of his Sabbath; yet there is no proof, that, that maintenance, which is implied in those pre∣cepts, must be the Tenth part, rather then the eleventh, fifteenth, or the twentyeth part of our goods. I answer, That I have proved already, That the very Tythe,  or tenth part is the continual due that belongs to Christ, as he is a continual Priest for ever; and all the precepts of Christ, and commandments of God, being Brevia, levia & utilia, very compendious and short, that they might not be forgotten; for which cause, the Ten Commandments are styled,The Com∣mandments are very short that we should not forget them. decem verba, ten words: and these ten words are contracted, into one word, which is but one syllable, and all the Commandments of God are compre∣hended in that one syllable, Love: For love is the fulfilling of the Law: There is no reason, we should look, that all the inclusive particulars, contained in that one word, or in those few short precepts, should or could be particu∣larly expressed therein. But they are alwaies left to be understood and explained by the Preachers and Commentators. As when he saith, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, the Sanctifying of the Sabbath, you must confess, is therein concluded; and yet, that the Sabbath shall be the seventh day, is not therein mentioned; So when he saith, Thou shalt have none other gods but me, the Tythes, that are a special means to uphold and further his out∣ward service must of necessity be understood, to be therein comprehended, though in direct terms, the tenth part is not expressed. And
Further, I answer to their fourth Objection; That although a Judicial and a Ceremonial consideration may be rendred, for the payment of Tythes among the Jews; As, that equality might be preserved among the tribes of this people; that, because, in the Division of the Land of Canaan, the Le∣vites had no part of the Land, Moses thought it fit, the Tythes, which were to be paid to God, should be given to them out of every tribe; and that would make their estate and maintenance proportionable to the other tribes; yet this judicial consideration of paying the Tythes unto the Le∣vites: doth no waies infringe or weaken the equity and morality of this precept, for the perpetual payment of the Tythes to Christ, and his Mini∣sters, to further and uphold the service of God. Any Kingdom may take laws from other Kingdoms, when they are seen good.And, besides the equity and morality of this precept; seeing Moses was so just and so excellent a Law-giver, far beyond and much better then all the Law-givers of the Gentiles, Greek or Latin; there is no reason, why o∣ther Kingdoms, or Nations should not use the same judicial Laws, as were used among the Jews: for the politick powers of any Kingdom, may take Laws from any other Kingdom, where they see the best Laws made; as the Romans took their Law of the twelve Tables from the Athenians, and the Cities of Germany from the Venetians: and then, Sicut leges quas Athenis Romani transtulerunt, cum ab ipsis comprobatae & confirmatae fuissent, eas ni∣hilominus Jus Civile Romanorum nominarunt: As the Laws, which the Ro∣mans took from Athens, when they were received and confirmed by the Senate of Rome,Cokus, de jure Regis Eccle∣siast. they were styled, The Civil-Laws of the Romans, saith the Lord Cook: so when any Kingdom or Common-wealth takes those Laws of the Jews, that were meerly Judicial, and not any waies Moral precepts, or the like politick Laws of any other Nation, and confirm them for Laws, to be observed in their Territories; they have the force of binding-Laws, and may not, with a safe Conscience, of any of the Subjects of those Domi∣nions, where they have their Sanction, be voyded or violated. CHAP. XVII. What the ancient Fathers of the Church, and the Councils (collected of most Learned and pious Bishops) have left written concerning Tythes: And of the three-fold cause, that detains them from the Church. What the Fa∣thers say of Tythes, and Oblations.ANd now having seen, by the Testimony of the Holy Scripture, and by many Reasons, that the Tythes are by a Divine right due to Christ, and his Ministers; Let us hear, what the Fathers, and Councils, and the Canons of the Church have said of this point, concerning Tythes: and I do find that Irenaeus,Iren. l. 4. c. 34. who was Scholler to Polycarpus, that was the disciple of S. John the Evangelist, saith, Offerimus Deo bona nostra, ut signa gratitudinis pro illis donis quae à Deo recepimus: We offer to God our goods, that is, our Tythes and Oblations to God, as the signs and tokens of our thankfulness un∣to God,Origen. in num. Hom. 11, for those gifts, which we receive from God: And Origen saith, Qui colit Deum, debet donis & oblationibus agnoscere eum Deum & datorem omnium: He that Worshippeth God, must by his gifts and oblations, that is, his Tythes and Offerings, acknowledge God to be the Lord and giver of all things:Extra de de∣cim: c. Cum non sit. And Innocentius saith, Deus speciali titulo decimas sibi-ipsi reser∣vavit, in signum dominationis & jurisdictionis super omnia, God hath, by a special title, reserved and kept unto himself the Tythes of all things, to
shew and put us in mind of that Ʋniversal power, right and Dominion, that he hath over all things, Itaque Judaei decimas persolvendo testabantur, quod omnia sua, seque adeò ipsos, Deo autori & omnium bonorum largitori debe∣rent: And so the Jews by the payment of their Tythes testified, that they owed all that they had, and themselves also, to God, the Author and the giver of all good. And what God hath reserved to himself, he hath resigned and given to his Ministers, that do serve at his Altar: because, the Lord requireth none other reward from us, but what tendeth to his Worship, to Praise him and magnify him for ever: And it is an argument of his Infinite loving kind∣ness, that for all the fruits and profits, that he bestoweth upon us, he re∣quireth, by way of precept, as a Rent-charge, to maintain his publick Wor∣ship, but the tenth part, to be restored back to him again; and that only to this end, that his people might not forget him, to be their God, and the giver of all the good that they have. And in that respect S. Gregory saith, Cum non ab hominibus sed à Deo ipso decimae sunt institutae, quasi debitum exigi possunt: Seeing the commandment of paying Tythes is not from men, but from God himself, they may be requi∣red by Gods Ministers, as due debts, that do belong unto them. But to let pass, what I might collect from all the rest, Saint Augustine,Decret. Greg. l. 3. tit. 30. c. 34. that in my judgment is the most learned, and most judicious of all the Fa∣thers, is most plain and plentiful in this point, saying, Haec est Domini ju∣stissima consuetudo, Si tu illi decimam non dederis, tu ad decimam revoca∣beris, id est, daemonibus, quae est decima pars angelorum, associaberis, This is the just proceeding of the Righteous Lord, that if thou wilt not pay thy Tythes to him, thou shalt be reduced unto the tenth, and associated unto the Devils, which is the tenth part of the Angels, and in the interim, the mean while, Dabis impio militi quod non vis dare Dei Sacerdoti, What thou wilt not give to Gods Minister, thou shalt give to the wicked Souldier, or it shall be consumed some other way; but on the other side,Aug. de doctri∣na Christiana. Si tu decimam dederis, non solum abundantiam fructuum recipies, sed etiam sanitatem animae & corporis consequeris; sic decimas dando, & terrena & coelestia possis praemia promereri; quia Dominus qui dignatus est totum donare, decimas à nobis digna∣tus est recipere; If thou dost willingly and justly pay thy Tthes,Malach. 3. thou shalt not only reap and receive abundance of fruits, as the Lord hath promised, but thou shalt likewise obtain health of body, and forgiveness of thy sins, and eternal life, (as Rainerus observeth) and so by paying thy Tythes, thou doest procure unto thy self both Earthly and Heavenly blessings; be∣cause the Lord, which vouchsafeth, most bountifully, to bestow all upon us is most graciously pleased, to receive the Tythes from us; and that, non sibi sed nobis proculdubio profuturas, not for any benefit to himself, but altoge∣ther, without question, for thy profit, that thou mayest be instructed to serve God, and that his Priests may pray to God for thee, when thou doest work for them, that God may bless thee, and bless all, that thou takest in hand. And what madness is it then in all covetous worldlings, to deny their Tythes unto their Ministers, when, as I said before, Decimas dando, possint terrestria, & coelestia promereri, pro avaritia sua denegando, duplici benedi∣ctione fraudari? By paying their Tythes they shall receive both Earthly and Heavenly blessings; and by denying them through their Covetousness, they shall deprive themselves of this double blessing; and, as S. Jerome saith, make themselves lyable to many judgments; for, Quia non reddidistis decimas, idcircò in penuria & fame maledicti estis; because you have not paid your Tythes, you are accursed, and do often perish with hunger and want, Quia dum parva subtrahitis, ubertatem possessionium vestrarum & totam abundantiam frugum perdidistis; Because that while you detain this small
part, which is the tenth, you lose the plenty of your possessions, and all the abundance of your fruits: Sciatis enim vos ideò abundantiam perdids∣se, quia fraudastis me parte mea; For you may understand, that you do therefore leese your plenty and abundance, because you have deceived and deprived me of my part: and therefore, if you desire that I should blesse your labours,Hieron. in Gloss. super Malach. 3. Moneo, ut reddatis mihi mea, & ego restituam vobis vestra: I advise you, to render to me, mine, and I will bless yours: which is a good counsel, for our own good. Thus you see what the Fathers say, concerning the payment of Tythes to God's Ministers; Quo autem tempore, & à quibus consuetudo invaluerit, ut decimae ad Christianas Ecclesias pervenerint, non satis certè liquet: But, at what time, and by whom, the custom of paying Tythes, came to the Chri∣stian Churches, it is not certainlie enough known, saith Fran. Sylvius. And Hermanus Gigas saith, Constantine the Great was the first that, by his Im∣perial Decree, commanded, Ʋt de rebus omnibus decimae Ecclesiis solveren∣tur,What the Councils and Synods do say concerning Tythes. That, out of all our goods, the Tythes should be paid unto the Chur∣ches. Yet, ex Synodo Matisconensi 11. which was held about the year 587. it seemeth to me, that they were usually paid by the Christians before Con∣stantines time; for in the 5th Canon of the said Synod, we find such a De∣cree, concerning Tythes, Leges Divinae, consulentes Sacerdotibus ac Ministris Ecclesiarum, pro haereditaria portione, omni populo praeceperunt, Decimas fructu∣um suorum locis sacris praestare; The Divine Laws counselling us, have com∣manded all people, to bring the Tythes of all their fruits unto the holy pla∣ces, that is, the Churches, for the Priests and Ministers of those Churches, for their hereditary portion; ut nullo labore impediti, per res illegitimas, spiritualibus possint vacare ministeriis, That, being no waies, or by no labour hindred, through unlawful affairs, they might wholly apply themselves to their spiritual Ministeries; Quas leges, Christianorum congeries, longis tempo∣ribus,, a heap ot pile. custodivit intemeratas, which Laws, the whole heap or multitude of Christians have of long times, (therefore no doubt but long before Con∣stantines time) observed inviolable: Ʋnde statuimus, ut decimas Ecclesiasti∣cas omnis populus inferat; quibus Sacerdotes, aut in usum pauperum, aut in captivorum redemptionem, prorogatis, suis orationibus pacem populo ac salutem impetrent; & si quis contumax nostris statutis fuerit, à membris Ecclesiae omni tempore separetur; Therefore we do ordain, that all people shall, and do, bring their Ecclesiastical Tythes, whereby the Priests bestowing, what they can spare, either upon the poor, or for the redemption of those that are held captives, might by their payers, obtain at the hands of God, peace and health unto the people; and if any man will be refractory, and not obey this our Decree, let him at all times be separated from the Members of God's Church. And so Duriensis Synodus, held under Charles the Great, about the year 779. ordained in the tenth Canon, Ʋt decimae solvantur; & dare nolentes, non Ecclesiasticis excommunicationibus tantum, sed à Reipublicae quoque mini∣steriis coerceantur, That the Tythes should be paid, and they that would not do it, should not only be forced by the Ecclesiastical Excommunica∣tions, but also be compelled, by the Magistrates of the Common-wealth, to pay the same. And in the Moguntine Synod, held by the Command of the same Charles the Great, Anno 813. we find it thus written in the 38th Canon, Admonemus, or, as it is in some Copies, Praecipimus, ut decima de omnibus dari non negligatur; quia Deus ipse sibi dari constituit: & ideò timen∣dum est, ut quisquis Deo debitum suum abstrahit, ne forte Deus propter pecca∣tum suum auferat ei necessaria sua: We admonish or command, that none neglect to pay their Tythes, of all their goods; because God himself hath commanded us to pay them to him: and therefore it may be feared, that as any man doth withhold his due from God, so God will, for his sins, with∣draw
from that man, those things that are needful for him. And the Council of Aquisgrane saith, Attende, diligens lector,Cncil. Aquis∣granense. l. 1. c. 34. quòd omnes primitiae, & quicquid ad Sanctuarium oblatum est, Sacerdotis sint, & ad jus ejus pertineant: Mark and attend, thou diligent Reader, that all the first-fruits, and whatsoever is presented and brought unto the Sanctuarie, (as all the Tythes was wont to be) pertained unto the Priest, and doth by law, and of right, belong to him. And so Concilium Cavilionense, cap. 18. saith, in one Canon, That Qui∣cunque decimas dare neglexerint, excommunicentur; And Concilium Ticinense, that was held under Ludovicus Pius, hath ordained, Ʋt non pro libitu suo, laici decimas clericis tribuerent, That the lay-people should not pay their Tythes, as they listed, unto the Clergy: but, as the Augustane Synod saith, Qui justas decimas non solvunt, ter moniti, eis neganda est Communio: They that pay not their just Tythes, being three times admonished, let them be denied to receive the holy Communion. And thus have these Councils and Synods determined concerning Tythes. Et plurimae aliae extant de decimis Conciliorum Sanctiones: And there are many other Sanctions and Decrees of Councils to the same purpose, saith Francis Sylvius; whereby you may see, that the Tythes are determined to be a debt due to God, and a duty of our obedience unto him;Tythes a due debt, and nei∣ther alms nor benevolence. and therefore not to be detained from his Ministers, nor to be given to them, as alms or voluntary benevolence. 1. Because, God hath no need of alms, who is Lord of all things, and giveth all things unto us, and requireth nothing, but what is of right due unto him from us. 2. Because, almes do alwayes exceed the desert of him, that receiveth them, and they shew the benevolence and bounty of the Giver, and not any worth or merit in the Receiver: But the preaching of the Gospel, and the works that the Ministers of Christ do for the people, do exceed all Tythes, and excell all the temporal gifts and oblations, that the people can do for the Ministers: And therefore the Apostle demandeth, If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter,1 Cor. 9.11. if we reap your carnal things? And therefore, seeing the Ministers gifts unto the people, are far better, and more excellent than the peoples gifts to them, whatsoever they give is of desert, and a due debt, and no alms or benevolence. 3. Because, the Tythes are due to Christ, as he is our Priest, and so they are the portion of the Lord, as the Lord professeth, and he gives them over to his Ministers, that are his Embassadours, and teach his people,Deut. 18.2. in his stead, as the Lord himself saith, I am the inheritance of the Priests. There∣fore to deny the Priests of that portion, which God saith is his, and pro∣miseth to give it them, for his Service, is to mock God, and to make a de∣rision of his promises, as the Apostle sheweth, when he saith, Let him that is taught in the word, make him that teacheth him, partaker of all his goods,Gal. 6.6, 7. and then immediately addeth, Be not deceived, for God is not mocked, and will not be mocked; intimating, that to deal otherwise with God's Mini∣sters, is none other thing, than to mock God; because God had promised this part and portion to them, that stand in his stead,2 Cor. 5.20. as the Apostle sheweth. And so you see, how the Scriptures, Fathers, and Councils, and all, con∣clude, that the Tythes of all our goods, are due, and perpetually due to Christ, and by him given over, by an indispensible Law, unto his Substi∣tutes, the Priests and Preachers of the Gospel. But then I may demand with Francis Sylvius, Quomodo factum sit ut de∣cimae, tot Imperatorum Christianorum donationibus, & decretis Synodorum Ecclesiis (in usus Canonicos, pios, legitimos,Francisc. Syl∣vius de decimis. nempe Ministerii Sacri conserva∣tione, Ministrrum Ecclesiasticorum honesto stipendio, pauperum varii generis
alimonia, captivorum redemptione, & locorum Sacrorum reparatione & sab¦ca) destinatae, ad laicorum, ut vocant, manus pervenerint? How comes it now to passe, that the Tythes, appointed and ordained by the Laws and Donations of so many Christian Kings and Emperours, and by the Decrees of so many Councils and Synods to be paid unto the Churches, for such regular, pious, and lawful uses, as to uphold and preserve the holy Mini∣stery, and publick Service of God, the honest stipend and maintenance of the Church-Ministers, the relief of the poor of divers kinds, the redemption of captives, the reparation of Churches, and other sacred places, or the ere∣cting and building of such places, and the like, should notwithstanding be now transferred and carried away by lay men?Albertus Kran∣zius Metropol. l. 1. c. 2. I answer and say, That, letting passe what Albertus Krantzius relateth, I find three special authors and causes of this mischief. 3. Special cau∣ses why the Tythes are de∣tained and a∣lienated from the Chu ch. 1. Cause.1. The malice of the Devil. 2. The pride and arrogancy of the Pope. 3. The covetousnesse, and the injustice of the wicked world∣lings. 1. Satan is the Grand enemy of all mankind, and therefore laboureth by all means to bring both the Service, and servants of God into contempt, and he knoweth, nothing makes them more contemptible than want and poverty, quae cogit ad turpia, which makes them unable to discharge that honourable Service, which they owe to God, and forceth them to do many base and dishonourable actions; and because their Lord and Master Christ, which taketh pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, hath very bountifully allowed them his own portion of Tythes and Oblations, for their maintenance, where∣by they might most honourably proceed in their Profession, and so inlarge the Christian Religion; this deadly enemy of all goodness, most cunningly and insensibly brought it so to passe, that almost the whole portion of Christ is alienated from the Church, and his Ministers are left like Pharaohs lean kine, poor and meager, whereby instead of the double honour that S. Paul saith is due unto them, their ears and their souls are filled with the scornful reproof of the wealthy, and the despitefulness of the proud. And because this mischief could not so easily be done, if he had come to do it, like the prince of darkness; therefore he changeth himself into an angel of light; and as he perswaded Judas, the Treasurer of Christ, to be∣tray Christ himself; so he got the Pope, the Vicar of Christ's Church, to betray and to undo the Church of Christ; and all under the shew and sha∣dow of Religion, because he knew, that, as the Poet saith, Tuta frequensque via est, sub amici fallere nomen. Though, as the same Poet saith, Tuta frequensque licet sit via, crimen habet: but that was his desire: And therefore, 2. He perswaded the Pope, to become the first founder of all our impro∣priations, by alienating them from their proper use, and from the Churches of Christ, and conferring them on Monastries and Nunries, to maintain the Abbots, Monks, and Nuns, that were the first nursing fathers and mothers of this devouring Harpie: And as the Devil said to Christ, All the King∣doms of the earth will I give thee, as if he had been Lord Paramount of all the World; So the Pope, in the pride of his heart conceiting, that, being Christ's Vicar, he might dispose of all that is Christs, as pleased himself, destroyed the servants of Christ to make his own Parasites; so that he
appropriated 3845. of the fattest and largest Benefices in England, either to his out-landish and Italian Harpies, or others his creatures,Church-lands not to be sold, pag. 31. of whom, no∣thing could be expected, but that they would feed themselves, like Epi∣cures, and never take care for the Church of Christ. And though the godly Bishops of England that saw the mischief of that practise, by the neglect of God's Service in the Parish-Churches, and the abominable evils committed in those Abbies and Nunries, so plentifully set down by Cornelius Agrippa, and others, did in the time of Henry the third direct a suite to Alexander the fourth,Cornelius Agrip∣pa de vanitate Scien. cap. 49. for the restitution of those impro∣priations, to their proper uses, and primitive ordination; Yet, the Devil would not permit that Pope to do that service unto God, as to be obedient to the Ordinance of God. And though it be against all reason, that the Tythes which are appoin∣ted for God's Service, should be transferred to any lay person; because that where Tythes are paid, there must be a matter of giving and receiving; as the Apostle sheweth, We give unto you spiritual things, and we receive your temporal things: but the lay men that have the impropriations do re∣ceive the Tythes, but can give no spiritual gift unto the people. And there∣fore Damasus demandeth, Qua fronte, aut qua conscientia,Damas. Decret. 3. decimas & obla∣tiones vultis accipere, quum vix valetis pro vobis ipsis, ne dum pro aliis, Deo preces offerre? With what face, or conscience, can the lay persons demand the Tythes and Oblations, when they are scarce able to pray for themselves, much lesse to offer up prayers and supplications for others? Yea, though their own Canons and Orders speak against the impropria∣ting of Benefices and Tythes to lay persons, as the Council of Lateran, held under Pope Alexander the 3d, decreed, That, Qui decimas laico,Cncil. Lateran. part 26. c. 8. Causa 16. q. 7. c. 3. Greg. 7. Causa 19 q 7. c. 1. Periculum animae. in seculo manenti, concesserit, deponendus est, The Priest which shall passe away the Tythes to any secular lay man, is to be deposed: And the Canon, Si quia à modo Episcopus, &c. saith, That if any Bishop hereafter do passe away the Tythes and Oblations to lay men, let them be numbred amongst the great∣est Hereticks: And, the lay men that receive the Tythes, as to be their own proper inheritance, either from the Bishops or Kings, do run into the dan∣ger of their souls, saith another Canon. Yet, as if all these were but tela aranea, a Spider's web, nothing would avail with the Pope, to make him to desist his wicked practice, of making these impropriations to whom he pleased: Therefore the wrath of God, being exceedingly kindled against the abo∣minations of these wicked houses, that were thus maintained with the Reve∣nues of the Church, and upheld in their wickedness by the usurped power of the Pope, the good God, that could bring light out of darknesse, could likewise punish and destroy wickedness by wicked men: As he did prophane Saul by the uncircumcised Philistines; and Idolatrous Manasses by the idolatrous Babylonians: So now he stirreth up a King, bad enough, Henry the Eighth, to be, as Nebuchadnezzar was unto the Jews, the Rod of his fu∣ry, to whip and scourge these idle, loose and lewd wantons; for when the King began to be weary of the same dish, and, to satisfie his palate, desired licence of the Pope, to change meat, and to be divorced from his old Wife, and the Pope, rather for fear of offending the King of Spain, than any true fear of God, as some conceive, knew not how to yield to his unlaw∣ful lust; the King, to be revenged, deviseth to overthrow the Pope's for∣mer wickedness, by a greater wickedness; even as Physitians sometimes do, allay poyson with a stronger poyson. And because wickedness can never want Counsellors and Abettors, the King had a Cromwell at his elbow, a name as fatal unto the Church, as Tar∣quin was to Rome; and many others, to please their Master, gave their Vote to the same purpose, That the only way to be throughly revenged was, not
to stand triffling about small matters that might soon have an end: but to give such a perpetual wound, as might not be cured; and that was ut∣terly to destroy the delights of the Pope, by taking away and rooting out all the Abbies, Monasteries, Nunries, and Religious houses, within his Do∣minions, so far as he could possibly reach: and it is strange, If the Lord him∣self had not been on our side, that the Cathedrals and Bishops had not been de∣stroyed likewise. And, lest the Pope, by the perswasions, slights, and eloquence of his Emis∣saries and Clergy, should gain them to be reduced and restored, either to these Houses, or to the Church again; the only sure way, to keep out the Popes fingers from them, is, to bestow both their Lands and all these impropriations upon his Nobility and Gentry; and so he shall not only per∣petually be revenged upon the Pope, but he shall also most infinitely oblige his friends and his servants, who will be tenacious enough to detain them, and keep them, ad Graecas calendas, from returning unto their proper sphere any more: and this Counsel pleased the King and his Master: and though Arch-Bishop Craumer did what ever he could, to get these impropriations restored unto the Church,The Holy Table, name and thing. pag. 148. by his manifold perswasions unto the King, and especially by a message purposely sent to Mr. John Calvin, by one Mr. Ni∣cholas, to intreat Mr. Calvin likewise, most earnestly to write to King Henry the 8th. and to perswade him by all means to restore these impro∣priations unto the Church of God: And so Mr. Bucer, and all the godly Pro∣testants of that time, did their best, to perswade him to restore them: yet all could not prevaile, to have them restored. For that now 3. Covetousness, and the greedy desire of wealth, and love unto this pre∣sent World, hath seized upon the hearts, and filled the souls of those Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, and the posterity of them likewise, which had taken hold of these impropriations, that they cannot endure to part with them any more; But as Kites and Cormorants do seize upon a Car∣rion, so do they engross unto themselves the portion of their God, and the inheritance of the Church of Christ; and such a sweet savour and pleasant taste of Tythes, and Church goods hath been taken, ever since the birth of this monstrous Sacriledge, as that now, many Noble men, and almost every Knight, and Gentleman of any note, hath got to themselves the Tythes, or some part of the Tythes of an impropriate Church, for the inlarging of their Larder-house. And that you need not doubt of this, I must here set down, what you may find in Mr. Crashaws Epistle to Mr. Perkins second Treatise of the Duties of the Ministry, that in one County of the Kingdom of England, (the East riding of the County of York) there are contain∣ed one hundred and five Parishes; whereof, nigh an hundred, or the full num∣ber of an hundred, are of this hateful name, and bastardly title of Impropria∣tions; and some of them are of yearly value of four hundred pounds, others worth three hundred pounds per annum, others two hundred pounds, and al∣most all worth one hundred pound a year; and yet the Minister's part is ten pound-stipend; yea some have but eight pounds, and some but six pounds, and some but four pounds to live upon, for the whole year; and out of the Great Benefice of four hundred pounds a year, the Minister had but eight pound per annum,Dr. Gardiner in his Scourge of Sacriledge. until of late, with much labour, ten pounds yearly for a Preacher. And, saith mine Author, the most of the Churches, in the pro∣perest Market-Towns of this Kingdom, are thus held and retained by our Nobility and Gentry. And so, I found it in my Diocess of Ossory, in the Kingdom of Ireland, that the Impropriations had so swallowed up the Tythes, and the Revenues of the Churches; that, as I shewed it in my Remonstrance to his Majesty, six or seven Vicaridges, united together, will scarce make twenty pound a year for the Preacher; Et durus est hic sermo, for hereby the people perish, and
as the Prophet saith, The poor Children cry for Bread; and, for want of means, to maintain the Ministers, there is none that is able to give it them. I know, King Henry the 8th. that could cause his Parliaments, as I ever understood, from the old Parliament men of those times, to make what Laws and to conclude what Acts of Parliament he pleased, got many Laws to be made, and many Acts to pass, to justify, and to make good and Law∣ful, the Taking away, Leasing, Selling, and Alienating the Tythes, Lands, Houses, and Possessions of the Church; and of our High Priest Jesus Christ, from his servants, to be inherited by lay persons, and many other Acts of Parliaments have been made, since that time, to the same purpose; which very thing, we conceive, as I have shewed, to be very High Sacriledge, and a robbing of Jesus Christ, and the obstructing of his service, and we fear, the cause of the perishing of many souls. And therefore, how the Shield of the Pope's Authority, that was the first Foster-Father of this execrable and accursed title, of Impropriation; or the power of King Henry the 8th. that would expunge the Pope's Sacri∣ledge with a greater Sacriledge, and be the second Patron of this Bastard brood, or all the pretences of the now detainers of the Tythes, and portion of Christ, and the Lands, Houses, and Possessions of the Church by these Humane Laws, can bear off the blow of Gods wrath, and turn aside the fierceness of his vengeance; when, in the day of his fury, he shall powre out the full vial of his indignation, upon the head of all Sacrilegious per∣sons, and upon the children and posterity of them, that have devoured the Lords inheritance, and laid wast his dwelling place, I can no waies un∣derstand; neither do I know how to give them any comfort, or counsel, but to advise them, to a full and timely Restitution of that, which, other∣wise, will be their utter destruction; Quia non remittitur peccatum,August. ad Maced. Epist. 54. donec re∣stituatur oblatum, cum restitui potest; The sin shall never be remitted, and blotted out of Gods book, until the Tythes and goods of Gods Church be restored, when men can restore them and will not do it. CHAP. XVIII. Of the second part of the Stipend, Wages, and Maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel; which is, the Oblation, Donation, or Free-wil-offering of the people, for to uphold, and continue the true service of God, and to obtain the blessings of God, upon themselves, and upon their labours; which Donations ought not to be impropriated, and alienated from the Church, by any means. YOu have heard of the first part of the Ministers maintenance; the se∣cond part consisteth in the voluntary Oblations, or Free-wil-offerings of the people, which the Lord requireth should be done, according as every one, in his own heart, thought good, to bestow upon the service of God: and what they did offer in this kind was most acceptable in the sight of God. For this is a Principal Branch of that Honor, which we yield unto God, by and with our substance, which we are injoyned to do, Prov. 3.9. Be∣cause, what we relieve the poor with, is not so much our alms, as their exi∣gence;
which, as necessity exacts it, so it is soon passed, and as quickly pe∣risheth; but those Donations, that were given for the service of God, as they savour of a more inward and deeper piety, so they are of a more lasting substance; and, besides the eternal Treasures, which men do thereby lay up for themselves, they do provide for the perpetuity of Religion, unto the after-ages of men, and may be justly said to Honour God, not only in them∣selves, but in all those likewise, which they gain, by their Donations, to Honor him. And it is strange, and marvellous, to consider how liberal, and how free the people of old time, were in their Donations and Free-wil-offerings, to maintain the Worship of God, and to do any thing, that did any wayes appertain to his service; for if you look into the 36. Chapt. of Exod. vers. 5. you shall find how Bezaleel and Aholiab spake unto Moses, saying, The peo∣ple bring much more then enough, for the service of the work, which the Lord hath commanded to be made;Exod. 36.5, 6, 7. and Moses gave commandment, and caused it to be Proclaimed through the Camp, that they should bring no more, for that they had already brought enough and too much: So they that returned out of Babylon were as ready and as willing, to offer up their gifts and free-wil-offerings for the service of the Temple, as their Forefathers were, for the erecting of the Tabernacle,Neh 7.70. &c. 10.33. as you may see it in the books of Ezra, and of Nehemiah. But the Christians, of the Primitive Church, were so zealous herein that they exceeded all that went before them, in their Donations and Free-wil-offerings for the service of God, and the increase of the Christian Religion; for they sold their Lands and Possessions, and laid the prizes thereof at the Apostles feet; and had all things in common among themselves: And Pope Ʋrban the I.Platin. in Ʋrban. instituted, Ʋt ecclesias, praedia, ac fundos, fidelibus oblatos episcopus reciperet, partireturque proventus clericis omnibus viritim, nihilque cujuspiam privatum esset, sed in commune bonum; That the Bishops should re∣ceive the Churches Possessions, and grounds, offered to the Faithful; and that the profits thereof should be divided by the Clergy, man by man, and that nothing should be of private propriety to any one, but in common a∣mongst them all; And Gratian tels us, that by a decretal Epistle unto all the Bishops, he decreed, that none should presume to alienate ought of the Church-Revenues, under the pain of Excommunication; And Pope Lucius the I. about twenty years after Ʋrban, directed an Epistle to the Bishops of Spain and France to the same purpose. And though the malice of Dr. Burges towards the Bishops, will not suf∣fer him to yield,Vide Flor. hist. ad an. 186. Matth. Westm. that King Lucius gave the Lands of the Idol-Priests unto the Christian Bishops; yet, is it clear enough, out of Antiquit. Brit. and Armachanus, that Lucius endowed the Christian Church with more Lands and Revenues then the Idol-Priests injoyed. And afterwards while it was permitted by the Imperial Laws, for every one to Collate upon the Church, whatsoever he would, without excep∣tion,Cod. l. 1. titulo. 5. l. 1. their Donations were so great, that the Kings and Emperours con∣ceived it fit, with Moses, to grant a prohibition that they should not offer any more, nor bestow any Lands or Goods upon the Church, without some special licence and toleration from the Civil Magistrate; for fear, that the Church, if this freedome of Donations should still continue, would have sucked out all the blood from the veins, and the marrow out of the bones of the politick body, and so leave the Common-Wealth deprived of their Lands, like Pharaohs lean and evil-favoured Cows, and the Church like those, that were fat and wel-liked. And therefore they enacted the Statute of Mortmain, that was a super∣sedeas against these too-liberal contributions: and the Emperour Justinian enacted, that no Legacy, bequeathed unto the Church, exceeding the
value of five hundred Crowns, should be good in Law, without a special licence from the Magistrate; and so, many other restrictions were made, as Rules, against such as could not otherwise well rule themselves and ob∣serve the just rules of Reason and moderation. And thereupon the Church it self, and those godly Bishops that desired no mans wealth, but what made for the glory of God, and the furtherance of the Gospel of Christ, made Canons and cautions against such catching Covetousness, as would too greedily incroach upon their neighbours estates,Decret. part. 2. Caus. 12. q. 2. Can 49. and too unreasonably hedge it in unto the Church; as that Canon, which beginneth, Ecclesia rapacitatis ardore, The Church, with too much gree∣diness, must not snatch, and pluck unto her self, the Lands and Possessions of her Children.The Reason of those Statutes, and Canons two fold. And the Reason, of these Inhibitions, and Statute of Mortmain, and Ca∣nons of the Church, seems to be two fold. 1. Because, as I said before, the zeal of those Christians was so fervent,  and their desire to promote the service of God, was so eager and vehe∣ment, that they cared not how much they gave, but thought all that they gave too little, for that service. So great was the difference betwixt their mind, and the minds of our Souldiers and others, Gentlemen of no mean rank, and some generated and degenerated from the Church, whose Co∣vetousness and greedy hearts, desire nothing more, then to pull down our Cathedrals and other Churches, and, as it were, Romana lege agraria, by an Irresragable Law, to pluck away their Lands and Possessions, until they be left as bare, as, in the day, wherein they were first brought forth into the World. 2. Because that, whatsoever Lands, Houses, or Possessions were once  dedicated and offered unto God, and for Gods service, could not with∣out committing the horrible sin of Sacriledge, be taken away by any man, or by any pretence, from God; or indeed, because the Lands, and Houses that were given unto the Church, were freed in those times of Popery, from all Taxes and Escheats; so that neither the King, nor Common-Wealth could have any help, or assistance from them, towards the defraying of the publick and most necessary charges of the State. And therefore, Henry the third, and Edward the first, his son, and Rich∣ard the second, seeing how many men, not out of any love to Religion, or zeale to Gods service, but craftily, to couzen the King, and other chief Lords, and the Common-Wealth, did thus fraudulently convey their Lands unto the Church, and then took Leases of them again from the Church, meerly to be freed from the Publick Taxes; made those Statutes,Cap 36. against the giving of their Lands in Mort-main, or in a dead hand, that is, the Church; and it is enacted in the great Charter, that it should not be lawful to any man from thence-forth, to give his Lands, to any Religious House, and then to take the same again from the same H use: the which thing, being a meer Collusion and an apparent wrong to the King, to the chief Lord of the Fee, and the Common-Wealth; no Bishop ever justified the same, or held it lawful for the Church to hold such Lands as were so given, contrary to those Acts of Parliament, and those Canons that were made against such deceitful dealings. But, for those Lands and Houses, that were truly, Religiously, and with∣out any manner of deceit, or wrong to any man, given to the Church for the service of God, and to promote the Gospel of Jesus Christ, I think them so sacred, and so properly Gods right, that, as the Author, of the Church Lands not to be sold, hath Truly, Religiously, and most Learnedly pro∣ved; so I assure my self, that none but the Limbs of the Great Anti-Christ will think otherwise. For
Before these holy men have made the Donations of their lands or houses unto God, and to his Church, it was in their own power, and they might without offence, either give them unto the Lord, or retain them still unto themselves and their posterity: for so S. Peter tells Anani, Whiles it re∣mained, that is, un-sold, was it not thine own? And after it was sold, was it not in thine own power, that is, either to offer it and give it to God and his Service,Acts 5.4. or not to give it? But now, after thou hast sold it, and dedicated the whole price of thy land for Gods Service, To keep back some part of the price, which formerly thou hadst given to God's Church, is such a Sacri∣ledge, and so transcendent a sin, as, to lye unto the Holy Ghost, and, to rob God of that, which now doth most properly belong to God, and is no wayes in thy power, to dispose of it: And so it is in any other mans case, Before thou givest thy land, house, or utensil unto the Church, and for the Service of God, it is thine own, and thou mayst lawfully do, what thou wilt with thine own, either give it unto God, or not give it: but, after thou hast once given it, and consecrated it for God's Service, it is none of thine, and nei∣ther thou, nor any man else, can make an alienation or impropriation thereof, without lying unto the Holy Ghost, and a robbing of God of his right: For so the Law saith,Jastinian lib. 2. Tit. 1 Nullius sunt res Sacrae: nam quod Divini juris est, nullius in bonis est, The Sacred and Dedicated things, that are of Divine property, are of no private mans right: but, God being the sole owner of them, none but such as are his servants and assignes, can have any thing to do with them. So Charles the Great, that was as good as he was great, saith, Bona Ecclesiae Deo sacrata sunt,Capit. Car. l. 6. c. 28. Whatsoever we give unto the Church, we offer and dedicate unto the Lord our God. And so the style of all the Graunts in our Magna Charta runneth,Magna Charta. c. 1. We have given such and such lands or things unto God, both for us, and for our heires for ever. And again, the same Magna Chartae saith, Privilegium Ecclesiae debet esse immune. And so the Law of God saith, The field when it goeth out in the year of Jubile, shall be holy unto the Lord, as a field devoted, the possession thereof shall be the Priests; because,Levit. 27.21, & 28. as the Lord saith verse 28. No devoted thing, that a man shall devote, or give unto the Lord of all that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed; because every devoted, dedicated, or consecrated thing, is most holy unto the Lord; and the Lord hath given the same unto the Priests, verse 21. And so the ancient Style of all Grants and Charters, for these matters, was, Domino Deo nostro offrimus & dica∣mus, & cetera, We give such and such things unto our Lord God. And un∣der the Law, as God instituted the Tythes and lands of the Priests for his Service; so he takes the Gifts and Donations and Oblations of the people unto himself, saying, Thou shalt give them me, Exod. 22.30. So he calls the Church his House, Matth. 21.13. and the Tythes his Tythes, saying, Will a man rob his God? yet you have robbed me, in Tythes and Offerings. And for lands he saith, You shall offer unto the Lord an holy portion, Ezech. 45. 1. And the same Law, S. Paul presseth under the Gospel, as you may see in 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. and 1 Tim. 5.17, 18. For, though we have some diffe∣rences in the manner of God's Worship, when as the Sacrifices and several Ceremonies are abolished; yet there is the same substance for the Guides in God's Worship, which is the reason of the Law; as the Prophet Esay, in the Name of the Lord, hath foretold us; when as, prophesying of the state of Christ his Church, and the Ministers thereof, he saith, And I will also take of them for Priests and Levites,Esay 66.21. saith the Lord; and not lay-men. And therefore these things may not be sold away, or alienated and impropriated from the Priests; because that now, God hath the best Interest therein: and, though before they were devoted & given to him, you might have told them, alienated them, or put them to what use you would; yet now, be∣ing God's proper goods, even by your own Donation, you may not, with∣out
God's consent, impropriate them, from God, and from his Ser∣vice. For, As in the case of Marriage; before the Marriage, both the man and the woman are free, to do what they please, to marry, or not to marry, & con∣sensus partium, and both their consents, publickly attested by the Priest, makes up the Marriage: but, after they are Marryed, let them both con∣sent as they will, and as often as they will, yet there desire and consent can∣not dis-joyn them, and dissolve the Marriage; because, that now God had a hand in the Marriage, and whom God hath joyned together, neither they themselves, nor any man else, may put assunder: Even so it is in the case of devoted and consecrated things, lands, houses, or what you will, offe∣red up, as a Free-will-offering unto God; Before you make your Oblation of them, you may do with them, what you please, give them, or not give them, as the man might marry this woman, or not marry her; but when once they are offered and given unto God, you must not make a mock of God, and alienate, or impropriate them from Him, and his Service: or if you do, Solomon will tell you, It is destruction and a snare to the man,Prov. 20.25. which devoureth that which is sanctified, or given to God, and after vows to make inquiry, and search for wayes to deprive God of them; as now, our men of War, and many others do. But if men gave 5 pound, or 10 pound, or other sum,  unto the Church for the furtherance of God's Service; and, to secure the same, appointed lands worth 50 pound, or a 100 pound, to pay it unto the Bishop, or other Ministers of the Church; Will you have the lands, and not rather still ac∣cept of the money, that was to be paid out of those lands? and was the true meaning of the Donor? I answer, God forbid, that any man in such a case,  should desire to have any more than what was given, and intended to be given; for God accept∣eth of no unjust acquisitions, and a just man requireth no unjust thing: But when the whole is given to God, no Bishop for love, either to his wife or children, or for any other gain, should lett and lease that for 5 pound, which is worth 50 pound, or the like, as I have shewed to you before. But I know what our sacrilegious persons,  that take the Tythes of im∣propriations, and the lands, houses, and possessions of the Church, into their possessions, will further object, and say for themselves, and against me; That our Laws do allow them to do what they do, and our Bishops, that knew God's will, as well, or better than my self, have formerly lett out the lands and houses belonging to the Church in fee-ferme, and for a very small rent, unto their Tenants and Fee-fermers, and they do still lett out long leases of them unto their children and friends; and therefore they are not to be blamed: but if there be any fault herein, it is in our selves, and in our Predecessors. To which Objection I shall answer, but as I did before;  That tyranni∣cal, fierce, and wilful Kings and Princes, and wicked Governours,See what I say in the Grand Rebellion. c. 7. when they have once got power and authority into their hands: as was King Henry the Eighth, and the late Rebel and Usurper Crumwell, will make what laws, and force the people in their Parliament to give their consent, to what Acts and tutes soever they please: And do you think, that such Laws can excu ou, for the breach of the Law of God? And for our Bi∣shops that do, of have done such things, to the prejudice of the Church, and the great dishonour of our God, I confess, majus peccatum habent, our sin is more than yours; for we are but God's Stewards, intrusted with the im∣plements of his House, and the revenues of his Church, to be used and im∣ployed, not wastefully upon our selves, in pride; or upon our children, to make them Knights, or Lords and Ladies: but for the best advantage and furtherance of God's Service, and the honour of Jesus Christ, as he hath
commanded us, to dispose of them; and you know, we must render an ac∣count of our Stewardship, and how soon I know not; and if we waste our Masters goods, or take all, or more than is due unto our sel hen we should dispose of it to other uses, for the Service of our Masr, I know not how we shall answer it. But I know that our greater sin, in imbezelling and alienating our Ma∣sters goods, and the Revenues of his Church, will not quit and excuse you, for your lesser sin, in being copartners with us in this Sacriledge; for, as the receiver of any stollen goods, is liable to the Law, as well as the stealer of his neighbours goods; so is the lessee, as well as the lessor, the detainer as well as the maker away of these unlawful Fee-ferms and long Leases of the Church-Revenues, liable to the just judgement of God. And therefore, in this respect, that the Donations and Free-will-offer∣ings of religious and holy men were given, not to men, but to God, and for the Honour and Service of God, and the good of his Church, the worthiest Bishops, and best Prelates, and Servants of Christ, would rather suffer the greatest indignities, and the heaviest wrath of the most powerful Comman∣ders, than they would yield to satisfie their desires, that sought to take a∣way or alienate the goods of God, that were dedicated to him for the ser∣vice of his Church; For, when at the instigation and evil advice of the Arrians, whom the Empress Faustina did very much favour, the Emperor Valentinian, sent certain Officers unto S. Ambrose, to require him to yield up, and surrender his Church of Millane, and all the possessions thereof, into their hands; the holy Bishop, in a letter that he sent to his Sister Marcel∣lina, telleth her, what he did, saying, When we were commanded to de∣liver up the Church, and all the vessels and possessions thereof into the Officers hands, I made this answer unto them: If you had demanded mine estate and goods, lands, houses, or any other thing that I had, Gold, Silver, or the like, I would very readily yield them to you: But it is not in my power, to yield up any thing, that is the Churches, and is but only committed to my trust and custody; and therefore herein, because the things of the Church are the goods of God,Ambros. l. 1. Epistol. & E∣pist. 33. I have a special respect to the saving of the Emperours soul; because it neither becometh me the Bishop, to give up the vessels and the goods of the Church, nor him the Emperour, to ask them; And there∣fore I besought his Majesty, to take my words in good part, and if he loved himself, to desist from offering such an injury unto Christ. And the same Father, in concione de Basilicis non tradendis haereticis, saith Solvimus quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, We give to Caesar, the things that are Caesars, and to God, the things that are God's: For if Caesar demands his Subsidy or Tribute, we do not refuse to pay it; but if he would have the Church, and Church-goods, they must not be delivered up to Caesar; Quia Templum Dei est,Idem de Basili∣cis non taden∣dis haereticis Tomo. 5. non jus Caesaris; Because the Temple, and what belongs unto the Temple, is Gods right, and not the right of Caesar. And this we say for the honour of Caesar, because nothing can be more honourable for the Emperour, than that he should be called the son of God. And the same may I say of every King, Prince, or Potentate. And here I must crave leave to insert a Story, How that in the time of Pope Xistus, a cunning persecuting Tyrant came to the Treasurer of the Church,The Story of a crafty Tyrant, and a faithful Pastour; rela∣ted by Doctor Gardiner. and said unto him, You Christians do compl that you are cruelly dealt withal; and perhaps you have some just ce to complain; and therefore I am far from any bloody purpose, being as unwilling to pro∣ceed in any capital Sentence against you, as your selves are willing to live: but I understand that your Bishops are very rich, and have store of vessels of God and Silver, and many men do give their lands and livings unto your Churches, whereby you must needs become exceeding rich; and yet your God is no Mammonist, but hath left many wholesome Precepts against cove∣tousness,
and hath advised you, to give unto Caesar, what is due to Cae∣sar; and you know, that his Wars, and the affairs of the Common-wealth are very chargeable unto him, and we know, that your profession is not to hoord up wealth, and to make account of transitory things: And therefore if you be pleased to forgo those lands, and riches, and vessels of Gold and Silver, which you have and care not for, I will warrant you, both safe∣ty of life, and freedom to use your Religion, according to your Con∣science. To whom the godly man answered,Prudent. Peri∣stoph. That he desired three dayes liberty to return his resolution: and by the third day, he had gathered together a multitude of poor, lame, blind, impotent men and women, whose names he delivered up in a Schedule, into the Tyrant's hands, and said, These are the goods of the Church, for whom I am but the Steward of those goods that you desire, and my Master commanded me, to keep for them, and for his Service. A blessed man, that herein shewed, he feared God more than man. And I would all our Bishops, that have alienated and past away the lands, houses, and pssessions of the Church in long Leases and Fee-ferms unto their children and friends, for a trifling rent only, reserved unto their succes∣sors, had had some part of this good mans spirit; for then, the Church of Christ had not been left so naked as it is. But you may remember the Canon, that I quoted to you before, which saith, If any Bishop do grant the Tythes,Caus. 16. qu. 7. c. 3. Oreg. 7. Si quis à modo Episcopus. or other possessions of the Church to any lay man, let him be numbred among the greatest Hereticks, and let his name be like Demas, a lover of this world, more than a lover of God. And I hope, that by this, which I have already shewed, it is apparent unto you, and to all men, that will not be blind, having their eyes open, and grope with the Sodomites for the wall at noon-day, The Donations of good and holy men, whether houses, lands, or goods, which they have freely dedi∣cated, and given to God, to perpetuate the Service, and to promote the Religion of Jesus Christ, ought not by any means to be, either by the Bishop alienated, or by his children, or any other person received, and taken away from the Church contrary to the will and intention of the Donor. And I say here, in the name of God, That no Bishop can passe it away, nor any lay person can receive it and detain it from the Church without sin, and com∣mitting a most horrible Sacriledge in the sight of God: And if men did but remember what the Apostle saith, That, a Testament,Heb. 9.17. or a mans last Will, is of force and inviolable after men are dead, and that the very Gentiles and Heathens thought it a piaculum, and a heynous offence, to in∣fringe and alter a mans last Will and Testament. I wonder, why these mens Wills, that gave their own goods (and it was lawful for them to do, what they would with their own) to God, and to maintain Gods Service, should not be of force, and stand unalterable, but that men will, so fearlesly break them, and so presumptuously take away the things that they bequeathed unto God; especially if men considered, the form and style of their Donation, which I find thus expressed in sundrie Copies. These things being lawfully our own, we offer and give to God, for the maintenance of his Service; from whom,Capit. Car. l. 6. cap. 285. if any man presume to take them away, (which we hope no man will at∣tempt to do) but if any man shall do, Let his account be without favour, and his judgement without mercy in the last Day, when he cometh to receive his doom, which is due for his Sacriledge, which he hath committed against that our Lord and God, unto whom we have given and dedicated the same. For this form and manner of their Dedication, should, in my judgement, make their hairs to stand on end, and their hearts to tremble, for fear of this judgement, when they go about to take away the lands, houses, and
possessions of the Church (which were offered for the service of God) and which I would not do, for all the World, and which I think none durst do, but such as have their hearts heardened above Pharaohs heart. But here, I must tell you; How that after I came to London, to put this Treatise into the Pess, I lighted upon a Pamphlet not only foolish, but most wicked, defending the most horrible sin of Sacriledge to be no sin at all: and the selling and taking away of the Church-Lands to be no offence at all; which Pamphlet had I met it at Kilkenny, I would have done, as our Savi∣our did at Jerusalem, made a scourge to Whip the publisher of it C. Burgs out of the Church of Christ, and after the detecting of his lies and errors, condemn his blaphemous scriblings into the fire; for, having read his Pam∣phlet all over, I find that all his malice is against the Bshops, and the flood of poyson, that he spitteth out of his mouth, is to none other end, then like Noahs deluge, to drown their lands, and none else: For in page 23. he pro∣secuteth the point at large, that Parochial Glebes, that is, the lands given to the Presbyterians, that were the limbs of the false Prophet, and setled in all the fattest livings of England, far better then the poor Bishop-pricks, must neither be sold nor alienated from them, and their Churches, by any means; so that had the land of the Bishops been given to these prating Presbyterians, it had been piacular to take it from them: And though he writes much and quotes Authors, to make men think that he is a Scholler, yet, this is the substance of his whole book, divided into these two parts. The whole sum and sub∣stance of Dr. Burges his book.1. Cathedral, or Episcopal, Lands are not of Divine right, à pag. 19. ad pag 44. But Presbyterian or Parochial lands are of Divine right, pag. 23. that therefore, 2. It is no Sacriledge, nor sin to purchase Cathedral and Episcopal lands, à pag. 44. ad 58. But the Parochial lands, and Presbyterian Glebes, being of Divine right, it must needs be Sacriledge, And a very haynous sin to sell or alien their lands from them, pag. 23. Now consider these things, thus plainly and briefly set forth, and tell me if any man, that hath his eyes open, will believe this blind fellow, that like a mad man layeth about him, to spit out all his malice against the Bi∣shops. When as the Scripture speaketh, Malitia ejus excoecavit eum: His envy and malice against the Bishops have made him stark blind. But as S. Jerome thought Helvidius not worthy to be answered, so I would answer all the extravagant passages of this Parochial Presbyter Burgs, were it not for fear, to make him proud, to think himself worthy to be answered by a Bishop; when as, in very deed, I think not his book worthy to be looked on, when as out of his own words and quotations, without any other help, I could easily answer and confute his whole book. And so I have sufficiently shewed the haynousness of this sin. And therefore, let me advise all Sacrilegious persons, to take heed how they dally with God, and take up from such desperate and irreligious fel∣lows a security to the inchantment of their souls, in this so haynous and so horrible an impiety, and to fill their houses and to inrich their children with those goods, that were Sanctified for Gods service, and are execrable unto them, and do make them ikewise execrable, and all the whole Host of Is∣rael, the whole Church of God, to be troubled, as the execrable goods of Ahan did. And let not us, that are Gods Ministers, and are commanded to give you warning of your sins, sub poena maledictionis, as the Prophet sheweth, after so many Sermons and Summons,. 3.18. Tam Verbis quam Scriptis, both in words and writings, find your hearts still obdurate, and as hard as the nether Milstone, lest we be forced, in the bitterness of our souls, to cry out with the Prophet, In vacuum laboravimus, we have spent our strength
in vain, and be so compelled, with grieved spirits to send you to Gods judg∣ment seat, carbone not abiles atro, marked by a black coal, with this inscrip∣tion upon your foreheads, Noluerunt incantari, They would not be charm∣ed, but made a mock of all that we said. But I would have these greedy snatchers of those lands and houses, that insteed of making their children happy, will bring an inevitable curse upon themselves and their Posterity, to weigh well what Fulgentius, a Holy Bishop, saith upon these words of John the Baptist,Matth. 3. To which pur∣pose S. August. saith in like manner, Si in ignem mit∣titur qui non dedit rem pro∣propriam; Ʋbi mittendus est qui invasit a∣lienam? Verè seipsum vili pendit, qui pro re aliena ani∣mam suam per∣dit. Aug. ad Ma∣ced. Ep. 54. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire; Si sterilitas in ignem mit∣titur, rapacitas quid meretur? &, si semper ardebit, qui sua non dedit, quid recipiet qui aliena tulit? If sterility be thrown in the fire, what shall be∣come of rapacity; and if he shall indure everlasting burning, that would not give his own goods, what punishment shall he receive that taketh away another mans goods, and especially the goods of God? And to weigh like∣wise what Rabanus Maurus, another Holy man, commenteth upon the words of Christ, I was hungry and you gave me not to eat, and, amplying our doings, saith, Esurivi, & pauxillum panis quod restabat, abstulisti: Nudus fui, & vilem chlamidem & vestem quam abui, abripuisti: Et unicam vineam habui & tu illam diripuisti: I was naked, and that simple garment that I had, you have taken from me; and I had but one Ewe, and one only Vine∣yard, and like Ahab you have deprived me of it; And what reward shall they have for these things? I fear, their doom will be too heavy, if, with Zacheus, they make not Restitution, of that, which with Ahab, they have most unjustly taken possession of; for, as S. Augustine truely saith, Si res aliena, propter quam peccatum est, reddi potest & non redditur, poenitentia simu∣latur, sed non agitur; nam si veraciter agitur, non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituaturi oblatum; id est, cum restitui potest: If that which we have taken away from another, whereby we have sinned, may be restored, and is not; the repentance is not done, but dissembled: because that if it be tru∣ly done, the sin is remitted; and the sin is never remitted,Aug. quo suprae Ep. 54. unless that which is taken away, be restored, that is, as I said, when Restitution may be made. But, though it be an Axiom infallible, not liable to controulment, and a truth as clear as the Sun, that Impropriations of Tythes, and the aliena∣tion of Lands, Houses, and other things that were given to God, and for the service of God, ought not to be done, nor cannot be injoyed, as their own proper goods, by any lay person, be he Lord, Knight, or what you will, contrary to the mind and will of the donors, without committing that horrible sin of Sacriledge; yet you must not so understand me,How the tythes, lands, and houses of the Church may be let and set to lay persons. as if I con∣ceived, that Ministers might not set their Tythes, or let their Lands, and their Livings to any lay-person: or that it must be generally understood, that no commerce or bargain can be made, of the goods and endowments of the Church; because that, as God is willing we should use those goods alwaies for our benefit; so he will be as graciously pleased, we shall forgoe them and exchange them, when we find it for our benefit, and the benefit of his Church and Service, which in all our bargains and commerce, we ought chiefely to regard: because, we are but Gods Stewards, for the ser∣vice of his Church; and so, whatsoever our Religion and our Ancestors have honoured God withal, we must imploy, not so much for our own best advantage, as for that, which maketh most for Gods honor. And therefore, we that are instructed with the inheritance of the Church and portion of Jesus Christ, must not make such bargains for our Master, as Glaucus made for himself, when he changed his golden Armour for bra∣zen furniture; neither must we deal with the Church of Christ, as Rehoboam did with the Temple of Solomon,1 Reg. 14.26, 27. when he took away all the shields of gold, and made in their steed shields of brass: but what bargain or covenant
soever we make, without sin, for the greater glory unto God, and gr¦ter good unto the Church, we hold it good, with whomsoever the same is made. CHAP. XIX. That it is the duty of all Christian Kings and Princes, to do their best endevours, to have all the Impropriations restored to their former Institution; to hinder the taking away, and the aliena∣tion of the Lands, Houses, and other the Religious Donations of our Ancestors from the Church of Christ; and to suppress and root out all the Ʋnjust and Covetous suttle customs and frauds, that are so generally used, and are so derogatory to the service of God; from amongst the people, and especially from this Kingdom of Ireland, where most corruption is used, and most need of Instruction unto the people. THus you have heard, how that Cathedrals and other Parochial Chur∣ches should be built and beautified for the Honor of God, Godly Bishops and Preachers should be placed in them for the Service of God; and then the allowance, that God hath appointed, should be given and yielded unto them, for their maintenance; And now, because the Lands, Houses, Tythes, and Hereditaments of the Church, which the Lord God hath granted, and the godly Emperours, pious Kings, and zealous Professors have given and dedicate for Gods service, are in these dismal daies, snatched away by the hands of Haksters, and haters of Religion, and alienated by the Souldiers, that divide Christ his garments amongst them, from the true servants and Ministers of Christ, who should be very thankful unto these Souldiers, as they often say, that we have any thing left unto us. For, as the Orator telleth the grave Senators of Rome of an audacious fellow called Fimbria, that stabbed Quintus Scaevola, an honest man,Cicero in Orat. pro Roscio Amerino. at the funerals of Caius Marius; and then boasted of the great fa∣vour that he shewed to him, Quòd non totum telum in ejus corpore absconde∣rat; That he had not thrust his dagger wholly to the Hilt, into his body, but only gave him a slight stab, that was sufficient to kill him; So these brood of Fimbria, having seized upon a great part of the Houses, Lands, and Patrimony of the Church, and still detayning them, Per fas & nefas, in their own hands; do labour to get more, and think the favour that they have done us deserveth no small thanks, that they brought or left to us what we have, and have not deprived us of all together. Therefore, Covetousness, Injustice, and the love of this World, be∣ing so deeply grounded and setled in the hearts of our Demas's, and this Epidemical disease of taking and detaining the Churches right, be∣ing, as one saith, just like the Kings-evil, which no Physitian but the King himself, will serve to heal it; Our address must be unto his Ma∣jesty, to supplicate, that he would be graciously pleased to interpose his Royal Command, to stop the current of these intruders into Gods right, and to cause the Restitution of the Church-goods to be made unto the Church.
And among the rest of the injuries done by these MilitaryI speak of the Souldiers; be∣cause either the Souldiers of that Parliament, or of Crumwel, or his Majesty, have almost all the Kingdom of Ireland; and do fill the House of Lords, and the House of Commons, and are the chief men in every place; So that nothing can be done either in Parliament City, or Countrey, but what they will have done; because they are the Major Par∣ty, and so can Out-vote all the rest; and therefore Ireland, being now Regnum Militum; This my discourse cannot be, Gratum opus agricolis, but Ingratum mi∣litibus, which is all one, to me, if you consider what I say, in the latter end of this book: and that I fear not what they say of me, Quia nec melior sum si lau∣deverint, nec deterior si vitupera∣verint. men to the Church of God; there is one great Abuse, which is generally used and practised here in Ireland, by the rich proprietors and possessors of Lands and Town-ships, to the abundant detriment and loss of the Ministers, and to the ha∣zard and danger, if not the destruction, of many, I know not how many, souls; and that is, when the Gentleman proprie∣tor, that holds all or most of the Parish in his own hands, if he be offended with his Minister and cannot have the Tythes, as he pleaseth himself, he can make the Rectory or Vicaridge, that might be well worth fifty or sixty pounds per annum, to be scarce worth ten pound a year, or nothing; for he will leave all his ground unplowed, and turne it to pasture, and so bring a dearth, through the scarcity of Corn in the Com∣mon-Wealth, and then he will buy young Bullocks, and fils his Lands with dry Cattle, whereof their Religious Lawyers, (of whom Dr. GardinerDr. Gardiner in his Scourge of Sacriledge. saith; that he never heard yet, at any hand, of any good, that they have Prophesied unto the Church) tels them, their custome will preserve them, from the payment of any Tythes; and so they bring a spiritual dearth, and a famine of Gods Word, unto the rest of the poor parishioners, when for want of sufficient maintenance, they shall want a sufficient Minister, that is able to give them any Instruction; because, as the Poet saith, —Nulla illis captetur gloria,Ovid. trist. lib. 5. quaeque Ingenii stimulos subdere fama solet. And the benefit, that these worldlings reap, by this lawless, impious, and wicked Custome, to pay no Tythes for their dry Bullocks, nor any thing to God for the fruits of their ground, is one main reason why the Mini∣ster's part of six or seven Parishes, doth scarce amount to twenty pounds per annum, as I have formerly shewed in my Remonstrance to his Majesty: and I conceive it likewise, to be a special Reason, why the poor simple Irish Papists have so many Popish Priests amongst them, for want of Protestant Priests; for, that want of sufficient maintenance, doth cause them to leave their Parishes and charge unlooked unto, and their flock untaught; and then the superstitious mendicant Friar cometh to instruct, and lead the silly igno∣rant Irish, as he pleaseth. And truly, to say what I think, though I am far enough from Popery, and from all Popish errors, and superstitions, as, I hope, all the Sermons that I have Preached, and the Books that I have Printed, can bear witness unto the World; yet, as Alexander Severus told an unruly Victualler, that would not suffer the Christians to erect a Church, in a place which he thought more convenient and fit for him to sell Ale in it, That it was better, God should be served in any place, and in any way, then that he should have his way, and God not served in any place, nor any way, as I shewed to you before; so I conceive it better to be Superstitious then Prophane, better to be a Papist then an Atheist, and better to have a Popish Priest, to give some light to them, that sit in darkness, and some knowledge of Christ, to them that otherwise would know nothing, then not to have any Priest at all.
And therefore, if you would abandon Popery, and suppress all popish Priests out of Ireland, which is my heart's desire; then I desire withal, that this, and all other lewd and wicked customes be taken away; the lands, hou∣ses, and possessions of the Church be restored; and all impropriations redu∣ced to their first institution, that so a sufficient Ministery may be maintained here in Ireland, as they are in England; and that the poor ignorant Irish may have honest and able Protestant Ministers,And to that end the natives, according to the institution of the Col∣ledge, should be placed in the Colledge at Dublin; the which thing hitherto, they say, hath been too much neg∣lected. and, as many as may be, of their own Nation, to live amongst them, and to instruct them: and then God will blesse this Nation, and the true Protestant Religion will prosper and flourish, and both we and they shall live happily together; which otherwise will very hardly, if ever, come to pass: Because that now, we have not our knowledge by inspiration, we cannot in an instant, understand and speak all Tongues, and we cannot work miracles; but we must buy many Books to learn Languages, and to get knowledge, which the Apostles had without any Book; and we must spend our time, in reading, writing, studying, and praying to God to assist us, and to inable us, to instruct our people: and all this cannot be done without maintenance and means to do it. And therefore, where there is no sufficient maintenance, there can be no sufficient Ministery, no instructing of the people, no true serving of God, as it ought to be. And what a heap of unspeakable mischiefs and miseries do these evil cu∣stomes, impropriations, and taking away the land, houses, and possessions of the Church, bring amongst us? And therefore, seeing the Souldiers, Captains, and others of the Mili∣tary rank, that have gotten the lands of the Irish Rebels (which for their service, they have justly deserved) have likewise unjustly seized upon Gods part, and the lands, houses, and possessions of the Church, and are as fast wedded to these evils, as to their wives; so that we can more easily over∣come Golias, or pull the club out of Hercules hands, than our lands out of these mens fingers: It is high time, and I hope no good man will be offended with us for it, to implore, and most humbly to beg and beseech, the help and assistance of our Most gracious King, to redress these intolerable abuses, and to drive away this three-headed Cerberus, or rather this many-headed Hidra, the manifold Sacriledge, and the great oppression of the Church of Christ that is used in these dayes, and especially in this Kingdom of Ire∣land at this time. For I call Heaven and Earth to witness, that ever since the monstrous, undutiful, and unnatural murder, of that Most glorious Mar∣tyr, your Majestie's most dear Father, my Most gracious Master, Charles the First, until the happy Arrival of your gracious Majesty, I lived more quiet∣ly and contentedly, when all my Ecclesiastical Preferments were taken from me, and not 20 pound per annum left me in all the world to maintain me, than now I do; when by your gracious goodnesse, all the Church Rights and Inheritances, are commanded unresistably to be yielded unto us: for your Majesty may be well assured, that they which, neither for love of Gods favour, nor fear of his vengeance, will observe Gods Commandments, will never regard to obey your commandments. And therefore many of our Military men, Colonels, Captains, and others that fought for the Long-Par∣liament and Crumwell, do, with some of your Commanders, that herein imitate them, divide and teare the Revenues, and Garment of the Church, the Spouse of Christ, worse than the Souldiers of Pilate did with the Coat of Christ. And therefore now in mine old age, well-nigh 80. years, I am forced to bestow all my labour, and take pains, and many journeys, which an old man can hardly do, and spend all my means in Law, (which were bet∣ter bestowed upon the poor) to wring the Church-means out of their hands, or suffer the same, through my remisness, to be swallowed down into the belly of Hell; and leave my self to be liable to that great account, which
I must render for my neglect of doing mine uttermost endeavour to recover it, at the last Day; the which wonderful streight that I am put to, doth wonderfully discontent and trouble me continually: which makes me often∣times to think, that I were better to resign my Bishoprick, if I knew it were no offence to God, to some younger man, that could better combate with these Golias's, than for me to agonize, as I do, to recover my right, who may well cry out with the Poet, —Impar congressus Achilli. But the nearness of the time, that I must render mine account of my Stewardship unto God, hath strengthned me, to write this Treatise against Sacriledge, and especially, the Sacriledge of this Climate, and more parti∣cularly of this Diocesse of Ossory, where the Irish behind me, the English before me, the Citizens of the Corporation of Kilkeny, and Crumwells Cap∣tains on the one hand, and your Majestie's faithful Souldiers and Subjects in Anno 1649. on the other hand, do all seem to me, to become faithless unto Christ, and to fight against God, to take away the Inheritance of his Church from us, that are his weak servants. And it hath imboldned me likewise, most humbly to supplicate your Majesty, to take notice of these wrongs done unto us, which you do not know; and to assist me, to gain that right unto the Church, which I without your Majesties assistance, cannot do; and to pardon me for my boldness, and whatsoever else I have done amisse. CHAP. XX. The Authour's supplication to Jesus Christ, that he would arise and maintain his own cause, which we his weak servants cannot do, against so many rich, powerful, and many-friended adversaries of his Church. ANd now, sweet Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, having made mine humble addresse according to my bounden duty, to thine Annointed, thy Livetenant, and my Sacred Soveraign, to assist thy servants, to main∣tain thy right, Thy right, I say, as thou art a Priest, and a Priest for ever af∣ter the order of Melchisedec; and I know, that his Majesty, being the son of so pious, and so gracious a Father, as is now so glorious with thee in Heaven, will stretch forth his Royal hand, as thou didst unto S. Peter, to preserve us from sinking: I must now, with fear and reverence, and in all humility, crave leave, to return my speech unto thy Self; and as thou hast commanded us, to hear thy voice, so thou hast promised, to hear our prayers: And therefore I pray thee let not my Lord be angry, but suffer thy servant to speak unto thee: And we confess, that we are not worthy to sit with the dogs of thy flock; yet thou hast called us, to a most high and honourable place, to be thine Embassadours to thy chosen people, and unto Kings and Princes, to be thy Stewards, and the Dispensers of thy manifold graces. And according to our places, thou hast commanded us to behave and carry our
selves, as may be most agreeable for thine Honour; to preach thy word, to relieve the poor, to keep hospitality, to build thine House, and to do other the like works of piety and charity. Matth. 21 33. Matth. 25 14. Luke 19 13.And we know, that thou art not like Pharaoh, a cruel Master, that ta∣keth away the straw, and yet will require the whole tale of bricks; for thou didst deliver thy Vineyard unto the Husbandmen, before thou didst expect the fruits of it; and thou gavest thy Talents unto thy servants, before thou didst look for any gain from them. But now, O Lord God, our straw is kept from us, our vineyard is taken away,It was all ta∣ken from us, and now still much is detain∣ed from us. and we have scarce any one talent left unto us; for, O God, the Heathen have come into thine Inheritance, and as of old they made Hieru∣salem, so, now of late, they have made the famous Church of S. Keny, and many other Churches in Ireland, an heap of stones; the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the air, and the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the field. And as the Prophet David said, The Tabernacles of the Edomites, and Ismaelites, the Moabites and the Haga∣reus, Gebal and Ammon, and Amalec, the Philistines, with them that dwell at Tyre; Assure also is joyned with them, and have holpen the children of Lot to devour Jacob, and to lay waste his dwelling place: So, the Indepen∣dents, the Arminians, the Brownists, the Anabaptists, Luther and Calvin, and Cartwright, the Hugonots, with them that are called Quakers, and the Je∣suites also, have joyned with them, and have, to the uttermost of their pow∣er, holpen our Grand Opposers the Presbyterians, if not to devour the seed of Jacob, to destroy the Church, and thy Service, (which they now deny to desire to do it) yet I am sure, to be confederate against thee, and to lay waste thy dwelling place, to imagin craftily against thy people, the true Roy∣alists; and to take counsel against the secret ones, the Bishops, and Gover∣nours of the Church:1 Reg. 19.10. And as Elias said of the children of Israel, They have forsaken thy Covenant, they have thrown down thine Altars, and they have killed thy Prophets; So I may say of the children of Belial, they have forsaken the true Protestant Religion, they threw down thy Churches, they killed many of thy servants; and they said, Come, and let us root out the Bishops, that they be no more a people, and that the name of Episcopacy may be no more in remembrance; and to that end, at the Prophet saith, They brake down all our carved and curious works, with axes and hammers; they have set fire upon thy holy places, and have defiled the dwelling place of thy Name,Psal. 74.7, 8. even to the ground: Yea, and they said in their hearts, Let us make havock of them altogether; And by taking away all our lands, hou∣ses,Psal. 80.5 and possessions, they fed us with the bread of tears, and gave us plen∣teousness of tears to drink: and so they made us a very strife unto our neighbours, and our enemies laughed us to scorn, when they saw us made as the filth of the world,1 Cor. 4.13. and as the off-scouring of all things. And though thou hast brought unto us, a most gracious King, to our unspeakable joy and comfort; yet to this very day, they and their associates, and that, which troubles us most of all, they that come in thy Name, and under pretence of thy Service, and for service done unto thee, and thy Church, do, by the example of those thine enemies, and the haters of thy Church, either through ignorance or covetousness, labour by all means, and with great friends, to blind the eyes of our good King, that he should not understand the truth of the Churches Right; that so they might the easier and the sooner, carry away the lands, houses, and possessions of the Church from thee, and from thy servants, whereby, they shall be made invalid and unable, to discharge the duties, and the works, that thou requirest at their hands, if thou dost not help them to their instruments and means wherewith they may do their work.
And therefore, because we are weak and friendless, and far unable to deal, and to prevail against so many powerful, armed men, we lift up our eyes and hands to thee, O Lord God, and pray thee, to arise and maintain thine own Cause, and let not man have the upper-hand; for they have rebel∣led against thee, and have robbed thee, as the Prophet testifieth, and be not angry with us for ever; but be gracious unto thy servants, and lay not that to our charge, which we cannot help, when we have done our very best to preserve thy Right, and to uphold thy Service; but let the sin lie upon the heads of them, that commit it. Hear us, O Lord our God, and grant our request, for Jesus Christ's sake, thy dear Son, and our only Saviour; to whom with thee, and the Holy Spirit, our blessed Comforter, be all Glory and Dominion, and Thanksgiving, for ever and ever. Amen. Jehovae Liberatori.
TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY. Most Gracious Sovereign, I Have been long ashamed to see the Ae∣gyptian locusts, the emissaries of Apol∣lyon, and the sons of perdition, under the name of Christ, so much to abuse His sacred truth, as to send forth so impudently, and most ignorantly, such lying Pamphlets; so stuffed with Trea∣son, to animate Rebellion, and to poyson the dutiful affe∣ctions, and the obliged loyalty of Your Majesties seduced Subjects; and seeing we ought not to be sleeping, when the Traytors are betraying our Master, I have been not a little grieved to see so many able men, the faithful servants of Christ, and most loyal to Your Majesty, either over-awed with fear, or distempered with their calamities, or, I know not for what else, to be so long silent from publishing the ne∣cessity of obedience, and the abomination of Rebellion, in this time of need; when the tongue and pen of the Divine, should aswell strengthen the weak hands of faithful subjects, as the Sword and Musket of the Souldier, should weaken the strength of faithlesse Rebels: Therefore, not presuming of mine ability to equalize my brethren, but as conscious of my
fidelity both to God and to Your Majesty, as in my younger years INon sine meo magno malo. fearlesly published The resolution of Pilate, so in my latter age, though as much perplexed and persecuted as any man, driven out of all my fortunes in Ireland, hunted out of my house and poor family in England; and (after I had been causelesly imprisoned, and most barbarously hand∣led) then threatned beyond measure; yet I resolvedly set forth this Tract of The Grand Rebellion: and though it be plain, without curiosity, —Qualem decet exulis esse: Yet I do it in all truth and sincerity, without any sinister aspect: for, my witnesse is in Heaven, I had rather have all the estate I have, plundred and pillaged; my wife and chil∣dren left desolate, and destitute of all relief; and my self de∣prived of liberty and life by the Rebels, for speaking truth; in defence of whom my conscience knoweth to be in the right; than to have all the praise and preferment that either Peo∣ple, Parliament, or Pope, can heap upon me, for sewing pil∣lowes under their elbows; and with idle distinctions, false interpretations, and wicked applications of holy Writ, hy∣pocritically to flatter, and most seditiously to instigate the discontented and seduced spirits, and others of most despe∣rate fortunes, to rebell against the Lord's annointed. I pre∣sume to present the same into Your sacred hands. God Al∣mighty, which delivereth your Majesty from the contradi∣ction of sinners, and subdueth your people that are under You, bless, protect, and prosper You in all Your wayes, Your Royal Queen, and all Your Royal Progeny. Thus prayeth Your Majesties most loyally-devoted Subject, and most faithfully-obliged servant, Gryffith Ossory.
THE GRAND REBELLION. PSAL. 106.16. Aemulati sunt Mosen in Castris, Aaron sanctum Domini. CHAP. I. Sheweth, who these Rebels were; how much they were obli∣ged to their Governours; and yet how ungratefully they rebelled against them. I Am here in this Treatise to shew unto you a Monster, more hideous and monstrous than any of those that are described either by the Greek or Latin Poets; and more noysome and destructive to humane kinde, then any of those that the hottest Regions of Africa have ever bred, though this be now most frequently produced in these colder Climates: The name of it is, Rebellion, an ugly beast of many-heads, of loathsome aspect, of great antiquity, and as great vivacity; for the whole world could not subdue it to this very day. And this Rebellion (the like whereof was never seen from the Creation of the World to this very time, and I hope shall never be seen here∣after to the day of Judgement) is fully set down in the 16. of Numbers;The greatnesse of this sin of Rebellion, is seen two ways. 1. From the Text. 2. From their punishment. 1. Of the Text 4. Parts of the Text. and it is briefly repeated in the words of the Psalmist, Psal. 106.16. How great a sin it is, and how odious unto God will appear, if we examine 1. The particulars of the Text in the 16. verse, and but view 2. The greatnesse of their punishment in the next verse. 1. The Text containeth four special parts: 1. Qui fuêre, who the Rebels were that did this: 2. Contra quos, against whom they rebelled: 3. Quid fecerunt, what they did: 4. Ʋbi fecerunt, where they did it.
And in each of these I will endevour brevity: for, as the Poet saith, Horat.Citò dicta, Percipiunt dociles animi, retinéntque fideles; Few words do best hold memory, and a short taste doth breed the more ea∣ger appetite; therefore, as all the precepts of Christ were 3. Properties of Christs pre∣cepts,1. Brevia, 2. Levia, 3. Ʋtilia, so my desire shall be to do herein. 1. Part, who the Rebels were.First then, Aemulati sunt, they angred; and who were they? the Prophet answereth, Vers 7. Patres nostri in Aegypto, Our Fathers regarded not thy wonders in Aegypt. And therfore they were Described by four notions.1. Their own Countrey-men, the Israelites. 2. Of their own Tribe, as was Corah and his companions; and of the Nobility of Israel, as were Dathan and Abiram, and their adherents. 3. Of their own Religion, such as had received the Oracles of God, and did professe to serve the same true and ever living God, as the others did. 4. Such as had obtained multa & mgna, many great favours and be∣nefits; yea, Beneficia nimis copiosa: and I may say, very precious bene∣fits from them. For when God sent Mses his servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen; these delivered them from bondage, and brought them forth with silver and gold, and there was not one feeble person among their Tribes, saith the Prophet: And yet these were the men that rebelled. 1. Of the same Country.1. They were their own Country-men, of their own Tribe, the seed of A∣braham, and partakers of the same fortunes; And therefore they should love, and not hate; they should further, and not hinder; rejoyce, and not envie at one anothers happinesse: for though wicked men of desperate fortunes, care for none but for themselves, Sibi nati sibi vivunt, sibi moriuntur, sibi damnan∣tur; yet not only the Heathen Philosophy of Natures Schollers, but also the Divine verity of Gods elected servants, doth teach us, that partem patria, partem parentes vendicant; the love of our Countrey, and to our Country∣men, should be such, as rather to spend our selves to relieve them, then by lewd practices to destroy them; when by our dissolute debauchment, we have destroyed our selves. 2. Of the same Tribe.2. These Rebels were of their own Tribe, of the Tribe of Levi, and so knit together indissolubili vinculo, with the indissoluble bond of blood and fraternity; and therefore they should have remembred the saying of Abraham their Father, unto his Nephew Lot; Let there be no dissention be∣twixt thee and me, for we be brethren: a good Uncle, that would never drive his Nephew out of his house and home. And we read, that affinity among the Heathens could not only keep away the force, and suppresse the malice of deadly foes, but also retain pignora juncti sanguinis, as Julia did Caesar and Pompey; and as the Poet saith, Lucan Pharsal. l. 1.Ʋt generos soceris mediae junxere Sabinae. And therefore why should not consanguinity, and the bond of flesh and blood suppresse the envy of friends, and retain the love of brethren? But these prove true the old saying, that Fratrum irae inter se inimi∣cissimae, the wrath of brethren is most deadly: as it appeared, not only in Cain against Abel, Romulus against Remus, and all his brethren against Jo∣seph; but especially in Caracalla, that slew his brother Geta in his mo∣thers armes: and therefore Solomon saith, A brother offended is harder to winne then a strong City,Prov. 28.19. and their contentions are like the barrs of a Pallace, not easily broken. Nam ut aqua calefacta, cum ad frigiditatem reducitur fri∣gidissima est For as water that hath been hot, being cold again, is colder then ever it was before; and as the Adamant, if it be once broken, is shive∣red
into a thousand pieces; so love, being turned into hatred, and the bond of friendship being once dissolved, there accreweth nothing but a swift increase of deadly hatred: So it happened now in the Camp of Isra∣el, that the saying of Saint Bernard is found true, Omnes amici,Bern. in Cant. Serm. 33. & omnes inimici, All of a house, and yet none at peace; all of a kindred, and yet in mortal hatred. And as Corah and his companions were so nearly allyed unto Moses, of the Tribe of Lev; so Dathan and Abiram were men famous in the Con∣gregation, noble Peers, and very popular men, heads of their families, of the Tribe of Reuben. A subtle practice of that pestiferous Serpent, to joyn Simeon and Levi, Clergy and Laity, in this wicked faction of Rebellion; the one under colour of dissembled sanctity, the other with their pow∣er and usurped authority, to seduce the more, to make the greater breach of obedience. And so it hath been always, that we scarse read of any Re∣bellion, but some base Priests, the Chaplains of the Devill, have begot it; and then the Nobles of the people, arripientes ansam, taking hold of this their desired opportunity, do foster that which they would have willingly fathered; as, besides this Rebellion of Corah, that of Jack Cade, in the reign of Henry the sixth; and that of Perkin Warbeck, in the time of Henry the seventh; and many more that you may find at home, in the lives of our own Kings, may make this point plain enough. But they should have thought on what our Saviour tells us, that Every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation; and every City or House divided against it self, , shall not stand. What a mischief then was it for these men to make such a division among their own Tribe, and in their own Camp? Nondum tibi de∣fuit hostis: had they not the Egyptians, and the Canaanites, and the Amalekites, and enow besides to fight against, but they must raise a civil discord in their own house? Could not their thoughts be as devout as the Heathen Poet's, which saith, —Omnibus hostes Reddite nos populis, civile avertite bellum.Lucan. Pharsal. lib. 1. And therefore this makes the sin of home-bred Rebels the more intolera∣ble, because they bring such an Ilias malorum, so many sorts of unusual cala∣mities, and grievous iniquities upon their own brethren. 3. These Rebels were of their own Religion,3. Of the same Religion. professing the same faith that the others did: Et religio dicitur à religando, (saith Lactan∣tius;) and therefore this bond should have tyed them together firmer then the former. For if equal manners do most of all bind affections; Et simi∣litudo morum parit amicitiam, as the Orator teacheth: then, hoc magnum est, hoc mirum, that men should not love those of the same Religion. And if the profession of the same trades and actions is so forcible, not onely to maintain peace, but also to increase love, and amity,JACOB REX, in Ep. to all Christian Mo∣narchs. as we see in all Societies and Corporations of any mechanick craft or handle work, they do inviolably observe that Maxim of the Civill Law, to give an interest un∣to those, qui fovent consimilem causam: so that as birds of the same feather, they will cluster all in one, and be zealous for the preservation of them that are of the same craft or society: why then should not the profession of the same Religion, if not increase affection, yet at least detain men from dissention? For, though diversities of Religion, non bene conveniunt, can sel∣dom contain themselves for any while in the same Kingdom, without Civil distractions, especially if each party be of a near equall power, which should move all Governours to do herein, as Hannibal did with
his army, that was a mixture of all Nations, to keep the most s spected un∣der, and rank them so, that they durst not kick against his Carthaginians: or as Henry the fourth did with the Brittains, to make such Laws, that they were never able to rebell: so should the discreet Magistrate, not root out a people, that they be no more a Nation, but so subordinate the furthst from truth to the best professors, that they shall never be able any wayes to endanger the true Religion; yet where the same Religion is universally profssd, excepting small differences in adiaphoral things, quae non diver∣sificant species, as the Schos speak; it is more then unnatural for any one to make a Schism, and much more transcendently heynous to rebell against his Governours. But indeed no sin is so unnatural, no offence so heynous, but that swelling pride, and discontented natures, will soon perpe∣trate; no bonds nor bounds can keep them in; and therefore Corah must rebell. And ever since in all Societies, even among the Levites, and among the Priests, the d sordered spirits have rebelled against their Governours, & fecerunt unitatem contra unitatem; and erecting Altars against Altars, (as the Fathers speak) they have made confederacies and conspiracies a∣gainst the truth, and thereby they have at all times drawn after them ma∣ny multitudes of ignorant soules unto perdition: This is no new thing, but a true saying; and therefore our Saviour biddeth us to Take heed of false Prophets, and of rebellious spirits; that, as Saint John saith, went from us, but were not of us, but are indeed the poyson, and Incediaries, both of Church and Common-wealth. 4. Much obli∣ged for many favours unto their Gover∣nours.4. These Rebels had received many favours and great benefits from their Governours: for they were delivered è lutulentis manuum operibus, as Saint Augustine speaketh; and, as the Prophet saith, They had eased their shoulders from their burthens, and their hands from making of pots: they had broken the Rod of their oppressors, and, as Moses tells them, they had sepa∣rated them from the rest of the multitude of Israel,Numb. 16.9. and set them near to God himself, to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord: and therefore the light of nature tells us, that they were most ungrateful, and as inhumane as the brood of Serpents, that would sting him to death, which, to preserve his life, would bring him home in his bosome. And it seems this was the transcendencie of Judas his sin, and that which grieved our Saviour most of all, that he, whom he had called to be one of his twelve Apostles, whom he had made his Steward and Treasurer of all his wealth, and for whom he had done more then for thousands of o∣thers, should betray him into the hands of sinners; for, if it had been ano∣ther (saith the Psalmist) that had done me this dishonour, I could well have born it, but seeing it was thou my familiar friend, which didst eat and drink at my table, it must needs trouble me: for though in others it might be pardonable, yet in thee it is intolerable; and therefore of all others he saith of Judas, Vae illi homini, woe be unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed, it had been better for him he had never been born, as if his sin were greater then the sin of Annas, Caaphas, or Plate. But the old saying is most true, Improbus à nullo flectitur obsequio, no ser∣vice can satisfie a froward soul, no favour, no benefit, no preferment can appease the rebellious thoughts of discontented spirits. And therefore not∣withstanding Mses had done all this for Corah, yet Corah must rebell against Moses: So many times, though Kings have given great honours unto their subjects, made them their Peers, their Chamberlains, their Treasurers, and their servants of nearest place, and greatest trust; And though Aaron, the High-Priest, or Bishop, doth impose his hands on others, and admit them into Sa∣cred Orders above their brethren, to be near the Lord, and bestow all the preferment they can upon them: yet, with Corah, these unquiet and ungrate∣full
spirits must rebell against their Governours: For, I think, I may well demand, Which of all them, that now rebell against their King, have not had either Grand fathers, Fathers, or themselves promoted to all, or most of their fortunes and honours, from that Crown which now they would tram∣ple under their feet? Who more against their King, then those, that re∣ceived most from their King? Just like Judas, or, here, like Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. I could instance the particulars, but I passe. So you see, who were the Rebels, most ungrateful, most unworthy men. CHAP. II. Sheweth against whom these men rebelled; that God is the giver of our Governours; the severall offices of Kings and Priests; how they should assist each other; and how the people laboureth to de∣stroy them both. SEcondly, we are to consider, against whom they rebelled;2. Part, against whom they re∣belled. 2. Points dis∣cussed. and the Text saith, Moses and Aaron: and therefore We must discusse 1. Qui fuére, who they were in regard of their places. 2. Quales fuére, what they were in regard of their qua∣lities. 1. In regard of their places, we find that these men were 1. The chief Governours of Gods people. 2. Governours both in temporal, and in spiritual things. 3. Agreeing, and consenting together in all their Government. 1. They were the prime Governours of the people: Moses the King or Prince, to rule the people; and Aaron the High-Priest to instruct and offer Sacrifice, to make attonement unto God for the sins of the people; and these have their authority from God: for though it sometimes happeneth that Potens, the Ruler, is not of God, as the Prophet saith,Hos. 8.4. They have reign∣ed, and not by me; and likewise modus assumendi, the manner of getting au∣thority is not alwayes of God, but sometimes by usurpation, cruelty, subtlety, or some other sinful means: yet Potestas, the power it self, whosoever hath it, is ever from God: for the Philosopher saith, Magistra ûs originem,Aristot. Plit. lib. 1. c 1. Ambros. Ser. 7. esse à natura ipsa. And Saint Ambrose saith, Datus à Deo Magistratus, non modo malorum coercendorum causâ, sed etiam bonorum fovendorum in vera animi pie aete & honestate, gratiâ. And others say, the Sun is not more necessary in Heaven, then the Magistrate is on Earth; for alas, how is it possible for any Society to live on earth, cùm vivitur ex rapto, when men live by rapine, and shall say, Let our strength be to us the law of justice; therefore God is the giver of our Governours, and he professeth, Per me regnant Reges: And Danel told Nebuchadnezzar,Vide etiam c. 2. v. 37. That the most high ruleth in the Kingdome of men, and he giveth it to whomsoever he will: Dan 4.25. 2. These two men were Governours, both in all temporal and in all spi∣ritual things; as Moses in the things that pertained to the Common-wealth, and Aaron in things pertaining unto God. And these two sorts of Government are in some sort subordinate each to other, and yet each one intire in it self, so that the one may not usurp the office of the other; for 1. The spiritual Priest is to instruct the Magistrates,2 Governours both in tem∣poral, and spi∣rituall things. and to reprove them too, if they do amisse, as they are members of their charge, and the sheep of their sheep-fold: And so we have the examples of David, reproved by Nathan, Achab by Elias, Herod by John Baptist; and, in the Primitive
Church,Euseb. l, 6. c. 34. Sozomen. lib. 7. of Philip the Emperour, repenting at the perswasion of Fabian; and Theodosius senior, by the writings of S. Ambrose. 2. The temporal Magistrate is to command, and, if they offend, to correct and condemn the Priests, as they are members of their Common-wealth;Rom. 13. Bernard ad Archiepis. Seno∣nensem. for Saint Paul saith, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: and if every soul, then the soul of the Priest, as well as the souls of the People; or otherwise, Quis eum excepit ab universitate? as Saint Bernard saith; and so, Theodoret, Theophylact, and Oecumenius, are of the same mind: And the examples of Abiathar, deposed by Solomon; and a greater than Solomon, Christ himself, not refusing the censure of Pilate, though for no fault; Saint Paul appealing unto Caesar; Caecilian judged by the Dele∣gates of Constantine; Flavianus by Theodosius, and all the Martyrs and godly Bishops never pleading exemption from their persecutors, do make this point beyond all question. 3. Governours well agreeing in their go∣vernment.3. These two Governours were not onely consanguinei, two brethren, for so were Cain and Abel, to whom totus non sufficit orbis; but they were also consentanei, like the soul and body of man, of the same sympathy and affection for the performance of every action: For the Church and Common-wealth, are like Hippocrates twins, so linked together, as the Ivie intwisteth it self about the Oak, that the one cannot happily subsist without the other; but, as the Secretary of nature well observeth, That the Marygold opens with the Sun, and shuts with the shade; even so, when the Sun-beams of peace and prosperity shine upon the Common-wealth, then by the reflection of those beams, the Church dilates and spreads it self the better; as you may see in Acts 9.31. and on the other side, when any Kingdom groaneth under civill dissention, the Church of Christ must needs suffer persecution. And therefore to this end, that the Prince and Priest might, as the two feet of a man, help each other to sup∣port the weight of the whole body, and to bear the burthen of so great a charge; God at the first severing of these offices, (which before were uni∣ted in one person, as the Poet saith of Anius, —Rex idem hominum, Phoebique Sacerdos. and as the Apostle saith of Melchisedech, that he was both a King, and the Priest of the most high God) did chuse two natural brethren to be the Governours of his people; and that, quod non caret mysterio, Aaron was the eldest, and yet Moses was the chiefest; to signifie, as I take it, that they should rather help and further each other, then any wayes rule and domineer one over the other; because that although Aaron was the eldest brother, and chief Priest, yet Moses was the chief Magistrate, and his brother's god, as God himself doth stile him; and therefore this should terrorem incutere, and teach him how to behave himself towards his bro∣ther; and though Moses was the chief Magistrate, yet Aaron was the chief Priest, and his eldest brother, which had not lost (like Reuben) the prero∣gative of his birth-right: and this should reverentiam inducere, work in Moses a respect unto his brother's age and place. And truly there is great reason why these two should do their best, to support and protect each other; for the government of the people, is, as we may now see, a very difficult, and miraculous thing, no lesse then the appeasing of the Surges of the raging Sea, as the Prophet shew∣eth, when he saith, That God ruleth the rage of the Sea, and the noyse of his waves, and the madness of his people: And the Rod of government is a mira∣culous Rod, as well that of Aaron, as that of Moses; for as Moses Rod turned into a Serpent, and the Serpent into a Rod again; so the Rod of
Aaron, of a dry stick, did blossome and bear ripe Almonds: to shew how strange and wonderful a thing it is, either for Prince or Priest, to rule an unruly multitude, too much for any one of them to do; and therefore God doth alwayes joyn both of them together, as the Psalmist sheweth, Thou led∣dest thy people like sheep, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. And besides, if these two do not assist and protect each other, they shall be soon suppressed, one after another, of their own people; for if the Prince, which is to be our Nursing-Father, be once subdued, then presently the Priest shall be destroyed; and when he hath lost his power, our power shall never be able to do any good: and if the Priest which prayeth, and preach∣eth, to direct the King, be trampled under foot,As soon as men have o∣verthrown their Priests, they will pre∣sently labour to destroy their king. it hath been found most certain, that after they have thrown away the Miter, they have not long retained the Scepter: And therefore King James of ever blessed memory, of a sharp conception, and sound judgement, was wont to say, No Bishop, no King; unlesse you mean such a King as Christ was, when the Jewes crowned him with Thorns, and bowing their knees, said, Hail King of the Jews; that is, Rex sine Regno, a King without power; like a man of straw, that is onely made to fright away the birds: For the people are alwayes prone to pull out their necks from the yoke of their obedience, and would soon re∣bell, if the Priests did not continually preach, that Every soul should be sub∣ject to the higher powers; as we see now by experience, how apt they are to rebell, when factious Preachers give them the least incouragement. And therefore as this rebellion of Corah, so every other, though they begin with one, yet they aym at both, and strive to overthrow aswell the one, as the o∣ther: for so my Text saith, They angred Moses in their Tents, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord. And therefore these two should be as Hippocrates twins, or indeed like man and wife, indissolubly coupled, and coherent to∣gether, without distraction; and cursed be they that strive to make the di∣vision: for whom God hath thus united together, no man should put asunder. And here you may observe the method of their Rebellion,The method of their Re∣bellion. the Text saith, Moses and Aaron, yet Moses sheweth, they began with Aaron: for when their Rebellion was first discovered, Moses doth not say, What have I done against you? but What is Aaron that you should murmure against him? to shew unto us, that although Moses was the first they aymed at in their intention, yet he was the last they purposed to overthrow in the execu∣tion: Quia progrediendum à facilioribus, as the Devil began with the wo∣man, the weaker vessel, that he might the easier overthrow the stronger; so the enemies of God and his Church do alwayes seek, first to overthrow the Priest, and then presently they will set upon the Prince. And therefore as Moses here,Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 2. so all Magistrates every where should re∣member, that Jam tua res agitur, through our sides they may smart, and our wounds may prove dangerous unto them: because you shall never read they began to shake us, but they fully intended to root out them: for if the fear of God, and the honour of the King must go together, as Saint Peter sheweth; it must needs follow, that they will but dishonour and disobey their King, that have cast away the fear of God; and it is most certain, that when they drive God out of their hearts, as the Gergezites drove Christ out of their Coasts:Little fear of God in them, that expell their Priests out of their societies. when they expell Aaron the chief Priest or Bishop out of their Assemblies, there is but little fear of God before their eyes: for if Seneca, that was but Nature's Schollar, could tell us, that when we go a∣bout any wicked Act, a grave Cato, or severe Aristides standing by us, would make us blush, and stop the doing thereof, then certainly the Chri∣stian that hath any grace, will be ashamed of his evill intent, and be afraid to offend God, when he seeth a man of God so near him; who doth often∣times
ponere obicem,, make a stop to stay the proceedings of the wicked, that would not seldom be farre worse, and do more unjustice, if it were not for the company and perswasions of the Priest and Preacher. The wisdom of the former age.And therefore the former ages, that feared God more then we, and were wiser to use this means, that they might fear him, desired, that in their greatest Assemblies of greatest affairs, as Sessions, Councels, Parliaments, and the like; the Bishops and Preachers might be as the chief members of their consultations, as well to witnesse the uprightnesse of their actions, as to direct them in cases of conscience, what is most agreeable to the divine constitution. The expulsion of Bishops, the cause of many subs quent mischiefs.And wheresoever you see the expulsion of these men, and the rejection of these helps and furtherances unto godlinesse, you shall find no good success, nor better fruit of their greatest Counsels, than Sedition, Oppression, Confu∣sion, and Rebellion: For it is not the least part of the Bishops office, and the duty of all Preachers, not onely in the Pulpit, where what they say is of many men soon forgotten, but also in all other meetings and assemblies; and in the very instances, when occasion shall be offered; to do as Christ and his Apostles did, perswade peace, righteousnesse, and obedience unto the people; and the want of their association hath been the opening of many gaps, to let in much injustice and impiety in many places, because their present per∣swasion may do as much, if not more good with men, when they are in action, then their preaching can do when they come to contemplation. And therefore if any assembly hath (like Corah) rebelled against Aaron, and cast their Bishops and Preachers out of doores, I would advise them to follow the Counsell of Saint Ambrose in the like case, Quod inconsultò fece∣runt, consultiùs revocetur, what they have inconsiderately done, to throw them out, let them more advisedly revoke and call them in again; and they whose breeding hath been in knowledge, and their calling is to do justice, and to teach truth, will help, and not hinder them to understand the truth, and to proceed in righteousnesse. And so you see, who these men were, in regard of their places. CHAP. III. Sheweth the assured testimonies of a good and lawful Governour, their qualifications, our duties to them; and wherein our obe∣dience to them consisteth. 2. How these Governours were qualified for their pla∣ces. 2. Points dis∣cussed. 1. How they obtained their places. Many u urp their placesSEcondly, we are to consider, Quales fuere, how these men were qualified for their places; touching which, these two points are to be handled: 1. Modus assumendi, the mannner of obtaining it. 2. Facultas exequendi, the ability and fidelity of discharging it. 1. I told you before, that many do obtain their places by sinful means: as many of the Popes and Roman Emperours, by poysoning and mur∣thering their Predecessours, have unlawfully stept the Thrones of Majesty; and so did Henry the fourth by the unjust deposition of Richard the se∣cond: and Richard the third, by the cruell and secret murthering of his poor innocent Nephewes, attain unto the Crown of England. And in such manner of assuming government, there is just cause of resisting, and a fair colour of rebelling against them; if you call it a Rebellion, when men discharge their duties in defence of justice, to oppose usurpation: But neither Moses nor Aaron came so to the places of their govern∣ment. For
1.1. Moses had a twofold testi∣mony to justi∣fie his calling. Moses had a double testimony to approve his calling to be from God. The first was Internum, to assure himself: And the second was Exter∣num, to confirm the same unto the people. For 1. When Moses said unto God, Who am I that I should goe unto Pharaoh;1. Inward. The Lord answered, I will be with thee, [ad protegendum & dirigendum] saith the glosse: and this shall be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee; Af∣ter that you have brought the people out of Egypt, you shall serve God upon this Mountain; and that may assure thee that I have sent thee, and will bring thy people unto Canaan, as I have brought them into this wildernesse. 2. That the people might be assured he was lawfully called,2. Outward, which was a threefold sign. 1. Of his Rod. God gave unto him a threefold sign. 1. Of his Rod: that, being cast to the ground, was turned to a Serpent; but taken by the tayle, it turned to a Rod again: to shew, that when the rod of Government is thrown out of the Magistrates hand,People with∣out govern∣ment, like Ser∣pents. the people are like the brood of Serpents, a malicious, and a viperous generation; but being taken into the hand of government, they prove a royal, and a glorious Nation. 2. The hand thrust into his bosom, and taken out, was leprous;2. Of the Hand but thrust again and taken out, was made whole: to signifie, that a good Magi∣strate out of the bosom of the Law, must pull out the hand of justice, both to wound and to heal, to kill and to make alive, as the Poet saith; Parcere subjectis, & debellare superbos. To defend the innocent, and to punish the wrong doer. 3. The water taken out of the river, and cast upon t dry ground,3. Of the Wa∣ter. should be turned into blood, to intimate unto them, that the d which was spilt by Pharaoh, when their children were murthered, and drowned in the Rivers, should be required, and revenged upon the Aegyptians, when, by the government of Moses, the carkasses of those outragious oppressours, should be cast out of the Red Sea, and laid upon the dry ground. Thus Moses shewed that he was lawfully called. 2. For Aaron,2. Aarons cal∣ling justified. Heb. 5. the Apostle makes him the pattern of all lawful entrance into this Calling, when he saith, that No man taketh this honour upon him, but he that is called as Aaron was: and Moses manifested the lawfulnesse of his calling unto all Israel, when according to the number of their twelve Tribes, he caused 12. Rods to be put in the Tabernacle of witness; and of all them the Rod of Aaron only, which was for the Tribe of Levi, was budded and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded Almonds.Numb. 17.8. And so it was apparent to all Israel, that these men came lawfully to their government. 2. For their ability and fidelity to discharge their places,2. Their qua∣lifications for their places. the malice of their adversaries could not charge them with any omission; they do not say they have governed amisse, but they would fain govern with them. And, to make this more apparent; 1. The Spirit of God testifieth of Moses,1. Of the abili∣ties of Moses. that He was faithful in all Gods house; and in that respect called the man of God, the servant of God, whose whole care was for his Master: and for the sweetnesse of his dispo∣sition, he is said to be a very meek man, above all the men that were upon the earth: for his love to his people, Tertullian makes him the figure of Christ,Tertul. de fug in persecut. Cùm adhuc Christo nn revelato, in se figurato, ait, Si perdis hunc populum & me pariter cum eo disperde; for his zeal of Gods honour he was most fervent, and therefore severe in punishing the worshippers of the golden Calfe: and for his just e and uprightnesse, he wronged no man; for his intellectuals he was exceeding wise, and learned in all the learning of the Aegyptians.
2. Of the abili∣ties of Aaron.2. For Aaron, how sit he was to be a Priest, will appear, if you consider those two vertues that are the most requisite for the Priest-hood, as Moses sheweth when he prayeth. Let thy Ʋrim and thy Thummim be upon the man of thy mercy, that is, omitting all other interpretations, 1. His ability to teach.1. Ability to teach. Malach.  Tim. 3.2.2. Sanctity of life. For, 1. The Priests lips must preserve knowledge; he must be apt to teach, & si Sacerdos est, sciat legem Dei; si ignorat legem, ipse se arguit non esse sacerdo∣tem Domini:Hieron. in Hag∣gai 2. & Aug. de doctr. Christ. l 4. c. 16. But God himself saith, that he knew Aaron was an eloquent man, and could speak well, and he promised unto Moses, that He would be with his mouth, to teach him what he should say: and therefore I know not who can say any thing against him herein, when God saith, he can do it so well, and ingageth himself that he will help him. 3. His up∣rightnesse of life.2. For the integrity of his life, I need not go further then my Text, when as the Prophet calleth him The Saint of the Lord; that is, not onely Sanctificatum ad Sacerdotium; but also a holy, just, and godly man, in re∣spect of the innnocency of his life. And so you have seen the persons described, against whom these Rebels have rebelled: They were the prime Governours of Gods people, and such Governours as the like, for all kind of goodnesse and excellencies, could not be found on earth. Therefore these Rebels ought to have obeyed them, though for no∣thing else, but because they were their Governours; for the Apostle tells us plainly, that Necesse est subjici, we must needs be subject; not onely for wrath, but also for conscience sake: wherein you see a double necessity of obeying. A double ne∣cessity of obe∣dience. Our obedience consisteth in two things. 1. In doing no∣thing against our Gover¦nours. 1. In Thought. Eccles 10 20. 2. In Word. Exod. 22.28. 3. In Deed. Rom. 13.2.1. Extern, Propter iram, for fear of wrath: 2. Internal, Propter conscientiam, for conscience sake: therefore we must needs obey. And our obedience consisteth chiefly in these two things: 1. To do nothing against them. 2. To do all that we can for them. For, 1. We are forbidden to think an ill thought of them with our hearts: Speak not evill of the King, (saith Solomon) no not in thy thought; for a bird of the ayr shall carry the voyce, and that which hath wings, shall tell the matter: 2. We are charged not to revile them with our tongues; for, Thou shalt not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of the people. 3. We are restrained from resisting them with our hands; for, Whosoe∣ver resisteth the power, resisteth the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, re∣ceive unto themselves damnation. And therefore the Lord saith unto all, Nolite tangere Christos meos; where he doth not say, Non occides, or ne perdas, the worst that can be, but ne tangas,Many kinds of touches. the least that may be; touch not, tactu noxio, with any hurt∣ful touch. And many times we are touched secretly, we know not bow, nor when, nor by whom, but cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly, and all the people shall say Amen: and therefore much more cursed be he, that smiteth his Prince, his Priest, his Governour. And sometimes we are touched with violent hands, when with hostile force, and open arms, our power and authority are withstood: but Most frequently we are touched with virulent tongues, as they say in Jeremy;Jerem. 18.18. Venite, percutiamus eum linguâ; and this touch, though it breaks no bones, yet doth it wound and kill the very heart.
But the Lord saith in general, Touch not at all; therefore no kind is li∣mited, no way permitted to touch them. 2. As we are forbidden to do any thing against them,2. In doing all that we can do for our Go∣vernours. 1. To honour them. so we are comman∣ded to do all we can for them: for, Saint Peter saith, Fear God, and honour the King; therefore he cannot be said to fear God, that doth not honour his King: And Solomon saith, Fear God, my son, and the King; therefore he cannot be the son of Wis∣dom, the son of Solomon, that doth not fear the King; that is, fear to wrong him, fear to offend him, fear to anger him.Rom. 1. Vide J sh. 1.16. Wherein we ought to obey, and disobey. And when the Ma∣gistrates command us any thing, Saint Paul bids us to obey them; but if they command any thing against God, then indeed their authority comes too short. Quia melius est obedire Deo, quam hominibus. Yet in these things wherein we may not obey, we must not resist; but as Julian's Souldiers would not sacrifice at his command; Sed timendo potestatem, contemnebant potestatem, in fearing the power of God, regarded not the power of man; yet when he led them against his enemies, Subditi erant propter Dominum aeternum, etiam domino temporali;Aug. in Psal. 124. so should we truly distinguish of the things they do command, and take heed we be not blind Judges herein, and too partial to satisfie our own passionate affections. And besides, we are to impart our goods to supply their necessities,2. To impart our goods to them. and for the supportance of their dignities; for our Saviour bids us, Give unto Caesar, what belongeth unto Caesar: and Saint Paul expresseth the same to be Tribute; that is, Imposts, Subsidies, Gifts, or the like, call it by what name you will; we are commanded by God, to the uttermost of our abili∣tie, to supply their occasion and necessities, even as the children are bound to relieve their parents in their extremities. And if we see our Moses, our King, or chief Governour,3. To hazard our lives for them. any wayes impugned, or like to be oppressed, either by forraign Aegyptians, or dome∣stick Israelites, though they should be Datqan and Abiram, the most prime and popular men in all the Congregation, that could draw thousands after them, yet are we bound, to the hazard of our lives, to preserve the Life, Crown, and Dignity of our Prince; as the subjects of King Da∣vid hazarded themselves to save him harmlesse: And if we will not do this,2 Sam. 18.3. then, as Mordecai in the like case said to Hester,Hester 4.14. If thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time, then shall there inlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place, but thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed. So I say, with King David, the Lord will help his Annointed, and deliver him from the strivings of his people: and if we still be silent and do nothing; yet, the Starres in their order shall fight against Sisera. Et conjurati veniunt ad clas∣sica venti: and as the Angell of the Lord said of the Merozites,The punish∣ment of them that will not assist their Governours. Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help Barack against the Canaanites: So let them fear a bitter curse, and a curse from God, that will not help their Prince against his enemies, especi∣ally such enemies as have least reason to be enemies unto him. So you see what obedience we owe unto our Governours, and therefore their rebellion was the more intolerable, that thus spurned against their Magistrates.
CHAP. IV. Sheweth the objection of the Rebels to justifie their Rebellion: the first part of it answered, that neither our compulsion to Idolatry, nor any other injury or tyranny should move us to Rebell. BUt we must not condemn them before their cause be heard; and there∣fore Corab shall have his Counsell, to object what he can for himself: And I find but one Objection of any moment, though the same consisteth of many branches. As The objection of the Rebels.What if Moses, the King, or chief Governour, being so much affected and addicted unto Aaron the chief Priest or Bishop, and to others his prime Councell, should be led by evill advice to set up Idolatry, and to play the Tyrant; to take away the goods, destroy the lives, and bring most of his people to most miserable conditions? may neither private men, nor the subordinate Magistrates, nor the prime Nobility of the people, nor any other Court or Assembly of men, restrain his fury, or remove this mischief from Gods inheritance, from the Church and Common-wealth? This is that Gordian knot which is so hard to be untied. But if I might in the School of Divinity have leave to resolve this que∣stion, and not to be confuted, as Saint Steven was, with stony arguments, I would soon answer,Two Parts of their obje∣ction. that 1. In neither of these cases: 2. Neither of these men may do it: and I could make this good by very good authority; for, Si Magistratus est bonus, nutritor est tuus; if our Governour be good, he is our Nursing-Father, and we should receive our nourishment with thanks; and no thanks to us for our obedience to such a one. And if our Gover∣nour be evill, he is so for our transgression, and we should receive our pu∣nishment with patience; and therefore no resistance: but either obey the good willingly, or endure the evill patiently. But to proceed to break this Gordian knot in pieces, and to answer each part of this Objection: 1. Part of their objection an∣swered. Not to rebell for any cause 1. Not for our compulsion to Idolatry.1. I say, that many wicked Kings, and cruel Emperours have set up Idolatry, and blasphemy against God, and yet I do not find that any of Gods servants did ever rebell against them; for you know Jeroboam the son of Nebat that made Israel to sin, did set up golden Calves to be worship∣ped. Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon made an Image of gold, and com∣manded all his people to fall down to worship it. And what shall I say of those Idolatrous Kings, Achab, Manasses, Julian, and abundance more, that most impiously compelled their subjects unto Idolatry? and yet you shall not find that either the faithfull Jews under Jeroboam, or the Pro∣phet Daniel in Babylon, or Elias the man of God in the time of Achab, or any of all the good Christians that were under Julian, either did themselves, or perswaded others of the servants of God, at any time, to rebell against those Idolatrous Kings: for they considered how far the Law of God that prohibiteth Idolatry, and instigateth us against the allurers and perswa∣ders of us to Idolatry and blasphemy,Deut. 13, 6. How far the Law of God extendeth to resist Idolaters. extendeth; and that is, If thy bro∣ther, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul, shall intice thee to Idolatry, and to serve strange Gods, thine eye shall not spare him, neither shalt thou have any pitty upon him; but for the sonne to rise up against the father, the wife against her husband, the servant against his Lord, the subject against his King, here is not a word; and therefore by this Law they are not obliged,
but rather forbidden to do it; for though the son is not expressely prohi∣bited to accuse his father, nor the wife her husband, nor the servant his Lord, nor the subject his King: yet, because Gods Law is absolute and perfect, to which we must neither adde nor detract, nor construe it as we please; the Divines conceive those things forbidden which are not expressed; especially in penall precepts, which are to be restrained, and not extended any further then they are set down, as Tostatus doth most truly conclude:Tostatus in Deut, 13. q. 3. And what the sonne may not do against his father, nor the wife against her husband, nor the servant against his Lord; that certainly no man may do against his King, which is the father of his Country, the husband of the Common-wealth, and the supreme Lord over all his subjects. And therefore Christ himself that came to fulfill the Law, and knew best how farre it reached, living under the Empire of Tiberius, the Princi∣pality of Herod, and the Government of Pilate, that were all wicked and idolatrous, did notwithstanding submit himself in all things (which the Law of God forbad him not) unto them; and though for strength, policy, and power, he might easily have resisted them,The obedience of all his Apo∣stles and prime Christi∣ans to Idola∣trous Gover∣nours. yet did he not only per∣form all the offices of subjection unto these wicked Magistrates, and idola∣trous Governours, but also commanded all his followers to do the like; and so we see they did: for the Christians which were at Hierusalem, when Saint James was martyred, were more in number, and greater in power, then were the persecutors of that Apostle; and yet for the reverence they bare to the Law of God, and the example of their Master Christ, interimi se à paucioribus, quàm interimere patiebantur; they rather suffered them∣selves to be killed, then they would kill their Persecutors, saith St. Cle∣ment. And so the other Apostles, under Caligula, Claudius, Nero,Clement. recog∣nit. lib. 1. f. 9. and Domi∣tian, that were bloody Tyrants, cruell Persecutors, and most wicked Idola∣ters: and those holy Fathers of the Church, Liberius, Hosius, Athanasius, Nazianzen, Hilary, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierom, Chrysostom, and the rest, for a thousand years together followed the example of Patience, without resistance; yea, Quamvis nimius & copiosus noster sit numerus; though their power was great, and their number greater then their adversaries, yet none of them strugled when he was apprehended, saith St. Cyprian.Cyprian ad De∣metrium. Tertul. in Apo∣log. He that would see more plen∣ty of proof, let him read the Treatise A perswasion to Loyalty. Where the Authour bringeth the Fathers of all ages, to con∣firm this point. And the reason is rendred by Tertullian, because among the Christians, Occidi licet, occidere non licet, It was lawfull for them to suffer themselves to be killed, but not to kill; for our Saviour had pronounced them blessed, that would suffer for righteousnesse sake: and what more righteous, then to suf∣fer death for not being an Idolater, to die rather then to deny their God? Therefore they are not to be blessed, which refuse to suffer, because that in not suffering, but in rising up, and rebelling against their Persecutors, they are (as the Apostle saith) convinced of sin, and in sinning, they ac∣quire unto themselves damnation, Rom. 13. Besides, if it were lawfull to maintain this Doctrine, then the Papists that believe our Religion to be false, and that we perswading men unto it, do seduce them from the true service of God, may lawfully rebell against their Prince, and justifie all their trayterous plots: and every heretical Sect that believeth we are Idolaters, (as they do all which oppose the crosse in Baptism) may, without offence, fall into Rebellion against all those Magi∣strates that maintain that Idoll, as they term it. And this false pretext might be a dissembled cloak for all Rebels, to say, They do it in defence of their Religion, because they are afraid to be compelled unto Idolatry: And therefore the truth is, if any Tyrant, like Julian, should endeavour to com∣pell me unto the Idols Temple, or to worship my true God with false ser∣vice I will rather die then do it; but I may not resist when I am compelled by any means: for so I find, that Shadrac, Meshao, and Abeduego, Elias,
the Prophets, and the Apostles, and all the Christians of the Primitive Church, did use to do in the like case. And I had rather imitate the obedience of those good Saints to those wicked Kings, that would have compelled them to Idolatry; then the in∣solencie of those proud Rebels, that under these false pretences wil rebell against their lawful Princes. 2. Not for any injury that is done unto us.2. If we may not rebell when we are compelled to Idolatry, much lesse may we do it for any other injury: for, what injury can be greater then to be forced to Idolatry, when as to be robbed of my faith and religion, is more intolerable then to be spoyled of all my goods and possessions?No injury greater then compulsion to Idolatry. And therefore, when Christ suffered as great an injury as could be offered unto his person, when the souldiers came with Swords and Staves to take him, as if he had been a thief and a murderer; and Saint Peter then, like a hot-headed Puritane, was very desirous to revenge this indignity, our Saviour reprehended his rashnesse, because he knew what the other as yet knew not: that he ought not to resist when the Magistrate doth send to apprehend; and so the Christians of the Primitive Church were extreamly injured by their Persecutors: And the Catholique faith it self suffered no small oppression under Constantius the Arian Emperour; and yet that purer age, wherein the better Christians lived, did not so much as once think of any revenge or resistance,When, and who did first resist, and what moved them. Baron. ad an∣num Christi. 350. saith Baronius: But about the year of Christ 350. then first (saith he) alas the Christian Souldiers being swell'd with pride, and taken up with a cruell desire of bearing rule, have conspired against the Chri∣stian Emperours; when as before, ne gregarius quidem miles inveniri qui∣dem posset, qui adversus Imperatores, licet Ethnicos, & Christianorum quoque persecutores, à partibus aliquando steterit insurgentium tyrannorum; not a Christian could be found that stood up against the Heathen Emperours, that were the persecutors of the Christians. But to make it yet more plain, that no grievance should move good Chri∣stians to make resistance, no injury should cause them to rebell against their Magistrates, our saviour saith, & authoritativè, with authority enough, I say unto you,Matth. 5.39. that ye resist not evill; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also: and if by our Saviour's rule we may not resist any one, what think you that we may resist our King, our Priest, or any other Magistrate that correcteth or reproveth us?1 Pet. 2.19. And Saint Peter saith, This is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully; for what glory is it, if when ye suffer for your faults, ye take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patient∣ly, this is acceptable with God; where you see still, the rule of piety is none other but suffering, though it be never so unjustly. How patheti∣cally the Fa∣thers perswade us to suffer, not to resist.And therefore the Fathers are most plentifull in the explanation and confirmation of this point; for Tertullian, that was no babe in the School of Divinity, nor any coward in the Army of Christ, speaking of those faithful Christians, that suffered no small measure of miseries in his time, saith, that one short night, with a few little torches, might have wrought their deliverance, and revenged all their wrongs, if it had been lawful for them to blot out, or expell evill with evill; but God forbid (saith he) ut aut igne humano vindicetur divina secta,Tertul. in Apo∣loge. aut doleat pati in quo probatur; that either the divine sect, that is, the Christian Religion, should be revenged with humane fire; or that it should grieve us to suffer, wherein we are commended for suffering. Nazianzen, that for his soundnesse of judgement, and profoundnesse of knowledge,Nazian. Orat. 1. was , termed Theologus, the Divine, saith, that the fury of Julian that great Apostata, was repressed onely with the tears of the Christians, which many of them did most plentifully powre forth to
God, when they had no other remedy against their Persecutor,Mark that they say, It is unlawful to resist. because they knew it unlawful for them to use any other means then sufferance; or else they might (having so much strength as they had) have repelled their wrongs with violence. Saint Ambrose saith as much; and Prosper in like manner saith,Ambros. ep. 33. The pre∣sent evils should be suffered, untill the promised happinesse doth come; the Infidels should be permitted among the faithful, and the plucking of the tares should be deferred: and let the wicked rage against the godly, as much as they will; yet the case of the righteous is far better, because that Quantò acriùs impetuntur, tantò gloriosiùs coronantur;Prosper. in sent. 99. by how much the more sharply they are tormented, by so much the more gloriously they shall be crowned. And Saint Bernard saith, If all the world should conspire against me, and conjure me, that I should plot any thing against the royal Majesty, yet I would fear God, and would not dare to offend the King,Bernard. Ep. 170. that is appointed of him over me; because I am not ignorant of the place where I read, Who∣soever resisteth the Power, resisteth the Ordinance of God. And yet he speaketh this of King Lodovicus, that offered a monstrous wrong to all the Clergy, when he robbed them, and took away all their goods without cause; and which is worse, would hear of no perswasi∣ons to make restitution, or to give them any satisfaction:Gaguin. lib, 6. as Gaguinus testifieth. Thus the Fathers (whereof I could heap many more) do testifie of this truth; and the School-men tread in the same steps,The School-men of the same judge∣ment. and differ not a nails breadth from them herein; For, Alexander Hales saith, wicked and evill men ought to suffer for the fault of their irrationability, and good men ought to suffer, Propter debitum divinae ordinationis, for the duty that they owe to the divine ordinance, and the benefit of their own purgation: Whereupon Saint Ambrose saith,Ambrosius in Rom. 13. If the Prince be good, he doth not punish the well-doer, but loveth him, be∣cause he doth well; but if the Prince be evill, and punisheth the well-doer, he hurteth him not, but purgeth him;Alex. Hales, p. 3. q. 48. memb. 2. art. 1. de offic. subd. erga Princ. and therefore he is not a terrour to him that doth well: but the wicked ought to fear, because Princes are ap∣pointed, that they should punish evill. Aquinas saith, The faith of Christ is the beginning, and the cause of righ∣teousnesse, and therefore by the faith of Christ, the order of Justice is not taken away, but rather setled and strengthened; because (as our Saviour saith) It became him to fulfill all righteousnesse. But the order of justice doth require, that all inferiours should obey their superiours; otherwise the estate of humane affairs could no ways be preserved:Tham. secunda secundae, q. 104. art. 6. and therefore by the faith of Christ, the godly and the faithful Christians are neither exempted, nor excused; but that they are tyed, and bound by the Law of Christ, to obey their secular Princes. Where you see the Christian faith doth not sub∣mit the superiour to the inferiour, contrary to the rule of justice; neither doth it any wayes for any cause permit the power of the sword to any sub∣ject to be used against his Prince, because this inordinate power would turn to the ruine of man-kind, and the destruction of all humane affairs; which can no otherwise be preserved, but through the preservation of the order of justice. Indeed many times there may happen some just causes,Wherein we may disobey, and how. for which we are not bound to obey the commands of our Magistrates, as when they command any thing contrary to the commandements of God; and yet then there can be no cause why we should withstand him that executeth the unjust sen∣tence of our condemnation, or requireth the punishment that an unjust ma∣litious Magistrate, under the colour of his power and authority, hath most
unjustly laid upon us; because he hath (as our Saviour saith unto Pilate) this ordinary power from God, which if he doth abuse, he is to be refrained, not by the preparation of arms, and the insurrection of his subjects to make impressions upon their Soveraign, but by those lawful means which are appointed for them; that is Petitions unto him, and prayers and tears unto God for him, because nothing else remaineth to him that is guilty, or con∣demned as guilty for any fault, but to commit his cause to the knowledge of the omnipotent God, and to expect the judgement of him which is the King of Kings, and the Judge of all Judges; and will undoubtedly chastize and correct the iniquity of any unjust sentence, with the severity of eternal ju∣stice,Barcl l. 3. c. 10. as Barclay saith. These testimonies are clear enough: and yet to all these I will adde this one memorable example,Berchetus in explicat. con∣trovers. Galli cana, cap. 7. which you may read in Berchetus, and Joh. Servi∣nus, which tells us, that in France, after the great Massacre ut Paris, when the reformed Religion did seem as it were forsaken, and almost extinguish∣ed, a certain King, powerful in strength, rich in wealth, and terrible for his Ships and navall Force, which was at enmity, and hatred with the King of France, dispatched a solemn Embassie and Message unto Henry King of Na∣varre, and other Protestant Lords, and commanded his Embassadors to do their best to set the Protestants against the Papists, and to arm Henry the Prince of Navarre, which then lived at Bearn, under the Dominion of the most Christian King, against his Soveraign, the French King; which thing the Embassadours endeavoured to do with all their art and skill,An example of a faithful, and excellent subject. but all in vain; for Henry being a good subject, as it were another David, to be∣come a most excellent King, would not prevent the day of his Lord; yet the Embassadours offered him many ample, fair, and magnificent condi∣tions, among the rest abundance of money, the summe of three hundred thousand, Aureorum Scutatorum, French Crowns, which were ready to be told for the preparation of the warre; and for the continuation of the same, there should be paid every moneth so much as was necessary: but Henry being a faithful Christian, a good Prince, a Widower; and though he was displaced from the publique government of the Common-wealth; and for his sake, for the dislike the King bare towards him, the King had banished many Protestants from his Country, and had killed many faithful Pastours; yet would not he for all this lift up his hand against the Lords annointed; but refused their gold,Jh. Servinus pro libertat. Ecclesiae, & sta∣tu Regni, tom. 3. Monarchia. Rom. p 202. rejected their conditions, and dismissed the Embassa∣dours, as witnesses of his faith to God, his fidelity and allegiance to his King, and peaceable mind towards his Country. Where you see this prudent and good Prince, had rather patiently suffer these intolerable injuries that were offered, both to himself, to the inferiour Magistrates, and to many other good Christians for his sake, then any wayes undutifully resist the Ordinance of God. And surely this Example is most acceptable unto God, most wholesome for any Common-wealth, and most honourable for any subordinate Prince; for I am certain this is the faith of Christ, and the religion of the true Protestants, Not to offer, but suffer all kind of injuries, and to render good for evill; and rather with pa∣tience, love, and obedience, to study to gain the favour of their Persecutors, then any ways with force and arms, to withstand those that God hath placed in authority: which must needs be not onely offensive unto God, whose Or∣dinance they do resist; but also destructive to the Common-wealth, which can never receive any benefit by any insurrection against the Prince. 3. Not for any tyranny that shall be offer∣ed unto us.3. Though the King should prove to be Nerone Neronior, worse then Phalaris, and, degenerating from all humanity, should prove a Tyrant to all his people; yet his subjects may not rebell against him upon this pretence; for if any cause should be admitted for which subjects might rebell, that cause
would be allwayes alledged by the Rebels, whensoever they did rebell; and whom I and many others should deem a good Prince and most pious, the Rebels would proclaim him tyrannical, and idolatrous. And therefore in such a case,The difference betwixt king and people, to be determined onely by God. when some men think their King most gra∣cious, and others think him vitious, some believe him to be good, others believe him to be evil; shall we think it fit that the disaffected party shall present∣ly with arms decide the controversie, and not rather have the accused, the accuser, and the witnesses, before a competent Judge to determine the truth of this question? Surely this seems more reasonable, and more agreeable unto the rules of justice, when as The Law condemneth no man (much lesse the King) before his cause be heard. And seeing such a competent Judge, as can justly determine this contro∣versie betwixt the King and his People, or rather betwixt one part of his people and the other, cannot be found under Heaven; therefore to avoid civil warres, and the effusion of humane and Christian blood, and the pre∣vention of abundance of other mischiefs; both the Scripture teacheth,That we ought not by any means to resist our kings. Proved, and the Church believeth, and Reason it self sheweth, and the publique safety requireth, that we should transmit this question to be decided onely by him, which is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and will, when he seeth good, bind evil Kings in fetters, and their Nobles with links of iron. CHAP. V. Sheweth, by Scripture, the Doctrine of the Church, humane Reason, and the Welfare of the weale publique, that we ought by no means to rebell. A threefold power of every Tyrant. Three kinds of ty∣rannies. The doubtful and dangerous events of Warre. Why ma∣ny men rebell. Jehu's example not to be followed. 1. THe Scripture saith, I counsell thee to keep the Kings commandement,1 By the Scrip∣tures. and that in regard of the oath of God; that is, the oath whereby thou hast sworn before God, and by God, to obey him; Be not hasty to go out of his sight, that is not, out of his presence, but out of his rule and go∣vernment, and stand not in an evill thing; that is, in opposition, or rebellion against thy King, which must needs be evill, and the worst of all evils to thy King, for He doth whatsoever pleaseth him; that is,Ecclesiast 8.2, 3, 4. he hath power and authority to do what he pleaseth. Where the Word of a King is, there is pow∣er; and who may say unto him, What dost thou? or, Why dost thou so? And Solomon saith, A Grey-hound, an Hee-Goat, and a King,Prov. 30.31. against whom there is no rising up; there ought not to be indeed. I will not set down what Samuel saith, but desire you to read the place, 1 Sam. chapter 8. verse 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. where you shall see what the King will doe, and what remedy the Prophet prescribeth against him, Not to rebell and take up arms, but to cry unto the Lord that he would help them. And Saint Paul saith, Whosoever resisteth the power,Rom. 13.1. resist∣eth the Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to themselves dam∣nation. And S. Peter saith, that they which despise government,2 Pet. 2.10.12. and are not afraid to speak evil of dignities, are presumptuous, and do walk after the flesh in the lusts of uncleannesse, and as natural brute beasts, that are made to be taken and destroyed, they speak evil of the things they under∣stand not, and therefore they shall utterly perish in their own corruption. And Saint Jude in like manner calleth those that despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, (the very phrase of Saint Peter) filthy dreamers,Jude 8.10, 11. that defile the flesh, and therefore shall perish in the gainsaying of Co∣rah.
This is the doctrine of God, therefore Saint Paul exhorteth us not to rebell, nor to speak evil of our Kings, be they what they will; but first of all,1 Tim 2.2. or before all things, to make prayers, and supplications for our Kings, and for all that are in authority. And I wonder what spirit, except it were the spirit of hell it self, durst ever presume to answer, and evade such plain and pregnant places of Scripture, to countenance disobedience, and to ju∣stifie their rebellion: And therefore, 2. By the Do∣ctrine of the Church.2. The Church of Christ believeth this Doctrine to be the truth of God; for no man (saith Saint Cyril) without punishment, resisteth the Laws of Kings, but Kings themselves, in whom the fault of prevarication hath no place; because it is wisely said, It is impiety (therefore against the will of God) to say unto the King,Cyrill. in J∣han l. 14. c 56 Iniquè agis, Thou dost amisse; for, as God is the supream Lord of all, which judgeth all, and is judged of none; so the Kings and Princes of the earth, which do correct and judge others, are to be corrected and judged of none, but onely of God, to whose power and authority they are onely subject; and therefore King David, under∣standing his own station well enough, when he was both an adulterer, and a murderer, and prayeth to God for mercy, saith, Against thee onely have I sinned; because I acknowledge none other my superiour on earth, be∣sides thee alone; and I have no Judge besides thee, which can call me to examination, or inflict any punishment on me for my transgression: And so the Poet saith, Regum timendorum in proprios greges, Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis. But you will object against S. Cyril; If it be impiety to say unto the King, Thou dost amiss; how shall we excuse Samuel, that told King Saul, he did foolishly; and Nathan that reproved King David; and Elias, that said to King Achab, it was he and his fathers house, that made Israel to sin; and John Baptist that told Herod, It was not lawful for him to have his bro∣thers wife. What the Priest or Pro¦phet may do, private men may not do.I answer, 1. That by the mouth of these men, God himself reproved them; because these men were no private persons, but extraordinarily inspired with the spirit of of God, to perform the extraordinary mes∣sages of God. 2. I say, as I said before, that as Moses may correct and punish Aaron if he doth amisse, so Aaron the Priest in regard of his calling, may reprove and admonish Moses the chief Magistrate, when he doh offend; but so, that he do it wisely, and with that love and reverence which he oweth unto Mo∣ses, as to his God; not publiquely to disgrace and vilifie his Prince unto his people, but modestly and privately to amend his fault, and recon∣cile him to God: and this is the work of his office which he ought to do as he is a Priest, and not of his person, which ought not to do it, as he is his subject. 3. By humane reason.3. Reason it self confirmeth this truth, because the King is the head of the body politique; and the members can neither judge the head, because they are subject unto it; nor cut it off, because then they kill themselves, and cease to be the members of that head: and therefore the subjects with no reason can either judge or depose their King. 4. From the welfare of eve∣ry Common-wealth. The event of every warre is doubtful.4. The publique safety and welfare of any Common-wealth requireth, that the subjects should never rebell against their King. 1. Because the event of a rebellious warre is both dubious, and dangerous; for who can di∣vine in whose ruine it shall end? or which party can assure themselves of vi∣ctory? It is true, that the justest cause hath best reason to be most confident; yet it succeeds not always: when God for secret causes best known unto
himself, suffereth many times, especially for a time, (as in the case of the Tribe of Benjamin) the Rebels to prevail against the true subjects. And as the event is doubtful, so it must needs be mournful, what side soever proveth victor; for who can expresse the sorrows and sadnesse of those faithful sub∣jects, that shall see the light of their sun any wayes eclipsed? the lamp of Israel, and the breath of their nostrils to be darkned, or extinguished? and also to see the learned Clergy, and the grave Fathers of the Church discountenanced and destroyed? On the other side, it will not be much less mournful to see so many of our illustrious Nobles, ancient Gentry, and o∣thers of the ablest Commonalty, brought to ruine; and to pay for their folly, not only their dearest lives, but also the desolation of their houses, and decay of their posterities. Quis talia sando Temperet à lachrymis? When the Kings victory shall be but like that of David, after the death of Absolon, & the Nobles victory but as the two victories of the Benjamites over their own brethren the Israelites;Bella geri pla∣cuit, nullos ha∣bitura trium∣phos. Lucan. l. 1. and the best triumph that can succeed on either side, shall be but as the espousal of a virgin on the day of her parents funeral; or as the laying of the foundation of the second Temple, when the shout of joy could not be discerned from the noyse of weeping. And therefore a learned Preacher of Gods Word saith most truly,Mr. Warmstry in Ramo Olivae, p. 23. that it is a hard matter to find out a mischief of so destructive a nature, that w would exchange it for this civil warre; for Tyranny, Slavery, Penury, or any thing almost, may be better born with peace and unity, then a civill warre with the greatest liberty and plenty; seeing the comfort of such associates would quickly be swallowed up, like Pharaohs fat kine, by such a monster feeding with them. Had we a Tyrant like Rehoboam, that would whip us with Scorpions, (which the Devil dares not be so impudent, as to alledge we have) yet, better it were to be under one Tyrant, then many, which we are sure to have in civil broyls, when every wicked man becomes a Tyrant, when he seeth the reines of government cut in pieces. Were we under the yoke of an Aegyptian slavery, to make bricks without straw, yet better it were for us to be in bondage, then that fury and violence should be set free, and ma∣lice suffered to have her will, because there is more safety in being shut up from a Tyger, then to be let loose before him, to be chased by him: or were we wasted and oppressed in our estates; yet the wisest of men tells us, that Better is a little with the fear of the Lord,Prov. 15.15, 17. then great treasure and trouble therewith. And therefore seeing civill warre is , an affliction full of all calamity, and one of the greatest punishments that God useth to send upon a Nation: it is apparent that the welfare of any State calleth upon every subject to be obedient unto his King; yea, though he were never so vile an Idolater, or so cruel a Tyrant: for though a King could be proved, and should be condemned to be cruell and tyrannous, un∣just and impious towards God and men, yet hereby that King will not yield what he doth hold from God, but though the confederate conspira∣tors should have a thousand times more men and strength then he; yet he will call his servants and friends, his kinsmen, allies, and other circumjacent Kings and Princes unto his aid, and he would hire mercenary Souldiers, to revenge the injury offered unto him, and to suppress the Rebels both with fire and sword: and if he should happen to have the worse, and to lose both his Crown and Kingdom, and his life and all, yet all this would be but a miserable comfort, and a lamentable vi∣ctory a to ruined Common-wealth, whose winnings can no ways countervail
her losses;The miseries that follow the disturbance or deposing of any king, are unspeakable. for we never read of any King that either was disturbed, expelled, or killed, but there succeeded infinite losses to that Kingdom; and there∣fore Writers say, that the death of Caesar was no benefit unto the Romans, because it brought upon them farre greater calamities then ever they felt before; as you may find in Appian, those infinite miseries that succeeded in severall fields and battels, which could never end untill the overthrow of Anthony by Augustus Caesar. And when Nero perished, it fell out with no good successe; but the next year that followed after his death, felt more op∣pression, and spilt more blood then was spilt in all those * nine years wherein he had so tyrannically reigned:His first Quin quennium was good. So when the Athenians had ex∣pelled one Tyrant, they brought in thirty. And when the Romans had abandoned their Kings, they did not put away the tyranny, but changed the Tyrants; for wicked Kings, they chose more wicked Consuls, which is nothing else, but (as the Proverb goeth) Antigonum effdere, to go out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun, or rather to change a bad Master for a worse:A fable worth the observing And this is contrary to the judgement of that ulcerated wretch in the fable, who, when the traveller saw him full of flies, swarming in his sores, and, pitying his miseries, would have swept them off, prayed him to let them alone, for that these being now well filled, would suck the lesse, but if these were gone, more hungry flies would come, which would most miserably suck his blood. And so Histories tell us of many other Kings, that by Heathens, and re∣bellious subjects, were for their injustice, cruelty, and tyranny, either expel∣led, or murdered; but very seldom or never with any publick benefit, when the chiefest plotters of any rebellion do most chiefly aym at their own pri∣vate revenge,Who do many times rebell, and why. or profit. Yea, many times those very Parasitical Lords, that have most perswaded the King, to do things which he knew not to be illegall, and made benefit of those Monopolies, and exactions to their own advantage, to fill their own purses; and then upon either discontent with the King, or to content the people, and to escape their own due deserved punishment, will be the chiefest upbraiders of their King, the greatest stick∣lers of rebellion, and the head leaders of all the disloyal Faction. What fools then are the people, upon the false pretence of publique good, to take up arms to destroy themselves; when this name of publique good is nothing else but a vain shadow to hide their private ends? Or were it granted, that it might happen for the publique good, yet it is not good to do it, because it can never stand with a good conscience, because it is contrary to the Commandement of God;A threefold power in every Tyrant. for in every Tyrant, there is a three-fold power and authority that doth concurre. 1. Paternal. 2. Con∣jugal. 3. Herile: and you know the law of God doth not permit the chil∣dren to renounce their father, nor, which is lesse, to laugh at their fathers nakednesse; nor doth it suffer the wife to forsake her husband, nor the ser∣vant to chastise his Lord and Master; and therefore much lesse may the Subjects deprive their King from his Dominion, and take from him what God hath given him; or any wayes chastize him for his ill go∣vernment, whereof he is accomptable to God, and not to them: or if they might depose him, or reduce him by their correction, when he doth degenerate into a Tyrant; yet seeing there are many kinds of Tyrannies, I demand if the same reason shall serve to proceed against all kinds of Ty∣ranny,Punishment should be pro∣portionable to the fault. to the like condemnation of all tyrannous Kings? and this every Sophister will deny; for where the punishment is not proportionable to the fault, the sentence is most unjust, and the suppressors of the Tyrant do shew the signs of a worse tyranny; and if there must be an adaequation of the pu∣nishment to the sin, I would know how they would distinguish to impose the just measure that is due to each kind of tyranny.Three kinds. 1. Kind. But to leave the Rebels in this Labyrinth, till they be better able to evade;
I say that there are three speciall kinds of tyrannies: 1. Is against all humane right for his own private commodity, to the pub∣lique  losse and dammage of his subjects, as was the tyranny of Achab, when he took away Naboths vineyard;1 Sam 8. and of those Kings which Samuel doth describe. 2. Violateth the divine Law, to the contumelie of the Creatour, as was  the tyranny of Nebuchadnezzar, when he would have forced the three children to adore his golden Image; and of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin, because he compelled them to go to Dan and Bethel to adore his Calves; and hindred them to go to Hierusalem for to worship the true God. 3. Treadeth and trampleth under foot both the divine and humane  right, to the utter overthrow of all piety and justice, as was the tyranny of Mansses, Julian, and others, that regarded neither the worship of God, nor the good of men. And I do confidently affirm, that each one of these tyrannies apart, or all of them coupled in one Tyrant; as well that which offereth violence unto God, as that which bringeth calamity and cruelty unto man, ought to be suffered, and not abolished, untill he doth abrogate the same, which alone looseth the belts of Kings, and girdeth about their loyns, as Job speaketh. For you know the fore-named Tyrants, and many more as bad or worse then they, as Solomon himself, that by his Oppression, Polygamy, and Idolatry, had most grievously sinned both against God and man, and yet all of them went on without either the diminution of their glory,These should be our pat∣terns, unlesse we have some new revelati∣ons. or the losse of their dominions: and Achab did most tyrannically kill Naboth, and took away his Inheritance without law, (as David did before kill Ʋrias, a most inno∣cent man, and took away his wife, contrary to all law, which was death by their law to any other man;) and he exiled the Prophets, and was the death of many of them, and he trampled down the true Religion under his feet, and by publique authority established the Idolatrous worship of Baal in every place; and yet neither the inferiour Magistrates, nor the greatest Peers, nor the consent of all the people, durst presume, contrary to the Or∣dinance of God, to depose or suppresse any of these tyrannous men. If you alleadge Jehu, I confesse indeed he did it,  2 Reg. 2.  when he conspired against Joram, his own Lord and Master. But how did he this? By a power extraordinarily given him from Hea∣ven, as you may see in the 6. and 7. verses of that Chapter, when the same was not permitted him by any lawes, as Jezabel her self could tell him; Had Zimri peace which slew his Master? to whom he might have answered, He breaks no Law, that obeyeth the commands of the Law-maker; no more then the Israelites could be accused of theft, when they did rob the Aegyptians, or Abraham of murder, if he had killed Isaac; but without this special command, he could not have done this extraordinary work without sin; and therefore that which he could not do then, without the warrant of the heavenly Oracle, cannot be done now by any other,Jehu's exam∣ple not to be imitated. with∣out the contempt of the Deity, the reproach of Majesty, and abundance of dammage to the Common-wealth. And so not onely I, but also Peter Martyr commenteth upon the place; where he saith, God stirred up, and armed one onely Jehu against his Lord; which fact, as it is peculiar and sin∣gular, so it is not to be drawn for any example: for certainly, if it might be lawfull for the people upon any pretence, to expell their Kings and Go∣vernours, though never so wicked and unjust, from their Kingdomes and government, no Kings or Princes could be safe in any place;Petrus Martyr loc. com. class. 4. loc. 20. for though they should raign never so justly and holily, yet they should never satisfie the people, but they would still accuse them of injustice and impiety, that they might depose them.
And Bodinus in his Policy, differeth not at all from this Divinity; for he saith, If the Prince be an absolute Soveraign, as are the Kings of France, Spain, England, Scotland, Aethiopia, Turkie, Persia, Muscovie, and the like true Monarchs, whose authority cannot be doubted, and their chief rule and government cannot be imparted with their subjects; in this case, it is not lawful for any one apart, nor for all together, to conspire and attempt any thing, either of fact, or under the colour of right, against the life, or the honour of his Prince or Monarch; yea, though his Prince should com∣mit all kind of impiety and cruelty, which the tongue of any man could expresse. For, as concerning the order of right, the subject hath no kind of jurisdiction against his Prince, from whom dependeth, and proceedeth all the power and authority of commanding, (as they that rise against their King, do notwithstanding send out their Warrants and Commands in the Kings name) and who not onely can recall all the faculty of judging and governing from his inferiour Magistrates,Johan. Bodinus de repub. l 2. l. 5 whensoever he please; but also being present, all the power and jurisdiction of all his under-Magistrates, Corporations, Colledges, Orders, and Societies do cease, and are even then reduced into him, from whom before they were derived. But we find it many times, that not the fault of the Prince, nor the good of the Common-wealth,The true cau∣ses that move many men to disturb the State and to rebell. but either the hiding of their own shame, or the hope of some private gain induceth many men to kindle and blow up the flames of civil discord; for as Paterculus saith, Ita se res habet ut publicâ ru∣inâ quisque malit, quàm suâ proteri: It so falls out, that men of desperate conditions, that, with Catiline, have out-run their fortunes, and quite spent their estates, had rather perish in a common calamity, which may hide the blemish of their sinking, then to be exposed to the shame of a private misery: and we know, that many men are of such base behaviour, that they care not what losse or calamity befalls others, so they may inrich themselves;Paterculus in Histor. Roman. so it was in the eivil warres of Rome, Bella non causis inita, sed prout merces eorum fuit; they undertook the same not upon the goodnesse of the cause, but upon the hope of prey: and so it is in most warres, that ava∣rice and desire of gain makes way for all kind of cruelty and oppression, and then it is as it was among the Romans, a fault enough to be wealthy; and they shall be plundered, that is, in plain English, robbed of their goods and possessions, without any shew of legal proceedings. But they that build their own houses out of the ruine of the State, and make themselves rich by the impoverishing of their neighbours, are like to have but small profit, and lesse comfort in such rapine; because there is a hidden curse that lurketh in it, and their account shall be great, which they must render for it. Therefore I conclude this point: that for no cause, and upon no pretext; it is lawful for any subject to rebell against his Soveraign governour; for Moses had a cause of justice, and a seeming equity to defend and revenge his brother upon the Aegyptian: And Saint Peter had the zeal of true re∣ligion, and, as a man might think, as great a reason as could be, to defend his Master that was most innocent, from most vile and base indignities, and to free him from the hands of his most cruell persecutors; and yet (as Saint Augustine saith) Ʋterque justitiae regulam excessit;August. contra Faustum Man. l. 27. c. 70. & ille Fraterno, iste Dominico amore peccavit; both of them exceeded the rule of justice: and Moses out of his love to his brother, and S. Peter out of his respect to his Master, have transgressed the commandement of God. And therefore I hope all men will yield, that what Moses could not do for his brother, nor Saint Peter for his Master, and the religion of his Ma∣ster Christ, that is, to strike any one without lawful authority, ought not to be done by any other man, for what cause or religion soever it be; espe∣cially to make insurrection against his King contrary to all divine autho∣rity,
for the true Religion hath been always humble, patient, and the pre∣server of peace and quietnesse;Pro temporali salute non pug∣navit, sed po∣tius ut obtine∣ret aeternam non repugnavit, Aug. de Civit. l. 22. c. 6. and (as Saint Augustine saith) the City of God, though it wandred never so much on earth, and had many troopes of mighty people; yet, for their temporal safety, they would not fight against their impious persecutors, but rather suffered without resistance, that they might attain unto eternal health. And so I end this first part of the objection, with that Decree of the Councell of Eliberis; If any man shall break the Idols to pieces, and shall be there killed for the doing of it, because it is not written in the Gospel, and the like fact is not found to be done at any time by the Apostles;Concil. Eliber. Can. 60. it pleased the Councel that he shall not be received into the number of Martyrs, be∣cause (contrary to the practice of our dayes, when every base mechanick runs to the Church to break down, not Heathen Idols, but the Pictures of the blessed Saints out of the windows) they conceived it unlawful for any man to pull down Idolatry, except he had a lawful authority. CHAP. VI. Sheweth, that neither private men, nor the subordinate Magi∣strates, nor the greatest Peers of the Kingdom may take arms,2. Part of the objection an∣swered. No kind of men ought to rebell. 1. Not private men. Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 20. Sect. 31. Beza Confess. c. 5. p. 171. J. Brutus q. 3. pag. 203. Dan. de Polit. Christ l. 6. c. 3. Bucan loc. com. 49. Sect. 76. The examples of obedience to kings. and make Warre against their King. Buchanan's mistake discove∣red, and the Anti-Cavalier confuted. 2. AS it is not lawful for any cause, so no more is it lawful for any one, or for any degree, calling, or kind of men, to rebell against their lawful Governours: For, 1. Touching private men, we find that Calvin, Beza, Jun. Brutus, Danaeus, Bucanus, and most others yield, that meer private men ought not to rebell at any hand; and no wonder, for the Scriptures forbid it flatly: as Exod. 22.28, Revile not the Gods, curse not the Ruler. 1 Chron. 16.22. Touch not mine annoynted. Prov. 30.31. Rise not up against the King, that is, to resist him. Eccles. 8.3. Let no man say to the King, Why doest thou so? Eccles. 10.17. Curse not the King in thy thought. And the examples of obe∣dience in this kind, are innumerable, and most remarkable; for David, when he had Saul, a wicked King, guilty of all impiety and cruelty, in his own hand, yet would he not lay his hand upon the Lords annointed, but was troubled in conscience, when he did but cut the lap of his garment: Elias could call for fire from Heaven to burn the two Captains and their men, a hundred in number, onely for desiring him to come down unto the King; as you may see, 2 Reg. 1.10, 12. and yet he would not resist Achab his King that sought his life, and was an enemy to all religion; but he rather fled, than desired any revenge, or perswaded any man to rebell a∣gainst him. Esaias was sawed in pieces by Manasses, Jeremy was cast into the dungeon, Daniel exposed to the Lyons, the Three Children thrown into the fiery Furnace, Amos thrust thorough the temples, Zacharias slain in the porch of the Temple, James killed with the sword, Peter fastened to the Crosse with his head downward, Bartholomew beaten to death with clubs, Matthew beheaded, Paul slain with the sword, and all the glorious company of the Martyrs, which have ennobled the Church with their inno∣cent life, and inlarged the same by their precious death, never resisted any of their Persecutors, never perswaded any man to rebell against them,Why the holy Saints obeyed the unjust Tyrant. never cursed the Tyrants, never implored the aid of the inferiour Magi∣strates, or superiour Nobility, either by force to escape their hands, or by violence to resist their power; for they thought it more honour unto God,
and farre better to themselves? that the just should unjustly suffer for righ∣teousnesse sake, than under the colour of justice undutifully to resist, and unjustly to rebell against these unjust Persecutors. A strange Po∣sition.And yet some men are not ashamed to averre, that meer private men, and inferiour subjects, if their King as a Tyrant should invade them like a robber or ravisher, may defend themselves, and oppose the Tyrant, as well, and as violently, as they may resist a private thief, or a high-way robber. But how untruly they do avouch this thing, will plainly appear, if you consider how disjunctive these things are, and how unjustly they are alledg∣ed for this purpose;Confuted. for a Chirurgion launceth a man, and draweth his blood, and so doth the thief, or a robber; but he deserveth a reward, this a rope:The Tyrant hath a just power, though he useth the same unjustly; so hath not the thief or the robber. So, the Prince sometimes doth in some sort the same thing, and it may be after the like manner as a thief or a robber doth, as often as with a strong hand he taketh the goods of his subjects, and forceth the rebellious unto obedience. But will you say, that both of them do it by the same right? I hope not: for God gave the power and the sword unto the Prince, and he, as the Judge of our actions, useth the same ad vindictam, for the punish∣ment of our offence; but the thief or the robber usurpeth the sword, and abuseth the same ad rapinam, to our destruction, and therefore whosoe∣ver saith, that a subject hath the same reason to rise against his Prince that punisheth him, as a traveller hath against a robber that stealeth from him, may well be ashamed of such doctrine, that carrieth so little shew of any truth. But you will say, the Prince that is a Tyrant punisheth for no fault, with∣out any just cause, nay, altogether unjustly, and against all truth; as Saul persecuted David, and put to death the harmlesse Priests: and David did the like to Ʋrias, Achab to Naboth, Joash to Zachary, Manasses to Esay, Pi∣late to Christ, Nero to Peter, and perhaps Theodosius to the Thessalonians; may they not resist in such a case, when they are thus punished, and persecuted without cause? I answer, that under Saul, David, Achab, Joash, and Manasses, there li∣ved many faithful Priests and Prophets, that were both upright for life, and excellent for knowledge;How the Saints at all times suffered, and never resi∣sted their kings. and in the days of Christ, Zacheus, Nicodemus, and Gamaliel, were inferiour Magistrates, and were also pious men, and skilful in the understanding, as well of Politique as of Divine affairs; and we are sure, that no age brought forth either more learned Bishops, or ho∣lyer Saints, than the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, that lived under Nero, and those excellent Fathers that were in the time of Theodosius; and yet never any of these, not one of them all, shewed us this resisting way, to escape the force of tyranny; but it hath been alwayes the doctrine of Christ and his Church, that Kings and Princes, offending the Lawes, and tran∣scending the bounds of their duties, have onely God for their revenger, and ought not to be resisted by any man, or any kind of men, though they should never so much abuse that power which they have received from God. Christ and his Apostles per∣swade all men obediently to suffer.And therefore Christ himself and all his Saints, not onely suffered their greatest rage, but also exhibited all honour, and shewed all reverence unto their most cruel Persecutors; and they perswaded all others, both by their precepts and examples, to do the like, and that not onely for fear of wrath, but also for conscience sake; because the King is Gods Steward, which Christ hath set over his whole family: and if the Steward, like the evil servant in the Gospel, shall begin to despise his Master, neglect his duty, smite his fellows, and dissolutely go on to eat and drink, and be drunken; yet not all the whole family, not the Priests, not the Nobles, not the Commons, nor yet all together have any power or right to displace that Steward, which their Lord hath appointed over them; but they with patience must expect and wait for the coming of their Master, which onely hath authority to call
him to his account, and to displace him, and dispose of him at his pleasure. Besides, we know that among men every one is either superiour, inferiour,3. Degrees of men. or equal. And, 1. The Superiour is no way subject to his inferiour. 2. The inferiour is every way subject to his Superiour. But 3. An equal hath no power or authority against his equal. As for example,Exod. 18.21. In the Common-wealth of Israel there were Rulers of thousands, and Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of fifties, and Rulers of tens;Tostatus in Num. 25 9. and those of tens were over the people, those of fifties were over the tens, those of hundreds over the fifties, those of thousands over the hun∣dreds, the 70. Elders over them, and Moses (as the King) over all; and he was subject neither to any of them apart, nor to all of them together, but onely unto God himself;Ambros. in Ps. 50. and therefore (as Saint Ambrose saith) he was ob∣liged by no lawes, because Kings are free from the bonds of offences, and cannot be called to their punishment by any Statute, Tuti imperii potestate, being safe from men by the power of their Dominion. But then you will object: If the Tyrant may thus do what he will,  with∣out resistance, then he may destroy the whole Society of men, and espe∣cially the Church of Christ, when the worse part, that is, the Tyrant and his Flatterers, shall take and root away the better, that is, the true ser∣vants of God. I answer, that the society of men and the communion of Saints,  the Church of Christ and the Common wealth, are continued and preserved, not by any humane policy, but by the divine providence, which useth the power and policy of men to do it; and yet, contrary to their power, and beyond all their policies,God preser∣veth his Church. suffereth not the same to be destroyed by the subtlety or cruelty of any Tyrant, whom he can bridle when he will; and either put a hook in his nostrils, or cut him off at his pleasure; and though this our God, when he will, and as long as he will, suffereth wicked Kings and Tyrants to reign and rage over his people, and disposeth the Ministe∣rie of those evil Governours for the punishment of ungodlinesse, or the trial of our faith; yet he is no lesse merciful and good unto us, when, either for the proof our fidelity, or the scourging of our sinnes by cruel Ty∣rants, for the healing of our dying and perishing soules, he punisheth us; than when he heapeth his blessings upon us, by most meek and clement Princes, for the comfort and consolation of this present life. Neither may we think, that by this sufferance of God, the worse part can take away the better, or that the Devill by this means shall be able to over∣throw the Church of Christ, against which, the gates of hell shall never be able to prevail; because he doth not cast his vessel into the furnace of tribulation, ut frangatur, sed ut coquatur. And as the Goldsmith doth not cast his gold into the fire to consume it, but to purge it; so God ne∣ver did, nor ever will, in the greatest persecutions,Why God pu∣nisheth his servants. deliver up his inhe∣ritance as a prey unto the Tyrants teeth, nor submit his people unto the hands of their adversaries, that they might be oppressed to destruction; but only that they might be pressed and reduced to amendment, or delivered from their miseries to salvation. And therefore,The best meanes to escape our punishments. when the Saints of God lye under the hands of a cruel Tyrant, Christ hath prescribed them farre better means, both for his glory and their own comfort, to escape his tyranny, than by resist∣ing his power. And these meanes I find to be amendment of life, tears for our sinnes, prayers to God, flight from them, and patience to suffer when we cannot escape: For so Theodoret saith,Theodor Orat. 8. de Provi∣dentia. As often as Tyrants sit at the stern of the Common wealth, or cruel masters do rule over us, the wrath of God is to be pacified, and the mitigation of these miseries is to be sought for by earnest prayers, and serious amendment of our lives. And Christ,
when he was sought to be murdered by Herod, fled into Egypt; and he adviseth us, When we are persecuted in one City, to flye into another; and when by flight we cannot escape, then, as the Martyrs and godly Con∣fessors did, so must we do; either mollifie the Tyrants by our humble prayers, or offer up our souls to God by true patience: For so Saint Ambrose saith,Ambrosius in Orat. contra Auxent. tom. 5. & Ep 32. simi∣lia habet. Basilius ut est apud nice∣rum in Theatro Historico, pag. 154. I have not learned to resist, but I can grieve, and weep, and sigh; and against the weapons of the Souldiers and the Gothes, my tears and my prayers are my weapons; otherwise, neither ought I, neither can I resist. And Saint Basil saith, I will not betray my faith for fear of the losse of my goods, or of banishment, or of death it self; for I have no wealth besides a torne garment, and a few books. I remain on earth as one that is alwayes going away, and my feeble body shall overcome all sense of pain and torments, unâ acceptâ plagâ, when I shall receive but one stroke. And Saint Chrysostome,Chrysost. in Epist. ad Cyria∣cum. when he was driven from Constantinople, said unto himself, If the Empresse will banish me, let her banish me; for the earth is the Lords, and the fulnesse of it: If she cut me in pieces, let her cut me; Esayas suffered the same punishment: If she will have me thrown into the Sea, I will remember Jonas: If she will throw me into the fiery fur∣nace, the three Children suffered the like doom: If she will cast me to wild beasts, let her do it; I shall call to mind how Daniel was cast into the Lyons den: If she will stone me to death, let her stone me; I have Steven the Proto-martyr my companion: If she will take away my head, let her take it; I have John Baptist for my fellow: If she will take away my goods and substance, let her take it; for, I came naked out of my mothers womb,Bernard. Epist. 22 1. and naked I shall return again. And Saint Bernard saith, whatsoever it pleaseth you to do, concerning your Kingdome, your Crown, and your Soul, we that are the children of the Church, cannot any wayes dissemble the injuries and contempt of our mother; and therefore truly we will stand, and fight unto death (if need be) for our mother, but with those weapons wherewith we may lawfully do it; not with swords, speares, and shields, but with our prayers and teares to God. And it would be too tedious for me to set down all that I might collect of this kind, most excellent sayings of those worthy men, which never hoped for any glory in the Kingdome of Heaven, but by suffering patiently in the Kingdom of the Earth; and, when they could, did faith∣fully discharge the duties of their places; and when they could not, did willingly undergo the bitternesse of death; and were alwayes faithfull, both to their good God, and their evil Kings; to God rather by suffering Martyrdom, then offend his Majesty; and to their Kings, not in committing that evil which they commanded, but in suffering that punishment which they inflicted upon them. 2. Not the Nobility, or Peers. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 20. Sect. 31. Beza in confess. c. 5. p. 171. Autor. vindic. q. 3 pag. 03. Alchus. de polit. c. 14 pag. 142. & 161. Danae∣us de polit. Christiana, l. 6. c. 3. p. 413.2. As no private men, of what rank or condition soever they be, so neither Magistratus populares, the peoples Magistrates, as some term them; nor Junius Brutus, his Optimates regni, the prime Noble-men of the Kigdom; nor Althusius his Ephori, the Kings assistants in the govern∣ment of the people; nor his great Councel of Estate, nor any other kind, calling, or degree of men, may any wayes resist, or at any time rebell for any cause or colour whatsoever, against their lawful Kings, and supreme Governours. 1. Because they are not, as Althusius doth most falsely suggest, Ma∣gistratus summo Superiores, but they are inferiours to the supreme and chief Magistrate; otherwise, how can he be Summus, if he be not Supremus? or how can Saint Peter call the King supereminent, 1 Pet 2.13. if the inferiour Magistrates be superiour unto him? and it is contra ordi∣nem  justitiae, contrary to the rules of justice, as I told you before out of Aquinas,. that the inferiours should rise up against their superiours, which
hath the rule and command over them,The Inferiour should never rise against his Superiour. Optat. de schis. Donat. l. 3. p. 85 as the husband hath over the wife, the father over the sonne, the Lord over his servants, and the King over his subjects; and therefore Jezabel might truly say, Had Zimri peace which slew his Master? And I may as truly say of these men, as Op∣tatus saith of the Donatists, when as none is above the King or the Empe∣rour, but onely God which made him Emperour; while the inferiour Ma∣gistrates do extoll themselves above him, they have now exceeded the bounds of men, that they might esteem themselves as God; Non verendo eum, qui post Deum ab hominibus timebatur, in not fearing him, which men ought to fear next to God. But the words of Saint Peter are plain enough.1 Pet. 2.15. Submit your selves unto every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as su∣preme, or unto Governours, as unto them that are sent by him, for the pu∣nishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. Where∣in you may see not onely the subordination which God hath placed be∣twixt the King and his Subjects, but also that different station which is be∣twixt the Supreme, and the inferiour powers: for the words [sent of him] do most clearly conclude, that the inferiour Magistrates have no power to command, but by the vertue, power, and force which they receive from the supreme; and that the inferiour Magistrates, opposed to the su∣preme power, are but as private men: and therefore, that as they are rulers of the people, so, being but instruments unto the King, they are subjects unto him, to be moved and ruled by him which is inferiour to none but God; and their authority, which they have received from him,Inferiour Ma∣gistrates in re∣spect of the king, are but private men. can have no power upon him, or to manage the sword, without him, and espe∣cially against him, upon any pretence whatsoever: how then can any, or all these Magistrates make a just war against their King, when as none of them can make any just warre without him. 2. Because, as Bodinus saith most truly, the best and greatest, not onely  of the inferiour Magistrates, but also of all these Peers, Nobles, Counsellors, or what you please to call them, have neither honour, power, nor authority, but what they have given them from him, which is the King or supreme Ma∣gistrate; as you see, God made Moses the chief Governour, and Moses made whom he pleased his Peers, and his inferiour Magistrates: and as they have all their power derived from him that is the chief, so he that is the King, or chief, can draw it away from them that are his inferiours, when he pleaseth; and as he made them, so he can unmake them when he will, and none can unmake him, but he that made him, that is, God himself; and therefore David, that was ex Optimatibus regni, the greatest Peer in Is∣rael, being powerful in warre, famous in peace, the Kings Son-in-law, and divinely destinated unto the Kingdome, yet would he not lay his hand up∣on his King, when he was delivered into his hands. And this Buchanan can∣not deny, but confesseth, that the Kings of the Jews were not to be punish∣ed, or resisted by their subjects, because that from the beginning, they were not created by the people, but given to them by God;Buchanan's absurdity. and therefore (saith he) jure optimo, qui fuit honoris autor, idem fuit poenarum exactor, it is great reason, that he which gives the honour, should impose the punishment. But for the Kings of Scotland,Buchan. de jure Regni, apud Scotos. they were (saith Buchanan) not given them of God, but created by the people, which gave them all the right that they can challenge; Ideoque jus idem habere in reges Multitudinem, quod illi in singulos è multitudine habent; which is most false: for Moses tells us, that imme∣diately after the deluge, God, the Creatour of all the world, ordained the revenging sword of blood-shed, and the slavish servitude of paternal derisi∣on, wherein all the parts of civil jurisdiction and regal power, are Sy∣necdochically set down: and Job saith, that there is one God, which
looseneth the bond of Kings,Job 12.18. and girdeth about their reines: which must be understood of the Gentile-Kings, because that in his time the Com∣mong-wealth of Israel was not in being; and God himself universally saith, By me Kings do reign, that is, all Kings; not onely of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles: and Christ doth positively affirm, that the power of Pilate was given him from Heaven, and Saint Paul saith, There is no power, but what is appointed of God. And Tertullian saith, Inde & Imperator, unde & homo; iude illi potestas, unde & spiritus; he that made him a man, made him Em∣perour; and he that gave him his spirit, gave him his power. And Irenaeus saith, God ordained earthly Kingdomes for the benefit of the Gentiles, Et cujus jussu homines nascuntur,That God is the ordainer of all kings. Ang. de Civit. Dei, l. 4. c 33. illius jussu reges constituuntur; And by whose com∣mand men are born, by his command Kings are made. And S. Augustine more plainly, and more fully saith, God alone is the giver of all earthly Kingdomes, which he giveth both to the good, and to the bad; neither doth he the same rashly, and as it were by chance, because he is God, but as he seeth good; Pro rerum ordine, ac tempore, in respect of the order of things and times, which are hid from us, but best known unto himself: and whosoever looketh back to the original of all governments, he shall find that God was the immediate authour of the Regal power,God the im∣mediate au∣thour of Mo¦narchy. and but the al∣lower, and confirmer of the Aristocratical, and all other forms of govern∣ment; which the people erected, and the Lord permitted, lest the executi∣on of judgement, should become a transgression of justice; for as Ho∣mer saith, Hom. Odyss. α.. And Aristotle tells us,Aristot. Polit. l. 1. c. 8. that the Regal power belonged to the father of the family, who, in the infancy of the world was so grandevous and long-liv'd, that he begat such a numerous posterity, as might well people a whole Na∣tion; as Cain for his own Colony built a City, and was as well the King as the father of all the Inhabitants; and therefore Justin saith very well, that Principio rerum,Justin. l. 1. Gentium, nationúmque imperium penes reges erat, The rule of Nations was in the hands of Kings from the beginning; and the Kingly right pertaining to the father of the family, the people had no more possibi∣lity in right to choose their Kings, then to choose their Fathers; and to make it appear unto all Nations, that not onely the Kings of Israel, but all other Heathen Kings are acknowledged by God himself to be of divine institution,Jerem. 43.10, Esay 45.1. he calleth Nebuchadnezzar his servant, and Cyrus his annointed. And therefore though I do not wonder that ignorant fellows should be so impudent,Jo. Goodwin in his Pam∣phlet of Anti-Cavalierism, p. 5. as to affirm The King, or kingly government to be the Ordinance or Creation, or creature, of man; and to say that the Apostle supposeth the same, because he saith, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, &c. whereas he might well un∣derstand that the same act is oftentimes ascribed aswel to the mediate as to the immediate agent, as Samuel's annointing of Saul and David Kings, denieth not but that God was the immediate giver of their Kingdomes, and the Authour of that regal power;1 Sam. 10. for God annointed Saul Captain over his inheritance, and by the mouth of Nathan he telleth David, that he annointed him King over Israel:2 Sam. 12. and Solomon acknowledgeth, that the Lord had set him on the Seat of his Father David:1 Reg. 2. and Abijah in the person of God saith unto Jeroboam,1 Reg. 11. I will give the Kingdome unto thee;1 Sam. 11.15. and yet it is said, that all the people went to Gilgal, and made Saul King before the Lord; and the men of Juda annointed Da∣vid King of Juda;2 Sam. 5. and Zadock the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet
annointed Solomon King; that is, God annointed them as Master of the substance, and gave unto them regal power, in whom is all pow∣er, primariò & per se; and the Prophets annointed them as Masters of the Ceremony, and declared, that God had given them that power. And therefore the power and authority of Kings is originally,Constituere re∣gem est facere ut regiam po∣testatem exer∣ceret. Pinedas de reb. Solom. c. 2. and pri∣marily (as Saint Paul saith) the Ordinance of God; and secondarily, or demonstratively, it is as Saint Peter calleth it, the ordinance of man: when the people, whose power is onely derivatively, makes them Kings, not by giving unto them the right of their Kingdomes, but by receiving them into the possession of their right, and admitting them to exercise their royal authority over them, which is given them of God, and therefore ought not to be withstood by any man. And this Anti-Cavalier might further see, that Saint Peter mean∣eth not, that the King is the creature of man, or his Office of mans Creation; but that the Lawes and Commands of Kings, though they be but the Commands and Ordinances of man, yet are we to obey the same for the Lords sake, because the Lord commandeth, that Every soul should be subject to the higher powers: Or if this will not satisfie him, because the Greeks word is not so plain for this, as the English, yet let him look into Pareus, that was no friend to Monarchy, and he shall find that he doth by seven speciall reasons prove,Pareus in Rom. c. 13. p. 13. 27. that the authority of Kings is primarily the Ordinance of God; and he quoteth these places of Scripture to confirm it, Proverbs 8.15. 2 Chron. 19.6. Psalm 81.6. Joh. 10.34. Genes. 9.6. 1 Sam. 15. 1 Kings 12. 2 Kings 9. Dan. 2.21. Job 34.30. Eccles. 10.8. And to this very objection he answereth, that the Apostle calleth the Magistrate , an humane Ordination, or Creation; not causally, because it is invented by man, and brought up onely by the will of men; but subjectively, because it is born and exe∣cuted by men; and objectively, because it is used about the government of humane society: and  in respect of the end, because it is or∣dained of God for the good and conservation of humane kind; and he saith further, that  appellatio, the Greek word , ad Deum primum autorem nos revocat, sheweth plainly, that God is the first author of it: for though the Magistrate, in some sense as I shewed, may be said to be created, that is, ordained by men, yet God alone is the first Creatour of them; as Aaron, though he was ordained the high-Priest by Moses, yet the Apostle tells us, None taketh this office upon him, but he that is cal∣led of God, as Aaron was. Yet I do admire, that Buchanan, or any other man of learn∣ing, to satisfie the people, or his own peevish opinion, will so absurd∣ly deny so divine, and so well known a verity, and say, that any Kings have their Kingdomes, and not from God: so flatly contrary to all Scripture.
CHAP. VII. Sheweth the Reasons and Examples that are alledged to justifie Re∣bellion, and a full answer to each of them: God the immediate Authour of Monarchy: Inferiour Magistrates have no power, but what is derived from the superiour: And the ill successe of all re∣bellious Resisting of our Kings. The allegati∣on to justifie Rebellion.BUt to prove their absurdities, they still alledge, that the inferiour Ma∣gistrates, as the Peers and Counsellours of Kings, and the chief hads of all the people, which are flos & medulla regni, are therefore added unto the superiour Magistrate,1. By Reason. both to be his helpers in the government, and also to refrain his licentiousnesse, and to hinder his impieties, if he degenerate to be an Idolater or a Tyrant. 2. By Exam∣ples.And to confirm this Tenet, they produce many examples both out of the sacred and prophane Histories; as the Judges that rose up against their neigh∣bour-Tyrants; Ezechias against the King of Assyria; the people withstand∣ing Saul, that he should not slay Jonathan; Ahikam defending the Prophet Jeremy against King Jehoiakim; the revoling of the ten Tribes in the time of Rehoboam;Jerem. 26.24. the Priests and Princes of Juda taking away Athalia; the Macchabees arming themselves against Antiochus, and others of the Ma∣cedonian Tyrants; Thrasibulus driving the thirty Tyrants out of Athens; the Romans expelling their flagitious Kings, Consuls, and other Tyrants, that behaved themselves most wickedly, out of Rome; and so, many Peers and Potentates of other Kingdomes, that in the like cases did the like. To all which I answer, Sol. 1. Their Rea∣sons answered.1. That it is most false that any Peer, or inferiour Potentate, Magistrate, or other, is appointed by God to be the Associate of the King, or supreme Governour for the government of the people: for, as God, and not the peo∣ple, appointed Moses, Joshua, Gideon, and the other supreme Judges of Is∣rael; so Moses, and not God immediately, as he did the others, appointed the Rulers of tens,To what end kings do choose their inferiour Ma∣gistrates, fifties, hundreds, and thousands, which alwayes ac∣knowledged themselves his subjects, and not his associates in the govern∣ment of the people. And so other Kings and Princes have alwayes chosen whom they pleased to be their Peers, Counsellors, and inferiour Magi∣strates, as well to bear some part of their burthen (as Jethro saith unto Mo∣ses) and to lessen their care, as also to afford them their best assistance and counsel in the discussion and determination of great and difficult affaires; but not for them to prescribe and set down Lawes, Orders, and Ordinances, that should either moderate their royal liberty, or bridle and revenge what they conceive to be Idolatry or Tyranny. I am sure, no King that did in∣tend to be a Tyrant, would choose Counsellours, or make Magistrates to that end; but they make choyce of them (as I said) to further them, and not to hinder them to effect those things which they conceive to be most fit and just; for the Magistrates that are over the people, are under the King, and do all,All the inferi∣our Magistrates must do all in the name of the Superiour. as you see, in the name of the King, from whom they derive all the power that they have; whereby it followeth, that neither the people can resist the Magistrates whom the King appointeth, nor those Magistrates re∣sist their King, without apparent sacriledge against God; because the grea∣ter can never be judged, nor condemned by the lesser: but, as the Apostle saith of Abraham and Melchisedech,Heb. 7.7. that without contradiction, the lesse is blessed of the better; so I say, that without all controversie, the inferiour
must be alwayes judged of the superiour; and therfore if these Peers, No∣bles, or inferiour Magistrates, have any wayes any power or authority over their Kings, we must conclude against Saint Peter, that these are above the King, and so they, and not the King, are the supereminent power. But we find no such power nor commandement, that they have from God to refrain Kings, in all the holy Scriptures; Et si mandatum non est, praesump∣tio est; & ad poenam proficiet, non ad praemium: and if there be no comman∣dement for it, it is presumption to do it, which deserveth punishment, and not praise; because it is to the reproach of the Creator, that contemning the Lord, we should worship the Servant; and neglecting the Emperour, we should adore or magnifie his Peers; as S. Augustine saith. And therefore both the learned and religious Fathers,And the Ho∣mily of the Church of England, against wilful Rebellion. and the best of our later Writers, are flat against this Doctrine, that any sort of men have any power over Kings, but he that is the King of Kings, as you may see, what would be too teadious for me to set down, in Johan. Bodinus Apol. pro Regi∣bus, c. 27. & de repub. l. 2. c. 5. Barclaius contra Monarchom. l. 3. c. 6. Ber∣chetus in explicat. controvers. Gallicar. c. 2. Saravia de Imperator. autorit. l. 2. c. 36. Sigon. de repub. Hebraeor. l. 7. c. 3. Bilson. de perpet. Eccles. gubernat. c. 7. Pet. Gregor. Tholos. de republ. l. 5. c. 3. num. 14, 15, 16. and many more. 2. For the examples that are produced,2. Their exam∣ples answered. to countenance Rebels against their Kings, I answer, that they are unlike, or of some peculiar fact, or un∣just, and therefore no warrant for any other to do the like; when as we are to live by the lawes and precepts of God, and not by the examples of men; which many times, contrary to equity, do induce us to transgresse the divine verity. But to run over the particulars of their examples as brief as I can. 1. I say, that to conclude an ordinary rule from the doings of the Judges, 1. Example answered. which were extraordinarily commanded by God to be done, is no more law∣ful for us to do, then it is for us to rob our neighbours,August. in Jud. c. 20. because the Israe∣lites robbed the Egyptians, as Saint Augustine sheweth. And therefore Aquinas (if Aquinas be the Authour of that book,Thom. de Regi∣mine Princip. l 1. c. 6. De Re∣gimine Princip) saith excellently well; Quibusdam visum est, it seems to some men, that it pertaineth to the honour of valiant and heroical men, to take away a Tyrant, and to expose themselves to the perill and danger of death, for the liberty and freedom of the Multitude: whereof they have an exam∣ple in the Old Testament, where Ehud killed Eglon:Judg. 3.21. But this agreeth not with the Apostolical Doctrine, for Saint Peter teacheth us to be subject, not onely to the good, but also to the froward, because this is thank-worthy with God, if for conscience sake we patiently suffer wrongs: therefore when many of the Roman Emperours did most tyrannically persecute the faith of Christ, and a great and mighty multitude both of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons, were converted unto Christianity, they are praised, not for resisting, but for suffering death. Besides,A great deal of difference betwixt a law∣ful King, and an Usurper. Eglon was not the lawful King of Israel, but an alien, an usurper, and a scourge to them for their sinne, and therefore no pattern for others to rebell against their law∣ful King. 2. For the example of Ezechias, rebelling against the King of Assyria; 2. Example answered. it is most impertinently alledged, for Ezechias was the lawful King of Ju∣da, and the King of Assyria had no right at all in his Dominions;An imperti∣nent example. but being greedily desirous to enlarge his territories, he incroached upon the others right, and for his injustice, was overcome by the sword in a just battell: and therefore to conclude from hence, that because the King of Juda refu∣sed to obey the King of Assyria, therefore the inferiour Magistrates, or Peers of any Kingdome, may resist and remove their lawful Prince for his
tyranny or impiety, surely this deserves rather fustibus retundi, quàm ratio∣nibus refelli; to be beaten with rods, then confuted with reasons: as Saint Bernard speaketh of the like Argument. And whereas they reply, that it skilleth not whether the Tyrant be for∣reign, as Eglon, and the King of Assyria were; or domestique, as Saul, Achab, and Manasses were;The ubsurdity of their repli∣cation. because the domestique is worse then the forreign, and therefore the rather to be suppressed, I will shew you the validity of this argument by the like: The seditious Preachers are the generation of vipers; nay, farre worse then vipers, because they hurt but the body onely, and these are pernicious both to body and soul; therefore as a man may law∣fully kill a viper, so he may more lawfully kill any seditious Preacher. Quia Dare ab∣surdum, non est solvere argu∣mentum.But to omit their absurdity, let us look into the comparison betwixt do∣mestique and extranean Tyrants; and we shall find, that domestique Tyrants are lawfully placed over us by God, who commandeth us to obey them, and forbiddeth us to resist them in every place; for the Scripture makes no di∣stinction betwixt a good Prince and a Tyrant, in respect of the honour, re∣verence, and obedience, that we owe unto our superiours; as you see the Lord doth not say, Touch not a good King, and, Obey righteous Princes; but as God saith, Honour thy father and thy mother, be they good or bad: so he saith, Touch not the King, resist not your Governours, speak not evil of the Rulers, be they good, or be they bad; and therefore Saint Paul, when he was strict y charged for reviling the wicked high-Priest, answered wisely, I wist not, brethren, that he was Gods High-Priest; for if I had known him to be the true High-Priest, I would not have spoken what I did, because I know the Law of God obligeth me to be obedient to him that God hath placed over me,Bad kings to be obeyed, as well as the good. be he good or bad; for it is Gods institution, and not the Governours condition that tyeth me to mine obedience: So you see the mind of the Apostle, he knew the Priest-hood was abolished, and that he was not the lawful High-Priest, therefore he saith, God shall smite thee, thou whited wall: But if he had known, and believed him to be the true and lawful High-Priest, which God had placed over him, he would never have said so, had the Priest been never so wicked; because the Law saith, Thou shalt not revile thy Ruler. But for private robbers, or forreign Tyrants, God hath not placed them over us, nor commanded us to obey them; neither have they any right by any Law, but the Law of strength, to exact any thing from us; and therefore we are obliged by no law to yield obedience unto them, neither are we hindred by any necessity, either of rule or subjection, but that we may lawfully repell all the injuries that they offer unto us. 3. For the peoples hindring of King Saul to put his son Jonathan to death; I say, that they freed him from his fathers vow, non armis, sed precibus, not with their weapons,Saul was con∣tented to be perswaded to spare his son. but by their prayers, when they appealed unto himself and his own conscience before the living God; and perswaded him, that setting aside his rash vow, he would have regard unto justice, and consider whether it was right, that he should suffer the least damage; who, follow∣ing God, had wrought so great a deliverance unto the peohle, as Tremelius and Junius in their Annotations do observe.Gregor. in 1 Reg. 4. And Saint Gregory saith, The people freed Jonathan that he should not die, when the King, overcome by the in∣stance of the people, spared his life: which no doubt, he was not very earnest to take away from so good a son. 4. Touching Ahikam, that was a prime Magistrate under King Je∣hoiakim, I say that he defended the Prophet, not from the Tyranny of the King but from the fury of the people; for so the Text saith, The hand of Ahikam,Jerem. 26.24. that is, (saith Tremelius) the authority and the help of Ahikam, was with Jeremy, that They, that is, his enemies, should not give him into the hands of the people which sought his life, to put him to death, because Ahikam had been a long while Counsellour unto the King, and was therefore very
powerful in credit and authority with him:The act of A∣hikam no co∣lour for Re∣bellion. And you know there is a great deal of difference betwixt the refraining of a tumultuous people by the authority of the King, and a tumultuous insurrection against the King; That was the part of a good man, and a faithful Magistrate, as Ahkam did; this of an enemy and a false Traytor, as the opposer of Kings use to do. 5. For the defection and revolting of the ten Tribes from Rehoboam  their own natural lawful King, unto a fugitive, and a man of a servile con∣dition; and for the Edomites, Lybnites, and others, that revolted against King Joram;2 Chron. 21. 2 Reg. 14.19. and that Conspiracy which was made in Jerusalem against Amazia; I answer briefly, That the Scriptures do herein (as they do in many other places) set down, rei gestae veritatem, non facti aequi∣tem, the truth of things how they were done, not the equity of the things that they were rightly done: and therefore,Actions com∣manded to be done, are not to be imitated by us, unl sse we be sue of the like com∣mandement. Non ideò quia factum legimus, faciendum credamus, ne violemus praeceptum dum sectamur exem∣plum; We must not believe it ought to be done, because we read that it was done, lest we violate the Commandement of God, by following the example of men, as Saint Augustine speaketh: for though Joseph sware by the life of Pharaoh, the Midwives lyed unto the King, and the Israelites robbed the Aegyptians, and sinned not therein; yet we have no warrant without sinne to follow their examples. Besides, God himself had foretold the defection of the ten Tribes for the sinne of Solomon, and he being Lord proprietary of all, his donation transferreth a full right to him,God is the right owner of all things and therefore may justly dispose any Kingdom. on whom he bestowes it; and this made Shemaiah the man of God, to warn Rehoboam not to fight against his brethren: for, as, when God com∣manded Abraham to kill his sonne, it was a laudable obedience, and no murther to have done it; and when he commanded the Israelites to rob the Aegyptians, it was no breach of the eighth Commandement: so this revolt of these Tribes, if done in obedience unto God, could be no offence against the Law of God: but because they regarded not so much the ful∣filling of Gods will, as their not being eased of their grievances, and the fear of the weight of Rehoboam's finger, which moved them to this Rebellion, I can no ways justifie their action: and though God by this Rent did most justly revenge the sinne of Solomon, and paid for the folly of Rehoboam; yet this doth no wayes excuse them for this rebellion, because they revolted not with any right aspect: and therefore it is worth our observation, that the consequences which attended this defection, was a present falling away from the true God into Idolatry, and not long after to be led into an endlesse Captivity. Which is a fearful example, to see how suddenly men do fall away from God, and from their true religion, after they have rebelled against their lawful King; and how, to avoid imaginary grievance, they do often fall into a real bondage, and so leap out of the Fry∣ing-pan into the fire. And for the Edomites they were not Israelites that led their lives by the law of God; neither can any man excuse the conspi∣rators against Amazia, from the transgression of the Law of God. 6. For Ʋzziah, that was taken with a grievous sicknesse, so that he  could not be present at the publique affaires of the Kingdom; I say, that according to the law, by reason of the contagion of his disease, he was rightly removed from the Court and concourse of people, and his sonne in the mean time placed in his fathers stead, to administer and dispose the Com∣mon-wealth: but he in all that while, like a good sonne, did neither affect the name, nor assume the title of a King. 7. For the deposing of Athalia, I see nothing contrary to equity; be∣cause  she was not the right Prince, but an unjust Ʋsurper of the Crown: and therefore Jehoida the chief Priest, having gathered together the principal Peers of the Kingdome, and the Centurions, and the rest of the people, shewed them the Kings sonne, whom for six yeares space
he had preserved alive from the rage and fury of Athalia, which had slain all the rest of the Kings seed; and when they saw him, they did all ac∣knowledge him for the Kings sonne; they crowned him King, and he be∣ing crowned, they joyfully cryed, God save the King: and then by the authority of the new crowned King, that was the right heir unto the King∣dom, they put to death the cruel Queen, that had so tyrannically slain the Kings children, and so unjustly usurped the Crown all that while. And therefore to alledge this example, so justly done, to justifie an insurrection contrary to justice, doth carry but a little shew of reason. And I say the like of the Macchabees, and Antiochus, that neither he, nor any other Macedonian Tyrant had any right over them, but they were unjust Ʋsur∣pers, that held the Jewes under them in ore gladii, with the edge of their swords, and were not their lawful Kings, whom they ought to obey; and therefore no reason, but that they might justly free themselves with their swords, that were kept in bondage by no other right, then the strength of the sword. 8. For the example of Thrasibulus, Juniu Brutus, and other Romans, or whosoever, that for their faults have deposed their Kings; I answer, with Saint Augustine,Examples not to be imitated. that Exempla paucorum non sunt trahenda in legem universo∣rum; we have no warrant to imitate these examples: for though these things were done, yet we say, they were done by Heathens that knew not God, and unjustly done contrary to the law of God; and therefore with no bles∣sing from God, with no good successe unto themselves, and with lesse happi∣nesse unto others; but it happened to them, as to all others that do the like, to expell a mischief, and to admit a greater; as, besides what I have shewed you before, this one most memorable example out of our own Histories, doth make it plain. The ill suc∣cess of resist∣ing our supe∣riours:In the time of Richard the second, the Nobility and Gentry murmured much against his government; in brief, they deposed him, and set the Crown upon the head of the Duke of Lancaster, whom they created King Henry the fourth. The good Bishop of Carlile made a bold and excellent Speech, to prove, that they could not by any law of God or man, depose and dispos∣sesse their lawful King: or, if they deposed him, that they had no right to make the Duke of Lancaster to succeed him; but he good man for his pains was served as Saint Paul and others were many times for speaking the truth, committed to prison, and there was an end of him, but not an end of the sto∣ry: for the many battels and blood-shed, the miseries and mischiefs that this one unjust and unfaithful act produced, had never any period, never an end, till that well nigh a hundred thousand English men were slain in civil warres; whereof two were Kings, one Prince, ten Dukes, two Marquesses, 21.Trussel in his supplement to Daniel's Hi∣story. Earles, 27. Lords, two Viscounts, one Lord Prior, one Judge, 139. Knights, 421. Esquires; and Gentlemen of great and ancient Families, a farre greater number; a just revenge for an unjust extrusion of their lawful King, whose greatest misery came from his great mildnesse. And therefore these things being well weighed in the ballance of the Sanctuary,All the pres∣sures that we have suffered since the first year of our king, are not comparable to the miseries that one years civil warre hath brought upon us. in the scales of true wisdom, it had been better for them, as it will be for us, and all others, patiently to suffer the crosse that shall be laid upon us, untill that by our prayers we can prevail with God, that for our sinnes hath sent it, in mercy to remove it, then for our selves to pluck our necks out of the coller; and, in a froward disobedience, to pull the house (as Sampson did) upon our own heads: and like impatient fishes, to leap out of the Frying-pan into the fire, from hard usage that we impatiently conceived, to most base cruel bondage, that we have deserved∣ly merited; or at the best, to bring many men to many miseries, before we can attain unto any happinesse: and so as the Poet saith in this ve∣ry case among the Romans, when for their liberty and priviledges, as
they termed it, in Pompey's time, Excessit medicina modum, The reme∣dy that they procured, hath proved farre worse then the disease they suffered; And I doubt not but ere long, the Rebels in this Kingdom will feelingly confesse this to be too true, when they shall more deeply taste of the like miseries, as they have brought, as well upon many of their own friends, as others. If you alledge the time of Richard the third, how soon he was remo∣ved, and how happily it cme to passe that Henry the seventh succeeded; I answer briefly, that Richard the third was not onely a cruel bloody Ty∣rant, but he was also an unjust Usurper of the Crown, and not the right King of England: and that there is a great deal of difference betwixt re∣belling against our lawful Kings which God hath justly placed over us, and expelling an usurping Tyrant, which hath unjustly intruded himself into the royal Throne: This God often hath blessed, as in the case of Eglon, Athalia, Henry the seventh, and many more, which you may obviously find both in the Greek and Roman stories; and the other, he alwayes cur∣sed, and will plague it, whensoever it is attempted. After I had answered these Objections, I lighted upon one more,  Goodwin in his Anti-Cavalie∣risme. p. 8, which is taken out of 2 Kings 6.32. where the Objector saith, When Ahab sent a Cavalier, a man of blood, to take away the Prophet Elisha's head, as he sate in his house among the Elders, did Elisha open his dore for him, and sit still till he took off his head in obedience to the King? No, he bestirred himself for the safeguard of his life, and called upon others to stand by him to assist him. And a little after he saith, Surely he that went thus farre for the safety of his life, when he was but in danger to be assaulted, would have gone further if occasion had been; and in case the Kings Butcher had got in to him, before the dore had been shut, if he had been able, and had had no other means to have saved his own head, but by taking away the others; there is little question to be made, but he would rather have taken, then given a head in this case. I answer, that who this Goodwin is, I know not;  The Ministers of Christ should not be the incen∣diaries of war. I could wish he were none o the Tribe of Levi: 1. Because I find him such an incendiary of warre, and an enemy unto peace; whereas the messengers of Christ have this Elogie given them, Qàm speciosi pedes Evangelizantium pacem? And the Scripture saith, Blessed are the Peace-makers; and we con∣tinually pray, Give peace in our dayes, O Lord: and therefore I can hardly believe these incendiaries of warre to be the sonnes of the God of peace. 2. Because his objection is full of falshoods, and false grounds: as 1. He saith, that Ahab sent to take Elisha's head,The first mi∣stake in the front of his Speech. 2 Kings 6.32. If any thing more. when as Ahab was dead long before: it was his ghost therefore, and not he. But it was his son, and what then? what did the Prophet? he shut the dore, and desi∣red the Elders to handle the messenger roughly, or hold him fast at the dore: Thus saith the Text, and the Prophet in my judgement doth herein but little more then what God and nature alloweth every man to do, not to lay down his life, if he can lawfully preserve it; but, as the Prophet did, to shut the dore; or, as our Saviour saith, When we are persecuted in one City, to flye into another, to save our lives as long as we can, and in all this I find no violent resistance. But 2. the Objector tells us, Surely, if the messenger had got in, Elisha had taken off his head, rather then given his own. I de∣mand, What inspiration he hath from God to be sure of this; for I am sure John Baptist would not do so, nor Saint Paul, nor any other of Gods Saints, that I have read of; but these men are sure of every thing, even of Gods secret Counsel, and that is more then the thoughts of mens hearts; or, if this be sure, which I am not sure of, I answer, that Elisha was a great Prophet, that had the spirit of Eliah doubled upon him; and those actions which he did, or might have done, through the inspiration
of Gods spirit; this man may not do, except he be sure of the like inspira∣tion: for God, who is justice it self, can command by wrd, as he did to Abraham to kill his son; or by inspiration, as he did to Elias to call fire from Heaven, and it is a sin to disobey it: whereas without this, it were an horrible sin to do it. And we must distinguish betwixt rare and extraor∣dinary cases, that were managed by special commission from God; and those patterns that are confirmed by known and general Rules, which passe through the whole course of Scripture: and take heed, that we make not obscure Commentaries of humane wisdom, upon the clear Text of holy Writ; Quia maledicta glossa quae corrumpit textum. Cursed be the gloss that corrupts the Text. But indeed the place is plain, that Elisha made no other resistance, but what every man may lawfully do, to keep the messenger out of dores so long as he could; and yet this man would inferre hence, that we may law∣fully, with a strong hand, and open warre, resist the authority of our law∣ful Kings; a Doctrine, I am sure, that was never taught in the School of Christ. He makes some other Objections, which I have already answered in this Treatise; and then he spends almost two leaves in six several answers, that, he maketh to an objection against the examining the equity or iniquity of the Kings commands: but to no purpose: because we never deny, but that in some cases, though not in all, (for there must be Arcana Imperii, and there must be Privie Counsellours; and every Peasant must not examine all the Edicts of his Prince:) The commands of Kings may not onely be examined, but also disobeyed; as the three Children did the commands of Nebuchadnezzar, and the Apostles the commands of the High-Priests: but though we may examine their commands, and disobey them too, when they are contrary to the commands of God; yet I would fain know, where we have leave to resist them, and to take arms against them? I would he un∣derstood, There is a great deal of difference betwixt examining their com∣mands, and resisting their authority: the one, in some cases we may; the other, by no means we may do. CHAP. VIII. Sheweth, that our Parliament hath no power to make warre against our King: Two main Objections answered: The original of Parliaments: The power of the King to call a Parliament, to deny what he will, and to dissolve it when he will. Why our King suffereth. BUt, when all that hath been spoken cannot satisfie their indignation against true obedience, and allay the heat of their rebellious spirits, they come to their ultimum refugium, best strength, and strongest fort; that although all others should want sufficient right to crosse the commands, and resist the violence of an unjust and tyrannical Prince; yet the Parliament, that is the representative body of all his Kingdom, and are intrusted with the goods, estates, and lives of all his people, may lawfully resist, and when necessity requireth, take arms, and subdue their most lawful King; and this they labour to confirm by many arguments. I answer, that for the Parliament of England it is beyond my sphere,
and I being a transmarine member of this Parliament of Ireland,And whatsoe∣ver I pak of Parliaments in all this Dis∣course, I mean of Parliaments disjyned from their King, and understand only the pre∣valent faction that ingros∣seth and cap∣tivateth the Votes of many of the plain honest minded party, which hath been of∣ten seen both in general Councels, and the greatest Parl aments. I will on∣ly direct my speech to that whereof I am a Peer; and I hope I may the more boldly speak my mind to them, whereof I am a member; and I dare maintain it, that it shall be a benefit, and no prejudice, both to King and Kingdome, that the Spiritual Lords have their Votes in this our Parliament. For, besides the equity of our sitting in Parliament, and our indubita∣ble right to vote therein; (and his Majesty, (as I conceive, under favour be it spoken) is obliged by the very first act in Magna Charta, to preserve that right unto us) when as in the Summons of Edw. 1. it is inserted in the Writ, that,Claus. 7. m. 3. dors. Quod omnes tangit ab omnibus approbari, or tractari debet, whatsoever affair is of publique concernment, ought to receive publique approbation; and therefore with what equity can so considerable a party of this Kingdom, as are the Clergy, (who certainly cannot deserve to for∣feit the priviledge of the meanest subjects, and of Common men, because they are more immediately the servants of the living God) be denied the benefit of that, which in all mens judgements is so reasonable a law, and they onely be excluded from that interest, which is common unto all, I cannot see: yet I say, that besides this our right, while we sit in Parlia∣ment, this fruit shall alwayes follow, that our knowledge and conscience shall never suffer us to vote such things against the truth, as to allow that power or priviledge to our Parliament, as to make Orders and Ordinan∣ces without the consent, and contrary to the will of our King, much lesse to leavie moneys, and raise armes against our King:Priviledges of Parliament, what they are. for I conceive the Privi∣ledges of Parliament to be Privatae leges Parliamenti, a proceeding ac∣cording to certain rules, and private customes and lawes of Parliament, which no member of the Houses ought to transcend; whereas the other is Privatio legum, a proceeding without Law, contrary to all rules, as if our Parliament had an omnipotent power, and were more infallible than the Pope, to make all their Votes just, and their sayings truth. I, but to make this assertion good, that the Parliament in some cases may justly take arms, and make warre upon their justest King, if they conceive him to be unjust: it is alledged, that although the King be Singulis major, greater then any one, yet he is Ʋniversis minor, lesse then all; therefore all may oppose him, if he refuse to consent unto them. I answer, that the weaknesse of this argument,Pag. 11. & 38, 39, 40. is singularly well shewed in the Answer to the Observations upon some of his Majesties late Answers and Expresses; and I will briefly contract the Answer, to say, the King is better than any one, doth not prove him to be better then two; and if his Supremacy be no more, then many others may challenge as much: for the Prince is Singulis major, a Lord above all Knights, and a Knight above all Esquires; he is singulis major, though universis minor; And if the King be universis minor, then the people have placed a King, not over, but under them: And Saint Peter doth much mistake, in calling the King Supreme,2 Pet. 2.13. and they do ill to petition, when they might command: and I am confident, that no re∣cords (except of such Parliaments as have most unjustly deposed their Kings) can shew us one example, that the Parliament should have a power,As Edw. Car∣narvan, and Richard the second. which must of necessity over-rule the King, or make their Votes Law, with∣out, and against the will of the King; for if their Votes be Law without his consent, what need they seek and sollicit his consent? But the clause in the Law made 2. Hen 5. cited by his Majesty, that it is of the Kings regality to grant or deny such of their Petitions as pleaseth himself,That the King is universis ma∣jor, greater then all: pro∣ved. and the power which the Law gives the King to dissolve the Parlia∣ment; and especially the words in the Preface of cap. 12. Vices to Hen. 8. where the Kings Supremacy, not over single persons, but over all the body politique is clearly delivered, doth sufficiently shew the simplicity of this
Sophistry,God having given, and the people having yielded their power to th it King: they can never chal∣lenge any power, but what they have derived from their king. 2. Reason. Sol. and prove that the King being invested with all the pow of the people, which is due to him as their King, he is the onely fountain of all power and justice; so that now they can justly claim no power, but what is derived from him; and therefore it is the more intolerable, that any man should usurp the power of the King, to destroy the King. 2. They will say, that Salus populi est suprema a lex, The good of the people is the chiefest thing that is aymed at in all government; and the Parlia∣ment is the representative body of all the people; therefore if any thing be intended contrary to the good of the people, they may and ought lawfully to resist the same. I answer, and confesse, that there is no wise King, but will carefully pro∣vide for the safety of his people, because his honour is included therein, and his ruine is involved in their destruction; but it is certain, that this princi∣ple hath been used as one of our Irish mantles, to hide the rebellion of many Traytors, and so abused to the confusion of many Nations; for there is not scarce any thing more facile,2 Sam. 15.4. then to perswade a people that they are not well governed; as you may see in the example of Absolon, who by abusing this very Axiome, hath stollen away the hearts of many of his fathers sub∣j cts:How easie it is to perswade the people to rebell. for, as Lipsius saith, Proprium est aegri, nihil diu pati, It is incident to sick men, and so to distempered minds, to indure nothing long, but foolish∣ly to think every change to be a remedy; therefore the people that are soon perswaded to believe the lightest burthen to be too heavie, are easily led away by every seducing Absolon, who promise them deliverance from all their evils, so they may have their assistance to effect their ends; and then the people, swelled up with hopes, cry up those men as the reformers of the State; and so the craft and subtilty of the one, prevailing over the weak∣nesse and simplicity of the other, every Peer and Officer that they like not, must with Teramines be condemned, and themselves must have all pre∣ferments, or the King and Kingdom must be lyable to be ruined. But you will say, the whole Parliament cannot be thought to be thus en∣vious against the Officers of State; or thus carelesse of the common good, as, for any sinister end, to destroy the happinesse of the whole. I answer, that Parliaments are not alwayes guided by an unerring spirit, but as Generall Councels, so whole Parliaments have been repealed and de∣clared null by succeeding Parliaments,How a Faction many times prevaileth to sway whole Councels and Parliaments. as 21. Rich. 2. c. 12. all the Statutes made 11 Rich. 2. are disanulled: and this in the 21 Rich. 2. is totally repea∣led in 1 Hen. 4. c. 3. And 39 Hen. 6. we find a total repeal of a Parliament held at Coventry the year before, and the like: and the reason is, because many times by the hypocritical craft of some Faction, working upon the weaknesse of some, and the discontent of others, the worse part procu∣ring most unto their party, prevaileth against the better. The original of Parlia∣ments: why they were at first ordained.Besides all this, I conceive the Original of Parliaments was, as it is ex∣pressed in the Kings Writ, to consult with the King, De quibusdam arduis, & urgentibus negotiis regni; they being collected from all the parts of the Kingdom, can best inform His Majesty, what grievances are sprung, and what reparations may be made, and what other things may be concluded for the good of His Subjects in every part: and His Majesty to inform them of his occasions and necessities which by their free and voluntary Subsi∣dies, they are to supply both for his honour, and their own defence. In all this they have no power to command their King,See Jo. Bodin. de repub. l. 1. c. 8. pag 95. in English, and the place is worth the no∣ting. no power to make Lawes with∣out their King, no right to meet without his Writ, no liberty to stay any longer then he gives leave; how then can you meet, as you do now, in my Episcopal See at Kilkenny, and continue your Parliament there, to make warre against your lawful King? What colour of reason have you to do the same? you cannot pretend to be above your King; you have with lyes and falshoods most wickedly seduced the whole Kingdom, and involved the same
in a most unnatural civil warre: you are the actives, the King is passive; you make the offensive, He the defensive warre; for you began, and when He, like a Gracious King, still cryed for peace, you still made ready for battel. And I doubt not but your selves know all this to be true, for you know, that all Parliament men must have their elections warranted by the Kings especial Writ. You will say, that so you were; well,The letter sent from a Gen∣tleman to his friend. and you were chosen but by subjects, and intrusted by them to represent the affections, and to act the duties of subjects; and subjects cannot impose a rule upon their Soveraign, nor make any ordinance against their King; and therefore, if the represen∣tative body of subjects transcend the limits of their trust; and do in the name of the subjects, that which all subjects cannot do; and assume that power which the subjects neither have, nor can conferre upon them: I see no reason that any subject in the world should any wayes approve of their actions. For, how can your priviledge of being Parliament men,That men in∣trusted, should not go beyond their trust. priviledge you from being Murderers, Thieves, or Traytors, if you do those things that the Law adjudgeth to be murders, thefts, and treasons? Your electi∣ons cannot quit you, and your places cannot excuse you; because he that is intrusted, cannot do more then all they that do intrust him; and there∣fore all subjects should desert them, that exceed the conditions, and falsifie the trust which their fellow-subjects have reposed in them. Besides,The King must needs be a part of every Par∣liament. you know the King must needs be reputed part of every Par∣liament, when as the selected company of Knights and Burgesses, together with the Spiritual and Temporal Peers, are the representative body, and the King is the real head of the whole Kingdom; and therefore if the body separates it self from the head, it can be but an uselesse trunk, that can pro∣duce no act, which pertaineth to the good of the body: because the spirits that gave life and motion to the whole body, are all derived from the head, as the Philosopher teacheth. And further, you do all know, that as the King hath a power to call,The power of dissolving the Parliament, greater then the power of denying any thing. so he hath a power to dissolve all Parliaments; and having a power of dissolving it when he will, he must needs have a power of denying what he please; be∣cause the other is farre greater then this. And therefore, all these premises well considered, it is apparent that your sitting in Kilkenny without your King, (or his Lievtenant, which is to the same purpose;) and your Votes without his assent, are all invalid to exact obedience from any subject; and for my part I deem them fooles that will obey them, and rebels that will take arms against their King at your commands; and if you persist in this your rebellious obstinacy, I wish your judgements may light onely upon your own heads: and that those, which like the followers of Absolon, are simply led by you, may have the mist taken from their eyes, that they may be able to discern the duty they owe unto their King, that they be not in∣volved, and so perish in your sin. For, though you be never so many, and think that all the Kingdom, Towns, and Cities be for you;Psal. 21.11. yet take heed lest you imagine such a mis∣chievous device, which you are not able to perform; for the involving of well-meaning men into your bad businesses,1 Reg. 22.29. as Jehosaphat was misled to war a∣gainst Ramoth Gilead, doth not only bring a punishment upon them that are seduced, but a far greater plague upon you that do seduce them: and God, who hath at all times so exceeding graciously defended His Majesty, and contrary to your hopes and expectation, from almost nothing in the begin∣ning of this rebellion, hath increased his power, to I hope an invincible Ar∣my, will be a rock of defence unto his annointed; because it is well known to all the world,For what cau∣ses the King suffereth. that whatsoever this good King hath suffered at the hands of his subjects, it is for the preservation of the true Protestant Religion, of the established Lawes of his Kingdomes, and of those Reverend Bishops,
Grave Doctors, and all the rest of the Learned and Religious Clergy, that have ever maintained, and will, to the spilling of the last drop of their blood, defend this truth against all Papists, and other Anabaptistical Brow∣nists and Sectaries whatsoever. What a shame it is to use the power we have received a∣gainst him that gave it us.And therefore if you that are his Parliament, should, like unthankeful va∣pours, that cloud the Sun which raised them; or like the Moon in her interpo∣sition, that obscures the glorious lamp which enlightens her, in the least man∣ner imploy that strength, which you have received from his Majesty, when he called you together, against His Majesty; it will be an ugly spot, and a foul blemish, both for your selves, and all your psterities: And if not sud∣denly prevented, you may raise such spirits, that your selves cannot lay down; and sow such seeds of discord and discontet between the King and his people, as may derive through the whole Race of all succeeding Kings, such a disaffection to Parliaments, as may prove a plague and poyson to the whole Kingdom. For, if the King out of his favour and grace call you to∣gether, and intrust you with a power either of continuing, concluding, or enacting such things, as may be for the good of the Common wealth; and you abuse that power against him that gave it you: I must needs confesse that I am of his mind,That it is law∣ful to recall a power given, when it is a∣bused. who saith, That the King were freed before God and man from all blame, though he should use all possible lawful means to with∣draw that power into his own hands; which being but lent them, hath been so misapplyed against him: for if my servant desireth to hold my sword, and when I intrust him with it, he seeks to thrust the same into my breast, Will not every man judge it lawful for me to gain my sword, if it be possi∣ble, out of his hand, and with that sword to cut off his head, that would have thrust it into my heart? or, as one saith, If I convey my estate in trust to any friend, to the use of me and mine, and the person intrusted falsifie the faith reposed in him, by conveying the profits of my estate to other ends, to the prejudice of me and mine, no man will think it unlawful for me to an∣nihilate (if I can possibly do it) such a deed of trust. And therefore, Noble Peers and Gentlemen of this ancient Kingdom of Ireland, that your Parliament may prove successeful to the benefit of the Common-wealth; let me, that have some interest and charge over all the In∣habitants and Sojourners of Kilkenny, perswade you to think your selves no Parliament without your King; and that your Votes and Ordinances, carrying with them the power, though not the name of Acts of Parliament, to oblige both King and Subjects to obey them, are the most absolute subversion of our Fundamental Lawes, the destructive invasion of our right∣ful Liberties; And that by an usurped power of an arbitrary rule, to dis∣pose of our estates, or any part thereof as you please, to make us Delin∣quents when you will, and to punish us as Malignants at your pleasure, and through your discontent to dispossesse your rightful King, though it were to set the Crown upon the head of your greatest One al; is such a priviledg, that never any Parliament hath yet claimed. Or if you still go on for the inlargement of your own usurped power, under the title of the priviledge of Parliament, to Vote diminution of the Kings just Prerogative, that your Progenitors never denied to any of his Ancestors, to exclude us Bishops out of your Assemblies, without whom your determinations can never be so well concluded in the fear of God, and to invade the Liberties of your fellow-subjects, under the pretences of religion, and the publique good: I will say no more, but turn my self to God, and put it in my Liturgie; From Pa∣rasites, Puritanes, Popes, and such Parliaments, Good Lord deliver us.
CHAP. IX. Sheweth the unanimous consent and testimonies of many famous learned men, and Martyrs, both ancient and modern, that have confirmed and justified the truth of the former Doctrine. ANd so you see, that as for no cause, so for no kind or degree of men, be they what you will; Peers, Magistrates, Heads of Families, Dar∣lings of the people, or any other Patriots, whom the Commons shall elect, it is lawfull to rebell against, or any wayes to resist our chief Princes, and soveraign Governours. This point is as clear as the Sunne; and yet to make it still more clear unto them, that will not believe that truth which they like not; but, as Tertullian saith, Credunt Scripturis, ut credant ad∣versus Scripturas,Testimonies of famous men. do alledge Scriptures to justifie their own wilful opini∣ons, against all Scripture; I will here adde a few testimonies of most famous men, to confirm the same. Henry de Bracton, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, under Hen. 3.L. Elismer in orat. habita in Camera Fiscali, anno 1609. pag. 108. saith, as he is quoted by the Lord Elismer, That under the King, there are free men and servants, and every man is under him, and he is under none but onely God: If any thing be demanded of the King, (seeing no Writ can issue forth against the King) there is a place for Petition, that he would correct and amend his fact; and, if he shall refuse to do it, he shall have punishment enough, when the Lord shall come to be his revenger; for otherwise, touching the Charters and deeds of Kings, neither private persons, nor Justitiaries, ought to dispute. This was the Law of that time: what new Lawes our young Lawyers have found since, I know not: I am not so good a Lawyer. The Civil Lawyers do farre surpasse the Common Law herein; for,Corsetus Sic. tract. de pote∣stat. reg. part. 5. num 66. Cor∣setus Siculus saith, Rex in suo regno potest omnia, imò de plenitudine potesta∣tis. And Marginista saith, Qui disputat de potestate Principis, utrum be∣nè fecerit, est infamis. Hostiensis saith, Princeps solutus est legibus, [id est, quoad vim coactivam, non quoad vim directivam: Thom. 1. 2 ae. q. 96. ar. 5. ad 3.] quia nulli subest, nec ab aliis judicatur. And, to omit all the rest,Marginista in Angelum Peru∣sinum. c. l. 9. tit. 29. De cri∣mine sacrilegii, l. 2 Hostiens. Sum. l 1. rubr. 32. de effic. legati. Barclaius con∣tra Monarcho∣mach. l. 3 c. 14. Gulielmus Barclaius out of Bartolus, Baldus, Castrensis Romanus, Alex∣ander, Felinus, Albericus, and others, doth inferre. Principem ex cer∣tâ scientiâ, supra jus, extra jus, & contra jus omnia posse; Principem solum, legem constituere universalem. Princeps soli Deo rationem debet. Prin∣ceps solutus est legibus, & temerarium est velle, Majestatem Regiam ullis terminis limitare: which things if I should English, seditious heads would think my head not suffiient to pay for this; but I only repeat their words, and not justifie their sayings: and therefore to proceed to more familiar things. Pasquerius writeth that Lewis the eleventh did urge his Senators and Counsellors to set forth a certain Edict, which they refused to do,Pasquer. de An∣tiquit. Gallican. l. 1. Sicut olim La∣cedaemonii, vi∣ctoribus respon∣derunt: Si du∣riora morte Im∣peretis, potius moriemur. be∣cause it seemed to them very unjust; and the King being very angry, threat∣ned death unto them all: whereupon Vacarius, President of the Councel, and all the Senate in their purple robes came unto the King; and the King, asto∣nished therewith, demanded whence they came, and what they would have: Vacarius answered for all, We come to undergoe that death which you have threatned unto us; for you must know (O King) that we will rather suffer death, then do any thing against our cnscience towards God, or our duty towards you: Whererein we see the Nobility of this King, like
Noble Christians, do more willingly offer to lay down their lives at the command of their Liege Lord, then unchristian like rebell, and take Arms against their delinquent Soveraign. And so Colmannus, a godly Bishop, did hinder the Scottish Nobility to rise against Fercardus, that was their most wicked King. Tertul. ad Sca∣pul.Tertullian, writing unto Scapula, the President of Carthage, saith, We are defamed, when the Christian is found to be the enemy of no man, no not of the Emperour; whom because he knoweth him to be appointed by God, he must needs love and reverence, and wish him safe with all the Ro∣man Empire; for we honour and worship the Emperour as a man second from God,Tertul in Apo∣oget. & solo Deo minorem, and inferiour onely to God: And in his Apologetico, he saith, Deus est solus in cujus solius potestate sunt reges, à quo sunt secundi, post quem primi, super omnes homines, ante omnes deos; it is God alone, in whose power Kings are kept, which are second from him, first after him, above all men, and before all gods; that is, all other Magi∣strates, that are called gods. Athanasius, de summo regum imperio. q. 55.Athanasius saith, that, As God is the King and Emperour in all the world, that doth exercise his power and authority over all things that are in Heaven, and in Earth; So the Prince and King is appointed by God over all earthly things; Et ille liberâ suâ voluntate facit quod vult, sicut ipse Deus; and the King by his own free-will doth whatsoever he pleaseth, even as God himself: And the Civilians could say but lit∣tle more. Simulach um à similitudine dictum. Isidor.Saint Augustine saith, Videtis simulachrorum templa, you see the temples of our Images, partly fallen for want of reparation, partly destroyed, partly shut up, partly changed to some other uses; ipsaque Simulachra, and those Images either broken to pieces, or burned and destroyed; and those Powers and Potentates of this world, which sometimes persecuted the Chri∣stians,Aug. ad frat. Madaur. ep. 42. See the duty of Subjects o a perswasion to Loyalty, which is a full collection of the Fathers to this purpose. pro istis simulachris, for those Images; to be overcome and ta∣med, non à repugnantibus, sed à morientibus Christianis, not of resisting, but of dying Christians; and the rest of the Fathers are most plentiful in this Theam: and therefore to the later Writers, Cardinal Alan saith, (but herein most untruly) that the Protestants are desperate men, and most factious; for, as long as they have their Prin∣ces, and Lawes, indulgent to their own wills, they know well enough how to use the prosperous blasts of fortune; but if the Princes should withstand their desires, or the Laws should be contrary to their minds, then pre∣sently,Card. Alan in resp. ad Instit, B itannicam. c. 4. they break asunder the bonds of their fidelity, they despise Maje∣sty, and with fire and sword, slaughters, and destructions, they rage in every place, and do run headlong into the contempt of all divine and hu∣mane things: which accusation, if it were true, then I confesse the Prote∣stants were to be blamed more then all the people in the world. But, how∣soever some factious, seditious, anabaptistical, and rebellious spirits amongst us, not deserving the name of Protestants, may be justly taxed for this intolerable vice: yet, to let you see how falsely he doth accuse us, that are true Protestants, and how fully we do agree with the Scriptures, and the Fathers of the purest age of the Church, in the Doctrine of our obe∣dience to our Kings and Princes; I will onely give you a taste of what we teach; And to begin with the first reformer. Luther saith, no man which stirreth up the multitude to any tumult, can be excused from his fault, though he should have never so just a cause; but he must go to the Magistrate, and attempt nothing privately: because all sedition and insurrection is against the Commandement of God,Sleidan. com∣mentar. l 5. which for∣biddeth, and detesteth the same. Philip Melancthon saith, though it be the Law of Nature to expell force with force, yet it is no wayes lawful for us to withstand the wrong
done us by the Magistrate with any force; yea, though we seem to pro∣mise our obedience upon this condition,Melancthon apud Luther. tom. 1. p. 463. if the Magistrate should command lawful things; yet it is not therfore lawful for us to withstand his unjust force with force: for though their Empires should be gotten and possest by wicked men, yet the work of their government is from God, and it is the good creature of God; and therefore, whatsoever the Magistrate doth, no force ought to be taken up against the Magistrate. Brentius saith; that the rule and government of a Prince,The rule of a Prince may be evil two ways. may be evill two wayes. 1. When he commandeth any thing against the faith of Christ; as, to deny our God, to worship Idols, and the like: and herein we must  give place to the saying of the Apostle, It is better to obey God, then men; but in this case the subject must in no way rage, or rise, against his Magistrate, but he should rather patiently suffer any evil, then any way strike again; and rather endure any inconveniences and discommodities, then any ways obey those ungodly commands. 2. The Prince his government may be evil, when he doth, or command∣eth  any thing against the publique justice; of which kind are the exaction of our goods, or the vexation of our bodies; and in these kinds of injuries,Brentius in re¦spon. ad artic. rusticorum. the subject ought rather then in the former, to be obedient to his Magi∣strate; for if he steps forth to arms, God hath pronounced of such men, He that smiteth with the sword, shall perish with the sword. Cranmer Arch Bishop of Canterbury, together with the rest of the Bishops, and most famous Divines of this Kingdom, saith, If Princes shall do any thing contrary to their duties, God hath not appointed any supe∣riour Judge over them in this world, but they are to render their account to God, which hath reserved their judgement to himself alone; and there∣fore it is not lawful for any subjects,Cranmer in lib. de Chistia∣ni hominis institutis. how wicked soever their Princes shall be, to take arms, or raise sedition against them, but they are to powre forth their prayers to God, in whose hand Kings hearts are, that he would inlighten them with his spirit; whereby they might rightly, to the glory of God, use that sword which he hath delivered unto them. Gulielmus Tindal, a godly Martyr of Christ, when Cardinal Lanio's sonne did lead the Lambs of Christ by troops unto the slaughter, doth then describe the duty of subjects according to the strait rule of the Gospel; saying, David spared Saul, and if he had killed him, he had sinned against God; for in every Kingdom, the King, which hath no su∣periour, judgeth of all things; and therefore he that indeavoureth, or in∣tendeth any mischief or calamity against the Prince that is a Tyrant, or a Persecutor; or whosoever with a froward hand doth but touch the Lords annointed, he is a rebel against God, and resisteth the ordinance of God: as often as a private man sinneth, he is held obnoxious to his King, that can punish him for his offence; but when the King offendeth, he ought to be reserved to the divine examination and vengeance of God:Tindal. l. de Christiani ho∣minis obedient. and as it is not lawful upon any pretence to resist the King, so it is not lawful to rise up against the Kings Officer, or Magistrate, that is sent by the King for the execution of those things which are commanded by the King: for, as our Saviour saith He that heareth you, heareth me; and he that despiseth you, de∣spiseth me; and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me; And as he saith unto Saul, when he persecuted the servants of Christ, Saul,Acts 9.4. Saul, why persecutest thou me? when as he was then in Heaven, farre above the reach of Saul; yet, because there is such a mystical union be∣twixt Christ and his Church, the head and members, as is betwixt man and wife; no man can be said to injure the one, but he must wrong the other: so, whosoever resisteth the Kings Lievtenant, Deputy, or any other Magistrate, or Officer that he sendeth, with Commission to execute his
commands, resisteth the King himself; and all the indignities that are offered to the Kings Embassadour, or servant, that he thus sendeth, are deemed as indignities offered to the King himself; as we see, the base usage of David's servants by King Hanun,2 Sam, 10. David revenged as an abuse offered unto himself; because the Kings person cannot be in all places, where justice and judgement, and many other offices and actions are necessarily to be done throughout the latitude of his Dominions; but his power and his authority,Whatsoever is done to any Messenger, is deemed as done to him that sent him. deputed to those his servants and officers that he sendeth, are as the lively representatives of the King, in every part of his Kingdome; and whatsoever favour, payment, neglect, or abuse, is shewed unto any of them; the same, in all Nations is accounted, and therefore punished or rewarded, as a service done unto the King himself; as our Saviour, when but the Tole gatherer came for the Tribute-mony, saith, Give unto Caesar, what belongeth unto Caesar. And therefore it is but an idle, simple, most foolish, and frivolous di∣stinction of men, to deceive children and fools; to say, They love and honour their King, and they fight not against their King, but against such and such, whom notwithstanding they know to be the Kings chiefest officers, and to be sent with the Kings Power, Commission, and Authority, to do those things that they do. This is such a foppery, that I know not what to say, to undeceive those that are so desirous to be deceived, when the Devill,Saint Paul saith, God sndeth them strong delusi∣ons. 2 Thess 2.11. But what God sendeth justly as the punisher of their sin, the Devil sendeth maliciously, as the guider of them to Hell. Ba nesius in Tract de huma∣nis Constitut. which knoweth how near their destruction hangeth over their heads, sends them strong delusions, that they should so easily, and so sil∣lily believe su h palpable lyes, as to make them think, they love him dear∣ly, whom they murder most barbarously. Barnesius, a very godly and learned man, treating of the same Argu∣ment, saith in a manner the same thing; That the servants of Christ, rather then either commit any evil, or resist any Magistrate, ought pati∣ently to suffer the losse of their goods, and the tearing of their members; nay, the Christian, after the example of his Master Christ, ought to suffer the bitterest death for truth and righteousnesse sake; and therefore (saith he) whosoever shall rebell under pretence of Religion, aeternae damnationis reus erit; he shall be found guilty of eternall dam∣nation. Master Dod upon the Com∣mandements.Master Dod saith, that, where the Prince commandeth a lawful act, the subjects must obey; and if he injoynes unlawful commands, we must not rebell, but we must be content to bear any punishment that shall be laid upon us, even unto death it self; and we should suffer our punish∣ment without grudging, even in heart: and this he presseth by the ex∣ample of the Three Children, and of Daniel that was a mighty man, and of very great power in Babylon, yet never went about to gather any power against his King, though it were in his own defence. Master Byfield upon 1 Pet. 2.13.Master Byfield expounding the words of Saint Peter, , as to the Supreme, saith, This should confirm every good subject to acknowledge and maintain the Kings Supremacy, and willingly to bind himself thereto by oath; for the Oath of Supremacy is the bond of this subjection; and this oath men must take without equivocation, men∣tall evasion, or secret reservation: yea, it should bind in them the same resolution that was in Saint Bernard, who saith, If all the world should conspire against me, to make me complot any thing against the Kings Majesty, yet I would fear God, and not dare to offend the King, ordained of God. Serenissimus Rex Jacobus, de vera lege li∣berae Monarchiae.I might fill a Volume, if I would collect the testimonies of our best Writers; I will adde but one, of a most excellent King, our late King James of ever blessed memory; for he saith, The improbity, or fault of the Governour, ought not to subject the King to them, over whom he
is appointed Judge by God; for if it be not lawful for a private man to prosecute the injury that is offered unto him against his private ad∣versary, when God hath committed the sword of vengeance onely to the Magistrate, how much lesse lawful is it, think you, either for all the people, or for some of them to usurp the sword, whereof they have no right, against the publique Magistrate, to whom alone it is committed by God? This hath been the Doctrine of all the Learned,The obedient example of the Martyrs in the time of Queen Mary. of all the Saints of God, of all the Martyrs of Jesus Christ; and therefore not onely they that suffered in the first Persecutions under Heathen Tyrants, but also they that of late lived under Queen Mary, and were compelled to un¦dergoe most exquisite torments, without number, and beyond mea∣sure; yet none of them, either in his former life, or when he was brought to his execution; did either despise her cruell Majesty, or yet curse this Tyrant-Queen, that made such havock of the Church of Christ, and causelesly spilt so much innocent blood; but being true Saints, they fea∣red God, and honoured her: and in all obedience to her authority, they yielded their estates and goods to be spoyled, their liberties to be infrin∣ged, and their bodies to be imprisoned, abused, and burned, as oblati∣ons unto God, rather then, contrary to the command of their Master Christ, they would give so much allowance unto their consciences, as, for the pre∣servation of their lives, to make any shew of resistance against their most bloody Persecutors, whom they knew to have their authority from that bloody, yet their lawful, Queen. And therefore I hope it is apparent unto all men that have their eyes open, and will not, with Balaam, most wilfully deceive themselves;Numb. 24.15. Gen. 19.11. or with the Sodomites, grope for the wall at noon-day; that, by the Law of God, by the example of all Saints, by the rule of honesty, and by all other equitable considerations, it is not lawfull for any man, or any degree or sort of men, Magistrates, Peers, Parliaments, Popes,The conclusi∣on of the whole. or whatsoe∣ver you please to call them, to give so much liberty unto their mis∣guided consciences, and so farre to follow the desires of their unruly affections, as for any cause, or under any pretence to withstand Gods Vice-gerent, and with violence to make warre against their lawful King; or indeed, in the least degree, and lowest manner, to offer any indignity either in thought, word, or deed; either to Moses our King, or to Aaron our High Priest, that hath the care and charge of our souls; or to any other of those subordinate callings, that are lawfully sent by them to discharge those offices wherewith they are intrusted: This is the truth of God, and so acknowledged by all good men. And what Preachers teach the contrary, I dare boldly affirm it, in the name of God, that they are the incendiaries of Hell, and deserve rather with Corah, to be consumed with fire from Heaven, then to be believed by any man on Earth.
CHAP. X. Sheweth the impudencie of the Anti-Cavalier: How the Rebels deny they warre against the King: An unanswerable Argument to presse obedience: A further discussion, whether for our Liber∣ty, Religion, or Laws, we may resist our Kings; and a pathetical disswasion from Rebellion. I Could insert here abundant more, both of the Ancient and Modern Writers, that do with invincible Arguments confirm this truth. But the Anti Cavalier would perswade the world,Anti-Cavalier, p. 17, 18, &c. that all those learned Fathers, and those constant Martyrs, that spent their purest blood to preserve the pu∣rity of religion unto us, did either belye their own strength,Yet Tertul. Cypr. (whom I quoted before) and R ssi hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 1. and S. Au∣gust in Psal 124. and others avouch, the Christians were far stron∣ger then their enemies, and the greatest part of Julians army were Christians. or befool themselves with the undue desire of over-valued Martyrdome; but now they are instructed by a better spirit, they have clearer illuminations to inform them to resist (if they have strength) the best, and most lawful authority that shall either oppose, or not consent unto them: thus they throw dirt in the Fathers face, and dishonour that glorious company, and noble army of Martyrs, which our Church confesseth, praiseth God; and therefore no wonder that they will warre against Gods annointed here on Earth, when they dare thus dishonour and abuse his Saints that raign in Heaven: but I hope the world will believe, that those holy Saints were as honest men, and those worthy Martyrs, that so willingly sacrificed their lives in defence of truth, could as well testifie the truth and be as well informed of the truth, as these seditious spirits, that spend all their breath to raise arms against their Prince, and to spill so much blood of the most faithful subjects. But though the authority of the best Authours is of no authority with them, that will believe none but themselves; yet I would wish all other men to read that Homily of the Church of England, where it is said, that God did never long prosper rebellious subjects against their Prince, were they never so great in authority, or so many in number: yea, were they never so noble, so many, so stout, so witty and politique, but alwayes they came by the overthrow, and to a shameful end. Yea, though they pretend the re∣dresse of the Common-wealth, (which rebellion of all other mischiefs, doth most destroy;The Homily against rebel∣lion, p. 390. & 301.) or reformation of religion, (whereas rebellion is most against all true religion) yet the speedy overthrow of all Rebels sheweth, that God alloweth neither the dignity of any person, nor the multitude of any peo∣ple, nor the weight of any cause, as sufficient; for the which, the subjects may move rebellion against their Princes: and I would to God that every subject would read over all the six parts of that Homily against wilful re∣bellion, for there are many excellent passages in it; which, being diligently read, and seriously weighed, would work upon every honest heart, never to rebell against their lawful Prince. And therefore the Lawes of all Lands being so plain to pronounce them Traytors, that take arms against their Kings, (as you may see in the Sta∣tutes of England, 25 Edw. 3. c. 2. And as you know, it was one of the greatest Articles for which the Earl of Strafford was beheaded, that he had actually leavied warre against the King:) The Nobles and Gentry, Lords and Commons of both Houses of Parliament, in all Kingdomes, be∣ing convicted in their consciences with the truth of this Doctrine, do in all their Votes and Declarations conclude and protest, (and I must believe them) that all the leavies, moneys, and other provision of horse and men,
that they raise and arm, are for the safety of the Kings person, and for the maintenance of his Crown and Dignity. Nay, more then this, the very Rebels in this our Kingdom of Ireland, knowing how odious it is before God and man, for subjects to rebell and take armes against their lawful King, do protest, if you will believe them, that they are the Kings souldiers, and do fight and suffer for their King, and in defence of his Prerogatives. But you know the old saying, Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen, The Devil deceiveth us soonest, when he comes like an Angel of light; and you shall ever know the true subjects best by their actions, farre better then by their Votes, Declarations, or Protestations; for, Quid audiam verba, cum videam contraria facta? When men do come in sheeps cloathing, and inwardly are ravening wolves; when they come with honey in their mouths, and gall in their hearts; and, like Joab, with peace in their tongue, and a sword in their hand; a petition to intreat, and a weapon to compell; I am told by my Saviour, that I shall know them by their works, not their words. And therefore, as our Saviour saith, Not he that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdome of Heaven, but he that doth the will of my Fa∣ther which is in Heaven: So I say, not he that cryeth peace, peace, is the son of peace, but he that doth obey his Prince, and doth most willingly what∣soever he commandeth; or suffereth most patiently for refusing to do what he commandeth amisse: This is the true subject. Well, to draw towards the end of this point,That is, when the Commo∣nalty guide the Nobility, and the Sub∣jects rule their King. of our obedience to our So∣veraign Governour, I desire you to remember a double story. The one of Plutarch, which tells us how the tayle of the Serpent rebelled against the head, because that did guide the whole body, and drew the tayle after it whithersoever it would, therefore the head yielded that the tayle should rule; and then, it being small, and wanting eyes, drew the whole body, head and all, through such narrow crevises, clefts, and thickets, that it soon brought the Serpent to confusion. The other is of Titus Livius,Titus Livius, Decad. 1. l. 2 who tells us, that, when the people of Rome made a factious combination to re∣bell against their Governours, Menenius Agrippa went unto them, and said, that on a time all the members conspired against the stomack, and alledg∣ed, that she devoured with ease and pleasure, what they had purchased with great labour and pain; therefore the feet would walk no more, the hands would work no more, the tongue would plead no more for it; and so within a while, the long fast of the stomack made weak knees, feeble hands, dimme eyes, a faltering tongue, and a heavie heart; and then presently, seeing their former folly, they were glad to be reconciled to the Stomack again: and this reconciled the people unto their Governours. I need not make any other application, but to wish, and to advise us all with the people of Rome, to submit our selves unto our Heads, that are our Governours, lest, if we be guided by the tayle, we shall bring our selves, with the Serpent, unto destruction: And to remember that excellent speech of S. Basil: The people through ambition, are fallen into grievous Anarchie, whence it happeneth, that all the exhortations of their rulers do no good: no man hath any list to obey, but every man would reign; being swelled up with pride, that springeth out of his ignorance: And a little after, he saith,Basilius de Spi∣ritu Sancto. c. ult. scii. 30. An argument of obedience drawn from the fifth Com∣mandement. that some sit no lesse impla∣cable, and bitter examiners of things amisse, then unjust and malevolent Judges of things well done, so that we are more brutish then the very beasts; because they are quiet among themselves, but we wage cruel and bloody warres against each other. And let us never forget that the Lord saith, Honour thy father and thy mother; and I must tell you, that by father in this precept, you must not
onely understand your natural father, but also the King, who is your politi∣cal father, and the father of all his subjects, and the Priest your spiritual father,1 Chron. 2.24. and those likewise that in loco patris, do breed, and bring you up: and though natural affection produceth more love and honour unto those fathers that begat us; yet, reason and religion oblige us more unto the King, that is the common father of all, and to the Priest, that begat us unto Christ, then unto him that begat us into the world; for that without our new birth, which is ordinarily done by the office of the Priest, we were no Christians;What we are, and should be, without King or Priest. and as good unborn, as unchristened, that is unregenerated: and without the King, that is Custos utriusque tabulae, the preserver both of the publick justice, and of the pure religion, our fathers can neither bring us up in peace, nor teach us in the faith of Christ: and therefore if my father should plot any treason against the King, or prove a Rebel against him, I am bound in all duty and conscience, to preferre the publick before the private, and if I cannot otherwise avert the same, to reveal the plot to preserve the King, though it were to the losse of my father's life; and therefore cer∣tainly they that curse, that is, speak evil of their King are cursed; and they that rebel against him, shall never have their dayes long in the land, but shall, through their own rebellion, be soon cut off from the land of the living. Whether for the liberty of Subjects, we can be war∣ranted to re∣bell. In the dis∣course of the differences be∣twixt King and Parliament.For mine own part, I have often admired, why the subjects of King CHARLES should raise any civil warre, and especially turn their spleen against him. If any say, it is for their liberties: I answer, that I am con∣fident His Majesty never thought to bring any (the meanest of his subjects) into bondage; nor by an arbitrary government, to reduce them into the like condition, as the Peasants of France, or the Boores of Germany, or the Pickroes of Spain are, as some do most falsely suggest: but that they should continue, as they have been in the dayes of his Father, of blessed memory, and of all other his most noble Progenitors, the freest subjects under Hea∣ven. And I hope they desire not to be such Libertines, as those in the Pri∣mitive Church,The Libertines of the Primi∣tive Church, what they thought. who (because Christian liberty freed us from all Jewish Ceremonies, and all typical Rites, which were such a burthen, that neither we nor our fathers could undergo, and also from the curse and malediction of the moral law) would, under this pretence of Christian liberty, be freed from the obligation of all lawes, and give themselves the freedom to do what they pleased; for this would prove to be, not the liberty, but the bondage, and the base slavery of a people, that are not governed by lawes, but suffe∣red to do what they please; because, that neither God, nor good lawes confine us, but for our own good: and he that forbids us to obey impious commands, bids us to obey all righteous lawes; and rather to suffer, then to resist the most unrighteous Governours. But I fear, that under the name of the liberty of the subjects,What is often aimed at un∣der the name of the liberty of the ub∣jects. the licentiousnesse of the flesh is aymed at; be∣cause you may see by what is already come to passe, our civil dissention hath procured to many men such a liberty, that few men are sure either of their life or estate: and God blesse me from such a liberty, and send me rather to be the slave of Christ, then such a libertine of the world. Whether for the preserva∣tion of our Re∣ligion, we can be warranted to rebell,And if religion be the cause that moveth you here hereunto, I confesse this should be dearer to us then our lives; but this title is like a velvet mask, that is often used to cover a deformed face, & decipimur specie recti: for as that worthy and learned Knight, Sir John Cheek, that was Tutor to King Edward the sixth, saith, If you were offered Persecution for Reli∣gion, you ought to flye, and yet you intend to fight; if you would stand in the truth, ye ought to suffer like Martyrs, and you would slay like Ty∣rants: Thus for Religion you keep no Religion, and neither will follow the Counsel of Christ, nor the constancie of Martyrs. And a little after, he de∣mands why the people should not like that Religion which Gods Word esta∣blished,
the Primitive Church hath authorized, the greatest learned men of this Realm, and the whole consent of the Parliament have confirmed, and the Kings Majesty hath set forth, is it not truly set out?Sir John Cheek in, The true subject to the rebell p. 4 & 6. Dare you Commons take upon you more learning then the chosen Bishops and Clerks of this Realm have? This was the judgement of that judicious man. And I must tell you that Religion never taught Rebellion; neither was it the will of Christ, that Faith should be compelled by fighting, but perswaded by preaching; for the Lord sharply reproveth them that built up Sion with blood,Micah 3.18. and Hierusalem with iniquitie: and the practice of Christ and his Apostles was to reform the Church by prayers and preaching, and not with fire and sword; and they presse obedience unto our Governours; yea, though they were impious, infidels, and idolatrous,True religion never rebel∣leth. with arguments fetched from Gods ordinance, from mans conscience, from wrath and vengeance, and from the terrible sentence of damnation. And this truth is so solid, that it hath the clear testimony of holy Writ, the perpetual practice of all the Primitive Saints and Martyrs; and, I dare boldly say it, the unanimous consent of all the orthodox Bishops, and Catholick Writers, both in England and Ireland, and in all the world, That Christian Religion teacheth us never with any vi∣olence to resist, or with arms to withstand the authority of our lawful Kings. If you say, The Laws of our Land,Whether the Laws of our Land do war∣rant us to re∣bell. and the Constitutions of this our King∣dom, give us leave to stand upon our libertie, and to withstand all tyrannie that shall be offered unto us, especially when our estates, lives, and religion, are in danger to be destroyed. To this I say with Laelius, that Nulla lex valeat contra jus divinum,Laels de pri∣vileg Eccles. 112. Mans lawes can exact no further obedience then may stand with the observance of the divine precepts; and therefore we must not so preferre them, or relye upon them so much, as to prejudice the other: and for our fear of the losse of estate, life, or religion, I wish it may not be setled upon groundlesse suspi∣tions; for I know, and all the world may believe, that our King is a most clement and religious Prince, that never did give cause unto any of his sub∣jects to foster such feares and jealousies within his breast; and you know what the Psalmist saith of many men, They were afraid, where no fear was. And Job tells you, whom terrours shall make afraid on every side,Job 18.11, 12. and shall drive him to his feet; (that is, to runne away, as you see the Rebels do from the Kings Army in every place) and in whose Tabernacle shall dwell the King of fear: for, though the ungodly fleeth, when no man pursueth him; yet, they that trust in God are confident as Lyons, without fear; they know that the heart of the King is not in his own hand, but in the hand of the Lord,Prov 21.1. Bonav. ad se∣cundam dist. 35. art 2. qu. 1. as the rivers of waters, and he turneth it whithersoever it pleaseth him; either to save them, or destroy them, even as it pleaseth God; He ordereth the King how to rule the people. And therefore, in the name of God, and for Christ Jesus sake, let me per∣swade you to put away all causelesse fears, and groundlesse jealousies, and trust your King; if not, trust your God; and let your will, which is so un∣happy in it self, become right and equall, by receiving direction from the will of God; and remember what Ʋlpian the great Civilian saith, that Rebellion and disobedience unto your King, is proximum sacrilegio cri∣men, and that it is, in Samuel's judgement, as the sinne of witchcraft, where∣by men forsake God, and cleave unto the Devil: and above all,The remem∣brance of his Oath should be a terrour to the conscience of every Rebel. remem∣ber the oath that many of you have taken, to be true and faithful unto your King, and to reveal whatsoever evils or plots that you shall know or hear to be contrived against his Person, Crown, or Dignity, and defend him from them, Pro posse tuo, to the uttermost of your power, So help you God. Which Oath, how they that are any wayes assistant in a warre against their King, can dispence with, I cannot with all my wit and
learning understand: and therefore return, O Shulamite, , lay down thine arms, submit thy self unto thy Soveraign, and know, that as the Kings of Israel were merciful Kings,1 Kings 20.31. so is the King of England; thou shalt find grace in the time of need: but delay not this duty, est, as Demades saith the Athenians never sate upon treaties of peace, but in mourning weeds, when by the losse of their nearest friends, they had paid too dear for their quarrels, so thou be driven to do the like: for (ex∣cept the sinnes of the people require no lesse satisfaction, then the ruine of the Kingdom I am confident,The Authours confidence of the kings vi∣ctory. and am ready to hazard life and for∣tunes in this confidence, that the goodnesse of our King, the justnesse of his cause, and the prayers of all honest and faithful Ministers for him and our Church, will in the end give him the victorie over all those his rebellious enemies; that with lyes, slanders, and false imputations, have seduced the Kings subjects, to strengthen themselves against their Soveraign: and all the world shall see, that as Christ, so, in sensu modificato, this Vice∣gerent of Christ, shall rule in the midst of these his enemies, and shall reign untill he puts them all under his feet. A rebellion, that the like was never seen.And because we never read of any rebellion (not this of Corah here, which of above six hundred thousand men had not many more then 250. Rebels: nor that of Absolon against David, who had all the Priests and Levites, and the best Counsellors, and a mighty Army with him, such as was able to overthrow Absolon and twenty thousand men in the plain field: nor Israel against Rehoboam, because they did but revolt from him, and not with any hostile Arms invade him: nor the Senate of Rome against Caesar, though he was the first that intrenched upon their libertie, and intended to exchange their Aristo-democracie into a Monarchie: nor any other that I can remember, except that Councel which condem∣ned Christ to death) that was grown to that height, to be so absolute, and so perfect a Rebellion in all respects, as that a whole Parliament in a manner, and the major part of the Plebeians of a whole Kingdom, should make a Covenant with Hell it self, yea, and which is most considera∣ble, that (as I understand the beginning of this rebellion in this Kingdom of Ireland was) the Commonalty therein should so fascinate the Nobility, as to allure them so long to confirm their Votes, till at last they must be compelled in all things to adhere unto their conclusions; that they whose power was formerly most absolute without them, must now be subordinate unto them, that the strength of the people may defend the weaknesse of the Nobility from that desert, which they merited by their simplici∣ty, to be seduced to joyn with them to rebell against their King. Therefore, if any faction in any Parliament should thus combine against the Lord, and against his annointed, there is no question, but their re∣ducement to obedience, will make that Majesty, which shall effect it, more glorious to posterity, than were any of all his Predecessors. And therefore I say again, Return, O Shulamite, return, and remem∣ber I pray thee, remember, lest my words shall accuse thy conscience in the day of judgement, that we are often commanded in many places of the Scriptures, to obey our Kings; but in no place bidden, nor permitted to rise up and assist any Parliament against our King. If thou sayest, Thou dost not do it against thy King, but against such and such that do abuse the King; I told you before, that whosoever resisteth him that hath the Kings authority, resisteth the King: and therefore the whole world of intelligible men laugheth at this gullery, and he that dwelleth in the hea∣vens, shall laugh it to scorn; when with such equivocation men shall think to justify their rebellion; and I hope the people will not still remain so simple, as to think that all the Canon and the Musket shot which the enemies of a
King should make at him, must be understood to be for the safety of his person. And as neither private men, nor any Senate, nor Magistrate, nor Peers,That the Pope hath no power to licence any man to make war against the King. nor Parliament, can lawfully resist, and take Arms against their King; so neither Synod, nor Councel, nor Pope, have any power to depose, excom∣municate or abdicate; or to give immunities to Clergy, or absolution to subjects, thereby to free them from their duty and due allegiance, and to give them any colour of allowance to rebell, and make warre against their lawful King. And this point, I should the more largely prosecute, be∣cause the natives of this Kingdome are more addicted to the Pope and his Decrees, then any others of all the Kings Dominion.Pareus in Rom. 13. Johan. Bede, in the Right and Preroga∣tives of Kings. And the Trea∣tise intituled, God and the King. But the bulk of this Treatise is already too much swelled, and I hope I may have hereafter a fitter opportunity to inlarge this Chapter: and therefore till then, I will onely referre my Reader unto Pareus, John Bede, and abundance more, that have most plentifully written of this Argument. And so much for the persons against whom they rebelled, Moses their King, and Aaron their High-Priest, or chief Bishop; both these the prime Governours of Gods people, whom they ought by all laws to have obey∣ed, and for no cause to have rebelled against them. CHAP. XI. Sheweth what these Rebels did: How by ten several steps and de∣grees (1. Pride. 2. Discontent. 3. Envy. 4. Murmuring. 5. Hypocrisie. 5. Lying. 7. Slandering. 8. Rayling. 9. Dis∣obedience. 10. Resistance.) they ascended to the height of their Rebellion; and how these are the steps and the wayes to all Re∣bellions, and the reason which moveth men to rebell. 3. WE are to consider, Quid fecerunt, what these Rebels did.3. Part. What these Rebels did. Cajetan saith, Zelati sunt. Tirinus saith, Irritaverunt. The vulgar Latin saith, Aemulati sunt. Our vulgar English saith, They angred Moses: and our last English saith, They envied Moses. And indeed the large extent of the original word, and the diversity of the Translation of it, sheweth the greatnesse of their iniquity; and the multiformity or multiplicity of their sin: And therefore that you may truly understand it, you must look into the HistoryNumb. 16., and there you shall see the whole matter; the conception, birth, strength, and progresse of their sin: for, 1. This sinne was begotten by the seed of Pride; they conceived an opi∣nion of their own excellency. Excellency, that bewitcheth men to rebell, thinking that they are inferiour to none, equall to the best, if not supe∣riour unto all; and therefore they disdained to be governed, and aspi∣red to the government of Gods people: And then Pride, as the father,Pride the be∣ginning of re∣bellion. begat Discontentment as his eldest sonne; they liked not their own sta∣tion, but would fain be promoted to higher dignity; and because Mo∣ses and Aaron were setled in the government before them, and they knew not how either to be adjoyned with them, or advanced above them; therefore discontent begat Envy, and they began to pine away at their fe∣licity; and so our last English reads it, They envied Moses. 2. This sinne being thus conceived in the womb of the heart,Private meet∣ings do often produce mis∣chief. at last it commeth forth to birth at the mouth; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh: and they begin to murmure and mutter among
themselves, and, as Rebels use to have, they have many private meetings and conventicles among themselves, where they say, We are all good, we are all holy,2 Sam. 15.3, 4. and They are no better then we; and, as Absolon depra∣ved his fathers government, and promised justice and judgement, and golden mountains unto the people, if he were King: so do they traduce the present government with all scandalous imputations, and professe such a reformation, as would make all people happy, if they were but in Moses place, or made over him, or with him, the Guardians, and Protectors of Common-wealth. And so now you see this ugly monster, the son of Pride and Discontent∣ment, is born into the world, and spreads it self from the inward thought, to open words. Then Moses hears the voyce of this infant, which was not like the voyce of Jacob, but of the Serpent, which spitteth fire and poyson out of his mouth. And therefore lest this fire should consume them, and these mutterers prove their murderers; Moses now begins to look unto himself, and to answer for his brother: he calleth these rebels, and he telleth them, that neither he nor his brother had ambitiously usurped, but were lawfully called into those places; and to make this apparent to all Israel, he bad these rebels come out of their Castles to some other place, where he might safely treat and conferre with them; and that was to the Tabernacle of the Lord: that is, to the place where wisdom and truth resided, and was from thence published and spread to all the people, and there the Lord should shew them whom he had chosen. The wisdom of Moses.And here I do observe the care and wisdom of the Prophet, that at the first appearance of their design, would presently begin to protect his brother, before their rebellion had increased to any strength; for had he then delivered Aaron into their hands, his hands had been so weaken∣ed, that he had never been able afterwards to defend himself; to teach all Kings to beware, that they yield not their Bishops and Priests unto the desires of the people, which is the fore-runner of rebellion against them∣selves: for as King Philip told the Athenians, that he had no dislike to them,The witty tale of Demosthenes to save the O∣raturs: and to assure all Kings that if Aarons tongue, and the Pro∣phets pen, per∣swade not the conscience to yield obedi∣ence, Moses's power, and Jo∣shua's sword may subdue the people to subjection but never retain them long without rebel∣lion. Evil men grow worse, & worse. Vers. 12. Vers. 13. but would admit them into his protection, so they would deliver to him their Orators, which were the fomenters of all mischief, and the people were mad to do it; till Demosthenes told them, how the Wolf made the same Proposition unto the Sheep, to become their friends and prote∣ctors, so they would deliver their Dogs, which were the cause of all dis∣content betwixt them; and the Shee being already weary of their Dogs, delivered them all unto the Wolves, and then immediately the Wolves spa∣rd neither Sheep nor Lambs; but tore them in pieces without resistance: even so, when any King yieldeth his Bishops unto the peoples Votes, he may fear, ere long, to feel the smart of this great mistake. Therefore Moses wisely delivereth not his brother, but stoutly defendeth him, who he knew had no wayes offended them; and offered, if they came to a convenient place, to make this plain to all the people, But as evil weeds grow apace, and lewd sons will not be kept under, so the more Moses sought to suppresse this sinne, the faster it grew, and spread it self to many branches; from secret muttering, to open rayl∣ing; from inward discontent, to outward disobedience. They tell them plainly to their faces, they will not come, è Castris, from their strong holds, they accuse them falsely, that Moses their Prince aymed at nothing but their destruction; and to that end, had brought them out of a good land to be killed in the wildernesse, and contemning them most scornfully in the face of all the people, whatsoever Moses bids them do, they resolve to do the contrary.
So now Moses well might say with the Poet,Moses is in a strait. Fluctibus hic tumidus, nubi b bus ille mi∣nax. Quocunque aspicio, nihil est nisi pontus, & aether. And therefore it was high time this evil Weed should be rooted out, or else the good corn shall be choaked; these Rebels must be destroyed, or they will destroy the Governours of Gods people; and Moses now must wax angry, Nam debet amor laesus irasci, otherwise his meeknesse had been stu∣pidnesse, and his mercy had proved little better then cruelty; when as to spare the Wolfe, is to spoile the Sheep: and, because these great Rebels had with Absolon, by their false accusations of their Governours, and their subtle insinuations into the affections of the people, stole away the hearts of many men; therefore Moses must call for aid from Heaven, and say; Exsurgat Deus, And let him that hath sent me, now defend me: So God must be the decider of this dissention, as you may see he was in the next verse. And by this you find, Quid fecerunt, what these Rebels did; and how their sin was not Simplex peccatum, but Morbus cumulatus, a very Chaos, and an heap of confused iniquity: for here is, 1. Pride. 2. Discontent. 3. Envy. 4. Murmuring. 5. Hypocrisie. 6. Lying. 7. Slandering.The ten fold sin of rebels. 8. Rayling. 9. Disobedience. 10. Rebellion. A Monster indeed, that is a ten-headed, or ten-horned beast. 1. Pride, which bred the distraction in the Primitive Church,1. Pride. and will be the destruction of any Church, of any Common-wealth, was the first seed of their rebelllion; for the humble man will easily be governed, but the proud heart, like a sturdy Oak; will rather break then bend. 2. Discontent was the second step, and that is a most vexatious vice;2. Discontent for though contentation is a rare blessing, because it ariseth either from a frui∣tion of all comforts, as it is in the glorious, in Heaven;The poyson of discontent. or a not desiring of that which they have not, as it is in the Saints on earth; yet discontent is that which annointeth all our joyes with Aloes: for though life be naturally sweet, yet a little discontent makes its weary of our lives, as the Israelites, that loved their lives as well as any, yet for want of a little water, say, O that we had dyed in Aegypt. And Haman tells his wife,Hester. 5.13. that all the honour which the King and Queen shewed unto him, availed him nothing, so long as Mordecai refused to bow unto him. And discontent may as well invade the highest, as the lowest; for as none is so bare, but he hath some benefits; so none is so full,The commn condition of man to be ever wanting something. but he wanteth something: as the Israelites had Manna, but they wanted water; and when they had water, they wanted flesh; and this want made them discontented; so these Rebels had the dignity to be Levites, and to be Peers; of high pla∣ces, and heads of all their families, which was more then they deserved; but they wanted the honour to be Priests, and to be Kings, the chief Go∣vernours of Gods people, which they desired; and therefore were disconten∣ted, because their conceit was unsatiable, and their desires unsatisfied. 3. As Pride makes men discontented to be inferiour unto any,3 Envy. so Dis∣content makes them alwayes to envy their superiours: and therefore Envy is the third head of this monster, and the third step unto rebellion;How mon∣strous a sin is Envy. a most hateful vice before God and man, That I should pine away with grief, be∣cause God is gracious unto another; and I must be angry with God, because he will not be guided by me in the disposing of his favurs: and therefore Saint Augustine calleth this a devillish vice, which caused Cain to kill Abel;Gen, 4.8. Acts 7.9. the Patriarchs to sell Joseph; the Medes to molest Daniel; and the Nobility
of Jury to persecute good King David,Cyprian. in Serm. de Li∣vors. and to crucifie the sonne of David, Christ himself; Et ideo periêre, quia malucrunt Christo invidere quàm credere. And yet herein I must commend Envy, that, as the Poet saith, — Sit licèt injustus Livor, Though it be unjust to others, yet is it very just, to destroy them first that would destroy others; as the envy of these rebels did, Sampson-like, pull down the house upon their own heads; and will, most likely, bring destru∣ction unto those that follow them in rebellion. 4. Murmuring.4. Murmuring, is a secret discontented muttering one to another of things that we dislike, or persons that we distaste; and the very word in all languages seems as harsh unto our ears, as the sinne is hateful unto our souls: for in Greek it is called ; in Latin, Murmurare; in English, to Murmure; in Brittish, Grwgnach; a sad word, and a sowre sinne:Exod. c. 15. c. 16. c. 17. therefore the wise man saith, Beware of murmuring, which is no∣thing worth; and yet this sinne was frequent among the Israelites, (three times in three Chapters) that they could never leave it, till, as Saint Paul saith,1 Cor. 10. they were destroyed of the destroyer. 5. Hypocrisie.5. Hypocrisie is, when a man seems to be what he is not; for, as Saint Hierom saith, Qi foris Cato, intus Nero, hypocrita est; he that talks of peace, and prepares for warre; that protesteth loyalty, and yet hates his King; that in his words will advance the Church, but in his actions will overthrow the Church-men; that commends all piety, but commits all iniquity; that will not swear for a Kingdom, but deceipe for a penny; that pretends the safety of the Kings person, but purloyneth away all his power; that will bend his knee, and say, Hayle King, but will spit in his face, and crown him with thorns, he is an hypocrite: So these rebels say, they are all holy, they love all their brethren, they hate usurpation, and cannot endure the tyranny of these Governours; but indeed, though they cryed, Templum Domini, Templum Domini, all for the King, and all for the Church; all for Moses, and all for Aaron; yet notwithstanding this voyce of Jacob, they had the hands of Esau, and they would have brought Moses and Aaron to confusion, as they brought themselves to de∣struction. This is the property of an Hypocrite, and therefore Job speaking of an hypocrite, saith, (and it is excedingly well worth the observing) Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung; they which have seen him, (that is, they which came out to see his pomp and his greatnesse, and have admired at the greatnesse of his glory) shall say, Where is he? or, How chance he doth not ride on with his honour?Job 20.6, 7, 8, 9. Job answereth, The eye which saw him, shall see him no more; that is, in the like Majesty, neither shall his place any more behold him: for, He shall flee away as a dream, and shall not be found; yea, he shall be chased away as a vision in the night. And our Saviour know∣ing as well the cruelty, as the subtlety of hypocrites, biddeth us to beware of hypocrites:Matth. 7.15. as the Poet saith, —ut atri limina Ditis. Shun hypocrites as the gates of Hell,Hypocrisie, how odious it is. and believe their actions rather then their protestations: for, as in the Old Testament Sodom and Gomorrah are the patterns of all beastlinesse, so in the New Testament the greatest sinners are threatned to have their portion with the hypocrites. 6. Lying.6. Lying must follow Hypocrisie at the heels: for, were it not for the
heaps of lyes that hypocrites spread abroad, the world could not possibly be so easily seduced by their hypocrisie; and I read it in a Sermon of a learned Divine, That now adayes some phanatique Sectaries of desperate opinions, and despicable fortunes, (whom the Church and State find to be a malig∣nant party), having little else to do, make it their trade to lye both by whole sale, and retayle; they invent lyes, and vent lyes; they tell lyes, and write lyes, and print lyes; yea, I may adde, and more palpable lyes, and more abominable, then either Bourn or Butter ever published of the affairs of Germany; and this they do as confidently, and impudently, as if they were informed by that lying spirit, which entred as a Voluntier into Ahab's Prophets; and by lying, and raising false rumours, they beget jealousies and feares in the people, and by blowing the coales which themselves kind∣led, and inlarging the difference betwixt King and Parliament, they set all in a combustion, and bring all into confusion: and that which grieves me most, he saith, that they are Preachers, which in the exuberancie of their mis-grounded and mis-guided zeal, do both preach and pray against pub∣lique peace, as inconsistent with the Independencie, or rather Anarchie, that they ayme at. 7. Slandering may be coupled unto their Lying,7. Slandering. because we can slander none with that which is truth; therefore these Rebels say, All the Con∣gregation is holy, and that is a lye; when there can be no holinesse in the Rebels: and, The Lord is among them, which is another lye; for he will forsake all those that forsake him: then they say, Moses and Aaron take too much upon them, which is an apparent slander; and they adde, that they lifted up themselves above the Congregation of the Lord, which is another slander, as false as the Father of lyes could lay upon them; for I shew∣ed unto you before, how truly they were called, and how justly they be∣haved themselves in their places; but as Absolon knew well enough, that to traduce his Father's Government, was the readiest way to insinuate, and to winde himselfe into a good opinion among the people, and to make the King odious unto his subjects; so these, and all other Rebels, will be sure to lay load enough of lyes and slanders upon their Governours; and so the namelesse Authour of the Soveraign Antidote, Goodwin,Goodwin in his Anti-Caval. Buroughs in his Sermon upon, The glo∣rious name of the Lord of Hosts. Bur∣roughs, and abundance more, such scandalous, impudent, lying libels, have not blushed (which a man would think the brazen face of Satan could not chuse but do) so maliciously, and reproachfully, to lay to his Majesty's charge, the things which (as the Prophet saith) he never knew; and which all they that know the King, do know to be apparent lyes, and most abo∣minable slanders against the Lord's Vicegerent: but, Quid domini facient, audent cum talia fures? You know the meaning of the Poet, and you may know the reason why these grand Lyars, these impudent slanderers, do so impudently bely so good a King, so pious, and so gracious a Majesty; for, Lay on enough, Et aliquid adhaerebit, and throw dust enough in their faces; and let the Governours be never so good, the King as milde, and as unreproveable as Moses, and the Bishops like Aaron, the Saints of the Lord; yet some thing will stick in the opinion of the simple, that are not able to discern the sub∣tilty of those distractors. And as they diminish and undermine the credit and reputation of the best Governours, by no other engine then a lying tongue, and a false pen; so with the same instruments they do magnifie their own repute, and further their unjust proceedings, by deceiving the most simple with such equivocal lyes, as any sensible man might well wonder,A strange equivocation. that they should be so insensibly swallowed down; as, when they say, They fight
for him whom they shoot at; and they are for the King, when with all their might and main they strive to take away his power, to pull the sword out of his hand, and to throw his Crown down to the dust; which is so strange a kind of equivocation, as might well move men, with Pilate, to ask What is truth? which we can never understand, if any of these things can be true: which (as one saith most truly) is one of the absurdest gulleries that ever was put upon any Nation; much like that Anabaptist which I knew, that beat his wife almost to death,The tale of an Anabaptist. and said, He beat not her, but that evill spirit that was in her. Therefore the Lord hateth this abominable sinne, because it is unpossible the people should be so soon drawn into rebellion, if they did not credit these defamations: But the wise man tells us, that Stultus credit omni verbo; therefore no wise man will believe those false and wicked slanders, that such malicious Rebels do spread abroad against their King, Prince, or Priest, or any other Governour of Gods people. 8. Rayling.8. After they had thus slandered these good men, they fell to open rayl∣ing against them, as you may see, Num. 16.13, 14. For now they had eaten shame, and drunk after it; and therefore they cared not what they said; and so now we find how the Rebels deal with our King, and with our Bi∣shops too; with our Moses, and with our Aaron; for here in Ireland they re∣bell against their Soveraign, because he is no Papist, and will not counte∣nance the Papists as they desire: And in England, they rayle at him, and rebell against him, because they say, He is a Papist, and doth connive at Po∣pery, and hath a design to bring in Popery into the Kingdome, which is as flat a lye as the father of lyes hath ever invented. So the Bishops here are driven out of all, (as my self am expelled, aedibus & sedibus, and left de∣stitute of all relief) because we are no Papists, but do both preach and write against their errours, as much as any, and more learnedly then many others. And in England we are persecuted, and driven to flee from place to place, or to take our place in a hard prison, (as my self have been often for∣ced to flee, and to wander in the cold and dark long nights) because we are Papists, and Popishly given: Good God! what shall we do, whither shall we go, or what shall we say? for, Nusquam tuta fides, — nec hospes ab hospite tutus. We cannot confide in the confiders, to whom we are become malignant ene∣mies for speaking truth; neither dare we trust in the followers of the publique faith, nor in the professors of the Catholique faith; whereof, men malici∣ously rejecting their godly Bishops, rebelliously fighting against their lawful King, and mortally wounding their own souls, have made a shipwrack. But, If they called the Master of the house Beelzebub, if they said he was a glutton, and a drunkard, what wonder if they say these things of us? and if Christ the King of Kings was crucified between two Thieves, what marvel if this servant of Christ, our King, be thus pressed, opposed, and abused betwixt two rebellious factions? And when we see our Saviour, and our King thus handled, it is lesse strange to find the Bishops and the Priests per∣secuted and crucified betwixt two heretical and tyrannical parties. Well, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, take heed lest the King of peace shall say unto thee, Verily, thou shalt see me no more, till thou sayest, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. 9 Disobedi∣ence.9. When they were grown thus impudent, from bad to worse, both o∣ver shooes and over boots, then Disobedience must needs follow; and there∣fore now putting on their brazen foreheads, they tell Moses plainly, We will not come to thee; we will do nothing that thou willest, but will
crosse thee in all that thou intendest: this is our most peremptory reso∣lution. And so we see, that, Nemo repentè fit pessimus, but the wicked grow worse and worse: first you must lend, then you must give, if not, we will take; or if you deny your goods, we will have your bodies: so at first, what soever we do, it is for the King; and, because this is so palpable a mockery, that as every man knoweth, they that fight against the Earl of Essex, and his Army, do warre against the Parliament; so they that fight against the Kings Army, do as certainly war against the King; then we grow so im∣pudent, as to justifie any rebellion against our King; as in England, Good∣win, and that seditious Pamphleter, in opening The glorious name of the Lord of Host, do but a little lesse: For which application of Gods glori∣ous name, and abusing the holy Scriptures, to such abominable transgres∣sion of Gods holy Precepts, to instigate the subjects to warre against their Soveraign, and to involve a whole Kingdom into a detestable distraction: I do much admire that they are not apprehended, and transferred to the Kings Bench Barre, to be there arraigned, and condemned to be punished according to their deserts. 10. When these Rebels had proceeded thus far,10. Rebellion. See the place. Jshua 1.16, 17, 18. then contrary to the loyal obedience which they owed unto their Prince, and which the people promise unto Joshua, they ascended to the height of that odious rebellion, which may not unfitly be called Monstrum, horrendum, informe, ingens, cui lumen ademptum, and is (as Thucydides saith). All kind of evill; Et qui facit, peccatum non facit, sed ipse totus est peccatum: and therefore Samuel saith, that Rebellion is as the sinne of Witchcraft, when men do confederate to give their souls unto the Devill; for now these Rebels are ready to take arms against Moses, and they had reduced all civill order to a confused pari∣tie, deposed and destroyed their Governours, if the Governour of all the world, by whom Kings do reign, and who hath promised to defend them, had not prevented the same from Heaven. And the reason why they did all this,The reason of their rebellion and proceeded thus farre against Moses and Aaron, is intimated in the words of my Text, Aemulati sunt, because they would emulate or imitate Moses, that is, to play the Moses, or play the King, and play the part of the chief Priest themselves; for this is certain, that none will envy, murmure at, slander, and disobey his King so farre, as to make an open rebellion against him, but they that in some sort would rule and be Kings themselves; especially when they shall seek, so farre to debilitate their Prince, as that he shall be no wayes able to make resistance; for they think, If Treason prosper, 'tis no Treason; what's the reason? if it prosper, who dares call it Treason? and none would disobey their Bishops or chief Priests, but they that would, and cannot be Bishops themselves; because pride and ambition are the two sides of that bellowes, which blowes up disobedience and rebellion. But they that are bad servants, will prove worse Masters; they that will not learn how to obey can never tell how to rule; and if Moses were, as these Rebels suggested, a Tyrant; yet the Philosopher tells us, we had better endure one Tyrant, then, as they were, 250. Tyrants. And the Homily of the Church tells us, that contrary to their hopes, God never suffers the greatest treasons or rebellions for any long time to prosper. Therefore, when under loyal pretences, we see nothing but studied mischiefs, and most crafty endeavours to innovate our government, or to imbroyle the Kingdom in a civil warre, that so they may fish in a troubled water; let us never be so stupid, as to secure them in these actions, to produce
our discredit for our simplicity, and destruction for our disloyalty; but ra∣ther let us leave them as Delinquents, to the justice of our Lawes, and the mercy of the King; and this will be the readiest way to effect peace and happinesse to our Nation. CHAP. XII. Sheweth where the Rebels do hatch their Rebellion: The heavy, and just deserved punishments of Rebels: The application, and conclusion of the whole. 4. Part. Where they did la this.4. WE are to consider, Ʋbi fecerunt, where they did all this; in ca∣stris, non in templis; that is, in their own houses, not in the house of God: for in Gods house we teach obedience to our Kings, and beat down rebellion in every Kingdom; this is the Doctrine of the Church. But in our houses, in our cabins and corners, in private Coventicles, they teach rebellion,Our houses are our Castles which is the doctrine of those Schools. And these Schools are called Castra, Tents, or Castles; because indeed every man's house is his Castle, or his Fort, where he thinks himselfe sure enough; so did these Rebels, and they would not come out of them: neither Moses the King could compell them, nor Aaron the Priest could perswade them, to come out of their Castles, and forsake their strong holds, which their guilty consciences would not permit them to do: and so all other rebels will ne∣ver be perswaded to forsake their places of strength, untill God pulleth them, as he did these Rebels, out of their holes: for, were it not for these Castra, the Cities and Castles that they possesse, they could not so (like subtle Foxes) run out and in, to nullifie the property, and to captivate the liberty of the Kings faithful subjects, as they do; for, though they do all this under those fair pretences, for the defence of the true reli∣gion, the maintenance of our liberties, and the property of our estates: yet for our Religion, it is now amongst us, as it was in the days of Saint Ba∣sil,Basilius de Spiritu Sancto, cap. ult. , Every one is a Divine; and then , &c. All the bounds of our forefathers are transgressed, foundation of doctrine, and fortification of discipline is rooted up; and the innovators which never had any other imposition of hands, but what they laid upon themselves, have matter enough to set forward their sedition: And for the other pretences, I dare procaim it to all the world, that mine own experience believeth, the liberty of the subjects, and the property of our goods, and the true Protestant Religion, could not possibly be more abu∣sed, then it hath been by them that came, in the name, and for the service of the Parliament: and therefore I would to God, that all the oppressions, injustice, and imprisonments, that have been made since the beginning of this Parliament, were collected and recorded in a Book of remembrance, that all the world might see and read the justice and equity of our Parlia∣ment, and the iniquity, oppression, and rapine of them, that to enrich themselves,How the Par∣liament Re∣bes have in∣riched them∣selves in Ire∣land. deprive us of our estates and liberties, and that under the Parliaments name. For I hear, that as many have been impoverished, so many both the Lords and Commons in this Kingdom of Ireland, that, before the conjunction of these malevolent martial Planets, were very low at an ebbe, and their names very deep in many Citizens books, have now wiped off all scores, paid all their debts, and clad themselves in Silks and Scarlet, but with the extorted moneys, and the plundered goods of the
loyal subjects: I hope it is not so in England. Yet, as Platina tells us, that when the Guelphes and the Gibilines,Platina's story of the Guelphs and Gibelines. in the City of Papia, were at civil discord; and the Gibilines promised to one Fa∣cinus Caius, all the goods of the Guelphes, if he assisted them to get the vi∣ctory, which he did; and after he had subdued the Guelphes, he seized up∣on the goods of both; and when the Gibilines complained that he brake his Covenant, to pillage their goods, Caius answered, that, Themselves were Gibilines, but their goods were Guelphs, and so belonged unto him: So both in England and Ireland, I see the Parliament-Forces, and the Rebels, (I hope contrary to the will of the Parliament) make little difference betwixt Papist and Protestant, the well-affected and disaffected; for, they cannot judge of their affections, but they can discern their estates, and that is the thing which they thirst after; Haud ignota cano. But you will say, These are miseries unavoidable, accidents common to all warre, when neither side can excuse all their followers. I answer, Woe be to them therefore that were the first suggesters and procurers of this warre, and cursed be they that are still the incendiaries, and blow the coales, for the continuance of these miserable distractions. I am sure, his Majesty was neither the cause, nor doth he desire the pro∣longing thereof for the least moment; but, as his royal Father was a most peaceable Prince, so hath he shewed himself in all his life, to follow him passibus aequis, and to be a Prince of peace: though, as the God of peace is likewise a man of warre, and the Lord of Hosts; so this peaceable Prince, when his patience is too much provoked, can (as you see) change his pen for a sword, and turn the mildnesse of a Lamb into the stoutnesse of a Lyon; and you know what Solomon saith, that The wrath of a King is the messenger of death, especially when he is so justly moved to wrath, And so much for the particulars of this Text. 2. Having fully seen the uglinesse of this sin,2. The punish∣ment of these rebels. you may a little view the greatnesse of the punishment: for, Although I must confesse, we should be slow to anger, slow to wrath, yet when the Magistrate is disobeyed, the Minister despised, and God himself disclaimed, it makes our hearts to bleed, and our spirits angry within us: yea, though the King were as gentle, and as meek as Moses, the meekest man on earth; and the Bishops as holy as Aaron,Tirinus in . Psal. the Saint of the Lord: yet such disobedience and rebellion, would anger Saints; for so Tiri∣nus faith, Irritaverunt, They angred Moses in their Tents, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord: Nay more then this, they angred God himself, so farre that fire was kindled in his wrath, and it burned to the bottom of hell. And as these rebels were Lords and Levites, Clergy and Laity; so God did proportion their punishments according to their sinnes: for the Le∣vites, that were to kindle fire upon Gods Altar, and should have been more heavenly, and those two hundred and fifty men which usurped the Office of the Priests; He sent fire from heaven to devour them; and the Nobility that were Lay-Lords, the Prophet tells you, The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the Congregation of Abiram. A most fearful example of a just judgement: for to have seen them dead upon the earth, as the Aegyptians upon the shore, had been very lamentable; but to see the earth opening, and the graves devouring them quick, was most lamentable, and so strange, that we never read of such revenge taken of Is∣rael; never any better deserved: and which is more, Saint Basil saith,Basilius hom. 9. quòd descenderunt in infernum damnatorum, they fell into the very pit of the dam∣ned; which doleful judgement, though they well deserved it, yet I will leave that undetermined.
And if these rebels, proceeding not so farre, whatsoever they intended, as to offer violence, and to make an open warre against Moses, were so hea∣vily plagued for the Embrio of their rebellion, what tongue shall be able to expresse the detestation of that sin, and the deserts of those Rebels, that by their subtilty and cruelty, would bring a greater persecution upon the Church, then any that we read since the time of Christ, and by a desperate disobedience to a most Gracious King, would utterly overthrow a most flourishing State? A rebellion and persecution; the one against the King, the other against the Church, that in all respects can scarce be parallel'd from the beginning of the world, to this very day. And therefore except they do speedily repent with that measure of re∣pentance, as shall be in some sort proportionable to the measure of their transgression, I fear God in justice will deal with them as he did with the Jews, deliver them into the hand of their Enemies, that will have no com∣passion upon young man or maiden,2 Chron. 36 17. old man, or him that stoopeth for age; or ra∣ther as he did with Pharaoh King of Aegypt, deliver them up to a repro∣bate sense, and harden their hearts, that they cannot repent, but in their folly and obstinacy still to fight against Heaven, untill the God of heaven shall overthrow them with a most fearful destruction; the which I pray God, they may foresee in time, and repent, that they may prevent it, that God may be still merciful unto us, as he useth to be to those that love his Name. And so much for the words of this Text. The applica∣tion of all.Now to Apply all in brief: if God shall say to any Nation, I will send them a King in my wrath, and give them Lawes not good: let them take heed they say not, We will take him away by our strength: for we have read, that He hath authority to give us a King in his displeasure, but you shall never read, that we have authority to disobey him at our plea∣sure, and to say, Nolumus hunc regnare super nos: or, if any do, let them know, that he which set him up, and setled him over them, is able to pro∣tec him against them; and they that struggle against him, do but strive against God; and therefore they have no better remedy, then to pray to God, which hath the hearts of all Kings in his hand; that he would, as the Psalmist saith, Give the King his judgements, and his righteousnesse unto the King's Son, that he would either guide his heart aright, and direct his feet to the way of peace: or as he hath sent him in his fury, so he would take him away in his mercy. But for our selves of these Islands we have a King, and I speak it here in the sight of God, and as I shall answer for what I say at the dreadful judgement, not to flatter him that hears me not, but to in∣form those of you that know him not so well as I, that had the happinesse to live with my ever honoured Lord, the Noble Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, 16, or 17. years in the Kings house, and of them 6, or 7. years in the Kings service, He is a most just, pious, and gracious King; and I believe, the best Protestant King that ever England or Ireland saw, neither Popishly affected, nor Schismatically led to disaffect, but most constantly resolved to be a true Defender of that true Protestant Faith, which is established by Law in the Church of England, and he is such a King, of so un∣blameable a life, so spotlesse in all his actions, so clement, and so meek towards all men, and so merciful towards his very enemies, that the mouth of Envy cannot truly taxe him, nor malice it self disprove him in any thing. Yet we know, that as Moses the meekest among men, and David the best of Kings, were sore afflicted, slandered, and persecu∣ted, not a little, by many of their own obliged subjects; yea, and the best Kings have had the greatest troubles; so this good King, hath had for his trial a great part of the like usage, I know not by whom,
neither do I intend here to accuse others, but to instruct you, and by what I shewed out of this Text, to teach you above all, to take heed of disobedience and Rebellion towards your King: and to let you understand, that what priviledges in the New Testament are acknowledged to be due to Heathen Princes, and what prerogatives the spirit of God hath in the Old Testament warranted unto the Jewish Kings, and what the univer∣sal Law of Nature, hath established upon all the supreme Governours, do all of them appertain by unquestionable right unto his most sacred Majesty; and yet His Majesty, out of His incomparable goodnesse, insisteth not to challenge all these, but vouchsafeth to accept of those Rights and Prero∣gatives, which are undoubtedly afforded him by the Lawes of His own Lands: and these come farre short, scarce the moity of the other; be∣cause we know, if our Historians have not deceived me, how many of them were obtained, by little better then by force and violence, compel∣ling Kings to consent unto them; whereas Lawes should be of a freer nature. And therefore of all the Nations round about us, besides, that God hath intrusted Him with us all, we have most reason to intrust him, and to give credit unto his Majesties many Protestations (too high to be forgotten by him, or misdoubted by us) for his resolution, to maintain the Liberty of his Subjects, the just Priviledges of Parliaments, and the true established Religion in the Kingdome of England: and likewise to rule over us accor∣ding to our Laws, in this Realm of Ireland. And we have least reason to re∣bell and take arms against him; and therefore let us not be perswaded by any means by any man to do it, because God will preserve his annointed, and will, as you see, plague the Rebels; but let us pray for our King, and praise God night and day, that he which might have given us a bramble, not on∣ly to tear our flesh, but also to set us all on fire, hath given us such a Ce∣dar, such a gracious, and a pious King; and, if either forreign foes, or dome∣stique Rebels, do presse him so, that he hath need of us, let us adde our help, and hazard our lives to defend and protect him that protecteth us; and suffereth all for the protection of Gods service, as it was established in the purest time of Reformation, and for the preservation of our Laws from any corrupt interpretation, or arbitrary invasion upon them, by those factious men, that under fair, yet false pretences, have, with wondrous sub∣tilty, and with most subtle hypocrisie, seduced so many simple men, to par∣take with them, not onely to overthrow the true Religion, to imbase the Church of Christ, that hitherto hath continued glorious in this Nation, and by trampling the most learned under feet, to reduce Popery into this Kingdom, and to bring in Atheism or Barbarism into our Pulpits, when they make their Coach-men, and Trades-men, like Jeroboam's Priests, the basest of the people, to become their Trencher-Chaplains, and the teachers of those poor sheep, for whom the Son of God hath shed his precious blood, but also to change the well-setled government, and to subvert the whole fabrick of this famous Common-wealth, either by their tyranny, or bringing all into an Anarchie; for if we have any regard of any of these things, either true Religion, or ancient Government; a gracious King, and a learned Clergy; a glorious Church, and a flourishing Kingdom; we ought not to spare our goods, or be niggards in our contributions to help his Majesty: yea, as Debora saith, To help the Lord against the mighty; Or, if we be cold and carelesse herein, penurious and tenacious of our worldly pelfe, preferring our gold before our God; or fearing grace∣lesse Rebels more then we love our gracious King: It may fall out, as Saint Augustine saith, Quod non capit Christus, rapit fiscus; or as it did with the Carthaginians, who because they would not assist Han∣niball with some reasonable proportion of their estates, they lost all
unto the Romans, and with the Constantinopolitans, that for denying a little to Paleologus, lost all unto the Turkes; so we may be robbed and pil∣laged of all, because we would not part with some; and I had rather the King should have all I have, then that the Rebels should have any part thereof. Therefore I hope I shall perswade all good men to honour God with their riches, and to assist His Majesty to the uttermost of their powers, even to the hazard, and to the losse both of liberty and life. And doing this, our God which is the King of Kings, will blesse us, and defend us from all evill, and make us Kings and Priests, to live with him for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all praise, and glory, and dominion, from hence∣forth for evermore. Amen. Amen. Hester 4.16, If I perish, I perish. Yet, Esdras 4.41. The truth is great, and will prevail. Jehovae Liberatori.
TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY. Most Gracious Sovereign, THough the wisest man in all the Kingdom of Persia saith, Great is the truth and stronger then all things; Yet, the father of lies hath now plaid his part so well, that, as the Prophet saith, Truth is fallen in the Street, and Equity cannot en∣ter in; And your Majesty, whom the God of Truth hath anointed his sole Vicegerent, to be the Supreme Protector of them both, in all your Dominions, hath accordingly lifted up your Stan∣dard against their Enemies; and I may truly say of you, as Menevensis saith of that most Noble King Alfred. Si modò victor erat, ad crastina bella pavebat. Si modò victus erat, ad crastina bella parabat. Neither do I believe, that Lucan's Verse can be ap∣plied to any man better than to your Majesty: — Non te videre superbum Prospera fatorum, nec fractum adversa videbunt.
As the height of your glory and prosperity never swelled your Pious heart, so your greatest crosses and adversities never dejected your Royal spirit; But as the Prophet saith of the Captain of the hoast of the Lord, so I say to you that are his Lieftenant, Ride on with your honor, or, ride prosperously, Because of the word of truth, of meekness, and righteousness, the people shall be sub∣dued unto you; and because the King putteth his trust in the Lord, and in the mercy of the most Highest, he shall not miscarry; especially, while he fighteth, as he doth, the battail of the Lord, in defence of the Church of Christ, who hath promised to be his shield and buckler; which is the daily faithful prayer of Your Majestie's most loyally devoted Subject, and most faithfully obliged servant Gryffith Ossory.
THE DISCOVERY OF MYSTERIES. OR, The Plots and practices of a prevailing Faction in this present Parliament, to overthrow both Church and State. CHAP. I. Sheweth the Introduction; the greatness of this Rebellion; the Original thereof; the secret plots of our Brownistical faction; and the two chifest things that they aymed at to effect their Plot. I Have long wandered in a region of Rebellion, a∣mong seduced Subjects, and discontented Peers; and now at last, after I had passed the raging Seas; and very hardly escaped the storms and dangers of the surging waves, I am arrived in my native soyle: where I find my self incompassed with far greater storms and more violent winds then ever I thought could be on any Land; for though that Grand Rebellion, which you may find lately described, was both magna & mira, very great and very grievous, such as I supposed could not be exceeded by any humane malice; yet now (me thinks) I hear the Spirit saying unto me as he did unto Ezkiel, Son of man stand up, and I will show thee grea∣ter abominations; and a Rebellion far greater and more odious then either Popish, Irish, or any other Sect or Nation of the World hath hitherto pro∣duced; and therefore I may now say with the Poet,
Barbara Pyraemidum sileat miracula Memphis. Let proud Babylon cease to boast Of her Pyramid's stately spires; This Rebellion is more strange, Surmounting all infernal fires: No age the like hath ever bred, Nor shall when these Rebels be dead. The seed and original of this Rebel∣lion.The seed of it was unseasonably sown in the Northern storm; and the Original of those Boreal blasts (either why or by whom those spirits were raised) is not so well known to me; therefore how justly the King did un∣dertake the quarrel, I will not at this time determine; or with what equi∣ty the Scots made their approach into England, it is not my purpose to discuss: yet I must needs say, that our English Sectaries, and Amsterdam Recusants, which hated our Church and loved not our King, justum, quia justum, only because he is so good, too good for them, did from hence arripere ansam, take hold of this opportunity, by procuring those to pro∣ceed that were coming on, and discouraging the others of the Kings side, that were Cowardly enough (to say no worse) of themselves, to betray both King and Kingdom into the hands of the Invaders. So the good King was now with King David brought into a strait, either to take counsel and follow the advice of those secret Sectaries,So now I fear more the secret enemies both of Church and State, that may luk in Court, then those that lie in the Earl of Essex his Camp. and the masked enemies both of the Church and State, that as yet insensible unto him, were such, in the bosome of his Court, and most slily aymed at a fur∣ther mischief then his Majesty could have imagined, as now it appear∣eth by the consequences of this Parliament; or, else to hazard the dan∣gers that his then open foes were like to bring upon his people: And I assure my self, eyes of flesh, that cannot pierce into the mysteries of the hearts and our secret thoughts, could see no further, nor make any better election then His Majesty did; that is, to call a Parliament, which the hearts of all the Kingdom called and cryed for; and which, in former times, by the wise institution and right prosecution thereof, was found to be the Pancreston, or, as the Weapon salve, an antidote to cure all the diseases, and to heal all the bleeding wounds of this Kingdom, (though of late we have sensibly felt the unhappy ending of some of them, which perhaps may be some accidental cause of some part of this unhap∣piness:) here was His Majesties fair mind, and an act of special grace; for which all His Subjects ought most thankfully to shew themselves Loy∣al unto Him, when He preferred their safety before the prosecuting of his own resolutions. But, Decipimur specie recti, we are many times deceived by the sha∣dow of the truth, and betrayed under the vizard of virtue; for, as God produceth light out of darkness, and good out of evil; so wicked men, like the spiders, do suck poyson from those flowers, whence the Bees do ex∣tract honey; and these subtle-headed Foxes (whereof many of them had unduly got themselves elected into the House of Commons, and there fa∣ctiously combined themselves together to do their great exploit, to over∣throw the Government both of Church and Sate, and minded to make the Parliament-House like Vulcans Forge, where they intended to contrive their Iron-net, that should be able to hold fast all sorts of people, from him that sitteth upon the Throne, to him that wallowed in dust and ashes) turned the hopes of our redresses to our extream miseries, when, in stead of rectifying our abuses, they intended principally to work our ruine in our just apprehension, though perhaps our happiness in their own mistaken conception.
And, as the Apostle saith, Known unto God are all his works from the begin∣ning, and he hath eternally decreed, how, and by what means, to bring them all unto perfection; so the Devil, being God's Ape, and the wicked treading in his steps, do first mold their designs, and intentions in the Idea of their own brains, and conclude the works they would have done in their own conceits, and then they frame to themselves the means and wayes, whereby they are resolved to produce and perfect all those mis-shapen em∣bryoes that they conceived; and so these factious men, this brood of vi∣pers, that would gnaw through the bowels of their mother, from the first convention of this Parliament had resolved upon their plot, and contrived among themselves, what great good work they would by such and such means bring to passe. And that was (as I hope this subsequent discourse will make it plain to all,The design  plot of the fa∣ction of Sea∣ries. that will not be wilfully blind) the subversion of the ancient government both of this Church and Kingdom; and to introduce a new Ecclesiastical Di∣scipline, and to frame a new Common-wealth, much like, if not worse than that of our neighbours in the Low-Countries. Gratum opus agricolis; a brave exploit, and a great work indeed, beyond the adventure of Junius Brutus, that expelled the Kings, but left the Priests alone; that purged the corruption of the Royal Government, but meddled not with the Religion of their Bishops and Prophets: and beyond the un∣dertaking of Martin Luther, that pulled down the pride of the Pope, and all that Romish Hierarchy; but ventured not to trample upon the Septer of Kings, and the Imperial Government, which he held Sacred, and inviolably to be obeyed; For, these men perceiving how God had so wisely ordered these Governments among his people, to assist each other, that the one can neither stand nor fall without the other, (as it is fully and truly shewed in the Grand Rebellion;) therefore as Caligula wished that the people of Rome had but one neck, that so he might dispatch them all, uno ictu, with one stroke; So these men would overthrow both Government, and destroy both King and Priest, both Church and State, at one time, with one clap, with one thunder-bolt: And so they should be famous indeed, though it were but like the fame of Herostratus, that burnt the Temple of Diana, or of Raviliac, that killed the King of France; of Nero, that destroyed his mo∣ther; or Oedipus that murdered his own father; for a man may be as noto∣riously famous for transcendent villanies, and nefarious impieties, as ano∣ther is for his rare vertues, and super-eminent deeds of piety; As in History Thersites is as well known for his base Cowardice, as Achilles for his heroick Valour: And in the Scripture, Judas for his Treachery is as notoriously known, as Saint Peter for his Fidelity. Therefore these men go on with this great Design; and to effect the same, I find that they aimed at these two special things. 1. To take away all the lets and impediments that might hinder them.They aimed at two things. 2. To secure unto themselves all the helps and furtherances that might advantage them. For, 1. As a Vineyard that is well hedged,1. To remove the impedi∣ments of their design. or a City strongly fenced with walls and bulwarks, cannot easily be laid wast and spoiled, before these defences be destroyed; so the wilde Boars cannot devour the grapes of God's Church, and swallow down the Revenues of her Governours; and the Re∣bels cannot pull the Sword out of their Soveraigns hand, and lay his Crown down in the dust; so long as the means of their preservations are intire and not removed: Therefore these men endeavour to eradicate all the impe∣diments of their Design. And they saw four great Blocks, that were as four mighty Mountains, which their great Faith (their publick faith being not yet conceived) must remove, before they could plant their new
Church, and subvert the old Government of this Kingdom: and those were; 1. The Earl of Straffords Head. Four impedi∣ments of their Design.2. The free judgement of the Judges. 3. The power of dissolving the Parliament. 4. The Bishops votes in the House of the Lords. For, as the heavenly Angels could do nothing against Sodom, while righteous Lot was in it; so these earthly angels, the messengers of Abad∣don, can never effect their ends, to overthrow the Church and State, to make them as Sodom, full of all impurity and villany, until these four main stops be taken away: And therefore; CHAP. II. Sheweth the eager prosecution of our Sectaries, to take off the Earl of Straffords head. How he answered for himself. The Bishops right of voting in his cause. His excellent vertues, and his death. 1. Impediment.1. THey get Master Pym, the grand father of all the purer sort, and a fit instrument for this Design, in the name of the House of Com∣mons,The Earl his Charge. and thereby of all the Commonaly of England, to charge Thomas, Earl of Strafford, of High-Treason; A high charge indeed, and yet no lesse a crime could serve the turn, to turn him out of their way; because nothing else could subdue that spirit, by which he was so well able to discover the plots, and to frustrate the practices of all the faction of Sectaries; for as the Jews were no wayes sufficient to answer Saint Stephen's arguments, but only with stones; so these men saw themselves unable to confute his reasons, and to subdue his power, but only by putting him to death, and cutting off his head, for that fault which Pym alleadged he had com∣mitted. But then, I demand, How this great charge of High Treason shall be made good against him? How sought to be proved.It is answered, That England, Scotland, and Ireland, and every corner of these three Kingdoms must be searched, and all discontented persons that had at any time any Sentence, though never so justly pronounced against them, by him that was so great a Judge, yet conceited to be otherwise by themselves; must now be incouraged and countenanced by the faction, and most likely by this grand Accuser, to say all that they know, and perhaps more than was true, against him; for what will not envy and malice say? or what beast will not trample upon the Lion, when they see him grovel∣ling and gasping for life in an unevitable pit, and, it may be, compassed with so many mastiff dogs (I mean his enemies, and discontented witnesses) as were able to tear more than one Lion all to pieces? So by this means they are enabled to frame near thirty Articles against him, ut, cum non prosint singula, multa juvent, that the number might amaz the people, and think him a strange creature, that was so full of heynous offences, and so com∣passed with transgressions. But, Si satis accusâsse, quis innocens? If accusations were sufficient to create offenders, not a righteous man could escape on earth: therefore, the Law condemneth no man before he be heard,The Earl his Answer. what he can answer for himself: And the Earl of Strafford coming to his Answer, made all things so clear, in the Judgement of the common-hearers, and answered to every Article so well, that, his enemies being Judges, they much applauded his abilities, and
admired at his Dexterity, whereby he had so finely untied those Gordian knots, that were so fouly contrived against him, and, as his friends conceived, had fairly escaped all those iron-nets, which his adversaries had so cunning∣ly laid, and my popular country-man, with the rest of the more learned Lawyers, had so vehemently prosecuted to insnare him in the links and traps of guiltiness; and, in brief, the Lords, who as yet were unpoisoned by the leavened subtilty of this bitter Faction, could find not any one of all those Articles to be Treason, by any Law that was yet established in this Land, sic te servavit Apollo; So God delivered him, as he thought, and his friends hoped, out of all these troubles. Yet, as a rivulet stopped, will at last prove the more violent,The nature of malice. viresque ac∣quirit ibidem, and recollect a greater strength in the same place; so rage and malice, hindered of their revengeful desires, will turn to be the more im∣placable; Quia malitia corum excaecavit eos, Because the malice of men be∣witcheth them, and hath no end, till it makes an end of its hated foe; there∣fore those men, that hated and maligned the Earl (like the Jews, that be∣cause their tongues could make no reply to the just defence of the holy Martyr, gnashed upon him with their teeth, and stopping their ears,Acts 7.51. ran upon him with one accord, all at once) because they had no Law, nor learning, to make those Articles Treason, they say with the Poet, Hac non successit, aliâ aggrediemur viâ; Seeing we failed herein, we will attempt another way: And to that end, they frame a Bill of Attainder against him; and this, if it passe by the ma∣jor part of both Houses, and have the Royal assent, will bring him to his just deserved death; And herein, I will not say, they shewed themselves worse than the Jews, because that, when their malice was at the highest pitch against Christ, they said, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die; and these haters of the Earl, seeing they had no Law, will have a Law, to be made, that shall bring him unto his death; because the House might have reasons, which my sense cannot conceive. Yet some of his friends have said, that, after a former prosecution accor∣ding to Law, to make a new Law, where there was none before, to take a∣way a mans life, is almost as bad as the Romancy-Law, that I read of,The rubs of the Bill how taken away. to hang him first, and then judge him afterward, to which I assent not: and not many lesse than 60. worthy Members of the House of Commons would never yield to passe that Bill; and it had a greater rub among the Lords, where, it is thought not upon any slight conjectures, it had never passed, but that this rub must be taken away by a new device; for that the Faction judging some of them might be more timorous than malicious, and remem∣bring, that primus in orbe deos fecit timor, Fear is a powerful passion, that produceth many strange effects, the Apprentices and Porters, Water-men and Car-men, and all the rascal rout of the ragged Regiment were gather∣ed together by some Chedorlaomer, and came, as they did against Christ, with swords and staves, without order, with great impudency, to awe them, and to cry for Justice against him; and this was done, and done again, and again, until the business, that they came for, was done: A course, not pre∣vented, that may undo all Justice, and bring us all to be undone. And yet all this will not do this deed, until the King passeth His assent; for as yet the new Law of Orders and Ordinances without the King,The Kings great pains to search out the truth. was not hatched; And the good King, having so graciously, so indefatigably taken such care and such pains, in his own Person every day, to hear and see all that could be laid unto his charge, and how he had answered each particular, was so just, and of such tender and religious conscience, that he was not satisfied (as men conceived) with the weight of those reasons that
were produced, to passe the same. Therefore here I find another Strata∣gem used, such as Hannibal could not invent, to effect this hard task: What? To perswade mildness to become severe, or to cause a just, and most clement Prince, so full of mercy, so proue to pardon where there is a fault, and so loth to punish, but where he must (by the Law of Justice) the great∣est fault, to yield to put him to death, that was in many things so excellent in his life. The task was, to procure his assent to passe this Bill; and how shall this be done? As the Man of God could not be perswaded by any man, but by a Man of God, a Prophet by a Prophet; so now the Bishops that were good men, men of conscience, and set apart by God to resolve and satisfie weak and tender consciences, are thought fit to be sent unto this good King, to perswade him, (as men supposed) that, to prevent a greater mischief, he might justly passe this Bill; and either 6. or 4. of the prime Prelates, are requested by the Lords, to go unto the King, to assay how far they can prevail with him herein: And so they went; and how they dealt with His Majesty, I do not fully understand, but am informed by some that went, that they assured Him, he ought to satisfie himself in point of Law by his Judges, and of State by his Council: And how they did any otherwise, in any other thing rectifie his Conscience, in point of Divinity, which belonged unto themselves, I cannot tell. But, though I think no man can justly lay the least tittle of blame upon the just King, no, not the Earl himself, as himself professed, for yielding to such, and so earnest perswasions of I know not how many reverend Bi∣shops, wise Counsellours, grave Judges, and the flower of all his people, to passe that Bill whatsoever it was: The Bishops right to vote in any cause:Yet, to say what I conceive, with their favour, of my Brethren the Bi∣shops, in the prosecution of this cause; I am perswaded, that they had no reason to withdraw themselves from the House, and to desert their own Right, when the Bill, or the Judgement, was to passe against the Earl, upon this slight pretence, alledged against them, by the haters of the Earl, and no lovers of the Bishops, That a Clergy-man ought not to have any Vote, or to be present, at the handling of the cause of blood or death; for they might know full well, when my Lords grace of York did most cleerly manifest this truth: that the first inhibition of the Clergy, to be present and assistant in causa sanguinis, or judicio mortis, in the Canon of Innocent the third (as I re∣member, for I am driven to fly without my Books) was most unjust, only to tie the Bishops to his blind obedience, to the apparent prejudice of all Christian Princes, by denying this their service unto them; and it is no wayes obligatory to bind us, that are, by the Laws of our Land, not only freed, but also injoyned to abandon all the unjust Canons, that are repugnant to our Laws, and derogatory to our Kings, and to renounce all the usurped authority of the Pope: For, I would fain know, what Scripture, or what reason Pope Innocent can alleadge, to exclude them from doing that good service, both to God and their King, which in all reason they can, or should be better able to do, than most others. And I am sure, that neither in the old, nor in the new Testament, nor yet in the Primitive Church, until these subtile Popes began thus to incroach upon the Rights of Princes, to take a∣way the Prerogatives of Kings, and to domineer over the consciences of men, this exclusion of them from the highest act of Justice was never found; For,The Prophets and Apostles, judged in the case of life and death. did not Moses, Joshua, Samuel, Eliah, Elizaeus, Jehoida, and others of the Priests and Prophets of the old Testament, and S. Peter also the Prince of the Apostles in the new Testament, judge in the case of blood, and pro∣nounced the sentence of death against Malefactors? As when Ananias and Sapphira were suddenly brought unto their end, by the judgement of the Apostle; and if they be able and fit to judge of any thing, then why not of this?
If you say, because they are the Advocates of mercy,  the procurers of pardon, the Preachers of repentance, and men that are made to save life, and not to put any one to death, or to bring any man unto his end: I answer,  That they are therefore the fittest men to be the Judges both of life and death: For who can better and more justly judge me to death, than he that doth most love my life? it is certain he will not condemn me without just cause; even as God, that is , the Father of mer∣cies, and even mercy it self, is the fittest and most righteous Judge that can be found both of death and damnation;Clergy, how fit to be Judges. because his mercy and goodness towards his creatures will not permit his severity against sin, though never so detestable to his purity, to do the least injustice to their persons; so our love of mercy and pity, will not suffer us to do any thing that shall tran∣scend the Rules of justice and equity; And as our inclination to mercy pro∣hibites us to condemn the innocent, so our love to justice, and our charge to preserve it, will not permit us to justifie the wicked; for, the Scripture teacheth us, That he which justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the innocent, that calleth the evil good, and the good evil; that spareth Agag, and killeth Naboth; are both alike abominable unto the Lord. And therefore notwithstanding this unjust Canon, I never find in any of our Histories, that the Bishops did ever withdraw themselves, and quit their Votes in this case, either before or after, save only from the 10th year of Richard the 2d, unto the 21th year of the raign of the same unfortunate King: which they did, not because they could not justly be present; but because they had just reasons to be absent, as you may find it in the Annals of his time: Therefore I know nor how to palliate their facility of yielding way to those Nn-Canonical Lords,Non-Canoni∣call Lords. to produce those non-obli∣ging Canons, which they abhorred in all that made not for the furtherance of their design, to exclude them from doing this, which was one of their chiefest duties; for who knoweth not the Lord Say, and Lord Brook, and others of the Lords, to hate all Canons, even the old Canons of the Apo∣stles, as inconsistent with their new Rules of Independent Government: and yet herein, to exclude the Bishops Votes, in the judgement of this man, and the passing of this Bill, which being admitted, might perhaps have turned the scales, they will take hold of the unjustest Law, and alleadge one of the worst of Canons, a Canon against reason, and most repugnant to the best of God's Properties, which though they be all equall in themselves, fummè & perfectissimè, yet are they not so perceived by us; but his mercy is over all his works. But you will say, Was this man so just, that he was unjustly condem∣ned to death? Did all men so untruly complain against him? And was he good, notwithstanding all the evill that was proved against him? I answer, That I dare not, and I do not say, that he was unjustly ad∣judged to death, or that the Bill it self was unjust; But this I assure my self, that he was a very wise and understanding man, and indued with may rare Heroick vertues, and most excellent graces; as, among the rest,The Earle's Vertues. with those two incomparable indowments, that cannot easily be found among many of the Nobles of this World. 1. Faithfulness to his Prince, to whom (as I conceive) he shewed him∣self a true servant, and most Trusty in his greatest imployments, save in what was (and I know not that) justly proved against him; and, I believe, he would never have taken Arms, as some others of the Lords do now, against his Soveraign. 2. Love unto the Church and Church-men; to whom, though others think it their glory to oppresse them, and a vertue to contemn them; yet he was a true Friend, a most Noble Benefactor, and most just, unto his death, as
his very last speech unto his dearest Son, doth sufficiently testifie unto all posterity; which speech was to this effect, (and I would to God it were indelibly imprinted in the memory of all our Nobility) That, as he regar∣ded his father's blessing, or expected a blessing from God upon what his fa∣ther left him, so he would be careful never to take away, or in any wise to diminish any part or parcell of the goods or Patrimony of the Church; which if he did, would prove a Canker, to waste and consume all that he had. Yet, it may be, he was (which in truth I cannot imagin) as the Philoso∣pher saith of Marcus Antonius, a man of that composition, that his vices did equalize, if not exceed his vertues, and his offences cloud all his graces, and obscure all his glory; And as the saving of one mans life, cannot save him from suffering, that doth unjustly put another man to death; so the rarest Vertues cannot justifie the man that committeth so many hor∣rible offences,How a Male∣factor may be unjustly con∣demned. as his accusers conceived this man did; to which it may be well replyed, That a notorious Malefactor (though I apply not this to him) may be unjustly condemned: and so he may be justly condem∣ned, and unjustly executed; as when he is not condemned for the fault committed, or condemned not according to the Law which condemneth that Fact; For though a Murderer deserveth death, yet any one may not pre∣sently be the death of that Murderer, nor the Judge condemn him for rob∣bery: And though I should commit many offences worthy of death, yet if the Law doth not condemn me, I ought not to die for any of them. For, as the Apostle saith, Where there is no Law, there is no sin, because sin is the transgression of the Law: Therefore the Earl of Strafford might be an evill man, and do many things that in the sight of God and good men, were worthy of death; Yet, if our Law made not those crimes Capital, or if the Law made them Capital, and not Treason, we ought not for Trea∣son to adjudge him unto death: So in sum the result is this, That he might justly deserve death, and yet be very unjustly condemned to death. And it seemed to some of his friends, that so he was; especially because they had no plain unquestionable Law, but were fain, in some kind, to make a Law, to take off his head; and when his head was off, this new manner of proceeding should end, and be no Law for any other that came after: And a Delaration must be made, That the course prosecu∣ted for his punishment, shall not afterward, be drawn into an Example; it must be produced for no Pattern, but for him alone and none other; lest perhaps,Complaint to the House of Commons. p. 6. if the same course should be still practised, the contrivers of this Plot, might have the like payment to fall ere long upon their own heads. Therefore, some say, this may well draw a suspicion upon the justice of the Sentence, though I will not censure any man for any inju∣stice therein. The Earle's words at his death.But, as the Earl said at his death, which he undertook like a good Christian, full of Charity, and no less Piety, it was an ill Omen to this Nation, that they should write the Frontispiece of this Parliament, with letters of Blood; which, if unjustly done, or unduly prosecuted, I fear may, with Abels blood, cry for vengeance in the ears of God, against the Con∣trivers of this mischief, to produce our miseries: And the God of Hea∣ven doth only know, how much of the blood of this Kingdom must be squeezed out, to expiate all the mis-proceedings, and the fearfull pro∣jects of our people. God Almighty turn his anger from us, and let not the righteous perish with the wicked, not the sins of some few be laid upon us all. This was the first impediment that was to be removed, before they could proceed any further in this Tragedy, and thus it was most artificially acted. And I say, He was a great, and a very great, impediment of their
design, which made me the larger in the prosecution thereof; because he was a person of that great ability, and so great fidelity both to the Church and State; and the taking off of his head, made a very wide gap for our enemies to enter into the Vineyard of Christ, and a large breach in∣to the City of God, to deface the Church, and to destroy this King∣dom. CHAP. III. Sheweth, how they stopped the free judgment of the Judges; procured the perpetuity of the Parliament; the consequences thereof, and the subtle device of Semiramis. 2. THe next Let that might hinder their design, was, the great learning,The second impediment of their de∣sign. long experience, and free judgment of the grave Judges, to declare what is Truth, and what is Law in every point; for these men being skilful in the Laws and Statutes of our Land, knew how contrary to the same, and how repugnant to the fundamental Constitutions of our Government, the erecting of a new Church, and the framing of a new Common-Wealth would be; and their judgment, being to be inquired in any emergent Doubt, might prove very prejudicial unto their plots, and a hinderance of their Desin, except it were diverted by some course. Therefore to stop this stream, to put a gagg in their mouthes,How they stop∣ped the free judgment of the Judges. to impri∣son all truths that might make against them, and to make these Judges yield to whatsoever they do, or at least not to contradict any thing they say, they get many of them to be accused of High-Treason; and they do but accuse them, and not proceed to any trial against them, which was a pretty plot of their policy; because that hereby they kept them, and the rest of their fellow-Judges (that had any finger in the mis-sentencing of the Ship money, and were therefore in the same predicament, and to be under the same Censure) under the last, and to be still silent, for very fear of their proceeding against them: for they saw by many presidents, that those men which favoured their design, or contradicted not their waies, were winked at by this Faction, though they were the greatest Delin∣quents; and therefore redimere se captos, to free themselves out of the hands of these men, they might conceive it their safest course to gain-say none of their conclusions; which was a Plot of no small value to further their design, by this removal of this second impediment. 3.The third im∣pediment of their design. The third Let that stood in their way to make stop of their impious design, was the Royal power to dissolve the present Parliament, as for∣merly to dissolve any other, which they knew to be an inseparable flower of the Crown; Timor undique nostris, this brought them in fear on every side, lest, if they were too soon discovered, they might suddenly be pre∣vented, and their plot might prove abortive, Like the untimely fruit of a woman, that perisheth before it seeth the Sun, or as the apples of Sodome, vanishing when they are touched, into Nothing; or, at the best, but to stinking blasts: Therefore to escape this rock, they sail about, and, like cun∣ning Water-men, they look towards you when they ow from you; their eyes and mouthes are one way, when their hearts and minds are another way; for they tell the King, that the discontinuance of Parliaments hath produced abundance of distempers in this State, and a world of grievances both in the Church and Common-wealth: besides they say, what the King and every man else saw to be true, That the Scots were entred into
our Land,The fair pre∣tences for the continuance of the Parlia∣ment. and setled in the bosom of this Kingdom; and though perhaps if some things had been better looked into, we mought at first most easily have kept them out; yet now, duriùs ejicitur, quàm non admittitur hostis, it was too late to shut the door, and it is not so easy to expel and drive them out, except we made them a bride of gold to pass over the river, and so to go homewards again. And this cannot be done without a great deal of money; which mo∣neys though the Parliament should grant them, (as we are most willing to do, to free your Majesty from these guests, and to prevent the dangers of an intestine war); yet they cannot suddenly be levied and collected, as the times and occasions now required; therefore it must be borrowed to sup∣ply our present necessities; and lenders we shall find none, except we can shew them a way how they shall be repaid again; and the expe∣perience we have lately had in these latter years, of so many Parliaments so unhappily and suddenly dissolved, puts us out of all hope to find any way to secure their debts, except your Majesty will pass an Act, (for as yet they durst not say they needed not His assent to what they did) that this Parliament shall not be dissolved, until it be agreed upon by the consent of both houses. How the King was seduced by their pre∣tences.This and the like were their fair pretences, like the Syrens voyces, very sweet, and very good; and the good King that ever spake as he thought, could not think that His great Councel, whom He trusted with all the Af∣fairs of His Kingdom, meant any otherwise then they said, or looked any further then they shewed Him; He never dream'd that they intended to have an everlasting Parliament, and so perfidiously to over-reach both the King and the Kingdom. But though our gracious King (being not so much versed with the dissembling subtilty and serpentine windings of wicked hypocrites, that are to be removed from the King, and expelled out of his House) sup∣posed all them to mean sincerely, and to deal fairly as they seemed to do; yet I do admire that the wisdom of the Kings Counsel, (but that they, which, as the Apostle saith, are not ignorant of the devices of Satan, are not permitted by these men to be of His Councel) could not espy what mischief might lurk under this fair shade, or what might be the Conse∣quences of such a Parliament, that is inconsistent with a Monarchy, and therefore must in a convenient time be ended, or else will make an end of all Monarchical Government; Why then might not a year or two, or three, (or more, so the years were limited) suffice to determine all busi∣nesses, but that the life of this Parliament should be endless, and the continuance thereof undetermined? This is beyond the age of the Counsel of Trent,What the fa∣ction could be contented with. Complaint p. 19. that they say lasted above forty years; for I presume, if some of the contrivers of this Design might have their desires, the youngest of us should hardly see the Dissolution of this Parliament, Til the earthly Houses of our Tabernacles be dissolved; for it is likely they could be well conten∣ted, as one saith, to make an Ordinance that both Houses should be a Corporation, to take our Lands and Goods to themselves and their suc∣cessours, and when any of that Corporation dieth, toties quoties, the sur∣viver and none else should choose a successour to perpetuity; so they should be Masters of our Estates and disposers of all we have (as they are now) for ever. And therefore, this was a Plot beyond the Powder-plot, and beyond the device of Semiramis,The plot of Se∣miramis. that with a lovely face, desired her husband, she might rule but three daies, to see how well she could mannage the State, and obtaining her request, in the first thereof, she removed all the Kings Officers, in the second she placed her own minions in all the places of Power and Authority, (as now the saction would do, such as they confide
in, in all places of strength) and in the third day she cut off the Kings head, and assumed the Government of all the Kings Dominions into her own hands; for not three daies, nor three years will serve their turn, for fear they shall not have ability in so short a space, to finish all their strange intended projects; and therefore, that they might not be hindered, their request is unlimited, that the Parliament should not be dissolved, till both Houses gave consent, which they were contented should be ad Graecas Calendas. Yet God that knew best, what punishments were due to be inflicted for their former Actions, and for all the subtle Devices of their hard hearts, gave way for this also, that this third Impediment of their pro∣jects might be removed; that so at last, their sins, like the sins of the Amorites by little and little growing unto the full, might undergo the fulness of Gods vengeance, which as yet, I fear, was not fully come to pass; for till the Parliament was made perpetual, the things that they have done since, were absolutely unimaginable;How the fac∣tion hath strengthened it self. because that while it was a dissolvable body, they durst not so palpably invade the known rights, either of King or Subjects; whereas now, their Body being made indis∣soluble, they need not have the same apprehension of either, having strengthened themselves by a Bill against the one, and by an Army against the other; and therefore all the dissolutions of Parliaments from the begin∣ning of them to this time, have not done half that mischief, as the continu∣ance of this one hath done hitherto: and God only knowes what is to suc∣ceed hereafter. But seeing themselves have publickly acknowledged in their Decla∣rations, that they were too blame, if they undertook any thing now, which they would not undertake, if it were in His Majesties power to dissolve them the next day, and they have since used this means, which was given them to disburthen the Common-Wealth, of that debt, which was thought insupportable,What many wise men do say. to plunge it irrevocably into a far greater debt, to the ruine of the whole Kingdom, to change the whole frame of our Government, and subjecting us to so unlimited an arbitrary power, that no man knows at the sitting of the House, what he shall be worth at the rising, or whether he shall have his liberty the next day, or imprisonment. Many wise men do say, they see no Reason that this trust being forfeited, and the faith reposed in them betrayed; the King may not immediatly re-assume that power of dissolving them, into his own hands again, and both our unjustly abused King, and our much injured people, declare this Act to be voyd, when as contrary to their own Faith and the trust of the King, they abuse it to over∣throw the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom; though I could hear∣tily wish, that because it still carrieth the Countenance of a Law, the faction would be so Wise to yield it to be presently dissolved by a Law.
CHAP. IV. Sheweth the abilities of the Bishops; the threefold practice of the Fa∣ction to exclude them out of the House of Peers; and all the Clergy out of all Civil Judicature. The fourth im∣pediment of their design.4. THere was one stop more that might hinder, or at least hardly suffer their plots to succeed according to their hearts desire; and that is, the Bishops Votes in the Ʋpper House, nay they cannot endure to call it so, but, in the House of the Lords; for they rightly considered therein these two special things. 1. Their Number, 2. Their Abilities. Which are two main things to stop and hinder many evils: For, 1. They had Twenty six Voyces, which was a very considerable number, and might stop a great gap, and stay the stream, or at least moderate the violence of any unjust prosecution. 2. They were men of great Learning, men of Profound knowledge both in Divine and Humane Affairs, and men well educated, à cunabulis, that spent all their time in Books, and were Conversant with the dead, that fea∣red not to speak the truth, and have wearied themselves in reading Histo∣ries,The abilities of the Bishops. comparing Laws, and considering the Affairs of all Common-wealths; and so were able, if their modesty did not silence them, to discourse de quo∣libet ente, to untie every knot, and to explain every riddle; and being the immediate servants of the living God, set apart as the Apostle speaketh, to offer Sacrifice and to administer the Sacraments of God, to prepare a people for the Kingdom of Heaven, it ought not, and it cannot be otherwise imagined, by any child of the Church, that is a true believer, but that they are men of Conscience, to speak the truth and to do justice in any cause, and betwixt any parties more then most others,Pardon me good Lords for so plainly speaking truth. especially those young Lords and Gentlemen, whose years do want experience, and the course of their lives, some in Hawking and Hunting, and others in Dicing and Bow∣ling, and visiting Black-Friars Play-house, or perhaps in worser exercises, doth sufficiently shew how weak their judgment must needs be in great Af∣fairs, and how imperfect their conscience is as yet in holy things, I hope not to be preferred before these grave and Reverend men. And therefore, lest these grave men should prove great hinderances of their unjust proceedings, before any of their worst intentions be well per∣ceived; there must be an exclusion of them from Parliament, and from those Lords, whose consciences and knowledge they may then the better captivate, and bring them the sooner to side with them, for to effect their great Design. And it is a world of wonders to see, with what subtilty and industry, with what Policy and Villany, this one work must be effected. It would fill a volume to collect the particulars of their Devices; I will re∣duce them to these three heads. A threefold practice a∣gainst the Bishops.1. They used all means to render them odious in the eyes of all people. 2. They brought the basest and the reffuse of all men, water-men, por∣ters, and the worst of all the apprentices, with threats and menaces, to thunder forth the death and destruction of these men. 3. Upon a pretended treason they caused twelve of them, besides the Arch-Bishop that was in the Tower before, to be clapt up at once into prison; where they kept them in that strong house, until they got it Enacted
that they should be excluded from the Ʋpper-House, and both they and their Clergy should be debarred from the Administration of any secular act of Justice in the Common-Wealth. 1.1. To make them odious two waies. They endeavoured to make them odious unto the people two waies. 1. In making that Order (or giving that notice unto the people) that  any man might exhibit his complaint against Scandalous Ministers, and he should be heard; which invitation of all discontented sheep to throw dirt in their Pastor's faces, was too palpably malicious; for our Saviour told us, We should be sent as sheep into the midst of Woolvs, but here is a sending for the Wolves to destroy the Shepheards; and it came to pass hereby, that no less then 900 complaints and petitions were brought in a very short space, (as I was informed by some of their own House, that feelingly misliked these undue proceedings) against many Learned and most faithful Servants of Jesus Christ, that were therefore hated, because they were not wicked; and persecuted because they were conformable to the Laws of the King and the Church.The Ministers why persecu∣ted. And the rest of our calling that were factious and Sedi∣tious, were both countenanced and applauded in all their Seditious cour∣ses, and the more they railed against our Church-Government, the more they were favoured by these enemies of the Church-Governours. As to instance in both particulars (as you may find in the Author of the Sober Sadness, p. 33.) Master Squire, Master Stone, and Master Swadlin, whom they have imprisoned, and scarce allowed them straw to lye on. Master Reading, Master Griffith, Master Ingoldsby, Master Wilcocks, and many o∣thers, having done nothing worthy of death or of bonds, are inserted into the black bill of Scandalous and superstitious Ministers, only for Preaching Obe∣dience to Soveraign-Authority, and other points consonant to the Holy Scriptures; and those that are scandalous indeed, as Doctor Burgesse the ring-leader of all Sedition, Doctor Downing that is reputed as variable as was Doctor Pern, Master Calamy that is little better, Master Harding a most vicious man, Master Bridge a Socinian, and Master Marshall, not free from the suspicion or some unjust perswasions of the weaker Sex, and ma∣ny more such factious men are not only dispensed with, for all faults, but al∣so rewarded and advanced for their infidelity to God, and disloyalty to His Vice-gerent: This the Author of the Sober Sadness affirmeth of them. 2. By framing Petitions themselves (as it is conceived) in the name of  thousands of people, from Cities and Countries, that either never saw or never knew what was in them, against Episcopacy and Episcopal men; and then exhibiting the said petitions unto themselves, and the rest of their seduced brethren, to instigate others of their own faction, that affected not Episcopacy, and those offendors that by their Ecclesiastical censure were justly punished, and yet thereby unjustly provoked to hate them,Petitions a∣gainst Episco∣pacy, how un∣justly procu∣red. to frame the like petitions against this Apostolical function, and to make the World believe how odious these Reverend men were in the judgment of so many millions of men, which were indeed most ignorant and simple, and which God knows, and themselves afterwards confessed, knew not what they did, nor to what end their hands were purloyned from them, under fair pretences, that were alleadged for the Reformation of some abuses, but were subscribed to most scandalous Petitions, which the poor men utterly renounced, when they understood how unchristianly they were seduced: So strange were their plots to make the Bishops odious. And yet you must not think, that these courses are more strange than true; for our Saviour tells his Apostles, that were men beyond excep∣tions,
full of inspirations, and abundantly indued with the gifts of sancti∣fication, They should be hated of all men for his names sake; and, if you look into the sufferings of Saint Paul, and the most horrible imputations that were so scandalously raised against the Holy Fathers, you need not admire so much to see these men suffering such things at the hands of sinners, to be made the scorn of men, and as the off scouring of the people, as they were not long since, when the Bishops and the most learned Preachers might pass with more honour, and less contempt, at Constantinople among the Turks, or in Jerusalem among the Jews, than in the City of London among this brood of Anabaptists. 2. How the scum of the people threa∣ten them.2. After they had thus brought them upon the Stage, and used them thus strangely without cause, they get Ven and Manwaring, and others of the same Sect, to gather together the scum of all the Prophanest rout, the vilest of all men, and the out-cast of the people, such, as Job saith, are not worthy to eat with the dogs of the flock: and as they came before for the Earl of Straffords head, so now again, they must come in great num∣bers, without order, without honesty, against all Law, and beyond all Religion, with swords and staves, and other unfashionable though not inconsiderable weapons, to cry, No Papists, no Bishops, and if they had ad∣ded, No God, no Devil, no Heaven, no Hell, then surely these men had obtained (if the Parliament could have granted their requests) the summ of their desires; and they would have thought themselves better than ei∣ther King or Bishop: but as yet they go no farther, than, No Papist, no Bi∣shop; and by this they put the good Bishops in great fear, and well they might be possest of that fear, qui cadit in fortem & constantem virum: for mine eyes did see them, and mine ears did hear it said, What Bishop soever they met, they would be his death, and I thanked God they knew not me to be a Bishop.Their furious assault upon Saint Peters Church in Westminster. Then they set upon Saint Peters Church of Westminster, burst part of the door to pieces, and had they not been most manfully withstood by the Arch-Bishop of York his Gentlemen, and the Prebends Servants, together with the Officers of the Church, they had entred, and likely ransacked, spoyled, and defaced all the Monuments of the An∣cient Kings, broken down the Organs, and committed such Sacriledge and prophanation of that Holy place, as their fellow Rebels have done since in Canterbury, Winchester, Worcester, and other places, whereof I shall speak hereafter; the like was never seen among the Turks and Pagans; and after these things, what rage, cruelty, and barbarity they would have shewed to the Dean and Prebends, we might well fear, but not easily judge; I am sure, the Dean was forced to hire Armed Souldiers to preserve the Church for many daies after; for, seeing these riotous Tumults could not as yet obtain their ends, they came, nay, they were brought again and again, and they justled and offered some violence unto the Arch-Bishop's Grace, as he went with the Earl of Dover into the Parliament House: which made him and the rest of his brethren justly to fear what might be the issue of these sad beginnings, which they conceived must needs be very lamentable, if timely remedy were not applied, to prevent these untimely frights and unchristian tumults. Therefore when no Complaints either to the House of Lords or Com∣mons could produce any safe effects, but rather a frivolous excuse than a serious redress, that they came to petition against the Government, and not to seek the destruction of the Governours, the Bishops were inforced (and, in my judgment, flesh and blood could take no better course in such a case, in such distress, and I believe it will be found wisdom hereafter) to make their Petition for their security, and Protestation against all Acts as null, (they might have added, to them and whom they represen∣ted) that should be enacted in their unwilling absence, while they
were so violently hindered from the House; and, it may be, some word might pass in this Protestation, that might be bettered, or explained by another word; yet, on such a suddain, in such a fright, when they scarce had time to take Counsel of their pillows, or to advise with their second thoughts (quae semper sunt saniores), To watch for iniquity,Esay 29.20, 21. to turn aside the just for a thing of nought, to take advantage of a word, or to catch men for one syllable, to charge them with High Treason to bring them unto death, so many Reverend Bishops to such a shameful end, was more heavy than ever I find the Jews were to the old Prophets, or the Pagan Tyrants unto the Primitive Fathers; nor do I believe you can Parallel the same charge in any History: yet 3. For this one necessitated Act of the Bishops,3. How they were commit∣ted to Prison. the House of Commons do suddainly upon the first sight thereof, charge twelv of them with High Treason; they were not so long in Condemning it, as the Bishops in Com∣posing it; and accordingly the Lords commit them unto Prison. And if this was Treason, I demand, why could they not prove it so to be? Or if it was not, why should such an House, Flos & Medulla regni, the greatest and the Highest Court of Justice, from which (the King consenting with them) there lieth none appeal, but only to the Court of Heaven, accuse them of High Treason? I would not have that Court to charge a man with any thing that were not most true, for certainly, whosoever unjustly compasseth my death is justly guilty of death himself, when as the Poet saith, —Lex non justior ulla, Quàm necis artifices arte perire suâ. It may be they would have us to believe this Treason was not proved, nor the charge so fully followed as they intended, out of some mercy to save their lives; but I could sooner believe, they rejoyced to see them fear, and were glad of their mistake, that they might charge them, and by such a charge cast them into prison, that so they might the more easily work their Design, to cast them out of the Parliament, which now they have soon effe∣cted, and procured an Act for their exclusion. And you must know, that to cast out from doing good, or serving God, is a work of the Divel, and not of God; so the wicked Husbandmen did cast out the right Heir of the Vine-yard, out of his own inheritance;The conse∣quences of this Act. so the Jews did cast out the blind man, and all that professed Christ out of their Synagogue. But you may better judge of this good Act, by these conse∣quences which are like to be the fruits thereof. 1. Hereby they are all made incapable to do any good,1. Made inca∣pable of doing any good. either for Gods honour, or their neighbours benefit, by executing justice, or pronouncing judgment, in any cause in any temporal Court: and justice which long agon hath fled to Heaven, and wanders as a stranger here on earth, must be countenanced and entertained only by the sons of men, by secular Lords and Gentlemen: and the Spiritual Lords the Servants of God, and mes∣sengers of Heaven must have nothing to do with her; not because they are not as well able as any other to do justice, but, because the others cannot endure to let them see it, for fear they should hinder their injustice, and therefore justice and judgment are like to speed well on earth, when their chiefest friends are banished from them, and it may be worldlings, oppres∣sours, or most ignorant youths, rather than any just understanders of their natures, must be their Judges. 2.2. Made una∣ble to defend themselves. Hereby they are made unable to defend themselves or their calling from any wrong; their respect was little enough before, and their indigni∣ties were great enough; and yet now we are exposed to far greater mise∣ries, and to unresistable injuries, when a Bishop hath not so much Authority as a Constable, to withstand his greatest affronts.
But hoc Ihacus est, this is that which the Devil and his great Atrei∣des's, his prime Champions to enlarge his Kingdom would fain have, our Souls to remain among Lions, and all the means or defence to be taken from us, our enemies to be our Judges, and our selves to be murdered with our own weapons. In the time of Popery there were many Laws de im∣munitate Clericorum, whereby we were so protected, that the greatest Prince could not oppress us, as you may find in the Reign of King John, and almost in all our Histories: and when we renounced the Pope, God made Kings our nursing Fathers, and Queens our nursing Mothers, and we, put∣ting our selves under their protection, have been hitherto most graciously protected: but now by this Act we are left naked of all defence, and set under the very sword of our Adversaries, and, as the Psalmist saith, They that hated us are made Lords over us, to call us, to assess us, to un∣do us. 3. Debarred of that right that none else are.3. Hereby they are made more slavish than the meanest Subject, and deprived of that benefit and priviledge which the poorest Shoomaker, Tai∣ler, or any other Tradesman or yeoman, hath most justly left unto him: for, to be excluded, debarred, and altogether made uncapable of any be∣nefit is such an insupportable burden, that it is set upon no mans shoul∣ders but upon the Clergy alone, as if they alone were either unworthy to receive, or unable to do, any good. 4. Made more contemptible than all o∣thers.4. Hereby they are made the unparalleled spectacle of all neglect and scorn to all forraign people; for I can hardly believe the like Precedent can be shewed in any Age, or any other Nation of the World, no not a∣mong the very Infidels or Indians; for, in former times, the Bishops and Clergy-men were thought the fittest instruments to be imployed in the best places of greatest truth, and highest importance in the Common-Wealth: and Kings made them their Embassadours, as the Emperour Valentinian did Saint Ambrose. And our own Chronicles relate how former times re∣spected the Clergy, and how our Kings made them both their Counsel∣lours, and their Treasurers, Chancellours, Keepers of the Great Seal, and the like Officers of the chiefest concernment, as Ethelbert in the year of Christ 605.Ʋt refert in tractatu suo de Episcopatu p. 61 62. M. Theyer. Sir Henry Spel∣man. p. 118. Idem p. 403. Idem. p. 219. saith, I Ethelbert; King of Kent, with the consent of the Reve∣rend Arch Bishop Augustine, and of my Princes, do give and grant, &c. And the said Ethelbert with the Queen and his Son Eadbald, and the most Reverend Prelate Augustine, and with the rest of the Nobility of the Land solemnly kept his Christmass at Canterbury, and there assembled a Com∣mon Councel, tam cleri quàm populi, as well of the Clergy as of the Peo∣ple; And King Adelstan saith, I Adelstan the King do signify unto all the Officers in my Kingdom, that by the advice of Wolfelm my Arch-Bishop, and of all my Bishops, &c. In the great Councel of King Ina, An. 712. The Edicts were Enacted by the Common Councel and consent, omnium Epis∣coporum, & Principum, Procorum, Cmitum, & omnium sapientum seniorum, & populorum totius regni, & per praeceptum regis Inae: And in the second Char∣ter of King Edward the Confessour,How former times respected the Clergy. granted to the Church of Saint Pe∣ter in Westminster; it is said to be, Cum concilio & decreto Archiepiscopo∣rum, Episcoporum, Comitum, aliorumque suorum Optimatum, With the Coun∣sel and Decree of the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Earls, and other Potentates. And so not only the Saxon Kings, but the Norman also, ever since the Conquest, had the Bishops in the like or greater esteem, that they never held Parliament or Councel without them. And surely these Princes were no Babes that made this choice of them, neither was the Common-Wealth neglected, nor justice prejudiced by these Governours. And who∣soever shall read Mores gentium, or the pilgrimage of Master Purchas, Livy, Plutarch, Appian, and the rest of the Greek and Latin Histories, I dare assure him, he shall find greater honour given, and far less contempt cast
upon the Priests and Flamins, the Prophets of the Sybils, than we find of this Faction left to the Servants of the Living God; who are now dit with∣all worse, than Pharaoh dealt with the Israelites, that took away their straw, and yet required their full tale of Bricks; For these men would rob us of all our means, and take away all our Lands, and all our Rights, and yet require not only the full tale of Sermons and Services, as was used by our Predecessours, but to double our files, to multiply our pains,How the Cler∣gy are now used. and to treble the Sermons and Services, that they used to have of our forefathers, more than ever was done in any Age since the first Plantation of the Gospel; And when we have done, with John Baptist, the utmost of our endeavours, like a shining and a burning lamp, that doth waste and consume it self to nothing, while it giveth light to others; they only deal with us, as Car∣riers use to do with their pack-horses, hang bels at their ears to make a me∣lodious noise, but with little provender lay heavy loads upon their backs; and when they can bear no more burdens, take away their Bells, withdraw their praises, call them Jades, exclaim against their laziness, and then, at last, turn them out to feed upon the Commons, and to die in a ditch; And thus we have now made the Ministers of Christ to be the Emblems of all misery, and in pretending to make them more glorious in the sight of God, we have made them most base in the eyes of all men. And therefore the consequence of this Act, is like to prove most lamen∣table, when the people, considering how that hereby, we are left naked of all comfort, and subject to all kind of scorn and distresse, and how that this be∣ing effected, is but the Praeludium of a far greater mischief; they will rather with no great cost, make their children of some good Trade, and their chil∣dren will chuse so to be, than with such great cost, and more care, and yet little hope, to bring them up to worse condition than the meanest of all Trades, or the lowest degree of all rusticks; When as they can challenge, and it shall not be denied them, to have the priviledges of the Law,The Clergy alone are de∣prived of Mag∣na Charta. and a property in their goods, which without their own consent, yielded in their persons or their representours, cannot be taken from them: And the Clergy only, of all the people in this Kingdom, shall be deprived of the right and benefit of our great Charter, which so many famous Kings and pious Prin∣ces have confirmed unto us; and when we have laboured all the dayes of our lives, with great pains, and more diligence, to instruct our people, and to attain to some competency of means to maintain our selves, and our fa∣milies, we shall be in the power of these men, at their pleasure, under the pretence of Religion, contrary to all justice, to be deprived of any part of our freehold, when we shall have not one man of our own Calling to speak a word in our behalf, on no Seat of Justice throughout the whole King∣dom, O terque quaterque beati, Queis ante or a patrum contigit oppetere! O most miserable, and lamentable condition of Gods Ministers! I must needs speak it, though I should die for it; and if some did not speak it, I think the stones would cry against it, and proclaim it, Better for the Clergy, were their hope only in this world, never to have been born, or at least never to have seen a Book, then to fall into the hands, and to be put under the censure of these men that do thus love Christ, by hating his Ministers;This Act more prejudiciall to the future times than now. who as I said before, by this one Act are made liable to undergo all kind of evils, which shall not only fall upon the present Clergy, (for were it so, our patience should teach us to be silent) but also to the increase of all prejudices to the Gospel, more than my fore-sight can expresse, in all succeeding Ages. And therefore I may well say with Jeremy,Jer. 5.9, 29. Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? And we need not wonder, that such plagues, ca∣lamities, and distresses, have so much increased in this Kingdom ever since
the passing of this Act, and yet the anger of the Lord is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still; and I fear, his wrath will not be appeased, till we have blotted this, and wiped away all other our great sins and trans∣gressions, with the truest tears of unfained repentance. These are like to be the consequences of this Act: And yet our good King, who we know loved our Nation, and built us a Synagogue, and was (as I assure my self) most unwilling to passe it, was notwithstanding over∣perswaded (considering where thirteen of the Bishops were, even in prison, and in what condition all the rest of them stood, in question whether all they should stand, or be cut down root and branch) to yield His assent unto the Act; though, if the case in truth were rightly weighed, not much lesse pre∣judicial to his Majesty, than injurious to us, to be thus deprived of our right, and exposed to all miseries, by excluding us from all Civil Judicature. And I would to God the King and all the Kingdom did continually consider, how his Majesty was used ever since the confirmation of this Act;How the King hath been used ever since this Act passed. for they no sooner had excluded the Bishops and Clergy out of their right, but pre∣sently they proceeded, and prosecuted the Design ever since, to thrust out the King from all those just Rights and Prerogatives, which God and Na∣ture, and the Laws of our Land, have put into his hands, for the Govern∣ment of this Kingdom: neither was it likely to succeed any otherwise, as I have fully shewed; and I would all Kings would read it, in the Grand Rebellion. That the Act should be an∣nulled.But I see no reason why it may not, and why it should not, be retracted and annulled, when the Houses shall be purged of that Anabaptistical, and Rebellious Faction, that contrived and procured the same to Passe; for these three special Reasons: 1. Because, that contrary to all former Precedents, that Bill for their exclusion, was (as it is reported) at the first refused, and after a full hear∣ing among the Lords, it was by most Votes, by more than a dozen voices, rejected: And yet, to shew unto the World, that the Faction's malice a∣gainst the Bishops had no end, and their rage was still implacable; at the same Session, and which is very considerable, immediately assoon as ever they understood it was rejected, the House of Commons revived it, and so pressed it unto the Lords, that (if I may have leave to speak the truth) contrary to all right,For I con∣ceive this to be an approved Maxim, That no Right, not proved forfited by some of∣fence, can be taken away without wrong: it must be again received; and while the Bishops were in prison, it was, with what honour I know not, strangely con∣firmed. 2. Because this Bill had the Royall assent, after that a most riotous tu∣mult, and many thousands of men, with all sorts of Warlike weapons, both on land and water, most disloyally had driven His Majesty to flie from Lon∣don, that most Rebellious City, not without fear, for his own safety, even for the safety of his life, as himself professeth. And when they had so cun∣ningly  contrived their Plot, as to get some of the Kings servants and friends, that were about him,In his Maje∣sties answer to the Petition of the Lords and Commons. 16. of July. p. 8. and imployed in the Queens affairs, to perswade Her Majesty to use all her power with the King, for the passing of this Bill, or else Her journey should be stayed, as formerly they had altered Her re∣solution for the Spaw; and at Rochester she should understand the sense of the House to stop Her passage unto Holland, whereas the passing of this Bill, might make way for Her passage over: And many other such frights and fears, they put both upon the King and Queen, to inforce Him, full sore against his will, as we believe, to passe this harsh Bill, for the exclusion of the spiritual Lords out of the House of Peers, and of all the Clergy, from all Secular Judicature. But Master Pym will tell us, as he did, that it was the opinion of both Houses, There was no occasion given by any tumults, that might justly cause His Majesties departure.
To whom I answer, with the words of Alderman Garraway,Ald. Gar. speech at Guild-hall. If the Hou∣ses had declared, that it had been lawful to beat the King out of Town, I must have sate still with wonder (though I should never believe it): but when they declare matters of Fact, which is equally within our own know∣ledge, and wherein we cannot be deceived, as in the things we have seen with our eyes; if they dissent from truth, they must give me leave to dif∣fer from them. As if they should declare, They have paid all the money that they owe unto the City, or that thereFor now I understand it is pulled down. was no Crosse standing in Cheapside, we shall hardly believe them. And therefore, seeing we all remember, when the Alarm was given, that there was an attempt from Whitehall upon the City, how hardly it was appeased, and how no Babies thought the Design of those subtile heads that gave that false. Alarm was no lesse, than to have caused Whitehall to be pulled down; and they that loved the King, and saw the Army both by land and water, which accompanied the persons accused, to Westminster the next day after His Majesties departure, (as if they had passed in a Ro∣man Triumph) conceived the danger to be so great, that I call Heaven to witness, they blessed God that so graciously put it in the Kings heart, rather to passe away over-night, though very late, than hazard the danger that might have ensued the day following. The meaning therefore of both Houses may be, That there was nothing done, which they confessed to be a tumult; And no marvel; Because they received incouragement, as we believed, from their defence; and no reproof, that we found was made, for this indignity offered unto the King. But if I be constrained, and in danger, it is not enough for me, that I am voted free and safe; For if that, which looks, as like a tumult, as that did; or, as the representation of my face in the truest Glasse, is like my face; doth come against me and incompasse me about, though I may be, perhaps, in more safety; yet I shall think my self in great fear, and in no more security, than His Majesty was at Edge-hill. 3. Because, as the viewer of the Observat, hath very well exprest it,  p. 7. No Act of Parliament can prevail to deprive the King of His Right and Authority; as an Attainder by Parliament could not bar the Title to the Crown from descending on King Hen. 7. Nor was an Act of Parliament disabling King Hen. 6. to re-assume the Government of his people, of any force; but, with∣out any repeal in it self, frustrate and void. 7. Rep. 14. Calvins case; an Act of Parliament cannot take away the protection or the Subjects service, which is due by the Law of Nature. 11. rep. Sur de la Wares case. William de la Ware, although disabled by Act of Parliament, was neverthelesse called by Queen Elizabeth to sit as a Peer in Parliament; for that it seems the Queen could not be barred of the service and counsel of any of Her Subjects. 2. H. 7. 6. a Statute, that the King by no non obstante shall dispence with it, is void; because it would take a necessary part of Government out of the Kings hand. And therefore I see not how this Act can deprive the King of the service and counsel of all his Bishops and Clergy, but that it is void of it self, and needeth no repeal; or if otherwise, yet seeing that besides all this, 13. of the Bishops were shut in prison when this Act passed, and their protestation was made long before this time, and it was so unduly fra∣med, so illegally prosecuted, and with such compulsive threats and ter∣rours procured to be passed; I hope the wisdom of the next Parliament, together with their love and respect to the Church and Church-men, will nullifie the same.
CHAP. VI. Sheweth the Plots of the Faction, to gain unto themselves the friend∣ship and assistance of the Scots; And to what end they framed their new Protestation; How they provoked the Irish to rebell, and what other things they gained thereby. ANd thus the Sectaries of this Kingdom, and the Faction in this Par∣liament, have by their craft and subtilty prevailed to have all the chiefest impediments of their Design to be removed: So now the hedge is broken down, and all the Boars of the Forrest may now come into the vine∣yard, to destroy the vine, and to undermine the City of God: But, into their counsels let not my soul come. 2. When they had taken away these stops and hinderances of their pro∣jects,2. The furthe∣rances of their Design were five. they were to recollect and make up the furtherances, that might help to advance their Cause, for the founding of their new Church, and the esta∣blishing of their famous Democratical Government, and popular Common-wealth. And these I find to be principally five. 1. The gaining of their Brethren of Scotland, to become their fast and faithful friends. 2. The framing of a Protestation to frighten the Papists, and to insnare the simple, to be led as they listed to prosecute their Design. 3. The condemning of our late Canons, as abominable in their judge∣ment, and inconsistent with their Religion. 4. The appointing of a new Synod, the like whereof was never heard in the Church, since Adam, to compose such Articles as they liked, and to frame such Discipline as should be most agreeable to their own disposi∣tions. 5. The setling of a Militia, a word that the vulgar knew not what it was, for to secure the Kingdom, as they pretended, from those dangers that they feared, that is, from those Jacks of Lent, and men of Clouts, which themselves set up as deadly enemies unto the Church and State; but indeed insensibly to get all the strength of the Realm into their own hands, and their Confederates; that so they might, like the Ephori, bridle the King, and bring him as they pleased, to abolish, and establish, what Laws and Government they should propose; whereby, perhaps, he might con∣tinue King in Name, but they in Deed. These were the things they aimed at, and they effected the first three, before they could be discryed, and their Plots discovered; but in the o∣ther two, they were prevented, when God said unto them, as he doth un∣to the Sea, Hitherto shalt thou go, and no further, here shalt thou stay thy proud waves: And therefore, I am confident (and I wish all good Christians were so) that their purposes shall never succeed, nor themselves prosper therein, while the World lasteth; because God hath so mercifully revealed so much, so graciously assisted our King, and so miraculously, not only delivered him from them, but also strengthened him against them, contrary to all ap∣pearing likely-hood, to this very day; which is a sufficient argument to se∣cure our faith, that we shall by the help of our God, escape all the rest of their destructive Designs. But to display their Banners, to discover their Projects, and to let the World see what they are, and how closely and yet cunningly, they went a∣bout to effect their work; I will in a plain manner set down what I know, and
what I have collected from other Writings, and from men that are fide dig∣i, (for one mans eyes cannot see all things, nor infallibly perceive the My∣steries of all particulars) for to confirm the faithful Subjects in their due obe∣dience, both to God, and their King, and to undeceive the poor seduced people, that they perish not in the contradiction of Corah. 1. It is believed, not without cause,1 The indeering of themselves unto the Scots. Our Sectaries the inviters of the Scots to England. with far greater probabilities than a bare suspicion, that our own Anabaptistical Sectaries, and this Faction, were the first inviters of those angry spirits (that conceived some cause to be dis∣contented, and were glad of secret entertainers) to enter into the bosom of this Kingdom. Whatsoever those our Brethren of Scotland did, I will bury it according to their Act, in oblivion; neither approving, nor yet blame∣ing them for any thing. But for any Subject of England, to enterchange Mes∣sages, and to keep private intelligence, with any that seem to be in Arms against their King, and the invaders of his Dominions, to animate them to come, and advance forward; to refuse their Soveraigns Service, and the Oath of their fidelity, which was tendered unto them; and to hinder the Kings Souldiers to do their duties, either by denying to go with him, or re∣fusing to fight for him when they went, (which if some men were brought to their Legal tryal, I believe, would be more than sufficiently proved a∣gainst them) can be no lesse than heynous Crimes, perhaps, within the com∣passe of high Treason. Or were these things but our jealousies and fears, which do wear the garments of Truth; yet their proceedings in Parliament do add more fuell unto the fire of our suspicion; as, for our men, whom we have chosen to plead for us, and to treat with them, to respect them more than us, to en∣rich them, by impoverishing us,How they be∣haved them∣selves towards the Scots. giving them no lesse than 300000. l. who had entered into our Land and brought upon us such fears, of I know not how many mischiefs that might succeed; and not only so, but also, (to shew what love they bare to them, and how little regard they had of us, their Native Brethren, that put such trust and confidence in their fidelity, as to commit all our fortunes and liberties into their hands) paying weekly such a Pension for their provision, (besides the maintenance of our own Army, which were forced to carry them their monies, when themselves were un∣paid) as in a short time was able to exhaust all the wealth of this King∣dom; and yet for all his Majesties continual calling upon them to dispatch their discharge, and to finish the Treaty, for the good of both Kingdoms, keeping them here so exceeding long, and making so very much of them, (which in truth we envyed not, but admired what it meant, when we saw with what continual feastings they were entertained in London, and their lodgings frequented as the Kings Court) till all the people began to murmur, and to wax weary of so great a charge, and such a burden, as they knew must at last light upon their shoulders; which must needs be matters worthy of our best examinations. But as yet the common people that seeth no further than the present tense,Why they de∣tained them here so long. and the outside of things, did little know, what many wise men did then foresee, that these men aimed further than they seemed to do, and delayed the businesse purposely till they had attained many of their desires, and had fully endeared themselves into the affections of the Scots, that (if need required, that they could not effect all the residue of their design as they intended, which now could not so suddenly be brought unto perfe∣ction,) they might recall them here again to assist them, to do that by force, which by their craft and subtilty they should fail to do; as now by their sending for them, going unto them, and alleadging the Act of Pacification for their assistance, to withstand their King and to overthrow our Church, it is apparent to all the World, how perfidiously they dealt with God and man, and how treacherous their thoughts were from the beginning,
both to the King and Kingdom. Yet, As we found our Brethren of Scot∣land (howsoever these men behaved themselves in their secret intentions) to have carried themselves none otherwise than as wise, rational, and re∣ligious men, in all the Treaty; So I assure my self, they will hereafter still continue, both faithful unto God, and loyal unto their King; and, as they perceived not their intentions at the first, so they will not now joyn with them in any Association of Rebellion to withstand their own Liege Lord, and to change the established Laws and Religion of our Kingdom; but will rather live in peace and happiness in their own Land, than by for∣saking their enjoyed quietness, to involve themselves in the unhappiness of a desperate War in another Country. 2. The com∣pelling of all people to take their new fra∣med Protesta∣tion.2. After they had thus endeared themselves unto their Brethren of Scot∣land, they framed a Protestation, to maintain and defend, as far as lawfully they might, with their lives, powers, and estates, the True Reformed Pro∣testant Religion, his Majesties Royal Person, Honour, and Estate, the po∣wer, and priviledge of Parliament, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, and every person that should make the Protestation, in whatso∣ever he should do in the lawful pursuance of the same; and to their power, and as far as lawfully they might, to oppose, and, by all good means, endea∣vour to bring to condign punishment, all such as shall either by force, pra∣ctice, counsels, plots, conspiracies, or otherwiseWhich word is like the &c. in the Canoni∣cal Oath. do any thing to the con∣trary of any thing in the said Protestation contained; and neither for fear, hope, nor other respect, to relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Prote∣station. In which Protestation, though no man can espy the least shadow of ill, prima facie, at the first reading thereof; yet if you look further, and search narrowly into the intentions of the composers, the frame of the Protesta∣tion, and the practice of these Protestors, ever since the framing of it, you shall find that Desinit in piscem mulier formosa supernè: these men are no Changelings, but as like themselves as ever they were; For, 1. To terrifie the Papists, & to raise a Re∣bellion in Ire∣land.1. As it was intended, so it succeeded; it terrified the Papists, and made them so desperate, as almost to despair of their very Being, as concerning the place where, or the manner how, they should live; Which thing, toge∣ther with many other harsh and hard proceedings against many of them, and the small countenance which they shewed unto a very moderate Peti∣tion that the Papists exhibited unto them, hath driven abundance of them into Ireland, (whom I saw my self) and there consulting with the Irish (which were then also threatened by the Agents of this Faction there, that ere long they should be severely handled, and brought to the Church whether they would or no, or pay such a Mulct as should make them poor) what course they should take in such a desperate condition, wherein they were all like to be ruined, or to be rooted out of all the Kings Dominions, they concluded what they would do; To defend them∣selves by a plain Rebellion. So this course against them hath been the leading-card (as some of them confessed) of that great Rebellion; which being kindled (as some Sectaries in England expected) they thought they would so much the more weaken the King, by how much the more com∣bustion should be raised in each one of his Dominions: And therefore notwithstanding all the Kings gracious Messages, and wishes unto the House of Commons (which I wish all men would remember, how affectionately he desired it) to hasten to relieve that bleeding Kingdom, yet still they protra∣cted and neglected their redresse; and at last, passed such Votes, made such Orders, and procured such Acts, as rather respected themselves, and their posterity, to get all the land and goods of the Rebels to themselves, that were the Adventurers, than the relieving of us that were distres∣sed, and would (as I told some of the House of Commons) rather increase
the Rebellion, than any wayes quench that destroying flame. And this was (as it succeeded, and, as you see hereby, most likely intended) a most detestable Plot, for the kindling of that Rebellion, and continu∣ing of that bloody War in Ireland, without which, they knew this Rebellion in England could never have gained so much strength as it hath. 2. By their large expression of what Religion they protested to defend:2. To gain all Sectaries to their side. not the Protestant Religion, as it is established by Law, and expressed in the 39. Articles of the Church of England; but as it is repugnant to Popery, and taught perhaps by Burton, Burges, Goodwin, Burrows, or the like Am∣sterdamian Schismaticks, they opened the gap so wide, and made Hea∣ven-gate so broad, that all Brownists, Anabaptists, Socinians, Familists, Adamites, and all other New-England-brood, and Out-landish Sectaries whatsoever, that opposed Popery, might return home, and joyn with them, as they have done since, to overthrow our established Church and State. And this Plot, to increase their own strength, was as craftily done, and is as Detestable as the other, which, to weaken the King in England, caused a Rebellion in Ireland. 3. By their illegall compelling,3. To descry their own strength. and forcible inducing of all the people in the Kingdom to take the same, or to be adjudged ill-affected and po∣pish; and after the Lords had rejected the imposing of it, they by their Declaration, which shewed, That what person soever would not take it, was unfit to bear Office, either in Church, or Common-wealth, prevailed in this Plot so, that they descryed the number of their own Party, they understood their own strength, and they perceived thereby many things, which they knew not before; for now they had with David, numbred Is∣rael, and, so far as the wit and policy of the Devil had instructed them, they had searched into the secrets of all hearts. 4. Having compelled the people to take it,4. To insnare all the simpler sort to adhere unto them. they have hereby insnared all the simpler sort and tender consciences to stick unto them, when they tell them, and presse it upon their souls, That they have made a Protesta∣tion to maintain the Priviledges of Parliament, and the Liberty of the Sub∣ject, and therefore they are bound to adhere to the Parliament to the uttermost of their power; and so by this equivocall Protestati n, they have seduced thousands into their Rebellion, and led them blindfold unto destruction. But to let you see, not the sincerity of their hearts,The mystery of their iniquity. but the mystery of their iniquity, by this their Protestation; you shall never find them urge it unto others, or remembring it themselves, For the defence of the Kings Person, Crown, or Dignity, or for the liberty of any Subject, but only such Subjects as will be Rebels with them: For, how can they be said to defend any of these, when they do their very best to destroy His Person, and deprive him of all his Royal Dignities? and to plunder and imprison all true Subjects for being true Subjects unto their King? Whereby you see, how these Rebels are likewise perjured, and have weaved this Protestation like a Spiders web,That the rebels are all perju∣red. through which themselves might passe when they pleased, and like Vulcans Net, to catch the simpler sort, to adhere most eagerly to their Designs; and so it is but a circle of all subtilties, and not unwittily questioned; An pro∣testatio Parliamentaria deterior sit juramento cum, &c. For if there be any thing injoyned to be done by that Protestation, which was unlawful to be done before the Protestation was taken, it is no more to be justified by that Act, than any other unlawful thing is by a rash and wicked vow; and it ought not to be urged to do mischief; and if there be nothing to be in∣joyned thereby, but what was every mans duty before, there was but small need to draw any argument from any Protestation: but if they intended to draw men from the duty of alleageance to which they were legally sworn, &
all men understood, to do somewhat which the ignorant did not understand, then such a voluntary Protestation might do the deed; for they have pro∣tested to maintain the Priviledges of Parliament. And yet the wisest of us now may justly protest, we cannot tell what those Priviledges are, or how far they should extend in the judgement of the House of Commons; for they are multiplied like the Rats of Egypt: And as Pharaohs lean Kine, did eat up all his fat Cows;Priviledges of Parl. multiply∣ed, and are like Pharaohs kine. so these meager Priviledges have eaten up all our goodly Laws. And therefore, the unlimited universality of these Priviledges in the Protestation, extending it self as far as the & caetera in the Canonical Oath, was but a mischievous plot in the Contrivers, to catch the simple to adhere unto them; And it is a madness in any man that hath legally sworn to defend the King's Person, Crown, and Dignity, which he knoweth, and hath irregularly protested to maintain the Priviledges of Parliament, which he knoweth not, immediately to draw his sword against his known Sove∣raign, or to Rebel against his well-known lawful Authority, in the behalf of some thing, he knoweth not what, but is told by these men, It is a Privi∣ledge of Parliament. O ye unwise among the people, When will you understand; Who hath bewitched you, that you should not believe the truth? CHAP. VII. Sheweth how the Faction was inraged against our last Canons. What manner of men they chose in their new Synod. And of six spe∣cial Acts of great prejudice unto the Church of Christ, which un∣der false pretences, they have already done. 3. The con∣demning of our last Canons.3. FOr the Canons, that were last made, I must confess, my self, and ma∣ny others of my Brethren, were very averse unto our sitting, to make any at that time; yet many Reasons were shewed us, that we might sit (and we had the Judges of the Common-Laws opinion under their hands shewed us, for the legality of our sitting) and conclude such Canons as might be for the glory of God, and the good of his Church; but of those that are made, though I assure my self, the worst of them, is not so ill as they al∣leadge, nor near so bad as most (I might say the best) of their illegall Or∣ders; yet, there were many of us that never gave our votes to passe them; and though not for any offence that we saw in them, yet, for the scandall that might be taken at them, we heartily wished they had never been so zealously propounded at that time. But the Sectaries of London, and the prevalent Faction in Parliament did, with open mouth, spend much time to the no small prejudice of the whole Kingdom, and made many long Speeches to exclaim against them, as against a Bundle of superstitions, that obscured the purity of our Reli∣gion, an introduction unto Popery, and an intolerable, unheard of the like, invasion upon the liberty of the Subjects, that revived again the Papal Tyranny, which, contrary to our Fundamental Laws, have incroached to make Canons and Constitutions to bind our Consciences; whereupon they canvas them, and condemn them out of their house, and the House of God, out of the Church and Common-wealth: and not only so, but also the Contrivers of them, and Consenters to them, they terrifie, and threaten to adjudge them, sometimes with a praemunire, to have forfeited all their goods and possessions, and sometimes to be fin'd, (as we were at last) with such a heavy Mulct, as, in all other mens judgement, did far exceed the pretended offence, especially of us that never consented to them.
And yet we find, not only in Lindwood, and others of our Canonists, but also in the book of Martyrs, and the rest of our English Histories, that the Arch-Bishops, within their Provinces, have at several times made Ca∣nons and Constitutions, for the Regulating of all the people committed to their charge, without any suspicion of the least violation of our laws; but the Faction say, Sic volumus, and the Houses of Parliament understand what is Law better then I do, and therefore accordingly (before the makers of them were called to make their answers, by what Authority they made them, or by what Law they could justify them) they reject the Ca∣nons and censure their makers. Yet notwithstanding their distast of them, it is conceived by some, that the Clergy having His Majesties writ to be con∣vocated, and leave to compose such Canons, as they thought fit to be ob∣served, for the Honor of God, the discharge of their duty, and the good of the Church, and having the Royal assent and approbation to all that they concluded; (which is all that I find the Statute provided in this case requireth) though they should be defective, or perhaps offensive, in some circumstances; yet if they be not legally abrogated, after a full hearing of all parties, and the Kings consent to reject them, as it was to approve them they are still as binding, and in as full force as ever they were; though, for mine own part, I will not undertake the task, to make that good, when as both the Houses have condemned them; but I say: 4. This Scandal taken against these Canons,4. The ap∣pointing of a new framed Synod. made way for the faction to call for a new Synod, or Assembly of Divines, for the rectifying of things amiss, as well in Discipline as in Doctrine; And in this new intended Synod, the Divines are nominated, not according to the rules and Canons of the Church, and the Customs of all Nations,Lay-men choosers of the Clergy, as if a shepheard did choose pretious stones. since the first Synod or Council of the Apostles, by Divines, that can best judg of their own abilities, as when the spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets: but, fearing the Clergy would have sent men that were too Orthodoxal for their faith, they deprived them of their rights, and, forgetting their Protestation to defend the right of the Subject, the choice is made by themselves, that are Lay men, and Young men, and many of them perhaps Prophane men, or at least not so religious, nor so judicious as they ought to be, for a business of this nature, of so great concernment, as the direction of our souls to their eter∣nal bliss. And now they being nominated, we know most of them what they are; men, not only justly suspected to be ill disposed to the peace of our Church, and too much addicted to innovation, to alter the Government,What manner of men they have chosen. to reject and cast away the Book of Common-Prayer, to oppose Episco∣pacy, and to displcae the grave and godly Governours of Gods Church; but also apparently fashioned to the humours of these their own Disci∣ples (who are to be the only judges of their determinations) that (al∣though some few Canonical men, and most Reverend, Learned, and Re∣ligious Bishops, and others, for fashion sake, to blind the World, are named amongst them; yet, when, as in a Parliament, so in a Synod, the most des∣perate faction, if they prove prevalent to be the major part, will carry any thing in despite of the better part, they shall stand but as Cyphers, able to do nothing) they might abolish our old established Government, erect their own new invented Discipline, and propagate their well affected Do∣ctrine in all Churches; for you may judge of them by their compeers, Goodwin, Burrows, Arrow-Smith, and the rest of their ignorant, factious, and schismatical Ministers, that together with those intruding Mechanicks, (who without any calling either from God or man, do step from the Botchers boord, or their Horses stable, into the Preachers Pulpit) are the bellows which blow up this fire, that threateneth the destruction of our Land, like Shebah's trumpet, to summon the people unto Rebellion, and
like the red Dragon in the Revelation, which gave them all his poyson, and made them eloquent, to disgorge their malice, and to cast forth floods of slanders after those that keep Loyalty to their Soveraign, and to belch forth their unsavory reproaches against those that discover their affected igno∣rance, and Seditious wickedness, in defence of truth; and are the Instru∣ments of this faction, to seduce the poor people to the desolation of the whole Kingdom, if not timely prevented by their repentance, and assistance to enable him whom God hath made our Protector to defend us against all such transcendent wickedness. And these are the main ends for which they summoned such a new Synod of their furious and Fanatick teachers, upon whose temper and fidelity, I believe, no wise man that knows them would lay the least weight of his souls felicity.Whar Synod they should have chosen. Whereas if they desired a Refor∣mation of things amiss, and not rather an alteration of our Religion and the abolition of our now setled Government, they would have called for such a Synod as was in Queen Elizabeths time, when the 39 Articles of our Religion were composed, and such as they needed not to be ashamed to own in future times, nor the best refuse to associate the rest, for the illega∣lity of their election; for if there be any scandalous Governours, (as we deny not but there may be a Cham in the Ark, a Judas amongst the Apo∣stles, and perhaps an unjustifiable Prelate among the Bishops, as there was a proud Lucifer among the Angels) or if they think it necessary to correct, qualify, explain, or alter some expressions or ceremonies in our Li∣turgy, and Book of Common-Prayer, we are so far from giving the least offence to weak Consciences, that we heartily wish a lawful Synod, which may have a full legal power, as well to remove the offences, as to punish the offenders, and to establish such Laws and Canons, as well against Sepa∣ratists and Schismaticks, Anabaptists and Brownists, as against Recusants and Papists, and such as may be for the Glory of God, and the peace of our Church; which was our sole intention in the last Synod. But seeing their Plot was rather to establish a new Church than to redress the defects of the old, and to countenance and advance those boute-fues that schismatically rent our Church in pieces, and most wickedly defile the pure Doctrine of the same, by degrading and displacing the grave Go∣vernours thereof, I will (to give you a taste of what fruit you are like to reap from them) very briefly set down the sum of these two points. Two points handled. 1. What they have already done in the Affairs of our Church. 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Tim. 1.20. 1. Opened a gap ta all li∣cenciousness.1. What they have already done. 2. What Discipline and Doctrine are like to ensue, if they should be enabled or permitted to erect their new Church; for, (as you may find it in the Remonstrance of the Commons of Eng∣land to the House of Commons.) 1. Under colour of Regulating the Ecclesiastical Courts, (Courts that have been founded by the Apostles, and had alwaies their Authority and Reverence among Christians, even before the Secular power (when the Emperours became Christians) had confirmed them) they have taken away (in respect of the coercive part thereof, which is the life of the Law, and without which the other part is fruitless) all the Spiritual jurisdi∣ction of Gods Church; they have taken away Aarons rod, and would have only Manna left in Gods Ark; so that now the crimes inquirable and censurable by those Courts, though never so heinous, as Adultery, Incest, and the like, cannot be punished; Heresies, and Schisms, which now of late have abounded in all places, can no waies be Reformed, and the neglect of Gods service can as hardly be repaired, when as the Ministers cannot be enforced to attend their Cures, the Church-officers cannot be compelled to perform their duty, and the Parishioners cannot be brought by our Law to pay their Tythes and other necessary Duties; which things
are all so considerable that all Christians ought to fear how lamentable will be the end of these sad beginnings; for, my self have seen the House of God most unchristianly prophaned, the Church-yard and the dead bodies of the Saints so rooted and miserably abused by Hogs and Swine, that it would grieve meer men, that scarce ever heard of God, to see such a bar∣barous usage of any holy place; and when the Ministers have given a seven-nights warning to prepare for the blessed Eucharist, and the Communi∣cants came to partake of those holy mysteries, they were fain to return home without it, for want of Bread and Wine to administer it; and yet now, the Church-Governours have not any power to redress any of these abominable abuses. 2. Under shew of Reforming the Church Discipline,2. Voted down all the Gover∣nours of Gods Church. and bettering the Government thereof, they have voted down those very Governours, the Bishops and their Assistants, the Deans and Chapters, whose function was constituted by the Apostles, and hath from that time continued to this very day; As the most Learned Arch-Bishop of Armagh, Bishop Hall, Master Mason, Master Tayler, and that worthy Gentleman Master Theyer, and o∣thers have sufficiently shewed to all the World. 3. Under the pretence of expunging Popery, which Bishop Jewel,3. Vilified our Service-book. Bi∣shop Parry, Bishop Babington, Bishop Bilson, Bishop Morton, Bishop Dave∣nant, Bishop Hall, and abundance more of the Reverend Bishops have con∣futed, expelled and kept out of our Church, more than any, yea than all their schismatical Disciples, whose Learning was no waies able to answer the weakest Arguments of our Adversaries, the Service Book that is esta∣blished by Act of Parliament, and was by those holy Martyrs, that lost their lives, and spilt their blood in defence of the Protestant Religion, and defiance of Erroneous Popery, so Divinely and devoutly composed, as all the Reformation can bear witness, and I am well assured, the whole flock of these Convocants shall never be able, without this, to make any neer so pious; must be totally cried down, and hath been in many places, burned, used to the uncleanest use, and teared all to pieces; And to let you see their abomination herein, I must crave patience to transcribe, that it may the more generally pass, the Speech of Alderman Garraway,Alderman Garraway p. 7. where he saith, pag. 7. Did not my Lord Maior (that is, Pennington) first enter upon his Office with a Speech against the Book of Common Prayer? Hath the Common Prayer ever been read before him? Hath not Captain Ven said, that his Wife could make prayers worth three of any in that Book? O Masters! There have been times, that he which should speak a∣gainst the Book of Common-Prayer in this City, should not have been put to the patience of a Legal-Trial; we were wont to look upon it as the grea∣test treasure, and the Jewel of our Religion; and he that should have told us, he wished well to our Religion, and yet would have taken away the Book of Common-Prayer would never have gotten credit. I have been in all the parts of Christendome, and have conversed with Christians in Tur∣key; why, in all the Reformed Churches there is not any thing of more Reverence than the English Liturgy; not our Royal Exchange, nor the Navy of Queen Elizabeth, is so famous as this; in Geneva it self, I have heard it extolled to the skies. I have been three months together by Sea, and not a day without hearing it read twice;How the Mari∣ners esteem the Liturgy. the honest Mariners then despised all the World but the King and the Common-Prayer Book; he that should be suspected to wish ill to either of them, should have made but an ill voyage; and let me tell you, they are shrewd Youths, those Sea-men; if they once discern that the person of the King is in danger, or the Prote∣stant professed Religion, they will shew themselves mad bodies before you are aware of it; I would not be a Brownist or an Anabaptist in their way, for — And yet, these men have so basely abused, and are so vio∣lent
to abolish this excellent Book and Divine Liturgy, that Many will not believe it though it should be told unto them: I would they did but read that Act of Parliament which is prefixed unto the same, to see if they regarded either the Law of God or Man, the Religion of the Cler∣gy that composed it, or the Wisdom of the Parliament that confirm∣ed it. 4. Abused the images and pi∣ctures of the Saints and o∣ther holy things.4. Under colour to shew their hatred to Idolatry, they have broken down the glass-Windows of many Churches; shot off the heads of the Images of the Blessed Virgin, and of our dear Saviour, represented in her lap, upon the porch of Saint Maries in Oxford; thrown away the Pictures of Christ, and of other his Holy Apostles, and Gods blessed Saints, into the Rivers; taken the Ministers Surplices to make Frocks to preserve their cloathes when they dressed their Horses; and in Worcester they have done what I am ashamed to speak, and would loathe any modest ear to heare; made the Pulpit, and (not far from the Town) the Font their house of office, as I was informed by one of the gravest Doctours and Prebends of that Church; thrown down the Organs, which cost above fifteen hundred pounds, and taken the Pipes, and Copes of the Prebends, and gone round about the Streets, with the Copes on their backs, and the Pipes in their hands, dancing the Morrice-dance; So in Winscomb in Glo∣cester-shire, they brake down the Organs, and made that Church their Slaughter-house, when they killed certain Sheep that they had stollen, and dressed the same upon the Communion Table; and in Lincoln-Min∣ster the Souldiers brought their Horses into the Quire, laid their hay upon the Holy Table, and made the House of God a Stable for their Horses, that did now eat their hay where the Christians did use to Com∣municate the Body and Blood of Christ; so that these men give their Sa∣viour no better entertainment now in his glory,Luk. 2.7: than the Jews did when he came in his Humility, but he shall be still kept low, and a Stable shall be good enough for his Mansion; yet, as in Canterbury they did but little less, so in Winchester they added this to their former prophanations, to take the ashes of those Saxon Kings, that were kept in certain Urns, and threw them about the ground, as if death it self could not appease their rage. Saeva sed in manes manibus arma dabant. It would fill a whole volume to relate all the Villanies that they did of this kind, the consideration of which prophane usage of Holy places, made a worthy Gentleman Pathetically to set down these fervent speeches; I would to God we had not cause to complain of the Horrid and barba∣rous attempts of divers among us (Christians I can scarce call them) a∣gainst some the mother-Churches,Canterbury, Worcester, Winchester, Chichester, and many others. who as if they had studied to affront the Almighty to his face, and purposely with Manasses to anger him, have not spared to prophane those goodly Structures, and irreligiously and Anti∣christianlike to deface the Instruments there prepared and imployed in the service of the great God: at the very thought whereof, I tremble and stand amazed,Master Theyer in his Trea¦tise of Episco¦pacy. 56, 57. and can hardly believe the Christian World in any age (no not under the Gothes and Vandals) can parallel it with an example of like abominable and Atheistical Villanies, yet to this day uncensured: and I am heartily sorry that it should be told in Gath or Ascalon, in any forraign Nation, that our English People should have any such Sect a∣mongst them, so voyd of all humanity, so destitute of all thoughts of a Deity, and so full of all incredible impieties. And therefore I must use the words of the Prophet Jeremy, 9, 29. Shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord? Or, shall not my soul, be avenged on such a Nation as this? Or, is it any wonder, that there are such Wars, such bloody Wars,
such barbarous rapines, and that these miseries do still continue amongst us, when we not onely proceed to commit,Rom. 1.32. Heb. 10.31. but also to defend and justify these and the like abominable wickednesses; and have pleasure in them that do them? for, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. 5. Under the colour of advancing the true Protestant Religion,5 Branded the true Prote∣stants, and advanced Ana∣baptists. they have branded the best Protestants, (even those that have most learnedly, both preached, and written against the Church of Rome, and all her erroneous tenets, and were not long since registred in the classe of Puritans, and for that cause kept under water) for Papists, and superstitiously Popish, and so Malignants, and opposers of the true, to be established, Religion; and they have encouraged and promoted to the Livings and Lively-hoods of the most Orthodox and Canonical men, Anabaptists and Brownists, and other Sectaries of most desperate opinions, that (as Saint Bernard saith of the like, Multiplicati sunt super numerum;) As the Caterpillers over∣spread all the Land of Aegypt, so these are multiplyed in every corner, without number; and these tares have almost choaked all the Wheat in Gods field, and do preach most desperate Doctrines, destructive both to themselves, their Proselytes, and all the truest Protestants throughout all this Kingdom; when as Sedition and Rebellion, besides their other damnable Doctrines condemned by the Church, must ever be at one end of their Sermons, and published in their Pamphlets; As for instance, you may find in the bloody books, and fiery writings, of the darling Secreta∣ries of the red Dragon, that warreth against the Saints, Stephen Marshal, Master Bridges, Jo. Goodwin, Burroughs, and the rest of the Locusts,Quae glome∣rantur in unum Innumerae pestes Erebi, Claud. that are sent out of the bottomlesse pit to seduce the people of God, and to lead them headlong unto perdition. But, let me advise the Servants of Christ, to remember their Saviour's words. To beware of false Prophets; they shall deceive many, and many,Matth. 7.15. love to be deceived by them; those whom God hath given up, that they should believe a lye; Qui infatuati seducuntur, & seducti judicabuntur;2 Thess. 2.10. The Authour's advice. but you that desire to escape their snares may know them by their fruits; which are, Rebellion against their King, and Rayling against their Governours, Perjury against God, by the breaches of those Oathes, which in the face of the Church they have taken, both to the King, and to their Superiours;Three notes by which we may know the false Apostles. and a wilful perverting of the sacred Scriptures, to the perdition of their Proselytes; besides many other bitter fruits, that, worse than any Aco∣nite are able to poyson any Christian soul, that do but taste of their Phil∣tra's: or, if you will believe these Apples of Sodom, to be as sweet as they seem fair, then remember by what marks the Prophets and Apostles tell us that we may know them; 1. Such as run before they be sent,1. Note. Jer. 23.21. as Weavers, Tailors, and the like, that never had any calling or Autho∣rity to enter upon this sacred Function. 2. They went from us,2. Note. 1 John 2.15. but are not of us; such as were called, but then forsook their first love, and apo∣stated from the Church, and, like ungracious children, did throw dirt in their mothers face, or, like the brood of Vipers, do labour to gnaw out her bowels; and here let the world judge, whether we went from them, or they from us; whether we or they apostated from that Oath and profes∣sion which all and every one of us did make, when we entred into holy Orders. 3. These false Prophets, saith the Apostle, do lead simple,3. Note. 2 Tim. 3.6. Gen. 3.1.6. or silly wo∣men, captives; just as their Master first seduced Eve, and she Adam, so do these; and because they have lesse worth than can attain to the height of their ambition, you may see most of them by women raised to great for∣tunes, that their pride disdaineth to be obedient; or if they fail of such wives, yet are they swelled with envie, which is as rebellious in these, as pride is in the other.
6 Ordered to take away all the revenues of the most worthy Clergy.6. Under the pretence of making our Clergie more spiritual and Apo¦stolique, they have voted away most of our temporal estates, the Lands and Lordships of the Bishops, Deans, and Prebends, and the Pluralities of those persons that possessed double Benefices, and made their Order that no man should pay any rent, or any dues, unto any of the forenamed per∣sons. And by this taking away the free-hold of the Clergy now in present, (which they hold with as good right, and by the same Law, as the best Lord in England holdeth his Inheritance) and by this discouragement of Learning for the time to come, they thought to make our Clergy Angeli∣cal; but have proved themselves, I will not say, diabolical, but most in∣jurious unto the Church of Christ, by committing an Act of as great inju∣stice, and as prejudicial to the Common-wealth, as can be found among the Pagans. For what can be more unjust, or more inhumane, than to take away my Lively-hood, which is my very life, in mine old age, with∣out any offence of mine, for which I had laboured all the dayes of my life? And what consequence can this produce, than (that which succeed∣ed in the like case,Sublatis studi∣orum praemiis, ipsa studia pe∣reunt, C. Tacit. 1 Reg. 12 31. Matth. 15.14. in Jeroboam's time, when he robbed the Priests and Levites of their Inheritance) ignorance and barbarity, and the basest of the people to be the Preachers of Gods Word, whereby the blind do lead the blind, untill both do fall into the ditch; as I can testifie, some of our greatest Nobility intended to make their sonnes Priests and Bishops, while the glory of Israel, and the beauty of our Church remained un-obscu∣red, and now, contempt and poverty being enacted and ordered to be their portion, those resolutions are vanished; and the Ʋniversities can bear me witnesse, the lowest Gentrie are not so well contented to under∣take this highest calling. These, and many other things ejusdem farinae, of the same mold, they have already done, to overwhelm the ship of Christ under the waves of this turbulent Faction. And these prophanations of Gods divine Service, and the violations of the Sepulchres of the dead (whose ashes and bones, like canes sepulchrales, they have disturbed in their graves) and those unheard-of sacriledges on Gods Priests and portion are so equally practised, that it is almost hard to judge which are greater, either their impiety towards God, their inhumanity towards the dead, or their injustice towards the living. CHAP. VIII. Sheweth what Discipline or Church-government our factious Schis∣maticks do like best. And twelve principal points of Doctrine, which they hold as twelve Articles of their faith: and we are to believe the same, or suffer; if this faction should prevail. 2. What disci∣pline and do∣ctrine the new Synod is like to set up.2. FOr the discipline and the doctrine that they would establish, they have not yet, and I believe they can never fully agree what they shall be; their desire is first to overthrow the old, and then they will take care, and consult how to devise a new; but I could wish they would let the old alone till they could agree to produce a better. Yet, because their blind zeal is so violent, to have their own unjust de∣sires, to destroy the vine-yard of Christ root and branch, I, that have served seven years, a Lecturer, among them, in the heart of London, and was con∣versant with the purest of these holy brethren, and thereby understood most of their Anabaptistical, and ridiculous tenets, and what discipline they best liked, will here draw you a model of their Ʋtopian, or New-England
Church, which they would transport hither, to obscure the glory of old England. 1. For their discipline and government:1. Their disci∣pline. Some would have the Scottish Synods, and that form of Government, which old furious Knox hath first brought among them, and is fully described by that Reverend Arch-Bishop Bancroft; Others like better of the Geneva Assemblies,Bancoft in lib. English Scot∣tizing. instituted by M. Cal∣vin, and continued by Theodore Beza, two worthy members of that Church, or the discipline of the Hugonots in the new French Reformation, which differeth but a little from the other; But most of them like better of the manner of Amsterdam, where every Church is independent, and every Pastour is a Pope in his own Parish; and to that purpose, you may re∣member how vehemently they have lately most foolishly writtenAs Smith, Best, Daven∣port, Canne, Robinson, and Mris. Childley, and many other anonyms. Sober Sadnesse, p. 22. for this Independent Government; and how the Lord Say, and the Lord Brooks, two leading Captains of that faction, have often protested they would dispense with all sorts of Religions, so they might freely exer∣cise their own; and that such a toleration ought to be granted, to all others; because their Independencie cannot otherwise consist; for he that is accountable to none, will use what Religion he pleaseth, with∣out controule; and therefore they support their own Army by men of all Nations and Religions, not their grand Adversaries the Papists excep∣ted, but of fifty or sixty Souldiers that billeted in Adthrop, there were no less than three or four Papists amongst them. But how unsutable these Governments would prove to stand with our English Nobility, and Gentry, (besides the novelty of them,How unsuta∣ble their go∣vernment would be to our Gentrie. and how farre dissonant they are to the Apostolique discipline) I will appeal to their own judgement, when every undiscreet Parson, and poor Vicar, shall be able, upon every discontent to excommunicate the best man in his Parish, and as we have seen some of them debarring whom they pleased from the holy Table, because their great anger, or little judgement, conceived them to be unworthy. When as the Church deemed it fitter that none of her children should undergo the least indignity for any personal distaste, but upon due examination of witnesses, a full hearing, and a just censure in open Court; which course if it be neglected, should be rather punished in the offenders, than the discipline dissolved, the Governours removed, and a new fantastical fancie erected. 2. For the Doctrines of these men,2. The Do∣ctrines of the faction that are like to be setled by the new Synod. they are like the poetical fiction of those Sisters, facies non omnibus una, Nec diversa tamen; I did once in∣tend, while I lived amongst them to collect a whole Volume of them; but Satan then prevented me, and plotted my destruction for mine inten∣tion: yet now, I will set down these few, out of those many, which I then observed. 1. Though Moses saith, The secret things belong to the Lord our God,1. They search into Gods se∣crets. Deut. 29.29. but the things revealed, belong to us and our children for ever: yet these men are all Gnostiques, they know very much, even of the secrets and counsels of God, and they are sure who shall be saved, and who shall be damned; and, as men of the Cabinet-counsel of God, broach their illusions for divine revelations, and perswade the people, that what they say, or do, is all from God; and therefore that this War which they prosecute, was preordained of God for the destruction of the wicked, to whom they formerly preached their damnation, and thereby have caused many silly soules most desperately to end the miseries of their wretched life, by putting themselves to an untimely death. 2. They onely,They judge th mselves only the elect. as the elect of God (which shall be the sole heires of heaven) are the Lords Proprietaries of all this worldly wealth, and the re∣probates being enemies unto God, have no right unto any of Gods crea∣tures; and therefore they think they may lawfully take away the goods of
those reprobates, whom now they call Malignants, and they have as good warrant for it, as ever the Israelites had to spoil the Aegyptians; for they tell us, that Saint Paul, which knew right from wrong, tells them plainly, that whether they be things present,1 Cor 3.22, 23 or things to come, even all are yours, and ye Christ's,That there is a double right to the things of this wo ld. Psal. 104.28. Matth. 5.45. and Christ God's; but they understand not that men have a double right unto these worldly goods. 1. As Christians, and so God as a merci∣full Father, hath provided all things for them. 2. As the Creatures of God; and so God, as a faithful Creator, openeth his hand, and filleth all things living with plenteousnesse; and maketh his Sun to shine upon the just, and upon the unjust; and so the wicked have as good an interest in their estates as the godly; and besides, God hath not given them the power to distinguish, who are the elect, or who are reprobates. And therefore if we have any regard of our goods, that God hath given us, we have great reason to look about us: for these are the greatest Chea∣ters in Christendome, and as they have made us Malignants, so they will make us reprobates when they please, that they may enjoy those things that we have. 3. They think themselves free from all sin Numb. 23.21. Tit. 1.15.3. Because Balaam saith, God beheld no iniquity in Jacob; and the Apo∣stle saith, To the pure, all things are pure; they teach their Proselytes, that in them, which are the holy Brethren, there is no sin; and their adultery, drunkenesse, cozenage, and the like odious crimes, are no crimes, because God loving them so tenderly, as a fond mother seeth no fault in her un∣toward child, so he takes no notice of any offence that they commit; but for the ungodly,To the unbe∣lieving, no∣thing is pure. Titus 1.15. their Prayers are sinnes, their Alms are odious, and what∣soever commendable duty they do perform, God accounteth their best acti∣ons to be heinous transgressions, and to adde the more weight of punishment to their damnation; which Doctrine how abominable it is to God, and how destructive to all men, to make these holy Brethren, and their sanctified Sisters senslesse in all sinnes,Matth. 9.12. uncapable of repentance, when the whole hath no need of the Physitian; and to discourage all other ignorant men from do∣ing good duties, when the performance of them shall multiply their stripes; is so apparent to all men, that I need not stand to confute it: for, if Coniah, (though he were the Signet upon my right hand,Jer. 22.24. Ezek. 33.15. or, as the apple of mine eye) doth offend, I will cut him off; and, if the wicked forsake his wicked∣nesse, and do that which is just, love mercy, and speak truth, he shall be accepted, and the Lord will not call light darknesse, nor good evill, in any one. 4. They allow the women to offend while their husbands sleep. Joh. 11.11. 1 Cor. 7.39.4. Because our Saviour saith, Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; when as indeed he was dead; and the Heathens say, Sleep is , the brother of Death: they take this colour to hide their adulteries, that while the husband sleepeth, the wife is as free from him as if he were dead, a foolery so ridiculous, that the naming of it, is a sufficient confuta∣tion of it, and yet you shall hardly withdraw our London-Anabaptists from it. 5. They justify many kinds of lyes, and equi∣vocations. Gen 12 13. Acts 23.5.5. Because Abraham said that Sarah was his Sister, and Saint Paul said, I wist not brethren, that he was the High Priest; they hold it as an Article of their Creed, that for officious lyes and equivocations, being for the furthe∣rance of their cause, the good work which they pretend, they may, and ought to use them, to swallow them down like water, they make no bones of them; and therefore it is dangerous to treat, and weaknesse to give cre∣dit, without sufficient pledges, to the faith of these men; whose profes∣sion may as lawfully deceive us, as their Religion teacheth them to destroy us: and I believe the experience which his Majesties Officers had of them in the performance of their promises and conditions of departure from Win∣chester, Reading, and other Townes surrendred unto them, may sufficiently confirm this equivocall point of their Publique faith.
6.6. They would root out all those that they term wicked. Deut 7.2. 1 Sam. 15.23. Because the Lord straitly charged the Israelites to root out the wick∣ed Canaanites, and the rest of those cursed Nations; and translated the Kingdom of Israel from Saul unto David, because he spared Agag; and our Saviour bids us, succidere ficum, to cut down that unprofitable tree which bare no fruit: they are so filled with such unmerciful cruelty to∣wards all those they term wicked, and judge Malignants, that they had better fall into the hands of heathen Tyrants, than of these their holy bre∣thren, who embruing their hands in the blood of so many faithful Christi∣ans, do sing with the Psalmist,Psal. 58 9. The righteous rejoyce when they see this ven∣geance, they shall wash their feet in the blood of the ungodly: for, as Solomon saith, The tender mercies of the wicked are meer cruelty.Prov. 12.10. And I believe the first inventers of that Design to root out all the Papists in Ireland, and to get that Act to purchase all the Lands of the Rebels, had tasted too much of this bitter root of such destructive Doctrine; whereby you see how the Religion of these men robbes us of our Estates, keeps no faith with us, and takes away our lives. 7. Though among the works of God, every flower cannot be a Lilly,7. They would have a party among all men, both in Church and Common-wealth. Gal. 5 6. Col. 3.11. every beast cannot be a Lyon, every bird cannot be an Eagle, and every Planet cannot be a Phoebus; yet in the School of these men, this is the do∣ctrine of their to be new erected Church, that with God there is no respect of persons, and neither Circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision; but whether they be bond or free, masters or servants, Jew, or Gentile, Barba∣rian, Scythian, a country-Clown, or a Court Gallant, rich or poor, it is all one with God because these Titles of Honour, Kings, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, are no entities of Gods making, but the creatures of mans in∣vention, to puffe him up with pride, and not to bring him unto God; and therefore though for the bringing of their great good work to passe, they are yet contented to make the Earl of Essex their General, and Warwick their Admiral, and so Pym and Hampden great Officers of State; yet, when the work is done, their Plot perfected, and their Government establi∣shed, then you shall find, that, As now, they will eradicate Episcopacie, and make all our Clergie equall, as if all had equally but one talent, and no no man worthier than another; so then there should be neither King, Lord, Knight, nor Gentleman, but a parity of degrees among all these holy bre∣thren. And to give us a taste of what they mean; as the Lords concur∣rence with them inabled them to devour the Kings power; so they have since, with great justice, prevailed with the House of Commons to swallow up the Lords power, and have most fairly invaded their priviledge, when they questioned particular MembersAs my Lord Duke, and my Lord Digbie. 8. They would have no man to pray for temporal things. Matth. 33 34. Matth. 6.11. 9. Not to say the Lords Prayer. 10. Not to say, God Speed you. 2 John 10.11, 12, Not to pray for the Malig∣nants. 1 John 5.16. for words spoken in that House, and then the whole House, when they brought up and countenanced a mutinous and seditious Petition, which demanded the Names of those Lords, that consented not with the House of Commons in those things, which that House had twice denied. 8. Because our Saviour saith, Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven and the righteousnesse thereof, and all these things, that is, meat, drink, and cloathes, and all other earthly things, , shall be cast unto you; and again, Be not carefull for to morrow; they teach their Proselytes, that they ought not to pray, by any means, for any of these things; whereas Christ biddeth us to say, Give us this day our daily Bread. 9. They cannot endure to say the Lords Prayer, for that's a Popish super∣stition, but their Prayers must be all tautologies, and a circular repetition of their own indigested inventions. 10. You must not say, God speed you, to any neighbour, or any traveller, lest he intends some evill work, and then you shall be partaker of his sin. 11. They will not allow any of their Disciples to pray for any of the Re∣probates; and therefore they do exceedingly blame us, and tear our Litur∣gie,
because we say, That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men. 12. Because Christ saith, Call no man father on earth, for one is your Fa∣ther which is in Heaven, the child must not call him that begat him, and nurseth him, his father; nor kneel unto him to ask him blessing, nor perform many other such duties which the Lord requireth, and the Church instru∣cteth her children to do to this very day: and this foolish Doctrine of cal∣ling no man Father, no man master, or Lord, and the like, in their sense, (because they understand not the divine meaning of our Saviour's words) hath been the cause of such undutifulnesse, and untowardnesse, such contempts of superiours, and such rebellions to Authority, as is be∣yond expression; when as by their disloyalty, being thus bred up in them from their cradle, they first despise their father, then their Teach∣ers, then their King, and then God himself. CHAP. IX. Sheweth three other speciall points of Doctrine, which the Brow∣nists and Anabaptists of this Kingdom do teach. 13. BEcause they can find no Text in Scripture (when as the Alcoran is not so impudently hellish, as to justifie the action) for to warrant men, to absolve our consciences from any Oaths that we have voluntarily taken, for the performance of any businesse; I cannot say that they do pro∣fessedly teach, but I do hear they do usually practise this most damnable sin; as, that Master Marshall, and Master Case, did absolve the Souldiers taken at Brainceford from their Oath, which they took, never to bear Arms against his Majesty; which is a sin destructive both to body and soul, when their Perjury added to their Treason, makes them two-fold more the children of hell, than they were before; and if they be taken again, they can expect nothing but their just deserved death; and therefore I do admire that any man can challenge the name of a Divine, which doth either preach or practise a point so devilish. 14. They think sacriledge to be no sin. Acts 20.34. 1 Thes. 2.9. 1 Cor. 1.12.14. Because Saint Paul saith, These hands have ministred to my necessities, and to them that were with me: and again, Labouring night and day, because we would not be chargeable to any of you, we preached unto you the Gospel of God: and because the rest of the Apostles and Disciples were Fishermen, Trades∣men, or professours of some Science, either liberal or mechanick, as Saint Luke was a Physician, Joseph a Carpenter, and the like, who did live by their manual crafts, and were chargeable to none of their people, but sought them, and not theirs, to win their souls to God, and not their monies unto them∣selves; therefore they think it no robbery to take away all the revenues of the Church, nor sacriledge to rob the Clergy of all the means they have; because they should either labour for their livings, as the Apostles did, or live upon the peoples Almes, as many poor Ministers do, to the utter un∣doing of many souls, in many distressed, and most miserable Churches. But because this revenue of the Church, and the Lands of the Bishops is that golden Wedge, and the brave Babylonish garment, which the Ana∣baptistical Achans of our time do most of all thirst after, in this their pre∣tended holy Reformation, I must here sistere gradum, stay awhile and let you know: 1. Sacriledge, what it is.1. That the taking away of any Lands or goods given and consecrated to holy uses, and to convert the same to any other purpose than which they
were dedicated, is termed sacriledge; that is, the stealing of holy goods from the right owners, to our selves and others to whom we leave them. 2. That this sacriledge is a sin; for it is a snare to the man,4. That it is a sinne. who devour∣eth that which is holy, and after vowes to make inquiry; that is, whether such a service be needful, or such a taking away be a sin. 3. That this sinne is a very great sinne; for Saint Paul saith,3. A great sin. Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou sacriledge? And Idolatry is the giving of our goods and service to false gods; Sacriledge the taking away of goods dedicated to the service of any God, especially of the true God. And this seemeth by the Apostles words to be a greater sinne than the other; be∣cause the devill laboureth more to take away the service of the true God, than to establish his own service; for he knoweth that as light taken away, darknesse must needs follow, so the true Religion being destroyed,Hosea 2.8. Ezech. 16. 1 Reg. 18.19. Gen. 22. Idolatry must needs succeed; and he knoweth that Idolatry hath been bountiful enough to the service of Idols, that he needeth not so much to fear the taking away of their goods, as to care that the goods dedicated to Gods service, be taken away. 4. That this sin is a very dan∣gerous sinne, both to 1. The Persons that commit it. 2.4 A most dan∣gerous sin. Joshua 7. Act. 5.4. 1. To the sacri∣legers. To the Common-wealth that suf∣fers it; for, 1. Not onely Achan, Ananias, and Sapphira, and other private men pe∣rished for this sinne, but the proudest Kings, and greatest Peers that be∣came sacrilegious, were plagued and destroyed by God; as Belshaz∣zar, the great Monarch of Assyria; William Rufus; and abundance more that you may find in our Histories: for the curse of God, like Damocles sword, by a slender thred hangs over their heads, and makes them like those that perished at Endor, and became as the dung of the earth. And I beseech you mark it, Make them like a wheel, and as the stubble before the wind, persecute them with thy tempest, let them be confounded, and be put to shame, and perish, which say, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession; and if this be the guerdon of them that say it, I wonder what shall be the plague of them that do it; and I wonder more that the very thought of this Curse doth not make their hearts to tremble, if their consciences were not seared, to be senselesse of all fear. 2. The sin of sacriledge, extendeth it selfe not onely to the persons com∣mitting it, but also to the whole Nation that suffereth it,2. To whole Nations. as the sin of Achan was not onely a snare to catch him to be destroyed, but it troubled all Israel, so that they were still discomfited, and never prospered, till the sa∣crileger was punished, and the Lord appeased. If you say, The sinne is taken away, when the Parliament takes these things away. I answer, that we must not idolize the Parliament, as if it were a kind of omnipotent Creature, and like the Pope, such an infallible Lord God upon earth, as that their Votes and Sanctions were the supremest rule of ju∣stice; that cannot be unjust, because they are enacted by the whole State: because as no conclusions are therefore truths, because determined by a whole Councell; so no Lawes are therefore just, because done by a whole Parliament, but when they do agree with the common rules of truth and justice, which God hath given unto men, and shewed the same in his holy Word, which he hath left to be the right rule of our actions. And therefore if the greatest Assemblies, Parliament, or Councell, make not the will of God the rule to guide their proceedings thereby, their Sanctions are so farre from taking away the nature of the sin, that they do increase the evill, and make it the more out of measure sinfull, and to become a national sin, that before was but personal; and the more exceed∣ingly sinful, when the same is confirmed by a Law, so that none dares speak
against it, and the sinners are become senselesse in their sinnes: and there∣fore the Prophet demandeth, how any man, that feareth God, dares med∣dle with such a people, that will thus justifie their sinnes, saying, Shall the throne of iniquity, that is, any unjust course, have fellowship with thee, which framest mischief by a Law? And the Lord doth extremely threaten them, that walk after unrighteous ordinances, as that they should sow much,Mich. 6.15, 16. but not reap; tread the Olives, but not annoint themselves there∣with; and sweet wine, but not drink it; because the Statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of Achab, and they walked in their counsels:Hos. 5.10, 11. and the Prophet Hosea doth more fully set down the wrath of God both against the makers, and the observers of all unrighteous Laws. If you say, The Lands and Lordships of the Bishops were not the patri∣mony of the Church, but were onely, in superstitious times, given by our Kings and others unto the Church-men; and therefore now, the King be∣ing in want, they may be restored to the Crown again. I confesse the Lands of the Church are the free bequests of godly Kings, and of other pious men dead long agoe, with most fearful impre∣cations made against all those that should seek to alter their Wills and Te∣staments:Gal. 3.15. and the Apostle saith, If it be but a mans Testament, no man altereth it; that is, no honest man ought to alter it, though perhaps his Will might have been made wiser, and his goods bestowed to better use; for our Saviours Maxim, when he gave a Penny to him that laboured but one hour, and but a Penny to him that had endured the heat of the day, is unanswerable, Is it not lawful for me to do what I will, with mine own? And therefore, 1. As others daily leave their estates of great Amount to whom they please, many times to strangers, and perhaps to idiots, or debauched per∣sons, of wicked lives, and noxious manners; and yet no man grudg∣eth, or endeavoureth to take away those just Legacies, which their good Benefactours had bestowed upon these unjust men; so there is no reason, that any mans eyes should be evill for the goodnesse of their Ancestours unto the Clergie, but that their Wills should stand to those uses after their death, as intemerate, as if they were now alive to dispose of their beneficence. 2. They are most injurious to the King, (who is wise as an Angel of God, and therefore holdeth this sacriledge odious to his Princely heart) that would seek to enrich his Crown with that, which will shake it on his head, and endanger all his Posterity to such fearful judgements as his Pro∣genitours have denounced, and God hath executed upon many Kings and Princes for the like sinnes; for, as Moses prayeth against the sacrilegi∣ous enemies of Levi,Deut. 33.11. Smite through the loines of them that rise aginst him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again? so, we find that many ancient families, having by the Statute of Dissolution taken some of the Lands and Tithes of the Church into their possessions, have found the same like the Gold of Tholous,Pierius in Hier glyph. or the Eagles feathers; pernitiosa potentia, that will consume all the feathers where they shall be mingled. Who so is wise will consider these things, and will not, to satisfie these Anabaptistical dregges of the people,Aelian. lib. 5. cap 15. Var. Hist. and the enimies of all Christian Re∣ligion, sacrilegiously take away, with Aelian's boy, the golden plate from Diana's Crown, the Lands and Revenues of the Church; but, ha∣ving not so learned Christ, they will do that which becommeth Saints, and suffer the dead to enjoy their own will in that wherein they put them to to no charge, and if they do intend to promote Gods service, they will not rob Saint Peter, to pay Saint Paul, but will rather say with holy David, God forbid that I should offer sacrifice to God of that which cost me nothing. 15. As any wooden Preachers, like Jeroboam's Priests de foece plebis, scarce worthy to be compared with the Grooms of their stable, or such
humi serpentes, poor abjects, as Job speaks of,Job 30.8. The sonnes of villains and bond-men, more vile than the earth they crawle upon, are fit enough to be their teachers, and beggarly pensioners; so any place, a thatched Barn, a littered Stable, or an ample Cow-house,What prayers and Sermons please these men. is thought by these to be very fair and fit to be the House of Him that was born in a Stable, and laid in a Manger; and any service, prayers without sense, such as our Saviour blames, and preaching without learning, without truth, such as their Enthusiasts conceive in illa horâ, & quicquid in buccam venerit, without any further study or meditation, is justified to be most acceptable to God; witnesse the Authour of One argument more against the Cavaliers, where that great Schollar in his own opinion, rails against our grave Bishops, and most impudently reproacheth a very reverend man of known worth, and great learning, by the scandalous Epithete of The ceremonious Master of Balliol Colledge, Doctor Laurence, whom for a most learned and pious Sermon preached before the King, upon these words of Exodus, Put off thy shooes from thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground: he doth, just like the eldest son of his dear father the devill (as Tertullian calleth Hermogenes, primogenitum diaboli) most falsely, and shamelesly, charge him with the wearing of consecrated slippers, which was never done, but is one of those scurrilous invented imputations of this mali∣cious Accuser of his brethren, now thrown at him, whose shooes, either for learning or piety, I am sure, this rambling Arguist, and railing Rab∣sheka is not worthy to bear; and for the service of God in our Churches, though the holy Prophet, which was a man according to Gods own heart,Musick ever used in the Church. Psal. 147.1. 149.3. Ps. 150.3, 4, 5. praised God in the beauty of holinesse, upon all the best instruments of mu∣sick, and commanded us, as well in the grammatical sense, as in the mysti∣cal sense, to sing praises unto our God with Tabret and Harp, to praise him in the sound of the Trumpet, in the Cymbals and dances, upon the well-tuned Cymbals, and upon the loud Cymbals; yet this zealous Organe-mastix, gives us none other Title, than Cathedral Roarers, and Squeakers: and good reason it is he should be very angry with roaring and squeaking in Churches;Pag. 14. for that having been possest of a very competent Living with cure of soules these four or five years together (if I am not mistaken in the Authour) he never yet either read, or preached, in that, or any other Church; so necessary is Non-residence, and so usefull are dumb dogges, when they are willing to snarle and bark against Government and Religion: but it is strange to me, that such a divine harmony,Musick how useful. Theodoric. Epist. l. 2. Plutarch de Musica. which hath made others sober, should make this spawn of the red Dragon mad; for we know some Law-givers commanded children to be taught , after the grave composed tones of the Dorick way, ad corda fera demul∣cenda, to soften the fiercenesse of their dispositions, and ad montis fer∣vorem temperandum, to cool and allay the heat and distempers of their minds, as Achilles was appeased in Homer, and Theodosius was drawn to commiseration, luctuoso carmine, by a sad Poem sung to him at supper,Niceph. lib. 12: cap. 43. when he intended the utter destruction of Antioch; and the Scripture te∣stifieth the like effect of Davids harp in King Saul; yet all this sweet and hallowed air, which ravisheth devout souls, hath onely filled this envi∣ous malignant with nasty winds, and stinking expressions. So contrary to the words of God himself, Exod. 3.5. and against the judgement of all Divines; and the practice of all Saints; à primordiis Ecclesiae, from the first birth of Gods Church,Pag. 15.18. he most ignorantly denieth any place to be holier than another, which makes me afraid, that Heaven with this man and his faction is deemed no holier than Hell, or the Lords day no holier than Monday, no more than they hold the Church holier than their Brns, or the holiest Priest, though he were Aaron himself, the Saint of the Lord, holier than the prophanest worldling; for I find no differnce that
they make either of persons, times, or places, but such a commixtion of all things as if they intended to reduce and bring the whole world into that confused Chaos, which God first created, before he disposed the parts thereof into their several stations. But I am loth to spend any more time about this ignorant Argument, that is, as all the rest of their Writings are, as full of railing and un∣savoury speeches, as any mortall pen can diffuse; therefore I leave him to do with his heart and mouth as that Morussian Cabares (where∣of he speaketh) did with those Churches, which the Goths and Van∣dals had defiled. Thus you have some, and I might adde here abundance more, of their absurd and impious Doctrines, which their ignorant simplicity produced, and their furious zeal published, out of mis-interpreted Scriptures; not that all these points are taught by every one of their Teachers, but that all these and many more are taught and maintained by some one or other of them, as I could easily expresse it, if it were not too tedious for my Reader; but the bulk of my Book swells too big, and their fancies are but Dreams fit for laughter; and I brought these onely as Vinegar to be ta∣sted, and then to be spit out again. CHAP. X. Sheweth the great Bug-bears that affrighted this Faction; the four speciall means they used to secure themselves; the manifold lyes they raised against the King; and the two speciall Questions that are discussed about Papists. 5. The setling of the Militia.5. FOr the setling of the Militia, and putting the whole Kingdom in a posture of Defence, as they termed it: 1. They dreamed of a desperate Disease. 2. They devised an Emperical way to cure it. and, 1. The disease.1. The Disease was a monstrous fear of Popery, and the re-establish∣ment of abolished superstitions in our Church, to invade their consci∣ences; and of the Papists, with fire and sword, to waste their estates, and to take away their lives and liberties, and through that groundlesse fear, they looked on the innocent Ceremonies that were established in the Church, as dangerous Innovations, and introductions to Idolatry. And in the State, they feared the practised wayes and endeavours, to produce an arbitrary government, by our advancing of a boundlesse Prero∣gative, even to the dispoyling of the Subject of his property, and robbing him of the benefit of the laws: these were their fears. And the grounds of these fears were lying fictions, and most scandalous detractions and defamations; for their invented Letters that should come from Holland, and from Denmark, and some other places beyond the Seas, (where we were better believe them, then go try whether they were true) which informed them sometimes of a Fleet of Danes, some∣times of another Nation, that should come to assist the King for the setting up of Popery, and the securing of himself in a tyrannical and arbitrary government over them:What terrible things fright∣ed them. and every day almost produced a discovery of new treacheries against the Parliament, what terrible things fright∣ed them; as the stable of Horses under ground, (for indeed they were in∣visible Horses, such as Elisha's servant saw, terrifying their guilty consci∣ences) and that of the Taylors in Moor-fields, and the like horrid ma∣chinations,
that were to come against them, I know not from whom, and God knowes from whence; which things, how false they were, time, which is the mother of truth, hath long agone made manifest and ridicu∣lous, to any man that is not bewitched with these lying fancies: there∣fore, lest these dreams of their distempered brains, should be too soon de∣scryed, and so prove defective to produce their intended project, they alledge, The Queen is a Papist (and I would to God they were so truly re∣ligious, and void of hypocrisie in their profession, as she, most gracious Queen, is in her religion) then they say, The Bishops are all Papists, Deans and Prebends are of the same stamp, and all the Kings Chapleins, that were preferred by the Arch-Bishop, were either close Papists, or pro∣fest Arminians, which are but Cosen-germans unto the other; Arminia∣nism being but a Bridge to passe over unto Popery. And with these and the like false slanders against the King, Queen, and Clergy, they so bewitched most of their well meaning brethren of the same house, and amazed all the simpler sort of people of this Kingdom with these fears, and filled them with such jealousies, with those Pamphlets, that they caused to be printed, and dispersed every where, that they were at their wits end, for fear of this lamentable alteration of their religion, and deprivation of their liberties. 2. The disease being thus spread, like a Gangrene,2. The Cure. over all the parts of the body of this Kingdom, they like skilful Physitians devise the cure; and that is, the preparation of a Militia, and this Militia they would have put into such hands as they pleased, such as they might confide in; and I wish the whole Kingdom knew who those men were, and who they are, that they do confide in; for I know, 1. Some of them are poor men of most desperate fortunes, if Bank-rup∣ters may be termed such; 2. Others to be most factious and schismatical men, addicted to Anabap∣tism, and Brownism, and other worser Sects; as amongst the London Com∣manders, Ven, Manwaring, Fowke, Nrington, Bradly, Best, and the rest, whereof there are twice as many schismatical, and, as it is conceived, beggarly Sectaries, as are right honest men among them; and if we looked among their Lords, and all the rest of their nomination throughout the Kingdom, I doubt we shall find some of them to be just of the same condition. And because the King (to whose care and trust God had committed all the people of this Kingdom (and not to them, that are called by the King, and chosen onely by men, and that onely for this time,) and of whom he will require an account of the laws and religion, whereof he made him keeper and defender, and not of them) thought most rightly, that this Militia should be committed rather to such men, as he might con∣fide in (as it was in the raign of Queen Elizabeth, and His Father of ever blessed memory) rather than to any that they should name, which was to dis-robe himself of all his regal power, of the chiefest garland of his royal Prerogatives, (without which he could hold his Crown by no better a te∣nure, then durante beneplacito) and to put the sword out of his own hand, into the hands of them that could not love him, because they could not trust him, as they alledged; (and what reason had he to trust them that were causelesly so distrustful of him?) they startled at this deniall. And because the King of heaven had by this time opened the Kings eys,God openeth the Kings eyes. to let him see what hitherto he could hardly imagine, that these men (to whom he had granted for the good of his kingdom, so many Acts of grace and favour, as never any King of England did before, and had very graciously offered to commit to the hands of their own choosing, so large a share of the Militia, as might have rendred the whole kingdom most secure, if security in a just and legall way, had been all that they
sought for) had their intentions far otherwise then they pretended, and that not onely the government of the Church was intended to be alter∣ed, and the Governours thereof destroyed, but himself also was here∣by dis-robed of those rights, which God and the Lawes of the Land had put into his hands, and the Kingdom brought either into a base Tyranny, or confused Anarchy, when all things shall be done according to the arbitrary power of these factious and schismatical men, therefore he utterly refused to grant their desires, and most wisely withstood their design. How they strengthened themselves to make their or∣ders fi m with∣out the King.Whereupon, these men put their heads together, to consult how they might strengthen themselves, and make their ordinances firm and bind∣ing without the King; and to that purpose, having by their former do∣ings, gotten too great an interest, as well in the faith, as in the affections of the people; in confidence of their own strength, they came roundly to the businesse, and what they knew was not their right, as their former Petitions can sufficiently witnesse, they resolve to effect the same by force, but as insensibly as they can devise; as, 1. To seize upon the Kings Navie to secure the Seas. 2. To lay hold upon all the Kings Magazine, Forts, Towns, and Castles. 3. To with-hold his moneys and revenues, and all other means from the King. 4. To withdraw the affections, and to poyson the loyalty of all his Ma∣jesties Subjects from him. And hereby they thought (and it must have been so indeed, except the Lord had been on his side) they had made their hill so strong, that it could not be moved, and the King so weak and destitute of all means, that he could no wayes subsist, or relieve himself, as a member of their own House did tell me, for 1. Earl of War∣wick made Vice-Admiral.1. They get the Earl of Warwick to be appointed Vice-Admiral of the Sea, and to commit all the Kings Navie into his hand, and to take away that charge from Sir John Pennington, whom most men believed to be far the better Sea-man, but more faithful to his King, and the other purer to the Parliament. 2. Sir John Ho∣tham put into Hull for the Magazine.2. They send Sir John Hotham a most insolent man, that most uncivilly contemned the King to his face, to seize upon the Kings Magazine that he bought with his own money, (when they might as well take away my horse that I paid for) and to keep the King out of Hull, which was his own proper Town, and therefore might as well have kept him out of White-Hall, and was an Act so full of injustice, as that I scarce know a greater. 3. They detain∣ed the Kings moneys. Esay 1.23.3. Because moneys are great means to effect any worldly affaire, and the sinews of every warre, when as men and arms, and all other necessaries may be had for money, some of them and their followers shew themselves to be just as the Peers of Israel, companions of thieves, meer robbers, which forcibly take away a mans mony from him; they take all the Kings trea∣sure, they intercept, detain, and convert all the Kings revenues and cu∣stomes, to strengthen themselves against the King. 4. They labour to render the King odious by lyes.4. Because their former Remonstrances framed by this faction, of the ill government of this kingdom, though in some things true, (which the King ingenuously acknowledgeth, and most graciously promiseth to redresse them) yet in all things full of gall and bitternesse against the King, could not so fully poyson the love and loyalty of the Kings Sub∣jects, as they desired, especially the love of those that knew his Majesty, who the better they knew him, did the more affectionately love him, and the more faithfully serve him; they thought to do it another, and a surer way, with apparent lyes, palpable slanders, and abominable accusations,
invented, printed, and scattered over all the parts of this kingdom, by their Trencher Chaplains, and parasitical Preachers, and other Pamphle∣ters, some busie Lawyers, and Pettifoggers, to bring the King into an odium, disliked and deserted of all his loving Subjects. And what cre∣ated power under heaven was able to dissolve that wickednesse, which subtilty and malice, had thus treacherously combined to bring to passe? Hereupon (after many threatning votes,1. Lye, that he intended to war against the Parlia∣ment. and actual hostility exerci∣sed against his Royall person) the King is forced to raise a guard for the defence of himself, and those his good Subjects that attended him; then presently that small guard, that consisted but of the chief gentry of the Countrey, was declared to be an Army raised for the subversion of the Parliament, and the destruction of our native liberties; an invincible Army is voted to be raised, the Earl of Essex is chosen to be their Ge∣nerall, with whom they promise both to live and die, the Earl of Bedford General of the Horse, moneys are provided, and all things are prepared to fetch the King and all delinquents, or to be the death of all withstanders; and that nothing might hinder this design, though the King in many gra∣cious Messages attested by the subscription of many noble Lords that were upon the place, assured them, he never intended any warre against his Par∣liament, yet they proceed with all eagernesse, and declare all those that shall assist the King, either with Horse, money, or men, to be malignants and enemies unto the King and Kingdome, and such delinquents as shall be sure to receive condigne punishment by the Parliament, Hoc mirum est, hoc magnum. And among the rest of their impudent slanders, this was their Master∣piece, which they ever harped upon, that he countenanced Papists, and intended to bring Popery into this Kingdgm, and to that end had an Ar∣my of Papists to assist him. But to satisfie any sensible man in this point, I would crave the resolution of these two Questions: 1. Whether every Papist that is subject to his Majesty,Two questions to be resolved. is not bound to assist and defend his King in all his dangers? 2. Whether the King should not protect his Subjects that are Papists in all their dangers, so far as by the Law he ought to do it; and accept of their service, when he himself is invironed with dangers? For first,1. All Papists bound to assist their King. I believe there is no Law that inhibiteth a Papist to serve his King against a Rebellion, or to ride Post, to tell the King of a Design to murder Him, or any other intended Treason against Him; or, being present, to take away a weapon from that man that attempted to kill the King; because his not coming to Church, doth not exempt him from his Allegiance, or discharge him of his duty and service unto the King; and therefore if a Fleet from France or Spain, or any other forreign part should invade us, or any Rebellion at home should rise against his Sove∣raign, and seek to destroy those Lawes and Liberties, whereof himself and his Posterity hath as good an interest to, as any other Subject; I say, he is bound by all Laws to assist his King, and to do his best endeavour, both with his purse and in his person, not only to oppose that external Invasion, but also to subdue, as well that home-bred Rebellion, as the forreign Invasion. 2. If a Papist should be injured, his estate seized upon,2. The King bound to pro∣tect dutiful Papists. his house plun∣dered, and his person, if taken, imprisoned, not because he transgres∣sed any other Law, but that he dispenceth not with the Law of his consci∣ence, to be no Papist; and being thus injured, should come unto his King, and say, I am your Subject, and have lived dutifully; I did nothing which the Law gives me not leave, I have truly paid all duties, and humbly sub∣mitted my self to all penalties; and yet, I know not why, I am thus used, and
abused by my neighbours; I am driven from my house by force of Arms; and I have no place to breathe, but under your Majesties wings, and the shelter of your power; therefore I beseech you, as you are my King, and are obliged to do your best for the safety of your true Subjects, let me have your protection, and you shall have my service unto death? I would fain know what the King should do in such a case; deny his protection, or refuse his service? The one is injustice, the other not the best wisdom; especially if he needed service: for as the Law of na∣ture and of nations requireth all Subjects, to obey their Kings, and faith∣fully to serve them, of what Religion soever their Kings shall be; so Lege relationis, every King is bound to protect every faithfull Subject, that observeth his Laws, or submitteth to their penalties, without cor∣rupting of his fellow Subjects, of what Religion soever he is: because they are his Subjects, not as they are faithfull Christians, but as obedi∣ent men; and he is to rule, not over the faith of their souls, but the actions of their bodies; and it is an Axiom in Divinity, that Fides non est cogenda; and if Kings cannot perswade their subjects to embrace the true Faith, they ought not to cut them off, so long as they are true Subjects: And therefore with what reason can any man blame the King, either for protecting them in their distresses, or accepting their service in his own ex∣tremities; I cannot understand. And yet, for the goodly company of Pa∣pists which his Majesty entertaineth in all his Armies, they cannot all make up so much as one good Regiment, as an Officer in his Majesties Ar∣my confidently affirmeth; but it will serve their turn to taxe the King, to lay imputations upon him, even the very things that belong unto themselves (as the whole summe of those things that are expressed in Englands Peti∣tion to their King, mutaetis mutandis, might truly be presented to the two Houses, that have now almost destroyed us all) and to make them mighty faults in him, which are no faults at all in themselves; because there is no fear of their favouring Popery, though, as they have very many, so they should have never so many more in their Army. 3. Lye, that he caused the Re∣bellion in Ire∣land.3. Another Slander they not onely whispered, but also dispersed the same farre and near among the people, to make the King still the more odious unto his Subjects, that he was the cause of the Rebellion in Ireland, and that the Rebels there had his Commission under the Broad Seal to plunder the Protestants, and to expell them thence; that so, the Gospel being root∣ed out of Ireland, Popery might the easier be transported and planted here in England; whereas themselves in very deed were the sole causers of this Rebellion, as I have shewed unto you before; and the colour of this slander was,The cause of this slander. that the Rebellion being raised, the Ring leaders of those Rebels, the sooner to gain the simple to adhere unto them, perswaded them to believe that they had the Kings command to do the same; and to that purpose shewed them the Broad Seal, which they had taken from Ministers, and Clerks of the Peace, and others, whom formerly they had plundered, and taken their Seales from them, which they cunningly affixed to certain Commissions of their own framing; as M. Sherman assu∣red me, he saw the Broad Seal that was taken from one M. Hart, that was Clerk of the Peace in the County of Tumond; and was found in the pocket of one of the chief Leaders of the Rebels, when he was killed by the Kings Souldiers; yet, this false and lewd practice of these Rebels in Ire∣land, was a most welcom news to this Faction in England, to lay this imputation upon the King, that he was the cause of this Rebellion, which themselves had kindled, and were glad to find such a colour to impute it unto him, that it might not be suspected to be raised by them. Many other such falsehoods, Lyes, and impudent slanders, hath the fa∣ther of lyes caused these his Children most impudently to father upon the King;
but as the Philosopher saith, Non quia affirmatur, aut negatur, res erit,How things are indeed. aut non erit, Things are not so and so, because they are said to be so; neither can they be no such things, onely because they are denied to be such; as Gold is not Copper, because ignorant men affirm it to be so; nor a drunken man sober, or a vitious man vertuous, because they deny him to be good, and blazon him abroad for one of the sonnes of Belial; but as Gold is Gold, and Brasse is Brasse, so godly men are good, wicked men are evill, and Rebels are none other then Rebels, let men call them what they will; and so our King is not such a man as they say, because they affirm it; but he is indeed a most just, vertuous, and most pious Prince, let them say what they will, Their tongues are their own, and we cannot rule them: and so all his followers are better Protestants indeed, and less Papists in all points of faith, than the best of them, that term us so by false names. God forgive them these slanderous accusations. CHAP. XI. Sheweth the unjust proceedings of these factious Sectaries against the King; eight special wrongs and injuries that they have offered him. Which are the three States. And that our Kings are not Kings by election or Covenants with the People. ANd yet, for all these strange courses, contrary to all humane thoughts,Psal. 118.23, Esay 46.10. which is marvellous in our eyes; the Lord of Heaven whose counsell shall stand, and whose will shall be done, hath them all in derision, dissipates all these devices, and turns all the counsell of Achitophel against his own head, when he opened the eyes of many millions of the Kings true Subjects, to behold and detest these unfaithful dealings, and dis-loyall proceed∣ings against so gracious a King; and therefore petitioned, and subscribed, that his Majesty standing upon his Guard, and defending himself from such indignities as might follow, they would hazard their lives and fortunes to assist him, to repell those more than barbarous injuries, that were offered unto Him. Therefore now, Memoriae proditum est, I find it written, that without fear of God, without regard of Majesty, without justice, without ho∣nesty; they are resolved, rather than to repent of their former wick∣ednesse, to involve the whole Kingdome in an unnatural civill War; and to maintain the same against the will, and contrary to the desires both of the King and Kingdom; and it is almost incredible, what wicked courses, and how unjust, and insufferable Orders and Ordinances you shall find record∣ed, that they have made: 1. Against the King. 2. Against the Subjects. 3. Against the Law. Which are all said to be exceedingly abused by them; for, 1. Against the King, it is registred to Posterity, that they have pro∣ceeded, besides many other things, in all these particulars: 1. They possesse all the Kings Houses, Towns, and Castles,1. Their pro∣ceedings a∣gainst the King. 1. Wrong. Matth. 8 20. but what he gets by the strength of his sword, and detain them from him; so that we may say with our Saviour, The Foxes have holes, and the fowles of the air have nests, but the King of England hath not an house allowed him by the Houses of Parliament, wherein to put his head; and they take not onely his Houses, but also his rents, and revenues, and (as I under∣stood when I was in Oxford) his very clothes, and provision for his Table,
that seeing they could not take away his life by the sword, they might murder him with cold or famin, when he should not have the subsistence (if they could hinder him) to maintain life and soul together, which is the shame of all shame, and able to make any other men odious to all the world,The complaint to the House of Commons. Pag. 19. thus maliciously and barbarously to deal with their own most gra∣cious King; neither doth their malice here end, but they with-hold the Rents of the Queen, and seize upon the Revenues of our Prince, which, I assure them, my Countrey-men takes in great scorn, and I believe will right it with their lives, or this Parliament-Faction shall redeem their er∣rours with no small repentance, when as we find no Prince of Wales was ever suffered by his Subjects to have such indignities offered him by the greatest Peers of England. And here I cannot omit what Alderman Garraway saith of the reproach of Master Pym, touching the maintaining of the Kings other Children, which he professeth made his heart to rise, and hoped it did so to many more:Alderman Garraway his Speech. Is our good King fallen so low, that his Children must be kept for him? It is worth our inquiry, Who brought him to that condi∣tion? We hear him complain, that all his own Revenue is seized, and taken from him; Is not his Exchequer, Court of Wards, and Mint here? his Customes too are worth somewhat, and are his Children kept upon Alms? How shall We and our Children prosper, if this be not re∣medied? And I pray God these things rise not up in judgement against them and this Nation; but hereby they intended to verifie that disloyal Speech which One of them uttered in a Tavern, and God will avert it from his Servant,Sober Sadnesse, pag. 22. 2. Wrong. That they would make the King as poor as Job, unlesse he did comply with them. 2. If any man which they like not attends the Kings Person, though he be his sworn servant, or assist him in his just defence, which he is bound to do by the Law of God and man; yet he is presently voted and con∣demned for a Malignant, Popish, dis-affected, evill Counsellour, and an enemy to the State; and that is enough (if he be catched) to have him spoyled and imprisoned at their pleasure; nay, my self was told by some of that Faction, that because I went to see the King, I should be plundered and imprisoned, if I were taken. 3, Wrong.3. Though they do solemnly professe that his Majesties personal safety, and his royal honour and greatnesse are much dearer unto them then their own lives and fortunes,The Petition to his Majesty the 16. of July 1642. which they do most heartily dedicate, and shall most willingly imploy for the support and maintenance thereof; yet for all this hearty Protestation, they had at that very time (as the King most accurately observeth in his Answer) directed the Earl of Warwick to as∣sist Sir John Hotham against him,Non turpe est ab eo vinci quem vincere est nefas; neque ei inhonestè ali∣quem submitti, quem Deus su∣per omnes extu∣lit. Dictum Arme∣nii Pompeii. appointed their Generals, and, as Alder∣man Garraway testifieth, raised ten thousand armed men out of London, and the Neighbour-Countries before the King had seven hundred: and afterwards, though the King sent from Nottingham a gracious Message and sollicitation for Peace, yet they supposing this proceeded from a diffi∣dence of his own strength, or being too confident of their own force, sleigh∣ted the Kings Grace, and most barbarously proceeded in the most hostile manner, waged warre, and gave battail against the Kings Army, where they knew he was in his own Person, and as one of their Preachers taught the Sunday before the Battail, that they might with a good conscience, as well kill the King (horresco dicere) as any other man; so (according to Captain Blagues directions, as Judas taught the High-Priests servants) we know what Troops and Regiments were most aimed at, whereas they do most ridiculously say they have, for the defence of his person, sent many a Cannon-bullet about his eares, which he did with that King∣ly courage, and Heroick magnanimity; yea, and that Christian resolution,
and dependance on Gods assistance pass through, that it shall be recorded to his everlasting honour, and their indelible shame and reproach, so long as the world endureth. 4.4 Wrong. They have most Disloyally and Traiterously spoken both privately and publickly such things against his Majesty, as would make the very Hea∣thens tear them in pieces, that should say the like of their Tyrannous Kings, and such as I could not believe they proceeded from the mouth of a Christian against so Christian a King, but that I find most of them were publickly uttered, made known unto his Majesty, and related by himself, and those that were Ear-witnesses thereof,Sober sadness p. 3. The Viewer p. 4. His Majesties Declaration. Trussel in the supplement to Daniels Histo∣ry. as (Horresco refe∣rens) that he was not worthy to be our King: not fit to live: that he was The Traitor: that the Prince would govern better: and that they dealt fairly with him they did not depose him, as their fore-fathers had deposed Richard the second, whom all the World knoweth to be most Traiterously Mur∣dered: and the whole progress of that Act, whereby he was deposed, is nothing else but the Scandal of that Parliament, and an horrid trea∣son upon the fairest relation of any Chronicle: and the good Bishop of Carlile, was not then affraid, in open house to tell the Lords so to their faces; and I would our Parliament men would read his Speech. 5. They command their own Orders, Ordinances,5. Wrong. and Declarations to be Printed Cum privilegio, and to be published in Publick throughout the whole Kingdom, and they are not a little punished that neglect it; and whatsoever Message, Answer, Declaration or Proclamation cometh from the King, to inform his Subjects of the Truth of things, and to undeceive his much seduced people, they streightly forbid those to be Printed, and imprison (if they can catch them) all that publish them, as they did many worthy Ministers in the City of London, and in many other places of this Kingdom. 6. They have publickly voted in their House,6. Wrong. and accordingly indeavour∣ed by Messages to perswade our brethren of Scotland, to joyn in their as∣sistance with these grand Rebels, to rebel against their Soveraign; but I perswade my self, (as I said before) that the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, are more Religious in themselves, more Loyal to their liege Lord, and indeed wiser in all their actions, then, while they may live quietly at home in a happy peace, to undertake upon the perswasions of Rebellious Subjects, such an unhappy war abroad. 7. It is remonstrated and related publickly, that,7. Wrong. as if they had shaken off all subjection, and were become already a State Independent, they have Treated by their agents with forraign States, and do still proceed in that course; which, if true, is such an usurpation upon Soveraignty, as was never before attempted in this Kingdom; and such a Presumption, as few men know the secret mischiefs that may lurk therein. 8. They suffer and licence their Pamphleters; Pryn, Goodwin, Burges,8. Wrong. Marshal, Sedgwick, and other emissaries of wickedness, to publish such Treasons and Blasphemies, and abominable Aphorisms; As, that the nega∣tive vote of the King is no more then the dissent of one man; the Affirma∣tive vote of the King makes not a Law, ergo, the Negative cannot destroy it; and the like absurd and sensless things that are in those Aphorisms, and in Prins book of the Soveraign power of Parliament, whereby they would deny the Kings power to hinder any Act, that both the Houses shall conclude; and so, taking away those just prerogatives from him, that are as Hereditary to him as his Kingdom, compell him to assent to their con∣clusions: for which things our Histories tell us, that other Parliaments have banished (and upon their returns they were hanged) both the Spencers, the Father and the Son, for the like presumption,Why the two Spencers died. as among
other Articles,Per asperte vid. Elismere post-nati p. 99. for denying this Prerogative unto their King, and affirm∣ing, that if he neglected his duty, and would not do what he ought, for the good of the Kingdom, he might be compelled by force to perform it: which very thing, divesteth the King of all Soveraignty, overthroweth Mo∣narchy, and maketh our government a meer Aristocracy, contrary to the constitution of our first Kings, and the judgment of all ages; for we know full well,Pag. 48. from the Practise of all former Parliaments, that seeing the three States are subordinate unto the King, in making Laws (wherein the chief∣est power consisteth) they may propound and consent, but it is still in the Kings power to refuse or ratify: and I never read that any Parliament man, till now, did ever say the contrary: but that if there be no concur∣rence of the King (in whom formally the power of making of any Law resideth, ut in subjecto,) to make the Law, the two Houses (whose consent is but a requisite condition to compleat the Kings power) are but a liveless convention, like two Cyphers without a figure, that of themselves are of no value or power, but, joyned unto their figures, have the full strength of their places; which is confirmed by the Viewer of the Observations, out of 11.Pag. 19, 20, 21. Hen. 7.23. per Davers, Polydore, 185. Cowel inter. verbo Praerog. Sir Thomas Smyth de republ. Angl. l. 2. c. 3. Bodin. l. 1. c. 8. For if the Kings con∣sent were not necessary for the perfecting of every Act,The Letter to a Gentleman in Gloucester∣shire, p. 3. then certainly (as another saith) all those Bils that heretofore have passed both Houses, and for want of the Royal assent, have slept, and been buried all this while, would now rise up as so many Laws and Statutes, and would make as great confusion, as these new orders and ordinances have done. And as the Lawyers tell us, that the necessity of the assent of all three States in Parliament, is such, as without any one of them, the rest do but lose their labour;Lamberts Ar∣cheion, 271. Vid. the Viewer p. 21. so, Le Roy est assentus ceo faict un Act de Parliament, and as another saith, Nihil ratum habetur, nisi quod Rex comprobarit, Nothing is perfected but what the King confirmeth. But here in the naming of the three States, I must tell you, that I find in most of our Writers, about this new-born question of the Kings power, a very great omission, that they are not particularly set down, that the whole Kingdom might know which is every one of them; and, up∣on this omission, I conceive as great mistake in them, that say the three States are, Which be the three States of England.1. The King. 2. The House of Peers. 3. The House of Commons. For, I am informed by no mean Lawyer, that you may find it upon the Rowls of Henry the fifth,Speed, l. 9. c. 19. p. 712. Anno. 1 Ric. 3. as I remember, and I am sure you may find it in the first year of Richard the third, where the three States are particu∣larly named, and the King is none of them; For it is said, That at the re∣quest, and by the assent of the three Estates of this Realm, that is to say, the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and Commons of the Land, Assembled, it is declared that our said Soveraign Lord the King, is the very undoubted King of this Realm: Wherein you may plainly see, the King that is ac∣knowledged their Soveraign by all three, can be none of the three, but is the head of all three, as the Dean is none of the Chapter, but is Caput capituli; and as in France, and Spain, so in England, I conceive the three Estates to be, 1. The Lords Spiritual, that are, if not representing, yet in loco, in the behalf of all the Clergy of England, that, till these Anabaptistical tares have almost choaked all the Wheat in Gods field, were thought so considerable a party, as might deserve as well a representation in Parliament, as old Sa∣rum, or the like Borough, of scarce twenty Houses. 2. The Lords Temporal in the right of their Honor and their Posterity.
And to make the World believe, how justly and sufficiently legal they could do this, they made another Ordinance for the inhabitants of the Counties of Northampton, Rutland, Derby, &c. to pay the twentieth part and to be assessed by the Assessors that they name, in imitation of the Sta∣tute lately made for the four hundred thousand pound: and it is more than probable, that this proceeding is but the praeludium of the like exa∣ction to be extended, when their need requireth, to all the other parts of the Kingdom; which is a most miserable course, and injustice not to be paralleld, to cast themselves, into a necessity of getting money, to maintain an impious War against their King, and then out of that necessity to com∣pel their fellow-Subjects, and those peaceable men, (that do abominate this War) to maintain the same (yea, and to fight in the same, to kill men a∣gainst their consciences) in despite of their teeth; or if they refuse to do it, to send, or at least to permit, a party of Horse, Dragooneers, and other strength to go to fetch their Money, Plate, or other goods, as if they were the goods of the deadly enemies of the Common-wealth; and this for none other reason, but for that the owners thereof are good Subjects to the King, and not well-affected to their unjust, and ungodly proceedings. But let me perswade all men, that do fear God, still to suffer any thing, which they cannot avoid, from the violence of these wicked men, rather than to contribute any thing unto them, to further such abominable courses, as they prosecute against the Law of God and man; Because the Lord com∣mandeth us, to fear none of those things that we shall suffer,Rev. 2.10. but to stand in our integrity unto death, and we shall be crowned with the crown of life. 3.3. How they discharged the Apprentices & compelled them to fight. They have discharged the Apprentices and servants from their Ma∣sters services, and have either compelled, or perswaded them, to serve in their Army against the King, and that without the consent, and against the will of their Masters and Dames, yea, sometimes against the commands of their own Parents, which I speak from their own months. 4. They have imprisoned very many hundreds of most able,4. How they imprisoned our men without cause. and most honest men; even so many, that the Prisons are not able to contain them, but they are fain to consecrate the greatest houses in London, to become Prisons; as the Bishop of London's house, Ely-house, Winchester-house, Lambeth-house, Crosby-house, the Savoy, and the like. And this they do for none other cause, but either for performing the duties of their places, and discharging their obedience to his Majesty; as the last Lord Maior Gurney, which deserved rather to be commended, than committed, if we believe many that were present at his Tryal: or petitioning unto them; as Sir George Bynion, and Captain Richard Lovelace, and Sir William Bo∣teler of Kent, because they did not therein flatter,Complaint. p. 8 and approve their pre∣sent wicked courses; or intending to petition unto the King for relief of these lamentable distresses, as those Gentlemen of Hertford-shire and West∣minsters; or for being, as they conceived, disaffected unto their disloyall Orders. A strange thing! and injustice beyond president, not the like to found among the Pagans, That (where no Law can condemn a man for his affections, when no action is committed against Law) men shall be rob∣bed of their estates, and adjudged for Malignants (which is also a crime most general, and without the compasse of any Statute) and then for this new-created sin, to be condemned and imprisoned, and therein to remain without Tryal of his offence, perhaps as long as the Archbishop of Canter∣bury. And this wonder, is the rather to be wondered at, because it is the sense of both Houses,M. Pym in his Speech at the Guild hall. (if we may believe Master Pym) That it is against the Rules of Justice, that any man should be imprisoned upon a general Charge, when no particulars are proved against him: For never Charge can be more general than to be ill-affected, or a Malignant, or a man not to be confided
in, whereof you find ten thousand in the City of London, and many hun∣dred thousands in the Kingdom: and therefore, when we find so many persons of Honour and Reputation imprisoned, only upon this surmise, with∣out any other particular Charge so much as once suggested against them, (as was the Lord of Middlesex, the Lord of Portland, and abundance more) and detained in prison, because they were ill-affected, in that they have not contributed to the maintenance of this War, we see how insensibly they have accused themselves to have laid this insupportable punishment, beyond the desert of the transgressors, and against the Rules of all Justice, and how they have forgotten their Protestation, and exceedingly infringed the liberty of the Subjects, whereof they promised to be such faithful Procu∣rators. CHAP. XIII. Sheweth the proceedings of this Faction against the Laws of the Land, the Priviledges of Parliament; transgressed eleven special wayes. 3. Their pro∣ceedings a∣gainst the Laws.3. FOr the Laws of our Land, which are either private, as those chiefly which belong unto the Parliament, and are called the Priviledges of Parliament; or Publick, which are the Inheritance of every Subject: you shall find how they have invaded, and violated, each one of these: For, 1. Against the Priviledges of Parliament.1. Touching the Priviledges of Parliament: We confess, that former Kings have graciously yielded many just Priviledges unto them, for the freedom of their persons, and the liberty of their speeches, so they be free from Blasphemy or Treason, or the like unpardonable offence; but such a freedom as they challenge, though for my self, I confess my skill in Law to be unable, to distinguish the legitimate from the usurped; yet in these subsequent particulars, I find wise men utterly denying it them: As, 1. Denying us to dispute of them. L. Elismer in post-nati.1. When they forbid us to dispute of their Priviledges, and say, That themselves alone are the sole Judges of them; when as in former Ages they have been adjudged by the Laws of the Kingdom, when Thorpe the Speaker of the House of Commons, hath been committed, and detained Prisoner, upon an Execution, and the House confirmed that Act. 2. Committing and putting out their Members.2. When the Members of the House (of whose elections, and transgres∣sions against the House, or any of their fellow-Members, or the like, the House is the proper Judge) which ought to have as free liberty as any of the rest, upon any emergent occasion, are committed; as Master Palmer, and others were;Complaint. p. 11. or put out of the House, as Sir Edward Deering, the Lord Faulkland, Sir John Culpepper, Sir John Strangwayes, and others, have been voted hand over head, for speaking more reason, than the more vio∣lent party could answer, or in very deed, for speaking their minds freely, against the sense of the House, or rather against some of the prevalent Fa∣ction of the House, which we say is no Priviledge, but the pravity of the House, to deny this just Priviledge unto those Members, that were thus committed or expelled: For, hereby it doth manifestly appear, that, con∣trary to the practice of all former Parliaments, and contrary to the Honour of any Parliament, things were herein debated and carried, not by strength of argument, but by the most voices; and the greater number were so far from understanding the validity of the alleadged Reasons, that, after the Votes passed, they scarce conceived the state of the Question, but
thought it enough to be Clerks to Master Pym, and to say Amen to Master Hampden by an implicite faith. 3. When they deny the Members of their House, or any other imployed by them in this horrid Rebellion, should be questioned for Felony, Treason,3. Denying their Members to be legally tried for any capital Crime. Vide Dyer, p. 59. 60. Crompton. 8. b. 9, 10, 11. Elism. post-nati 20, 21. The viewer. p. 43. Murder, or the like capital Crimes, but only in Parliament, or at least, by the leave of that House whereof they are Members, or which doth imploy them; for by this means any Member of their House may be a Traitor, or a Murderer, or a Robber, whensoever he please, and may easily escape, before the party wronged, or complainant can obtain this leave of the House of Commons: and therefore this is as unreasonable, and as sensless a Priviledge as ever was challenged, and was never heard of till this Parliament: For, why should any man refuse his Tryal, or the House deny their Members to the justice of the Law, when as the deniall of them to be tryed by the Law, implyeth a doubt in us of the innocency of those, whom we will not submit to justice; and their Tryal would make them live gloriously hereafter, if they were found innocent, and move the King to deliver those men, that had so wickedly conspired their destructi∣on, to the like censure of the Law. But for them to cry out, The King is mis-informed, and we dare not trust our selves upon a Tryal, may be a way to preserve their safety, but with the losse of their reputation, and perhaps the destruction of many thousands of people. If they say, They are contented to be tried, but by their own House, which, in the time of Parliament, is the highest Court of justice; It may be answered, said a plain Rustick, with the old Proverb, Ask my fellow, if I be a Thief. For mine own part, I reverence the justice of a Parliament in all other judgements betwixt party and party, yea, betwixt the King and any other Subject; yet, when the party accused shall be judged by his own Society, his Brethren, and his own Faction, I believe any indifferent Judge would see this to be too great partiality against the King, that he shall not have those, whom he accuseth to be tried by the Laws already established, and the ordinary course of Justice; and if the Judges offend in their Sentence, the Parliament hath full power, undenied them by his Majesty, to question, and to punish those Judges, as they did for that too palpable in justice (as they conceived) in the case of the Ship money; but they will be judged by themselves, and all that dissent from them, must be at their mercy or destruction. And yet it is said to be evident, That no Priviledge can have its ground or commencement, unlesse it be by Statute, Grant, or Prescription. And by the Stat. 26. Hen. 8. cap. 13. it is enacted, That no offender in any kind of high Treason, shall have the priviledge of any manner of Sanctuary: So all the Grants of such a priviledge, if any such should be made, are meerly void, 1 Hen. 7. Staffords case, and not one Instance could hitherto be produced, whereby such a Priviledge was either allowed, or claimed, but the contrary most clearly proved by his Ma∣jesty out of Wentworths case. And therefore, seeing your own Law-books tell us, That the Priviledge of Parliament doth not extend to Treason, the breach of the Peace, and (as some think) against the Kings debt: it is apparent, how grossely they do abuse the People by this claim of the Priviledge of Parlia∣ment. 4.4. Conniving with their Fa∣ction for any fault. When they connive with their own compeers for any breach of pri∣viledge; as with Master Whitakers, for searching Master Hampdens poc∣kets, and taking away his papers, immediately after the abrupt breaking up of the last unhappy Parliament, and those that discovered the names of them that differed in opinion from the rest of the Faction, in the busi∣ness of the Earl of Straffords and specially with that rabble of Brownists
and Anabaptists, which with unheard-of impudency, durst ask that question publickly at the Bar, Who they were that opposed the well-affected party in that House? as if they meant to be eeven with them, whosoever they were. And likewise that unruly multitude of zealous Sectaries, that were sent, as I find it, by Captain Ven, and Isaac Pennington, to cry Justice, Justice, Justice, and, No Bishops, no Bishops; and this to terrifie some of the Lords from the House, and to awe the rest that should remain in the House, as they had formerly done in the case of the Earl of Strafford; and when others that they like not, are for the least breach of pretended Priviledge, either imprisoned, or expelled; for I assure my self, there cannot be higher breaches of Priviledges than these be, nor greater stains to obscure the Ho∣nour, and vilifie the repute, of this Parliament. 5. The inga∣ging one ano∣ther in civil causes.5. When there is such siding, and ingaging one another in civil causes, (that they may be conglutinated together for their great Design) to do things, not according unto Justice, but for their own ends, contrary to all right; and their favour is scarce worth the charge of attendance, to them that speed best by their Ordinances; but the complaint is, that m n have the greatest injuries done them, in this, that themselves call the highest Court of Justice, which others say, hath now justified all other inferiour Courts, and made all unrighteous Judges most just. 6. The surrep∣titious carry∣ing of busines∣ses.6. When (as we have been informed) a matter of the greatest importance hath been debated and put unto the question, and upon the question deter∣mined, and the Bill once and again rejected, yet at another time, even the third time, when the Faction had prepared the House for their own pur∣pose, and knew they could carry it by most voices, the same question hath been resumed, and determined quite contrary to the former determina∣tion, when the House was more orderly convened; as it is said they did, to passe the Ordinance for the Militia, which many men dare avouch to their faces to be no Priviledge of Parliament, but a great abuse of their fellow-Members, and a greater injury unto all their fellow-Subjects. 7. Their parti∣all questioning of some men, and no questi∣oning of some others.7. When the elections of some of their Members have been questioned, and others have been accused, for no lesse than capital Crimes, (as Master Griffith was) yet if these men incline, and conspire with this Faction, to confirm those Positions, which they proposed to themselves, to overthrow the Church and State, and to uphold their usurped Government, and tyrannical Ordinances, they will pretend twenty excuses: as, The great Affairs of the State, The multiplicity of their businesses, The ne∣cessity of procuring monies, The shortnesse of their time, (though they sate almost three years already) that they have no leisure to determine these questions (which in truth they do purposely put off, lest they should leese such a friend unto their party;) but when any other, which dissenteth from their humours, doth but any thing contrary to the strait∣est Rules of the House, they do presently (notwithstanding all their greatest affairs) call that matter into question,The L; Digby in his Apolog. and it must be exa∣mined and followed with that eagernesse (as in my Lord Digby's case) that he must be forthwith condemned and excluded; for we say, This cannot be any just Priuiledge, but an unjust proceeding of this Parliament. 8. The delega∣ting of their power to parti∣cular men.8. When they delegate their power to some men to do some things of themselves without the rest; as it seems they did unto Master Pym, when an Order passed under his sole test, for taking away the Rails from the Communion Table; for this is a course we never heard of in former time. 9. The multi∣plying of their Priviledges.9. When their Priviledges are so infinitely grown and inlarged, more than ever they were in former Parliaments, and so swelled, that they
have now swallowed up almost all the Priviledges of other men; so that they alone must do what they please, and where they will, in all Cities, and in all Courts, because they have the Priviledge of Parliament. 10. When, according to the great liberty of language,10. Their speaking and sitting in other Courts. which we deny them not within their own wall, they take the Priviledge to speak what they list in other places, and to govern other Courts as they please, where (as they did in Dublin, and do commonly in London) they sit as Assistants with them, that are priviledged by their Charters to be freed from such Controllers. 11. When, above all that hath been, or can be spoken,11. Their close Committee. they have made a close Committee of Safety, (as they call it) which in the apprehension of all wise and honest men, is not only a course most absurd and illegall, but also most destructive to all true Priviledges, and contrary to the equitable pra∣ctice of all publick meetings, that any one should be excluded from that which concerneth him as well as any of the rest; And this Committee only, which consisteth of a very few of the most pragmatical Members of their House, must have all intelligences and privy counsels received, and reser∣ved among themselves; and what they conclude upon, must be reported to the House, which must take all that they deliver upon trust, and with an implicite Roman faith, believe all that they say, and assent to all that they do; only because these (forsooth) are men to be confided in, upon their bare word,The greatnesse of this abuse. (when their House hath no power to administer an Oath unto any man) in the greatest affairs, happiness or destruction of the whole King∣dom; for this is, in a manner, to make these men Kings, more than the Roman Consuls, and so as great a breach of Priviledge, and abuse of Parlia∣ment, as derogatory to his Majesty, that called them to consult together, and as injurious to all the people, as can be named, or imagined. CHAP. XIV. Sheweth how they have transgressed the publike Laws of the Land three wayes: and of four miserable Consequences of their wicked doings. 2. FOr those publike, written, and better known Laws of this Land,2. Against the publick laws of the Land. they have no lesse violated and transgressed the same than the o∣ther; and that, as well in their execution and exposition, as in their compo∣sition; For, 1. When they had caused the Archbishop of Canterbury to be commit∣ted to the Tower, Judge Berkeley to the Sheriff of London,1. In the exe∣cution of the old Laws. Sir George Ratcliffe to the Gate-house, for no lesse crimes than high Treason, and many other men to some other prisons for some other faults; yet all the World seeth, how long most of them have been kept in prison; some a year, some two, some almost three, and God only knoweth, when these men intend to bring them to their legal tryal; which delay of justice, is not only an intolerable abuse to the present Subjects of this Kingdom, to be so long deprived of their liberty upon a bare surmise, but also a far greater injury to all posterity, when this President shall be produced to be imitated by the succeeding Parliaments, and to justifie the delayes of all inferiour Judges. 2. Whereas we believe what Judge Bracton saith, and Judge Britton likewise, which lived in the time of Edward the first,2. In expoun∣ding the Laws. Si disputatio oriatur, justiciarii non possunt eam interpretari; sed in dubiis & obscuris,
Domini regis erit expectanda interpretatio & voluntas;Citatur à Do∣mino Elism. in post-nati p. 108. cùm ejus sit interpre∣tari, cujus est condere; If any Dispute doth arise, the Judges canot inter∣pret the same, but in all obscure and doubtful questions, the interpretation, and the will of the King, is to be expected; when as he that makes the Law, is to be the expounder and interpreter of the Law; Yet they have challenged, and assumed to themselves, such a power, that their bare Vote, without any Act of Parliament, may expound or alter a known Law; which if it were so, they might make the Law, as Pighius saith of the Scripture, hke a nose of wax, that may be fashioned and bended as they pleased; but we do constantly maintain, That the House of Commons hath no power, to adjudge of any point or matter, but to inform the Lords what they conceive; and the House of Peers hath the power of Judicature, which they are bound to do, according to the Rules of the known established Laws; and to that end, they have the Judges to in∣form them of those cases, and to explain those Laws, wherein themselves are not so well experienced, (though now they sit in the House for cyphers, even as some Clergy did many times in the Convocation;) and if any for∣mer Statute be so intricate and obscure, that the Judges cannot well agree upon the right interpretation thereof, then (as in explaining Poynings Act, and the like, either in England or Ireland) the makers of the Act, that is the King, and the major part of both Houses, must explain the same. 3. In compose∣ing and setting forth new laws.3. Whereas we never knew that the House had any power to make Orders and Ordinances to bind any, (besides their own Members) to ob∣serve them as Laws; yet they compell us to obey their Orders, in a stricter manner than usually we are injoyned by Law; and this course, to make such binding Ordinances as they do, to carry the force, though not the name of an Act of Parliament, or a Law, is a mighty abuse of our Laws and Liberties; for Sir Edward Cook tells us plainly, That (as the con∣stitution of our Government now standeth) neither the House of Com∣mons and King,L. Cook in the Preface of the Stat. of West∣minster the se∣cond. Lamberts Ar∣cheion. 271. can make any binding Law, when the Peers dissent; nor the Lords and King, when the Commonalty dissenteth; nor yet both Hou∣ses without the Kings consent; but all three, King, Peers, and Commons, must agree, before any coactive Law can be composed: Nay more, it is sufficiently proved, that Dare jus populo, or the legislative power, being one principall end of Regall Authority, was in Kings by the Law of Nature, (while they governed the people by naturall equity) long be∣fore municipall Laws, or Parliaments had any beeing. For, as the Poet saith, Remo cum fratre, Quirinus — Jura dabat populo. Hoc Priami gestamen erat, cum jura vocatis More daret populis — Because this was the custom of the Kings of Scythia, Assyria, Aegypt, &c. (long before Moses and Pharonaeus, when Municipall Laws first began) to give Laws unto their people, according to the Rules of Naturall equity, which, by the Law of Nature, they were all bound to ob∣serve. And though some Kings did graciously yield, and by their voluntary oathes, for themselves and their successors, bind themselves may times, to stricter limits, than were absolutely requisite; as William Rufus, King Stephen, Henry the fourth, Richard the third, and the like, granted ma∣ny Priviledges, perhaps to gain the favour of their Subjects, against those which likely had a better Title to the Crown than themselves: or, it may be, to satisfie their people, as the guerdon or compensation for the sufferance of some fore-passed grievances, as Henry the first, Edward
the second, Richard the second, and the like: yet, these limitations, be∣ing agreeable to equity, and consistent with Royalty, and not forcibly extracted, ought in all truth and reason to be observed by them. And hence it is that the Kings of this Realm, according to the oathes and pro∣mises which they made at their Coronation, can never give, nor repeal any Law, but with the assent of the Peers and People. But though they have thus yielded, to make no Laws, nor to repeal any Laws without them; yet this voluntary concession of so much grace unto the people, doth no waies translate the legislative power from the King unto his assistants, but that it is formaliter and subjectivè still in the King, and not in them; else, would the government of this Kingdom be an Ari∣stocracy, or Democracy, and not a Monarchy; because the Supreme power of making and repealing Laws, and Governing or judging decisively accor∣ding to those Laws, are two of those three things, that give being to each one of these three sorts of Government. Therefore, the King of England,Cassan. in cata, gloria mundi. 2 2 Ed. 3. 3. pl. 25. Vid. The view of a Printed book, intitu∣led, Observa∣tions, &c. Where this point is proved at large, p. 18, 19, 21, 22. being an absolute Monarch in his own Kingdom, as Cassaneus saith, and no man can deny it; the Legislative power must needs reside solely in the King, ut in subjecto proprio; and the consent of the Lords and Commons is no sharing of that power, but only a con∣dition yielded to be observed by the King, in the use of that power: and so, both the Oath of Supremacy, and the form of all our ancient Statutes, wherein the King speaks as the Law-maker, do most evidently prove the same unto us, Le Roy voit. Neither durst any Subjects in former times either assume such a power unto themselves, or deny the same unto their King: for you may find how the House of Commons, denying to pass the Bill for the Pardon of the Clergy, which Henry the 8th. granted them, when they were all charg∣ed to be in a Premunire, unless themselves also might be included within the pardon, received this answer from the King, that He was their Sove∣raign Lord, and would not be compelled to shew his mercy, (nor indeed could they compel him to any thing else:) but seeing they went about to restrain him of his Liberty, he would grant a pardon unto his Clergy by his great Seal without them; though afterwards of his own accord he signed their pardon also, which brought great commendation to his judgment,Sir Rich. Baker in vita Hen. 8. to deny it at first, when it was demanded as a right, and to grant it after∣ward, when it was received as of grace. And yet the denyal of their assent unto the King, is more equitable to them, and less derogatory to him, then to make orders without him; And this manner of compulsion, to shew grace unto themselves is more tolerable, than to force him, to disgrace and dis∣place his most faithful servants; only because others cannot confide in them, when no criminal charge is laid against them. And therefore for the Lords and Commons to make Orders and Ordi∣nances without the King, and in opposition to the King, is a meer usurpation of the Regal power, a nullifying of the Kings power, and a making of the Royal assent, which heretofore gave life to every Law, to be an empty piece of formality, which is indeed, an intolerable arrogancy in the contrivers of these Orders and the makers of these Ordinances, a monstrous abuse of the Subjects, and a plain making of our good King to be somewhat like him in the Comedy, A King and no King. And, whereas no Subject, yea, under favour be it spoken, nor the King himself, after he hath taken his Oath at his Coronation, is free from the observation of the established Laws; yet they make themselves so far above the reach of Law, that they freed him, which the Lord chief Justice Bram∣ston had committed to Newgate for felony in stealing the Countess of Ri∣vers goods; they hindered all men, as we found in their journal, from proceeding against Sir Thomas Dawes; they injoyned the Judges by their
Orders, to forbear to proceed in their ordinary courses, in the Courts of Justice, contrary to the Oathes of those Judges; and some Parliament-men came to the Bench to forbid the Judges to grant Habeas Corpus's: which is as great an iniquity, and as apparent an injustice, as ever was done by any Parliament. The most abo∣minable wick∣edness of these factious Re∣bels.And that which is a Note above Ela, above all that could be spoken; whereas the Law of God and man, the bonds and obligations of Civility and Christianity, tye us all to be dutiful and obedient unto our King, in all things, either Actively or Passively; and no wayes for no cause violently to resist him, under the greatest penalties that can be devised here, and dam∣nation hereafter; yet these men, contrary to all Laws, do injoyn us and compell us, as much against our Consciences, as if they should compell us, with the Pagan Tyrants, to offer sacrifice unto Idols, to war against our most gracious Soveraign, whom we from our hearts do both love and ho∣nour; and they proscribe us as malignants, and as enemies to the Common-Wealth,Ps. 50.22. Augu. contra. Faust. l. 22. c. 75. 76. if we contribute not Money, Horse, and Arms, to maintain this ungodly War, and so become deadly enemies unto our own souls. O con∣sider this yee that forget God, lest, for tearing us, He tear you in pieces while there is none to help you: for, considering what the Apostle saith, Rom. 13.1, 2. and what Saint Augustine saith, Ordo naturalis, mortalium paci ac∣commodatus hoc poscit, ut suscipiendi belli Autoritas atque consilium penes prin∣cipem sit; and lest men should think, they ought by force of Armes to re∣sist their King for Religion, he answereth that objection by the example of the Apostles, Isti non resistendo interfecti sunt, ut potiorem esse docerent victo∣riam, pro fide veritatis occidi. We conceive this to be so execrable an Act, and so odious to God and man, that we are made thus miserable, and abu∣sed beyond measure, to have our Religion, which is most glorious, our Laws,The miserable consequences of their wick∣ed doings. that in their own nature are most excellent, and our Liberties, that make us as free as any Subjects in the World, under false pretences, and the shadows of Religion, Laws, and Liberties, to be eradicated, and fun∣damentally destroyed; whereby, 1. We are made a spectacle of scorn, and the object of derision to our neighbour-Nations, that formerly have envied at our happiness; and we are become the Subject of all pitty and lamentation, to all them that love us. 2. As in the Roman Civil-Wars, in the time of Metellus, the Son did kill his own Father; so now, by the subtilty of this faction, we are cast into such a War as is, 1. A most unnatural War, the Son against the Father, and the Father a∣gainst the Son: The Earl of Warwick fighteth for the Parliament, and my Lord Rich his Son with the King: The Earl of Dover is with the King, and my Lord Rochford his Son with the Parliament: So one brother against another, as the Earl of Northumberland with the Parliament, and his bro∣ther with the King; The Earl of Bedford with the Parliament and his brother with the King; Master Perpoint with the Parliament, and the Earl of Newark with the King; Devoreux Farmer with the Parliament, and his bother Richard Farmer, together with his brother in law my Lord Co∣kain with the King, and the like: and of Cosens without number, the one part with the King, and the other with the Parliament: And if they do this in subtilty to preserve their Estates, I say it is a wicked policy to undo the Kingdom, which all wise men should consider. 2. A most irreligious War, when one Christian, of the same professed Re∣ligion, shall bathe his Sword, and wash his Hands in the blood of his fellow Christian, and his fellow Protestant, that shall be coheir with him of the same Kingdom. 3. A most unnatural, irreligious, and barbarous War, when the Subject
shall take Arms, to destroy or unthrone their own Liege, a Religious and most gracious King. 3. The Service of God in most Churches is neglected, when almost all  the ablest, gravest, and most Orthodox Divines and Preachers are perse∣cuted, plundered, imprisoned, and driven to flie (as in the time of the Arian or Donatist, which was worse than the Heathen, perfection) from City to City, and to wander in Desarts from place to place, to save them∣selves from the hands of these Rebels against the King, and Persecuters of Gods Church: which is a most grievous and a most cruel persecution, far more general than that of the Anabaptists in Germany, or of Queen Mary here in England. The Lord of Heaven make us constant, and give us pati∣ence to indure it. 4. The whole Kingdom is, and shall be yet more, by the continuance  hereof, unspeakably impoverished, and plunged into all kind of miseries; when the travailer cannot pass without fear, nec hospes ab hospite tutus, the Carrier cannot transport his commodity, but it shall be intercepted, the Husbandman cannot till his ground, but his Horses, as my self saw it, shall be taken from the Plough, and his Corn shall be destroyed when it is rea∣dy for the Sickle, which must be the fore-runner of a Famine, that is ever the Usher to introduce the Plague and Pestilence, and all other kind of grievous diseases; and these things put together, do set wide our Gates, and open our Ports, to bring forraign foes into our Coasts, to possess that good Land, whereof we are unworthy; because with the Israelites we loathed Manna, we were weary of our peace and happiness; we would buy Arms and be Voluntiers, and every Town being too wanton, would needs train and put themselves into a posture of defence, as they termed it, to be secured from their own shadows: and though the King told them often, there was no cause of their Jealousies, and therefore forbade these disloyalties; yet just like the Jews, they were willing to be deceived by this miserable faction, that contrived that Act whereby they have perfidiously over-reached both our good King, and the rest of our wel-meaning brethren, either to perfect their Design, or else, to make themselves perpetual Dictators, and to betray the felicity of all our people, under the name of Parliament; which though (as I said before) I honour and love, as much as any of the truest Patriots of either House, both in the institution and the right prose∣cution thereof; that is, as it was constituted, to be the great Council of the Kingdom graciously called by his Majesties-writ, confidently to present the grievances of the people, and humbly to offer their advice and counsels for their Reformation; yet I do abhor those men, that would abuse the word Parliament, only as a Stalking-Horse to destroy all Acts of Parlia∣ment; and I hate to see men calling the Fanatick actions of a few desperate seditious persons, the proceedings of Parliament, and others (making an Idol of it, as if their power were omnipotent or unlimitted, and more than any Regal Power, their judgment infallible, their Orders irreprehensible, and themselves unaccountable for their proceedings) to be so besotted with the name of it, that this bare shadow without the substance (for it is no Parliament without the King; and the Major part of both Houses is either banished, or imprisoned, or compelled to reside with his Majesty) should so bewitch us (as Master Smyth blushed not to say, Nothing could free us from our dangers but the Divinity of a Parliament) out of our own hap∣piness to become more miserable,Ingeniosus ad blasphemiam. then heretofore this Kingdom hath ever been by any Civil War: for, if you will consider the Treasons and Re∣bellions, the Injustice, Cruelty, and Inhumanity, the Subtilty, Hypocrisie, Lying, Swearing, Blasphemy, Prophaneness, and Sacriledge in the highest pitch, and many other the like fearful sins, that have been committed since the beginning of this Parliament, by the sole means of this Faction,
and observe the ill Acts that have been used by them to compass things lawful, & the wicked Acts that have been daily practised to procure things unlawful (when by blood and rapine and the curses of many Fatherless and Widdows, they have gotten the Treasure of the Kingdom, and the Wealth of the Kings loyal Subjects into their hands, and wasted it so, that their wants are still as notorious as their crimes) we may admire the miracles of Gods mercy, and the bottomless depth of his goodness, that the stones in the streets have not risen against them, or the fire from Heaven had not consumed these Rebels, that thus far and thus insolently had tempted Gods patience, and provoked him to anger with such horrible abominations. 5. As Jerusalem justified Samaria, so this Faction hath justified all the Romanists, and shewed themselves worse Christians, less Subjects, and viler Traytors than all the Papists are; for these factious Rebels justify their Rebellion, and, to the indelible shame of their Profession, they maintain that it is not only lawful, but that it is their duty to bear Arms, and to wage War against their King, when the King doth abuse his Power: where∣as the Doctrine of the Church of RomeChristopher∣son tract. contr. rebell. Rhemist. in Nov. Test. p. 01. Goldastus de Monarchia S. Imp. Rom. tom. 3. Dr. Kellison in his Survey. Aquin. de Re∣gim. Princip. c. 6. Concil. Constan. Sess. 15. Stephan. Cantuar anno 8. H. 3. Tolet. in summa l 5. c 6. Gr. Valentia, p. 2. q 64. Bellar. Apol. c. 13 Lessi l. 2 c. 9. Serrarius, Azorius, &c. utterly denieth the same, and concludes them no Children of the Church that do it: and Doctor Kelli∣son giveth this reason for it, because Faith is not necessarily required to Jurisdiction or Government; neither is Authority lost by the loss of Faith; therefore it is not lawful for any Subjects to Rebel against their King, though their King should prove a Tyrant, or should Apostate from the Faith of Christ; so that now the Papists boast, they are better Subjects than these Rebellious Protestants: and thefore I fear that this Faction (Defendens Christum, verso mucrone cecidit.) by their unjust Design to propagate the Gospel, have most grievously wounded the Faith of Christ, and given a more deadly blow to the Prote∣stant Religion than ever it had since the Reformation; when it is impossi∣ble that the true Religion should produce Rebellion. And therefore seeing we are free-born Subjects, and persons interessed in the good and safety of this Kingdom, as well as any of them, we must crave liberty to express our grievances, and to crave redresses; and seeing my self am called to be a Preacher of Gods Word, and a Bishop over many of the souls of my Brethren, for which I must render an account to my God, both for my silence when I should speak, and speaking any thing that should not be spoken, I resolved to fear my God, and neither out of flat∣tery to the King and his party, nor out of hatred or malice to those factious men, but as I am perswaded in my Conscience, fully satisfied and guid∣ed by Gods Truth, to set forth this Discovery of these Mysteries, what danger soever I shall undergo; and if I shall become their Enemy for speaking Truth, I shall fare no worse than Saint Paul did; and it shall be with them, if they do not repent, as it was with the Israelites, When their destruction cometh,Ezech. 7.25, 27. they shall seek peace and shall not have it, but calami∣ty shall come upon calamity.
CHAP. XV. Sheweth a particular recapitulation of the Reasons, whereby their Design to alter the Government of the Church and State is evin∣ced; And a pathetical disswasion from Rebellion. ANd thus I have set down not any thing to render these men more o∣dious than they are, or to abuse my Reader with falshood,If I have been misinformed of any thing that shall appear false, I shall not blush to retract it by an ingenuous con∣fession. or uncer∣tainties, but to report what I knew, and what I collected out of the pre∣sent writings of best credit, and attested by men of known truth and inte∣grity, whereby it is most apparent to any discerning eye, That the Faction of Anabaptists, and Brownists, and some other of the subtilest heads in the House of Commons, had from the first Convention of this Parliament, se∣cretly projected this Design, and, insensible to the rest of their well-mean∣ing Brethren, prosecuted the same, to alter and change the ancient Govern∣ment both of the Church and Kingdom,Sober Sadnesse. p. 44, 45, 46. which the Author of Sober-Sadness proveth by these subsequent Reasons: as (for the first) 1. By suspending all Ecelesiasticall Laws and Censures;Their Design to change the Church Go¦vernment, pro∣ved 4. wayes. which indulgence of all Vices, hath drawn all Offenders to comply with them. 2. By setting the people on work, to petition against the present Go∣vernment, and the Service of the Church. 3. By the Bill concluded for the abolishing of our Govern∣ment. 4. By the chief persons countenanced and imployed by them in that businesse, who are Anabaptists and Brownists, and all sorts of Sectaries; he evinceth their Design to change our Church-Government, and to convert the Patrimony of the Church, which our religious Ancestors dedicated for the advancement of God's Worship; not to establish Learning and a prea∣ching Ministery, as they pretended, but to dis-ingage their Publick-faith, which otherwise would never prove a saving faith. And I wish, there might be none about His Majesty, that, pretending great loyalty unto him, do comply with them herein, and either to raise, or to secure their own Fortunes, would perswade Saint Paul, to part with Saint Peters keyes so he may still hold the sword in his hand; or, to speak more plainly, to purchase the peace of the Common-wealth, with the ruine of God's Church: But for this, let me be bold, 1. To crave leave to tell His Majesty, It was not His sword that hath brought him from a flying Prince out of Westminster, and as yet unsecured at Nottingham, to be a victorious King at Edge hill, and immediately to be the terrour of all the Rebels in London; But it was God, whose Church and Church-Service he defended, that protected him hitherto, and gave him the Victory in Battel; And let him be assured, that He, which is Yea and Amen, will be his Shield and Buckler still, to defend him from the strivings of his people, and to subdue them that rise against him, while he defendeth them, whose eyes, next under God, are only fixt on him, to be, as God hath pro∣mised, their nursing Father. 2. To assure those that would suffer the Church to fall, or perhaps sell the same out of a by-respect unto themselves, That taking their rise from the fall of the Church, or laying the foundation of their houses in the ruine
of the Clergy, they do but build upon the sands, whence they shall fall, and their fall shall be great, when the successe thereof shal be as the success of the City of Jericho, that was built by Hiel, who laid the foundation of it in Abiram his first-born, and set up the gates thereof in Segub his youngest son, and had her destiny described by Joshua; and all the Poss ssions that they shall get, shall prove Acheldama's, fields of blood; and we hope God will raise deliverance to his Church from some better men, when as they and their Fathers House shall all perish, and shall stink in the nostrils of all good men for their perfidiousness in Gods cause. But if any man should demand why we suspect any Traytors, or false Counsellours, to be in Kings Courts: I answer, because Saint Paul saith, Oportet esse hareses; and, I believe, the purest Court hath no more Priviledge to be free from Traytors, then the Church from Hereticks. And you know there was one of eight in Noahs Ark, and another of twelve in Christ his Court; and he that was so near him, as to dip his hand with him in the dish, was the first that flew in his face, and yet with a Hayl Master, and with a Kiss: two fair testimonies of true love. Therefore, let no King in Christendom think it strange that his Court should have Flatterers, Traytors, or evil Counsellours; let not us be blam∣ed for saying this, and let not Pym so foolishly charge our King for evil Counsellours; for certainly, did he know them, I make no question but he would discard them: or could I, or any other, inform his Majesty who they are, and that it were an easy matter, dicer, Hic est; we would not be affraid to pull off their veils, and to say, as Christ did to Judas, Thou art the man; but their Maeandrian windings, their Syrens voyces, and their Judas kisses, are as a fair mantle, to conceal and cover Joabs Treason, even perhaps to betray some of the wisest in the Parliament, as well as some of them have betrayed the King. In such a case, all I can say, is this; Memento diffidere, was Epicarmus his Motto. The honest plain dealing man that doth things for Religion, not for ends, is the unlikest man to betray his Master; and few Counsellours are not so apt to breed so many Traytors as a multitude. It was the indiscretion of Rehoboam that lost him ten parts of twelve, to prefer young Counsellours before the ancientSeldom dis∣cretion in youth attend∣eth great and suddain for∣tunes. In vita Hen: 3. and if we may believe that either paupertas, or ne∣cessitas cogit ad turpia, or the fable of the ulcerated Travailer, They that are to make their fortunes are apter to sell Church and State, and to be∣tray King and Kingdom, rather then those that have sufficiently reple∣nished their coffers, and inlarged their possessions. But I assure my self the mouth of malice cannot deny, but that our King hath been as wary and as wise in the choice of his Servants, Officers, and Counsellors, so far as eyes of flesh can see,Their design to change the Government of th State, shewed. in all respects, as any Prince in Christendom; and more by man cannot be done. And for the second, that is, their Design to change the Government of the State, and to work the subversion of the Monarchy: he evin∣ceth it, 1. By that Declaration upon the Earl of Straffords suffering, that this Example might not be drawn to a President for the future; because they thought that themselves, intending to do the like, and to become guilty of the same Crimes, might by virtue of this Declaration be secu∣red from the punishment, if things should succeed otherwise then they hoped. 2. By the pulling down of so many Courts of Justice, which may per∣haps Relieve the Subjects from some pressures, but incourage many more in licentiousness, and prove the Prodroms to the ruine of our Monar∣chy. 3. By those 19. Propositions, whereby the King was, in very deed, de∣manded
to lay down his Crown,The Letter p. 11. and to compound with them for the same; because (as another saith) therein, there was presented to him a perfect Platform of a total change of Government, by which the Counsellours, indeed, were to have been Kings, and the King in name to have become scarce a Counsellour, and nothing of the present State to have remained, but the very Names and Titles of our Gover∣nours. 4. By that expression (so little understood by many men, and yet so much talked of in many of their papers) of a power of re-assuming the trust, which is falsly pretended to be derived unto his Majesty, by the meer human pactions and agreement of the Politick body of the people, which I shewed unto you to be a most false and a meer invented sugge∣stion. 5. By their pretending to, and according to this Doctrine their Ʋsurping of the power of the Militia both by Sea and Land. 6. By their Actual exercising of this power, in disposing of Offices, Ge∣nerals, Colonels, Captains, and the like Places of Command in War, and appointing their Speaker, Master of the Rowls, and other Officers of Peace. 7. By the expression of one of them to Sir Edward Deering, while he was yet of their Cabinet-Council, that if they could bring down the Lords to the House of Commons, and make the King as one of the Lords, then the whole work were done; that is, to make the Government of this Kingdom popular. 8. I may add to these, as another unanswerable Argument of this De∣sign, the licencing of Master Pryn's Book of The Soveraign Authority of Par∣liaments, and suffering the same to pass unquestioned to this very day; be∣cause that book devesteth the King of all his Soveraignty, and maketh our Government Aristocratical. And this subversion of our Monarchical Government was the last De∣sign, if not the grand Design of this Faction: not that all the Mem∣bers, which have voted all or most of those things that tended to this change, or be still remaining in either House, did intend any ill either to Church or State, (for I know many, especially my ever honoured Lord, the Earl, of Pembrook and Montgomery, who, I dare avouch it in Truth and honesty, did ever, and as I believe doth still bear a most upright heart, and as sincere intentions, (howsoever perhaps by a mis-understanding his Lordship and the rest of those well meaning men may be mis-guided, as were those honest men that followed Absolon) both to Gods Service, the Kings Honour, and the happiness both of Church and Common-Wealth, as any man in the Kingdom) but that a Faction, it may be very few at first have insensibly seduced the rest to effect their own Design; and thia Faction is all that I mean by the name of Parliament, throughut this whole Treatise; because their subtilty hath prevailed over the plain Integrity of the other well-minded men, to make up the major part of the House, both of the Lords and Commons; which thing hath often happened both in General Councils, and great Parliaments, as in the Council of Constans and Trent, and many others, and that Parliament which was branded with the name of Parliamentum insanum, and the other somewhat like this, in quo jugulum ecclesiae atrocius petebatur, and the like;Tempore Hen. 3. for other∣wise, I do both honour, and reverence this Parliament rightly understood, and every Member of the same, as much as any discreet Member can de∣sire. And therefore having thus discovered and displayed the Plots and pra∣ctices of these infernal instruments; to insinuate their assistance unto the Scots, and their allurements of them to invade our Kings Dominions;
to ensnare the Irish, and to provoke the Papists, to such a Rebellion as hath been the utter ruine and destruction of many millions of men; to obscure the Glory of this noble Kingdom, to alter the Discipline, and corrupt the Doctrine of the most glorious and the purest Church. that profes∣seth the name of Christ, and to bring us all, and all our Posterity to ex∣tream miseries, to suffer yet more than we have endured, or that can be hitherto imagined; And considering those bloody Treasons that have been publickly uttered, and openly practised against the Sacred Person of our Soveraign; I may justly say, that, as the sins of the Israelites, and their impetuous calling for a King, moved the Lord to send them a King in his anger, so our sins and our impatient crying for a Parliament, made our God to send us a Parliament in his Wrath, that will never turn for our Blessing, till we return to God from our sinnes; for when I consider on the one side, the Piety and goodness of our King, the justness of his cause, and the most ready and cordial valour, as well in the Common Souldiers as the Commanders of a full and sufficient Army; and on the other side, the multitude of disloyal and seduced Subjects, the vigilancy and subtilty of their Commanders, with their unlimited waies to get Monies; and on both sides, the desire of too many, not for the honour of the King, nor the Peace of the Kingdom to end the War, but to continue the same for their own advantage, until the wealth of Law∣yers, Clergy, and Gentry, be transplanted to the possession of other Masters, I am affraid it will prove an heavy Judgment. And therefore, lest our obstinacy in our sins should procure the continuance of Gods an∣ger, which being removed will soon remove all our miseries; let me per∣swade all conscientious men, especially the Gentry, and all other under∣standing men, (howsoever the Citizens that deceive the Kingdom of their Wealth, delight to be deceived in their Faith) that would not be cheated of their Religion by these factious Mountebanks, and that would not provoke God to say, I have no pleasure in them, to turn from their Rebellious courses, to listen no longer to those furious fire brands, that out of their new Divinity, contrary to the Doctrine of all the ancient Fathers, and all the Orthodox and grave Preachers of this Kingdom, do incite the People unto this unnatural bloody War, and to slander the foot∣steps of Gods Anointed; because they know him not, and to remember the Oathes of their Allegeance and Supremacy, together with their late Protestation, whereby they stand obliged to their uttermost power to main∣tain his Majesties Royal Person, Crown, and Dignity, against all treache∣rous practices, that may any waies dishonour or impair them; and then I presume their consciences will disavow the proceedings of these Proje∣ctours, protest against all their Ordinances, that are made against or without the Kings consent, advise all the Knights and Burgesses to Vote no more against their Soveraign, and to make no further use of the trust they re∣posed in them, to Murder us and our fellow Subjects, under the pre∣tence of shedding the blood of the ungodly; or, if they still go on to abuse that trust, (to make us yet more miserable) to withdraw themselves and their trust and power of the representation from them, and to joyn their uttermost assistance unto his Majesty to Protect him, that he may be enabled to protect us, and to overwhelm these Rebels into the same pit which they have made for us. And this may be, by dissolving the knot of factious members wherein we see our miseries involved, and to make elections of new members into their places, who, with the rest of the Lords and Commons, which were faith∣ful both to the Church, King, and Kingdom, shall call them to a strict ac∣count, for betraying our Trust, interrupting our Peace, opposing his Ma∣jesty, and violating all our ancient liberties.
Or if a better way may be found, let us follow the same to God's glory, and to produce the peace and happinesse of this Kingdom, lest, if we persist obstinately in this wilfull Rebellion, to withstand God's Ordinance, to oppose his Anointed, and to shed so much innocent blood, we shall, thus fighting against Heaven, so far provoke the wrath of the God of Heaven, as that the Glory of Israel shall be darkned, the Honour of this Nation shall be troden under-foot, and be made the scorn of all other Nations round about us; and the light of our Candlestick shall be extinguished, and we shall all become most miserable; because we would not hearken to the voice of the Lord our God. Which I hope we will do; and do most earnestly pray, that we may do it, to the Glory of God, the Honour of our King, and the Happinesse of this whole Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be Praise and Dominion, both now and for ever. Amen. Jehovae Liberatori. AN APPENDIX. THe man of God speaking of transcendent wickednesse, saith, Their Vine is of the Vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah:Deut. 32.32. their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter; their wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel vemon of Aspes. And I believe, never any wickednesse deserved better to be clad with this elegant expression, than that threefold iniquity. 1. The unparallel'd Vote. 2. The intolerable Ordinance. 3. The damnable Covenant, which the rebellious Faction in Parlia∣ment have most impiously contrived, to make up the full measure of their impiety, since the writing of my Discoveries; For, 1. Omitting that horrible practice of those rebellious blood thirsty Souldiers, that did their best to murder their own most gracious Queen; this Faction seeing how God prevented that plot, voted this most loving and most loyal Wife, to be impeached of High Treason, for being faithful to do her uttermost endeavour (which will be her everlasting praise) to assist her most dear, and Royal Husband, (their own Liege Lord, and Soveraign King) in his greatest extremities, against a virulent mighty Faction of most malicious Traytors; The strangest Treason that ever the World heard of. 2. They made an Ordinance for the composing and convocating of such a Synod (whereof I said somewhat before) of Lay-men, ignorant men, fa∣ctious men, trayterous men, and such concretion of heterogeneall parts, like Nebuchadnezzars Image, Gold, Brass, and Clay, all mixed together, and
all so ordered, limited, and bridled, (as it is expressed in the 5. and 6. page of their Ordinance) by the power of both Houses, where there are such abundance of Schismaticall and seditious Members, that I should scarce put the worst sensitive soul to professe that erratical faith, or any brute beast, to be guided by that Ecclesiastical Discipline, that such factious Traytors (as some of them are like to be proved) should compose, or cause to be composed. 3. They composed a form of a sacred Vow, or Covenant (as they term it) or, as it is indeed, the Covenant of Hell, a Covenant against God, to overthrow the Gospel of Christ, under the name of Christ; which Cove∣nant, is the oil that swimmeth uppermost upon the waters, that is, the oil of Scorpions, or (as Moses saith) The poison of Dragons, so lately wringed and diffused far and near, to defile and destroy millions of souls; when, forgetting their faith to God, and the oathes of their allegeance (so often, and so solemnly taken by many, or most of them) to be faithful unto their King, they shall be compelled (which is one degree worse than the vow of them that bound themselves with a curse, neither to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul;) so hypocritically, so perjuredly, so rebelliously, so horribly, and so bloodily, to make such a fearful Vow, and such an abominable Co∣venant, so wickedly contrived, that without great and serious repentance, spitteth forth nothing but fire and brimstone, and can produce nothing else but Hell and Damnation, to all that take it; especially, to them that will compell men to be thus transcendently wicked, as if they would send them with Corah quick to Hell. All which triplicity of evil, I shall leave to some abler, and more eloquent Pen, to be set forth more fully in the right colours, that, being sufficiently displayed, they may be throughly detested of all good men. Amen. O Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep thy Laws.
THE CONTENTS Of the severall Chapters in the Plots of the Parliament. Chap. I. SHeweth the Introduction; the greatness of this Rebel∣lion; the originall thereof; the secret plots of the Brownisticall Faction; and the two cheifest things they aimed at to effect their plot. Page 251. Chap. II. Sheweth the eager prosecution of our Sectaries to take off the Earl of Strafford's head; How he answered for himself; The Bishops right of voting in his cause; His excellent virtues, and his death. p. 254. Chap. III. Sheweth how they stopped the free judgement of the Judges; procured the perpetuity of the Parliament; the conse∣quences thereof. And the subtile device of Semiramis. p. 259. Chap. IV. Sheweth the abilities of the Bishops; the threefold pra∣ctice of the Faction to exclude them out of the House of Peers; and all the Clergy out of all Civil Judicature. p. 262. Chap. V. Sheweth the evil consequences of this Act; How former times respected the Clergy; How the King hath been used ever since this Act passed; and how for three speciall Reasons it ought to be annulled. p. 265. Chap. VI. Sheweth the plots of the Faction, to gain unto them∣selves the friendship and assistance of the Scots: To what end they framed their new Protestation: How they provoked the Irish to rebell: And what other things they gained thereby. p. 270. Chap. VII. Sheweth how the Faction was inraged against our last Canons. What manner of men they chose in their new Synod. And of six speciall Acts of great prejudice unto the Church of Christ, which under false pretences they have al∣ready done, p. 274. Chap. VIII. Sheweth what Discipline, or Church-government our factious Schismaticks like best. Twelve Principal points of their Doctrines, which they hold as 12. Articles of their faith, and
we must all believe the same, or suffer, if this Faction should prevail. p. 270. Chap. IX. Sheweth three other speciall points of Doctrine, which the Brownists and Anabaptists of this Kingdom do teach. p. 274, Chap. X. Sheweth the great Bug-bears that affrighted this Facti∣on. The four speciall means they used to secure themselves. The manifold lyes they raised against the King. And the two special Questions that are discussed about Papists. p. 278. Chap. XI. Sheweth the unjust proceedings of these factious Secta∣ries against the King. Eight special wrongs and injuries that they have offered him. Which are the three States? And that our Kings are not Kings by Election or Covenants with the people. p. 283. Chap. XII. Sheweth the unjust proceedings of this Faction a∣gainst their fellow Subjects, set down in four particular things. p. 289. Chap. XIII. Sheweth the proceedings of this Faction against the Laws of the Land. The Priviledges of Parliament transgressed eleven special wayes. p. 292. Chap. XIV. Sheweth how they have transgressed the publike Laws of the Land three wayes: and of four miserable Conse∣quences of their wicked doings. p. 295. Chap. XV. Sheweth a particular recapitulation of the Reasons, whereby their Design to alter the Government both of Church and State, is evinced: And a pathetical disswasion from Re∣bellion. p. 301.
TO THE KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY. Most gracious Soveraign, WITH no smal paines (and the more for want of my books, and of any setled place, being multum terris jactatus & alto, frighted out of mine house, and tost betwixt two distracted Kingdoms) I have collected out of the sacred Scri∣pture, explained by the ancient Fathers, and the best Writers of God's Church, these few Rights out of many, that God, and Nature, and Nations, and the Lawes of this Land have fully and undeniably granted unto our Soveraign Kings. My witness is in Heaven, that as my conscience di∣rected me, without any squint aspect, so I have with all sincerity, and freely traced and expressed the truth, as I shall answer to the contrary at the dreadful judgement; ; therefore with all fervency I humbly supplicate the divine Majesty, still to assist Your Highness, that, as in Your lowest ebb, You have put on Righteousness as a breast plate, and with an heroick Resolu∣tion withstood the proudest waves of the raging Seas, and the violent Attempts of so many imaginary Kings; so now, in Your acquired strength, You may still ride on with Your
honour; and for the glory of God, the preservation of Christ his Church, and the happiness of this Kingdom, not for the greatest storm that can be threatned, suffer these Rights to be snatched away, nor Your Crown to be thrown to the dust, nor the Sword, that God hath given You, to be wrest∣ed out of Your hand by these uncircumcised Philistines, these ungracious Rebels, and the Vessels of God's wrath, , unlesse they do most speedily repent; for if the unrighteous will be unrighteous still, and our wickednesse provoke God to bring our Land to Desolati∣on, Your Majesty, standing in the truth, and for the right, for the honour of God, and the Church of his Son, is ab∣solved from all blame, and all the bloud that shall be spilt, and the oppressions, insolencies, and abhominations that are perpetrated, shall be required at the hands, and reven∣ged upon the heads of these detested Rebels. You are, and ought in the truth of cases of conscience, to be informed by Your Divines; and I am confident that herein they will all subscribe, that God will undoubtedly assist You, and arise in his good time, to maintain his own cause; and by this war, that is so undutifully, so unjustly made a∣gainst Your Majesty, so Giant-like fought against Hea∣ven, to overthrow the true Church, You shall be glorious like King David, that was a man of War, whose dear son raised a dangerous rebellion against him, and in whose reign so much bloud was spilt; and yet, notwithstanding these distempers in his Dominion, he was a man according to God's own heart, especially, because that from α to ωAs, in the be∣ginning, by re∣ducing the Ark from the Phi∣listins, through∣out the midst, by setling the service of the Tabernacle, & in the ending by his resoluti∣on to build, & leaving such a treasure for the erecting of the Temple., the beginning of his reign, to the end of his life, his chiefest en∣deavour was to promote the service, and protect the ser∣vants of the Tabernacle, the Ministers of God's Church. God Almighty so continue Your Majesty, bless You and protect You in all Your wayes, Your vertuous, pious Queen, and all Your royal Progeny. Which is the dayly prayer of The most faithful to Your Majesty, GRYFFITH OSSORY.
THE RIGHTS OF KINGS, Both in CHURCH & STATE: And, The Wickednesses of this Pretended PAR∣LIAMENT Manifested and Proved. CHAP. I. Sheweth, who are the fittest to set down the Rights which God granted unto Kings; what causeth men to rebell; the parts considerable in S. Peter's words, 1 Pet. ii. 17. in fine. How Kings honoured the Cler∣gie; the fair, but most false pretences of the refractary Faction, what they chiefly aime at, and their malice to Episcopacie and Royaltie. IT was not unwisely said by Ocham that great Scholeman to a great Emperour (which M. Luther said also to the Duke of Saxonie,) Tu protege me gladio,Guliel. Ocham. Ludov. 4. & ego defen∣dam te calamo; do you defend me with your Sword, and I will maintain your Right with my Pen; for God hath committed the Sword into the hand of the King, and His hand which beareth not the Sword in vain,Rom. 13. v. 4 knoweth how to use the Sword better than the Preach∣er, and the King may better make good His Rights by the Sword then by the Pen, which having once blotted His papers with mistakes, and concessions more then due, though they should be never so small (if granted further than the truth would permit, as I fear some have done in some particulars) yet they
cannot so easily be scraped away by the sharpest sword; and God ordered the divine tongue and learned Scribe to be the pens of a ready Writer, and thereby to display the duties, and to justifie the Rights of Kings; and if they fail in either part,The Divine best to set down the Rights of kings. the King needeth neither to performe what undue Offices they im∣pose upon him, nor to let pass those just honours they omit to yield unto him; but he may justly claime his due Rights, and either retain them, or regain them by his Sword, which the Scribe either wilfully omitted, or ignorantly neglected to ascribe unto him, or else maliciously endeavoured, (as the most impudent, and rebellious Sectaries of our time have most virulently done) to abstract them from him. And seeing the Crown is set upon the head of every Christian King, and the Scepter of Government is put into his hand, by a threefold Law 1. Of Nature, that is common to all. 2. Of the Nation, that he ruleth over. 3. Of God, that is over all. As, Every Chri∣stian king e∣stablished by a threefold Law. Psal. 119.1. Nature teaching every King to governe his People according to the com∣mon rules of honesty and justice. 2. The politique constitution of every several State, and particular King∣dom, shewing how they would have their government to be administred. 3. The Law of God, which is an undefiled Law, and doth infallibly set down what duties are to be performed, and what Rights are to be yielded to every King:To what end the stories of the kings of Israel and Ju∣dah were writ∣ten. Rom. 15.4. for whatsoever things are written of the Kings of Israel, and Ju∣dah in the holy Scriptures, are not onely written for those Kings, and the Go∣vernment of that one Nation, but as the Apostle saith, They are written for our learning, that all Kings and Princes might know thereby how to govern, and all Subjects might in like manner, by this impartial, and most perfect rule, under∣stand how to behave themselves in all obedience and loyalty towards their Kings and Governours; for he that made man, knew, he had been better un∣made, than left without a Government; therefore, as he ordained those Laws, whereby we should live, and set down those truths that we should beleive; so he settled,The ordinati∣on of our go∣vernment as beneficial as our creation. and ordained that Government, whereby all men in all Nations should be guided and governed, as knowing full well, that we neither would, or could do any of these things right, unless he himselfe did set down the same for us; therefore, though the frowardness of our Nature will neither yield to live according to that Law, nor beleive according to that rule, nor be go∣verned according to that divine Ordinance, which God hath prescribed for us in his Word; yet it is most certain, that he left us not without a perfect rule, and direction for each one of these our faith, our life, and our government without which government, we could neither enjoy the benefits of our life, nor scarce reap the fruits of our faith: and because it were as good to leave us without Rules,Unwritten things most uncertain. and without Laws, as to live by unwritten Laws, which in the vastness of this world would be soon altered, corrupted, and obliterated; therefore God hath written down all these things in the holy Scriptures, which though they were delivered to the People of the Jews, for the government both of their Church and Kingdom: yet were they left with them to be com∣municated for the use and benefit of all other Nations; (God being not the God of the Jews onely,Rom. 3 29. but of the Gentiles also:) because the Scripture, in all morall and perpetual precepts (that are not meerly judicialia Judaica, or secundae clas∣sis, which the Royal Government was not, because this was ordained from the beginning of the world to be observed among all Nations, and to be continu∣ed to the end of the world; nor the types and shadows that were to vanish when the true substance approached) was left as a perfect patern, and platforme for all Kings and People, Pastours and Flocks, Churches and Kingdoms through∣out the whole world, to be directed how to live, to govern, and to be governed thereby. Such was the love and care of God for the Government of them that love and care as little to be governed by his government.
And therefore the dim and dusky light of bleare-ey'd Nature,Every Go∣vernment the better, by how much nearer it is to the Go∣vernment of the Scripture kings. and the dark distracted inventions of the subtillest politicks must stoop, and yield place in all things, wherein they swerve from that strict rule of justice, and the right order of government, which is expressed necessarily to be observed in the holy Scripture, either of the Kings part towards his People, or of the Peoples duty towards their King. And though each one of these faculties, or the understanding of each one of these three Laws requireth more than the whole man, our life being too short to make us perfect in any one; yet seeing that of all three, the Law of God is abyssus magna, like the bottomless sea, and the supreme Lady, to whom all other Laws and Sciences are but as Penelopes, handmaids to attend her service; the Divine may far better, and much sooner understand what is naturall right, and what ought to be a just nationall Law, and thereby what is the Right of Kings,The Divine is better able to understand Law, then the Lawyer to un∣derstand Divi∣nity. Psal. 1.2. and what the duty of Subjects, than any, either Philosopher or Lawyer, can finde the same by any other art; especially to understand the same so fully by the Law of God, as the Divine that exerciseth himselfe therein day and night, may do it; unless you think (as our Enthusiasts dream) that every illiterate Trades∣man, or at least a Lawyers Latine, (I speak of the generality, when I know many of them of much worth in all learning) may easily wade, with the read∣ing of our English Bibles, into the depth of all Divinty: and that the greatest Doctour that spent all his days in studies, can hardly understand the mysteries of these Camelion-like Laws, which may change sense, as often as the Case shall be changed; either by the subtlety of the Pleader, or the ignorance, or corrupti∣on of the Judges. But we know their deepest Laws, discreetest Statutes, and sub∣tillest Cases cannot exceed the reach of sound reason; and therefore no Reason can be shewed, but that a rational man meanly understanding Languages, may sooner understand them, and with less danger mistake them, than that Law, which (as the Psalmist saith) is exceeding broad, and exceedeth all humane sense,Psal 119.96. 1 Cor. 2.14. and the most exquisite natural understanding, when (as the Apostle saith) The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: and being not discerned, or misunderstood, they make all such mistakers liable to no small punishment, if God should be extreme to marke what is done amiss: and this not understanding of God's Law, is the errour of other Laws, and the cause of much mischief; for if men understood not the Law of God,What causeth many men to rebell. The Scriptures say more for the right of kings, then a∣ny book in the world. Downing in his discourse of the Ecclesiasti∣call State, p. 91. or would beleive us that do understand it, I assure my self, many of the Rebels (such as rebell not out of pride, disobedience, or discontent) are so conscientious, that they would not so rebell as they do, being seduced through their ignorance, by the subtletie of the most crafty children of disobedience. And therefore letting the usuall impatience of the furious fire-brands of se∣dition, and the malicious incendiaries of Rebellion, together with those treae∣cherous Judasses, that insensibly, lurke in the King's Court, and are more dange∣rous both to the Church and State, than those open Rebels that are in the Par∣liament House, to lay on me what reproach they please; as some of them being galled, and now gone, have already done, Ego in bona conscientia teneo, quisquis volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi meae.August. I shall beleive it in a good conscience, that whosoever shall wittingly detract from my repute, and unjustly load me with undue disgrace, shall unwillingly add to my reward; neither shall I ever think, Plus ponderis esse in alieno convicio,Ambrose. quàm in testimonio meo, that there is more account to be had in the foule slander of another mans malice, then in the spotless testimony of mine own conscience: but consider∣ing (as Saint Hierome saith) that, Apud Christianos non qui patitur sed qui facit contumeliam, miser est; among Christians, not he that suffereth, but he that of∣fereth injuries and reproaches, is wretched;Osor. in Epist. Reginae Eliz. pag. 7. though (as Osorius faith) Multae insidiae principibus à suis domesticis intenduntur, multae fraudes in aula Regia quaestus & compendii gratiâ suscipiuntur, multa, partim adulatione & perfidiâ,
partim offensionis periculosà formidine dissimulantur, ità ut rarò inveniantur qui Regibus liberè loqui audeant; many snares are laid for Princes by their own domestique servants; many deceitfull tricks, and cunning plots, are undertaken in the King's Court for gain and honours sake, and many things partly for fear of offending,How kings are deluded by their own Courtiers, and the truth con∣cealed from them. The Authours Resolution with God's Assistance. and partly through a persidious and false flattery, are dissembled, and the truth of things is imprisoned from the sight of the King; so that he that seeth with these Courtiers eyes, and heareth with their ears, can hardly know the certain state of his own affairs, especially when their flattering Para∣sites shall bear so heavy a hand over the faithfull servants, that few of them shall dare freely to declare the Truth; yet I am resolved to set down the plain face of Truth, without either flattering of my Royal Master, or fear either of the Court flatterers hatred, or the Parliamentary Facti∣ons cruelty. And though my eldest Brethren, that are abler than my self, should reprove me,1 Sam. 17.28. and say unto me, as Eliab said unto David; yet I will take my staff in my hand, mine own integrity to uphold me, and my fidelity to my King, and to the King of kings to protect me, and I will gather a few stones out of the Brook of living waters, out of the Book of holy Scriptures, and I hope with one of them to smite the Philistine,The Adversa∣ries of regal Right. the three-headed Gerion, the Anabap∣tist, Brownist, and Puritan Rebel, in the forehead, that he fall to the earth, his head shall be cut off with his own sword, and the whole army of the uncircum∣cised Philistines, that is, all the rest of the wilfully seduced Rebels, that re∣fuse to be un-deceived, and to accept of his Majesties grace and pardon, shall flie away, and be destroyed. And, The first stone that comes into my hand (which I believe will hit the Bird in the eye, and be abundantly sufficient to do the deed) is a stone taken out of the Rock, that appears highest in the Brook, that is Saint Peter, which our Sa∣viour in the judgement of some Fathers, which I quoted in my true Church, calleth a Rock, and in the judgement of most of the Fathers, and the sober Pro∣testants,, 1 Pet. 2.17. is the Prince of Apostles: for he saith, Honour the King; and this one short sentence truly understood, (though I confess many other may seem more full) is absolutely sufficient to overthrow all the Anti-Royalists, and to silence all the Basileu-Mastices, all the opposers of their own Kings, throughout all the world, especially, if we consider, 1. Who saith this, S. Peter. 2. What is said, Honour the King. 3. To whom he saith thus, to every Soul. 1. The Author of these words.First, The words are the words of Saint Peter, the first in order, the chiefest for authority, and the greatest for resolution of all the Apostles of Christ,; and he spake them as he was inspired by the holy Ghost; therefore we may believe them,2 Pet. 1.21. and we should obey them, or we should fear the judgements of God; for if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, much more shall not we escape,Hebr 12.27. if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven. 2. The Sub∣stance of the Precept.Secondly, The Substance of this precept containeth as many parts as there be words, 1. Who is to be honoured, the King. 2. What is that Honour, that is due unto him. Which two Points, rightly understood, and duely observed, as they are en∣joined, would make a peaceable Common-wealth, and a most flourishing King∣dom, without any civil Broiles, or intestine Rebellion, which is the greatest Plague, and heaviest Curse, that God hath ever laid upon any Nation. Lucan l. 1.Bella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos. I have therefore resolved (to preuent this evil, and to diswade us from this mi∣serable mischief) to say something of these two Points, as may best heal the bleeding Wounds of these unhappy, and distracted times. First, It is the most Gratious Promise of our good God to all them, that will
faithfully serve him, I will honour them, that honour me:1 Sam. 2.30. and Saint Augustine saith, that Sicut verax est in punitione malorum, ità & in retributione honorum. as he is most certain in his threatnings for the punishment of the wicked, so he is most faithful in his Promises for rewarding of the Godly; and that not onely for the future, but also in these present times,1 Tim. 4.8. because Godliness hath the Promise both of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. Therefore pious Princes, that are God's Vicegerents here on earth,How kings have honour∣ed those that honoured God. 1. With Dig∣nities. and his Deputies to discharge his Promise, have accordingly honoured them, that have by their upright life, and indefatigable pains honoured God in his Church, with double honour. 1. With titular Dignities, honourable Places, and considerable Eminencies in the Common-wealth, as conceiving it not unworthy, to make the greater lights of the Church to be not of least esteem in the Civil State; but judging it most convenient, that they, whom God had intrusted with the Soules of men, should with all confidence be intrusted with their personal Actions, and with the Imploy∣ments of the greatest trust. 2. With competent means,2. With Main∣tenance. in some sort answerable to support their Digni∣ties, without which means, as the Poët saith, Virtus nisi cum re, vilior. algâ, so honourable Titles, without any subsistence, is more contemptible then plain Beg∣gery; therefore, out of their piety to God, and bounty to the Church, they have conferred many faire Lordships, and other large Endowments upon the best deserving Members of Christ's Ministers. But, as the good Husbandman had no sooner sown his pure Wheat,Matth. 13.24. , but im∣mediately Inimicus homo, the evil and envious man, superseminavit zizania, sowed his poysonous Tares amongst them; so God had no sooner thus honour∣ed his Servants, but presently the Devil, which is. 2 Cor. 4.4. the God of this World, be∣gan to throw dirt in their faces, and to deprive them of both these honours: for, 1. He stirred up ignorant men, of small learning but of great spirits, of no fidelity but of much hypocrisie, that, as Pope Leo wrote unto Theodosius,Leo Papa Epist. 23. What the fa∣ctious Prea∣chers pretend∣ed. Privatas causas pietatis agunt obtentu, and under a faire pretext did play the part of Aesop's Fox, who being ashamed that his taile was cut off, began to inveigh against the unseemly burthensome tailes of all the other Foxes, and to perswade them to cut theirs off, that so by the common calamity he might be the better excused for his obscenity; for so they cryed down all Learning, as pro∣phane, they railed at the Scholemen, they scorned the Fathers, and esteemed no∣thing, but that nothing which they had themselves: and although they professed to the Vulgar, that they aimed at no end but the purity of the Gospel, they de∣sired nothing but the amendment of life, and reformation of Ecclesiastical Di∣scipline, and hated nothing but the pride and covetousness of the Bishops, and the other dignified Prelates, which stopped their mouthes, and imprisoned the liberty of their Conscience; yet the truth is, that because their worth was not answerable to their ambition, to enable them to climbe up to some height of honour, their envy was so great, that they would fain pull down all those, that had ascended, and exceeded them. And therefore, with open mouthes, that would not be silenced, they ex∣claimed against Episcopacy; and as the Apostle saith, spake evil of Dignities, imploying all their strength, like wicked birds, to defile their own nests, to disrobe us of all honour, and to leave us naked; yea, and as much as in them lay,What the Fa∣ctious aim at. to make us odious and to stinke (as the Israelites said to Moses) in the eyes of the people. Then 2. As Plutarch tells us, that a certain Sicilian Gnatho,Plutarch. in lib. . and Philoxenus the son of Erixis, that were slaves unto their gutts, and make a God of their bel∣lies, to cause all the other guests, to leath their meat, that they alone might devour all the dainties, did use Narium mucum in catinis emungere; so do these men spit all their poyson against the Revenues of the Bishops, and that
little maintenance that is left unto the Ministers, and are as greedy to devour the same themselves, as the dogs, that gape after every bit they see us put into our mouths; for, so I heard a whelp of that litter, making a bitter invective in the House of Commons against Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, and the great∣ness of their Revenue;Doctor Burges and concluding, that all they should be degraded, their means should be sequestred, and distributed all without any diminution of what they now possessed, but with the restitution of all Impropriations unto himselfe, and the rest of his factious fellow Preachers; which speech, as it pleased but few in the latter clause, so no doubt it had fauters enough in the former part; when we see this little remnant of our fore-fathers bounty, this testimony of our Princes piety, is the onely mote that sticks in their eye, the undigested morsell in their stomacks, and the onely bait that they gape after; for, did our King yeild this garment of Christ to be parted among their Souldiers, and this reve∣nue of the Church to be disposed of by the Parliament, I doubt not but all quarrels about the Church would soon end, and all oher strife about Religion would be soon composed. What many men would willingly un∣dergo to pro∣cure peace.But, would this end all our civil Wars, would the unbishoping of our Prela∣tes bring rest unto our Prince, and the taking away of their estates settle the State of the Common-wealth, and bring peace and tranquillity unto this King∣dom? If so, we could be well contented for our own parts, to be sacrificed for the safety of the people; for though we dare not say with Saint Paul, that we could wish our selves , or separated from Christ for our Country-men; yet I can say with a syncere heart,. Rom. 9.6. that I believe many of us could be well con∣tented our fortunes should be confiscated, and our lives ended, so that could pro∣cure the peace of the Church, which is infinitely troubled, redeeme His Majesties honour, which is so deeply wounded, and preserve this our native Country from that destruction,The abolish∣ing of Episco∣pacy would not satisfie the Factious. which this unparallel'd Rebellion doth so infallibly threaten: but the truth is, that the abolishing of Episcopacy, root and branch, the reducing of the best to the lowest rank, and the bringing of the Clergy to the basest con∣dition of servility, to be such as should not be worthy to eate with the dogs of their flock, as Job speaketh, will not do the deed; because, as the Satyrist saith, nemo repentè fit turpissimus, but as virtues, so vices have their encrease by use and progression,Juven. Sat. 2. & primum quodque flagitium gradus est ad proximum, and every heynous offence is as iron chain, to draw on another. For, as Seneca saith, nun∣quam usque adeò temperatae cupiditates sunt,Seneca de Clem lib. 1. ut in eo quod contigit desinant, sed gra∣dus à magnis ad majora fit, & spes improbissimas complectuntur insperata assecuti: our desires are never so far temperated, that they end in that which is obtained, but the gaining of one thing is a step to seek another: And therefore, cùm publicum jus omne positum sit in sacris, as Plato saith, how can it be, that they which have prophaned all sacred things,Plato de legibus lib. 12. and have degraded their Ministers, should not also proceed to depose their Magistrates? if you be diffident to believe the same; let the Annals of France, Germany, England and Scotland be revised, and you shall find that Charles the fifth was then troubled with War, when the Bishops were turmoyled, and tumbled out of their Seas: & Scoti uno eodém∣que momento numinis & principis jugum excusserunt, nec justum magistratum agnoverunt ullum, ex quo primùm tempore sacris & sacerdotibus bellum indixe∣runt: and the Scots at one and the self-same moment did shake off the yoke of their obedience both unto their God, and to their King; neither did they acknowledg any for their just Magistrate after they had once warred against Re∣ligion and religious men,Blacvod. Apo∣log. pro regibus pag. 3. which were their Priests and Bishops, saith Blacvodaeus and in Fran e (saith he) the same men were enemies unto the King that were adversaries unto the Priests; quia politicam dominationem nunquam ferent, qui principatum Ecclesiae sustulerunt, nec mirum si Regibus obloquantur, qui sa∣cerdotes flammâ & ferro persequuntur; because (as I have shewed at large in my Grand Rebellion) they will never endure the Political Magistrate to have any rule,The haters of the Bishops ever enemies unto kings. when they have shaken off the Ecclesiastical government; neither is it
any wonder that they should slander, rage against, and reject their King, when they persecute their Bishops with fire and sword. And I think▪ the sad aspect of this distracted Kingdom at this time, makes this point so clear, that I need not add any more proof to beget faith in any so∣ber man; for doth not all the World see, that as soon as the seditious and tray∣terous faction in this unhappy Parliament, had cast most of the Bishops,How soon the Faction fell upon the King, after they had cast off their Bishops. the gra∣vest and the greatest of all, with Joseph into the dungeon, (a thing that no story can shew the like president in any age) and had voted them all, contrary to all right, out of their indubitable right to sit in the House of Peers, (an act indeed so full of incivility, as hath no small affinity with that of the Gergesites, who for love of their swine, drave not out,. Matth. 8.34. but desired Christ to depart out of their coasts:) they presently began to pluck the sword out of the Kings hand, and endevoured to make their Soveraign in many things more servile, then any of his own Subjects, so that he should be gloriosissimè servilis, as Saint Augustine saith, that Homer was suavissimè vanus, and to effect this, you see, how they have torn in peices all his Rights, they have trampled his Prerogatives under foot, they have as much as they could, laid his honour in the dust; and they have with violent warr, and virulent malice, sought to vanquish and subdue their own most gracious Soveraign, which cannot chuse but make any Christi∣an heart to bleed, to see such unchristian, and such horrid unheard of things attempted to be done by any, that would take upon him the name of a Chri∣stian. Therefore to manifest my duty to God, and my fidelity to my King, I have undertaken this hard, and to the Rebels unpleasant labour,The Rebels for the punish∣ment of our sins may pro∣sper for a time, but at last they shall be most surely destroy∣ed. Prov. 8.15. Psal. 68.30. Joshua 9 16. Psal. 91.16. to set down the Rights of Kings: wherein I shall not be afraid of the Rebels power, neither would I have any man to fear them; for however, Victores, victique cadunt, here may be a vicissitude of good success many times on both sides, to prolong the war for our sins, and they may prosper in some places; yet that is but nu∣becula quaedam, a transient cloud, or summer storm, that will soon pass away; for we may assure our selves they shall not prevaile, because God hath said it, By me Kings do raigne, and He will give strength unto his King, and exalt the horn of his Annointed; He will scatter the people that delight in war, and make the hearts of the cursed Canaanites to melt, and their joynts to tremble; but, He will satisfie the King with long life, and shew him his salvation. CHAP. II. Sheweth what Kings are to be honoured; the institution of Kings to be immediately from God; the first Kings; the three chiefest rights to Kingdoms; the best of the three rights; how Kings came to be elect∣ted; and how, contrary to the opinion of Master Selden, Aristocra∣cie and Democracie issued out of Monarchie. TO proceed then, you see the person that by Saint Peters precept is to be honoured, to be the King, and what King was that? but (as you may see in the beginning of this epistle) the King of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bythinia; and what manner of Kings were they, I pray you? I presume you will confess they were no Christians, but it may be as bad as Ne∣ro, who was then their Emperour, and most cruelly tyrannizing over the Saints of God,What Kings are to be ho∣noured. gave a very bad example to all other his substitute Kings and Princes to do the like; and yet these holy Christians are commanded to honour them. And therefore,
1. Heathen, Pagan, wicked and tyrannical Kings are to be truely honour∣ed by God's precept. 2. Religious, just, and Christian Kings are to have a double honour, be∣cause there is a double charge imposed upon them: as The double charge of all Christian Kings. 1. To preserve peace.1. To execute justice and judgement among their people; to preserve equity and peace, both from intestine broyles, and foreign Foes; which careful go∣vernment bringeth plenty and prosperity in all external affaires unto the whole Kingdom: and this they do as Kings, which is the common duty of all the Kings of the earth. 2. To protect the Church.2. To maintaine true Religion, to promote the faith of Christ, and to be the guardians and foster-fathers unto the Church and Church-men, which tye their people unto God to make them spiritually and everlastingly happy; and this duty is laid upon them, as they are Christian Kings: and therefore in re∣gard of this accession of charge, they ought to have an accession of honour, more then all other Kings whatsoever. 1. Then I say, that the Heathen, Pagan, wicked and tyrannical Kings, such as were Nero, Dioclesian, and Julian, among the Christians, or Ahab and Manasses among the Jews, or Antiochus, Dionysius, and the rest of the Sicilian Tyrants among the Gentiles, are to be honoured, served, and obeyed of all their Subjects, and that in three especial respects. 1. All Kings to be honour∣ed in three respects.1. Of their institution, which is the immediate ordinance of God. 2. Of God's precept, which enjoineth us to honour them. 3. Of all good mens practice: whether they be 1. Jewes. 2. Gentiles. 3. Christians. 1. The institu∣tion of Kings, is immediately from God. Justin lib. 1. Herodot. lib. 1. Clio.1. Justin tells us, that Principio rerum gentium, nationúmque imperium penes reges erat, from the beginning of things, that is, the beginning of the world, the rule and government of the people of all Nations was in the hands of Kings; Quos ad honoris fastigium non ambitio popularis, sed spectata inter bonos moderatio provehebat. And Herodotus setteth down, how Deioces the first King of the Medes had his beginning. And Homer also nameth the Kings that were in, and before the wars of Troy. But the choice of Deioces, and some others about that time and after,Cicero in Offi∣ciis. whereof Cicero speaketh, may give some colour unto our rebellious Sectaries, to make the royal Dignity , a humane ordinance; therefore I must go before Herodotus, and look further then blind Homer could see: and from the first King that ever was, I will truly lay down the first institution and succession of Kings, and how times have wrought by corruption, the alteration of their right, and diminution of their power, which both God and nature had first granted unto them. God the first King. . 1 Tim. 1.17. Apoc. 19.16.And I hope no Basileu-mastix, no hater of Kings, nor opposer of the royal government can deny, but, that God himself was the first King that ever the world saw, that was the King of ages before all worlds, and the King of Kings ever since there were any created Kings. The next King that I read of was Adam, whom Cedrenus stiles the Catholique Monarch; : a mighty King of a large Territory, of great Dominion, and of unquestionable right unto his Kingdom, which was the whole World, the Earth, the Seas, and all that were therein. For, the great King of all Kings said unto him,Gen. 1.28. Adam the first King of all men. Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing, that moveth upon the earth. Which is a very large Commission, when dominare, is more then regere; and therefore his royalty is so plain, that none but wilful ignorants will deny it to be divi∣num institutum, a divine institution, and affirm it, as they do, to be humanum inventum, a humane ordination, when you know there were no men to chuse him, and you see God himself doth appoint him, and after the flood the Em∣pire
of Noah was divided betwixt his three sons; Japheth reigned in Europe,Johan. Beda. de jure Regum. p. 4. Sem in Asia, and Cham in Africa. Yet I must confess, the first Kingdom that is spoken of by that name, is the Kingdom of Nimrod, who notwithstanding is not himself termed King,Gen. 10.9. but in the Scripture phrase a mighty hunter, because he was not onely a great King, but also a mighty Tyrant, or oppressour of his people in all his Kingdom; or as I rather conceive it, because he was the first usurper that incroached upon his neighbours rights to enlarge his own dominions: and the first king that I find by that name in the Scripture was Amraephel, king of Shinar, with whom we find eight other Kings named in the same chapter.Gen. 14.1. But we are not to contest about words, or to strive about the winde, when the Scripture doth first give this name unto them: the plain truth is that, which we are to enquire after; and so it is manifest, there were Kings ever since Adam and so named ever since Noahs flood; for Melchizedech, which in the judg∣ment of Master Selden, Broughton, and others, was Sem the eldest son of Noah, (though mine own minde is set down otherwise) was King of Salem; and Justin tells us, that long before Ninus, which was the son of Nimrod, there were many other Kings, as Vexores King of Aegypt, and Tanais King of Scythia, Euripides de Cyclop. Gen. 14.14. and the like; and as reason sheweth us, that evey one, qui regit alios Rex est, so every master of a family that ruleth his own houshould is a petty King, as we commonly say to this very day, every man is a King in his own house; and as their families were the greater, so were they the greater Kings; so Abraham hand three hundred and eighteen servants, that were able men for the War in his own house: and therefore the inhabitants of the Land tell him, Princeps Dei es inter nos, thou art a Prince of God, that is, a great ruler amongst us: and yet the greatest of these rulers were rather reguli then reges, Kings of some Cities, or small Territories, and of no large dominion, as those thirty and one Kings which Joshua vanquished, doth make it plain.Josh. 12.14. Selden in his Titles of ho∣nour, cap. 1. But Master Selden confesseth that civil societies, beginning in particular fami∣lies, the heads thereof ruled as kings: and as the World encreased, or these kings incroached upon their neighbours, so their Kingdoms were enlarged. Kings therefore they were, and they were kings from the beginning. But how they came to be kings, or what right they had to regal power, from whence their authority is derived 1. Whether God ordained it: or, 2. Themselves assumed it: 3. The people conferred it upon them: herein lyeth all the question. To which I must briefly answer,The chiefest rights to king∣doms either of three ways. that the right of all kings which have any right unto their kingdoms, is principally either, 1. By birth: or, 2. By the sword: or 3. By choice. whereof The last is and may be just and good. The second is so with∣out question: but, The first is most just, and so best of all. For, 1. The best right, whereby the Patriarchs and all the rest of the posterity of Adam injoyed their royalty, was that which God hath appointed; that is,1. The best right, without contradiction, is by inheri∣tance. Gen. 4.7. Gen. 25.31. the right of primogeniture, whereby the elder was by the law of nature, to reign and rule over the younger; as God saith unto Cain, though he was never so wicked an hypocrite, unto thee shall be the desire of thy brother, and thou shalt rule over him, though he was never so godly and syncere a server of God: which made Jacob so earnestly desirous to purchase the birth-right, or the right of primogeniture from his brother. And 2. When the rightful kings became with Nimrod to be unjust Tyrants,2. The right by conquest is a just and a good right. then God that is not tyed to his Vicegerent any longer then he pleaseth, but hath right and power Paramount to translate the rule, and transfer the domi∣nion
of his People to whom he will;Psal. 89.44. So the Israelites enjoyed the kingdome of Canaan, and David the ter∣ritories of them that he subdued, &c. Esdras. 1.2. Esay. 45.1, 2. Dan. 2. &c 4. hath oftentimes thrown down the mighty from their seat, and given away their crownes and kingdomes unto others, that were more humble and meek, or some other way fitter to effect his divine pur∣pose, as he did the kingdom of Saul unto David, and Belshazzar's unto Cyrus; and this he doth most commonly by the power of the sword, when the Con∣querour shall make his strength to become the Law of justice, and his ability to hold it, to become his right of enjoying it; for so he gave the Kingdoms of the earth to Cyrus, Alexander, Augustus, and the like Kings and Empe∣rours, that had no other right to their Dominions, but what they purchased with the edg of their swords; which notwithstanding must needs be a very good right, as the same cometh from God, which is the God of war, and giveth the victory unto Kings;Psal. 144.10. when as the Poet saith, — Victrix causa Deo placuit. And he deposeth his Vicegerents, and translateth the government of their Kingdomes, as he seeth cause, and to whom he pleaseth. 3. The right of elective kings, and how they came to be elected.3. When either the Kings neglected their duty, and omitted the care of their People so far as that the People knew not that they had any Kings, or who had any right to be their Kings, or upon the incursion of invading Foes, the Nations being exceedingly multiplied, and having no Prince to protect them, did change the orderly course of right, belonging unto the first-born (which their rude and salvage course of life had obliterated from their minds) unto the election and choice of whom they thought the better, and the abler men to expel their enemies, and to maintain justice among themselves; so the Medes being oppressed with the insolencies and rapines of enemies and the greater man, said, it cannot be that in this corruption and lewdness of manners we shall long enjoy our Countrey: and therefore .Herodot. lib. 1. Let us appoint over us a King, that our Land may be governed by good Lawes. . And we turning our selves to our own affairs, need not be oppressed by the rage and violence of the lawless: and finding by their former experience of him, that Deioces was the justest man amongst them, they chose him for his equity to be their King; which is the first elective King that I do read of; and Cicero saith,Cicero in Offic. pag. 322. Mihi quidem non apud Medos solùm, sed etiam apud majores no∣stros, justitiae fruendae causâ videntur olim benè morati reges constituti: even as Justin said before. And when the People do thus make choice of their King, it is most true which Roffensis,Roffensis de po∣testate Papae, fol. 283. and our most learned Divines do say, that Licet communicatio potestatis quandoque sit per consensum hominum, potestas tamen ipsa immediatè est à Deo, cujus est potestas; though the power be sometimes con∣ferred by the consent of men▪ yet it is immediately given from God, whose power it is.Spalat. tem. 2. 529. Et communitas nihil sui confert regibus (saith Spalat.) nisi ad summum personam determinet; & potiùs personam applicat divinae potestati, quàm divinam potestatem personae: & ità Winton. Resp. ad Matth. Tort. fol. 384. saith, Christi Domini, non Christi populi sunt. But as their justice and goodness moved the People to exalt them to this height of Dignity;Why kings were rejected by the people. so either their own tyranny, when change of place did change their manners, or their Peoples inconstancy, that are never long pleased with their governours, caused them to be deposed again, and many times to be mur∣dered by those hands, that exalted them How the Ari∣stocracy and Democracy issued out of Monarchy.Then the People perceiving the manifold evils that flow from the want of government, do erect other governments unto themselves, and rather then they will endure the miserable effects of an Anarchy, they resign their hurtfull liberty, and their total power sometimes into the hands of few of the best of the flock, which we call Aristocracy or optimacy, and sometimes into the hands of many, which we call Democracy, or a popular state. In all which Elections
of Magistrates,Each form of government lawfull. and resignations of the Peoples power voluntarily to the hands of their governours, call them what you will, Senate, Consuls, Duke, Prince or King, thoug I dare not any way reject any of them as a forme utterly dis∣allowed and condemned of God; yet comparing them together, I dare boldly say, the farther men go from God's first institution,Democracy the worst kinde of Go∣vernment. the more corruption we shall finde in them; and therefore it must needs follow that Democracy is the next degree to Anarchy, and Aristocracy far worse then Monarchy; for though it may seem very unreasonable, that one man should have all the power; — toto liber in orbe Solus Caesar erit — And many plausible reasons may be alleadged for the rule of the Nobles,Inter partes plebemque certamina exer∣cere modò tur∣bulenti tribuni, modò consules praevalidi; & in urbe ac foro tentamenta ci∣vilium bello∣rum; mox è plebe infima C. Marius, & nobilium saevis∣simus L. Sylla victam armis libertatem in dominationem verterunt, Tac. l. 2. hist. P. 16. usque 28. Prov. 28.2. Ecclesiast. 10.16. or of the People; yet the experience, that the Roman State had in those miserable Civill Wars, that so frequently, and so extremely afflicted them, after they had put down their Kings, (as when Caius Marius, the meanest of the Commonal∣ty, and Lucius Sylla the cruellest of all the Nobility, destroyed their liberty, and rooted out all property, by their Civill faction, and the assistance of an ille∣gal Militia, and a multitude of unruly voluntiers) and the fatal miscarriages of many businesses, and the bad successes of their Armies, when both the Con∣suls went forth Generals, together with the want of unity, secrecy, and expe∣dition, (which cannot be so well preserved amongst many) do sufficiently shew, how defective these Governments are▪ and how far beneath the excellency of Mo∣narchy, as it is most fully poved in the unlawfullness of Subjects taking up armes against their Soveraigne; and more especially by the wisest of men, that tells us plainly, that for the transgressions of a Land, many are the Princes thereof, but by a man of understanding and knowledg the State thereof shall be prolonged: and in ano∣ther place he crieth Wo to that land whose king is but a childe, either in knowledg, or in years; for that during his infancy, and the want of ability, the government will be managed by many others, which can produce nothing else but woes to that Common-wealth; and therefore Saint Augustine saith, that if they who do bear Rule in Democracy, do corrupt justice, a good powerfull man may law∣fully change that Democraticall government into an Aristocraticall,Aug. de l. ar∣bit. l. 1. c. 6. or Mo∣narchical; but you shall never finde it in any Christian Authour, that any man, be he never so good, never so powerfull, may lawfully, upon any occasion, or pretence, change the Monarchy into an Aristocracy, or Democracy; because it is lawfull for us to reduce things from the worst and remotest state to the bet∣ter, and the nearer to the original forme: but, not from the better to a worser, and remoter from its original institution, which is then soundest, when it is nearest to its first ordination. CHAP. III. Sheweth, the Monarchicall Government to be the best forme; the first Government that ever was; agreeable to Nature, wherein God founded it; consonant to God's own Government; the most univer∣sally received throughout the world; the immediate and proper Or∣dinance of God, when the other Governments began; how allowed by God; the quality of elective Kingdoms, not primarily the institu∣tion of God; and the nature of the People. THerefore it is apparent, that of all sorts of Government,The Monar¦chicall go∣vernment best. the Monarchy is absolutely the best, (and of all Monarchs, the best right is that which is hereditary) because it is,
1. The first in Nature. 2. The prime and principal Ordinance of God. For, 1. Reason. Selden in his Titles of Ho∣nour, lib. 1.1. Though Master Selden saith, that naturally all men in oeconomick rule, being equally free, and equally possest of superiority in those ancient propaga∣tions of mankinde, even out of Nature it selfe, and that inbred sociableness which every man hath, as his character of civility, a popular state first raised it selfe, which by own judgement afterward was converted into a Monar∣chy; and in the fourth page of his Book, rejecteth the opinion of great Philo∣sophers, that affirm with Saint Austin, the first of the three Governments to be a Monarchy, and affirmeth possitively, that the Monarchy hath its original out of a Democracy, as Aristocracy likewise had, yet I say, that this contra∣dicteth his first Thesis, where he asserteth, that the husband, father, and master of the house ruled as a King: and therefore the Monarchy must needs be be∣fore either Aristocracy, or Democracy: and where citing Pausanias, that In Booeticorum initio, saith, .Monarchy an¦cienter then any other Go∣vernment. All Greece was anciently under Kings, and no Democracies; he is driven to confess, pag. 5. that a family, being in Nature before a publick Society, or Common-Wealth was an exemplary Monarchy, and in that regard Monarchy is to be acknowledged ancienter then any other state; and so, not oney the Or∣thodoxal people, but the Pagans also had this notion thereof by the instinct of Nature;Monarchicall government most agreeable to Nature. for the Cappadocians being vanquished by the Romans, did instantly request them to give them a King, protesting, that they were not otherwise able to maintain themselves; and so most other Nations esteemed that true, which Herodian saith, that as Jupiter hath command over all the gods, so, in imitation of him, it is his pleasure, that the Empire of men should be Monar∣chicall. And indeed, it is concluded by the common consent of the best Philosophers, that the Laws of Nature lead us to a Monarchy,Monarchy founded in Nature. as when among all Creatures both animate, and inanimate, we do always finde one that hath the prehemi∣nence above all the rest of his kinde, as among the Beasts, the Lion, among the Fowls the Eagle, among Grains, the Wheat, among Drink the Wine, among Spices the Baulme, among the Planets the Sun; and all the best Divines con∣clude, the Monarchicall government to be the most lively image, and repre∣sentation of the divine regiment and government of God,Consonant to the Divine go∣vernment. who, as sole Mo∣narch ruleth and guideth all things; and therefore we finde all the Nations of greatest renown lived under the Royal Government, as the Scythians, Ae∣thiopians, Indians, Assyrians, Medes, Aegyptians, Bactrians, Armenians, Ma∣cedonians, Jews, and Romans first and last; and at this day the most famous peo∣ple live under this forme, as the English, French, Spaniards, Polonians, Danes, Muscovites,The Govern∣ment of the most famous Nations Mo∣narchicall — Summo dulcius unum stare loco, sociis∣que comes di∣scordia regnis, Statius The∣baid. 1. Tartars, Turks, Abissines, Moores, Agiamesques, Zagathinians, Cathaians, yea, and the Salvage people lately discovered in the West Indies, as being guided thereto by the rules of Nature▪ do all of them in a manner live un∣der the Government of Kings; and I beleive the Apostle doth specially mean the Regal Government, though he speaketh plurally of powers, as understand∣ing the same of many Kings, because he speaketh but of one , one sword, which being wrested out of the hand of the King, and put amongst many, would make them all, like mad men, fall out and fight, which of them should bear it, when one Sword can never be well guided by many hands; and therefore I think it is a madness indeed for any people to be weary of that go∣vernment which God first ordained, which is most agreeable unto Nature, most consonant to God's government, most acceptable to God himself, and most pro∣fitable unto men, and to affect a late new invented government, full of all dan∣gers and inconveniences. A family is a small king∣dom, and a kingdom a great family.Therefore it is apparent that Monarchie is the first Ordinance of all govern∣ments; a family being nothing else but a small Kingdome, wherein the paterfa∣milias had Regal power, & potestatem vitae & necis, even over his own children,
as I have elsewhere shewed in the example of Abraham, and of other Hea∣thens, that justly executed their own sons; and a Kingdom being nothing else but a great family, where the King hath paternal power, and more then fathers now have, because of the great abuse that divers fathers committed, while they had their plenary authority: therefore it was thought fit to abridge them of that pristine power, and to place it all in the hands of the more publique father. And to make this yet more plain unto the World, I would fain know of these Democratical men, 1. When 2. How their Democracy, and Aristocracy had their being, and came first in use. I have shewed the age of Monarchy to be from Adam. — primáque ab origine mundi, Ad mea perpetuum deduxi tempora Regem. And I cannot remember that any Democracy or Aristocracy was in all the Assy∣rian Monarchy, which notwithstanding lasted above a thousand years;When Aristo∣cracies and Democracies began. for the Aristocracies of Greece, alas, they are but of yesterday, of no age, long after Homers time, which yet lived but about the time of Jephte Judge of Israel, and besides, I will not believe, — Quicquid Graecia mendax Audet in historiis. — And for the Democracy of Rome, Titus Livius sheweth when it was first hatch∣ed, after the expulsion of Tarquinius Superbus; if therefore you will believe Tertullian, that Id verius quod prius, you must needs give the precedency of all governments unto Monarchy. But that which is more considerable is to understand, how these birds flitted out of the nest of Monarchy? Our Saviour saith, Every plant which my Father planted not, shall be rooted up▪ that he planted Monarchy, I have made it plain;Matth. 15.13. but when this Vine began to grow wilde and instead of grapes to bring forth bitter clusters, that is, oppression instead of justice;What caused the change of Monarchy. the people grew weary of God's Ordinance, and loath to be contained within the bounds of obedi∣ence, when they found strength and opportunity, they withstood their lawful but degenerated Kings, and then they deposed them from their estates and de∣prived them of their lives; so that as the Poet saith, Ad generum Cereris sine caede & sanguine pauciJuvenal Satyr. 10. Descendunt reges, & siccâ morte tyranni. And thinking to finde a better way, then that which they found so thorny, and a better government then that which formerly they found so bad, they elected those men, whom they thought would make them happy,The uncon∣stancy of the people in the choice of their Governours. sometimes more, and sometimes fewer, as their disposition was, to be their Governours: so after the expulsion of Tarquinius the Romanes chose two Consuls, and these giving not a plenary content unto the People, they added the Tribunes to bridle the disorders of the Consuls, and when all this would not satisfie their unsatia∣ble expectation, they must have their Decemviros, and in great dangers their Dictator, then comes the Triumvirat, of Antony, Lepidus, and Augustus,The Govern∣ment never settled till it came, as all things in na∣ture, , to Monarchy. who at last takes upon him the name of an Emperour, but the full power of a King, and governs all as the sole Monarch: thus they ran in a maze, and turn∣ed round like a wheel: and I should but weary my Reader to trace the Greek Histories, to set down the state of Athens under the thirty Tyrants, or of the Lacedaemonians, under those Ephori, that bore a fair shew to restrain their
Kings,Lacedaemonio∣rum aristocratia ex duobus Re∣gibus, quinque Ephoris, octo & viginti se∣natoribus com∣posita. 1 Sam. 2.14.15. Chap. 8.11. but were indeed a scourge and plague unto the people; so that in truth the remedy proved far worse then the disease, excessit medicina modum, and the change of Government never brought any other good, but an exchange of mi∣series, the greater for the lesser, unto the people, as for that one rape of Lucrece by Tarquinius, to undergo a thousand greater insolencies under the new erected Government of the Consuls and Tribunes; and the Israelites for preventing the snatching of the flesh out of their pots, by the sons of Eli, and growing weary of the sons of Samuel, to have a Saul, that shall tear their own flesh in pieces, and take their sons and their daughters for his vassals. 2. Reason that Monarchy is the best form of Govern∣ment.2. As the hereditary Monarch is the first kinde of Government, so it is the principal and best government; because it is the immediate Ordinance of God, that he set down for the Government of his People; for this was ordained by God himself, and so continued among his people, even in an hereditary way, unless the same God designed another person by those Prophets, that he inspi∣red for that purpose; as it was in the case of David, Solomon, and Jehu; and it is certain, that the wisests of men cannot devise a better Form of Government then God ordained: therefore the choice of one, or more, made by the People to be their King or Governour, cannot be (if not without sin) yet I am sure, without folly; but seeing, as our Saviour saith, a Sparrow cannot light upon the ground without the providence of our heavenly Father: so I must confess; Matth. 10.29.— haec non sine numine divûm Eveniunt. This election of Kings and change of the first Ordinance happend not without God's providence, either for the Tyranny of the evil Kings, or the punishment of the rebellious people: and therefore as Moses for the hardness of those mens hearts that hated their Wives, to prevent a greater mischief, either continual fighting, or secret murdering one another, suffered them to give their Wives a bill of divorcement,Deut. 24.1. Matth. 19.8. (but as our Saviour saith) Non erat sic ab initio, it was not any primary Ordinance of God, but a permissive toleration of the lesser evil; so when the people out of their froward disposition to God's first Institution of the Regal right,How God al∣lowed the A∣ristocratical and Democra∣tical Govern∣ment, and why, and presuming to like better of their own choice, do alter this hereditary Right and divine Ordinance into the election of one or more Go∣vernours, either annual, as among the ancient Romans, or vital, as it is in the present state of the Venetians; God, out of his infinite lenity to our humane frail∣ty, rather then his people should be without Government, and so many heynous sins should go unpunished, doth permit, and it may be allow and approve the same, though sometimes not without great anger and indignation for our contempt and distaste of his heavenly institution;Deut. 33, 5, as when the Israelites, weary of the Judges that succeeded Moses, who was a king in Jesurun, and that God raised still to rule as Kings amongst them, to make War against their enemies, and to judge them according to the Law in the time of peace, which are the two chiefest Offices of all kings,1 Sam. 8, 5. desired to have a king, to judg them like all the Nations; not a king simply (for so they had indeed though not in name) but a king like all the Nations, that is, a king of a more absolute power then the Judges had, as Samuel sheweth, and they seem contented therewith: God sent them a King in his wrath, because they had rejected him, that he should not reign over them; that is,vers. 7. they had refused to submit themselves to his Ordinance, and to obey the Kings that he appointed over them, but they must needs be their own Carvers and have a King of their own election, or such a king invested with a more absolute power) as they desired, though notwithstanding they did most hypocritically seem to desire none but whom God appointed over them; and therefore per∣ceiving their own errour, and seeing their own offence by the anger that God shewed, they confessed their fault and did always thereafter accept of their kings by succession,The lamenta∣ble success of the first ele∣ctive kings. but onely when their Prophets by the sacred Ointment had ordain∣ed another by God's special designation.
But I cannot finde it in all the Scripture, or in any other Writings authenti∣cal, where God appointed or commanded any people to be the hesers of their kings, but rather to accept of him, and submit themselves to him, whom the Lord had placed over them. For I would very fain know, as Roffensis speaketh,Roffen. de po∣test. Papae, 282 An potestas Adami in filios ac nepotes, adeóque omnes ubique homines, ex consensu filior um ac nepotum dependet, an à solo Deo ac natur prostuit And if this Autho∣rity of the Father be from God without the consent of his Children, then cer∣tainly the authority of Kings is both natural and divine immediately from God and not from any consent or allowance of men; and Pineda saith▪Pineda de rebus Solo l. 2. c. 2 Nusquam in∣venio Regem aliquem Judaeorum populi suffragiis creatum quin si primus ille erat, qui designaretur à Deo, vel à Propheta et Dei jussus vel sorte, vel aliâ ratione quàm Deus indicâsset. Neither do I remember any one that was chosen king by the Children of Israel, but onely Abimelh the bastard son of Gedeon, and (as some say) Jeroboam that made Israel to sin; and the Scripture tells you how unjustly they entered, how wickedly they reigned,Strange that the People should bestow the greatest favour or dig∣nity on earth. Esay 42.8. and how lamentably the first, that was without question the Creature of the people, ended both his life and his reign; to teach us how unsuccesful it is to have other makers of kings then he that is the King of kings, and saith, He will not give his glory unto ano∣ther, nor hold them guiltless that intrude into his Throne, to bestow Soveraign∣ty and create kings at their pleasures, when as he professeth, it belongeth unto him not to the People, to say, Yee are Gods, and to place his own Viceroy to govern his own People. And therefore though I do not wonder to finde Aristotel of that opinion, Ʋt reges populi suffragio constarent, That Kings should be elected by the People,Arst pol l. 3. and that it was the manner of the Barbarians to accept of their kings by suc∣cession, Quales sors tulerit, non virtutis opinione probatos,The nature of the people. Blaovod p. 61. and as T. Liv. saith, Aut ser∣vit humiliter, aut dominatur superbè. such as nature gave them, and not those which were approved by the people for their virtues, be∣cause he was ignorant of the divine Oracles; yet me thinkes it is very strange that men continually versed in God's Word, and knowing the nature of the people, which as one saith, Semper ager est, semper insanus, semper furore & intemperiis a∣gitur, and specially reading the story of times, should be transported with such dreames and fopperies, that the people should have any hand in the election of their kings: for if you briefly run over most of the kings of this World, you shall scare finde one of a thousand to be made by the suffrage of the people:Of all the kings of the world, very few made by the suffrage of the People. for Nimrod got his kingdom by his strength, Ninus enlarged the same by his sword, and left the same unto his heirs; from the Assyrians the Mo∣narchy was translated to the Medes and Persians, and I pray you how? by the consent of the people, or by the edg of the sword? From the Persians it was con∣ferred to Alexander, but the same way; and it continued among his successours by the same right: and Romulus, Ad sua qui domitos deduxit stagra Quirites. Did not obtain his power by the suffrage of his people; and if you look over the States of Grece, we shall finde one Timondas which obtained the Scepter of the Corinthians, and Pittacus the Government of the Mytilenians by the suf∣frage of the people; but for the Athenians, Laecedemonians Sicyoni, Thebanes, Epirots, and Macedons, among whom the Regal Dignity flourished a far longer time then the popular rule,Idem. pag. 63. Non optione populi sed nascendi conditione regnatum est, their kings reigned not by the election of the people, but by the condition of their birth: and what shall we say of the Parthians, Indians, Africans, Tartars, Arabians, Aethiopians, Numidians, Muscovites, Celtans, Spaniards, French, English and of many other kingdoms that were obtained, either by gift,Quintus Cur∣tius. as Abdolonimus received his kingdom of Alexander, Juba the kingdom of Numidia from Augu∣stus, and the French king got the kingdoms of the Naples and Sicily; or by will, as the Romans had the kingdoms of Aegypt, Bithinia, Pergamus, and Asia, or by
Arms,Claud. de 4. cons, Honorii. as many of the aforesaid kingdoms were first gotten, and were always transmitted afterwards to posterity by the hereditary right of bloud. And the Poet could say, — terrae dominos pelagique futuros Immenso decuit rerum de principe nasci. It behoved the Kings of the earth to be born of Kings. Besides we must all confess, that the King is the Father of people, the Hus∣band of the Common-wealth, and the Master of all his subjects: and can you shew me, that God ever appointed that the Children should make choice of their fathers?Children and servants not allowed to choose what fathers and masters they please. then surely all would be the sons of Princes; but though fathers may adopt their sons, as the King may make a Turke or any other stranger a free Denizon, yet Children may not choose whom they please for their Fa∣thers, but they are bound to honour those fathers that God hath appointed, or suffered to beget them; though the same should be never so poor, never so wicked; so the wives, though while they are free, they may have the power to refuse whom they dislike, yet they have no such prerogative to choose what hus∣bands they please; or if they had, I am sure no woman would be less then a Lady: and the like may be said of all servants. Therefore the election of Kings by the People seemes to me no prime Ordi∣nance of God, but as our sectaries say, , A humane Ordinati∣on indeed, and the corruption of our Nature, a meere , and an imitation of what the Poet saith, Optat Ephippia bos niger, optat arare caballus. Just as if the women would fain have that Law of liberty to choose what husbands they please, and the servants to make choice of what Masters they like best: so the People, never contented with whom God sendeth, never satisfied with his Ordinance, would fain pull their necks out of God's yoke, and become their own chosers, both of their Kings and of their Priests, and indeed of all things else, when as nothing doth please them but what they do, and none can con∣tent them,The People are in all things greedy to have their own wllls. but whom themselves will choose; and their choice cannot long satis∣fie their mindes, but as the Jews received Christ into Jerusalem with the joy∣full acclamation of Hosanna, and yet the next day had the malicious cry of Crucifige, so the least distaste makes them greedy of a new change; such is the nature of the People. But though I said before, the election of our chiefe Governours may for ma∣ny respects be approved of God among some States, yet I hope by this that I have set down, it is most apparent unto all men, contrary to the tenet of our Anabaptisticall Sectaries, that the hereditary succession of Kings to govern God's People, is their indubitable right, and the immediate, prime, principal Or∣dinance of God: therefore it concerns every man, as much as his soul is worth, to examine seriously, whether to fight against their own King, be not to resist the Ordinance of God, for which, God threatneth no less punishment then dam∣nation, from which Machiavel cannot preserve us, nor any policy of State pro∣cure a dispensation.
CHAP. IV. Sheweth, what we should not do, and what we should do for the King; the Rebels transgressing in all those; how the Israelites honoured their persecuting King in Egypt, how they behaved themselves under Artaxerxes, Ahashuerus, and under all their own Kings of Israel; and how our Kings are of the like institution with the Kings of Isra∣el; proved in the chiefest respects at large; and therefore to have the like honour and obedience. 2. AS every lawfull King is to be truly honoured in regard of God's Or∣dinance, so likewise in respect of God's precept,2. All kings are to be ho∣noured in re∣spect of God's precept, consi∣dered two wayes. 1. What we should not do. which commandeth us to honour the King; and this duty is so often inculcated, and so fully laid up∣on us in the holy Scripture, that I scarce know any duty towards man so much pressed, and so plainly expressed, as this is; 1. Negatively, what we should not do, to deprive him of his Honour. 2. Affirmatively, what we should do, to manifest, and magnifie this Honour towards him: for, 1. Our very thoughts, words, and works are imprisoned, and chained up in the linkes of God's strictest prohibition; that they should no wayes peeep forth, to produce the least dishonour unto our King: for, 1. The Spirit of God, by the mouth of the wisest of men commands us to think no ill of the King, let the King be what he will,1. To think no ill of the King; Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, Eccles. 10.30. the precept is without restriction; you must think no ill, that is, you must not intend, or purpose in your thoughts to do the least ill office or disparagement to the King that ru∣leth over you, be the same King virtuous or vitious, milde, or cruell, good or bad: this is the sense of the Holy Ghost. For, as the childe with Cham shall become accursed, if he doth but dishonour, and despise his wicked father (or his father in his wickedness) whom in all duty he ought to reverence, so the Subject shall be liable to Gods vengeance, if his heart shall intend the least ill to his most tyrannicall King. 2. The same Spirit saith, Thou shalt not revile the Gods; that is,2. To say no ill of the King. Exod. 22.28. Act 23.5. . 3. To do no hurt to the King. Psal. 10.15. 1 Sam. 24 4, 5. the Judges of the Land; nor curse, that is, in Saint Pauls phrase, speak evill of the Ruler of the peo∣ple: and what can be more evill, then to bely his Religion, to traduce his Govern∣ment, and to make so faithfull a Christian King, as faithless as a Cretan, which is commonly broached by the Rebels, and Preached by their seditious Teachers. 3. The great Jehovah gives this peremptory charge to all Subjects, saying, Touch not mine Anointed; which is the least indignity that may be: and there∣fore Davids heart smote him when he did but cut off the lap of Sauls garment. What then can be said for them that draw their swords, and shoot their Can∣nons, to take away the life of Gods Anointed, which is the greatest mischiefe they can do? I beleive no distinction can blinde the judgment of Almighty God, but his revengefull hand will finde them out,2. What we should do to honour the King. Eccles. 8.2. 1. To observe the kings commands. that so maliiously transgress his precepts, and think by their subtilty to escape his punishments. 2. The Scriptures do positively, and plainly command us to shew all honour unto our King. For, 1. Solomon saith, I counsell thee to keep the Kings commandment; or, as the phrase imports, to observe the mouth of the King; that is, not onely his writ¦ten law, but also his verball commands, and that in regard of the oath of God; that is, in respect of thy Religion, or the solemne vow which thou madest at thine initiation, and incorporation into Gods Church, to obey all the precepts
of God,Et si religio tol∣litur, nulla no bis cum coelo ra∣tio est. Lactant, Iust. l. 3. c. 10. whereof this is one, to honour and obey the King; or else that oath of allegiance and fidelity, which thou hast sworn unto thy King in the presence, and with the approbation of thy God, which certainly will plague all perjurers, and take revenge on them that take his name in vain; which is the infallible, and therefore most miserable condition of all the perjured Rebels of this Kingdom. For if moral honesty teacheth us to keep our promises, yea, though it were to our own hindrance, then much more should Christianity teach us to observe our deliberate and solemn oathes, whose violation can bear none other fruit, then the heavy censure of God's fearful indignation. But when the prevalent faction took a solemn Oath and Protestation to defend all the Privileges of Parliament, and the Rights of the Subjects, and then pre∣sently forgetting their oath, and forsaking their faith, by throwing the Bi∣shops out of the House of Peers (which all men knew to be a singular Priviledge,How the pre∣valent Faction of the Parlia∣ment forswore themselves. 2. To obey the kings com∣mandements. Josh. 1.18 and the House of Lords acknowledged to be the indubitable right of the Bishops) and their doctrine being to dispence with all oaths for the furtherance of the cause, it is no wonder they falsifie all oaths that they have made unto the King. 2. The people said unto Joshua, Whosoever rebelleth against thy command∣ment, and will not hearken to the words of thy mouth, in all that thou commandest, he shall be put to death: surely this was an absolute government, and though martial, yet most excellent to keep the people within the bounds of their obe∣dience; for they knew that where rebellion is permitted, there can be no good performance of any duty; and it may be a good lesson for all the higher powers, not to be too clement (which is the incouragement of Rebels) to most obsti∣nate, trayterous, and rebellious Subjects, who daring not to stir under rigid Tyrants, do kick with their heeles against the most pious Princes: and therefore my soul wisheth (not out of any desire of bloud, but from my love to peace) that this rule were well observed, Whosoever rebelleth against thy commandment, he shall be put to death.Quia in tali∣bus non obedien∣tes, mortaliter peccant, nisi foret illud quod praecipitur con∣tra praeceptum Dei, vel in sa¦lutis dispendi∣m: Angel. summa verb. obedientia. 3 To give the king no just cause of anger. Prov. 2.2. The Rebels have given him cause enough to be provoked. 4. To speak reverently to the king, and of the king. Eccles. 8.4. 3. The wisest of all Kings, but the King of Kings, saith, The fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lion, who so provoketh him to anger, sinneth against his own soul. And I believe that the taking up of Armes by the Subjects against their own King, that never wronged them, and the seeking to take away his life, and the life of his most faithful servants, is cause enough to provoke any King to anger, if he be not , too Stoically given to abandon all passions: and that anger should be like the roaring of a Lion to them that would pull out the Lions eyes, and take away the Lions life. 4. The King of Heaven saith of these earthly Kings, That where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what dost thou? And Elihu demands, Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked, or to Princes, you are un∣godly? Truely if Elihu were now here, he might hear many unfitter things said to our King by his own people, and which is more strange, by some Preachers; for some of them have said, but most maliciously, and more falsely, that he is a Papist, he is the Traytor, unworthy to reign, unfit to live; good God! do these men think, God saith truth, Where the word of a King is, there is power, that is, to blast the conspiracies, and to confound the spirits of all Rebels, who shall one day finde it; because the wrath of God at last will be awaked against their treachery,Jerem. 27.8. and to revenge their perjury by inabling the King to accom∣plish the same upon all that resist him, as he promised to doe in the like case, 5. To pray for the king. Ezra 6.10. 1 Tim. 2.1, 2.5. The Israelites being in captivity under the King of Babylon, were com∣manded to pray for the life of that Heathen King, and for the life of his sons. And Saint Paul exhorteth Timothy to make supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks for Kings, and for all that are in authority: and how do our men pray for our King? in many Pulpits not at all, and in some places for his overthrow, for the shortning of his life, and the finishing of his dayes (nullum sit in omine pondus:) and they give thanks indeed, not for his good, but for their own supposed good success against him; thus they praevaricate and
pervert the words of the Apostle to their own destruction,Psal. 109 6. when as the Pro∣phet saith, Their prayers shall be turned into sin. 6. Christ commandeth us to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, that is,6. To render all his dues unto him. (as I shall more fully shew hereafter) your inward duties of honour, love, reverence, and the like: and your outward debts, tolls, tribute, custome, &c. and the Rebels render none unto him, but take all from him, and return His Arms to his destruction. I might produce many other places and precepts of Holy Scripture to inforce this duty to honour the king, but what will suffice him, cui Roma parùm est;Luke 16.31. if they beleive not Moses, neither will they believe, if one should arise from the dead; and if these things cannot move them, then certainly all the world cannot remove them from their Wickedness. Yet 3. Quia exempla movent, plus quàm praecepta docent;3. All kings should be ho∣noured by the example of all Nations. 1 The Israeli∣tes. 1 In Egypt. Exod. 12.37. Exod. 1.9. you shall finde this doctrine practised by the perpetual demeanour of all Nations. For 1. If you looke upon the Children of Israel in the Land of Egypt, it cannot be denyed but Pharaoh was a wicked king, and exercised great cruelty, and ex∣ceeding tyranny against Gods people; yet Moses did not excite the Israelites to take arms against him, though they were more in number, being six hundred thousand men, and abler for strength to make their party good then Pharoah was, as the king himself confesseth; but they contained themselves within the bounds of their Obedience, and waited Gods leisure for their deliverance; because they knew their patient suffering would more manifest their own piety, and ag∣gravate king Pharoah's obstinacy, and especially magnify Gods glory, then their undutiful rebelling could any ways illustrate the least of these. 2. Davids demeanour towards Saul is most memorable;2. Under Saul. The loyal Sub∣jects belief, p. 55. for though (as one saith) king Saul discovered in part the described manner of such a king, as Sa∣muel had foreshewed; yet David and all his followers performed and observed the prescribed conditions, that are approved by God in true Subjects: never resisting, never rebelling against his king, though his king most unjustly persecu∣ted him. Samuel also, when he had pronounced Sauls rejection,1 Sam. 15. yet did he never incite the people to Rebellion, but wept and prayed for him, and dis∣charged all other duties, which formerly he had shewed to be due unto him; and Elias, that had as good repute with the people,3. Under A∣hab. and could as easily have stirred up sedition, as any of the seditious Preachers of this time; yet did he never per∣swade the Subjects to withstand the illegal commands of a most wicked king,1 Reg. 21.25. that as the Scripture testifieth, had sold himself to work wickedness, and became the more exceedingly sinful by the provocation of Jezabel his most wicked wife, and harlot; but he honoured his Soveraignty, and feared his Majesty, when he fled away from his cruelty. And because these are but particular presidents,Two examples of the whole Nation under Heathen kings 1. Under Ar∣taxerxes. Ezra 1.1. I will name you two observe∣able examples of the whole Nation. 1. When Cyrus made a Decree, and his Decree (according to the Laws of the Medes and Persians) should be unalterable; that the Temple of Jerusalem should be re-edified, and the adversaries of the Jews obtained a letter from Ar∣taxerxes to prohibit them, the people of God submitting themselves to the per∣sonal command of the king, contrary to that unalterable Law of Cyrus, pleaded neither the goodness of the work, nor the justness of the cause, but yeilded to the kings will, and ceased from their work, until they obtained a new Licence in the second year of king Darius: and if it be objected that they built the Tem∣ple in despite of those that hindered them, with their sword in one hand, and a trowel in the other: it is rightly answered, that having the kings leave to build it, they might justly resist their enemies, that did therein, not onely shew their malice unto them, but also resisted the will of the King. 2. When Ahashuerus, to satisfie the unjust desire of his proud favorite,2. Under A∣hashuerus. Hester. 3.10▪ had wickedly decreed, and most tyrannically destined all the Nation of the Jewes to a sudden death; yet this dutiful people did not undutifully rebel, and plead
the King was seduced by evil counsel, and misguided by proud Haman, there∣fore nature teaching them, vim vi pellere, to stand upon their own defence, they would not submit their necks to his unjust Decree; but, being versed in God's Lawes, and unacquainted with these new devices, they return to God, and betake themselves to their prayers,Hester. 8.11. until God had put it into the Kings heart to grant them leave to defend themselves, and to sheath their swords in the bow∣els of their adversaries; which is a most memorable example of most dutiful un∣resisting Subjects: an example of such piety, as would make our Land happy, if our zealous generation were but acquainted with the like Religion. The author of the Treatise of Monarchy, p. 32.But here I know what our Anabaptists, Brownist, and Puritan will say, that I build Castles in the air, and lay down my frame without foundation; because all Kings are not such as the Kings of Israel and Judah wee, as the Kings that God gave unto the Jews, and prescribed special Laws both for the Kings to govern, and the people to obey them; but all other Nations have their own different and several Laws and Constitutions, according to which Laws their Kings are tyed to rule, and the Subjects bound to obey, and no otherwise. Henric. Ste∣pha. in libello de hac re, con∣tendit in omnes respub debere leges Hebraeo∣rum, tanquam ab ipso Deo pro∣fectas, & per consequens om∣nium optimas reduci.I answer, that indeed it is granted there are several Constitutions of Royal∣ties in several Nations, and there may be Regna Laconica, conditional and pro∣visional Kingdoms, wherein perhaps upon a real breach of some exprest condi∣tions, some Magistrates like the Ephori, may pronounce a forfeiture, as well in the successive, as in the elective Kingdoms; because (as one saith) succession is not a new title to more right, but a legal continuance of what was first gotten: which I can no ways yield unto, if you mean it of any Soveraign King, (be∣cause the name of a King doth not always denotate the Soveraign power, as the Kings of Lacedaemon though so called, yet had no regal authority; and the Dictator for the time being, and the Emperours afterwards had an absolute power, though not the name of Kings) for I say, that such a government is not properly a regal government, ordained by God, but either an Aristocra∣tical or Democratical government instituted by the people, though approved by God for the welfare of the Common-wealth;1 Sam. 8 4, 20. but as the Israelites desired a King to judge them like all the Nations, that is, such a King as Aristotle de∣scribeth, such as the Nations had intrusted with an absolute and full regal power, as Sigonius sheweth; so the Kings of the Nations, if they be not like the Spar∣tan Kings, were and are like the Kings of Israel, both in respect of their ordi∣nation from God, by whom all Kings, as wel of other Nations as of Israel do reign, and of their full power and inviolable authority over the people; which have no more dispensation to resist their Kings, then the Jews had to resist theirs. And therefore Valentinian, though an elected Emperour; yet, when he was re∣quested by his Electours to admit of an associate,Sozom. histor. l 6. c. 6. Niceph hist. l. 11. c 1. answered, it was in your power to chuse me to be an Emperour, but now, after you have chosen me, what you re∣quire is in my power, not in you: Vòbis tanquam subditis competit parere, mihi verò quae facienda sunt, cogitare, it becomes you to obey, as Subjects, and I am to consider what is fittest to be done. And when the wife takes an husband, there is a compact, agreement, and a solemn vow past in the presence of God, that he shall love, cherish, and main∣tain her;The wife may not forsake her husband, though he break his vow, and neglect his duty. yet if he breaks this vow, and neglects both to love and to cherish her, she cannot renounce him, she must not forsake him, she may not follow after another; and there is a greater marriage betwixt the King and his people: therefore though as a wife they might have power to chuse him, and in their choice to tye him to some conditions, yet though he breaks them, they have no more power to abdicate their King, then the wife hath to renounce her husband, nor so much, because she may complain and call her husband before a competent Judge, and produce witnesses against him; whereas there can be no Judge betwixt the King and his people, but onely God: and no witnesses can be found on earth, because it is against all Lawes, and against all Reason, that they which rise against their king, should be both the witnesses against him, and the Judges to
condemn him: or were it so, that all other Kings have not the like constitution which the Scripture setteth down for the Kings of Israel; yet I say, that ex∣cepting some circumstantial Ceremonies, in all real points, the Laws of our Land are (so far as men could make them) in all things agreeable to the Scriptures in the constituting of our Kings, according to the livelyest pattern of the Kings of Israel; as it is well observed by the Authour of the Appeal to thy conscience,An Appeal to thy conscience pag 30. Our Kings of the like Insti∣tution to the kings of Israel. in these four special respects. 1. In his Right to the Crown. 2. In his Power and Authority. 3. In his Charge and Duty. 4. In the rendring of his Account. For 1. As the Kings of Israel were hereditary by succession, and not elective,  unless there were an extraordinary and divine designation, as in David,Kings of Eng∣land are kings by birth, Proved. Salo∣mon, Jehu: so do the Kings of England obtain their Kingdoms by birth, or hereditary succession, as it appeareth, 1. By the Oath of Allegiance, used in every Leete, that you shall be true  and faithful to our Soveraign Lord King Charles, and to his Heires. 2. Because we owe our legeance to the King in his natural capacity, that is,  as he is Charles the Son and Heir apparent of King James; when as homage cannot be done to any King in his politique capacity,Coke, l. 7. Cal∣vin's case. the body of the King being invisible in that sence. 3. Because in that case it is expresly affirmed, that the King holds the King∣dom  of England by birth-right, inherent by descent from the bloud-royal: there∣fore to shew how inseperable this right is from the next in bloud. Hen. the 4. though he was of the bloud-royal, being first cozen unto the King, and had the Crown resigned unto him by Rich. the 2. and confirmed unto him by Act of Parliament; yet upon his death-bed, confessed he had no right thereunto,Speed, l. 9. c. 16. as Speed writeth. 4. Because it was determined by all the Judges, at the Arraignment of Wat∣son  and Clerke,1. Jacobi. that immediately by descent his Majesty was compleatly and ab∣solutely King, without the Ceremony of Coronation, which was but a Royal Orna∣ment and outward Solemnization of the descent. And it is illustrated by Hen. 6. that was not crowned till the ninth year of his Reign;Speed, l. 9. c. 16. and yet divers were at∣tainted of High Treason before that time, which could not have been done, had he not been King. And we know, that upon the death of any of our Kings,The right heir to the King∣dom is King before he is crowned. Why the peo∣ples consent is asked. his Successor is immediately proclaimed King; to shew that he hath his Kingdom by descent, and not by the people at his Coronation; whose consent is then asked, not because they have any power to deny their consent, or refuse him for their King; but, that the King having their assent, may with greater security and con∣fidence rely upon their loyalty. 2, As the Kings of Israel had full power and authority to make war and  conclude peace, to call the greatest Assemblies, as Moses, Joshua, David, Jeho∣saphat, and the rest of the Kings did; to place and displace the greatest Officers of State, as Solomon placed Abiathar in Sadoc's room, and Jehosaphat appoin∣ted Amariah and Zebaediah rulers of the greatest Affaires,2 Chron. 19.11 The absolute authority of the kings of England. Coke 7, rep. fol. 25. 6. Polyd. Virgil. lib 11. Speed. Stow, &c. and had all the Militia of the Kingdom in their hands: so the Kings of England have the like; for, 1. He onely can lawfully proclaim war, as I shewed before; and he onely can conclude peace. 2. There is no Assembly that can lawfully meet but by his Authority; and as the Parliament was first devised and instituted by the king, as all our Historians write in the life of Henry the first, so they cannot meet but by the king's Writ. 3. All Laws, Customs, and Franchises are granted and confirmed unto the people by the King. Rot. Claus. 1. R. 2. n. 44. 4. All the Officers of the Realm, whether Spiritual or Temporal,Smith de repub. Angl. l. 2. c. 4. &c. 5. are chosen and established by him; as the highest immediately by himself, and the inferiour by an authority derived from him.
The absurdi∣ies of them that deny the Militia to the King.5. He hath the sole power of ordering and disposing all the Castles, Forts, and strong Holds, and all the Ports, Havens, and all other parts of the Mili∣tia of this kingdom; or otherwise it would follow, that the king had power to proclaime war, but not to be able to maintain it; and that he is bound to defend his subjects, but is denied the meanes to protect them; which is such an absur∣dity, as cannot be answered by all the House of Commons. 6. The kings of Israel were unto their people their honour, their Soveraigns, their life, and the very breath of their nostrils, as themselves acknowledge; and so the kings of England are the life, the head, and the authority of all things that be done in the Realm of England; supremam potestatem & merum imperi∣um apud nos habentes,Smith de Re∣pub. l. 2. Cambden Bri∣tan. p. 132. nec in Imperii clientela sunt, nec investituram ab alio acci∣pientes, nec praeter Deum superiorem agnoscentes; and their Subjects are bound by Oath to maintain the kings Soveraignty, in all causes, and over all per∣sons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; and that not onely as they are singularly con∣sidered, but overall collectively represented in the body politick; for by sundry, divers, old authentick Histories and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and ex∣pressed, that this Realm of England is an Empire, and so hath been accepted in the world,In the Preface to a Stat. 24. Hen. 8. cap. 12 governed by one supream head and king, having the dignity and roy∣al estate of the Imperial Crown of the same; unto whom a body politick, com∣pact of all sorts and degrees of people, divided in terms and by names of spiri∣tualty and temporalty, have been bounden and owen to bear next to God a na∣tural and humble obedience. 3. As the duty of every one of the kings of Israel was to be custos utriusque tabulae, to keep the Law of God, and to have a special care of his Religion; and then to do justice and judgment, according to the Law of nature, and to observe all the judicial Laws of that kingdom: so are the kings of England obliged to discharge the same duties. The duty of the kings of England.1. To have the chiefest care to defend the faith of Christ, and to preserve the honour of Gods Church, as I shewed before. 2. To maintain common right, according to the rules and dictates of Na∣ture. And. 3. To see the particular Laws and Statutes of his own kingdom well obser∣ved amongst his people. To all which the king is bound, not onely virtute officii, in respect of his office, but also vinculo juramenti, in respect of his Oath, which enjoyneth him to guide his actions, not according to the desires of an unbridled will, but according to the tyes of these estabished Laws; neither do our Divines give any further li∣berty to any king, but if he failes in these he doth offend in his duty. 4. As the kings of Israel were accountable for their actions unto none, but onely unto God,Psal. 51.4. and therefore king David after he had committed both murder and adultery, saith unto God; Tibi soli peccavi, as if he had said, none can call me to any account for what I have done but thou alone; and we never read that either the people did call, or the Prophets perswaded them to call any of their most idolatrous,The kings of England ac∣countable for their actions only to God tyrannical, or wicked kings to any account for their idolatry, ty∣ranny, or wickedness; even so the kings of England are accountable to none but to God. 1. Because they have their Crown immediately from God, who first gave it to the Conquerour through his sword, and since to the succeeding kings, by the ordinary means of hereditary succession.Smith de repub l. 1. c. 9. 2. Because the Oath which he takes at his Coronation binds him onely before God, who alone can both judge him, and punish him if he forgets it. 3. Because there is neither condition, promise, or limitation, either in that Oath or in any other Covenant or compact that the king makes with the people, either at his Coronation, or at any other time, that he should be accomptable, or that they should question and censure him for any thing that he should do. 4. Because the Testimony of many famous Lawyers justify the same truth;
for Bracton saith, if the king refuse to do what is just, satis erit ei ad poenam, quòd Dominum expectet ultorem, The Lord will be his avenger, which will be punish∣ment enough for him; but of the kings grants and actions, nec privatae personae, nec justiciarii debent disputare: And Walsingham maketh mention of a Letter written from the Parliament to the Bishop of Rome, wherein they say,Bracton fol. 34. 2. b. apud Lin∣col. anno 1301. that certum & directum Dominium à prima institutione regni Angliae ad Regem perti∣nuit, the certain and direct Dominion of this Kingdom from the very first instituti∣on thereof, hath belonged unto the King, who by reason of the arbitrary or free preeminence of the royal dignity and custome observed in all ages, ought not to answer before any Judge, either Ecclesiastical or Secular.Ex libera praee∣minentia. Ergo neither be∣fore the Pope, nor Parliament, nor Presbytery. 5. Because the constant custome and practice of this kingdom was ever, such, that no Parliament at any time sought to censure their king, and either to depose him, or to punish him for any of all his actions; save onely those that were cal∣led in the troublesome and irregular times of our unfortunate Princes,No legitimate and just Parli∣ment did ever question the kings of Eng∣land for their actions. and were swayed by those that were the heads of the most powerful Faction, to conclude most horrid and unjustifiable Acts, to the very shame of their Judicial authorities as those factious Parliaments in the times of Hen. 3. king John, Rich. 2. and Hen. 4. and others, whose acts in the judgment of all good authors, are not to be drawn into examples, when as they deposed their king for those pretended faults, whereof not the worst of them but is fairly answered, and all thirty three of them proved to be no way sufficient to depose him,Heningus c. 4. p. 93. by that excellent Civilian Heningus Arnisaeus. And therefore seeing the Institution of our kings is not onely by Gods Law, but also by our own Laws, Customs, and practice thus agreeable to the Scri∣pture kings, they ought to be as sacred and as inviolable to us, as the kings of Is∣rael were to the Jews; and as reverently honoured and obeyed by us, as both the Apostles, Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, advise us to honour and obey the king. CHAP. V. Sheweth, how the Heathens honoured their Kings; how Christ exhibited all due honour unto Heathen and wicked Kings; how he carried him∣self before Pilate; and how all the good Primitive Christians behaved themselves towards their Heathen persecuting Emperours. 2. WE finde that not onely the Jews, that were the people of God, a roy∣al Priesthood, that had the Oracles of God, and therefore no won∣der that they were so conformable in their obedience to the will of God,2. The Hea∣thens. Persae quidem olim aliquid coeleste atque divinum in re∣gibus inesse sta∣tuebant. Osor. de Instit. regis, l 4. p. 106. Justin. l. 4. Herodot. l. 8. What great re∣spect men in former times did bear unto their kings. but the Gentiles also that knew not God knew this by the light of nature, that they were bound to yield all honour unto their kings. For Quintus Curtius tells us, that the Persians had such a divine estimation and love unto their king, that Alexander could not perswade them either for fear or reward, to tell him where their king was gone, or to reveale any of his intentions, or to do any other thing that might any ways prejudice the life, or the affairs of their king. And Justin tell us, that the Sicilians did bear so great a respect unto the last Will and Testament of A∣naxilaus their deceased king, that they disdain not to obey a slave, whom he had appointed Regent, during the minority of his son. And Herodotus saith, that when Xerxes fled from Greece in a vessel that was so ful of men of war, that it was im∣possible for him to be saved, without casting some part of them into the Sea; he said, O yee men of Persia, let some among you testifie that he hath care of his
King, whose safety is in your disposition; then the Nobility which accompanied him having adored him, did cast themselves into the Sea, till the vessel was un∣burthened, and the King preserved. And I fear these Pagans will rise in judge∣ment to condemn our Nobility, that seek the destruction of their King. And the Macedonians had such a reverent opinion of their King, that being foyled in war, before they returned again to the battle, they fetched their cradle wherein their young King lay, and set him in the midst of the Camp, as suppo∣sing that their former misfortune proceeded,Justin. l. 7. because they neglected to take with them the good augure of their King's presence. And Boëmus Aubanus speaking of the Aegyptian Kings, saith, that they have so much good will and love from all men, ut non solùm sacerdotibus, sed etiam singulis Aegyptiis, ma∣jor regis quàm xorum filiorúmque,Aubanus de A∣fr ca. l. 1. p. 39. Reges divinos Iove genitos, à Iove nutritos, Homerus & Hesiodus appel∣larunt. aut aliorum principum salutis inesset cura; that not onely the Priests, but also the Aegyptians have a greater care of the safety of their King, then of their wives or children, or any other Princes of the Land. And the same Author describing the manner, how the Tartars cre∣ate their King, saith, the Princes, Dukes, Barons, and all the people meet, then they place him that is to be their King on a Throne of gold, and prostrating themselves upon the ground, they cry with an unanimous and loud voice, Roga∣mus, volumus & praecipimus, ut domineris nobis, We intreat you and beseech you to reign over us; and he answereth, If you would have this of me, it is necessary that you should be obedient to do whatsoever I shall command you; when I call you, to come; whethersoever I shall send you, to go; whomsoever I shall command you to kill, to do it immediately without fear; and to com∣mit the whole Kingdom into my hands: then they do all answer, We are willing to do all this. And then he saith again, Therefore from hence-forth, oris mei sermo, gladius meus erit, the word of my mouth shall be the sword of my power: then all the people do applaud him. And a little after he saith, in ejus manibus seu potestate omnia sunt,Aubaus l. 8. p. 141. all things are in his hands and power: no man dare say, this is mine, or that is his: no one man may dwell in any part of the Land, but in that which is assigned unto him by the King. Nemini licèt imperatoris verba mutare, nemini latae ab illo sententiae qualicunque mede contra∣ire; and no man dares alter the Kings words, nor gain-say his sentence what∣soever it is. And we read that the Turk is as absolute in his Dominions, and as readily obeyed in his commands as the Tartar; and yet these Subjects learn this duty of honour and obedience unto their Kings onely by the light of nature; and if grace and the Gospel hath made us free from this slavish subjection, should we not be thankful unto our God, and be contented with that liberty which he hath given us; but because we have so much, we will have more:And as the Poet saith, Like Subjects arm'd, the more their Princes gave, They this ad∣vantage too, the more to crave Lucan. lib. 1. and seeing God hath delivered us from the rage of tyrannous Kings, we will free our selves from all government, and disobey the commands of the most clement Prin∣ces. We may remember the fable of the Frogs, where they prayed unto Jupiter to haue a King, and what was the success thereof, — omnia dat qui justa negat: an he that undutifully denyeth his due obedience, may unwillingly be forced to undue subjection; as the Israelites, not contented with just Samuel, shall be put under an unjust Saul. So God may justly deal with us for our injustice towards our King, to deny that honour unto him which God commanded to be given, and the very Heathens have not detained from their Kings. But 3. Christians.3. Lest with Saint Paul we should be blamed (though unjustly) for bringing the uncircumcised Greeks into the Temple, for alleadging the disorderly practice of blinde Heathens to be a pattern for these zealous Ch istians: (which thing, notwithstanding our Saviour did, when he preferred Sodom and Gomorrha be∣fore Capernaum;Matth. 11.21. yea, Tyrus and Sidon before Corazin and Bethsaida:) we cannot want the example of good Christians, and a multitude of most holy Mar∣tyrs, to shame the practice of these prophane hypocrites. For 1. Christ him self exhibited all due honour unto wicked kings.1. Christ him¦self, the authour and the finisher of our faith, never left any plainer mark of his religion, then to propagate the same by patience; as on
the other side, there cannot be a more suspitious sign of a false Religion, then to enlarge it and protect it by violence: and therefore when the Inhabitants of a cer∣tain Samaritane village refused to admit Christ and his Disciples into their Town, and so renounced him and his Religion; James and John,Luke 9.54. two principal members of his Court, remembring what Elias did in the like case,1 Reg. 18. 2 Reg. 1. asked if they should not command fire to consume them, as Elias did? that is, if they should not use their best endeavours, and be confident of Gods assistance, to destroy those prophane rejecters of Christ, and refusers of his religion? Our Saviour, though ever meeke, yet now moved at this their unchristian thought, rebuked them with that sharpness, as he did Saint Peter, when he committed the like ∣rour, and said, You know not what manner of spirit you are of: as if he had said,Matth. 16.23. you understand not the difference betwixt the profession of Elias, and my reli∣gion; for he was such a Zelot, that jure zelotarum, and the extraordinary in∣stinct of Gods spirit that was in him, might at that time (when the Jews were governed by a , as Josephus saith, and God presiding as it were their King amongst them, and interposing rules by his Oracles, and other particular directions, that should oblige and warrant them, as well as their standing Law) do this or the like act, though not authorized by any ordinary Law; and those actions thus performed, are as just and as legal as any other that proceed from the authority of the supreame Magistrate; but that dispensation of the Prophets is now ended, and the profession of my Disciples must be far otherwise; for I do not authorize my servants to pretend to the spirit of Elias, or to do as Phineas and others, extraordinary men among the Jews, have done, but they must learn of me to be meeke and lowly in heart, and rather to suffer wrong of others, then to offer the least injury unto their meanest neighbour,Matth. 11.29. much less to resist their supreame Magistrate. And when Christ was apprehended, not by any legal power of the supreme Magistrate, but by the rude servants of the High Priests; and Saint Peter,How Christ carried himself before Pilate and the High-Priests. as zealous for his Master as our Zealots are for their Religion, drew his sword and smote off Malchus ear, a most justifiable and commendable act, a man would think, to defend Christ, and in him all Christianity; our Saviour bids him put up his sword, and he adds a reason most considerable to all Christians; for all they that take the sword shall perish by the sword: that is, all they that without law∣ful authority take the sword, to defend me and my religion with the sword, they deserve to suffer by the sword; and it is very well observed by the Author, of resisting the lawful Magistrate upon colour of religion, that the two parallel pla∣ces quoted in the margent of our Bibles, are very pertinent to this purpose;Pag. 6. for that Law concerning the effusion of bloud,Gen. 9.6▪ being not any prohibition to the le∣gal cutting off of Malefactors, is notwithstanding urged against S. Peter, to shew that his shedding of bloud in defence of religion was altogether illegal, and prohibited by that Law: and the other place (where immediately after these words, He that killeth with the sword must be killed with the sword;Revel. 13.10. the Holy Ghost adjoyneth, here is the patience and the faith of the Saints:) doth most clearly shew, that all forcible resistance is inconsistent with the religion of the Saints; because their faith must be ever accompanied with their patience; and it is contrary to their profession to save themselves by any violent opposition of them that have the lawful authority. But that example which is unparallel'd, is the suffering of Christ under Ponti∣us Pilate; for the whole course of their proceeding; gainst Christ was illegal, when as no Law can be found to justifie the delivering up of an innocent person to the will of his accusers, as Pilate did our Saviour Christ; and our Saviour had ability and strength enough to have defended himself;John 19.16. for he might have comman∣ded more then twelve Legions of Angels to assist him; yet our Saviour acknow∣ledging the legal power of Pilate to proceed against him,John 19.12. that it was given him from above, makes no resistance either to maintain his doctrine or to preserve his life, but in all things submits himself to their illegal proceedings, and gives
unto the Magistrates all the honour that was due unto their places: and you know the rule, Omnis Christi actio, debet esse nostra instrictio, we ought to fol∣low his example. And therefore not onely Christ, but also all good Christians have imitated him in this point; for the Apostles prayed for their persecuting Tyrants, ex∣horted all their followers to honour even the Pagan Kings, and most shrply re∣proved all that spake evill of Authority, much more would they say against them, that commit evill, and proceed in all wickedness against Authority. And Tertullian speaking of the behaviour of the Primitive Christians towards the Heathen Emperours,How the Pri∣mitive Chri∣stians hehaved themselves to∣wards their Heathen per∣secutors. and their cruell persecutors, saith▪ that because they knew them to be appointed by God, they did love and reverence them, and wish them safe with all the Romane Empire; yea, they honoured the Emperour, and worshipped him as a man second from God, & solo Deo minorem, and inferiour onely unto God; and in his Apologetico he saith, Deus est sous in cuus solius potestate sunt reges, à quo sunt secundi, post quem primi, super omnes homines, ante omnes Deos; God alone is he by whose power Kings are preserved, which are second from him, first after him, above all men, and before all gods; that is, all other Magistrates that the Scripture calleth Gods. So Justin Martyr, Minut us Felix, Nazianzen, (which also wrote against the vices of Ju∣lian) S. Augustine, and others of the prime Fathers of the Church have set down, how the Primitive Christians, and godly Martyrs, that suffered all k nde of most barbarous cruelty at the hands of their Heathen Magistrates, did not∣withstanding pray for them, and honour them, and neither derogated from their authority,Beda p. 15. nor any wayes resisted their insolencie. And Johannes Beda, Advo∣cate in the Court of Parliament of Paris, saith, that the Protestants of France in the midst of torments have blessed their King, by whom they were so severely intreated; and in the midst of fires and massacres, have published their con∣fession in these words:Artic. 39 & 40 confess. eccles. Gal. re∣for. For th cause he (that is, God) put the sword into the Magistrates hand, that he may repress the sins committed, not onely against the se∣cond Table of Gods Commandments, but also against the first: We must there∣fore for his sake not onely endure that Superiours rule over us, but also honour and esteem of them with all reverence, holding them for his Lieutenants and Offi∣cers, to whom he hath given in commission to execute a lawfull and a holy function: We therefore hold that we must obey their Lawes and Statutes, pay Tributes, Im∣posts, and other duties, and bear the yoke of subjection with a good and free will, although they were Infidels. Ob. But against this patience of the Saints, and the wisdome of these good Christians, it is objected by Goodwin, and oters of his Sect, that, ei her they wanted strength to resist, or wanted knowledge of their strength, or of their pri∣viledge and power, which God granted them to defend themselves and their re∣ligion, or were over-much transported with an ambitious desire of Martyr∣dome, or by some other misguiding spirit were utterly mis-led to an unnecessary patience; and therefore we having strength enough, as we conceive, to sub∣due the King and all his strength, and being wiser in our generation then all the generation of those fathers, as being guided by a more unerring spirit, we have no reason to pray for patience, but rather to render vengeance, both to the King, and to all his adherents. Sol. This unchristian censure, and this false imputation laid upon these holy Fathers, by these stubborn Rebels, and proud Enthusiasts, are so mildly, and so learnedly answered by the Author, of resisting the lawfull Magistrate upon colour of Religion,Where they are fully an∣swered that more need not be said to stop the mouthes of all ignorant gain-sayers. Therefore seeing that by the institution of Kings, by the precept of God, and by the practice of all wise men, and good Christians, Heathen Kings, and wicked Tyrants are to be loved, honoured, and obeyed, it is a most hatefull thing to God and man, to see men professing themselves Christians (but are indeed like
those in the Revel. (which say, they are Jewes,Revel. 2 9. and are not) in stead of honou∣ring, transcendently to hate, and most violently to persecute their own most Christian, and most gracious King; a sin so infinitely sinfull, that I do not wonder to see the greatness of Gods anger to powre all the plagues that we suffer, upon this Nation; but I do rather admire, and adore his wonted clemency and pa∣tience, that he hath not all this while either sent forth his fire and lightning from heaven, as he did upon Sodome and Gomorrah, to consume them,Gen. 19.24. Num 16.31 or cause the earth to swallow them, as it did Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for this their rebellion against their King; or that he hath not showred down far greater plagues, and more miserable calamities then hitherto we have suffered; because we have suffered these Antichristian Rebels to proceed so far, and have with the Merozites neglected all this while to add our strength to assist the Lords Anointed, to reduce his seduced Subjects to their obedience,Judges 5.23. and to impose condigne punishments upon the seducers, and the ringleaders of this unnaturall, and most horrible Rebellion. CHAP. VI. Sheweth, the two chiefest duties of all Christian Kings; to whom the charge and preservation of Religion is committed; three severall o∣pinions; the strange speeches of the Disciplinarians against Kings are shewed; and Viretus his scandalous reasons are answered; the double service of all Christian Kings; and how the Heathen Kings and Emperours had the charge of Religion. 2. AS all Kings are to be honoured in the fore-said respects,2. Christian Kings are to have double honour, in re∣shect of their double duty. 1. Duty. 2. Duty. so all Christi∣an Kings are to have a double honour, in respect of the double charge and duty that is laid upon them: As, 1. To preserve true religion, and to defend the faith of Christ, against all Atheists, Hereticks, Schismaticks, and all other adversaries of the Gospel, within their Territories and Dominions. 2. To preserve their Subjects from all forraigne adversaries, and to pre∣vent civill dissentions, to govern them according to the rules of justice and equity, which all other Kings are bound to do; but neither did, nor can do it so fully, and so faithfully as the Christian Kings; because no Law, either So∣lons, Lycurgus, Pompilius, or any other Greek or Latine; nor any Politique, Plato, Aristotle, Machievle, or whom you will, old or new, can so perfectly set down, and so fairly declare, quid justum, & quid honestum, as the Law of Christ hath done; and theefore, seeing omnis honos praesupponit onus, the ho∣nour is but the reward of labour, and that this labour, or duty of Kings to maintain true Religion, well performed, and faithfully discharged, brings most glory unto God, and the greatest honour to all Kings; when it is more to be, with Constantine, a nursing father to Gods Church, then it is to be with Alex∣ander the sole Monarch of the known world; I will first treat of their charge and care, and the power that God hath given them to defend the faith, and to preserve true Religion. And 1. Religion (saith a learned Divine) without authority, is no Religion; for,1. Care of Kings to pre∣serve true Re∣ligion. Aug. de utili∣tate credendi cap. 9. as Saint Augustine saith, no true Religion can can be received by any means, without some weighty force of authority: therefore if that Religion, whereby thou hopest to be saved, hath no authority to ground it self upon: or if that authority, whereby thy Religion is settled, be mis-placed in him that hath no au∣thority
at all, what hope of salvation remaining in that Religion canst thou con∣ceive? but it is concluded on all sides, that the right authority of preserving true religion must reside in him, and proceed from him, by whose supreme power and government it is to be enacted and forced upon us: and therefore now the question is,To whom the charge of pre∣serving religi∣on is commit∣ted. 3 Opinions. and it is very much questioned, to whom the supreme go∣vernment of our Religion ought rightly to be attributed, whereof I finde three several resolutions. 1. Papistical, which leaneth too much on the right hand. 2. Anabaptistical, which bendeth twice as much on the left hand. 3. Orthodoxal of the Protestants, that ascribe the same to him, on whom God himself hath conferred it. 1. That the Church of Rome maketh the Pope solely to have the supreme government of our Christian Religion,Ʋnde saepe obji∣ciunt dictum Hosii ad Con∣stantium: Tibi Deus imperium commisit, nobis quae sunt eccle∣siastica, concre∣didit. Sed hic intelligitur de executione offi∣cii, non de gu∣bernatione ec∣clesiae. Sicut ibi manifestum est, cùm dicitur, ne∣que fas est nobis in terris im∣perium tenere, neque tibi thy∣miamatum & sacrorum pote∣statem hbere. (i. e.) in praedi∣catione Evan¦gelii, & admi∣nistratione Sa∣cramentorum & similibus. is most apparent out of all their write∣ings; and you may see what a large book our Country-man Stapleton wote against Master Horn Bishop of Winchester to justifie the same. And Sanders to disprove the right of Kings, saith, Fatemur personas Episcoporum, qui in toto orbe fuerunt, Romano Imperatori subjectas fuisse, quoniam Rex praeest hominibus Christianis, verùm non quia sunt Christiani; sed quia sunt homines, episcopis etiam ex ea parte rex praeesset. So Master Harding saith, that the office of a King in it self is all one every where, not onley among the Christian Princes, but also among the Heathen; so that a Christian King hath no more to do in deciding Church matters, or medling with any point of Religion then a Heathen. And so Fekenham, and all the brood of Jesuites, do with all violence and virulency labour to disprove the Prince's authority and supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes, and the points of our Religion, and to transfer the same wholly unto the Pope and his Cardinals. Neither do I wonder so much, that the Pope having so uni∣versally gained, and so long continued this power, and retained this govern∣ment from the right owners, should imploy all his Hierarchy to maintain that usurped authority, which he held with so much advantage to his Episcopal See, (though with no small prejudice to the Church of Christ, when, the Empe∣rours being busied with other affairs, and leaving this care of religion and go∣vernment of the Church to the Pope, the Pope to the Bishops, the Bishops to their Suffragans, and the Suffragans to the Monkes, whose authority being little, their knowledg less, and their honesty least of all, all things were ruled with greater corruption and less truth then they ought to be) so long as possi∣bly he should be able to possesse it, But at last, when the light of the Gospel shined, and Christian Princes had the leisure to look, and the heart to take hold upon their right, the learned men (opposing themselves against the Pope's usurped jurisdiction) have sound∣ly proved the Soveraign authority of Christian Kings in the government of the Church; that, not onely in other Kingdoms, but also here in England, this power was annexed by divers Laws unto the interest of the Crown, and the law∣ful right of the King: and I am perswaded (saith that Reverend ArchBishop Bancroft) had it not been that new adversaries did arise,Survey of Di∣scip. c. 22. p. 251. and opposed themselves in this matter, the Papists before this time had been utterly subdued; for the Devil seeing himself so like to lose the field, stirred up in the bosom of Reforma∣tion a flock of violent and seditious men,How the De∣vil raised in∣struments to hinder the re∣formation. that pretending a great deal of hate to Popery, have notwithstanding joined themselves, like Sampson's Foxes, with the worst of Papists, in the worst and most pernicious Doctrines that ever Papist taught; to rob Kings of their sacred and divine right, and to deprive the Church of Christ of the truth of all those points, that do most specially concern her go∣vernment and governours: and though in the fury of their wilde zeal they do no less maliciously then falsly cast upon the soundest Protestants, the aspersion of Popery and Malignancy; yet I hope to make it plain unto my reader, that them∣selves
are the Papists indeed, or worse then Papists both to the Church and State: For, 2. As the whole Colledge of Cardinals, and all the Scholes of the Jesuites, do most stfly defend this usurped authority of the Pope, which, as I said,Of the Ana∣baptists, and Puritans. may be with the less admiration, because of the Princes concession, and their own long possesion of it; so on the other side there are sprung up of late a certain genera∣tion of Vipers, the brood of Anabaptists and Brownists, that do most violently strive not to detain what they have unjustly obtained, but a degree far worse, to pull the sword out of their Prince his hand, and to place authority on them which have neither right to own it, nor discretion to use it; and that is,Where the Pu∣ritans place the authority to maintain reli∣gion. 1 In the Pres∣bytery. either 1. A Consistory of Presbyters: 2. A Parliament of Lay men. For 1. These new Adversaries of this Truth, that would most impudently take away from Christian Princes the supreame and immediate authority, under Christ, in all Ecclesiastical Callings and Causes, will needs place the same in themselves, and a Consistorian company of their own Faction; a whole Volume would not contain their absurdities, falsities, and blasphemies that they have ut∣tered about this point. I will onely give you a taste of what some of the chief of them have belched forth against the Divine Truth of God's Word and the sacred Majesty of Kings. Master Calvin a man otherwise of much worth,Calvin in A∣mos cap. 7. and worthy to be honoured, yet in this point transported with his own passion, calleth those, Blasphemers, that did call King Henry the eight the supreme Head of this Church of England: and Stapleton saith, that he handled the King him∣self with such villany and with so spiteful words,Stapl. cont. Horn. l. 1. p. 22. as he never handled the Pope more spitefully; and all for this Title of Supremacy in Church causes: and in his fifty fourth Epistle to Myconius, he termed them prophane spirits and mad men, that perswaded the Magistrates of Geneva, not to deprive themselves of that authority which God hath given them: Viretus is more virulent;How Viretus would prove the temporal Pope (as he calleth the King) worse then the spiri∣tual Pope. for he resembleth them not to mad men, (as Calvin did) but to white Devils, be∣cause they stand in defence of the Kings authority; and he saith, they are false Christians, though they cover themselves with the cloke of the Gospel, affirm∣ing that the putting of all authority and power into the Civil Magistrates hands, and making them masters of the Church, is nothing else but the changing of the Popedome, from the Spiritual Pope into a Temporal Pope, who (as it is to be feared) will prove worss and more tyrannous then the Spirituall Pope, which he laboureth to confirme by these three reasons: 1. Because the Spiritual Pope had not the Sword in his own hand, to punish men with death, but was fain to crave the aid of the Secular power, which the Temporal Pope needs not do 2. Because the old spiritual Popes had some regard in their dealings of Coun∣cils, Synods, and ancient Canons; but the new Secular Popes will do what they list without respect of any Ecclesiastical Order, be it right or wrong▪ 3. Because the Romish Popes were most commonly very learned, but it hap∣peneth oftentimes, that the Regal Popes have neither learning nor knowledg in divine matters; and yet these shall be they that shall command Ministers and and Preachers what they list; and to make this assertion good, he affirmeth that he saw in some places some Christian Princes, under the title of Reformation, to have in ten or twenty years, usurped more tyranny over the Churches in their Dominions, then ever the Pope and his adherents did in six hundred years. All which reasons are but meere fopperies, blown up by the black Devil, to blast the beauty of this truth; for we speak not of the abuse of any Prince,Viretus his scandalous reasons an∣swered. to justifie the same against any one, but of his right, that cannot be the cause of any wrong; and it cannot be denyed but an illiterate Prince may prove a singular advancer of all learning, as Bishop Wickham was no great Scholler, yet was he a most excellent instrument to produce abundance of famous Clerks in this Church; and the King ruleth his Church by those Laws, which through his royal autho∣rity
are made with the advice of his greatest Divines, as hereafter I shall shew unto you: yet these spurious and specious pretexts may serve, like clouds, to hide the light from the eyes of the simple.T. C. l. 2. p. 411. So Cartwright also, that was our English firebrand, and his Disciples teach as Harding had done before, that Kings and Princes do hold their Kingdoms and Dominions under Christ, as he is the Son of God onely, before all Worlds, coequal with the Father, and not as he is Mediator and Governour of the Church: and therefore the Christian Kings have no more to do with the Church government, then the Heathen Princes: so Tra∣vers saith, that the Heathen Princes being converted to the faith, receive no more nor any further encrease of their power, whereby they may deale in Church causes, then they had before; so the whole pack of the Disciplinarians are all of the same minde, and do hold that all Kings, as well Heathen as Christian receiving but one Commission and equal Authority immediately from God, have no more to do with Church causes, the one sort then the other. And I am ashamed to set down the railing and the scurrilous speeches of Anthony Gilby against Hen. 8. and of Knox,Gilby in his ad∣monition p. 69 Knox in his exhortation to the Nobility of Scotland, fol. 77. Whittingham, and others, against the truth of the King's lawful right and authority in all Ecclesiastical causes. For, were it so, as Cartwright, Travers, and the rest of that crew do avouch, that Kings by being Christians receive no more authority over Christ his Church, then they had beforeWhich is most false.; yet this will appear most evident to all understanding men, that all Kings, as well the Heathens as the Christians, are in the first place to see that their people do religiously observe the worship of that God which they adore: and therefore much more should Christian Princes have a care to pre∣serve the religion of Jesus Christ. The Gentilee Kings preser∣vers of religi∣on.For it cannot be denyed, but that all Kings ought to preserve their Kingdoms; and all Kingdoms are preserved by the same means, by which they were first established; and they are established by obedience and good manners: neither shall you finde any thing that can beget obedience and good manners, but Lawes and Religion; and Religion doth naturally beget obedience unto the Lawes; therefore most of those Kings that gave Lawes were originally Priests; and as Synesius saith,Synes. ep. 126. Vide Arnis. part. 2. pag. 14. Ad magnas reipubl. utilita∣tes retinetur religio in civi∣tatibus. Cicero de divin. l. 2. , a Priest and a Prince was all one with them: when the Kings, to preserve their Laws inviolable, and to keep their people in obedience that they might be happy, became Priests, and exercised the duties of Religion, offering sacrifices unto their Gods, and discha ging the other offices of the Priestly Function (as our factious Priests could willingly take upon them the offices of the King;) or if some of them were not Priests (as all were not Law-makers) yet all of them preserved Re∣ligion as the onely preservation of their Lawes, and the happinesse of their Kingdomes, which thye saw, could not continue without Religion. But 2. The wisedom of our grave Prelates, and the learning of our religious Cler∣gie having stopped the course of this violent stream,2. In the Par∣liament. and hindred the translation of this right of Kings, unto their new-born Presbytery and late erected Synods: There sprang up another generation out of the dregs of the former, that because they would be sure to be bad enough, out of their envy unto Kings, and malice unto the Church (that the one doth not advance their unworthyness, and the other doth not bear with undutifullness) will needs transfer this right of ruling God's Church unto a Parliament of Lay-men; the King shall be denuded of what God hath given him: and the people shall be endued with what God and all good men have ever denyed them. I deny not but the Parliament men, as they are most noble and worthy Gentlemen, so many of them may be very learned, and not a few of them most religious; and I honour the Parliament rightly discharging their duties, as much as their modesty can desire, or their merit deserve; neither do I gain-say, but as they are pious men, and the great∣est Council of our King, so they may propose things, and request such and such Lawes to be enacted, such abuses to be redressed, and such a reformation to be effected, as they think befitting for Gods Church; but for Aaron's feed
and the Tribe of Levi,Hugo de Sancto Vict. l b 2. de sacr. fid par. 2. cap 3. Laicis Christia∣nis fidelibus ter∣rena possidere conceditur, cle∣ricis verò tan∣tum spiritualia committuntur; quae atem illa spiritualia sunt, subjicit, c. 5. dicens; omnis ecclesiastica ad∣ministratio in tribus consi∣stit, in sacra∣mentis, in ordi∣nibus, in prae∣ceptis. Ergo, Laici nihil ju∣ris habent in le∣gibus & prae∣ceptis condendis ecclesiastcis. to be directed and commanded out of the Parliament chair, how to perform the service of the Tabernacle, and for Lay men to de∣termine the Articles of faith, to make Canons for Church-men, to condemn heresies and define verities, and to have the chief power for the government of Gods Church, as our Faction now challengeth, and their Preachers ascribe unto them, is such a violation of the right of Kings, such a derogation to the Clergy, and so prejudicial to the Church of Christ, as I never found the like usurpation of this right, to the eradication of the true Religion, in any age; for seeing that, as the Proverb goeth, Quod medicorum est, promittunt medici, & practant fabrilia fabri; what Papist or Atheist will be ever converted to profess that religion, which shall be truly, what now they alleadge falsly unto us, a Parliamentary religion, or a religion made by Lay-men, with the ad∣vice of a few that they choose è faece Cleri? I must seriously profess what I have often bewayled, to see Nadab and Abihu offering strange fires upon God's Altar, to see the sacred offices of the Priests so presumptuously usurped by the Laity, and to see the children of the Church, nay, the servants of the Church to prescribe Lawes unto their Masters; and I did ever fear it to be an argu∣ment, not onely of a corrupted, but also of a decaying State when Moses chaire should be set in the Parliament House, and the Doctours of the Church should never sit thereon: therefore I wish that the Ark may be brought back from the Philistines, and restored to the Priests, to be placed in Shilo where it should be; and that the care of the Ark, which king David undertook, may not be taken out of his hands by his people; but that he may have the honour of that service, which God hath imposed upon him. For 3. As nothing is dearer to understanding, righteous, and religious Kings, then the encrease and maintenance of true religion,Of the Ortho∣dox. Quia religio est ex potioribus reipublicae par∣tibus: ut ait Aristot Polit. l. 7. c. 8. & ipsa sola custodit hominum inter se societates: ut ait Lactant. de ira Dei, cap. 12. Peritura Troja perdidit pri∣mùm Deos. Therefore the Tyrians chay∣ned their gods, lest if they fled they should be destroyed. and the inlargement of the Church of Christ throughout all their Dominions, so they have at all times im∣ployed their studies to this end; because it is an infallible maxime, even among the Politicians, that the prosperity of any Kingdome flourisheth for no longer time, then the care of Religion and the prosperity of the Church is maintained by them among their people: as we see Troy was soon lost, when they lost their Palla∣dium, so it is the truest sign of a declining and a decaying State, to see the Clergy despised, and religion disgraced: and therefore the provision for the safety of the Church, the publick injoying of the word of God, the form of Service, the man∣ner of Government, and the honour and maintenance of the Clergy, are all, the du∣ties of a most Christian King, which the King of Heaven hath imposed upon him for the happiness and prosperity of his Kingdom; and whosoever derive the autho∣rity of this charge, either in a blinde obedience to the See of Rome, as the Jesuites do, or out of their too much zeal and affection, to a new Consistory as the late Presbyterians did, or to a Lay Parliament, as our upstart Anabaptists aad Brown∣ists do, are most unjust usurpers of the Kings Right, which is not onely ascribed unto him and warranted by the Word of God, but is also confirmed to the Princes of this Land by several Acts of Parliament, to have the supremacy in all causes and over all persons, as well in the Ecclesiastical as in the Civil government; which being so, they are exempted thereby from all inforcement of any domesti∣cal or forraign power, and freed from the penalties of all those Laws, both Eccle∣siastical and civil, whereunto all their Subjects, Clergy and Laity,Q. Curtius de rebus Alexand. Joh. Beda, p. 22, 23. and all inferi∣our persons, and the superiour Nobility within their Kingdomes, are obliged by our Laws and Statutes; (as hereafter I shall more fully declare.) Therefore it behoveth all Kings (and especially our King at this time) seri∣ously to consider, what prejudice they shall create unto themselves and their just authority, if they should yeild themselves inferiour to their Subjects, (aggre∣gativè, or repraesentativè, or how you will) or liable to the penal Laws, (for so they may be soon dethroned by the unstable affection and weak judgment of discontented people) or subject to the jurisdiction of Lay Elders, and the ex∣communication of a tyrannous Consistory, who denouncing him,Matth. 18.17. tanquam Eth∣nicum,
may soon add,Deut. 17.15. a stranger shall not raign over thee, and so depose him from all government. For seeing all attempts are most violent, that have their beginning and strength from zeal unto Religion, be the same true or false, and from the false most of all, and those are ever the most dangerous whose ringlead∣ers are most base (as the servile War under Spartacus was most pernicious un∣to the Romans) there can be nothing of greater use,How necessary it is for Kings to retain their just rights in their hands. or more profitable either for the safety of the King, the peace of the Church, and the quiet state of the Kingdome, then for the Prince, the King, to retain the Militia, and to keep that power and authority which the Laws of God and of our Land have granted to, and intailed upon him, in his own hands unclipped and unshaken: for when the multitude shall be unbridled, and the rights of the Kings are brandished in their hands, we shall assuredly taste, and I fear in too great a measure (as experience now sheweth) of those miserable evils, which uncontrouled ignorance, furious zeal, false hypocricy, and the merciless cruelty of the giddy-headed people, and discontented Peeres shall bring upon us and our Prince. But to make it manifest unto the World, what power and authority God hath granted unto Kings, for the government of the Church, and the preservation of his true Religion; we finde them the worst men, at all times and in all places, that mislike their Government, and reject their authority; and we see those Churches most happy,The Kings that maintain true religion make their Kingdoms happy. and those Kingdoms most flourishing, which God hath blessed with religious Kings, as the State of the Church of Judaea makes it plain, when David, Ezechias, Josias, and the other virtuous Kings restored the Religion, and purified that Service, which the idolatry of others their predecessours had corrupted, and we know that as Moses,Exod. 14 31 Num. 12.7, 8 Deut. 34.5. Josh. 1.1, 2. so kings are called the servants of God in a more special manner then all others are: that is, not onely because they serve the Lord in the Government of the Common wealth, but especially because he vouchsafeth to use their service for the advancement of his Church, and the honour of his Son Christ here on earth: or to distribute their duties more particularly, we know the Lord exspecteth, and so requireth a double ser∣vice from every Christian king. 1. The one common with all others, to serve him as they are his creatures and Christians;The double service of all Christian kings. and therefore to serve him as all o∣ther Christians are bound to do. 2. The other proper and peculiar to them alone, to serve him as they are Kings and Princes. 1. As they are Christians.In the first respect, they are no more priviledged to offend then other men; but they are tyed to the same obedience of Gods Laws, and are obliged to per∣forme as many virtuous actions, and to abstain from all vices, as well as any o∣ther of their Subjects: and if they fail in either point, they shall be called to the same account, and shall be judged with the same severity as the meanest of their people: and therefore, Be wise O ye Kings, be learned ye that are Judges of the earth;Psal. 2.10. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoyce unto him with reverence; for with God there is no respect of persons, but if they do offend he will binde Kings in fetters,Rom. 2.11. Psal. 149.8. and their Nobles with linkes of iron: and we dare not flatter you, to give you the least liberty to neglect the strict service of the great God. 2. As they are Christian king: and that is twofoldIn the second respect, the service of all Christian kings and princes hath (as I told you before) these two parts: 1. To protect the true religion, and to govern the Church of Christ. 2. To preserve peace, and to govern the Com∣mon-wealth. For 1. To protect the Church. Aug. cont. lit. petil. l. 2. Optat. Milivit. lib. 3.1. It is true indeed, that the Donatists of old, the grand fathers of our new Se∣ctaries, were wont to say, Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? What have we to do with the Emperour, or what hath the Emperour to do with the Church? but to this Optatus answereth, that, Ille solito furore acceusus in haec verba prorupit.
Donatus out of his accustomed madness burst forth into these mad termes;Prima omnium in republ. fun∣ctionum est, . A∣rist l. 7. c. 8. Arist. Polit. l. 3. c. 10. for it is a duty that lyeth upon all Princes, (because all, both Christians and Pagans ought to be religious, as I shewed to you before) not onely to be devout, but also to be the means to make all their Subjects (so far as they can) to become devoted to Gods service, as the practice of those Heathens, that had no other guide of their actions then the light of nature, doth make it plain; for Aristo∣tle saith, that, Qu ad Deorum cultum pertinent, commissa sunt regibus, & ma∣gistratibus, those things that pertain unto the worship of the Gods are committed to the care of Kings; and civil Magistrates: and whatsoever their religion was, (as indeed it was but meere superstition) yet because Superstition and Reli∣gion, hoc habent commune, do this in common: Ʋt faciant animos humiles formidine divûm. Therefore to make men better, the more humble and more dutiful, the trans∣gression thereof was deemed worthy to receive punishment among the Pagans; and that punishment was appointed by them, that had the principal authority to govern the Common-wealth; as the Athenian Magistrates condemned Socra∣tes, (though he was a man wiser then themselves, yet as they conceived very faulty) for his irreligion and derision of their adored gods:The chief Ma∣gistrates of the Heathens had the charge of Religion. And Tiberius would set up Christ among the Romane gods (though the act added no honour unto Christ) without the authority and against the will of the Senate; to shew that the care of religion belonged unto the Emperour, or chief Magistrate; and therefore as the Lord commanded the kings of Israel to write a copy of his Law in a booke, and to take heed to all the words of that Law for to do them; that is, not onely as a private person, (for so every man was not to write it)▪Deut. 17.18, 19. but as King, to reduce others to the obedience thereof; so the examples of the best kings both of Israel and Juda, and of the best Christian Emperours do make this plain unto us: for Joshua caused all Israel to put away the strange gods that were among them,Josh. 24.23. The care of the good kings of the Jews to preserve the true religion. and to incline their hearts unto the Lord God of Israel; Manasses, after his return from Babylon, tooke away the strange Gods, and the Idols out of the house of the Lord, and cast them all out of the City, and repaired the Altar of the Lord, and com∣manded Juda to serve the Lord God of Israel. And what shall I say of David, whose whole study was to further the service of God; and of Jehosaphat, Asa, Josias, Ezechias, and others, that were rare patternes for other kings for the well government of Gods Church? and in the time of the Gospel, Quod non tollit praecepta legis, sed perficit, which takes not away the rules of nature, nor the precepts of the Law, but rather establisheth the one, and perfecteth the other; be∣cause Christ came into the world, non ut tolleret jura saeculi, sed ut deeret pec∣cata mundi, not to take away the rights of the Nations, but to satisfie for the sins of the World, the best Christian Emperours discharged the same duty, reformed the Church, abolished Idolatry, punished Heresy, and maintained Piety:The care of the good Em∣perours to pre∣serve the true religion. Esay 49.23. especi∣ally, Constantine and Theodosius, that were most pious Princes, and of much virtues, and became, as the Prophet foretold us, nursing fathers unto Gods Church; for though they are most religious and best in their religion, that are religious for conscience sake, yet there is a fear from the hand of the Magistrate, that is able to restrain those men from many outward evils, whom neither conscience nor religion could make honest: therefore God committed the principal care of his Church to the Prince, and principal Magistrate. And this is confirmed, and throughly maintained by sundry notable men,who defended this truth. The Papists unawares con∣fess this truth. Osorius de relig. p. 21. as Brentius against Asoto, Bishop Horne against Fekenham, Jewel against Harding; and many other learned men, that have written against such other Papists and Puritans, Anabaptists and Brownists, that have taken upon them to impugne it; yea, many of the Papists themselves at unawares, do confess as much; for Osorius saith, Omne regis officium in religionis sanctissimae rationem conferendum; & munus ejus est beare rempubl. religione & pietate: all the office of a King is to be confer∣red, or imployed for the regard of the most holy Religion, and his whole duty is
to bless, or make happy the Common-wealth with Religion and piety: Quod enim est aliud reipublicae principi munus assignatum, quàm ut rempubl. florentem atque beatam faciat? quod quidem nullo modo sine egregia pietatis & religionis sanctitate perficitur. For, though we confess with Ignatius, that no man is equall to the Bishop in causes Ecclesiasticall, no not the King himselfe; that is, in such things as belong to his office,Whit. resp. Camp. p. 302. as Whitaker saith; because he onely ought to see to holy things, that is, the instruction of the people, the admini∣stration of the Sacraments, the use of the keyes of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the like,The Kings au∣thority over Bishops. 1 Chron. 28.13. 2 Chron. 29. 1 Reg. 2.26. matters of great weight, and exceeding the Kings authority; yet Kings are above Bishops in wealth, honour, power, government, and majesty: and though they may not do any of the Episcopall duties, yet they may, and ought lawfully to admonish them of their duties, and restrain them from evill, and command them diligently to execute their office; and if they neglect the same, they ought to reprove and punish them, as we read the good Kings of the Jewish Church, and the godly EmperoursAs Martian apud Binium, l. 2. p. 178. Iustinian. novel. 10. tit. 6. Theodos. jun. Evagr. l. 1. c. 12. Basil. in Council Con∣stant 8. act. 1. Binius tom. 8. p. 880. Reason confir∣meth, that Kings should take care of religion. of the Christian Church have ever done; and the Bishops themselves in sundry Councils, have acknowledged the same power and Authority to be due, and of right belonging unto them: as at Mentz, Anno 814. and Anno 847. apud Binium, tom. 3. p. 462. & 631. At Emerita in Portugall, Anno 705. Bin. tom. 2. p. 1183. and therefore it is an ill consequent, to say, Princes have no Authority to preach, Ergo they have no authority to punish those that will not preach, or that do preach false Do∣ctrine. This truth is likewise apparent, not only by the the testimony of Scripture and Fathers, but also by the evidence of plain reason; because the prosperity of that Land which any King doth govern, without a principal care of Religi∣on, decayeth and degenerateth into Wars, Dearths, Plagues and Pestilence, and abundance of other miseries, that are the lamentable effects and consequences of the neglect of Religion, and contempt of the Ministers of Gods Church; which I beleive is no small cause of these great troubles which we now suffer; because our God,Psal. 35.27. that taketh pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, cannot endure that either his service should be neglected, or his servants abused. CHAP VII. Sheweth, the three things necessary for all Kings that would preserve true Religion; how the King may attain to the knowledge of things that pertain to Religion; by his Bishops and Chaplains, and the cal∣ling of Synods; the unlawfulness of the new Synod; the Kings pow∣er and authority to govern the Church; and how both the old and new Disciplinarians and Sectaries rob the King of this power. THerefore seeing this should be the greatest care, that brings the greatest honour to a Christian Prince, to promote the true Religion; it is requisite that we should consider those things that are most necessary to a Christian King, for the Religious performance of this duty: And they are Three things necessary for a king to pre∣ferre the Church and the Religion.1. A will to performe it. 2. An understanding to go a∣bout it. 3. A power to effect it. And these three must be inseperable in the Prince that maintaineth true Religion. For, 1. Our knowledge and our power without a willing minde, doth want motion.
2. Our will and power without knowledge shall never be able to move right. And, 3. Our will and knowledge without ability can never prevaile to produce any effect. Therefore Kings and Princes ought to labour to be furnished with these three special graces. The first is a good will to preserve the purity of Gods service,1. A wil∣ling minde to do it. not onely in his House, but also througout all his Kingdom: and this, as all other gra∣ces are, must be acquired by our faithfull prayers, and that in a more speci∣all manner for Kings and Princes then for any other; and it is wrought in them by outward instruction, and the often predication of God's Word, and the in∣ward inspiration of Gods Spirit. The second is knowledge, which is not much less necessay then the former;2. Under∣standing to know what is to be reform∣ed and what to be retained. because not to run right, is no better then not to run at all, and men were as good to do nothing, as to do amiss; and therefore true knowledge is most requi∣site for that King that will maintain true religion: and this should be not one∣ly in generall, and by others, but as much as possible he can, in particulars, and of himselfe; that himselfe might be assured what were fit to be reformed, and what warranted to be maintained in Gods service; for so Moses commandeth the chiefe Princes to be exercised in Gods Law day and night: because this would be a special means to beatifie, or make happy, both the Church and Common-Wealth: As the neglect thereof brought ignorance unto the Church,The kings ne∣glect of reli∣gion and the Church, is the destruction of the Common-wealth. and ru∣ine to the Romane Empire; for, as in Augustus time learning flourished, and in Constantines time piety was much embraced; because these Emperours were such themselves: so when the Kings, whose examples most men are apt to fol∣low, either busied with secular affairs, or neglecting to understand the truth of things, and the state of the Church, do leave this care unto others; then others imitating their neglect, do rule all things with great corruption, and as little truth; whereby errours and blindness will over-spread the Church; and pride, covetousness, and ambition will replenish the Common-Wealth; and these vices, like the tares that grow up in Gods field to suffocate the pure Wheat, will at last choake up all virtue and piety both in Church and State, Therefore to prevent this mischiefe, the King, on whom God hath laid the care of these things, ought himselfe (what he can) to learn and finde out the true state of things: and because it is far unbefitting the honour and inconsist∣ent with the charge of great Princes, (whose other affairs will not permit them) to be alwayes poring at their books, as if they were such critiques,How kings may attaine unto the knowledge of religion, and understand the state of the Church, and how to go∣vern the same. 1. To call a∣ble Clergy∣men about them. as intended to exceed all others in the therick learning, like Archimedes, that was in his study drawing forth his Mathematicall figures, when the City was sackt, and his enemies pulling down the house about his eares; therefore it is wisdome in them to imitate the discreet examples of other wise Kings, and religious Empe∣rours, in following the means that God hath left, and using the power and au∣thority that he hath given them, to attain unto more knowledge, and to be bet∣ter instructed in any religious matter, then themselves could possibly attaine unto by their own greatest study: and that is, 1. As Alexander had his Aristotle ready to inform him in any Philosophicall doubt, and Augustus his prime Orators, Poets, and Historians to instruct him in all affairs; so God hath granted this power unto his Kings, to call those Bishops, and command such Chaplaines to reside about them, as shall be able to informe them in any truth of Divinity, and so direct them in the best forme of Government of Gods Church; and these Chaplains should be well approved, both for their learning and their honesty; for to be learned without honesty, as many are, is to be witty to do evill, which is most pernitious, and doth often times make a pri∣vate gaine by a publique loss,How they should be qua∣lified. or an advantage to themselves by the detriment of the Church: and to be honest without knowledge, or to have knowledge without experience, especially in such places of eminency, and for the affaires
of importance, may be as dangerous; when their want of skill may counsel to do matters of much hurt: but when both are met together in one person, that man is a fit Subject to do good service both to God and the King: and the King may be assured, there cannot be a better furtherance to assist him for the well ordering of God's Church, then the grave advice and directions of such in∣struments, as it appeareth by that memorable example of King Ioas, (left to be remembred by all Kings) who, whilst the wise and religious Priest Jehoiada assisted and directed him, had all things successefull and happy to his whole Kingdome;2 Reg. 12.2. but after Jehoiada's death, the King destitute of such a Chaplain to attend, and such a Priest to counsel him, all things came speedily to great ruine. Therefore I dare boldly avouch it, they are enemies unto Kings, and the un∣derminers of God's Church, and such instruments as I am not able to express their wickedness, that would exclude such Jehoiada's from the Kings counsel; for was not Saul a wicked King, and Ahab little better? yet Saul would have Samuel to direct him, though he followed not his direction; and Ahab would ask counsel of Micaiah, though he rejected the same to his own destruction: and King David,1 Reg. 22.16. though never so wise and so great a Prophet, and Josias, and E∣zechias, and all the rest of the good Kings, had always the Priests and the men of God to be their Counsellors, and followed their directions, especially in Church causes,Mar. 6.20. as the oracles of God: so wicked Herod disdained not to hear John the Baptist, and to be reformed by him in many things; and happy had he been, had he done it in all things. And if you read Eusebius (which is called Pamphilus, for the great love he bare to that his noble Patron) and Socrates, and the rest of the Ecclesiastical Historians, or the Histories of our own I and, you shall finde that the best Kings and greatest Emperours had the best Divines, and the most reverend Bishops to be their chiefest Counsellors, and to be imploy∣ed by them in their weightiest affairs. How then hath the Devil now prevailed to exclude them from all Counsels, and as much as in him lyeth, from the sight of Princes, when he makes it a suspicion of much evil, if they do but talk toge∣the? How hath he bewitched the Nobility to yield to be deprived of their Chaplains? Is it not to keep them (that have not time to study, and to finde out truth themselves) still in the ignorance of things; and to none other end, then to overthrow the true religion, and to bring Kings and Princes to con∣fusion? 2 To call Sy∣nods to discuss and conclude the harder things.2. When the King seeth cause, God hath given him power and authority to call Synods and Councils, and to assemble the best men, the most moderate and most learned, to determine of those things together, which a fewer number could not so well, or at least not so authoritatively conclude upon: for so Con∣stantine the Great called the great Council of Nice to suppress the Heresie of Arius. Theodosius called the Council of Ephesus in the case of Nestorius: Va∣lentinian and Martian called the Council of Calcedon against Eutyches: Justi∣nian called the Council of Constantinople against Severus, that renewed the Heresie of Eutyches: Constantine the Fifth called the sixth Synod against the Monothelites; and so did many others in the like cases: God having fully grant∣ed this right and authority unto them, for their better information in any point of religion, and the goverment of the Church. And therefore they that deny this power unto Kings, or assume this authority unto themselves, whether Popes or Parliament, out of the Kings hand, they may as well take his eyes out of his head; because this is one of the best helps that God hath left unto Kings,The unparal∣lel'd presum∣ption of the Faction to call a Synod with∣out the king to assist and direct them in the chiefest part of their royal government: how presumptuous then, and injurious unto our King, and prejudicial to the Church of Christ, was the faction of this Parliament, without the Kings leave, and contrary to his command, to undertake the nomi∣nation of such a pack of Schismatical Divines for such a Synod, as might finally determine such points of faith and discipline, as themselves best liked of, let all
the Christian world, that as yet never saw the like president, be the Judge; and tell us what shall be the religion of that Church, where the Devil shall have the power to prompt worldlings to nominate his prime Chaplains, Socinians, Brownists, Anabaptists, and the refuse of all the refractory Clergy,The quality of the Synodical men. (that seem learned in nothing but in the contradiction of learning, and justifying Rebellion against their King and the Church) to compose the Articles of our faith, and to frame a new government of our Church? I am even ashamed that so glorious a Kingdom should ever breed so base a Faction, that durst ever presume to be so audacious; and I am sorry that I should be so unhappy to live to see such an unparallel'd boldness in any Clergy, that the like cannot be found in any Ec∣clesiastical History, from the first birth of Christ's Church to this very day, unless our Sectaries can produce it from some of the Ʋtopian Kingdoms, that are so far South ward In terra incognita, beyond the Torrid Zone, that we (whose zeal is not so fiery, but are of the colder spirits) could not yet per∣fectly learn the true method of their Anarchical government: or if our Lawyers can shew us the like president that ever Parliament called a Synod contrary to the King's Proclamation, I shall rest beholding to them, produce it if they can, Cre∣dat Judaeus appella; non ego. The third thing requisite to a King for the preservation of true religion,3. An authori∣ty and power to guide the Church, and to uphold the true religion. and the government of God's Church, is power and authority to defend it; for though the Prince should be never so religious, never so desirous to defend the faith, and never so well able in his understanding, and so well furnished with knowledge to set down what Service and Ceremonies should be used; yet if he hath not power and ability, which do arise from his right and just authority to do it, and to put the same in execution, all the rest are but fruitless embryoes, like those potentials, that are never reduced into actions;Ps. 129.6. or like the grass upon the house top, that withereth before it be plucked up. But to let you see, that Kings and Princes should have this power and autho∣rity in all Ecclesiastical causes, and over all Ecclesiastical persons, we finde that all Ages and all Lawes have warranted them to do the same; for Solomon displaced Abiathar and placed Sadoc in his room;1. Reg. 2.27. & 35. Jerem. 26. How all kings and Emperors exercised this power ouer the Church. Jeremy's case was heard by the King of Israel. Theodosius, and Valentinian made a Decree, that all those should be deposed, which were infected with the impiety of Nestorius; and Justinian deposed Sylverius and Vigilius: and many other Kings and Emperours did the like; and not onely the Law of God, whereof the King is the prime keeper, and the keeper of both Tables, but also the Statutes of our Land do give unto our King the nomination of Bishops, and some other elective dignities in the Church, the custody of the Bishops Temporalties during the vacation, the Patronage Pa∣ramount, or right to present by the last lapse; and many other furtherances and preservatives of religion are, in terminis terminantibus, deputed by our Lawes unto the King; and for his care and charge thereof, they have setled upon him our first Fruits, Tenths, Subsidies, and all other contributions of the Ecclesiastical persons, which the Pope received while he usurped the government of this Church; these things being due to him that had the supreme power for the government. And therefore seeing the examples of all good Kings in the Old Testament, and of the Christian Kings and Emperours in the New Testament, and all Lawes both of God and man, (excepting those Lawes of the Pontifici∣als, that are made against the Law of God,) and all Divines,Cassian. de In∣carn. l. 1. c. 6. excepting the Jesuites and their sworn Brethren the Presbyterians, do most justly ascribe this right and power unto Kings; I may truly say with Cassianus, that there is no place of audience left for them, by whom obedience is not yielded to that which all have agreed upon; nor any excuse for those Subjects that assist not their Soveraign to inable him to discharge this great charge that is laid upon him. What then shall we say to them that pull this power, and tear this preroga∣tive out of the King's hand, and place it in the hands of mad men, as the Pro∣phet
epithets the madness of the people?Psal. 65.7. How the Dis∣ciplinarians rob the king of this right. Knox to the Commonalty, fol. 49. 50, 55. For that furious Knox belched forth this unsavory Doctrine, That the Commonalty may lawfully require of their King to have true Preachers; and if he be negligent, they themselves may justly provide them, maintain them, defend them, against all that oppose them, and detain the profits of the Church Livings from the other sort of Ministers; a point fully practised by the English Scotizers of these dayes: and as if this Doctrine were not seditious enough, and abundantly sufficient to move Rebellion, Good∣man publisheth that horrible tenet unto the world, that it is lawful to kill wi∣cked Kings: which most dangerous and more damnable Doctrine, Dean Whit∣tingham affirmeth to be the tenet of the best and most learned of them that were our Disciplinarians. But when as true Religion doth command us to obey our Kings, whatsoever their Religion is,What true re∣ligion teach∣eth us. aut agendo aut patiendo, either in suffering with patience, what∣soever they do impose, or in doing with obedience whatsoever they do command. Re∣ligion can be no warrant for those actions, which must remain as the everlasting blemishes of that Religion, which either commanded or approved of their doing, I am sure all wise men wil detest these Doctrines of Devils: and seeing it is an infallible rule, that good deserveth then to be accounted evil, when it ceaseth to be well done, it is apparent that it is no more lawful for private and inferiour persons to usurp the princes power, and violently to remove Idolatry, or to cause any Reformation; then it is for the Church of Rome by invasion or treason to e∣stablish the Doctrine of that See in this or any other forraign kingdome, because both are performed by the like usurped authority. The old Dis∣ciplinarians.Yet these were the opinions and practises of former times, when Buchanan, Knox, Cartwright, Goodman, Gilby, Penry, Fenner, Martin, Travers, Throg∣morton, Philips, Nichols, and the rest of those introducers of Out landish and Genevian Discipline, first broached these uncouth and unsufferable tenets in our Land, in the Realm of England and Scotland; and truely if their opinions had not dispersed themselves, like poison, throughout all the veines of this Kingdom, and infected many of our Nobility, and as many of the greatest Cities of this Kingdome, (as it appeareth by this late unparallel'd rebellion) these and the rest of the trayterous authours of those unsavory books, which they published, and those damnable tenets which they most ignorantly held, and maliciously taught unto the people, should have slept in silence; their hallowed and sanctified Trea∣son should have remained untouched, and their memorial should have perished with them. But seeing, as Saint Chrysostome saith of the Hereticks of his time, that al∣though in age they were younger, yet in malice they were equal to the antient Hereticks;Our rebelli∣ous Sectaries far worse then all the former Disciplinari∣ans. and as the brood of Serpents, though they are of less stature, yet in their poyson no less dangerous then their dammes; so no more have our new Sectaries, our upstart Anabaptists, any less wickedness then their first begetters; nay, we finde it true, that as the Poet saith, Aetas parentum pejor avis Tulit nos nequiores.— These young cubbs prove worse then the old foxes; for if you compare the Wheles with the wolves, our latter Schismaticks with their former Masters, I doubt not but you shall finde less learning, and more villany, less honesty, and more subtilty, hypocrisy and treachery in Doctor Burges, Master Marshal, Case, Goodwin, Burrowes, Calamy, Perne, Hill, Cheynel, and the rest of our giddy-headed Incendiaries, then can be found in all the seditious Pamphlets of the for∣mer Disciplinarians, or of them that were hanged (as Penry) for their treasons: for these men do not onely (as Sidonius saith of the like) apertè invidere,S idon lib. epist. ab∣jectè fingere, & serviliter superbire, openly envy the state of the Bishops, basely forge lyes against them, and servilely swel with the pride of their own conceited sanctity and apparent ignorance; but they have also most impudently (even in their pulpits) slan∣dered
the footsteps of Gods Anointed, and so brought the abomination of their trans∣gression to stand in the holy place; they haue with Achan troubled Israel, and tormented the whole Land; yea, these three Kingdomes, England, Scotland, and Ireland; and for inciting, provoking, and incouraging simple, ignorant, poore,For which their intoler∣able villanies If I be not de∣ceived in my judgement, they of all o∣thers, & above all the Rebels in the king∣dom, deserve the greatest and severest punishment, God of Hea∣ven give them the grace to repent. discontented and seditions Sectaries, to be Rebels and Traytors against their own most gracious King; they have not onely with Jerusalem justified Samaria, Sodome and Gomorrah, but they have justified all the Samaritanes, all the Sodo∣mites, all the Schismaticks, Hereticks, Rebels, and Traytors, Papists, and A∣theists, and all that went before them, Judas himself in many circumstances not excepted; and that which makes their doings the more evil, and the more ex∣ceedingly wicked, is, that they make Religion to be the warrant for their evil doings: the pack-horse to carry, and the clokt to cover all their treacheries: and thereby they drew the greater multitudes of poore Zelots to be their fol∣lowers. And therefore seeing it is not onely the honour, but also the duty, as of all other Kings, so likewise of our King, to be as the Princes of our Land are justly stiled, the Defenders of the Faith; and that not only in regard of enemies abroad, but also in respect of those far worse enemies, which desire alteration at home, it behoves the King to looke to these home-bred enemies of the Church; and seeing the king, though never so willing for his piety and religion, never so able for his knowledge and understanding,What Gods faithful ser∣vants, and the kings loyal Subjects must do in these times. 1. To justifie the kings right yet without strength and power to ef∣fect what he desires, cannot defend the faith, and maintain the true Religion, from the violence of Sectaries and Traytors within his kingdome; it hehoves us all to do these two things. 2. To justifie the kings , his authority and right to the supreme Go∣vernour and defender of the Chuch, and of Gods true religion and service, both in respect of Doctrine and Discipline; and that none else, Pope or Parliament, hath any power at all herein, but what they have derivately from him: which I hope we have sufficiently proved. 2. To submit our selves unto our king, and to add our strength, force,2. To assist Him against the Rebels. and power to inable his power to discharge this duty against all the Innovators of our Religion, and the enemies of our peace, for the honour of God, and the happi∣ness of this Church and Common-wealth: for that power which is called the Kings power, and is granted and given to him of God, is not onely that Hero∣ick virtue of fortitude, which God planteth in the hearts of most noble Princes, (as he hath most grasiously done it in abundant measure in our most gracious king) but it is the collected and united power and strength of all his Subjects, which the Lord hath commanded us to joyn and submit it for the assistance of the kings power, against all those that shall oppose it, and if we refuse or ne∣glect the same, then questionless whatsoever mischief, idolatry, barbarity, or superstition shall take root in the Church, and whatsoeuer oppression and wicked∣ness shall impair the Common-wealth, Heaven will free His Majesty, and the wrath of God, in no smal measure, must undoubtedly light upon us and our po∣sterity; even as Debora saith of them, that refused to assist Barac against his enemies, Curse ye Meroz, curse bitterly the Inhabitants thereof,Jud. 5.23. because they came not forth to helpe the Lord against the mighty.
CHAP. VIII. Sheweth it is the right of Kings to make Ecclesiastical Lawes and Canons, proved by many authorities and examples; that the good Kings and Emperours made such Laws by the advice of their Bishops and Cler∣gy, and not of their Lay Counsellours; how our late Canons came to be annulled; that it is the Kings right to admit his Bishops and Prelates to be of his Council, and to delegate secular authority, or civil jurisdiction unto them; proved by the examples of the Hea∣thens, Jewes, and Christians. OUt of all this that hath been spoken, it is more then manifest, that the king ought to have the supreme power over Gods Church, and the Govern∣ment thereof, and the greatest care to preserve true Religion throughout all his Dominions: this is his duty, and this is his honour, that God hath com∣mitted not a people, but his people, and the members of his Son under his charge. For the performance of which charge, it is requisite for us to know that God hath granted unto him, among other rights, these two special pre∣rogatives. Two special rights and pre∣rogatives of the King for the govern∣ment of the Church. 1. To make Laws and Ca∣nons.1. That he may and ought to make Lawes, Orders, Canons, and Decrees, for the well governing of Gods Church. 2. That he may, when he seeth cause, lawfully and justly grant tolerations and dispensations of his own Laws and Decrees, as he pleaseth. 1. Not onely Solomon and Jehosaphat gave commandment, and prescribed unto the chief Priests and Levites, what form and order they should observe in their Ecclesiastical causes, and methode of serving God; but also Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, and all the Christian Emperours that were careful of Gods service, did the like; and therefore, when the Donatists alleadged, that secular Princes had nothing to do to meddle in matters of Religion, and in causes Ec∣clesiastical,Aug. l. 2. c. 26. Saint Augustine in his second Epistle against Gaudentius, saith, I have already proved that it appertaineth to the Kings charge, that the Ninivites should pacifie Gods wrath; and therefore the Kings that are of Christs Church, do judge most truely, that it belongeth to their charge, to see that men Rebel not,Idom ep. 48. & ep. 50. ad Boni∣fac. without punishment against the same; because God doth inspire it is to the mindes of Kings that they should procure the Commandments of the Lord to be performed in al their Kingdomes; for they are commanded to serve the Lord in fear; and how do they serve the Lord, as Kings, but in making Laws for Christ?So they are called the kings Ecclesi¦astical Lawes. as man he serveth him by living faithfully, but as King he serveth him in making Laws that shal command just things, and forbid the contrary, which they could not do, if they were not kings: And by the example of the king of Ninive, Darius, Nebuchadnezzar, and others, which were but fi∣gures and prophesies that foreshewed the power, duty and service that Christian kings should owe and performe in like sort to the furtherance of Christs Religi∣on in the time of the New Testament, when al kings shall fall down and Wor∣ship Christ,Psal. 72.11. Arg. cont. lit. Peul. l. 2. c 92 and all Nations shall do him service, he proveth, that the Christian kings and Princes should make Laws and Decrees for the furtherance of Gods service, even as Nebuchadnezzar had done in his time. And upon the words of the Apostle,Idem in l. de 12. abus. grad. grad. 2. that the king beareth not the sword in vain, he proveth against Petilian, that the power and authority of the Princes, which the Apostle treateth
of in that place, is given unto them, to make sharpe penall Lawes to further true religion, and to suppress all Heresies and Schismes. And so accordingly we finde the good Emperours and Kings have ever done;The good Em∣perours have made Laws for the govern∣ment of the Church. Euseb. in vita Constant. l. 2. & 3. for Constantine caused the idolatrous religions to be suppressed, and the true knowledge of Christ to be preached and planted amongst his people, and made many wholsome Lawes, and godly Constitutions, to restrain the sacrificing unto Idols, and all other devillish and superstitious south-sayings, and to cause the true service of God to be rightly administred in every place, saith Eusebius. And in another place he saith, that the same Constantine gave injunctions to the chiefe Ministers of the Churches, that they should make speciall supplication to God for him; and he enjoyned all his Subjects that they should keep holy cer∣tain dayes dedicated to Christ, and the Sabboth, or Saturday (which was then wont to be kept holy, and as yet not abrogated by any Law among the Christi∣ans;) he gave a Law to the Ruler of every Nation, that they should cele∣brate the Sunday, or the Lords day in like sort;Idem de vita Constant. l. 1. & 3. & 4. c. 18. and so for the dayes that were dedicated to the memory of the Martyrs, and other festival times; and all such things were done according to the ordinance of the Emperour. Nicephorus writing of the excellent virtues of Andronicus, son to Immanuel Palaeologus, and comparing him to Constantine the Great, saith,Niceph. in pra∣fation. Eccles. hist. thou hast re∣stored the Catholique Church, being troubled with new opinions, to the old State, thou hast banished all unlawfull and impure doctrine, thou hast establish∣ed the truth, and hast made Lawes and Constitutions for the same. Sozomen speaking of Constantines sons, saith,Sozomenus l, 3. c. 17. the Princes also concurred to the increase of these things, , shewing their good af∣fections to the Churches, no less then their father did, and honouring the Cler∣gy their servants with singular promotions and immunities, both confirming their fathers Lawes, and making also new Lawes of their own, against such as went about to sacrifice, and to worship Idols, or by any other means fell to the Greekish, or Heathenish superstitions. Theodoret tells us, that Valentinian at the Synod in Illirico, did not onely con∣firme the true faith by his Royall assent, but made also many godly and sharpe Lawes, as well for the maintenance of the truth of Christ his doctrine, as also touching many other causes Ecclesiastical, and, as ratifying those things that were done by the Bishops, ,Theodor. l. c. 5, 6, & 7. he sent abroad to them that doubted thereof. Honorius, at the request of Boniface the first, made a Law, whereby it might appear what was to be done,Distinct. 79. siduo. when two Popes were chosen at once by the indis∣cretion of the Electors. Martianus also made a Statute, to cut off, and put away all manner of contention about the true faith and Religion, in the Councell of Cal∣cedon. The Emperour Justinus made a Law, that the Churches of Heretiques should be consecrated to the Catholique Religion, saith Martinus Poenitentiarius. And who knowes not of the many Laws, and Decrees, that Justinian made in Eccle∣siasticall causes for the furtherance of the true Religion? for in the begin∣ning of the Constitutions collected in the Code of Iustinian, the first 13 titles are all filled with Laws for to rule the Church; where it forbiddeth the Bi∣shops to reiterate baptisme, to paint,L. 1. tit. 5. L. 1. tit. 7. Novel. 123. c. 10. Novel. 58. Novel. 137. c. 6. or grave on earth the Image of our Savi∣our. And in the Novels the Emperour ordaineth Lawes, of the creation and consecration of Bishops; that Synods should be annually held; that the holy mysteries should not be celebrated in private houses; that the Bishops should speak alond when they celebrate the Sacraments of Baptisme and the Eucharist; and that the holy Bible should be translated into the vulgar tongue, and the like. And not onely these and the rest of the godly Emperours that succeeded them, but also Ariamirus, Wambanus, Richaredus, and divers other Kings of Spaine
did in like manner: And Charlemaigne, who approved not the decisions of the Greekish Synod, wrote a book against the sameIntituled, A Treatise of Charlemaigne against the Greekish Synod touching Ima∣ges., whereby the King main∣tained himself in possession, to make Lawes for the Church (saith Johannes Beda) of which Lawes there are many in a book, called The capitulary Decrees of Charles the Great, who as Popin his predecessour had done in the City of Bourges, so did he also assemble many Councils in divers places of his King∣doms, as at Mayns, at Tours, at Reines at Chaalons, at Arles, and the sixt, most famous of all, at Francfort, where himself was present in person, and condemned the errour of Felician; and so other Kings of France, and the Kings of our own Kingdom of England, both before and after the Conquest, (as Master Fox plentifully recordeth) did make many Lawes and Constitutions for the government of God's Church. The saying of Dioclesian.But as Dioclesian, that was neither the best nor the happiest governour, said most truly of the civil government, that there was nothing haraer th n to rule wellThat is, to rule the Com∣mon-wealth., so it is much harder to govern the Church of Christ; therefore as there cannot be an argument of greater wisdome in a Prince, nor any thing of grea∣ter safety and felicity to the Common-wealth, then for him to make choice of a wise Council to assist him in his most weighty affaires,Tacitus Annal. lib. 12. saith Cornelius Tacitus: So all religious Kings must do the like in the government of the Church, and the making of their Lawes for that government; for God out of his great mercy to them, and no less desire to have his people religiously governed, left such men to be their supporters, their helpers and advisers in the performance of these duties: and I pray you, whom did Kings chuse for this business, but whom God had ordained for that purpose? for you may observe that although those Christian Kings and Emperours made their Lawes, as having the supremacy and the chieest cre of God's religion committed by God into their hands; yet they did never make them, that ever I could read, with the advice, counsel, or direction of any of their Peers, or Lay Subjects; but, as David had Nathan and God,The good Kings & Em∣perours made their Lawes for the go∣vernment of the Church, onely by the adv ce of their Clergy. A good Law of Instinian. Constit. 123. Nbuhadnezzar had Daniel, and the rest of the Jewish Kings and Heathens had their Prophets onely and Priests to direct them in all matters of religion; so those Chr stian Kings and Princes took their Bishops and their Cler∣gie onely to be their counsellors and directors in all Church causes, as it appear∣eth out of all the fore-cited Authors, and all the Histories that do write thereof: and Justinian published this Law, that when any Ecclesiastical cause or matter was moved, his Lay officers should not intermeddle with it, but should suffer the Bishops to end the same according to the Canons: the words are, Si Ec∣clesiasticum negotium sit, nullam communionem habento civiles magistratus cum ea disceptatione, sed religiosssimi Episcopi secundum sacros canones, negotio finem imp nunto. For the good Emperour knew full well, that the Lay Senate neither understood what to determine in the points of faith, and the government of Christ's Church, nor was ever willing to do any great good, or any special fa∣vour unto the Shepherds of Christ's flock, and the teachers of the true religion; because the Son of God had fore-told it, that the world should hate us, that se∣cular men and Lay Senatours should commonly oppose,John. 15.19. cross, and shew all the spite they can unto the Clergy,Matth. 10.16. of whom our Saviour saith, Behold I send you forth, , as sheep in the midst of wolves. Whence this, , great distance between their dispositions being observed, it grew into a Proverb, that Laici semper infesti sunt Clericis. And Doctour Meriton In a Sermon before King James,How the Lai∣ty love the Clergy. A very memo∣rable act. Anno. 9. Eliz. cap. 4. observed this as one of the good favours the Clergie of England found from our Parliaments since the reformation, (when many men first began to be translated from the seat of the scornefull to sit in Moses chaire, and to prescribe Lawes for Christ his Spouse) to make an Act, that all wandering beggars after their correction by the Constable, should be brought to the Minister of the Parish, to have their names registred in a Book, (and the Constable used to give to the Minister 2d for his paines for every one so registred) but if he refused or neglected to do it, the Statute saith he should be
punished five shillings for every one that should be so omitted; where, besides the honourable office, I will not say to make the Minister of Christ a Bedle of the Beggars, but a Register of the vagrants; you see the punishment of one ne∣glect amounteth to the reward of thirty labours: therefore all the Christian Emperours and the wisest Kings, considering this great charge that God had laid upon them, to make wholesome Lawes and Constitutions for the govern∣ment of his Church, and seeing the inclinations of the Laity, would never per∣mit any of these Lay-Elders, and the Citizens of the world, to usurp this au∣thority, to be the composers, contrivers, or assistants in concluding of any Ec∣clesiastical Law, until the fences of God's vineyard were pulled down,That the Laity should have no interest in making Laws for the Church. and the wilde Boar out of the forrest, the audacious presumption of the unruly Com∣monalty ventured either to govern the Church, or to subdue their Prince; since which incroachment upon the rights of Kings, it hath never succeeded well with the Church of Christ; and I dare boldly say it, & fidenter quia fideliter, and the more boldly because most truly: the more authority they shall gain herein, the less glory shall Christ have from the service of his Church; and therefore Be wise ô ye Kings. And consider how any new Canons are to be made by our Statute, 25 Hen. 8. Ob. But then it may be demanded, if this be so,  that the Laity hath no right in making Lawes and Decrees for the government of God's Church, but that it belongs wholly unto the King to do it, with the advice of his Bishops and the rest of his Clergy: then how came the Parliament to annul those Canons that were so made by the King and Clergy, because they had no vote nor consent in confirming of them? Sol. Truely I cannot answer to this Objection,  unless I should tell you what the Poet saith, Dum furor incursu, currenti cede furori, Dfficiles aditus impetus omnis habet. They wee furiously bent against them; and you know, furor arma mini∣strat: & dum regnant arma, si lent leges, all Lawes must sleep while Armes pre∣vaile: besides, you may finde those Canons, as if they had been prophetically made, fore-saw the increasing strength of Anabaptisme, Brownisme, Purita∣nisme, most likely to subvert true Protestantisme, and therefore were as equally directed against these Sectaries of the left hand, as against the Papists on the right hand; and I think the whole Kingdom now findes and feels the strength of that virulent Faction; and therefore what wonder, that they should seek to break all those Canons to pieces, and batter them down with their mighty Ordinan∣ces, for seeking to subdue their invincible errours; or else, because (as they say) the Ecclesiastical State is not an independent society, but a member of the whole, the Parliament was not so to be excluded, as that their advice and ap∣probation should not be required, to make them obligatory to the rest of the Sub∣jects of the whole Kingdom, which claim this priviledge, to be tyed to the obser∣vation of no humane Lawes, that themselves by their representatives have not consented unto. 2. As the King is intrusted by God to make Lawes for the government of the Church of Christ, so it is a rule without question,2. To grant dispensations of his own Lawes. that ejus est dispensare & absolvere, cujus est condere, he hath the like power to dispense with whom he pleaseth, and to absolve him that transgresseth, as he hath to oblige them: there∣fore our Church being for reformation the most famous throughout all the parts of the Christian world, and our King, having so just an authority to do the same, it is a most impudent scandal, full of all malice and ignorance, not to be endured by any well-affected Christian, that the new brood of the old Ana∣baptists do lay upon our Church and State, that they did very unreasonably, and unconscionably by their Lawes, grant Dispensations both for Plurali∣ties
and Non-residency,The scandals of the malici∣ous ignorants against the worthier cler∣gy. onely to further the corrupt desires of some few, to the infinite wrong of the whole Clergy, besides the hazard of many thousands of souls, the intolerable dishonour of Gods truth, and the exceeding disadvantage of Christ his Church: for, seeing God hath principally committed, and pri∣marily commended the care of his Church and service unto Kings, who are therefore to make Laws and Orders for the well governing of the same, i shall make it most evident, that they may, as they have ever done, most lawfully and more beneficially, both for Gods Church, and also for the Common-wealth, do these three things. Three special points hand∣led.1. To grant that grace and favour unto their Bishops and other Ecclesiasti∣cal persons, as to admit them of their counsel, and to undertake secular authority and civil jurisdiction. 2. To allow dispensations of Pluralities, and Non-residency, which they may most justly and most wisely do, without any transgression of the Law of God. 3. To give tolerations (where they see cause) of many things prohibited by their Law, to dispence with the transgressions, and to remit the fault of the transgressours. For 1 Point.1. Though the world relapsed from the true light, and declined from the sin∣cere Religion to most detestable superstition; yet there remained in the people certain impressions of the divine truth,The great re∣spect of the Clergy in for∣mer ages Saravia l. 2. c. 2. p. 103. 1. Among the Gentiles. Osor p. 231. De tota Syria & Paestina refert Dion. l. 37. quòd rex summi Pontifi∣cis nomen habe∣at. Strbo lib. 12 Apud Tertul. advers Valent. Hermetem le∣gimus appellari & Max. sacer∣dotem, & ma∣ximum regem. Cicero l. 2. de legibus. Diotogenes a∣pud Stob. d cit. , Aethiopes reges suos del gebant ex numer sa∣crdotum. Di odor. l 3. c. 1. Titus Vespas Pontification maximum ideo sele prosessusest accipere, ut puras servaret manus. Sution i't Tito. cap. 9. In Aricia regnum erat concretum cu sacerdotio Danae, ut iunuit Ovid De arte amandi, lib. 1. Ecce suburbanae templum nemorade Dianae, Paraiáque per gladios regna nocente manu, & Strabo lib. 5. that there was a GOD, and that this God, was religiously to be worshipped; and those men that taught the worship of that God, how fowly soever they did mistake it, were had in singular account and supereminent authority among all Nations: and as Saravia saith, they were compeers with Kings in their Government, so that nothing was done without their counsel and consent; and as Theseus was the first, that Cives Atticos è pa∣gis in rbem compulit, and put the difference betwixt Nobles, Husbandmen, and Artificers; so the Priests were always selected out of the noblest families, and were ever in all their publick counsels, as the Divines sate among the Athenians, and the South-sayers sate with the King among the Lacedemonians in all their weightiest consultations: and Strabo tells us, that the Priests of Bellona, which were in Pontus and Cappadocia (for that Goddess was honoured in both places) were regarded with the greatest honour next to the King himself: and the Ro∣mans that were both wealthy, warlike, and wise, did almost nothing without the advice and counsel of their Priests. I will omit what Valerius Maximus set∣teth down of their care of Religion, and their great respect unto their Priests, and religious persons; and I will refer you onely to what Tully writeth of this point, where he saith, that the greatest and worthiest thing in their Common-wealth, was the priviledge and preheminence of the Divines, which was joyned with the greatest authority; for they dismissed the companies and the Councels of the chiefest Empires and the greatest Potentates, when they were proposed; they restrayned them when they were concluded; they ceased from the affaires which they had in hand, if but one Divine did say the contrary; they appointed that the Consuls should depose themselves from their Magistracy; and it was in their intire power, either to give leave or not to give leave, to deale with the people, or not to deal; to repeal Laws not lawfully made, and to suffer no∣thing to be done by the Magistrate in peace or war without their leave or autho∣rity: this was their Law; (though I beleive it was not always observed by their proud Consuls, and unruly Magistrates.) Cicero de nat. deorum, l. 2. In like manner Caesar writeth of the Gaules and Britons, that they had two sorts of men in singular honour; the one was their Druides or Divines, the o∣ther was their Souldiers or men of war; and he saith, that their Druides deter∣mined of all controversies (in a manner) both private and publick; and if there were any crime committed, any murther attempted, if any controversy
about inheritance, or the bounds of lands did arise, they also did set down their Decree, and appointed the penalty: and whosoever rejected their order, or re∣fused their judgement they excommunicated him from all society, and he was then deemed of all men as an ungodly and a most graceless person. Thus did they, that had but the twilight of corrupted Nature to direct them, judge those that were most conversant with the minde and will of the gods, to be the fittest Counsellors and Judges of the actions of men: and I fear these chil∣dren of nature will rise in judgement, to condemne many of them that profess themselves to be the sons of grace, for comming so short of them in this point. 2. The Jewes also which received the oracles of God,2. Among the Jewes. were injoyned by God to yeild unto their Priests the dispensation both of dvine and humane Lawes; and the Lord enacted it by an irrevocable Law, that the judgement of the High Priest should be observed, as sacred,Deut. 17. and inviolable in all controversies; and if any man refused to submit himselfe uno it, his death must make recompence for his contumacy. And Josephus saith, Si judi∣ces nesciunt de rebus ad se delatis pronunciare, integram causam in urbem sanctam mittent, & convenientes Pontifex & Propheta & Senatus, quod visum sit,Joseph. contra Appi. lib. 2. pronun∣tient: and in his second book against Appian he saith, Sacerdotes inspectores om∣nium, judices controversiarum, punitores damnatorum constituti sunt à Moyse: The Priests were appointed by Moses to be the lookers into all things, the Judges of controversies, and the punishers of the condemned. And they were of that high esteem amongst the Jewes, that the royall blood disdained not to match in marriages with the Priests, as Jehojada married the daughter of King Jehoram,2 Chron. 22.11. and in the vacancie of Kings they had all the affaires of the King∣dome in their administration, and when they became tributaries unto the Romans after Aristobulus, the royall government was often annexed to the Priesthood: and S. Paul argueth from hence,2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9. that if the administration of death was glorious, how shall not the administration of the spirit be rather glorious? for, if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory; or otherwise it were very strange, that the Mi∣nisters of the Gospel should be deemed more base and contemptible, because their calling is far more glorious and excellent, yea, so excellent, that to all good Christians the Prophet demandeth, quàm speciosi pedes eorum?Esay. 52.7. Priests imploy∣ed in secular affaires. 1 Among the Jewes. Psal. 99.6, Priests and Prophets among the Jewes exerci∣sed secular ju∣risdiction. And for the discharging of secular imployments, we have not onely the example of the Priests and Prophets of the Old Testament, but we have also the testimony, and the practice of many godly Bishops, and Fa∣thers of the Church of Christ, under the New Testament, to justifie this truth. For, 1. Not onely Moses and Aaron that were both the Priests of the most high God, and the chiefe Judges in all secular causes, but also Joseph had his juris∣diction over the Aegyptians, Daniel had his Lieutenancie over the Babylonians, and Nehemias was a great Courtier among the Persians: and yet these secu∣lar imployments were no hinderance to them in the divine worship and service of God. So Ely and Samuel both, were both Judges and Priests together: and the most religious Princes, David, Solomon, Jehosaephat, and others, used the Priests and Levites at their command in the civill government of their Dominions; for, when David caused all the Levites to be numbered from 30 years old and upward, and that they were found to be 38 thousand; he appointed 24 thou∣sand of them to he over-seers of the works of the house of the Lord, and he or∣dained the other six thousand to be Judges and Rulers in all Israel;1 Chron. 23.4. and so did Jehosaphat likewise;2 Chron. 19.11. The place ex∣plained for though the last verse of the said chapter seems to put a difference betwixt the Civil matters and the Ecclesiastical affaires; yet it is rightly answered by Saravia, that this errour riseth from a misconceived opi∣nion of their government, as if it were the same with the government of some of our reformed Churches, which was nothing less; for if you compare
this place with the 26. chap.Sigonius legit, super opera quae ad regis officia pertinent. l. 6. p. 315. 1 Sam. c. 8. of the 1. Chron vers. the 29, 30, and 32. you may easily finde, that the Kings service, or the affairs of the King, doth not signifie the civil matters, or the politique affairs of the Kingdom, over which Amarias here, and Hashabia and his brethren there (1 Chron. 26.30.) were appointed the chief Rulers; but it signifieth those things which pertained to the King's right, betwixt him and his subjects, (as those things that were described by Samuel, and were retained, and perhaps augmented, either by the consent of the people, or the incroachment of the succeeding Kings, as the special rights of the Kings) over which Zebadias the son of Ismael was appointed by Jehosa∣phat to be the Ruler; and the business of the Lord is fully set down, vers. 10. to be not onely the Church affairs, but all the affairs of the Kingdom, between bloud and bloud,Versu 10. between Law and Commandment, Statutes and Judgements, o∣ver which the Priests and Levites were appointed the ordinary Judges, and the Interpreters of the Law, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical; for the Lord saith plain∣ly,Ezech 44 23. Vide locum. Sigon ait: & circa judicium sanguinis ipsi insistent. 2. In the Pri∣mitive Church Salmer tract 18. in parabol. hominis divitis lo. 16. num. 1. that every question and controversie shall be determined according to the cen∣sure of the Priests; which certainly he would never have so prescribed, nor these holy men have thus executed them, if these two Functions had been so averse, and contrary the one to the other, that they could never be exercised together by the same man. 2. In the Primitive times under the Gospel, Salmeron saith, that in the time of S. Augustine, as himself teacheth, Episcopi litibus Christianorum vacare so∣lebant, the Bishops had so much leisure, that they were wont to judge of the quar∣rels of Christians: yet they did not so spend their time in judging their conten∣tions, that they neglected their Preaching and Episcopal function: and now that they do judge in civil causes, consuetudine Ecclesiae introductum est, ut pec∣cata caverentur.Bellar. de Rom. Pont. l. 5. c. 9. And Bellarmine saith, Non pugnat cum verbo Dei, ut unus homo sit Princeps Ecclesiasticus & politicus simul, it is not against the Word of God, that the same man should be an Ecclesiastical and a Secular Prince together, when as the same man may both govern his Episcopacy and his Principality. And therefore we read of divers men;Theod. l. 2. c. 30. that were both the Princes and the Bishops of the same Cities: as the Archbishop of Collen, Mentz, Triers, and other Ger∣man Princes,Henr. of Hun∣tingson, Hist. Angl. that are both Ecclesiastical Pastours, and great secular Princes. And Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury was for a long while Viceroy of this Kingdom: And so Leo. 9. Julius 2. Philip Archbishop of York, Adelboldus. Innocnt 2. Collenutius and Blondus, and many others, famous and most wor∣thy Bishops, both of this Island and of other Kingdoms, have undertaken and exercised both the Functions. And Saint Paul recommendeth secular busines∣ses and judgements unto the Pastours of the Church,Aug. tom. 3. de aerib. Me∣nach. c. 29. as S. Augustine testifieth at large; where he saith, I call the Lord Jesus a witness to my soul, that for so much as concerneth my commodity. I had rather work every day with my hands, and to reserve the other houres free to read, pray, and exercise my self in Scriptures, then to sustain the tumultuous perplexities of other mens causes, in determining secular Controvesies by judgement, or taking them up by ar∣bitrement: to which troubles the Apostle hath appointed us, not of his own will, but of his that spake in him. And as this excellent Father, that wrote so many worthy volumes, did notwithstanding imploy no small part of his time in these troublesome affairs, so S. Ambrose twice undertook an honourable Em∣bassie so Valentinian the Emperour unto the Tyrant Maximus.Socrat. Eccl hist. lib 7. And Ma∣rutha Bishop of Mesopotamia was sent by the Romane Emperour, an Ambassa∣dour to the King of Persia, in which imployment he hath abundantly benefit∣ted both the Church and the Emperour: and we read of divers famous men that undertook divers Functions, and yet neither confounded their offices, nor neglected their duties; for Spiridion was an husbandman, and a Bishop of the Church: a Pastour of sheep, and a feeder of soules; and yet none of the anci∣ent Fathers, that we read of, either envyed his Farm, or blamed his neglect in his Bishoprick; but they admired his simplicity, and commended his sanctity:
they were not of the spirit of our hypocritical Saints. And Theodoret writeth,Theodor. lib. 4. c. 13. that one James Bishop of Nisib, was both a Bishop and a Captain of the same City, which by the help of his God he manfully preserved against Sapor King of Persia. And Ensebius Bishop of Samosis, managing himself with all warlike habiliments, ranged along throughout all Syria, Phaenicia, and Palaestina; and as he passed, erected Churches, and ordained Priests and Deacons, and peformed such other Ecclesiastical pensions, as pertained to his office in all places; and I fear me the iniquity of our time will now call upon all Bishops, that are able, to do the like: to preach unto our people, and to fight against God's enemies, (that have long laboured to overthow his Church) as we read of some Bishops of this Kingdom, that have been driven to do the like: and if these men might do these things without blame, as they did, why may not the same man be both a Bishop and the Kings Counsellour? both a Preacher in the pulpit, and a Justice of the peace on the Bench? and yet the callings not con∣founded, though the same man be called to both offices; for you know the office of a Lawyer is different from the office of a Physitian, and the office of a Physitian as different from the duty of a Divine; and yet as Saint Luke was an excellent Physitian, and a heavenly Evangelist; and S. Paul as good a Lawyer, as he was a Preacher, (for he was bred at the feet of Gamaliel) as was Master Calvin too, as good a Civilian as he was a Divine (for that was his first profession,) so the same man may, as in many places they do, and that without blame, both play the part of a Physitian to cure the body, and of a Di∣vine to instruct the soul; and therefore why not of a Lawyer? when as the Preachers duty, next to the teaching of the faith in Christ, is to perswade men to live according to the rules of Justice; and Justice we cannot understand without the knowledge of the Laws, both of God and men; and if he be ob∣liged to know the Law, why should he be thought an unfit man to judge accor∣ding to the Law? But. CHAP. IX. Sheweth a full answer to four special Objections that are made against the Civil jurisd ctions of Ecclesiastical persons; their abilities to discharge these offices, and desire to benefit the Common-wealth; why some Councils inhibited these offices unto Bishops; that the King may give titles of honour unto his Clergy; of this title, LORD, not unfitly given to the Bishops, proved; the objections against it answered, six special reasons why the King should confer honours and favours upon his Bishops and Clergy. 1. IF you say the office of a Preacher requireth the whole man, and where the whole man is not sufficient to one duty, for ?  2 Cor. 2.16. then certainly one man is never able to supply two charges. I answer, that this indefinite censure is uncertainly true,  and most certainly false, as I have proved unto you before, by many examples of most holy men, that discharged two offices with great applause, and no very great difficul∣ty to themseves; for though Saint Matthew could not return to his trade of Pub∣lican, because that a continued attendance on a secular business, would have taken him from his Apostolate, and prove an impediment to his Evangelick mi∣nistration; yet Saint Peter might return to his nets, as he did, without blame; because that a temporary imployment, and no constant secession, can be no hin∣derance
to our Clericall office;No man is al∣wayes able to do the same thing. when there is no man that can so wholly ad∣dict himselfe to any kinde of art, trade, or faculy, but that he must sometimes interchangeably afford himselfe leisure, either for his recreation, Ʋt quemvis animo possit sufferre laborem; or the recollection of strength and abilities to dis∣charge his office by the undertaking of some other exercise, which is to many men their chiefest recreation; as you see, the husband-mans change of labour doth still inable him to continue in labour; and the Courtier cannot alwayes wait in the same posture, nor the Scribe alwayes write, nor the Divine alwayes study;Change of la∣bour is a kinde of recreation. but there must be an exchange of his actions for the better perfor∣mance of his chiefest imployment: and that time, which either some Gentle∣men, Citizens, or Courtiers spend in playing, hawking, or hunting, onely for their recreation, the better to inable them to discharge their offices, why may not the Divine imploy it in the performance of any other duty, different, but not destructive, or contradictory to his more special function? especially con∣sidering that the discharging of those good duties, to give counsell, to do justice, to releive the distressed, and the like, are more acceptable recreations unto them (as it was meate and drink to Christ to do his fathers will) then the other fore-na∣med exercises are or can be to any others;John. 4.34, and considering also, that where the Bishop or Pastor hath great affairs, and much charge, he may have great helpes, and much aid to assist him. You will allow us an hour for our recreati∣on, why, will you not allow us that hour to do justice? Ob. 2.2. If you say, they are spirituall men, and therefore cannot have so great a care of the temporall State, and Common-wealth. Sol. 1. The abi∣lity of the Clergy to ma∣nage civil af∣faires Ignat. Epist. ad Ephes. .I answer, that as now the Common-wealth is the Church, and the Church is the Common wealth, and have as good interest therein, and better we hope then many of the Common-wealth have in the Church; and they should be as able to unde stand what is beneficiall to the Common-wealth as any other; for Ig∣natius saith, that Kings ought to be served by wise men, and by those that are of great understanding, , and not to be attend∣ed upon by weak and simple men; and if Kings must be served by such men, then certainly the service of God is not to be performed by Weavers and Tay∣lors, and others like Jeroboams Priests; but it will require men of great abili∣ties, learning, and understanding in all businesses whatsoever, such as are in∣deed well able to discourse De quolibet ente: And they have very unprefitably consumed themselves with their time in their head-pain vigils, and heart-break∣ing studies, in traversing over all the Common-wealths of the world, if they have learned nothing,The Clergy of better abilities to benefit the Common-wealth, then many others that now sway it. whereby they may benefit their own Common-wealth, or do understand less what belongeth unto the good of their Countrey especi∣ally in matters of equity and right, then illiterate Burgesses, and meere Chap∣men: for, if you read but the bookes of the Prophets, you shall finde how plentifull they are in the precepts of peace, in the policies of war, and in the best counsels for all things which concern the good of the Common-wealth: and do not the Divines read the Histories of all, or most other Common-wealths? how else shall they be inabled to propose unto their people the exam∣ple of Gods justice upon the wicked, and his bounty and favour unto the obser∣vers of his Lawes, throughout all ages, and in all places of this world? and will you deprive the King of the assistance of such instruments for the govern∣ment of his people,The imploy∣ment of the Bishops in ci∣vil affaires, is the good of the Common wealth. that are stronger then any one man can rule, and would quickly despise Heaven, and destroy the earth, if their consciences were not aw∣ed with Religion? or would you damme up the channels of those benefits that should flow from them to the Common-wealth? for it is not the addition of any honour to the calling of a Bishop, but the King's interest, and the peoples good that is aimed at, when we assert the capacity of the Clergy to discharge the offices of the most publique affaires;Petrus Blesen∣sis, ep. 84. because, as Petrus Blesensis saith, it is the office of the Bishops to instruct the King to righteousness, to be a rule of San∣ctity, and sobriety unto the Court, to mix the influencies of Religion with the
designes of State, and to restrain the malignity of the ill-disposed people; and all histories do relate unto us, that when pious Bishops were imployed in the King's Counsels, the rigour of the Lawes was abated, equity introduced, the cry of the poor respected, their necessities relieved, the liberties of the Church preserved, pride depressed, religion increased, the devotion of the Laity multi∣plied, the peace of the Kingdom flourished, and the tribunals were made more just and merciful, then now they be. And therefore the sacred histories do record of purpose, how the people of God never adventured upon any action of weight and moment, before they had well consulted with the Priests and Prophets, as you see in the example of Ahab,No Nation at∣tempted any great matter without the advice of their Priests. that was none of the best Kings, yet would not omit this good duty: and such was the custom of all other Countries, wheresoever there was any religion or reverence of God; Quae enim est respub. ubi ecclesiastici primum non habeant locum in comitiis & publicis de salute reipub. deliberationibus? for which is that Common-wealth, where the Ecclesiastical persons had not the first place in all meetings and publique consultations about the welfare of the Common-wealth? as in Germany the three spiritual Electours are the first; in France the three Ecclesiastical persons were the first of all the Peers; in England (till this un∣happy time) the two Archbishops, and in Poland as many, were wont to have the chiefest place, and not unworthily: quia aequum est,Apud Euseb. Pamphilam, l. 11. Strabo l. 4. Caesar de bello Gallico lib. 6. antestent in concilio qui antestant prudentiâ, nec videtur novisse res humanas, nisi qui divinas cognitas habet; as the Indian said unto Socrates: and therefore the Chaldaans, the Aegyptians, the Graecians, the Romanes, the French, and the Britons, thought it alwayes ominous to attempt any notable thing in the Common-wealth, without the sad and sage advice of their Priests and Prophets; for they knew the neglect of God was never left without due revenge; and though their false gods were no gods, yet the true God was found to have been a sharp revenger of the con∣tempt of the false gods; because that to them they were proposed for the true gods, and they believed them so to be, as Lactantius sheweth: and therefore all antiquity that bare any reverence to any Deity, shewed all reverence and respect unto the teachers of his religion; but now men desire to throw learning over the Bar, because it should not discover the ignorance of the Bench; or rather piety is excluded, because it should not reprove their iniquity: And the Clergy must not sit on the seat of judgement, that the Laity may do injustice without controul; or perhaps revenge themselves upon their Ministers on the Bench, for reproving their vices in the Church: so the Devil gaineth, whatso∣ever piety loseth by their depression. 2. As the Clergy-men are as able,2. The desire of the Clergy to do good to the State. so they are as willing and as careful to provide for the good of the State, as any other; for themselves are members of the Common-wealth, and they are appointed by God to be watchmen and over∣seers, to foretel what mischiefes or felicities are like to ensue, and to admonish as well the Prince as the people, of such things as are to be avoided and to be performed; which they cannot do, if they be strangers from the conscience, and excluded from the conference of such things that are to be done in the Com∣mon wealth. Therefore, seeing the good of the Common-wealth is their own good,The Church of Christ and a Christian common-wealth sail together. and the good of the Church is the good of the Common-wealth, when a Chri∣stian Common-wealth and the Church of Christ are imbarked in the same Vessel, and do sayle together with the same successe, aiming both at the same Port; and God hath commanded his Ministers to be no lesse solicitous for the one, then the other: it is incredible to think that a godly Minister should have lesse care of the Common-wealth, then the best of our common Burgo-Masters; and it is impossible to conceive any true reason, why the Bishops and Pastours above all others, should be excommunicated out of their assemblies, and exclu∣ded from their Parliaments, and other civil Courts; when it doth most chiefly concern them, to see unto the wellfare of their flock, not onely in such things
as concern the safety of their souls,A miserable thing, that the Ministers of the Gospel should be made more slaves, then the basest cal∣ling in the World. but also in all other things that may pertain, either to the security of their bodies, or the quietness of their estates; because this is a thing utterly against the equal right of all Subjects, that the Ministers of the Gospel, being Subjects unto the king, and Citizens of the Commonwealth should have nothing to do in the Government thereof, but must be governed, not as strangers, that may have admission, but as slaves with an impossibility to be re∣ceived into the civil administration af any matter: and their exclusion is as pre∣judicial to the king and kingdome, as it is injurious unto the Clergy; when they must be deprived of the grave advice and faithful service of so learned and religious assistants for the government of the people, as the reverend Bishops and devout Doctors have ever been. Ob. 3. Act. 15. S. Cyprian pu∣nished Gemini∣us Faustinus for undertaking the Executor ship of Gemini∣us Victor. ep. 66. Sol.3. If you say the sixth Canon of the Apostles, the seventh Canon of the Coun∣cil of Calcedon, and Saint Cyprian in his Epistle to the Priests of Furnam, do forbid these things in Ecclesiastical persons; and so many Fathers have accor∣dingly refused these civil imployments and jurisdictions. I answer briefly, that while the Emperours were Heathens, and neither the Kings nor their Kingdoms Christian, but their counsels were often held for wi∣cked ends, private gain, or privy deceit, for bloudy murthers, or horrid treason the Clergy were inhibited, and the godly Bishops were ashamed to sit in such ungodly assemblies, that would neither be converted to Christ, nor reformed from their sins; and so now, when the Puritan faction prevailed in our Parlia∣ment,Good to be excluded from the counsel of the wicked. and our Sectaries disdained in their counsels, to take the counsel of Religi∣on, and resolved to banish GOD from their assemblies, to make the Church and Church-men a publick scorn unto the wicked, and the Common-wealth a private gain to every broken Citizen, and every needy Varlet; I say, happy are those Bishops that are excluded, and well it is for those Ministers that are fur∣thest off from such godless and irreligious, not Parliament, but Parricides; even as the Psalmist testifieth, Blessed is the man that hath not sate in the seat of the scornful;Psal. 1.1. and therefore if they had not been excluded, I am sure, that as the case now standeth, they would have seceded themselves. But when the civil Magistrates became Christians, and the Christians consul∣ted with God in all their actions, then it was no indecorum for the servants of Christ to be seen in the Congregation of Saints, and to sit as Judges among gods, where the judgement shall pass for the glory of God; neither is it any prejudice to our holy calling,The giving of Caesar's due doth not hin∣der us to give to god his due to give unto Caesar those things that are Caesar's, and that we owe unto him, as our service and our counsel, and whatsoever else lyeth in us to do for the good of the Common-wealth, as we are his Subjects and the Tenants of the Common-wealth: nor do the rendering of these things to Cae∣sar any wayes hinder us to give unto God the things that are God's, and that we owe to God, as our prayers and our care over God's flock, as we are Chri∣stians and Bishops over the Church of Christ; but the same man, if he will be faithful, may justly perfom both duties, without giving over or neglecting either And when our men shall return to God, and take him along with them into their counsels, and desire the assistance of his servants (as I hope they will have grace to do) I assure my self the Reverend Bishops will not refuse to do them ser∣vice. But you will say the Emperours were good Christians, when the Council of Calcedon put out their Canons. I answer, the Emperours were, but all Kings were not: besides, that Canon cleares it self; for it sheweth that Clergymen did at that time undertake secular imployments, Propter lucra turpia, ministerium Dei parvi pendentes, for gaine, neglecting their duty; and therefore the Council forbade all Clergy-men, negotiis secularibus se immiscere; because the Apostle saith, ;2 Tim. 2.4. no man that warreth, intangleth or insnareth himself with the affairs of this life: and so neither the Apostle nor the Council doth absolute∣ly forbid all secular affairs, as inconsistent with this function; but as the Coun∣cil
of Arles saith,Concil. Arelai. Ca. 14. The words of the Canon ex∣plained, Clericus turpis lucri gratia aliquod genus negotiationis non exerceat, so they forbid all Clerks to meddle with any business for the love of gain, and filthy lucre, that might insnare him to neglect his duty: or as the Canon of the Apostle saith, , a Bishop should not assume unto himself, or seeke after worldly cares, but if either necessity or authori∣ty impose them on him, I see not how he can refuse them, because there is no absolute prohibition of such imployments in any place, but as it might be a hin∣derance to discharge his office: or otherwise Saint Paul's Tent-making was as much against the calling of an Apostle, as the sitting in a secular tribunal is a∣gainst the office of a Bishop; because there is no reason we should deny that benefit to a publick necessitated community, which we will yeeld to a private personal necessity. And so indeed these very men that cry out against our Bishops,The Presbyte∣rians will be the directors of all affaires. and other grave Prelates of the Church, for the least medling in these civil affaires, do not onely suffer their own Preachers to strain at a gnat, but also to swallow a Camel; when M. Henderson, Marshal, Case, and the rest of their new inspired Pro∣phets shall sit as Presidents in all their Counsels, and Committees of their chief∣est affaires and consultations, either about War or Peace, or of any other ci∣vil cognizance; how these things can be answered, to deny that to us, which they themselves do practise, I cannot understand, when as the light of Nature tells us. Quod tibi vis fieri, mihi fac, quod non, mihi noli: Sic potes in terris vivere jure poli.Ʋnde Baldus jubet, ut quis in alios non aliter judicet, quàm in se judicari vellet. And therefore when as there is no politick Philosophy, no imperial constitution, nor any humane invention, that doth or can so strictly binde the consciences of men unto subjection and true obedience, as the Doctrine of the Gospel; and no man can perswade the people so much unto it, as the Preachers of Gods word, (as it appeareth by this Rebellion, perswaded by the false Preachers) because the Prin∣ciples of Philosophy, and the Laws of many nations do permit many things to be done against tyrants, which the Religion of Christ and the true Bishops of Gods Church do flatly inhibit;How requisite it is for Kings to delegate ci∣vil affaires un∣to their Cler∣gie. it is very requisite and necessary for all Christi∣an Kings, both for the glory of God, their own safety, and the happiness of the Common-wealth, to defend this their own right, and the right of the Clergy, to call them into their Parliaments and Counsels, and to demise certain civil causes and affairs to the gravest Bishops, and the wisest of the Ministers, and not suffer those Rebellious Anabaptists and Brownists, that have so disloyally la∣boured to pull off the Crown from their Kings head, to bury all the glory of the Church in the dust, to bring the true Religion into a scorn, and to deprive the King of the right, which is so necessary for his safety, and so useful for the Go∣vernment of his people, that is, the service of his Clergy in all civil Courts and Councils. And as it is the Kings right to call whom he pleaseth into his Parliaments and Councils,That it is the Kings right to give titles of honour to whom he plea∣seth. and to delegate whom he will to discharge the office of a civil or Ec∣clesiastical magistrate, or both, wheresoever he appoints, within his Realms and Dominions: so it is primarily in his power and authority and his regal right, to give titles of honour and dignity to those officers and magistrates whom he chooseth: for, though the Barbarians acknowledge no other distinction of Persons, but of Master and Servants, which was the first punishment for the first contempt of our Superiors;Gen. 9.25. therefore their Kings do raign and domineer over their Subjects, as Masters do over their servants; and the Fathers of Fa∣milies have the same authority over their Wives and Children,Saravia c. 28. p. 194. as ouer the slaves and vassals; and the Muscovites at the day do rule after this manner neither is the great Empire of the Turke much unlike this Government, and generally all the Eastern Kingdomes were ever of this kinde, and kept this
rule over all the Nations whom they Conquered; and many of them do still retain it to these very times. Yet our Westerne Kings whom charity hath taught better, and made them milder, and especially the Kings of this Island, which, in the sweetness of Government exceeded all other Kings,The milde go∣vernment of our Kings. (as holding it their chiefest glory to have a free people subject unto them, and thinking it more Ho∣nourable to command over a free, then a servile nation,) have conferred up∣on their subject many titles of great honour, which the Learned Gentleman M. Selden hath most Learnedly treated of: and therefore I might well be silent in this point, (and not to write Iliads after Homer) if this title of Lord, given by His Majesty unto our Bishops,Of the Title of Lord. (for none but he hath any right to give it) did not require that I should say something thereof: touching which, you must observe, that this name dominus is of divers significations, and is derived à domo, as Zanchius observeth, where every man is a Lord of that house and possessi∣on which he holdeth; and it hath relation also to a servant; so that this name is ordinarily given among the Latinists to any man that is able to keep servants: and so it must needs appear, how great is the malice, I cannot say, the ignorance, (when every school-boy knowes it) of those Sectaries that deny this title to be consistent with the calling of a Bishop, which indeed cannot be denyed to any man of any ordinary esteeme. But they will say, that it signifieth also rule and authority; and so, as it is a title of rule and Dominion, it is the invention of Antichrist, the donation of the Devill,Luke 22.25. . Matth. 16.30. and forbidden by our Saviour, where he saith, : that is, in effect, be not you called gracious Lords, or benefactors (which is the proper signification of :) there∣fore these titles of honour are not fit for the Preachers of the Gospell, to puffe them up with pride, and to make them swell above their brethren. That there is a double rule or dominion.It is answered, that if our Saviours words be rightly understood, and his meaning not maliciously perverted, neither the authority of the Bishops, nor the title of their honour is forbidden; for as  is a title of dominion, so it is fit to be ascribed to them, unto whom the Lord and author of all rule and do∣minion, hath committed any rule or Government over his People; and our Saviour forbiddeth not the same; because you may finde that there is a double rule and dominion; the one just and approved, the other tyrannicall and dis∣allowed;1 Pet. 5.3. . and the tyrannicall rule, or as S. Peter saith, , the domi∣neering authority over Gods inheritance, both Christ and his Apostles do for∣bid; but the just rule and dominion they deny not; because they must do it, , as the son of man doth it; so the manner of their rule, ; as the Kings of the Nations rule with tyranny, he prohibiteth; but, as the servants of Christ ought to rule with charity, not with austerity; with humility, and not with insolencie, he denieth not; and so he denieth not the name of Lord, as it is a title of honour and reverence, given unto them by the King, and ascribed by their people; but he forbiddeth an ambitious aspiring to it, and a proud carriage, and deportment in it; yet it may be so with you, , as it is with the son of man, whom no man can exceed in humility; and yet in his greatest humility, he saith, ye call me, , Master and Lord: , and ye say well, for so I am: John. 13.13. And therefore he forbad not this title no otherwise then he forbad them to be Fathers, Doctors, and Masters; and I hope you will confess he doth not inhibit the Children to call them Fathers that begat them, nor forbid us to call them Doctors, unto whom the Lord himselfe hath given the name, , of Doctors in his Church, Ephes. 4.11. other∣wise we must know why S. Paul doth call himselfe the Doctor of the Gentiles, 1 Tim. 2.7. and why doth the Law command us to honour our Father and our Mother, if we may call no man Father. But Christ coming not to diminish the power of Princes, nor to make it un∣lawful for Christian Kings to honour his servants, which the heathen Princes did
to the servants of God, as Nebuchadnezzar preferred Daniel among the Ba∣bylonians, and Darius advanced Mordecai among the Persians, nor to deny that honour unto his servants, which their own honest demerits, and the bounty of their gracious Princes do confer upon them; it is apparent,What Christ forbiddeth to his Ministers. that it is not the condition of these names, but the ambition of these titles and the abuse of their authority, is forbidden by our Saviour Christ; For, as Elias and Elizaeus in the old Testament suffered themselves with no breach of humi∣lity to be called Lords, as where Abdias,3 Reg. 18.1. a great officer of King Ahab saith, art not thou my Lord Elias? and the Shunamite called Elizaus Lord, 4 Reg. 4.16. So in the new Testament Paul and Barnabas that rent their cloaths when the people ascribed unto them, more then humane ho∣nour; yet refused not the name of Lords,Act. 16.30. . when it was given them by the keeper of the prison, that said, Lords, what shall I do to be saved? which title certainly they would never have endured, if this honour might not be yielded, and this title received by the Ministers of the Gospel: and Saint Peter tells us, that Christian women, if they imitate Sarah (that obeyed Abraham.) whom he propounded to them as a pattern, may, and should call their husbands, though mean Mechanicks, Lords: or else he proposeth this example to no pur∣pose; and therefore me thinks they should be ashamed, to think this honour may be afforded to poor Trades-men, and to deny it to those eminent pillars, and chief governours of God's Church. And as the Scripture gives, not onely others the like eminent, and more significant titles of honour unto the governours of the Church, (as when it saith, they are , Presidents; , Ru∣lers; , Princes; as where the Psalmist saith, instead of thy Fathers, thou shalt have children, whom thou mayest make Princes in all lands, which the best interpreters do expound of the Apostles and Bishops, that are cal∣led the Princes of God's Church,Origen ho. 19. in Matth. Hier. in Psal. 45.16. but also giveth and alloweth this very title of Lord uno them, as I shewed before; so the fathers of the Primitive Church did usually ascribe the same one to another, as Saint Hierom writing to Saint Augustine saith, Domine verè sancte, and the Letters sent to Julius Bishop of Rome had their superscription, , To our most blessed Lord.Sozom. lib. 3. c. 23. Nazian. in ep. ad gr. Nyssen Theodor l. 1. c. 4. & 5. l. c. 9. And Nazianzen saith, Let no man speak any untruth of me, nor , of the Lords the Bishops: and in all antiquity as Theodoret sheweth, this title of Lord is most frequently ascribed unto the Bishops: Saint Chrysostom in Psal. 13. as he is cited by Baronius, Anno 58. n. 2. saith, that Hereticks have learned of the Devil to deny the due titles of honour unto their Bishops: neither is it strange, that he which would have no Bishops, should deny all honour unto the Bishops; but they can be contented to transfer this honour, though to cover their hypocrisie in another title, that shall be as Emperour instead of King, from the Episcopacy to the Presbytery: so that indeed it is not the honour which they hate, but the Persons of the Bishops that are honoured. Therefore, though for mine own particular, I do so much under value the vanity of all titles, that we e it not the duty of the people to give it, more then the desire of the Bishops to have it, I should have spared all this Discourse: yet seeing it is the right of Kings to bestow honours, and it is an argument of their love to Christ, to honour them that honour God, to magnifie the order of their Religion, and to account the chief Ministers of the Gospel among the chief States of the Land, I could not pass it over in silence, but shew you how it belongs to him to give this honour to whom he will: and because this dignity cannot be given to all that are in the same order, it is wisely provided by the King, that the whole order or Ministry should be honoured in those few,The whole or∣der honoured in few. whose learning and wisdome he hath had most use and experience of, or is otherwise well in∣formed thereof; and it is no small wonder unto me, that any learned man should be so blinded with this errour, as any wayes to oppose this truth, or that any Christian should be like the sons of Jacob, so transported with envy, when they see any of their brethren made more honourable then themselves, for they
ought to thinke themselves honoured in the honour of their brethren;when the lord Bishops are down, the Lords Tempo∣ral shall not continue long, for as Geneva put away their Bishop, their Prince: so the Cantons and Switzers put a∣way all Lords. A just judge∣ment of God, that they which will have no spiri∣tual Lords, should not be any temporall Lords, but should be as little regarded by their crea∣tures, as they regard the ser∣vants of their Creator. Six special rea∣sons, why the King should confer his sa∣vours and ho∣nours upon the Bishops. 1 Reason. but that, pride, is such a beast, that thinketh himself the most worthy, and envy is such a monster, that cannot endure any happiness to any other. And that which makes me wonder most of all, is to see those Lords, whose honours scarce saw the age of a man, and some pretending great loyalty to His Majesty, and wishing happiness to His posterity, so far yeilding to the mis-guided Faction, to darken the glory of Gods Church, and 10 undervalue Christs Mi∣nisters, as to obliterate that dignity, and rase out those titles which are inherent to the Ministry from the foundation of the Church, and are ascribed unto the Bishops by the same Majesly that honoured them; and for some by-respect and private ends to perswade the King, to desert the Church, to leave the Prelates in the suds, their honour to be laied and buried in the dust, and their revenues to be devoured by the enemies of all Godliness. But do these men thinke that blessings come from God; or that this is the way for God to bless the King, or themselves, or this Kingdome, to vilifie those that honour God, and of whom Christ directly saith, He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that despiseth you despiseth me? for alas, who were more favoured, protected, and blessed by God, then Constantine, Theodosius, and the rest of those good Emperours and Kings, that gave most immunities, and conferred most dignities upon the Bishops, and Prelates of Gods Church? because that hereby they testified their love to Christ himself; and did not God withdraw his fa∣vour and protection from those kings and Potentates that neglected to protect his servants? therefore they cannot wish well unto the king, that wish him to give way to denude the Church, and to desert the defence of the Bishops. For, be∣sides many other reasons, we finde six special arguments proving, that our king, rather then any king in Europe, should uphold his Clergy, and confer his favours and honours upon them, I say, not more then upon his nobility, for that would procure hatred unto the king, envy unto them, and ruine unto all, but as well as upon any other state in this kingdome. As 1. Not onely the relation betwixt them and their Prince, as they are his faith∣ful Subjects, and he their Soveraigne King, but as he is the Lords Anointed, and the Defender of that faith which they teach and publish unto his people, for this anointing of him by God for this end, superinduceth a brother-hood betwixt the king and the Bishops, and makes him quasi unus ex nobis, and the chief guide and guardian of the Clergy; because that thereby he is mixta persona, more then a meere Lay-man,Rex inunctus non est merus Laicus, Guime∣rus, tit. 12. sect 9.33. Edw. 3. tit. Aide le Roy 2. Reason.  and hath an Ecclesiastical supreme Government, as well as the civil, and ùt oleo sancto uncti sunt, spiritualis jurisdictionis capaces sunt, and as it was said in the time of Edward the third, and therefore as in relation to the tem∣poralty, the king is supremus justiciarius totius Angliae; so in respect to the spi∣ritualty, he is as Constantine stiled himself in the Councel of Nice,  as the chief Christian Bishop among his Bishops. 2. Our Bishops and Clergy are truer and faithfuller Subjects to their Prince then any other Clergy in Christendome; because the Clergy of France and Spain, and other Popish States and Dominions, are not simply Subjects unto their king, but deny civil obedience unto their Prince, where canonical obedience commands the contrary; and you see how the Presbytery not only deny their just allegeance, but incite the people to unjust Rebellion; but the Bishops and their Clergy renounce all obedience to any other Potentate, and anathematize as ut∣terly unlawful, all resistance against our lawful Soveraigne; and in this hearty adherence to His Majesty, as they are wholly his, so they do exspect favour from none, but onely from His Highness; and yet Philip the second of Spaine, not∣withstanding he had but half the obedience of his Clergy, advised his son Philip the third to stick fast unto his Bishops, even as he had done before him; therefore our king that hath his Bishops so totally faithful unto him, hath more reason to succour them, that they be not no the object of contempt unto the vul∣gar.
3. The state of the Clergy is constantly and most really to their power, the most beneficial state to the Crown, both in ordinary and extraordinary revenues, of all others; for though their meanes is much impaired, and their charges en∣creased in many things, yet if you consider their first fruits the first year, their Tenths every year, Subsidies most years, and all other due and necessary pay∣ments to the king, I may boldly say, that computatis computandis, no state in England of double their revenue scarce renders half their payments; and now in the kings necessity for the defence of Church and Crown,Or else they are much to blame, and far unworthy to be Bishops. I hope my Bre∣thren the Bishops, and all the rest of the loyal Clergy, will rather empty them∣selves of all they have, and put it to His Majesties hands, then suffer him to want what lyeth in them, during all the time of these occasions. 4. They bestow all their labours in Gods service, continually praying for blessings upon the head of His Majesty, and his posterity; and next under god relying onely upon His favour and protection. 5. God hath laid this charge upon all Christian kings, to be our nursing fa∣thers, and to defend the faith that we preach,Esay 49.33. which cannot be done when the Bishops and Prelates are not protected; and God hath promised to bless them, so long as they discharge this duty, and hath threatned to forsake them when they forsake his Church, and leave the same as a prey to the adversaries of the Gospel. 6. Our king hath, like a pious and a gracious King, at his Coronation promi∣sed and engaged himself to do all this that is desired of him. And as for these and other reasons His Majesty should, so we do acknowledge with all thanke∣fulness that he hath and doth His best endeavour to discharge this whole duty,Quia non plus valet ad deji∣ciendumterrena mala quàm ad erigendum di∣vina tutela: Cypr. and do beleive with all confidence, that maugre all open opposition; and all se∣cret insinuation against us, He will in like manner continue his grace and favour unto the Church and Church governours unto the end: And if any, whoso∣ever they be, how great or how powerful soever, either in kingdome or in Court shall seeke to alienate the Kings heart, or diminish His affection and furtherance to protect and promote the publishers of the Gospel, (which we are confident all their malice cannot do, because the God of Heaven, that hath built his Church upon a rock, and will not turn away his face from his Anointed, will so bless our King, that it shall never be with him as it was with Zedechia, when it was not in his power to save Gods Prophet, but said unto his Princes,Jerem. 28.5. Behold he is in your hand, for the King is not he that can do any thing against you;) yet as Mordecai said to Hester, God will send enlargement and deliverance unto his Church,Hester 4.14. and they and their fathers houses that are against it, shall be destroyed; because as Saint Peter saith, we have forsaken all to become his servants, that otherwise might have served Kings with the like honour that they do, and we have lest the world to build up his Church, we put our trust under the shadow of his wings, and being in trouble we do cry unto the Lord, and therefore he will hear our cry and will helpe us, and we shall never be confounded. Amen.
CHAP. X. Sheweth, that it is the Kings right to grant Dispensatious for Plura∣lities and Non-residency; what Dispensation is; reasons for it, to tolerate divers Sects, or sorts of Religions; the foure special sorts of false professors; S. Augustines reasons for the toleration of the Jewes; toleration of Papists, and of Puritans; and which of them deserve best to be tolerated among the Protestants; and how any Sect is to be tolerated. 2. That the King may law∣fully grant his dispensation for Pluralities and Non-resi∣dency.2. WHereas the Anabaptists and Brownists of our time, with what consci∣ence I know not, cry out, that our Kings by their Lawes do unrea∣sonably, and unconscionably grant dispensations both for Pluralities and Non-residency, onely to further the corrupt desire of some few aspiring Prelates, to the infinite wrong of the whole Clergy, the intolerable dishonour of our Reli∣gion, the exceeding prejudice of Gods Church, and the lamentable hazard of many thousand soules. I say, that the Pluralities and Non-residency granted by the King, and war∣ranted by the Lawes of this Land,In Anno 112. may finde sufficient reasons to justifie them, for,In Anno 636. if you consider the first limitation of Benefices, that either Euaristus Bi∣shop of Rome, or Dionysius (as others thinke) did first assigne the precincts of Parishes,The first distri∣bution of Pa∣rishes. and appointed a certain compass to every Presbyter: and in this King∣dome Honorius Arch-bishop of Canterbury was the first that did the like, ap∣pointed the Pastorall charge and the portion of meanes accrewing from that compass, to this or that particular person; whereas before, for many years, they had no particular charge assigned, nor any Benefice allotted them, but had their Canonicall pensions and dividents, given them by the Bishop out of the common stock of the Church, according as the Bishop saw their severall deserts, for at first the greater Cities onely had their standing Pastors, and then the Countrey Villages imitating the Cities, to allow maintenance according to the abilities of the inhabitants, had men of lesser learning appointed for those places. Pluralities and Non-residency no transgres∣sion of Gods Law.Therefore this limitation of particular Parishes being meerly positive, and an humane constitution, it cannot be the transgression of a divine ordinance to have more Parishes then one, or to be absent from that one which is allotted to him, when he is dispenced with by the Law-maker to do the same; for, as it is not lawfull without a dispensation to do either, because we are to obey every ordinance of the higher power for the Lords sake; so for the higher power to dispence with both,Gods Law ad∣mitteth an in∣terpretation, not a dispen∣sation of it. is most agreeable to reason, and Gods truth; for all our Lawes are either divine, or humane: and in the divine Law, though we allow of interpretation, quia non sermoni res, sed rei sermo debet esse subjectus, be∣cause the words must be applyed to the matter, else we may fall into the heresie of those, that as Alfonsus de Castro saith, held it unlawfull upon any occasion to sweare: because our Saviour saith, sweare not at all: yet no man. King nor Pope, hath power to grant any dispensation for the least breach of the least precept of Gods Law: he cannot dispence with the doing of that which God forbiddeth to be done, nor with the omitting of that which God commandeth; but in all humane Lawes,Mans Law may be dispen∣sed with. so far as they are meerly positive and humane, it is in the power of their makers to dispence with them; and so quicquid fit dispensa∣tione superioris, non fit contra praeceptum superioris, and he sinneth neither a∣gainst
the Law, nor against his own conscience, because he is delivered from the obligation of that Law by the same authority, whereby he stood bound un∣to it. And as he that is dispensed with, is free from all sin; so the King, which is the dispenser, is as free from all fault, as having full right and power to grant His dispensations. For, seeing that all humane Lawes are the conclusions of the Law of nature, or the evidences of humane reason, shewing what things are most beneficiall to any society, either the Church or Common-wealth; and that experience teacheth us, our reason groweth often from an imperfection to be more perfect, when time produceth more light unto us, we cannot in reason deny an abrogation and dispensation to all humane Lawes, which therefore ought not to be like the Lawes of the Medes and Persians, that might not be changed;Aug. de libero arbit. l. 1. and so Saint Augustine saith, Lex humana quamvis justa sit, commutari tamen pro tempore juste potest, any humane Law, though it be never so just, yet for the time, as occasion requireth, may be justly changed: & dispensatio est ju∣ris communis relaxatio, facta cum caus cognitione ab eo,Dispensation, what it is. qui jus habet dispensan∣di; and as the Civilians say, a dispensation is the relaxation of common right, granted upon the knowledge of the cause, by him that hath the power of dispen∣sing; or as the etymologie of the word beareth, dispensare est diversa pensare,The reward of learning and vertue, how to be rendered. to dispense is to render different rewards: and the reward of learning, or of any other virtue, either in the civill, or the ecclesiasticall person, being to be rendered (as one saith) not by an Arithmeticall, but a Geometricall proportion; and the division of Parishes being (as I said before) a positive, humane Law, it cannot be denyed but the giver of honour, and the bestower of rewards, which is the King, hath the sole power and right to dispose how much shall be given to this or that particular person. If you say the Law of the King,  which is made by the advice of his whole Parliament, hath already determined what portion is fit for every one, and what service is required from him. I answer, that the voice of equity and justice tells us,  that a generall Law doth never derogate from a speciall priviledge, or that a priviledge is not op∣posite to the principles of common right, and where the Law it selfe gives this priviledge (as our Law doth it yet) envy it selfe can never deny this right unto the King, to grant his dispensation whensoever he seeth occasion; and where the Law is tacite, and faith nothing of any priviledge, yet seeing in all Lawes,The end of e∣very Law is chiefly to be respected. as in all other actions, the end is the marke that is aimed at, and this end is no other then the publique good of any society, for which the Law is made; if the King, which is the sole Law-maker, so, as I shewed in my Discovery of My∣steries, seeth this publique good better procured by granting dispensations to some particular men, doth he not performe thereby what the Law intendeth, and no wayes breake the Law of common right? as if a mans absence from his proper Cure should be more beneficiall to the whole Church,Reasons of di∣spensations. then his residence upon his Charge could possibly be, (as when his absence may be either for the recovery of his health, or to discharge the Kings Embassage, or to do his best to confute Heretiques, or to pacifie Schismes, or to consult about the Church affaires, or some other urgent cause that the Law never dreamt of when it was in making) shall not the King (whom the Lawes have intrusted with the exa∣mination of these things, and to whom the principal care of Religion, and the charge of all the People is committed by God himselfe, and the power of executing his own Lawes) have power to grant his dispensations for the same? Certainly, they that would perswade the world that all Lawes must have such force, that all dispensations are transgressions of them, (as if generall rules should have no exceptions) would manacle the Kings hands, and binde his pow∣er in the chaines of their crooked wills, that he should not be able to do that good, which God, and Right, and Law it selfe do give him leave; and their envy
towards other mens grace,How God doth diversly bestow his gifts. Matth. 25.15. Gen. 43.34. is a great deale more, then either the grace of humi∣lity, or the love of truth in them; for doth not God give five talents to some of his servants, when he gives but one to some others? and did not Joseph make Benjamins messe five times so much as any of his brethren's? and have not some Lords, six, or eight or ten thousand pounds a year, and some very good men in the Common-wealth, and perhaps higher in God's favour, not ten pounds a year? and shall not the King double the reward of them that deserve it in the Church of God? or shall he be so curbed and manacled, that he shall neither alter nor dispense with his own Law, though it be for the greater glo∣ry unto God, and the greater benefit both to the Church and Common-wealth? Besides, who can deny, but that some mens merits, virtue, paines, and learning, are more worthy of two Benefices, then many others are of one? and when in his younger time he is possessed of a small Benefice, he may perchance afterwards, when his years deserve better, far easier obtain another little one to keep with it, then get (what I dare assure you, he would desire much ra∣therFor who would not ra∣ther chuse one Living of an 100 l. a year then two of 50 l. a piece.) one Living of equall value to them both: and shall the unlearned zeal of an envious minde so far prejudice a worthy man, that the King's lawful right shall be censured, and his power questioned and clipped, or traduced by this ignorant Zelot? I will blesse my self from them, and maintain it before all the world, that the King's dispensations for Pluralities, Non-residency, and the like Priviledges, not repugnant to common right, are not against Law; nor the giving or taking of them upon just causes against conscience: but what the vio∣lence of this viperous brood proclaimeth an intolerable offence, we dare warrant both with good reason and true Divinity to be no sin, no fault at all, but an un∣doubted portion of the King's right, for the greater benefit both of the Church and State, and the greater glory unto God himself. The Author's Petition to His Majesty.And therefore (most gracious King) we humbly desire your Majesty, suffer not these children of Apollyon to pull this flower out of your Royal Crown, to abridge you of your just right of granting dispensations for Pluralities and Non-residency (which the Lawes of your Land do yet allow you) and which they la∣bour to annul, to darken the glory of God's Church, and to bring your Clergy, by depriving them of their meanes and honour, into contempt, lest that, when by one and one, they have robbed you of all your rights, they will fairly salute you, as the Jews did Christ, Haile King of the Jewes, when God knows they hated him, and stript him of all power, (I speak not of his Divinity) either to govern them, or to save himself. 3. The tolera∣tion of divers Sects and sorts of religions.3. As the King hath right and power to grant his dispensations both of grace and of justice, of grace when it is merely of the King' Princely favour, as in le∣gitimations and the like, and of justice when the King findeth a just cause to grant it; so likewise it is in the King's power and right to remit any offence, (that is, the mulct or penalty) and to absolve the offender from any, or all the trans∣gressions of his own Lawes; from the transgression of God's Law, neither King, nor Pope, nor Priest, nor any other can formally remit the fault, and absolve transgressors, but as God is the Law-giver, so God alone must be the forgiver of the offence;Mar. 2.7. so the Jewes say, who can forgive sins but God onely? Yet, as God which gives the Law can lawfully remit the sin, and forgive the breach of the Law,As David par∣doned Absolon, and Solomon Abiathar. so the King, which makes these positive Lawes cannot be denyed this power, to pardon when he seeth cause, or is so pleased, the offenders of his Lawes; as you see they do many times grant their pardons for the most hay∣nous faults and capital crimes, as treasons, murders, felonies, and the like: and if they may grant their pardons for the breach of the Law, and remit the mulct imposed for the transgression thereof, it is strange if they should not have right to dispense with whom they please, when they see cause, from the bond of the Law: and therefore, we are to discuss how far the King, (in these Lawes of the Church) may give exemptions and tolerations unto them, whose consciences
cannot submit themselves to the observation of the established Laws;Christ bid∣deth that the ares should grow. Matth. 13.30. And the Apostle saith, . there must be here∣sies: therefore there must be a toleration of divers Sects. 1 Cor. 11.19. Four special sorts of false Professors. 1. Jewes Whitak. against Campian, trans∣lated by Ma∣ster Stoke, p. 311. With what cautions the Jewes are to be suffered. for see∣ing all men are not of the same faith, nor do profess the same Religion; and it is the nature of all men to dislike that which themselves will not profess, and if opportunity serve to root out that which they dislike; it is requisite it should be shewed, how far a prudent and a pious Prince may grant a toleration (the Law in terminis not forbidding it) unto any of these Sects that may be com∣morant within his Kingdomes. Touching which, I say that besides dissembling hypocrites, and prophane worldlings, that have no faith, nor any other Religion, but the shadow of that Re∣ligion, whatsoever it is, which is profest wheresoever they are, there may be in any Kingdome Jewes, Turkes, Papists, Puritans, and the like; or to call them otherwise, Idolaters, Hereticks, Schismatickes, &c. And 1. For the Jewes, though they have many things in their Religion, which will ever alienate them from the Papists, yet they have free leave to use their ancient Ceremonies in Rome, saith Doctor Whitaker; and it is well known, that many pious Princes have permitted them to dwell, and to exercise their own Religion in this kingdome; the old Jury in London is so called, because it was allotted for their abode; and the Lawes of many Christian Emperours have in like sort permitted them to do the like in their Dominions, but with those cautions and limitations that Moses prescribed unto the Jewes, to be observed with the Heathens and Idolaters that dwelt amongst them; that is, neither to make marriages with them, nor to communicate with them in their Religion. And Saint Augustine is reported to be so favourable towards them, that he al∣leadgeth several reasons for their toleration. As 1. That above and before others they had the promise of salvation;Deut. 7.3. Exod. 23.32. Doctor Covel. c. 14. p. 199. 1 Reason for their tolerati∣on. Rom. 11.24, 25. 2 Reason. Psal. 59.11. and therefore though some of the branches be cut off, and the case of the rest be most lamentable, yet not altogether desperate and incurable, if we consider what the Apostle setteth down, of their conversion and re-unition unto the good right o∣live tree. 2. That the Prophet David speaking of them, made that prayer unto God, Slay them not, O Lord, lest my people forget it, but scatter them abroad among the Heathen, and put them down, O Lord, our defence, for many excellent ends; as first; that their being scattered among the Christians, might shew both the cle∣mency and severity of God, towards us mercy and clemency, and towards them justice and severity, which may likewise happen, unto us if we take not heed, as the Apostle bids us, Be not high minded but fear: and secondly,Rom. 11.20. We may not force the Jews to beleive. that being a∣mong the Christians, they might the sooner at all times by their charity and prayers be reduced, the more willingly to imbrace the faith of Christ, when as un∣willingly we may neither compel them, nor take their children to be baptized from them. And therefore as the Princes of this Realm, for divers causes hurt∣ful to their State, have banished them out of their Dominions: so if they see good cause to permit them (as time may change the condition of things) they may do, as by their counsel they shall be advised, either the one or the other, to receive them or reject them without offence; because we finde no special precept or direction in Gods Word either to banish or to cherish them in any kingdome. 2. For the Turks, the reasons are not much unlike,2 Turkes. though something diffe∣rent, and in my judgement no less tolerable then the other, because somewhat nearer to the Christian faith; therefore I leave them to the Laws of each king∣dome, to do as the wisedome of the Prince shall think fit. 3 Papists.3. For the Papists the case is far otherwise with them, then either with the Turks or Jews; because, 1. They profess the same faith, quoad essentialia, the same Creeds, the same Gospel, and the same Christ as we do. 2. It is not denyed by the best of our Divines, but that they together with us do constitute the same Catholick Church of Christ, though they be sick and
corrupted, yet not dead; and we strong and sound, yet not unspotted mem∣bers of the same; as I have more fully shewed in my book of the true Church. 3. It is not agreed upon by all our Divines, that they are Idolaters, though they be in great errours, and implunged in many superstitions; because every Church in errour, though never so dangerous, is not so desperate, as that Church which is Idolatrous; or be it granted, (which some of our Protestants will not admit) that they were Idolaters;Carol. Sigon. l. 5. c. 11. p. 274. yet seeing not onely seaven speciall sorts of heresies, as 1. the Sadducees. 2. the Scribes. 3. the Pharisees. The Hemero-baptists, such as baptized themselves every day. 5. The Esseni, which Josephus calleth Es∣saei. 6. The Nazarites. And 7. the Herodians; whereof some denied the resurre∣ction, and the being of Angels and spirits; but also Idolaters and heathens that knew not God, but worshipped the Devill instead of God, were not inhi∣bited to dwell and inhabit among the Jewes (of whose Religion notwithstanding God was as carefull to preserve the purity of it, and as jealous to keep them from Idolatry, as of any Nation that then or ever after lived upon the earth) it is no question, but if it please the King, permission may be granted them to exercise their own Religion, not publickely and authoritativè, equally with the Protestant,Grand Rebell. c. 1. p. 5. &. 6. but quietly, and so as I have shewed in my Grand Rebellion; for, I am not of their faith, which hold it more safe, and less dangerous, to be con∣versant with the Turkes, or Jewes, and to have more neerness with them, then with an Idolatrous Church that professeth Christ; because, that where the greater distance is from the true Religion, there the lesser familiarity, and neerenesse should be in conversation, and the greater distance in communion; therefore as the wrath of God was kindled against the Israelites, because they had the Jewes, their own brethren, in greater detestation then the Idumeans, or the Egyptians,The least fa∣miliarity in conversation, where there is greatest di∣stance from truth. whose idolatry must needs be far greater, and their Religion far worse, in their own judgement, then that of the Jewes; so we may feare the like anger from God, if we will be so partiall in our judgement, and so tran∣sported with disaffection, as to prefer a blasphemous Turke, or an impious Jew before those men, though ignorantly idolatrous, that do with all feare and reverence worship the same God, and adore the name of Christ as we doe. And we read, that the Emperour Justinus, a right Catholique Prince, as Bishop Horne calleth him,Bishop Horne against Fken∣ham. Justinus gave a toleration to the Arians. at the request of Theodoricke King of Italy, granted licence, that the Arians, which denied the Deity of our Saviour Christ, and were the worst of Heretiques, and therefore worse then any Papist, should be restored, and suffered to live after their own orders; and Pope John, for the peace and quietness of the Catholique Church, requested him most humbly so to do, which he did for feare of Theodoricke, that otherwise threatned the Catho∣liques should not live. But you will say, the fatall success that befell to King Davids house for So∣lomons permission of divers religions, to be divided into two parts, and the best ten Tribes for two to be given unto a stranger;Deut. 17, 17, 19. and the principall care of a pious Prince, being to preserve pure Religion, which is soon infected by Idola∣trous neighbours, do rather disprove all toleration, then any wayes connive with them that are of a different Religion: and if we read the Oration of the league to the King of France, wherein that Orator numbereth their victories, and innumerable successes, whilest they had but one Religion, and their miseries, and ill fortunes, when they fostered two Religions; it will appeare how far they were from allowing a toleration of any more then one Religion in one King∣dome. The true cause of renting So∣lomons King∣dome. Ps. 106.35.Yet to this it may be easily answered, that Solomons Kingdom was not rent from his posterity for his permission of idolaters to dwell in his Kingdome, which the Law of God did not forbid; but for that fault which his father ta∣xed the Jewes with, they were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works, for his commixtion of alliances with strangers, and the corruption of true Reli∣gion,
by his marrying of so many idolatrous wives, and so becomming idola∣trous himself, and thereby inducing his subjects the Israelites to be the like: and for the Oration of the league, there is in that brave Orator want of Lo∣gick, & ignoratio lenchi, non causae ùt causae; for you know what the Poêt saith, —Careat successibus opto, Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putaet: and we must not judge of true causes by the various success of things, and I may say, it was not the professing of one religion, but the sincere serving of God in that true religion, which brought to them, and will bring to others, prosperous success against the infidels: neither was it the permitting of two reli∣gions, or to speak more properly, the diversity of opinions in the same religion, but their emulation and hatred one against another, their pride and ambition, and many other consequences of private discords might be the just causes of their misfortunes. 4. For the Puritans, Brownists, Anabaptists, Heretiques, and Schisma∣tiques, that are deemed neither Infidels nor Idolaters,4. Puritans. but do obstinately erre in some points of faith, as the Arians, that denyed the Divinity of Christ, and the Nestorians to them which sinned after baptisme, and the like pernicious he∣resies, though not all alike dangerous; or do make a Schisme or a rent in the Church of Christ, as the Donatists did in Saint Augustin's time, and the Ana∣baptists and Puritans do in our dayes; I say, these are not to be esteemed and expelled as deadly enemies, but to be suffered and respected as weake friends, if they proceed not to be turbulent and malicious, who then may prove to be more dangerous both to Church and State, then any of the former sort that profess their religion with Peace and quietness: for it is not the Profession of this or that religion, but the malice and wickedness of the professor,What wrong Professors are chiefly to be suffered. that is the bane and poyson of the Church wherein it resteth: for what is diversity of opi∣nions in the Church of God, but tares among the wheat? and our Saviour sheweth, that the tares should not be plucked up, but suffered to grow with the wheat; to teach us,Matth. 13.29. that in respect of external communion, and civil conversa∣tion, all sorts of Professors may live together, though in respect of our spiritu∣al communion and exercise of our religion, the Heretique shall be cast forth,Why to be suf∣fered? either for the exer∣cise of the godly, or in hope to con∣vert the un∣godly. and be unto me tanquam Ethnicus & Publicanus, with whom notwithstanding I may converse, as our Saviour did, with hope that I may convert them unto him; which could never be done, if they should be quite excluded our compa∣ny, and banished from all holy society. And therefore as the prudent Prince seeth the disposition, and observeth the conversation of any Faction, and the turbulency of any Sect, so he knoweth best how to advise with his Council to grant his toleration to them that best deserve it, not so much in respect of the meliority of their religion, as their peaceable and harmless habitation among their neighbours without railing against their faith, or rebelling against their Prince. And thus, as the case now standeth, I see not any Sect, or any sort of Profes∣sors, that for turbulency of spirit, madness of zeal, and violency of hatred and persecution to the true Protestants, are more dangerous to the true religion, and deserve less favour from their pious Prince then these Anabaptists, Brown∣ists, and Puritans, that have so maliciously plotted, and so rebelliously prosecu∣ted their damnable designs, to the utter ruine both of Church and State.Doctor Covell. cap. 15. p. 2 . His descripti∣on of the Pu∣ritans. Doctor Covell long ago, when they were not half so bad as they be now, saith, they pretend gravity, reprehend severely, speak gloriously, and all in hypocrisie; they daily invent new opinions, and run from errour to errour; their wilfulnesse they account constancy, their deserved punishment persecution, their mouthes are ever open to speak evil; they give neither reverence nor titles to any in
place above them:And to con∣firme this description, read what King JAMES writ∣eth of them in his Basilicon Doron p. 160. & 161 and in the History of the conference at Hampton-Court in anno 603. p. 81, 82. in one word, the Church cannot fear a more dangerous and fatal enemy to her peace and happinesse, a greater cloud to the light of the Gos∣pel, a stronger hand to pull in barbarisme and poverty into all our Land, a more furious monster to breed contempt and disobedience in all estates, a more fretting canker to the very marrow and sinewes of this Church and kingdome, then this beast, who is proud without learning, presumptuous without authority, zealous without knowledge, holy without Religion, and in brief a most dangerous and malicious hypocrite, and were therefore banished from amongst us in the dayes of Queen Elizabeth, but now deserve it far better, being more dangerous, because far more numerous,;Huc usque. Our factious Puritans bit∣terer against Kings then the Jesuites. and therefore I cannot say with Saint Bernard, Aut corrigendi nè pereant, aut coercendi nè perimant; for in my judgement they are incorrigible, and in their own opinion they are invincible, having by lyes and frauds gathered so much wealth, and united such strength to∣gether, that, except the Lord himself had been on our side, and made our very enemies the Papists to become our friends, and to hazard their lives and fortunes according to their duty, to preserve the Crown and Dignity of their king, as God most wisely disposeth of things, when he produceth light out of darkness, and against their wills support our true Protestant Religion from being quite defaced by these mercilesse enemies, we might well fear what destruction would have come upon us. And therefore considering the bitter writings of their Prophets old and new, being fuller of gall and venome against Christian Kings, then can be found in the bookes of the Jesuites; and considering the wicked practices, and this unparallel'd rebellion of these new Proselytes, and the loyalty of those that heretofore received least favour from the Church, and not much from the State: Tell me I pray you which of these deserve best to be suffered in a Protestant Church? they that maliciously seeke her ruine, or they that unwillingly support her from falling? for my self, I will ever be of the true Protestant faith; yet for this loyalty of the Papists unto their King, I will ever be in charity, and rest in hope, though not in the same faith with them: and I doubt not but His Majesty will thinke well of their fidelity. But as Saint Bernard saith, Non est meae humilitatis dictitare vobis, it is not for me to prescribe who are most capable of Grace, or who best deserveth the Kings favour, when his Princely Grace presupposeth a sufficient merit, but in humility to set down mine own opinion in this point of toleration, with submission to the judgement of this Church: wherein also I humbly desire my reader not to mistake me, as if I meant such a publick and legal toleration, as might breed a greater distraction in a kingdome, then the wisedome of the State could well master, and raise more spirits then they could lay down; but such as I have exprest in my Grand Rebellion;Grand Rebelli∣on p. 5, 6. that is, a favourable connivence to enjoy their own con∣sciences, so long as they live in peace and amity with their neighbours, but without any publick exercise of their Religion, which can produce nothing else but discord, distraction, and destruction to that Kingdome, where two re∣ligions are profest in Aequilibrio, with the same priviledges and autho∣rity. These and many more are the rights of Kings, granted them by God for the Government of his Church, which they are to looke unto, and to pro∣tect in all her rights, service, maintenance, ordinances, governours, and the like, if they looke that God should bless and protect them in their ways, dignities, and dues; because it is their duties and the first charge that God layeth upon them, to be nursing Fathers unto his Church: for God knew the Church should have many enemies; & intus est equus Troja∣nus, and they are the worst that are nearest unto kings, and do with Ju∣das kiss, with fair words, and Machiavilian counsels, betray both Church
and King, and in the end destroy themselves; for who deceived Absolon though rightly, but his own Counsellour? who betrayed Ahab, and that most wickedly, but his lying Parasites? and who overthrew Rehoboam, and that foolishly, but his young favourites?Which thing is purposely set down in the holy Scripture, to be a caveat for all Kings, not to rely too much upon young Coun∣sellors; not that wisedome and prudence are intailed to old age,, and inseperable from gray∣haires, or di∣vorced from green heads; but because commonly experience is the fruitfull mother of these faire issues, and the multitude of yeares teacheth wisdom: for otherwise there may be delirium senectutis, the dotage of old age, as well as vanitas juventutis, the folly of youth; and as Elihu saith, Great men are not alwayes wise, neither do the aged understand judgement: but as Solomon saith,  isdem, even in youth, is the gray haires and an undefiled life is the old age; as we see, young Ioseph was the wisest in all Egypt: Solomon, Daniel, and Titus, how wise, how learned, and how religious were they in their younger yeares? So Alexander, Hànniball, Scipio, in the feates of war; Lucan, Mirandula, Keckerman, and abundance more in all humane learning that were but Neophyti annis, yet were egregii virtutibus, young in years, yet very admirable for their worth. And Princes do most wisely, when they make such election; especially when they are inforced to call men to pla∣ces of labour, and industry, they must have some regard to the bodies, as well as to the mindes of their ser∣vants, and chuse men of younger yeares, though not to be their favourites, but their confidents, according to the French distinction, as His Majesty hath lately made choice of one noble servant, who is, (a Nazian∣zen speaks) : gray in the minde, though yellow in the head, and supplying in all manner of excellent parts, what may be conceived wanting in years, whose name, so much already catched at by envy, I shall ever reverence, though now I purposely passe it over in silence. and whom may the Church fear most of all, but her dissembling friends, that are in most favour with Kings, and therefore seduce them soonest, insensibly to wound the Care, and neglect the Charge that is laid upon them; because, as St. Bernard saith, Longè plus nocet falsus Catholicus, quàm si apertus appareret haereticus, those eare-wigs are most pernicious, whose counsels seeme to be most specious, when they are but as the spirit of darkness, appearing like an Angel of light, when they say, God in∣deed must be served, and the Word must be preached, but, whether Bishop or no Bishop, whether in a sumptuous Church, or private house, whether by an e∣steemed Clergy, or a poore meane Ministrie, in this manner, or in another fashi∣on, it skilleth not much; Kings may well enough give way to spare that cost, to lessen that Revenue, and to pull down these Cathedrals, especially to give content unto the People, and to defray the expensive charge of the Common-wealth. But these counsels will not excuse Kings in the day of their account; there∣fore let them take heed of such Counsellors; and when they hear them begin to speak against the Church, though they be-guild their beginnings never so slily, let them either stop their eares with the Cockatrice,Psal. 58.5. that will not heare the voice of the charmer, charme he never so wisely; or let them answer, as our Sa∣viour answered their grand instructor, Vade Satana, non tentabis;Matth. 4.10. for it is most true, that, Qui deliberat, jam desivit; he that listens to them is halfe corrupted by them; and so they may prove destructive both to themselves, and to their posterity; for, as nothing establisheth the Throne of Kings surer, then obedience to God; so nothing is more dangerous then rebellion against God, with whom there is no respect of persons; for he expecteth,Rom. 2.11. that as he made Kings his Vice-gerents, so they should feare him, preserve the right of his Church, uphold his service, defend his servants, and do all that he commands them intirely, without taking the least liberty, for feare of the people, to dispense with any omissi∣on of his honour, or suffering the hedges of his Vineyard, the Governours of his Church, to be trodden down, and torne in pieces, that the beasts of the field may destroy the grapes, and defile the service of our God. Therefore to conclude this point, let all Kings do their best to hinder their People to corrupt the Covenant of Levi, which is a Covenant of Salt, that is,Malach. 2.8. Deut. 33.11. to indure for ever; let them remember Moses prayer; Blesse Lord his substance, and accept the worke of his hands; smite through the loynes of them that rise a∣gainst him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again; and let them al∣wayes consider, that God taketh pleasure in the prosperity of his servants.Psal. 35.27.
CHAP. XI. Sheweth, where the Protestants, Papists, and Puritans, do place Soveraignty; who first taught the deposing of Kings; the Pu∣ritans tenet worse then the Jesuites; Kings authority immedi∣ately from God; the twofold royalty in a King; the words of the Apostle vindicated from false glosses; the testimony of the Fathers and Romanists for the Soveraignty of Kings; the two things that shew the difficulty of government; what a miracu∣lous thing it is; and that God himself is the governour of the people. 2 The duty of the King in the government of the Common-wealth.HAving set down some particulars of the Kings right in the Government of Gods Church; it resteth that I should shew some part of his right and duty to serve God, as he is a King, in the government of the Common-wealth; touching which, for our more orderly proceeding, I will distribute my whole discourse into these five heads. Five points handled.1. To justifie his right to govern the people. 2. To shew the difficulty of this government. 3. To set down the assistants that are to helpe him in the per∣formance of this duty. 4. To distinguish the chiefest parts of this Government. 5. To declare the end for which this Government is ordained of God. 1. Point. 1. Where the Protestants place Sove∣raignty.1. We say that the Kings Soveraignty or royal power to govern the peo∣ple, is independent from all creatures solely from God, who hath immediately conferred the same upon him; and this we are able to make good, with abun∣dance both of divine and humane proofes: and yet we finde the same adversa∣ries of this truth (though with a far less shew of reason) that we met withall about Government of Gods Church. For 2. In whom the Papists do place Sove∣raignty. The Pope's sad Message to Hen. 3. Imp. Quem meritum investivimus, quare immeri∣tum non deve∣stiamus? quia ad quem perti∣net institutio, ad eundem per∣tinet destitutio.2 They that are infatuated with the cup of Babylon, the Canonists and some Jesuites do constantly aver, that summum imperium, the primary supreme power of this Government, is in the Pope, , absolutely and directly, as he is the Vicar of Christ, who hath all power given him both in Heaven and earth; from whom it is immediately deriued unto his Vicar, and from him to all Kings mediately by subordination unto him: so Baronius, Carerius, and others. But Bellarmine and the rest of the more moderate Jesuists say, that this imperium in reges, the Popes power over all Kings and States is but indirectum dominium, a power by consequent and indirectly, in ordine ad bonum spirituale, as the civil State hath relation to Religion; and this great Cardinal, lest he should seeme fine ratione insanire, doth (as the Hereticks did in Tertullians time) Caedem Scripturarum facere ad materiam suam, alleadge two and twenty places of Scri∣pture mis-interpreted, to confirme his indirect Divinity; and as Petiphars wife, he produceth very honest apparel, but to prove a very bad cause; and there∣fore attributing to the Pope by the greatness of his learning, and the excellency of his wit, more then he could justifie with a good conscience, he was so far from satisfying the then Pope, that he was well nigh resolved to condemne all his works for this one opinion:Carerius, lib. 1. cap. 5. and Carerius undertooke his confutation ex professo, and taxeth him so bitterly, that he putteth him inter impios haereticos, which he indeed
needed not to have done; because the difference is onely in the expression, when the Pope by this indirect power may take occasion to king and unking whom he pleaseth, and do what he will in all Christian States. 3. The Anabaptists and Puritans either deny all government,3 Where the Puritans place the Soveraign∣ty. Majestas regia sita est magis in populo quam in persona regis. Parsons in Dol∣man: with the Fra∣tricelli, and all superiority by the title of Christianity, as the Author of the Tract of Schisme and Schismaticks; or do say that originally it proceedeth, and habitually resideth in the people, but is cumulatively and communicatively de∣rived f om them unto the King; and therefore the people (not denuding them∣selves of their first interest, but still retaining the same in the collective body, that is, in themselves suppletivè, if the King in their judgement be defective in the administration, or neglect the performance of his duty) may question their King for his mis-government, dethrone him if they see cause, and resuming the collated power into their own hands again, may transfer it to any other whom they please. Which opinion, if it were true, would make miserable the condition of all Kings; and I believe they first learned it from the Sorbonists,The Sorbonists first taught the deposing of Kings, and why. who to subject the Pope to the community of the faithful, say, that the chief spiritual power was first committed by Christ unto them, and they to preserve the unity of the Church remitted the same communicatively unto the Pope, but suppletively, (not privatively, or habitually devesting themselves thereof) retaining the same still in themselves, if the Pope failed in the faith of the Church; and therefore he was not onely censureable, but also deposable by the Council, if he became an heretique, or apostated from the religion of Christ, and to make this both the more plausible and probable, they alleadged, how Kings were thus eligible, and likewise deposable by the community of the people; for out of this Buchanan saith, Romani Pontifices longè regum omnium conditione superiores,Buchan. de jure regni p. 25, & 91. le∣gum tamen poenis haud eximuntur; sed & eos, quanquam sacrosanctos Christia∣nis omnibus semper habitos, Synodus Basiliensis communi ordinum consensu senatui sacerdotum obnoxios esse pronunciavit: that is, in brief, the Popes are deprivable by the Council; So are Kings by the community of the people: and so both the Papist and the Puritan do agree to depose their Kings,Claudian de 4. Consul. Honorii and as the Poet saith, Ausus utérque nfas, domini respersus utérque, Insontis jugulo. — never a barrel better herring; both alike friends to Kings. But to this Blackvodaeus answereth most truely, that although the Pope should be deprivable by the Council, (which I am sure neither Pope nor Jesuite will allow) yet for divers different reasons betwixt the examples, Kings are not deposable by their Subjects; especially if you consider the great difference be∣twixt the Church of Christ, that is guided by the Spirit of God, and the repre∣sentation thereof in the flower of her Clergy, and a giddyheaded multitude,Blac. cap. 23. p. 304. that is led by their unruly and unreasonable passions, and are represented by those, that either basely bought their Votes, as the Consuls and other great men did the votes of the people of Rome, or that their partial and most ignorant affecti∣on, oftentimes without judgement, have made choice of: ex quo sequitur, ut non sit eadem populi potestas in regem, qu in pontificem est Ecclesiae: So that the reason is far unlike. But, though the Sorbonists, to justifie their former tenet,The Puritans opinion worse then the Jesu∣ites in two re∣spects. were the first broach∣ers of this unjust opinion of the deposition of Kings by the people, from whence the Jesuites, to subject the King unto the Pope, suck't it afterward: Yet in two main Respects I finde this tenet, as it is held by the Puritans, far worse then the doctrine of the Jesuites. 1. Because some of them say, that the people may not restrain the power, which they have once transmitted unto the King: when the Law of justice doth not permit, that Covenants should be repealed or a donation granted shoud be
revoked, though it were never so prejudiciall to the donor: and Bellarmine makes this good by the example of the souldiers, that had power to accept or re∣ject their Emperour before he was created,Bellar. in tract. cont. Pat. Paul. but being once elected, they had no coactive power over him, whereas all the Puritanes will make and unmake, pro∣mise and breake, doe and undoe at their pleasure. Because the Jesuites permit not the people nor any Peers to depose their King, untill the Pope, as an indifferent judge deputed by Christ, shall approve of the cause; and our Sectaries depresse kings so far, as to submit them to the weake judgment, and extravagant power of the people, who to day cry to Gideon, raign thou and thy son over us for ever, and to morrow joyne with the base son of Jerubbaal and the Sichemites to kill seventy of the Children of Gideon,Judges 9. and to create Abimilech to be their king. Our Opinion proved. Anti-Cav. in Os Ossor p. 25But, though the Anti-Cavalier takes it ill, that I should affirm that the kings power and right unto his government is immediately from God, yet if he would believe learned Authours, he might find enough of this judgment; for the sub∣lime power and authority that resideth in earthly Potentates, is not a derivation or collection of humane power scattered among many, and gathered into one head, but a power immediately granted by God to his VicegerentsSo acknow∣ledged by Act of Parliament, 25 H. 8. c. 12.28. c. 10. Dr Sarav. sol. 175. Bellar. de Lai∣cis, cap. 6. & 8., quam nun∣quam fuisse populo demandatam legimus, which God never communicated to any multitudes of men, saith Saravia. And Bellarmine himself against the Anabaptists confuteth their error, that denyed the power and authority of kings to be immediately from God; I. From Script. Sap. 6. Esay, 45. Hierem. 27. Dan. 2. Rom. 13.1 Pet. 2. II. From the Councill of Constans. Sess. 8. & 15. III. From S. Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 5. c. 21. where he saith, non tribuamus dandi regni potestatem nisi Deo vero; which giveth felicity in the kingdome of Heaven onely to the godly, but the earthly kingdomes he giveth both to the godly, and to the wicked; nam qui dedit Mario, ipse & Caesari, qui Augusto, ipse & Neroni, qui Vespasianis, vel patri vel filio,Idem de Rom. Pont. l. 5. c. 3. Irvinus de jure regni. c. 2. p. 40. suavissimis imperatoribus, ipse & Domitiano crudelissimo, qui Con∣stantino Christiano, ipse & Apostatae Juliano; And IV. it is proved from the confession of the Popes of Rome, as Leo. ep. 38. & 43. Gelasius epist. ad Ana∣stasium. Greg. l. 2. epist. 61. Nicholaus epist. ad Michaelem: out of all which saith Irvinus, it is apparent, all and every king, non multitudini aut hominibus sed Deo soli, regum regi, quicquid juris habent, acceptum ferre; And he might consider that a thing may be said to be immediately from God divers wayes, as specially. 1 , absque ullo signo creato. 2  cum aliquo actu conjuncto. that is, 1. Solely from God and no other; presupposing nothing praevious to the ob∣taining of it; So Moses and Joshua had their authority from God. Heningus fusè, c. 1. p. 4 & 5. de distinct. duplici jurisdict. Sive electione sive po∣stulatione, vel successione, vel belli jure Prin∣cipi tamen facto divinitùs pote∣stas data est. Cu∣nerus, c. 5. de offic. Princip.2. Joyntly with an interposed act of some other instrument, as the Apostolicall power of Matthias was immediately from God, though his constitution was from the Apostles; so Kings though some of them be after a sort elected by men; yet as our Saviour saith to Pilate, that his power was from above, though he was deputed by Caesar; So may they be said to have their authority immediately from God, though they should be some wayes deputed by men: for we must distinguish betwixt the soveraignty, the Subject, and the collation of the Sove∣raignty to the Subject; the Soveraignty is immediately from God, the Subject is from it's naturall cause, and the unition of the Soveraignty to the Subject, is likewise immediately from God, not onely approving, but appointing the same in all the Kings of his ordination: or to speak with the Schooles, we must di∣stinguish betwixt deputationem personae, and collationem potestatis, the designation of the person, which is sometimes done by men, and that is where the King is elective, and the donation of the power which is proper onely unto God; for so the Psalmist saith,Psal. 62.11. God hath spoken once and twice; I have also heard the same, that power belongeth unto God: and the Apostle saith, the powers that are, are ordained of God,Rom. 13.2. which is to be understood of the regall, or Monarchicall power,
because Saint Paules ,2 Pet. 2.13. Saint Peters description be∣twixt the King and the inferi∣our Magi∣strates. A twofold roy∣alty in a King. 1 Merum impe∣rium. higher powers are interpreted by Saint Peter, to be , Kings that are supreme: where Saint Peter makes an excellent distinction betwixt the superiour and the inferiour Magi∣strates: the superiour is that which Saint Paul saith is ordained of God, and the inferiours, are they which Saint Peter calleth , such as are sent by the King,: for the better explanation of which place, you must know that in every King or supreme Magistrate, we may conceive a double royalty. The 1 is merum imperium, or regni potestas, summa & plenissima; and this , this fulnesse of power, and independent of any creature, and immediately received of God, which the Civilians call jus regis, or munus regni, is in the person of the King indivisible, not to be imparted by the King to any creature; because he cannot devest himself, divide this power, or alienate the same to any subject, no not to his own son, without renouncing or dividing his Kingdome;How the King cannot do un∣justly. and by this the Civilians say, the King may governe sine certa lege, sine certo jure, sed non sine aequitate & justitia, without Law, but not without equity: where∣upon it is a rule in the Common Law, hoc unum rex potest facere, quod non potest injustè agere, which is to be applyed to this inseperable regality of the King;2 Imperium dis∣positivum. and hath been often alleadged by other Parliaments to justifie the King from all blame. The 2 is, imperium dispositivum, or jus gubernandi vel jurisdictio the right of governing, or jurisdiction and distribution of justice; and this may be derived and delegated from the King, legatis vitalitiis, either for terme of life, or during the Kings pleasure. But how? not privativè, when the King doth not denude himself thereof, but cumulativè and executivè, to execute the same, as the Kings Instruments for the preservation of peace,How the King delegates his power to his inferiour Ma∣gistrates. and the administration of justice, as it appeareth in their patent; and this subordinate power is not inhe∣rent in their persons, but onely committed unto them for the execution of some office; because that when the supreame power is present, the power of the in∣feriour officers is silent, it is in nubibus, fled into the clouds, and like the light of the Moon and Stars vanishing, whensoever the Sun appeareth, for Kings, when they do transfer any actuall power to the subalternate Officers, retain the habi∣tuall power still in their own hands, which upon any emergent occasion they may actually resume to themselves again, which they could not do, if they part∣ed with the habite and forme of this despoticall power of government,The words of the Apostles vindicated from the false glosses of the Sectaries. Rom. 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. The testimony of the Fathers for the Sove∣raignty of Kings. Tertul. ad Scap. & in apologet. c. 30. Iren. ad∣vers. baeres. Va∣lent. l. 5. c. 20. Optat. contr. Parmen. l. 3. . Chrysost. tom. 6. orat. 40. orat. 2. Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 5. c. 21. that they have immediately received from God. And, as the Scriptures make it plain, that the Kings right and power to go∣vern is immediately from God, so they make it as plain, that it is the greatest right, and most eminent highest power that is on earth; for though the ca∣villers at this power translate the words of Saint Paul, , not potestatibus sublimioribus or supremis, but potestatibus superexcellentibus, and say, that the word or particle  where S. Peter bids us submit our selves to the King; , as to the cheif, intends a resemblance onely, and not a reall demonstration to prove the King to be the chief: Yet the malice of these men, and the falshood of these glosses will appear, if you consider that the word, , habens se super alios, or  joyned with  to the powers that are ordained of God, must needs signify not any subordinate power, but the supremest power on earth; because the other powers are directly said by Saint Peter to be sent by the King, and the article  doth as really expresse the mat∣ter there, as in John i. 14. where the Evangelist saith, and we beheld his glory, , as the glory of the onely begotten Son of God. And I hope our Sectaries will not be so impudent, as to say that this signifieth but a resemblance of the Son of God. But to make this point more plain, you shall heare what the Fathers and the learned say; for, I told you before, Tertullian saith of Kings and Emperours, inde potestas, un∣de & spiritus, and he is solo Deo minor inferiour to none but God. Saint Chryso∣stome saith, he hath no peer on Earth, but is the top of all men living. Athana∣sius
saith, there is none above the Emperour, but onely God that made the Em∣perour.Q. Curtius l. 9. Saint Cyrill in a Sermon upon that text, I am the vine, commendeth the answer of a King, (whom Quintus Curtius affirmeth to be Alexander,) that being shot, and his Subjects would have him bound to pull out the arrow, said, non decet vinciri Regem, Bern. Tractat. de pass. Dom. c. 4. it becomes not Kings to be bound, because none is superiour unto them: A∣gapetus, a Deacon of Constantine, saith as much; and because it is a rule in the Civill Law, testem quem quis inducit pro se, tenetur recipere contra sese: the testimony of our adversaries is most convictive: therefore I be∣seech you hear what they say; for Rosellus a great Catholique saith, it is heretical to affirm, that the universal administration of the temporall affaires is or must be in the Pope, when the King hath no superiour on earth, but the Creator of heaven and earth. Caninus also saith, that the Apostle, Rom. 13. spake of the Regall and secular Power,Cassan. Catal. glor. mundi p. 8. consider. 28. Card. Cusan. concord. Cathol. l. 3. c. 5. Vide Arnis. p. 5. de dist. dupl. jurisdict. and not of the Ecclesiasticall; and Cas∣sanaeus saith, that Kings are the highest, and most paramount secular power and authority that ever God appointed on earth, and denies that either the old, or the new Testament, makes any mention of an Emperour: & juris utriusque testimonia manifestè declarant imperialem dignitatem & potestatem immediatè á filio Dei ab antiquo processisse, said Philip King of France, in Constit. de potest. elect. Imperat. Irvin. p. 33, 34, 35. quoteth many authors to confirme the same truth: Lombard, Gratian, Melancthon, Cranmer, Tyndall, and abundance more without number do likewise most peremptorily affirme, that the Kings Power is the supreme power on earth: and as the mirror of our time, the Bi∣shop of Winchester, observeth, the Scripture testifieth, that their Throne, their Crowne, their Sword, their Scepter, their Judgement, their Royalty, their Pow∣er, their Charge, their Person, and all in them are of God, from God, and by God; to shew how sacred they are, and ought to be unto us all; and so the very Heathens teaching sounder Divinity then our Sectaries thought, and said that Kings were ,Homere Plutarch. Ovid. Fast. l. 5. Quia à jove nu∣triti & ab eo re∣gnum ade, ti sunt. Scapula in ver∣be . and , the Ministers of God, and not the servants of the people. Good God! what shall we say then to those children of Adam, that will not onely with Adam be content to be like God, but with Antichrist, this ,Many-head∣ed beast. 2. The diffi∣culty of Go∣vernment. 2. Things shewing the difficulty of Government. as Plato calleth them, wil exalt themselves above all that is called God? they will devest the King, and invest themselves with his right, and therefore, 2. This sheweth how difficult a thing it is to rule and govern this unruly, aspi∣ring, and ambitious multitude: for the fuller understanding of which diffi∣cult duty, Osorius saith, that two things are to be considered. 1. Suscepti muneris amplitudo, the greatness of the charge, which is of that weight, that we can scarce think of a greater in all our life; the care of Church and Common-wealth, and to rule millions of men far and neare. 2. Gubernandorum qualitas, the quality and conditions of those men that are to be governed; which (if there were nothing else to prove it) will suffici∣ently shew the difficulty of their government; for, if it be a very hard thing to govern a mans selfe, how much harder is it to govern such a multitude of mad men? for Cicero saith, the multitude is the greatest teacher of errour, the unjustest judge of dignity, being without counsell, without reason, without judgement;Cicero. Tusc 3. & de sinibus lib. 2. Plutarch. in Alcibiad. and Plutarch calleth them, pessimam veritatis interpretem, where∣unto agreeth the answer of that Pope, who being demanded what was furthest from truth, answered, populi sententia, the opinion of the People; and as they are the weakest for judgement, so they are most instable in their resolutions; to day crying Hosanna, and to morrow Crucifige; this is the nature of the People,Osorius his de∣scription of the factious Puri∣tans, most plainly seen verified in our Rebels: of whom these our Sectaries are the very dregs, the worst, and the ba∣sest of all: I must crave leave to set down what Osorius saith of them long a∣go, and you may finde, that this rebellion proves his words most true: for he saith, the desire and end of this faction is too much liberty, then which nothing can be more averse to the office and government of Kings; for, it is the duty
of a King to cut off all haynous offences with just punishments, the unbridled people desires to be free from all fear of punishment; the King is the Minister of the Law, the Keeper of it, and the auenger of the transgression thereof, the people as much as possibly they can, with an impetuous temerity, pulleth down all Laws; the King laboureth to preserve peace and quietness, the people with an untamcable lust turmoileth and troubleth the peace of all men: lastly, the King thinkes not fit to distribute rewards and compensations indifferently to all men alike, but the people desire to have all difference of worth and dignity taken away, & infima summis permisceri, and to make the basest equal with the best, whence it happeneth so, that they hate all Princes, and especially all Kings quos immani odio persequuntur, whom they persecute with a dead∣ly hate; for they cannot endure any excellency or dignity: and to that end they use all endeavour, ut principes interimant, vel saltem in turbam conjiciant, either utterly to take away and destroy their Princes; or to implunge them into a World of troubles; which thing at first doth not appeare, but when the multitude of furious men hath gathered strength, then at last their impudent boldness, being confirmed by daily impunity, breaketh forth to the destruction of the royal Majesty. And a little after he saith,Osoriu in ep. Reginae Eliza∣bethae praefix. l. de relig. add to these things the abolition of Laws, the contempt of Rule, the hatred of royal Majesty, and the cruel lying in wait, which they most impiously and nefariously do endeavour, for their Princes: add also their clandestine and secret discourses, where their confederacies are made for the extirpation of their Kings, and to plot with un∣speakable mischief the death of them, whose health and safety they ought most heartily to pray to God for: and then he addeth,Pagina 24. & 25. cum immodica libertatis cu∣piditate rapiantur, leges oderunt, judicia detestantur, regum majestatem extinctam cupiunt, ut licentiùs & impuniùs queant per omnia libidinum genera vagari; and this is most manifest (saith he) all their endeavours ayme at this end, that Princes being taken away, they may have an uncontroulable leave and liberty to commit all kinde of villanies; and to that purpose they have poysoned some kings,Revera mihi vi∣detur esse ars artium, homi∣nem regere, qui certè est inter omnes animan∣tes maximè & moribus varius, & voluntate diversas. Na∣zian in Apol. and killed others with the sword, and to root out all rule, Consilia plena scele∣ris inierunt, they are full of all wicked counsels. And therefore this being the condition of the people, as the Scripture sheweth plainly in the Jews, by their continual Rebellions and murmurings against Moses and Aaron; and we see it as plainly in our own time, when our people hath confirmed all that this Bishop said; it is not an easie matter to govern such an unruly people: But we finde that the rod of Government is a miraculous rod, that being in Moses hand was a fair wand, but cast unto the ground turned to be an ungly and a poysonous Serpent; to shew that the people, being subject to the hand of Government, is a goodly thing, and a glorious society; but let loose out of the Princes hands, they are as Serpents, crooked, wriggled, versipelles,A people well governed very glorious. and as full as may be of all deadly poyson: and the Prophet David makes the ru∣ling of the people to be as great a miracle, as to appease the raging of the Seas; and therefore he ascribes this Government to be the proper work of God,psal. 65.7. God is the go∣vernour, and Kings are but Gods instru∣ments. psal. 77.20. when speaking unto God, he saith, Thou rulest the rage of the Seas, the noyse of his waves, and the madness of the people; for Kings are but Gods instruments, and God himself is the ruler of his people, even as the same King David sheweth, saying still to God, Tu duxisti populum tuum, Thou leadest thy people like sheep by the hands of Moses and Aaron; God was the leader, and they were but the hands by which he led them; for where God hath not a hand in the government of the people, it is impossible for the best and most politick heads to do it: and this Solomon knew full well, when God bade him aske what he should give him, and he said, Thou hast made me King (he doth not say the people hath made me) and I know not how to go out or in; that is, to govern them:1 Reg. 3.7 9. therefore I pray the, give thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people? that is, what one man is able to govern an innumerable multitude of men? Thou
therefore must be the Governour, and I am but thine instrument; and that I may be a fit instrument to do thy work, I desire thee to give me a docible heart. They that re∣ject their King, reject God,Wherefore, O you Subjects without obedience, and you Divines without Divinity, how dare you put any instruments into Gods hands, and refuse, nay reject the instrument that he chuseth, for the performance of his own work, to rule the people? you may as well refuse God himself, even as God saith unto Samuel,1 Sam. 8.7. They have not reiected thee, but they have reiected me; so you that do rebel and cast away your King that God hath chosen, as his hand to guide you, and his instrument to govern you,. Luk. 10.16. I pronounce it to all the World you have rebelled against God, and you have cast away your God; for the rule of Christ must stand infallible, he that rejecteth (or despiseth) him that is sent, reje∣cteth him that sent him. CHAP. XII. Sheweth, the assistants of Kings in their government; to whom the choice of inferiour Magistrates belongeth; the power of the subor∣dinate officers; neither Peers nor Parliament can have supremacy; the Sectaries chiefest argument out of Bracton answered; our Lawes prove all Soveraignty to be in the King; the two chief parts of the regal government; the four properties of a just War; and how the Parliamentary Faction transgress in every property. 3. The assi∣stance that God alloweth unto Kings to help them in their govern∣ment, of two sorts.3. SEeing it is so hard and difficult a matter, ars artium gubernare po∣pulum, the Mistresse of all Sciences, and the most dangerous of all facul∣ties to govern the people, that Saturninus said truly to them that put on his Kingly ornaments, they knew not what an evil it was to rule, because of the many dangers that hang over the rulers heads, which under the seeming shew of a Crown of gold, do wear indeed a Crown of thornes: therefore, Ʋt rarò e∣minentes viros non magnis adjutoribus ad gubernandam fortunam suam usus inve∣nies, saith Paterculus; as great men, of a wealthy and vast estate, are seldome without great counsel to assist them to govern, and to dispose of that great for∣tune; so Kings having a great charge laid upon them, are not onely permitted, but advised and counselled by God, to have 1. Wise Coun∣sellors,1. Faithful and wise Counsellors to di∣rect them in the government of the peo∣ple. 2. Subordinate Magistrates to assist them in the government of the peo∣ple. Tacit. annal. lib. 2.1. Tacitus (as I said before) saith, There cannot be an argument of greater wisedome in a Prince, nor any thing of greater safety to the Common-wealth, then for him to make choice of a wise and religious Counsel; because the most weighty labours of the Prince do stand in need of the greatest helpes: therefore Aga∣memnon had his Nestor and Chaleas;Dionys. Halicar. lib. 2. Augustus had Mecoenas and Agrippa, two wise Counsellors, to direct him in all his affairs; David had Nathan, Gad, A∣chitophel, and Hushai; and Nebuchadnezzar had Daniel, Shadrach, Meshac, and Abednego: and so all other Kings in all Nations do chuse the wisest men, that they conceive, to be their Counsellors. 1. Subordinate Magistrates.2. For subordinate Magistrates, Jethro's counsel unto Moses, and Moses hearkning unto him, as to a wise and faithful Counsellor, makes it plain, how necessary it is for the supreme Magistrate to chuse such assistants, as may bear with him some part of the great burthen of government. Thus far it is agreed upon on all sides, but the difference betwixt us and our new State-Divines, con∣sisteth in these two points.
1. About the choice 2. About the power of these officers.A twofold dif∣ference. For 1. We say, that by the Law of nature, every master hath right to chuse his own servants: this is Lex gentium, ever practiced among all Nations;1. About the choice of infe∣riour Magi∣strates and Of∣ficers. . 2 Cor. 4 5. Exod. 18.11. why then should not the King make choice of his own Counsellors and Servants? they will say, because he is the servant of the Common-wealth: But how is that? I hope none otherwise then the Minister is the servant of the Church, for Christ his sake: and shall he therefore, that is your King, lose the priviledges of a com∣mon Subject? Besides, hath not God committed the charge of his people into the Kings hand, and will he not require an accompt of him of their government? how then shall he give an account to God when the government is taken out of his hands, and subordinate officers and servants put upon him? I am sure, when the 70 grand Senators of Israel, the great Sanhedrim of the Jewes were to be cho∣sen; Jethro saith unto Moses, Thou shalt provide out of the people able men: mark I pray you, thou and not the people, shalt provide them; neither shall you find it otherwise in any History. Pharaoh, and not his people,Gen. 41.41. made Joseph ruler o∣ver all the Land of Egypt. Nebuchadnezzar, and not his people, made Daniel ruler over the whole Province of Babylon:Dan. 2.48. Cap. 6.1, 2. and Darius set over his Kingdome a hundred and twenty Princes, and made Daniel the first of the three Presidents that were over all these. And what shall I say of Ahashuerus, and all other kings,All kings chuse their own Of∣ficers. Heathens, Jewes, or Christians, that ever kept this power, to chuse their own servants, Counsellors, and Officers, except they were infant Kings, in their non-age, and so not able to chuse them. But you will say that our Histories tell you,  how Ric. 2. Edw. 2. and others of our Kings, had their Officers appointed, and themselves committed unto Guar∣dians by the Parliament; therefore why may not our Parliament do the like in case of male-administration? I answer, that I speak of the right of kings,  2 Reg. 19.37. and not justifie the wrongs done to Kings. Adramelech and Sharezer killed Sennacherib their own Father; is it therefore lawfull for other children so to do? Why should we therefore alleadge those things, Quae insolentiâ populari, quae vi, quae furore, non ad imitationem ex∣emplo proponenda, sed justo legum supplicio vindicanda sunt; which should rather have been revenged by the just punishment of the Law, then proposed to be imitated by the example? Therefore I say, that whosoever abridgeth the King of this power, robbeth him of that right which God and nature hath allowed him: whereby you may judge how justly the Parliamentary faction would have dealt herein with our King, by forcing Counsellors and great Officers upon him; but I hope you see, it is the Kings right to chuse his Servants, Officers, and Counsellors; what man∣ner of men he should chuse, Jethro setteth down.True Church. lib. 6. c. 4. &c. And I have most fully descri∣bed the qualities and conditions that they should be indued withall in my True Church. 2. As our Sectaries differ much from the true Divines, about the choyce,2. Difference, about the pow∣er of the subor∣dinate Magi∣strates. so they differ much more about the power of these subordinate officers, and inferiour Magistrates; for we say, they are alwayes to be obedient to the supreme power: or otherwise, ejus est deponere, cujus est constituere, he can displace them that hath appointed them; or if you say no, because I cited you a place out of Bellarmine, where he saith, the Souldiers had power to refuse their Emperour while he was in fieri, to be elected; but not when he was in facto, fully chosen and made Em∣perour; so the King hath power to chuse them, but not to displace them. I an∣swer briefly, that in creating or constituting our inferiours, we may; but our superiour we may not: because inferiours, in the judgment of all men,None can de∣pose him in whom the su∣preme Majesty resideth. have no jurisdiction over their superiours. And therefore elective Kings are not depose∣able in a Monarchicall government: where the supreme power resides in the Monarch; though perhaps the Kings of Lacedemon might be justly deposed, be∣cause by the constitution of their Kingdome, the supreme power was not in their Kings, but in their Ephori.
But our new Sectaries out of Junius Brutus, Burcher, Althusius, Knox, and Cartwright, teach very devoutly, but most falsely, that in case of defailance to do his duty, they may with the Tribunes of Rome, or the Demarchi at A∣thens, censure and depose him too, if they see just cause for the same. Blacvod. c. 33. p. 285. Grand Rebelli∣on, c. 7. p. 52.To confute which blasphemous doctrine against God, and so pernicious and dangerous to this State, though others have done it very excellently well already, and I have formerly shewed the absurdity of it in my Grand Rebellion; yet, because all books come not to every hand, I will say somewhat of it in this place. If these Counsellours, Magistrates, Parliament, call them what you will, have any power and authority, it must be either subordinate, coordinate, or supreme. 1 Subordinate officers can have no power over their su∣periors.1. If subordinate, I told you before, they can have no power over their superi∣our, because all inferiour Magistrates are Magistrates onely, in respect of those that are under their jurisdiction; because to them they represent the King, and supply the office of the King; but in reference to the King; they are but private persons and Subjects, that can challenge no jurisdiction over him. 2. that neither Peers not Par∣liament can have the supre∣macy. None above the king at any time.2. If they be supreme, then Saint Peter is much mistaken, to say the King is su∣preme; and they do ill to disclaime this supremacy, when in all their Petitions, (not disjunctively, but as they are an united body) they say, Your Majesties humble Subjects the Lords and Commons in Parliament: and besides, they are perjur'd that deny it, after they have taken the Oath of supremacy, where every one saith, I A. B. do utterly testifie and declare in my conscience, that the Kings Highness is the onely supreme Governour of this Realme, &c. But this is further, and so fully proved out of Bracton, the nature of all the Subjects tenures, and the constitution of this government, by the Authour of The unlawfulness of Sub∣jects taking up armes against their Soveraigne, that more needs not be spoken to any rational man. Yet because this point is of such great concernment, and the chiefest argument they have out of Bracton, is, that he saith, Rex habet superi∣orem,The Sectaries chiefest argu∣ment out of Bracton fully answered. legem, curiam suam, comites, Barones; quia comites dicuntur, quasi socii Regis, & qui habet socium, habet magistrum; & ideò si Rex fuerit sine frano, id est, sine lege, debent ei fraenum ponere, nisi ipsimet fuerint cum rege sine fraeno: and all this makes just nothing in the World for them, if they had the honesty or the learning to understand it right; for what is above the King? the Law, and the Court of Earles and Barons; but how are they above him? as the Prea∣cher is above the King, when he preacheth unto him; or the Physician when he gives him Physick; or the Pilot when he sayleth by Sea; that is, quoad ratio∣nem consulendi,How the Law and the Court of Barons is a∣bove the King non cogendi, they have superioritatem directivam, non coactivam; for so the teacher is above him that is taught, and the Counsellor above him that is counselled, that is, by way-of advice, but not by way of command; and to shew you that this is Bractons true meaning, I pray you consider his words; Co∣mites dicuntur quasi socii, they are as his fellows or Peeres, not simply but qua∣si: and if they were simply so, yet they are but socii, not superiours; and what can socii do? not command, for par in parem non habet potestatem, that is, praeci∣piendi; otherwise, you must confesse, habet potestatem consulendi: therefore Bracton addes, qui habet socium, habet magistrum, that is, a teacher, not a com∣mander; and to make this yet moe plain, he addes, Si Rex fuerit sine fraeno, id est, lege, if the King be without a bridle, that is, saith he (lest you should mis∣take what he meanes by the bridle, and thinke he meanes force and armes) the Law: they ought to put this bridle unto him, that is, to presse him with this Law, and still to shew him his duty, even as we do both to King and people, saying, this is the Law, this should bridle you: but here is not a word of com∣manding, much lesse of forcing the King: not a word of superiority, nor yet simply of equality: and therefore I must say, hoc argumentum nihil ad rhombum, these do abuse every author.3 That neither Peers nor Par∣liament are co∣ordinate with the King. If their , (I speak not of , their natural strength and power) but of their right and authority, be coordinate and equal with the Kings autho∣rity,
then whether given by God (which they cannot prove) or by the people) there must be duo summa imperia, two supreme powers, (which the Philoso∣phers say cannot be; nam quod summum est, unum est,Ommesque Phi∣losoph. & juris∣consulti, ponunt summum in eo rerum genere quod dividi non possit Lactant. l. 1. c. 3. . Marc. 3.14. from whence they prove the unity of the God-head, that there can be but one God) and if this supreme power be divided betwixt King and Parliament, you know what the Poet saith, — Omnisque potestas, Impatiens consortis erit,— Or you may remember what our Saviour saith, If a Kingdome be divided a∣gainst it selfe it cannot stand, and therefore when Tiberius, out of his wonted subtilty, desired the Senate to appoint a colleague and partner with him, for the better administration of the Empire, Asinius Gallus, that was desirous enough of their Pristine liberty, yet understanding well with what minde the subtle fox spake, (onely to descry his ill willers) after some jests answered seriously, , that government must not be divided; because you can never have any happiness where the power is equally divided in two parts, when according to the well known axiome to every one, Par in parem non habet potestatem. But to make the matter cleare,The Case of our Affaires. p. 19.20. The Lawes of our Land ac∣knowledge all Soveraignty in the King. and to shew that the Soveraign∣ty is inseperably inherent in the person of His Majesty, we have the whole cur∣rent of our very Acts of Parliament acknowledging it in these very termes, Our Soveraigne Lord the King; and the Parliament, 25. Hen. 8. saith, This your Graces Realme, recognizing no superiour under God, but your Grace, &c. And the Parliament 16. Rich. 2.5. affirmeth the Crown of England to have been so free at all times, that it hath been in no earthly subjection, but immediately to God, in all things touching the regality of the said Crown, and to none other, and in the 25. of Hen. 5. the Parliament declareth, that it belongeth to the Kings regality, to grant or deny what Petitions in Parliament he pleaseth: and so indeed whatsoever authority is in the constant practice of the Kingdom, or in the known and published Laws and Statutes, it concludeth the Soveraignty to be fixed in the King, and all the Subjects virtually united in the representative body of the Parlia∣ment, to be obliged in obedience & allegeance to the individual person of the King: and I doubt not but our learned Lawyers can finde much more proofe then I do, out of their Law to this purpose. And therefore seeing divers supreme powers are not compatible in one State, nor allowable in our State; the conceit of a mix∣ed Monarchy is but a foppery, to prove the distribution of the supreme power into two sorts of governours, equally indued with the same power; because the supreme power, being but one, must be placed in one sort of governours, either in one numericall man, as it is in Monarchy; or in one specificall kinde of men, as the optimates, as it is in Aristocracie; or in the people, as in Democracie;. but if by a mixed Monarchy you meane, that this supreme power is not simply abso∣lute, quoad omnia, but a government limited and regulated, , we will not much quarrell with our Sectaries, because His Majesty hath promised, and we are sure he will performe it, to govern his people according to the Lawes of this Land. And therefore they that would rob the King of this right,They deserve not to live in the Kingdom that diminish the supremacy of the King. and give any part of his supreme power to the Parliament, or to any of all his inferiour Magi∣strates, deserve as well to be expelled the Kingdome, as Plato would have Homer to be banished, for bringing in the Gods fighting, and disagreeing among them∣selves; when as Ovid, out of him, saith, Jupiter in Trojam, pro Troja stabat Apollo: Because, as the Civilians say, Naturale vitium est negligi, quod communiter pos∣sidetur, útque se nihil habere putet qui totum non habeat, & suam partem corrum∣pi patiatur, dum invidet alienae; and therefore the same Homer treating of our humane Government, saith,
Nec multos reg∣nare bonum, rex unicus esto., — which Aristotle doth so infinitely commend,Arist. Metaph. lib. 1. Statius Thebaid. lib. 1. where he disputeth, ; and so doth Plato and all the wise Philosophers that followed af∣ter: because as the Poët saith, — Summo dulcius unum Stare loco: sociísque comes discordia regnis. And, as our own most lamentable experience sheweth, what abundance of miseries happened unto our selves by this renting of the King's power, and pla∣cing it in the hands of the Parliament, and his own inferiour officers: and as those sad Tragedies of Etheocles and Polynices, Numitor and Amulius, Romu∣lus and Remus, Antoninus and Geta, and almost infinite more, do make it ma∣nifest to all the world. §. The two chiefest parts of the regal Government; the four properties of a just war; and how the Parliamentary faction transgresse in every property. 4. The chiefest parts of the Regal govern∣ment, which are two. Exod. 2.14.4. HAving spoken of those assistants, that should further and not hinder the King in the Common-wealth, it resteth that I should now speak of the chiefest parts of this government: when Moses killed the Aegyptian that wronged the Israelite, and the next day said unto the Hebrew, that did injure his fellow, Wherefore smitest thou him? the oppressor answered, Who made thee a Prince and a Judge over us?1 Sam. 8.20. 2 Sam. 5.2. and the people say unto Samuel, we will have a King over us, that our King may judge us, and go out before us and fight our battails. Out of which two places, we finde two special parts of the King's government. Sigon. l. 7. c. 1.1. Principatum bellorum, the charge of the wars; in respect whereof the Kings were called Captains, as the Lord said unto Samuel concerning Saul, Ʋnges eum ducem,1 Sam. 9.16. thou shalt anoint him to be Captain over my people Israel. 1 Reg. 3.9. Psal. 72.2. Araisaeus de jure Majest. l. 2. c. 1. p. 214.2. Curam judiciorum, the care of all judgments; in respect whereof Da∣vid, and Solomon, and the other Kings are said to judge the people. So Arnisaeus saith, Majestatis potestas omnis consistit vel in defendenda repub. vel in regenda, all the power of royalty consisteth either in defending or in go∣verning the Common-wealth, according as Homer describeth a perfect King, Homer Iliad. γ.. And so you see the two principal parts of the King's government are the Offices.1. Ducis in bel∣lo gerendo. 2. Judicis in jure reddendo. 1. Part. In the time of War. Ordo ille natu∣ralis mortalium paci accommo∣datus, hoc poscit ut suscipiendi belli autoritas atque consilium apud principes sit. Aug. cont. Faust. l. 22. & Arnis. l. 2. c. 5. p. 345. Plato de legib. lib. 2. 1. Of a Captain in the time of War. 2. Of a Judge in the time of Peace. 1. Then it is the proper right of the King, and of none but the King, or he that hath the regal and supreme power, to make war, and to conclude peace; for Plato in his Common-wealth ordained, that, Si quis pacem vel bellum fecerit cum aliquibus, , and the Julian Law adjudgeth him guilty of High Treason, Qui injussu principis bellum gesserit, delectúmve habuerit, exercitum vel comparaverit, that either maketh War, or raiseth an Army without his Kings command.
And to this part of the regall government,Luc. 14.31.32. Aristot. Polit. l. 7. c. 8. which consisteth in the Militia in Armes, for the defence of the Kingdome, pertaineth, 1. The proclaiming of War, which our Saviour properly ascribeth unto the right of Kings, when he saith not what State, or Common-wealth,Arnis. l. 2. c. 1. but What King going to war with another King? &c. 2. The concluding of Peace, which our Saviour ascribeth also unto the King, in the same place. 3. The making of leagues and confede∣racies with other forraigne States. 4. The sending, and receiving of Ambassa∣dors. 5. To raise Armes, and the like, which the Lawes of God, and of all Na∣tions justifie to be the proper right of Kings, and to belong onely unto the su∣preame Majesty. But then you will say, did not the Judges, Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Jephta,Judges 11.11. Barac, Samson, and the rest make war, and yet they were no Kings? Why then may not the Nobles make war, as well as Kings? I answer, that they do in∣deed make war, and a miserable wretched war; but I speak of a just war, and so I say that none but the King, or he that hath the Kings power can do it; for though the Judges assumed not the name of Kings, nor Captains, sed à potiore parte vocati sunt judices, but from the sweetest part of the Royall government were termed Judges; yet they had the full power, & ducendi & judicandi popu∣lum, both of war and peace, saith Sigenius: and so the men of Gilead said unto Jephthe, veni & esto princeps noster: and they made him their head by an inviola∣ble covenant. And of Moses it was plainly said, He was King in Jesurun;Deut. 33.5. and when there was no Judge, it is said, there was no King in Israel: for I stand not about words, when some were called Kings, for the honour of the People,Judges 17.6.18.1.19.1. and yet had no more power then Subjects, as the Kings of Sparta; and others had not the name of Kings, and yet had the full power of Kings; as the Dictator, and the Emperour, and the great Duke of Muscovie, and the like. But, when a war is undertaken by any Prince, how shall we know which par∣ty is in the right? for to make an unjust war, cannot be said to be the right of any King: yet, as the Poet saith, — Quis justius induit armaLucan lib. 1. Scire nefas, summo se judice quisque tuetur. Every one pretends his cause is just, he fights for God, for the truth of the Gospell, the faith of Christ, and the liberty and Lawes of his Countrey: how then shall those poore men, that hazard their lives and their fortunes, yea, and soules too, if they war on the wrong side, understand the truth of this great, doubtfull, and dangerous point? I answer, all the Divines that I read of, speaking of war,Dambaud. in praxi criminal. cap. 82. do concur with what Dambauderius writeth of this point, that there must be foure properties of a just war. 1. A just cause. 2. A right intention.Foure proper∣ties of a just War. 3. Meet Members. 4. The Kings authority. Sine qua est laesa Majestas, without which authority the Warriours are all Traytors. And I would to God our Rebels would lay their hands upon their hearts, and seriously examine these foure points in this present War. 1. What cause have they to take Armes against their King,1. A just cause. and to kill and murder so many thousands of their own Brethren? they will answer, that they do it for the defence of their Liberty, Lawes, and Religion: but how truely, let God himselfe be the Judge; for, His Majesty hath promised and protested they shall enjoy all these fully and freely, without any manner of dimunution: and we know that never any rebellion was raised, but these very causes were still pretended. And therefore, 2. Consider with what intent they do all this?2: A right intention. and I doubt not but you shall
finde foul weeds under this fair cloak; for under the shadow of liberty and pro∣perty, they took the liberty to rob all the King's loyal Subjects that they could reach, of all or most of their estates, and to keep them fast in prison; because they would not consent to their lawless liberty, and to be Rebels with them a∣gainst their conscience. And under the pretence of Lawes they aimed not to have the old Lawes well kept, which was never denyed them, but to have such new ones made, as might quite rob the King of all his rights, and transfer the same unto themselves and their friends; so he should be like the King of Spar∣ta,What Lawes and Religion the Rebels would fain have. a Royal Slave; and they should be like the Ephori, ruling and command∣ing Subjects. And for the religion, you may know by their new Synod, which are a Synod not of Saints, but of Rebels, what religion they would fain have, not that which was professed in Q. Elizabeth's times, that was established by the Lawes, justified by the paines, and confirmed by the bloud of so many worthy men and faithful Martyrs, but a new religion first hatched in Amster∣dam, then nourished in New-England, and now to be transplanted into this Kingdom. 3. Meet Mem∣bers.3. Who are the persons that are imployed in this war? he first of all, that is the more disloyal, because he was a person of honour, that had so much ho∣nour conferred upon him by His Majesty, and so much trust reposed in him, and would notwithstanding prove so unthankful, as to kick with his heeles a∣gainst his Master; and so follow, whom you know, passibus aequis, whose ex∣ample, any other man, that were not rob'd of his understanding, would make a remora to retain him from rebellion: and what are the other heads, but a company either of poor,Who the Re∣bels are, and what manner persons they be. needy, and mean condition'd Lords and Gentlemen, or discontented Peers that are misled, or such factious Sectaries, whose blind zeal and furious malice are able to hurry them headlong to perpetrate any mis∣chief? for their Captains and their Officers, I believe they fight neither for the Anabaptists creed, nor against the Romane faith, nor to overthrow our Pro∣testant Church, but for their pay; for which, though they cannot be justified to take their hire for such ill service, to rebel against their King, and to murder their innocent brethren; Yet are they not so bad as their grand Masters; and for their common Souldiers. I assure my self many of them fight against their wills, many seduced by their false Prophets, others inticed by their factious Ma∣sters, and most of them compelled to kill their brethren against their wils; and therefore in some places, though their number trebled the Kings; yet they had rather run away then fight; and what a miserable and deplorable case is this, when so many poor soules shall be driven unto the Devil by Preachers and Parliament against their wills? 4. The su∣preme author∣rity.4. If you consider quâ authoritate, by what authority they wage this war, they will answer by the Authority of Parliament, and that is just none at all; because the Parliament hath not the supreme authority, without which the war is not publique, nor can it be justified: for a war is then justifiable, when there is no legal way to end the controversie by prohibiting farther appeales, which cannot be,Albericus Gen∣tilis de jure bel∣li, l. 1. c. 2. Subjects can never make a lawful war against their King. but onely betwixt independent States and several Princes, that have the supreme power in their own hands, and are not liable to the sensure of any Court; which power the Parliament cannot challenge; because they are or should be the King's lawful Subjects: and therefore cannot be his law∣ful enemies: but they will say, Master Goodwin, Burroughs, and all the rest of our good men, zealous brethren, and powerful Preachers do continually cry out in our eares, it is bellum sanctum, a most just and holy war, a war for the Gospel and for our Lawes and Liberties, wherein whosoever dies, he shall be crowned a Martyr. I answer, that for their reward, they shall be indeed as Saint Augustine saith of the like,Res dura ac plena pericli est, regale occidisse genus. Martyres stultae Philosophiae, when every one of them may be indicted at the bar of God's justice for a felo de se, a Malefactour guilty of his own untimely death: and for their good Oratours that perswade them to
this wickednesse, I pray you consider well what they are: men of no worth, re∣bellious against the Church, Rebels against the King, factious Schismaticks,In what con∣dition their Preachers are; and of what worth. of no faith, of no learning, that have already forfeited their estates, if they have any, and their lives unto the king: and will any man that is wise, hazard his estate, his life and his soul to follow the perswasions of these men? my life is as deare to me, as the Earle of Essex his head is to him, and my soul dearer; and I dare ingage them both, that if all the Doctors in both Ʋniversities, and all the Divines within the kingdome of England, were gathered together to give their judgement of this War, there could not be found one of ten, it may be as I be∣leive not one of twenty that durst upon his conscience say, this war is lawful upon the Parliament side; for though these Locusts, that is, the German,It is contrary to the doctrine of all the Pro∣testant Church, for Subjects to resist their king Scot∣tish, and the English Puritane, agreeing with the Romane Jesuite ever since the reformation, harped upon this string, and retained this serpentine poison within their bosome, still spitting it forth against all States, as you may see by their bookes; Yet I must tell you plainly, this doctrine of Subjects taking up armes against their lawful King, is point blanck and directly against the received do∣ctrine of the Church of England, and against the tenet of all true Protestants: and therefore Andreas Rivetus Professor at Leyden writing against a Jesuite,Paraeus in Rom. 13. Bou∣cher. l. 2. c 2. Keckerm. Syst. pol. c. 32. Jun. Brut. q. 2. p. 56. Bellar. de laic. c. 6. Suar. de. fid. cathol. c. 3. Lichfield. l. 4. 19. sect. 19. Field l. 5. c. 30. that cast this aspersion upon the Protestants, that they jumpe with them in this doctrine of warring against, and deposing kings, saith, that no Protestant doth maintain that damnable doctrine, and that rashness of Knox and Buchanan is to be ascribed praefervido Scotorum ingenio & ad audendum prompto. Juel and Bil∣son and all the Doctors of the Church are of the same minde: and Lichfield saith, no Orthodox father did by word or writing teach any resistance, for the space of a thousand yeares: and Doctor Field saith, that all the worthy fathers and Bishops of the Church perswaded themselves, that they owed all duty unto their kings, though they were Hereticks and Infidels; and the Homilies of the Church of England, allowed by authority, do plainly and peremptorily con∣demne all Subjects warring against their King for Rebels and Traytors, that do resist the ordinance of God and procure unto themselves damnation: and truely I beleive most of their own consciences tell them so; and they that thinke o∣therwise, I would have them to consider, that if they were at a banquet, where twenty should aver such a dish to be full of poyson, for every one that would warrant it good, would'st thou venture to eate it, and hazard thy life in such a case? O then consider what it is to hazard thy soule upon the like termes. So you see the justness of the War on the Parliament side. But. 1. On the Kings side, it cannot be denied, but his cause is most just; for his own defence, for the maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, that is esta∣blished by our Laws, and for the rights of the Church and the just liberties and property of all his loyal Subjects: this he testifieth in all his Declarations: and this we know in our own consciences to be true; and therefore 2. As his Majesty professeth, so we beleive him, that he never intended other∣wise by this war, but to protect us, and our Religion, and to maintain his own just and unquestionable rights, which these Rebels would most unjustly wrest out of his hands, and under the shew of humble Petitioners to become at last proud Commanders; for as one saith, — They whom no denial can withstand, Seeme but to aske, while they indeed command. 3. For the persons that war with him, they are the chiefest of the Nobility;3 His assistants learned, honest and religious, all the best Gentry, that hazard their lives, not for filthy lucre; for, the Kings Revenues, being so unjustly detained from him, they are fain to supply his neces∣sities, and to bear their own charges; and the poor common Soldiers are no∣thing wanting to do their best endeavours; neither need they to fear any thing; because
4 His authori∣ty sacred and unquestiona∣ble. What the pre∣tended Parlia∣ment is;4. The King hath a just right, to give them full power and authority to do execution upon these Rebels, as I have proved unto you before. And therefore the result of all is, that the Parliament side (under the pre∣tence of Religion, fighting if not for the Crown, yet certainly for the full power and authority of the King, who shall have the ordering of the Militia, that is, who shall have the government of this Kingdome, which is all one as who shall be the King, they or King CHARLES, and which is the very question that they would now decide by the sword) in taking away our goods, are theeves and robbers; in killing their brethren, are bloudy murderers, and in resisting their King, are rebellious traytors; that as the Apostle saith, purchase to themselves damnation: when (as the Prophet Esay speaketh of the like Re∣bels) being hardly bestead and hungry,Esay 8.21, 22. (as I believe thousands of them are in London, and other Rebellious Cities) they shall fret themselves, and curse their King and their God, and looke upward (as I fear many of them do, curse the King with their tongues, and God in their hearts) and they shall looke unto the earth:Matth. 8.12. and behold trouble and darknesse, dimnesse and anguish, and they shall be dri∣ven to darknesse even to utter darknesse, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, if by a true repentance they do not betimes rent their hearts and for∣sake their fearful sinns And the Kings side, in this war, doing no further then the king gives Com∣mission, do no more then what God commandeth, and therefore, living, they shall be accounted loyal Subjects worthy of honour: and dying, they shall be sure to be everlastingly rewarded. CHAP. XIII. Sheweth, how the first Government of Kings was arbitrary; the pla∣ces of Moses, Deu. 17. and of Samuel, 1 Sam. 8. discussed; whether Ahab offended in desiring Naboths Vineyard, and where∣in; why absolute power was granted unto Kings; and how the diversities of Government came up. 2 part of the regal govern∣ment in the time of peace. Master Selden in his titles of Honour p. 15. That the first government of Kings was ar∣bitrary.2. HAving thus shewed you potestatem ducendi, the Kings right and power of making War, it resteth that I should speake De potestate judicandi of his power and right of judging and governing his people in the time of peace; tou∣ching which we finde none denying his right, but all the difference is about the manner: where 1. I finde Master Selden rejecting, as ridiculous, the testimony of Justine, which saith, Populus nullis legibus tenebatur, sed arbitria regum pro legibus erant; the people were kept under by no Lawes but the will of their Kings was all the Law they had; but as oportet mendacem esse memorem, so it behoves him that opposeth the truth to be very subtile, and very mindful of his own discourse; otherwise a meaner Scholler, having such advantage as the truth to assist him, may easily get the victory; for, though he goeth about to confute the reason that some alleadge, for the denyal of those times to be governed by any Law, because the word  is not to be found in all Homer, but wheresoeuer he speakes of Justice,Homer  in hymnis ad Apoll. he expresseth the same by the word Themis, and saith, that this is false, which he proveth from Homers , and his ; and sheweth that there were Lawes before Homers time, from Talus his Lawes, that were written in brasse in the Isle of Crete; yet all this may be answered,
and Justines opinion prove most true;Joseph. advers Appion. l. 51 Plutarch in lib. de Hero. for Talus his time must needs be uncer¦tain, and by , Homer means the just measure of riming, but never useth  for the set Law of living; besides, there were many ages, and many Kings before Homers time, and before Talus, Minos, Radamanthus, or any other Law-maker that you read of; Moses was the first that I finde, either giving Lawes. or inventing Letters; and yet there were many Kings before Moses; nine Kings named in one Chapter,Gen. 14.1, 2. and what Lawes had they to govern their people besides their own wils? and therefore Master Selden, vi veritatis victus, confesseth that in the first times, in the beginning of States, there were no Lawes but the arbitrements of Princes, as Pomponius speaketh:Pompon. de ori∣gine juris, ff. l. 1. sect. 2. Josephus regnū appellat impe∣rium summum unius hominis, non ex lege, sed ex arbitrio im∣perantis. Anti∣quit. l. 4. Saravia de im∣perand. autor. l. 2. c. 3. Barclaius l. 3. c. 16. Arnis. l. 1. c. 3. p. 49. 50. Irvinus cap. 4. p. 64, 65. and pag. 4. he saith, the people, seeing the inconveniences of popular rule, chose one Monarch, under whose arbitrary rule their happy quiet should be preserved; where also you may observe his great mistake, in making the Monarchy to spring out of the Democracy; when as I have proved before, the Monarchicall government was many hundred of years before we heare mention of any other forme of go∣vernment: but in any government, Doctor Saravia saith, and he saith most truly, Quisquis summum obtinet imperium, sive is sit unus rex, sive pauci nobiles, vel ipse populus universus, supra omnes leges sunt; ratio haec est, quòd nemo sibi fe∣rat legem, sed subditis suis, se legibus nemo adstringit: huc accedit & illa ratio, quòd neque suis legibus teneri possit (scil. rex) cum nemo sit seipso superior, nemo à seipso cogi possit, & leges à superiore tantùm sciscantur, dentúrque inferi∣oribus. And so Arnisaeus saith, and proveth at large, Majestatis essentiam consistere in summa & absoluta potestate, that the being of Majesty and Soveraignty consisteth in the highest and most absolute power. And Irvinus alleadgeth many testimo∣nies out of Aristotle, Cicero, Ʋlpian, Dio, Constant. Harmenopolus, and others, to p ove that Rex legibus non subjicitur. And to make it yet more cleare, that the kings power to rule his people was arbitrary; Sigonius saith most truly, that the power of governing the people was given by God unto Moses before the Law was given; and therefore he called the people to counsell, and without either Judges or Magistrates, jura eisdem reddidit, he administred Justice, and did right to every one of them: So Joshua exercised the same right, and the Judges after him;Sigon. de rep. Heb. l. 7. c. 3. Hoc arbitrari∣um imperium expressit Deus. 1 Sam. 8. & David. Ps. 11. Reges eos in virga serrea. Idem Ibidem. and after the Judges succeeded the Kings, quorum potestai atque autoritas multò major, ut quae non tam à legibus quàm ab arbitrio & voluntate regis profecta sit, whose power and au∣thority was far greater, as proceeding, not so much from the Lawes, as from the arbitrement, and the will of the King, saith Sigonius: for they understood the power of a King in Aristotles sence, Qui solutus legibus plenissimo jure regnaret, who being freed from the Lawes, or not tyed to Lawes, might governe with a plenary right. And so Saul judged Israel, and had altogether the arbitrary power both of life and death; & quodam modo superior legibus fuit, and was af∣ter a sort above the Law, undertaking and making Warr, pro arbitratu suo, ac∣cording to his own will. And in his sixth book he saith, the Jewes had three great Courts or Assemblies. 1. Their Councell, which contained that company,Cap. 2. that handled those things especially, which concerned the State of the whole Common-wealth: as warre, peace, provision, institution of Lawes, creation of Magistrates and the like. 2. Their Synagogue, or the meeting of the whole Congregation or people,Cap. 3. which no man might convocate, but he which had the chiefe rule, as Moses, Jo∣shua, the Judges, and the Kings. 3. Their standing Senate,Cap. 4. Numb. 15. Plenum regnum vocatur quo cuncta rex sua voluntate gerit. Idem. which was appointed of God to be of the seventy Elders; whereof he saith, that although this was alwayes standing for consulta∣tion; yet we must understand that the kings, which had the Common-wealth in their own power, and were not obnoxious to the Lawes, made Decrees of themselves, without the authority of the Senate, ut qui cum summo imperio essent,
as men that were indued with the chiefest rule and command: And we find that the king judged the people two manner of wayes. 1. Alone. 2. Together with the Elders and Priests. 2 Sam. 15 2, 6.For it is said, that Absolon, when any man came to the king for judgment, wish∣ed that he were made Judge in the Land, and he did in this manner to all Israel that came to the king for judgement: and when the people demanded a King instead of Samuel to reigne over them,1 Sam. 8,7. and God said, They had cast him off from being their King; he signifieth most plainly, that while the Judges ruled, which had their chiefest authority from the Law, God reigned over them, because his Law did rule them; but the rule and government being translated unto Kings, God reigned no longer over them; Quia non penes legem Dei, sed penes volun∣tatem unius hominis summa rerum autoritas esset futura; because now all autho∣rity, and all things were not in the power of the Law, but in the power of one mans arbitrary will. But, seeing we are fallen upon the peoples desire of a king, let us examine what right God saith, belongeth unto him; and because that place, 1 Sam. 8. is contradicted by another, Deut. 17. as it seemeth, we will examine both places, and see if Moses doth any wayes crosse Samuel:Deut. 17.14. usque ad finem. and truly I may say of these two places, that, as S. Aug. saith in the like case, Alii atque alii, aliud atque ali∣ud opinati sunt; for some learned men say, that Moses setteth down to the king, legem regendi, the Law by which he should governe the people, without wrong∣ing them; and Samuel setteth down to the people legem pardi, the Law by which they should obey the king, without resisting him whatsoever he should doe to them;Spalat. tom. 2. fol 251. And other Divines say, Haec est potestas legitima, non tyrannica, nec violenta: & ideò quando rex propria negotia non possit expedire per proprias res ac servos, possit pro negotiis propriis tollere res & servos aliorum: & isto modo di∣cebat Deus quod pertinebat ad jus regis,G. Ocham. tract. 2. l. 2. c. 25. this is the lawfull and just right of the king. Therefore to find out the truth, let us a little more narrowly discusse both places. And 1. In the words of Moses, there I observe two speciall things. 1. The charge of the people. 2. The charge of the king. 1. Popular ele∣ction utterly forbidden.1. The people are commanded very strictly, in any wise, saith the Text, to make choice of no king of their own heads, but to accept of him whom the Lord did chuse. 2. The Kings charge.2. The king is commanded to write out the Law, to study it, and to practice it; and he is forbidden to do foure speciall things, which are 1. Not to bring the people back into Egypt, nor to provide the means to bring them, by multiplying his horses. 2. Not to marry many wives that might intice him, as they did Solomon, unto Idolatry. 3. Not to hoord up too much riches. 4. Not to tyrannize over his Brethren. Joseph Anti∣quit. l. 4.And Josephus to the same purpose saith, Si regis cupiditas vos incesserit, is ex eadem gente sit, curam omnino gerat justitiae & aliarum virtutum, caveat verò, ne plus legibus aut Deo sapiat, nihil autem agat sine Pontificis, Senatorúmque senten∣tia, (which Moses hath not) neque nuptiis multis utatur, nec copiam pecuniarum equorúmque sectetur, quibus partis super leges superbiâ efferatur, that is, to be a Tyrant. Rex Jacobus in his true Law of free Mo∣narchs.2. The words of Samuel are set down, 1 Sam. viii. 11. to the 18. verse, whereof I confesse there are severall expositions; some making the same a propheticall prediction of what some of their Kings would doe, contrary to what they should doe, as it was expressed by Moses. So King James himself takes it; others take it Grammatically, for the true right of a King, that may do all this, and yet no way contradict those precepts forecited by Moses; to confirme which
supposition, they say, 1. The phrase here used must beare it out; for as the Hebrew word signifieth, as Pagninus noteth, Morem, aut modum, aut consuetu∣dinem, and many other things, as the place and the matter to be expressed do re∣quire, (because every equivocall word of various signification is not to be taken alike in all places, but is to be interpreted secundum materiam subjectam) yet the Septuagint that should know both the propriety of the word, and the meaning of the Holy Ghost in that place, as well as any other,. Apparet nomen juris significare hic potestatem jure soncessam. Arnisaeus c. 1. p. 216. translate the word to signifie ; and we know the Greek word , which the Septuagint useth, and jus, which the Latine useth, is never taken in the worser sence, the Scripture never using to call vices by the names of vertues, or to give a right to any one to exercise tyranny which then might be better termed jus latronis, because an unjust tyrant is no better then an open thiefe. 2. There is nothing here set downe by Samuel, that is simply forbidden by the Law of God, but that any, the very best Kings may do, as the occasions shall requi e; for, being a King, he must have the royalty of his house supported, and the necessities of his war supplied: and you may read in Herodotus how Dioces, after he was chosen King, had all things granted unto him, that were needfull to express his royall state and mag∣nificence; and here is nothing else in the text; for if you marke it, the Pro∣phet saith not, he should kill their sons, nor ravish their wives, nor yet take their daughters to be his Concubines, which are the properties of a tyrant;Instat terribi∣lis vivis, mori∣entibus haeres. Virginibus rap∣tor, thalamis obscaenus adul∣ter. Divit: busque dies, & nox me∣tuenda maritis; Quisquis vel locuples, pulchra vel conjuge no∣tus, Crimini pulsa∣tur falso; si cri∣mina desunt, Accitus convi∣va perit; mors nulla refugit Artificem—Claudian. de bello Gildon. Bilson diff. fol. 356. but he should take them to support his State, and to maintain his war, which, as his necessities require, is lawfull for him to do; so that, it is not the doing of those things, but the motives that cause the King to do them, or the manner of doing them, that do make it either an unjust tyranny, or the just right of a King; for as Doctor Bilson saith, kings may justly command the goods and bodies of all their Subjects, in the time both of war and peace, for any publique necessity or utility. And Hugo de Sancto Victore saith, Nunquam possessiones à regia potesta∣te ita elongari possunt, quin si ratio postulaverit & necessitas, & illis ipsa potestas debeat patrocinium, & illis ipsae possessiones debeant in necessitate obsequium. And so most Authors say, the Subjects ought to supply the kings necessities, and he may justly demand what is requisite and necessary for his publique occasions; and who shall judge of that necessity but his own conscience? and God shall judge that conscience, which doth unjustly demand what he hath no reason to require; because the greatness of his authority gives him no right to tran∣scend the rules of equity, whereof both God and his conscience will be the im∣partiall Judges. And therefore in Deut. Modus describitur, res non prohibetur; and in Samuel, Jus ponitur, & ratio subintelligitur; for many things may be prohibited in some respect, that in other respects may be allowed; and many things lawfull in some wayes, which otherwayes may be most sinfull; as it is most lawfull to drink, ad satietatem, but not ad obrietatem, and many o∣ther the like things: so it is lawfull for the king to do all that Samuel saith, ad supplendam reipubl. necessitatem, & supportandam regiam majestatem, but not ad satisfaciendum suo fastui, luxui, lucro, vanitati, aut carnali voluptati; which is the thing that Moses forbiddeth: So that in briefe the meaning is, if the Subjects should be unwilling to do what Samuel saith, then the king, when just necessity requireth, may for these lawfull ends lawfully assume them. And if he takes them any other way, or for any other end then so, habet Deum judicem conscientiae, & ultorem injustitiae. But then it may be said,  Ahab did not offend in taking away Naboths vine∣yard, if Samuel did properly describe the right of kings. I cannot say that Ahab sinned in desiring Naboths vineyard,  neither do I finde that the Prophet blames him for that desire; there is not a word of that in the text but for killing Naboth, and then taking possession; for this he might not do, the other he might do, so he do it to a right end, and in the right man∣ner; wherein he failed,
Ahbs sin.1. In being so discontented for his denyal, because his conscience telling him, that he had no such urgent necessity whereby he could take it; and Na∣both being unwilling to sell it, he should have beene satisfied. 2. In suffering his wife, whom he knew to be so wicked, to proceed in her un∣just course against Naboth. Naboths fault3. In going down to take possession, when he knew that by his Wifes wicked practice the poore man was unjustly murdered, when he should have rather questioned the fact, and have punished the murderers Lex posterior derogat priori, specialis genera∣li: & ceremo∣nialia atque fo∣rensia cedunt moralibus.And yet Ahabs sin doth not excuse Naboths fault, both in the denyal of the Kings right, if the king had a just necessity to use it; and also for his uncivil answer unto the King, far unlike the answer of Arauna to King David, but nearer like the answer of Nabal, which the Holy Ghost seemes to take notice of, when after he had said, The LORD forbid it me, which was rather a prayer and postulation that God would forbid it, as we say, absit, when we hear of any displeasing likelyhood; then any declaration of any inhibition of God to sell it, who never denyed them leave to sell it until the yeare of redemption, the Prophet tells us in the next verse, that Naboth said,1 Reg 21.4. Whch very answer seemes to be the cause, why Ahab was so much dis∣pleased. I will not give thee the inheritance of my father. But whether this speech of Samuel sheweth the just right of a King what he might do, or his power what he would do, what belongs to him of equity, or what his practice would be by tyranny, I will not determine: but I say, that although it should not be a just rule for him to command: yet it is a certain rule for them to obey; and though it should not excuse the king from sin, yet it wholly dis∣ables and disavowes the peoples resisting their king; because in all this the Pro∣phet allowes them none other remedy, but to cry unto the Lord: for seeing God hath given him directum dominium,The kings ab∣solute power not given him to inable him for oppression, but to retaine his Subjects from rebellion. & absolutum imperium, though he should fail of his duty, which God requireth, and do that wrong unto the peo∣ple, which God forbiddeth; yet he is solutus legibus, free from all Laws, quoad coactionem, in respect of any coaction from the people, but not quoad obligationem, in respect of obedience to God by his obligation; for though Kings had this plenitu∣dinem potestatis, to rule and govern their people, as the father of the family rules his houshold, or the Pilot directs his Ship, secundum liberum arbitrium, accor∣ding to his own arbitrary will; yet that will was to rule and to guide all his actions according to the strict Law of common equity and justice, as I have often shewed unto you. Diodor. Sicu∣lus, l. 2. c. 3. Boemus Auba∣nus tamen asse∣rit voluntatem regum Aegypti, pro lege esse.But though this arbitrary rule continued long and very general for Diodo∣rus Siculus saith, that excepting the Kings of Egypt that were indeed very strictly tied to live according to Law, all other Kings infinit â licentiâ ac volun∣tate suâ pro lege regnabant, ruled as they listed themselves; Yet at last corruption so prevailed, that either the Kings abusing their power, or the people refusing to yeild their obedience, caused this arbitrary rule to be abridged and limited with∣in the bounds of lawes, whereby the Kings promised and obliged themselves to govern their people according to the rules of those established lawes; for though the supreme Majesty be free from all Lawes, spontè tamen iis accomodare potest, the king may of his own accord yeild to observe the same; and as the German Po∣et saith,German. vates de rebus Frid. l. 8. —Nihil, ut verum fatear, magis esse decorum Aut regalt puto, quàm legis jure solutum Sponte tamen legisese supponere regem. and according to the diversities of those Laws,How diversi∣ties of govern∣ment came up. so are the diversities of govern∣ment, among the several kingdoms of the earth; for I speake not of any Popular or Aristocratical state; therefore as some kings are more restrain∣ed by their Lawes then some others, so are their powers the lesse absolute; and yet all of them being absolute Kings and free Monarchs, are excepted
from any account of their actions to any inferiour jurisdiction; because then they had not been Monarchs, but of Kings had made themselves Subjects. Thus you see, that rule which formerly was arbitrary, is now become limi∣ted, but limited by their own lawes, and with their own wills, and none other∣wise: for I shewed you else-where, that the Legislative power resided al∣wayes in the King, even as Virgil saith,Virgil Aeneid. l. — Gaudet regno Trojanus Acestes, Indicitque forum, & patribus dare jura vocatis. And as that mirror of all learned Kings saith,Rex Jacobus in the true Law of free Mo∣narchs, p. 201. King Fergus came to Scotland before any Statutes, or Parliament, or Lawes were made; and you may easily finde it, that Kings were the makers of the Laws, and not the Lawes the makers of Kings; for the Lawes are but craved by the Subjects, and made onely by him at their roga∣tion, and with their advice: so he gives the Law to them, but takes none from them; and by their own Lawes Kings have limited, and abridged their own Right and Power, which God and nature have conferred upon them, some more, some less, according as their grants were unto their people. §. The extent of the grants of Kings; what they may, and what they may not grant; what our Kings have not granted, in seven speciall prerogatives; and what they have granted unto their people. ANd here I would have you to consider these two points,Two things considerable about the pri∣viledged grants of Kings. 1. The ex∣tent of the grants of kings. Prov. 30.15. concerning these grants of Kings unto their Subjects. 1. Of the extents of these grants, 2. Of the Kings obligation to observe them. for, 1. It is certain, that the people, alwayes desirous of liberty, though that liberty should produce their ruine, are notwithstanding like the daughters of the Horse-leech, still crying unto their Kings, give, give, give us liberties and pri∣viledges more and more; and if they may have their wills, they are never sa∣tisfied, Till Kings by giving, give themselves away, And even that power, which should deny, betray. For the concessions, and giving away of their right to govern,That it is to the prejudice of govern∣ment to grant too many pri∣viledges to the people. is the weak∣ning of their government: and the more priviledges they give, the less pow∣er they have to rule: and then the more unruly will their Subjects be: and therefore the people being herein like the horses the Poets faigne to be in Phae∣bus chariot, proud and stomackfull, Kings should remember the grave advice the Father gave unto Phaeton: Parce puer stimulis, sed fortiùs utere loris: Sponte sua properant, labor est inhibere volantes.Ovid. Met. l. 1 They must be strongly bribled, and restrained, or they will soone destroy both horse and rider, both themselves and their Governours: Yet many Kings,Constrained gifts not wor∣thy of thanks. either forcibly compelled by their unruly Subjects, (when they might think, and therefore not yield, that, Who gives constrain'd, but his own feare reviles, Not thank't, but scorn'd, nor are they gifts, but spoiles.) Or else (as some intruding usurping Kings have done) to retaine their unjust∣ly gained crownes without opposition, or as others, out of their Princely
clemency and facility,What moved Kings to grant so many privi∣ledges to their Subjects. to gain the more love and affection, and as they con∣ceived, the greater obligation from their Subjects, have many times, to the pre∣judice of themselves and their posterity, to the diminution of the rights of go∣vernment, and often to the great damage of the Common-wealth, given away and released the execution of many parts of that right, which originally most justly belonged unto them, and tyed themselves by promises and oaths to observe those Laws, which they made for the exemption of their Subjects. Majora jura inseperabilia à Majestue, ne queunt indul¦geri subditis, & ita cohaerent ossibus, & ab illo separari, si ne illius destru∣ctione non pos∣sunt. Paris. de puteo Arnisaeus l. 2. c. 2. de ju∣re ma. Blacvod. c 7. pag. 75. things that the King cannot grant.But there be some things, which the King cannot grant, as to transfer the right of succession to any other then the right heir, to whom it doth justly be∣long: quia non jam haereditas est: sed proprium adeuntis patrimonium, cujus ei pleno jure dominium acquiritur, non à Patre, non à populo, sed à lege—: Because he hath this right unto the Crown, not from his Father, nor from the people, but from the Law of the Land, and from God himself, which appointed him for the same, saith the Civilian: and therefore that vulgar saying is not absurd, nunquam mori Regem That the King never dyeth: for as soone as ever the one parteth with this life, the other immediately without exspecting the consent either of Peeres or people, doth by a just and plenary right succeed, not onely as his fathers heir, but as the lawful governour of the people, and as the Lord of the whole kingdome, not by any option of any men, but by the condition of his birth, and the donation of his God: and therefore the resignation of the Crown by King John unto the Pope was but a fiction, that could infer no dimi∣nution of the right of his successour: because no King can give away this right from him, whom God hath designed for it. And there be some things, which no Christian King should grant away, as any of those things,things that the King should not grant. that being granted, may prejudice the Church of God, and depresse the glory of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; as the giving way for the diminution of the just revenues of the Church, the prophanation of things conse∣crated to Gods service, and the suppression of any of the divine callings of the Gospel, which are Bishops, Priests and Deacons; because all kings are bound to honour God, and to hinder all those things, whereby he is dishonoured, either in respect of things, persons, or places. Things that kings have not granted away.And there be some things, which the Kings of this realm have never granted away, but have still retained them in their own hands, as inviolable prerogatives and characteristical Symboles and Properties of their Supremacy, and the relicks of their pristine right, as in the time of peace, those two special parts of the go∣uernment of the Common-wealth, which do consist. 1. About the Lawes.1. About the Laws. 2. About the Magistrates. The first whereof, saith Arnisaeus, containeth these particulars, that is, to make Lawes, to create Nobility, and give titles of dignity, to legitimate the ill begot∣ten, to grant Priviledges, to restore Offenders to their lost repute, to pardon the transgressors, and the like. 1. Then it is the right of the King jura dare, to give Laws unto his people: for though (as I said before) the Subjects in Parliament may treat of Lawes,1. Jus Legisla∣tivum. Johan. Beda. Pag. 25. The power of making Lawes is in the King and intreat the King to approve of them that they propose unto him; yet they are no Laws, and carry with them no binding force, till the King gives his con∣sent; and therefore out of Parliament, you see the Kings Proclamation hath vim & vigorem legis, the full force and strength of a Law; to shew unto us, that the power of making Lawes was never yeilded out of Kings hands; nor can it in∣deed be parted with,The case of our affaires, pag. 11. except he part with His Majesty and Soveraignty; for the limiting of his own power, by his voluntary concession of such favours un∣to his people, not to make any Lawes without their consent, doth no way diminish
his Soveraignty, or lessen his own right and authority;Stat. West. 1. 3. E. 1. 3. & 6. & 42. Stat. of Merch. 13. E. 1. West. 3. 18. E. 1. 1. Stat. of Waste. 20. E. 1. of appeale. 28. E. 1. 1. E. 2. 1. and all the ti∣tles and acts of our Parlia∣ments. but as a man that yeild∣eth himself to be bound by some others, hath the use of his strength taken from him, but none of his naturall strength it self is lessened, (and much lesse is any part of it transferred to them that bound him;) but that whensoever his bonds are loosened, he can work again by vertue of his own naturall strength, and not by any received strength from his loosers; so the naturall right and interest of the Soveraignty, being solely in the King, and the Peeres and Commons, by the Kings voluntary concession, being onely interessed in the office of restraining his power, for the more regular working of the true legitimate Soveraignty, it can∣not be denyed, but in whatsoever the Peeres and Commons do remit the re∣straint, by yeilding their consent to the point proposed, the King worketh and acteth therein absolutely by the power of his own inherent Soveraignty; and all acts and lawes so passing doe virtually proceed from the King,How the same acts may be said to be the acts of the King, and of the Parlia∣ment. as from the true and proper efficient author thereof: and may notwithstanding be said to be the acts of the whole Court, because the three estates contribute their power of re∣mitting the restraint, and yeilding their assent, as well as the King useth his unre∣strained power. And therefore Suarez saith, that as condere legem, unus est ex pracipuis actibus gubernationis reipublicae, ita praecipuam & superiorem requirit potestatem, to make Lawes is one of the chiefest acts of the government of a Common-wealth,Suarez. l. 1. c: 8 n. 8. so it requireth the cheifest and supremest power and authority; quae quidem potestas legislativa primariò in Deo est, which legislative power is primarily in God, and is communicated unto Kings (saith he) per quandam participationem, ac∣cording to the saying of the wise man, Heare O ye Kings, because power is given unto you of the Lord.Sap. 6. And Saint Augustine calleth Jura humana jura imperato∣rum, quia ipsa jura humana per imperatores:Aug. in Joan tract 6. all humane lawes are the lawes of Emperors or Kings, because they are made by them, and the Holy Ghost speaking of the Kings of Judah, saith, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet; to teach us,Gen. 49.10. that whosoever swayeth the Scepter hath the right to be the Law-maker, which is one of the prime prerogatives of Soveraignty. 2. Jus nobilitandi, the right of appointing the principall Officers of State;2. Ius nobili∣tandi. to cry up any of all his Subjects, whom the King will honour, as Pharaoh did Joseph, and Ahasuerus did Haman and Mordecai, and to give them titles of ho∣nour, per codicillos honorarios, aut per diplomata sua, as to make Dukes, Mar∣quesses, Barons, Knights, &c. doth belong onely unto the King, that hath one∣ly the supreme Majesty. But if the Dukes, Earles, and Barons be so plyable to the Puritan faction,It is the Do∣ctrine of the Anabaptists and Puritans, that there should be no Degrees of Schooles, nor titles of ho∣nour among men. to put down the spiritual Lords, I doubt that e're long the King shall have but few Nobility; when not onely the Mechanicks and Rusticks will all cry out against this Lordlinesse, and say, as they did in the rebellion of Jack Cade and Wat Tyler. When Adam delv'd, and Eve span, Who was then the Gentleman? And why should we now indure so many titles of vanity, and so many vain ho∣nours to vapour it over us? but the Puritan Clergy also, seeing themselves deprived of their due honour, and made all equall, all as base as Jeroboams Priests, will be apt enough to blow up this conceit, and to put it into the Creed of all the vulgar, that God made us all equall, and to be Lords is but to be tyrants over their Brethren; and the Presbytery, whose pride could not obey the authority of their Bishops, will not abide the superiority of any Lords; but if they cannot Lord it themselves, will be sure to take away the Lordship from all others. And therefore if the Nobility be not wiser, then to lay our honours in the dust, (as I see some about his Majesty, that would faine be the Priests to bury it,
which meere policy, though they wanted piety, should prohibit) they shall find that Virgil. Aeneid. l. 1.Jam tua res agitur paries cùm proximus ardet. When our Cottages are burnt, their next Palaces shall not escape the fire; but through our sides their Honours shall be killed, and buried without honour. 3. Jus legiti∣mandi.3. Jus legitimandi, the right of legitimation belongs unto the King, without which legitimation the Lawyers tell us, that as the world now standeth, a mighty emolument would happen unto the Crown, if the King granted not this grace to them that want it. 4. Ius appella∣tiones recipi∣endi. Act. 25.11.4. Jus appellationes recipiendi, the right of taking notice of causes, and of judging the same by the last appeale definitively, doth alwayes belong to the supreme Ma∣jesty; because that as Saint Paul appealed unto Caesar, so the last appeale is to the highest Soveraigne, from whom there lyeth none appeale, but onely to him that shall judge all the Judges of the earth. 5. Honores re∣stituendi.5. Jus restituendi in integrum, the right to restore men attainted, or banished, or condemned to death, unto their Country, wealth, and honour, is likewise a part of the royall right.Osorius de rebus Imman. p. 6. So Osorius saith, that Immanuel King of Portugall re∣stored James son of Fernandus, and his brother Dionysius, and others, unto their forfeited honours; and so not onely the Scripture sheweth how David pardon∣ed Absolon and Shimei,1 Reg. 2.26. two wicked Rebels, and Solomon pardoned Abiathar that were all worthy of death;Ventam crimi∣uosis indulgere. but also Saint Augustine speaking of other Kings and Emperours, saith, judicibus statuendum est ne liceat in reum datam sententiam re∣vocare, the Judges may not pardon a man condemned to death; numquid & ipse Imperator sub hac lege erit? but shall not the Emperour or King pardon him? are they likewise under this Law of restraint? by no meanes: Nam ipsi soli licet revocare sententiam, & reum mortis absolvere, & ipsi ignoscere; for he and he alone, that is, the Emperour or King, may revoke the sentence, and absolve him that is guilty of death. And so our King according to this his undenyable right,Our kings un∣parallel'd cle∣mency and pie∣ty towards the Rebels. hath most graciously, and not seldome, offered his pardon unto these intole∣rable Rebels, a pardon not to be parallel'd in any History, nor to be beleived, unlesse we had seen it, that a man could be so far inclined to clemency and mercy, as to remit such transcendent impiety, which will render them the more odious both to God and man; and their names the more infamous to all posterity, that after they had filled themselves with all kind of wickednesse, with incredible transgressions, they should be sound contemners of so favourable a pardon. But though it be the Kings right to pardon faults, and to restore offenders; yet herein all Princes should take great heed (especially when they have power to take revenge,2. Sam. 3.39. for sometimes the sinners may be like the sons of Zervia, too strong for David) how they pardon those great crimes that are committed to the dishonour of God, and do so far provoke him to anger, as to plague both the doers and the sufferers of them; because, that although they be soluti legibus suis, not bound to their own Lawes,Arnisaeus l. 1. c. 3. pag. 69. yet they are not soluti ratione & praeceptis divinis, but they are bound to observe Gods Lawes, and to punish the transgressors of his Commandments; or if they do not when they can do it, they shall render a strict account to God for all their omissions, as they may see it in the example of King Saul.1 Sam. 15.9. 6. Jus convo∣candi Synodos, Parliamenta, &c.6. Jus convecandi, the right of calling Synods, Parliaments, Dyets, and the like, were the rights of the kings of Israel, and are the just Prerogatives of the kings of England, howsoever this faction of the Parliament hath sought to wrest it, as they do all other rights out of the kings hands, by their presumption to call their Schismaticall Synod, to which they have no more colour of right, then to call a Parliament. 7. Jus mone tas excudendi. Matth. 22.20.7. Jus excudendi, the right of coyning mony, to give it value, to stampe his armes or his image upon it, (as our Saviour saith, Whose Image and superscripti∣on is this? and they say to him Caesars) is the proper right of Caesar, the preroga∣tive of the king.
The second sort of the King's right is circa Magistratus,2. About the Magistrates. and containeth ju∣risdiction, rule, creation of officers, appointing of circuits, provinces, judge∣ments, censures institution of Scholes and Colledges, collation of dignities, receiving of sidelities, and abundance more; whereof I intend not to speak at this time, but refer my Reader to Arnisaeus, de jure Majestatis, if he desires to be informed of these particulars.Arn s l. 2. c. 2. And as these and the like are jura Regalia, the rights of Majesty in the time of peace; so when peace cannot continue, it doth properly belong unto the King, and to none else, but to him that hath the Sovereignty, whose right it is alone, to make war, either to succour his allyes, or to revenge great injuries, or for any the like just causes; and, as he seeth cause, to conclude Peace, to send Ambassadours, to negotiate with foreign States, and the like, are the rights of Kings, and the indeleble Characters of Soveraignty, which whosoever viola∣teth, and endeavoureth to purloin them from the King, doth with Prometheus steal fire from Heaven, which the Gods would not suffer (as the Poëts feign) to go unrevenged. And these things (so far as I can finde) the King never parted with them unto his Subjects; and therefore whosoever pretendeth to an inderived power to do any of these, and exempteth himself from the King's right herein, resisteth the ordinance of God, and is guilty of High-Treason,Ioh. Beda. 26. what pretext soever he brings, saith the Advocate of Paris. And there be some things which our Kings have granted unto their Subjects,Ita itiam Reges Aegypti quibus. voluntas pro le∣ge est, legum ta∣men instituta in cogendis pecuni∣is, quotidianoque victu sequeban∣tur. Aubanus. What things Kings have granted. and restrained themselves from their full right; as the use of that power, which makes new Lawes, or repeals the old, or layeth any tax or sums of monies upon his Subjects without the consent of the Lords and Commons in Parlia∣ment; and it may be some other particulars, which the Lawyers know better then I. And all these Priviledges of the Subjects are but limitations and restrictions of the King's right, made by themselves unto their people; and therefore where the Law cannot be produced to confirm such and such Liberties and Priviled∣ges granted unto them, I say there the King's power is absolute, and the Sub∣ject ought not in such cases to determine any thing to the disadvantage of the King: because all these Liberties that we have, are injoyed by vertue of the King's grant, as you may see in the ratification of Magna Charta; where the King saith, We have granted and given all these Liberties. But I could never see it produced,9 Hen. 3. where the King granted unto his Subjects that they might force him, and compel him with a strong hand, by an Army of Soul∣diers to do what they will, or else to take away either his Crown or his Life, this Priviledge was never granted, because this deprives the King of his supre∣macy, and puts him in the condition of a Subject, and would ever prove an occasion of rebellion, when the people upon every discontent would take Arms against their King. And therefore this present resistance is a meer usurpation of the King's right, a rebellion against his Lawes, an High Treason against his Person, and a resistance of the ordinance of God, which heap of deadly sins can bring none other fruit then damnation, saith the Apostle.
CHAP. XIV. Sheweth the Kings grants unto his people to be of three sorts. Which ought to be observed: the Act of excluding the Bishops out of Parliament discussed: the King's Oath at his Coronation: how it obligeth him: and how Statutes have been procured and re∣pealed. 2. The Kings obligation to observe his grants. Peter de la Pri∣mandas saith, Laws annexed to the Crown the Prince can∣not so abrogate them, but his Successor may disannul what∣soever he hath done in preju∣dice of them. p. 597.2. WE are to consider how far the King is obliged to observe his pro∣mise, and to make good these Liberties and Priviledges unto his Sub∣jects; where I speak not how far the father's grant may oblige the son, or the predecessor his successor, who cannot be deprived of his right dominion by any act of his predecessors; but for the rights of his dominion, how far precedent grants, and the custom of their continuance, with the desuetude and non-claim of his right, may strengthen them unto the Subject, and oblige the successors to observe them, I leave it unto the Lawyers and Civilians to dispute: but I am here to discusse how far the King, that hath promised and taken his oath to ob∣serve his Lawes, and make good all priviledges granted to his Subjects, is bound in conscience to keep and observe them: Touching which, you must under∣stand, that these grants of immunities and favours are of three special kindes. 1. Of grace. 2. By fraud. 3. Through fear. For, 1. The King that hath his full right, either by conquest or succession over his people,1. All grants of grace ought to be observed. to govern them as a most absolute Monarch, and out of his meer grace and favour, to sweeten the subjection of his people, and to binde them with the greater love and affection to his obedience, doth minuere sua jura, restrain his absolute right, bestow liberties upon his people, and take his oath for their security, that he will observe them, is bound in all conscience to per∣form them, and can never be freed from injustice before God and man, if he transgresse them:The true Law of free Mo∣narchs, p. 203. Quia volenti fit non injuria, because they do him no injury, when he doth voluntarily, either totally resign, or in some particularity diminish his own right; but after he hath thus firmely done it, he can never iustly go from it: and therefore King James saith, that a King which governeth not by his Lawes, can neither be accountable to God for his administration, nor have a happy and established Raign; because it cannot be, but that the people seeing their King failing of his duty, will be always murmuring and defective in their fidelity. And Yet the King's breach of oath doth neither forfeit his right, nor warrant their distoyalty: because another mans sin doth no way lessen mine offence, and neither God nor the King granted this priviledge unto Subjects, to rebel and take Armes against their Soveraign, when they pretend he hath broken his pro∣mise. 2. Grants ob∣tained through fraud; which to be observed.2. When the King through the subtile perswasions of his people, that pre∣tend one thing, and intend another, shall be seduced to grant those things that are full of inconveniencies; as our King was over-reached, and no better then meerly cheated by the faction of this Parliament, to grant the continuance of it, till it should be dissolved with the consent of both Houses, and the like Lawes that are procured by meer fraud, that soonest over-reacheth the best meaning Kings. I answer with the old Proverb, Caveat emptor, he ought to have been as wise to prevent them, as they were subtile to circumvent him; and there∣fore,
as Joshua, being deceived by the Gibeonites, could not alter his promise,Josh. 9.20. nor break his league with them, lest wrath should fall upon him, so no more should any other King break promise in the like case. But you must observe, that the Psalmist saith,Psal. 15.5. The good man which shall dwell in the Tabernacle of the Lord, is he that sweareth unto his neighbour and disappointeth him not, though it were to his own hinderance: mark,Quicquid fit do∣lo malo, annul∣lat factum & imponit poenam, summa Angel. though it were to his own hinderance never so much, he must perform it; but what if he hath promised and sworn that which will be to the great dishonour of God, to the hinderance of thousands of others, and it may be to the ruine of a whole Kingdom, which is a great deal more then his own hinderance, is a King bound, or is any man else obliged to perform such a promise, or to keep such an oath? to tell you mine own judgement, I think he ought not to perform it; and our own Law tels us what grants soever are obtained from the King, under the broad Seal by fraud and deceit, those grants are void in Law; therefore, see∣ing the Act for the perpetuity of this Parliament was obtained, dolo pessimo, to the great dishonour of God, and the ruine both of Church and State, when their pretence was very good; though the goodness of his Majesty in the tenderness of his conscience was still loath to allow himself the liberty to dissolve it, until he had other juste and more clear causes to pronounce it no Parliament, as the a∣busing of his grant to the raising of an Army, and the upholding of a Rebelli∣on against their Soveraign; yet I believe he might safely have done it long a∣gone, without the least violation of God's Law, when their evil intentions were openly discovered by those Armies which they raised. For I doubt not to affirm it with the Authour of The sacred Prerogative of Christian Kings, p. 144. if any good Prince, or his royal Ancestors have been cheated out of their sacred right by fraud o force, he may at the fittest opportunity, when God in his wise providence offereth the occasion, resume it, especially when the Subjects do abuse the King's concessions, to the dammage of Soveraignty, so that it re∣dounds also to the prejudice either of the Church or Common-wealth. 3. When the King, through fear, not such as the Parliaments fear is,3. Grants got∣ten by force not to be ob∣served. who were afraid where no fear was, and were frighted with dreames and causelesse jealousies; but that fear, which is real, and not little, but such as may fall in fortem & constantem virum, doth passe any Law, especially that is prejudicial to the Church, and injurious to many of his Subjects; I say, that when he shall be freed from that fear, he is not onely freed from the obligation of that Law, but he is also obliged to do his uttermost endeavour to annul the same: it is true, that his fear may justly free him from all blame at the passing of it, as the fear of the thief may clear me from all fault in delivering my purse unto him; be∣cause these are no voluntary acts, and all acts are adjudged good or evil ac∣cording to the disposition of the will; the same being like the golden bridle that Minerva was said to put upon Pegasus to guide him and to turn him as she pleased: but when his fear is past,The will must never consent to forced acts that are un∣lawful. His Majesties answer to the Petition of the Lords and Commons, 16. Julii p. 8. and God hath delivered him from the insur∣rection of wicked doers, if his will gives consent to what before he did unwilling, who can free the greatest Monarch from this fault? Therefore His Majesty confessing (which we that saw the whole proceedings of those tumultuous routs, that affrighted all the good Protestants and the Loy∣al Subjects, do know that it could not be otherwise,) that he was driven out of London for fear of his life; I conclude that the act of excluding the Bishops out of Parliament, being past after his flight out of London can be no free, nor just, nor lawful act; and the King when he is more fully informed of many parti∣culars about this act, that is so prejudicial to the Church of Christ, and so in∣jurious to all his servants, the Clergy whose rights and priviledges the King promised and sware at His Coronation to maintain, cannot continue it in my judgement, and be innocent. But this is answered by the answerer to Doctour Ferne,Ob. Pag. 31. that he is no more bound to defend the rights of the Clergy by his oath, then the rest of the Lawes for∣merly
enacted, whereof any may be abrogated without perjury, when they are desi∣red to be annulled by the Kingdome. Sol. His Majesties answer to the remonstrance, or declaration of the Lords and Com∣mons 26. of May, 1642.To which I say, that as His Majesty confesseth, there are two speciall questi∣ons demanded of the king at His Coronation. 1. Sir, Will you grant and keep, and by your oath confirm to the people of Eng∣land, the Lawes and Customes to them granted by the Kings of England, your law∣full and religious predecessors? And the king answereth, I grant and promise to keep them. 2. After such questions, as concerne all the commonalty of this kingdome, both Clergy and Laity, as they are his Subjects, one of the Bishops reads this admonition to the king before the people with a loud voice; Our Lord and King, we beseech you to pardon, and to grant, and to preserve un∣to us, and to the Churches committed to our charge all Canonicall priviledges, and due law and justice, and that you would protect and defend us, as every good King in His Kingdome ought to be the protector and defender of the Bishops, and the Churches under their Government, And the king answereth, With a willing and devout heart I promise and grant my pardon, and that I will preserve and maintaine to you and the Churches committed to your charge, all Canonicall Priviledges, and due law and Justice, and that I will be your Protector and defender to my power, by the assistance of God, as every good king in His kingdome, in right, ought to protect and defend the Bishops and Churches under their Government. The Kings Oath at His Coronation two-fold.Then the king laying his hand upon the book, saith, the things which I have before promised, I shall performe and keep, so helpe me God, and the contents of this Book. Where I beseech all men to observe, that here is a two-fold promise, and so a two-fold oath. The first part of the Oath. Populo Angli∣cano. Vide D. p. 165.1. The one to all the Commonalty and people of England, Clergy and Laity; and so whatsoever he promiseth, may by the consent of the parties, to whom the right was transferred, be remitted and altered by the representative body in Parliament, quia volenti non fit injuria, and the rule holds good, quibus medis contrahitur contractus, iisdem dissolvitur; and therefore as any compact, or con∣tract is made good and binding, so it may be made void and dissolved, mutuo contrahentium assensu; by the mutuall assent of both parties; that is, any com∣pact, where God hath not a speciall interest in the contract, as he hath in the conjugall contract betwixt man and wife, and the politicke covenant betwixt the King and His Subjects;Contracts, wherein God is interessed, cannot be dis∣solved without God. which therefore cannot be dissolved by the consent of the parties, untill God, who hath the cheifest hand in the contract, gives his as∣sent to the dissolution; and so, when things are dedicated for the service of God, or Priviledges granted for his honour; neither donor nor receiver can alienate the gift, or annull that Priviledge, without the leave and consent of God, that was the principal party in the concession, as it appeareth in the example of A∣nanias, and is confirmed by all Casuists. The second part of the oath. Clericls Ecclesi∣asticis. D. p. 165.2. The other part of the oath is made to the Clergy in particular; and so also with their consent, some things I confess, may perhaps be revoked, but with∣out their consent, not any thing can be altered, in my understanding, without injustice; for, with what equity can the Laity vote away the rights of the Cler∣gy, when the Clergy do absolutely deny their assent? just as if the Clergy should give away the lands of the Laity; or as if I had lent the king ten thousand pounds upon the publique assurance of King and both Houses, to be repaid again; and they without mine assent, shall vote the remission of this debt, for some great benefit,The party to whom the bond is made, must release the bonds. that they conceive redounding to the Common-Wealth; by which vote I should beleive my selfe to be no better then meerely cheated; or, as if the Par∣liament, without the assent of the Londoners, should pass an act, that all the mo∣ney which they lent, should be remitted for the releiving of the State; I doubt
not, but they would conclude that act very unjust; and so is this act against the Bishops; because the Kings obligation to a particular body, personall or poli∣tique, cannot be dispensed with by the representative Kingdome without the releasement of that body, to whom the King is obliged. For I find that all the Casuists will tell you, that juramentum promissorium ita obligat, ut invito creditore, non potest in melius commutari; quia aliter justitia & veritas non servarentur inter homines: and it is their common tenet,Suarez. de ju∣ramento pro∣miss. l. 2. c. 12. n. 14. that it cannot be dispensed with, quia per promissum acquiritur jus ei cui fit promissio, & utilitas unius non sufficit ut alter suo jure privetur, the benefit of others must not deprive me of my right; This point is so cleare, that neither Scholer, nor any man of reason or conscience will deny it. Therefore to perswade the king, that is bound by his oath to preserve the Rights and Priviledges of the Church and Clergy, to cast out the Bishops out of their rights, or to take away their Lands, without their own consent (whom the king by his oath hath obliged himself to protect;) I cannot see how they can do it without great iniquity, or His Majesty consent to it, and be innocent, when he is fully informed of the Rights of his Clergy; whereas otherwise the most religi∣ous Prince may be subject to mistakings, and so nesciently admit that, which wil∣lingly he would never have granted. And if they can not perswade him to do this without iniquity, how dare they goe about to force and compell him against conscience, to commit this and such other horrible impiety? but I assure my self that God, who hath blessed our king, and preserved him hitherto without blame, as being forced to what he did, or not throughly understanding what was our right, the Bishops being imprisoned, and not suffered to informe him, nor to answer for themselves, will still arme His Majesty with that resolution, as shall never yeild to their impetuousnesse, to transcend the limits of his own most up∣right conscience. Yet still it is urged, they were excluded by act of Parliament,  therefore their exclusion cannot be unjust, as being done by the wisdome of the whole State, and the king should not desire it to be altered. I answer, that all Parliaments are not alwayes guided by an unerring spirit,  but were many times swayed by the heads of the most powerfull faction,The case of our affairs. p. 17. How power∣full factions have procured Parliaments to doe most un∣just things. Turba tremens sequitur fortu∣nam, ut semper & odit damna∣tos. Juven. Sa∣tyra. 10. When Kings were most powerfull, they could get the Parliaments to yeeld to what Statutes they thought best; when the Lords or faction were most powerful, they forced their Kings to make what Statutes they liked best. which are instances rather of their unsteady weaknesse, then of their just power; when forsaking the guidance of their lawfull head, they suffered themselves to be led by popular pretenders, as when Canutus prevailed by his armes, he could have a Parliament to resolve, that his title to the Crown was the best; when Hen. 4. had an army of 60000 men, he could have a Parliament to depose Rich. 2. and confer the Crown upon himself; when Edw. Duke of Yorke grew powerfull, he could have a Parliament to determine the reigne of Hen. 6. and leave him only the name of king, for his life, but give the very Kingdome unto the Duke, under the names of Protector and Regent; and then he could procure the Parliament to declare that Hen. 4. Hen. 5. and Hen. 6 were but kings de facto, non de jure; so Rich. the 3. as meere an Usurper as any, could notwithstanding procure a Parlia∣ment, to declare him a lawfull king, and Hen. 7. could procure the forementioned acts, that were made in favour of Edw. 4. and Rich. 3. to be annulled; and Hen. 8. could have a Parliament to justifie and authorize his divorces, and Queen Elizab. could have a Parliament to make it high treason for any man to say, that the Queen could not by Act of Parliament bind and dispose the rights and titles, which any person whatsoever might have unto the Crown: when as we know, it was adjudged in Hen. 7. that no Act of Parliament, nor yet an Attainder by Parliament, can disable the right heire to the Crown; because the descent of the Crown upon him purges all disabilityes whatsoever, and makes him every way capable thereof. Thus, as the Parliaments, when they were most prevalent, caused their kings unwillingly to yeeld many things against right; so the kings, growing most powerfull, prevailed to work the Parliament to consent to very unjust conclusi∣ons:
and therefore it is inconsequent to say, this exclusion must be just, because it is past by an Act of Parliament. The case of our affaires. p. 20.And therefore, as in the 15 yeare of Edw. 3. the king being unwillingly drawn to consent to certain Articles, prejudiciall to the Crown, and to promise to seale the Statute thereupon made, lest otherwise his affairs in hand might have been ruinated, (which we conceive to be just in like manner now, the king very unwillingly drawn to passe this Act for the exclusion of the Clergy, which is most prejudiciall both to the Crown and the Church, and a mighty dishonour unto God himself, lest otherwise more mischiefe might have followed, when he hoped that this would have appeased the fury of that prevalent faction, which now the kingdome seeth it did not.) Another Statute was made the same year, reciting the former matter,Statutes un∣willingly pro∣cured from the king, repealed. that was enacted, in these words; It seemed to the said Earls, Barons, and otherwise men, that since the Statute did not of our free will proceed, the same to be void, and ought not to have the name, nor strength of a Statute, and therefore by their counsell and assent, we have decreed the said Statute to be void, &c. So I hope our Earles and Baron,, and the rest, will be so wise and so just, both to the king and to the Church, that seeing this Statute proceeded not of the kings free will, as I beleeve their own conscience knoweth, and do presume His Majesty will acknowledge, they likewise will consent, that the king may make it void again. §. Certaine Quaeres discussed, but not resolved; the end for which God ordained Kings; the prayse of a just rule: Kings ought to be more just then all others in three respects; and what should most especially move them to rule their people justly. AND here I must further craue leave, to be resolved in certain Quaeres and doubts, wherein I would very gladly be satisfied; for, seeing, as I told you before, there are some rights of royalty, which are inseperabilia à majestate, which the king ought not, and which indeed he cannot grant away; as there be some things which he may forgoe, though he need not; I demand, 1. Whether any positive Act, Statute, or Law, that is, either ex diametro, or ex obliquo, either directly, or by consequent, or any other way contradictory, or trans∣gressive to the Law of God, ought to be kept and observed; wherein I beleive, and constantly maintain that it ought not: and I say further, that by the Word of God, not any Lay men, be they never so noble, never so learned, and never so many; but the Clergy, be they never so poore, and never so much dis-esteemed, ought to be the resolvers of this point, what is repugnant, and what consonant to the Law of God;Malach. 2.7. because the Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and the people must seek the Law at his month; therefore it may be conceived no Statute can be rightly made, that is not assented to, and approved (as all our former Statutes were) by the Bishops, that are the chiefest of the Clergy, to be no wayes contra∣ry to the Law of God. 2. Whether the king that is an absolute Monarch, to whom God hath com∣mitted the charge and government of his people, can without offence to God, change this forme of government, from a Monarchicall to an Aristocraticall, or a Democraticall forme of government; which may be beleived he cannot; be∣cause, though as I shewed out of Saint Augustine, the worser forme, invented by man, may lawfully be changed into a better: yet the best, which is onely and primarily ordained by God, cannot be changed into a worser without of∣fence. 3. Whether the king can passe away that power, authority, and right, which God hath given him, and without which he cannot govern and protect his people, that God hath committed under his charge; wherein it may be conceived he
cannot, because God must discharge him from the charge that he imposed upon him before he can be freed and excused from it; but, as the Bishop, on whom the Lord hath laid the charge of soules, cannot lay aside this charge when he pleaseth, so no more can the King lay aside the charge of the Government, nor pat with that power and right,Otherwise then by sub∣stitution. Rege absente & durante bene∣placito; or, quamdiu se be∣nè gesserint sub∣stituti. whereby he is inabled to govern them, and without which he cannot governe them, untill God, that laid this charge upon him, and gave him full power and authority to do it, by some undeniable dis∣pensation gives him his Writ of ease to discha ge him. 4. Whether such an Act or Statute, which disinableth any King to dissolve his Dyet, Councill, Assembly, or Parliament, and inableth some subtle faction of his Subjects, in some sort, to countermand their King, be not derogatory to the inseperable right of Majesty, destructive to the power of government, and prejudicial to all the loyall Subjects, and therefore void of it selfe, and not to be observed; because such an act ought not to have been concluded:The Act for the indissolu∣bility of any Parliament, be∣leived by ma∣ny, to be of it selfe void. wherein I leave the resolution to be dete mined by the Judges and Bishops of this Land, and I will onely crave leave to set down what may be thought herein, viz. that such an Act or Statute is clearly and absolutely void. 1. Because that hereby the King may be said, after a sort, and in some kinde, to change the fundamentall constitution, and Government of his Kingdome, from an absolute Monarchy, to another species, and forme of Government, either Aristocraticall, or Democraticall, or some other forme, emergent out of all these, such as we know not how to terme it, and such as was never known from the beginning of the world; a mixture indeed, which, I told you before, no absolute King can be thought to do without offence, unless he can prove his licence from God to do the same. 2. Because that hereby he may be said to denude himselfe of his Right, and by depriving himselfe of this power, to disinable himselfe to discharge that du∣ty, which God doth necessarily require at his hands; that is, to govern his peo∣ple, by protecting the innocent, and punishing the wrong doer; and when God shall call the King to an account, why he did not thus governe his people, and de∣fend those poore Subjects that were loyal and faithful both to God and their King, according to the charge that he laid upon him, and the right and power which he gave him to discharge it: It may be feared, it will be no sufficient answer for any King to say, but I have so laid away that power, and parted with that right unto my Lords and Commons, that I could not do it; for it may be ask∣ed, where doth God require him, or when did he authorize him to devest him∣selfe of that authority wherewith he indued him? how then can he do it, to the undoing of many people, without an assured leave from God? therefore, as that Act which was made unrepealable, was adjudged no Act, but immediately void, because it was destructive to the very power of Parliament,Which may repeale their owne Acts, but not de∣stroy their just power, not themselves, as it seemes the Act of exclu∣ding the Bi∣shops doth, and takes a∣way as it were the soule of the Parlia∣ment. and if any act should be made to destroy common right, or to hinder the publique ser∣vice of God, or to disinable the right heire to injoy the Crowne, or the like, those Acts are void of themselves; so any Statute that disinableth the Kings Government, must needs be void ipso facto; as I have partly shewed in my Dis∣covery of Mysteries. p. 32. 3. Because it may be beleived no King would ever grant such an act, unless he were either subtilly deceived and seduced, or forcibly compelled thereunto, for feare of some inavoidable extremity, which (according to all outward ap∣pearance) could not otherwise be prevented, without the concessions of such unspeakable disadvantages; as a man gives away his sword when he seeth his life in danger, if he deliver it not: Therefore the premises con∣sidered. 5. The Quaere is, whether any King should be bound and obliged to observe such grants, and make good such Acts,In all these Quaeries I con∣clude nothing whatsoever I beleive. as are thus fraudulently obtained, or forcibly wrested from him, and are thus contradictory to Gods will, thus prejudiciall to the power of Government, and thus destructive to his
Subjects: which for the fore said reasons is by many men beleived he is not; but that this right was unduly procured from him, so when God inableth him, he may justly acquire it, and re-assume it, without any offence to God, or the least reluctancy to his own conscience. And if this Act, that hath passed in our Parliament, makes it immediately to be no Parliament,As I know not whether it doth or not; neither will I determine it. as being now another forme of government, which the Divines hold, ought not to be effected; then certainly all Acts that passed since, are no Acts, but are void and invalid of themselves. Or be it granted, that the Act for the perpetuity of Parliament doth not annul the Parliament; yet it is doubted by many, whether the Parliament may not themselves, without the kings pronouncing it void or dissolved, make it no Parliament:Quid prodest ti∣bi nomen usur∣pare alienum, & vocari quod non es? when of Counsellors for the King, they become Traytors unto the King, and of Patriots, that should protect the Common-wealth, they become Parricides and Catilines unto the same: because these duties, being as the soul, the life, and the end of Parliaments, when these are changed, to be the bane and death of King and Kingdome, it is doubted how it can be a Parliament, any more then a dead carkase that is deprived of his soul, can be said to be a man; for the circumstances and ceremonies of times, places, and the like, are not essentialia Parliamenti, but as accidentia, quae possunt adesse & abesse sine interita subjecti, and may be ad benè esse, but are as Punctilio's in respect of the end and essence of a Parliament. And therefore, as God promiseth infallibly to do a thing, for example, that He will not fail David,Psal. 89.34. 1 Sam. 2.30. his seed shall endure for ever: and of Eli, he said in∣deed, that his house and the house of his father should walke before him for ever; yet this unchangeable God, when the change is wrought in David, or his seed or in Eli his house, David doth immediately say, Thou hast abhorred and for∣saken thine Anointed,Psal. 89.37. 1 Sam. 2.30. and art displeased at him; and of his promise to Eli, God saith in the same place, now be it far from me; so it may be conceived, that when any Parliament changeth its nature,I should never acknowledge Judas after he betrayed his master, and re∣solved to per∣sist in his wick∣ednesse, to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ, no more then I should take the Temple of Jerusalem to be the house of God, so long as it continu∣ed the den of theeves. faileth in its very being, and of a preservative becomes a poyson, both to the King and Kingdome; the King and Kingdome may then, without any change in themselves, or failing of their for∣mer promises, justly say, they are no Parliament; but, as the Romans said un∣to a worthy Patriot, that had formerly saved them from the Senones, and at last became an enemy to the State, We did honour thee as our deliverer, when thou didst save us from the Senones, sed jam nobis es quasi unus ex Senonibus; so may we say of any Parliament, that turnes to be the destruction of a Common-wealth; that it is but a shadow, and no substance; a den of theeves and no Par∣liament of Counsellours: And I assure my selfe much more may be spoken, and many inanswerable arguments may be produced to confirm this to be most true; so I have set down what I conceive to be true about the Kings grants and con∣cessions unto his people, and his obligations to observe them. And if His Majesty (whom I unfainedly love, and heartily honour, and in whose service, as I have most willingly spent my slender fortunes, so I shall as readily hazard my dearest life) be offended with me for setting down any of these things, that my conscience tells me to be true, and needful to be known, and my duty to declare them; I must answer in all humility and with all reve∣rence, that, remembring what Lucian saith, , many men shunning the smoake fell into the fire; and that Job saith, Timentes pruinam opprimentur à nive, which Saint Gregory moralizeth of them, that fearing the frost of mans anger, which they may tread under foot, shall be over∣whelmed with the snow of Gods vengeance, that fals from Heaven, and cannot be avoided; I had rather suffer the anger of any mortal man, then endure the wrath of the great God; and now I have freed my soule, let what will come of my body: I will fear God, and honour my King. 5 The end for which God or∣dained Kings,5. We are to consider the end for which God ordained the King to rule and govern his people; and that is, to preserve justice and to maintain peace
through out all the parts of his Dominions; for as the Subjects may neither murmur nor resist heir Soveraign, at any time, for any cause, so the King must not do any wrong or injustice to his meanest Subject; neither do we presse the obedience of the Subject, to give licence unto the King to use them as he listeth, but we tell Kings their duties, as well as we do to the Subjects, and that is to doe justice unto the afflicted, and to execute true judgement among all his people: for as Plato saith,Psal 82.3. Zachar. 7 9.  all men cry out with one mouth how beautiful a thing is temperance and righteousnesse: Cicero calleth her the Lady and Mistresse of all virtues: and Pindarus saith, that ,Cice, o offic. l. 3. a golden eye and a golden countenance are always to be seene in the face of justice, and that Jupiter Soter dwelleth together with Themis: whereby he would give us to under∣stand, regem servatorem esse justum:Pindar. apud A∣then. Cl. Alex. and Sirom, l. 5 that a King must preserve his people by justice, as Clemens Alexand. expoundeth it: because as Theognis pag. 431. saith, , justice is that virtue, which comprehends all virtues in it self; and therefore Solomon saith, that the Kings throne is esta∣blished by righteousnesse: and justice exalteth a Nation,Prov. 16.12. c. 14 34. injustice de∣stroyeth King∣domes. making it to flourish and famous; and justice destroyeth the people, when a Kingdome is translated from nation to Nation because of unrighteousnesse; the same being as it was said of Car∣thage fuller of sins then of people: as you see the Monarchy of the Assyrians was translated unto the Medes and Persians, and the most famous repub. of the Romanes was spoiled, when forgetting their pristine honesty, they became un∣just.Lucan. l. 1. — Mensuráque juris Vis erat. — And the Law was measured by strength, and he had the best right which was most powerful: and so the ancient nation of the Britons came to utter ruine and destruction, propter avaritiam principum, injustitiam judicum, negligentiam Epis∣coporum, & luxuriam populi, saith Gildas.Ezechiel. 33.11. and 18.22. Judges 17.6. Dan. 2.21.37. 1 Chron. 2 84. 1 Sam. 10.1. 1 Reg. 19 15. Romans 13.4. Tertul. ad Scap. c. 21. Optat. cont. Par∣men. l. 3. p. 8. 5. Auson in Mo∣nosyll. Et id possumus quod jure possu∣mus. Chrysost. ad Pop. Antioch. hom. 2. Ambros. apol. pro Davide c. 4. &c. 10. Aug. de civit. l. 4. c. 33. Greg. epis. l. 2. ep. 110. Autor libelli cui inscriptio brevis narratio quomodo Hen. 4. &c. Bellar. de laic. c. 5. Rhem. anno 1 Pet. 2.23. Dela Cerda in Virgil. l. 11. p. 560. &c. Herod. l. 2. And therefore God, that desireth not the death of a sinner, much lesse the ruine of any Nation, would have us to seeke for justice, and to live uprightly one a∣mong another; but as the sheepe that are without a shepheard, wander where they list, so, as you read often in the booke of Judges, when the people were without a King, there was no justice amongst them, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes: therefore to prevent oppressions and wrongs, God out of his infinite love, and favour unto mankind, from the beginning of the World, called and appointed Kings to be his Vicegerents, to judge the earth and to see that the poore and the fatherlesse have right: for besides many other pla∣ces that might be alleadged, the Spirit of God saith directly, ego dixi Dii estis, and by me Kings do reign, that is, by my appointment, by my direction, and by my protection, they do, and shall rule and reign over my people, as Tertull. Optat. Saint Chrysost. St Ambrose, St Aug. Saint Gregory, and the rest of the most Orthodox Fathers have ever taught, and maintained; and therefore this is not inventum humanum, as the Puritans have dreamed, and the Popes flat∣terers have maintained, but it is an ordination of God, that we have Kings given unto us, not to domineere and to satisfy their untamed wills, and sensual appe∣tites, but to administer justice and judgement unto their people, and so to guide them to live in all peace and tranquillity; for as Auson saith; Qui rectè faciet, non qui dominatur, erit Rex And therefore Plinius Secundus in his panegyricks, saith, ut foelicitatis est posse quantum velis, sic magnitudinis est velle quantum possis, & bonitatis facere quantum justum: as it is a great felicity to be able to do what we will, so it is a
most heroick resolution, to will no more but what we should, and to do nothing but what is just; Claudian saith to Honorius. Nec tibi quid liccat, sed quid fecisse decebit, Occurrat, mentémque domet respectus honesti. and so Homer saith, that Sarpedon preserved Licia,  through justice and fortitude: whereupon the old Scholiast citeth the words of Aes∣chilus , that virtue and justice are ever coupled together: and Dio. Chrysost. saith, , he is the best of men, that is, the most valiant and most just: Orat. 2. and Herodian saith of Pertinax,Plut. in vit. Cicero 2. orat. in Anton. Ovid. Met. 6. Suet. de act. c. 2 that he was both loved and feared of the Bar∣barians, as well for the remembrance of his virtues in former battels, as also  because that wittingly or willingly he never did inju∣stice to any man at any time. Plutarch ascribeth these virtues to Lucullus and to Paulus Aemilius; Cicero saith the like of Pompey, Ovid. of Erictheus; Suetonius of Octavius, Augustus his father; Virgil of Aeneas; Krantius of Fronto king of the Danes; and of our late king James of famous and ever blessed memory, we may truly say, —Cui pudor & justitiae soror Incorrupta fides, nudáque veritas, Quando ullum invenient parem? Horat. lib. 1. Od. 26. Neither need I blush to apply the same to our pre∣sent King. So you see how Justice exalteth a Nation, commends the doers of it, and crownes them with all honour, and as the Poet saith, —. he that worketh justly shall have God himself for his Co-adjutor. But here you must observe that, which indeed is most true; , . He is not a just man that doeth no hurt,Who rightly termed just. but he that is able to do hurt, and will not do it, that can be unjust and will not be: for it is no great matter to see a poore man that hath no ability, to do no wrong; but it is hard to use power right, even in the meanest office, and therefore this is that, that is to be urged, to be then most just, when we have most power to offend, which most properly doth belong to all kings and Princes, to put them in minde of their duties, to what end God hath made them kings: for they are but base statterers,Tacit. annal. l. 3. Plut. in Apo∣theg. Eustath. ad Iliad. ss. Salust. in Orat. Cas. cont. Catil. quibus omnia principum honesta atque inhonesta laudare mos est, that will commend all the doing of Princes, be they good or bad: and which say, , all things are honest and just that kings do, as that flattering sycophant said to Antigonus, or like those Chirodicai: , who thinke justice lyeth not in the Lawes, but in their hands: because as Caesar saith, in maxima fortuna minima licentia est, the higher their places are, the more righteous they ought to be, and the lesse liberty of sinning is left unto them: and that in respect 1 of God. 2. of others. 3. of themselves. Kings ought to be more just then all others in 3 respects.1. Where God hath conferred much honour, there he exspecteth much e∣quity, and the more goodnesse, where he bestowed the more grace: ideò dete∣riores
estis, quia meliores esse debetis? and will men therefore be the more sinfull,Luke 12.48. Salvian. de Pro. vid. l. 4. because they ought to be the more righteous? 2. All mens eyes are upon the Prince; and as Seneca saith of the royall Pal∣lace, Perlucet omne regiae vitium domûs; the houses of Kings are like glasses, and every man may look through them: so their actions can no more be hid, then the City that is placed upon an hill; but their least and lightest acts are soon seen. 3. Their places are as slippery as they are lofty,Seneca in Aga∣memn. 2.1. when (as one saith) height it∣self maketh mens braines to swimme; & nunquam solido stetit superba foelicitas, and proud insolency never stood sure for any certain space; for, as God hath made them Gods, so he can unmake them at his pleasure; and as S. Au∣gustine saith, Quod contulit immerentibus, tollit malè merentibus,Aug. ho. 14. & quod illo do∣nante fit nostrum, nobis superbientibus fit alienum; what God hah freely bestow∣ed upon you without desert, he may justly take away from you for your evill de∣serts; and what is ours through Gods gift, may be made another mans through our own pride; and not onely so, but as he hath heaped honours upon their heads, that they might honour him; so, if they neglect him,Job. 12.21. Job. 30.1. he can powre contempt upon Princes, and cast dirt in their faces, and make them a very scorne to those that formerly they thought unworthy to eate with the dogs of their flock; and then, Quanto gradus altior, tanto casus gravior, the higher they were exalted, the more will be their greif when they are dejected; as it was with those Kings, that being wont to be carryed in their royall Charets, were forced like horses to draw Sesostris Coach; Quia miserrimum est fuisse felicem; because it is a most wretched thing to have been happy, and not to be; or as the Poët saith, Qui cadit in plano, vix hoc tamen evenit unquam,Ovidius Trist. l. 3. Eleg. 4. Sic cadit ut tacta surgere possit humo; At miser Elpenor, tecto dilapsus ab alto Occurrit regi, flebilis umbra suo. And therefore all Kings should be ever mindfull of the words of King David, He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the feare of God;2 Sam. 23.3. and all these things that I have set down, should move all Kings and Princes to set their mindes upon righteousnesse, to judge the thing that is right, and to live,Psal. 58.1. What should move all kings to rule justly according to Lawes. to reigne and rule ac∣cording to the straight rule of the Law; that so carrying them justly and wor∣thily in their places, the poore people may truly say of them, Certè Deus est in illis, they may well be called Gods, because God is in them: and if these things will not, nor cannot move them to be as mindfull of their duty, as well as they are mindfull of their excellency, then let them remember what the Psalmist saith,Psal. 149.8. He will bind Kings with fetters, and their Nobles with linkes of Iron; and let them meditate upon the words of King Solomon, where he saith unto them all, Heare O ye Kings, and understand, learne ye that be Judges of the ends of the earth; give eare, you that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of Nations, for power is given you of the Lord, and soveraignty from the Highest, who shall try your works, and search out your counsels; because, being Ministers of his Kingdomes, you have not judged aright, nor kept the Law, nor walked after the counsell of God, horribly and speedily shall he come upon you;Sap. 6. usque ad vers. 9. for a sharpe judgment shall be to them that are in high places: for mercy will soon pardon the meanest, but mighty men shall be mightily tormented: for he that is Lord over all shall feare no mans person, neither shall he stand in awe of any mans greatnesse, for he hath made the small and the great, and careth for all alike: but a sore tryall shall come upon the mighty. And the Apostle saith, It is a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of the living God,Heb. 10 31. which things should make their eares to tingle, and their hearts to tremble, whensoever they step aside out of Gods Commandments. And thus we set down the charge of Kings, and the strict account that they must tender unto God, how they have discharged the same: whereby you see we flatter them not in their
greatnesse, but tell them as well what they should be, as what they are, and presse nor onely obedience unto the people, but also equity and justice unto the Prince, that both doing their dutie, both may be happy. CHAP. XV. Sheweth the honour due to the King. 1. Feare. 2. An high esteem of our King; how highly the Heathens esteemed of their Kings; the Mar∣riage of obedience and authority; the Rebellion of the Nobility how haynous. 3. Obedience, fourefold; diverse kinds of Monarchs; and how an absolute Monarch may limit himself. 2. The ho∣nour that is due to the King.2 I Have shewed you the person that we are commanded to honour, the King; I am now to shew you the honour that is due unto him, not only by the cu∣stomes of all Nations, but also by the Commandment of God himself. Where first of all you must observe, that the Apostle useth the same word here to expresse our duty to our King, as the Holy Ghost doth to expresse our duty to our father and mother; for there it is said, , and here S. Peter saith, : to shew indeed that the King — urbi pater est, ur∣bíque maritus;The same that is due to our Father and Mother. is the common Father of us all, and therefore is to have the same honour that is due to our Father and Mother: and I have fully shewed the par∣ticulars of that honour upon that fifth Commandment. I will insist upon some few points in this place, and as the ascent to Solomons throne was, per sex gra∣dus, by six speciall steps, so I will set you down six main branches of this honour, that are typified in the six ensignes or emblems of Royall Majesty; for Six speciall branches of the honour due to the King.1 The Sword exacteth feare, and the word  signifieth as much. 2 The Crown importeth honour, because it is of pure gold. 3 The Scepter requireth obedience, because that ruleth us. 4 The Throne deserves Tribute, that his Royalty may be maintained. 5 His Person meriteth defence, because he is the Defender of us all. 6 His charge calleth for our Prayers, that he may be inabled to discharge it. 1. Feare.1. Kings are called Gods, and all the Royal Ensigns and Acts of Kings are ascri∣bed to God, as their Crown is of God, whereupon they are called , crown∣ed of God;Psal. 21.3. Psal. 18.39. Judg 7.17. Exod. 4.20.17.9. 1 Chron. 19 21. 2 Chron. 19.6. Sap. 17.21. their sword is of God, whereupon the Psalmist saith, thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle; their Scepter is the Scepter of God, for so Moses rod, which signifieth a Scepter as well as a rod, is called the rod of God; their throne is the throne of God, and their judgment is the judgment of God: and you know how often we are commanded in the Scripture to feare God; and the Poet saith, primus in orbe Deos fecit timor: and where thee is no feare of God, there is no beleife, that there is a God: for feare is the betraying of the succours which reason offereth; and when we have no reason to expect succour, our reason tells us, that we should feare, that is, the punishment which we deserved for those evils, which deprived us of our su cours:The want of feare the cause of all mischiefe. and therefore this feare of the punishment, doth often times keep us from those evils: even as the Scripture saith, timor Domini expellit peccatum: and the want of this feare is the cause of all mischief, as the Prophet David sheweth, when after he enumerated, the most horrible sins of the wicked,Rom. 3.13. that their throat was an open sepulcher, the poyson of aspes under their lips, their mouth full of cursing and bitternesse, and their feet swift to shed blood, he addeth this as the cause of all,P. 14. V. 7. that there was no feare of God before their eyes: And truly this is the cause of all our calamities, that we feare not our King: for if we feared him, we durst not Rebell and revile him as we do.
But what is the reason that we do so little fear either God or the king?Why men do so little fear God and the King. Eccles. 5.6. the son of Sirach sheweth, it is their great mercy and clemency: this, which wor∣keth love in all good natures, produceth boldnesse, impudency, and Rebellion in all froward dispositions, who therefore sin because God is merciful, and will Rebel against their king, because they know he is pitiful and milde, and will grant them pardon, as they beleive, if they cannot prevaile, which is nothing else, but like spides, to suck poyson out of those sweet flowers, from whence the bees do gather hony, but let them not deceive themselves, for debet amor laesus irasci, love too much provoked will wax most angry, & laesa patientia fit furor: and therefore the son of Syrach saith,Eccles. 55, 6. concerning propitiation be not with∣out fear, and say not, his mercy is great, for mercy and wrath come from him; and his indignation resteth upon sinners, so though our king be as the kings of Israel, a merciful minded man, most mild and clement, yet now when he seeth how these Rebels have abused his goodnesse and his patience, to the great sufferance of his best Subjects, he can draw his sword, and make it drunk in the bloud of the ungodly, that have so transcendently abused both the mercies of God, and the goodnesse of the King. When diverse people had Rebelled against Tarquin, and his son had surprised many of their chief leaders, he sent unto his father to know what he should do with them, the King being in his field, paused a while, and then summa Papavera carpsit, with his staffe chopt off the heads of diverse weeds and thistles, and gave the messenger none other answer, but go, and tell my son what I am doing; and his Son, understanding his meaning,What Tarquin did to Rebels. did with them, as Tarquin did with the Poppies; so many Kings would have done with these Rebels, not out of any love to shed bloud, but out of a desire to preserve Peace, not for any natural inclination to diminish their Nobility by their decolla∣tion, but from an earnest endeavour to suppresse the community from unnatu∣ral Rebellion, ut poena in paucos, metus ad omnes, that the punishment of some might have bred fear in the rest:What effects the Kings clemency wrought- and that fear of the King in them might keep his good Subjects from fear of being undone by them. But all the World seeth our King is more merciful, and hath sought all this while to draw them with the cords of love, which hath bred more troubles to himself, more afflictions to us and made them the more cruel, and by their Oaths and Protestations, Leagues and Covenants, to do their best to bring the King and all his loyal Subjects into fear, if they may not have their own desires. But we are not afraid of these Bug-beares; because we know this hath been the practice of all Rebels to linke themselves together with Leagues and Covenants, as in the conjuration of Cate∣line; and the holy league in France, and the like; and many such Covenants, and Leagues have been made with Hell, to the utter destruction of the makers; as when more then forty men vowed very solemnly (and they intended to do it very cunningly) that they would neither eat nor drinke until they had killed Paul; for so they might be without meat until the day of judgement,Act. 23.12. if they would keep their Oath: and so these Covenanters may undo themselves by such hardening their faces in their wickednesse;The Rebels Covenants shew they are grown despe∣rate. because this sheweth they are grown desperate, and are come to that pass, that they have little hope to preserve their lives but by the hazarding of their soules; as if they thought the Devil, for the good service they desire to do him, to overthrow the Church, to destroy thousand souls, may perchance do them this favour, to preserve their lives for a time, to bring to passe so great a worke; whereas we know, the Church is built upon a Rock and God hath promised to defend his Anoynted, so that all the power of hell shall never prevail against any of these. Wherefore to conclude this point, seeing God hath put a sword into the hand of the king, and the King bears not the sword in vain,Rom. 13.4. but though it be long in the sheath, he can draw it out when He will, and recompence the abuse of His lenity with the sharpnesse of severity, let us fear; or if you would not fear, do well, saith the Apostle, return from your Rebellion,V. 3. and from all your wicked wayes, and you may yet finde grace, because you have both a merci∣ful God, and a gracious king.
2. To have an high and good esteeme of our King, and to make o∣thers to have the like. 2 Sam. 15.6.2. As we are to feare, so we are to reverence our King, that is, to have an high esteeme of His Majesty, and to manifest the same in our termes, speeches, and communications accordingly, to gain the love of the rest of His Subjects towards Him; and not as Absolon did, by cunning and sinister expressions, to steale away the hearts and affections of His People; for, to make mention of him either in our prayers, or Sermons, or in any other familiar talke, so, as if he were a friend to Popery, an enemy to the Gospell, and carelesse of Justice, and the like, (as too many of our Sectaries most falsely and most malitiously have done) is rather to vilifie and disgrace him, to work an odium against him, and a tediousness of him, then to procure an honourable esteeme and reverence of him Cassiodorus saith, stipendium tyranno penditur, praedicatio non nisi bono Principi; Tribute is due to Tyrants, and ought to be paid unto them; but honour and reve∣rence much more to a good Prince;Rom. 12.14. Matth. 5.44. and the spirit of God bids us, bless them that persecute us, and our Saviour saith, blesse them that curse you, that is, speak well of Tyrants that oppress us, and speak not ill of them that speak ill of you; espe∣cially if they be your Magistrates, or your King, whom  you are commanded to honour, even with the same word  (therefore no doubt, but with the same honour) as we are commanded to honour our Father, and our Mother;The fifth Command∣ment is the most obliging of all the Command∣ments of the second Table. Ephes. 6.2. How the hea∣thens honou∣red their kings. C. Tacitus. lib. 14. Seneca de be∣nefic. l. 30. The reason of their reve∣rence. because the King is our Politicall Father; and is therefore command∣ed to be reverenced by this precept, which (as the Divines observe) is of greater moment, and more obliging, then any of the rest of the Command∣ments of the second Table, not onely because it keepeth the first place of all these precepts, but is also the first Commandment with promise, as the Apo∣stle observeth. And not onely the Scriptures command us thus to honour, and to reverence our King, but the very Heathens also did so reverence them, that they did adore the Statues and Images of their Kings and Caesars, as Tacitus reporteth; and it was Treason for any man to pull away, or violate them, that fled unto them for sanctuary; yea, it was capitall for a man, that had the Image of his Prince stamped in silver, or ingraven in a Ring, to go to any uncleane, or unseemly place; and therefore Seneca saith, that under the Empire of Tiberius, a cer∣tain Noble man was accused of Treason, for moving his hand, that had on his fin∣ger a Ring, whereon was ingraven the portraiture of the Prince, unto his pri∣vie parts, when he did urine; and the reason of this great reverence, which they bare unto their Princes, was, that they beleived there was in Kings , some divine thing, which above the reach of man, was ingraffed in them, and could not be derived from them;Raderus Com∣ment. in Quint. Curt. for so Raderus tells us, that this divine Ma∣jesty, or celestiall sparke, was so eminent in the countenance of Alexander, that it did not onely terrifie his enemies, but also moved his best Commanders, and greatest Peeres to obey his commands: and the like is reported of Scipio Afri∣canus:A Macedoni∣an Law. and I finde the Macedonians had a Law, that (besides the Traitors) con∣demned to death five of their next Kinsfolkes, that were convicted of conspi∣racy against their King; and a Gentleman of Normandy, confessing to his Fri∣er, how such a thought came once in his minde, to have killed King Francis the first,A Gentleman hanged for his thought. but repenting of his intention, he resolved never to do it; the Frier ab∣solved him of his sin, but told the King thereof, and he sent him to his Parlia∣ment, who condemned and executed him for his thought. Philip the first of Spain, seeing a Falcon killing an Eagle, commanded his head to be wrung off; saying, let none presume above their Soveraigne; and in the Raigne of Henry the fourth of England, one was hanged, drawn, and quartered, in Cheapside London, for jesting with his son, that if he did learne well, he would make him heire of the Crowne, meaning his owne house, that had the Signe of the Crowne, to prove the Proverbe true, non est bonum ludere cum sanctis, it is not safe jesting with Kings and Crowns, and it is lesse safe to resist them, if you will believe wise Solomon. And I have read of another King, that passing over a river, his Crowne fell into the water, one of his water-men lept in, and dived to the bottome, and
taking up the Crown, put it upon his head, that it might not hinder his swimming and so brought it to the King again, who rewarded him well for his pains, but caused his head to be chopt off for presuming to weare his Crown. And all this is but an inanswerable argument to condemne our Rebels, that neither reverence the Majesty of their King, nor respect the commandment of their God. 3.3. Obedience. Obedience is another principall part of that honour which we owe unto the king; and this obedience of the inferiours joyned with the direction of the supe∣riors, doe make any state most successefull; but when these are divorced,The marriage of obedience and authority, and the issue. Aeschylus. All must be obedient. then nothing goeth right in that Common-wealth; for so the Sages of Greece exprest it by the marriage that Jupiter made between  and , whose child, brought forth betwixt them, was ; to shew unto us, that when autho∣rity is married to obedience, and obedience proves a dutifull and good wife to au∣thority, the fruit of that match will be happinesse to the whole Kingdome. And therefore if we would be happy, we must be obedient, and our obedience, must be universall, in all things in the Lord. Jussa sequi tam velle mihi quàm posse necesse est.Lucan. l. 1. So the people say unto Joshua, all that thou commandest us, we will do:Josh. 1.16. and all must do it, the greater aswell as the lesser, the noble man as well as the meane man, yea, rather then the meane man; for though Rebellion in any one, is as the sin of witchcraft, yet in a vulgar man it may admit of vulgar apologies; but in a man of quality, in noble men in Courtiers, bred in the Kings house,Noble mens Rebellion more abomi∣nable to God and man, then any other. in the Kings ser∣vice, and raised by the Kings favour, it is Morbus complicatus, a decompound sin, a transcendent ingratitude, and unexpressable iniquity, the example more spreading, and the infection more contagious, because more conspicuous; and the giddy attempts of an unguided multitude, are but, as Cardinal Farnesius saith, like the Beech tree without his top, soon withered and vanishing into no∣thing without leaders, when they become a burthen unto themselves, and a prey unto others; therefore the contradiction of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, that were so eminent in the congregation, was a sin so odious unto God, that he would have destroyed all Israel for their sake, as now he punisheth all England for the sins of those noble men, that have rebelled against their King,Rom. 13.1. and were alwayes like Sejanus as wayward, pleased as opposed. And therefore St. Paul saith, that , every soul must be subject to the higher power, and he saith, , you must needs be subject, or be obedient,Rom. 13.5. Obedience pressed by a three fold ar∣gument. and he presseth this obedi∣ence with many arguments, as 1. From Gods ordinance, because God hath set them over us, and commanded us to be obedient unto them, and therefore whosoever resisteth them, warreth a∣gainst God. 2. From mans Conscience, which telleth us,Rom. 13 4. that he is the minister of God , for good, and therefore virtutis amore, if we have any love to goodnesse, we ought to obey our King. 3. For feare of vengeance, because he beareth not the sword in vain, but is,v. 4. How we ought to behave our selves towards wicked Kings. , a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doth evill; therefore this obedience to our King, is not , a thing of in∣differency but of necessity; for be our King, for his Religion, Impious, for his government, unjust, and for life, licentious, as cruell as Nero, as prophane as Juli∣an, and as wicked as Heliogabalus; yet the Subjects must obey him, the Bishops must admonish him, the counsell must advise him, and all must pray for him; but no mortall man, that is his Subject, hath either leave to resist him, or license to re∣ject him: unless they reject the ordinance of God, and so fight against God; and you know, , it is hard to vanquish God. It is truly said by a learned Bishop, si bonus est Princeps, nutritor est tuus,Ardua res ho∣mini est mortali vincere numen. Why God sen∣deth evil kings. if thy King be good, he is thy nursing Father, and it is a great happinesse to his Sub∣jects; sin malus est, tentator est tuus, but if he be evill, he is either for the punish∣ment
of thy sins, or for the triall of thy faith; and therefore receive thy pu∣nishment with patience, or thy triall without resistance; and Aquin saith, tollenda est culpa & cessabit tyrannorum plaga, do thou take away thy sins, and God will soon take away thy punishment; otherwise, as for our sins, we do often suffer droughts, floods, unseasonable weather, sicknesses, plagues, and ma∣ny other evills of nature, ita luxum & avaritiam deminantium tolerare debe∣mus; so when God setteth up hypocrites, or tyrants to reigne over us, to be the scourges of his wrath, and the rods of his fury, we must not struggle against God, but rest contented to indure the vices of our rulers, as a just punishment of our wickednesses, saith Cornelius TacitusEt Michael Palatinus Hungariae, dice∣bat, rege coro nato, etiamsi bos esses, nobis ob∣temperandum est. Bonfin. dec. 4. lib. 3. Foure kindes of obedience. 1. Forced obedience. Rom. 12.1. 1 Sam. 15.22. But here you must observe, that there are diverse kindes of obedience; es∣pecially, 1. Coacta. 2. Caca. 3. Simulata. 4. Ordinata. 1. Forced. 2. Foolish. 3. Faigned. 4. Well ordered. 1. The first is a forced and compelled obedience, meerly for feare of wrath, as Children learne, or Slaves do their duty, for fear of the rod; and this is bet∣ter then resstance, though nothing like to that obedience, which S. Paul calleth ; because this voluntary, and not extorted obedience, is that, which is better then sacrifice. 2. Blinde o∣bedience.2. The second is a blinde obedience, such as the young youths, that being commanded by their Abbat, to carry a basket of figs, and other Juncates unto a solitary Monke, or Hermite, that lived in his cave, and loosing their way in that unfrequented wilderness chose rather to dye in the desert, then taste of those acates that they had in their Basket; and such obedience is most frequent in the proselites of Rome, who will do whatsoever they are commanded by their supe∣riors though both they and their superiors do thereby commit never so great a wickednesse: where notwithstanding I must confesse, that this blinde obedi∣ence is far better, both for Church and State, then a proud resistance, when as the one produceth nothing but some particular inconveniencies, and the other proceedeth to an universall destruction. 3. Hypocri∣ticall obedi∣ence.3. The third is an hypocriticall, and dissembled obedience: that is, an obe∣dience for a time, till they see their time to do mischiefe, which is the worst of all obedience, and therefore most hatefull both to God and Man; because it is but catenus, usque dum vires suppetunt, untill they have the opportunity, and have gotten sufficient strength, to shake off their subjection, and to maintain their Rebellion;The obedience of our Rebells. and this was the obedience of all our Rebells, our Sectaries and Puri∣tans here in England, who would also face us down, but most falsely, that it was the obedience of the Primitive Christians; for so the grand impostor John Goodwin, in his Anticavalierisme, saith, they were onely obedient to those perse∣cuting Tyrants, because as yet they wanted strength, and were not able to re∣sist them; but O thou enemy of all goodness, that so hatest to become a Martyr for thy God, that was martyred for thee, is it not enough for thee to play the dissembling hypocrite thy selfe, but thou must taxe those holy Martyrs, those true Saints,The Authour more out of patience for the wrong of∣fered to the Martyrs, then for his own a∣buse. that raigne with Christ in Heaven of hypocrisie, and disobedience in their hearts, to the Ordinance of God? I could willingly beare with any asper∣sion thou shouldest cast in my face, but I am out of patience, though sorry that I am so transported, to see such false and scandalous imputations, so unjustly laid upon such holy Saints; yet this you must do to countenance your Rebellion, to get the Rhetorick of the Divell to bely Heaven it selfe; and therefore what wonder is it, that you should bely your King on earth, when you dare thus bely the martyrs that are in Heaven. 4. The obe∣dience of the Saints two-fold.4. The fourth is a voluntary, hearty and well ordered obedience, which is, the obedience of the Saints, and is also Two-fold, 1. Active. 2. Passive. For,
1. The Saints knowing the will of God, that they should obey their King,1. Active o∣bedience. and those that are sent ot him, they do willingly yield obedience to their supe∣riours, and no marvel; because there cannot be a surer argument of an evil man, then in a Church reformed, and a Kingdom lawfully governed, to resist authority, and to disobey them that should rule over us, especially him, whom God immediately hath appointed to be his vice-gerent, his substitute, and the supreme Monarch of his Dominions here on earth; for all other things, both in heaven and earth, do obsere that Law, which their maker hath appointed for them, when, as the Psalmist saith, he hath given them a Law which shall not be broken; therefore this must needs be a great reproof and a mighty shame to those men, that being Subjects unto their King, and to be ruled by his Lawes, will notwithstanding disobey the King, and transgresse those Lawes, that are made for their safety, and resist that authority, which they are bound to obey; onely because their weak heads, or false hearts, do account the commandment of the King to be against right, and what themselves doe to be most holy and just. But our City Prophets will say,Ob. Diverse kinds of Monarchie that although the King be the supreme Mo∣narch, whom we are commanded to obey,; yet there are diverse kinds of Mo∣narchies or Regal governments; as usurped, lawful, by conquest, by inheri∣tance, by election; and these are either absolute, as were the Eastern Kings, and the Roman Emperours, or limited and mixed; which they term a Political Monarchy, where the King or Monarch can do nothing alone, but with the assistance and direction of his Nobility and Parliament; or if he doth attempt to bring any exorbitancies to the Common-wealth, or deny those things that are necessary for the preservation thereof, they may lawfully resist him in the one, and compel him to the other: to which I answer. 1. As God himself, which is most absolute, & liberrimum agens,Sol. Absolute Mo∣narchs may limit them∣selves. may not∣withstanding limit himself, and his own power, as he doth, when he promiseth and sweareth that he will not fail David, and that the unrepentant Rebels should never enter into his rest; so the Monarch may limit himself in some points of his administration; and yet this limitation neither transferreth any power of So∣veraignty unto the Parliament, nor denieth the Monarch to be absolute, nor ad∣mitteth of any resistance against him: for 1. This is a meer gull to seduce the people,I cannot de∣vise words to expresse this new devised government. that cannot distinguish the point of a needle; just like the Papist, that saith he is a Roman Catholick; that is, a particular universal, a black white, a polumonarcha, a many one governor, when we say he is a Monarch, joined in his government with the Parliament; for he can be no Monarch or supreme King and Soveraign, that hath any sharers with him or above him in the government. 2. There is no Monarch that can be said to be simply absolute, but onely God; yet where there is no superiour, but the soveraignty residing in the King, he may he said to be an absolute Monarch . 1. Because there is none on earth, that can controul him. 2. Because he is free and absolute in all such things, wherein he is not expresly limited: and therefore 3. Seeing no Monarch or Soveraign is so absolute,No Monarch so absolute but someway limited. but that he is some way limited either by the Law of God, or by the Rules of nature, or of his own concessions and grants unto his people, or else by the compact that he maketh with them, if he be an elective King and so admitted unto his Kingdom: there is no reason they should resist their King, for transgressing the limitations of one kind more then the other: or if any, no doubt but he that transcendeth the li∣mits of God's Law, or goeth against the common rules of nature, ought rather to be resisted, then he that observeth not his own voluntary concessions: but themselves perceiving how peremptorily the Apostle speaketh against resistance of the Heathen Emperours that then ruled, do confess that absolute Monarchs ought not to be resisted; (wherein also they are mistaken, because the histories tell us, those Emperours were not so absolute as our Kings, till the time of Ve∣spasian, when the lex regia transferred all the power of the People upon the
Emperour,No Monarch ought to be resisted. Ʋlpian de constit. Principis; therefore indeed, no Monarch ought to be resisted, whatsoever limitations he hath granted unto his Subjects. And the resisters of authority might understand, if their more malitious then blinde leaders would give them leave, that this virtue of obedience to the su∣preme power maketh good things unlawful, when we are forbidden to do them, as the eating the forbidden tree was to Adam, and the holding up of the Arke, was to Ʋzza: and it maketh evil things to be good and lawful, when they are commanded to be done, as the killing of Isaack (if he had done it) had been commendable in Abraham, and the smiting of the Prophet was very lauda∣ble in him that smote him, when the Prophet commanded him to do it: and therefore Adam and Ʋzza were punished with death, because they did those lawful good things,Rebels should well consider these things. which they were forbidden to do; and the others were re∣compenced with blessings, because they did and were ready to do those evill things, that they were commanded to do, when as he that refused to smite the Prophet,1 Reg. 20.38. being commanded to do it, was destroyed by a Lyon, because he did it not; whereby you see, that things forbidden when they are commanded, & è contrà, cannot be omitted without sin. Ob. Mandatum imperantis tol∣lit peccatum obedientis. Aug. Sol.You will say it is true, when it is done by God, whose injunction or prohibiti∣on, his precept or his forbidding to do it, or not to do it, maketh all things lawful or unlawful. I answer, that we cannot thinke our selves obedient to God, whilest we are disobedient to him, whom God hath commanded us to obey; and therefore, if we will obey God, we must obey the King; because God hath commanded us to obey him; and being to obey him, non attendit verus obediens quale sit quod praecipitur, sed hoc solo contentus quia praecipitur, he that is truely obedient to him, whom God commanded us to obey, never regardeth, what it is that is com∣manded (so it be not simply evil, for then as the Apostle saith, it is better to obey God then man, were he the greatest Monarch in the World) but he con∣sidereth, and is therewith satisfied, that it is commanded, and therefore doth it, saith Saint Bernard,Bernard in l. de praecept. & dispensat. in l. de praecept. & dispensat. CHAP. XVI. Sheweth the answer to some objections against the obeying of our So∣veraign Magistrate; all actions of three kinds; how our Con∣sciences may be reformed; of our passive obedience to the Magi∣strates; and of the Kings concessions, how to be taken. BUt against this our Sectaries and Rebels will object, that their conscience, which is vinculum, accusator, testis & judex, their bond, their accuser, their witnesse and their judge, against whom they can say nothing, and from whom they cannot appeale, unlesse it be to a severer Judge, will not give them leave to obey, to do many things, that the King requireth to be done; and who can blame them for obeying their conscience rather then any King? I confesse that it is naturally ingraffed in the hearts of all men, that no evil is to be done, and reason, according to that measure of knowledge, which every man hath, tells us, what is good, and what is evil; then conscience concludeth what is to be done, and what not to be done; quia conscientia est applicatio no∣titiae nostrae ad actum particularem, because our conscience is the application of our knowledge to some particular act,Thom. 2. Sent. dist. 14. part. 4. saith Aquinas: And this application of our knowledge to that act considereth,
1. De praeteritis, of things past, whether such a thing be done, or not done,Conscience a witness. Conscience a Judge. and so our conscience is a witnesse that cannot erre. 2. De praesentibus factis, of our present actions, whether the fact done be good or evill, just or unjust, so our conscience is a judge according to the mea∣sure of our knowledge. 3. De futuris faciendis, of future acts that are to be done,Conscience a follower of reason. Reason obscu∣red two wayes. 1. Way. Iohn. 16.2. whether they ought to be done, or left undone. But because our conscience springeth from our reason, and our reason may be clouded and obscured by a double error. 1. A false assumption, when we take those things to be good or true, which are indeed evill or false, as they that think they do God good service, when they kill his servants, even as the Rebells do at this very day, and that they please God when they disobey their King. 2. A false application, or a false conclusion from a true assumption; as,2. Way. The Rebells offend both wayes. be∣cause I am commanded to love God above all things, therefore I am to hate all things but God; or because, it is better to obey God then man; therefore I must not obey the commands of any man. So our conscience may be poysoned in like manner with the same errors; and being so misguided, they ought not to binde us, but we ought rather to re∣forme them; for that, which truely should binde the conscience,What should binde our con∣science. is not our judg∣ment, but Gods precept, that either commandeth or forbiddeth such and such acti∣ons to be done, or not done. And you know, that all actions are either, 1 good. 2. evill. 3. indifferent. 1. The good, God commandeth us to do them.All actions of three sorts. 2. The evill, he flatly forbiddeth them to be done: and 3. The indifferent he wholly leaveth to the power of the Magistrate, to make them either lawfull or unlawfull, good or bad, as he pleaseth. And therefore, for the first two sorts of actions, because thy conscience hath Gods precept to direct thee, if thy reason, either through ignorance,Pride blindeth many men. or the strength of thine own fancy, (which often happeneth to proud Spirits) doth not mislead thee, to call good evill, and evill good, it is safer for thee to follow the dictamen of thine own conscience, then the command of the greatest poten∣tate;Act. 5.29. for in all such cases, it is better to obey God then man. But in all the other things, that are indifferent of themselves, the precept of the King, or any other our lawfull superiour,We are too inquisitive of many things maketh them to become necessa∣ry unto the Subject; because the command of the superiour Magistrate doth binde more then the conscience of the inferiour Subject can do, for though the conscience, rightly guided by reason, is the Judge of those things, which are ei∣ther directly forbidden, or commanded, yet in the other things, that are indif∣ferent, the Magistrate is the more immediate Judge under God,The Magistrate the immediate judge of indif∣ferent. which hath given him power, either to command them to be done, or to forbid them; and therefore the Subject, having the command of his King, (whom God command∣eth us to obey) for his warrant in things of this nature, either to do such things, or to leave such things undone, his duty is not to examine the reason of the com∣mand, but to performe what he seeth commanded; for so S. Augustine saith, that although Julian was an Idolater, an Apostata, an Infidell; yet, milites fi∣deles servierunt imperatori infideli; but when it came to the cause of Christ, they acknowledged none, but him that was in Heaven; when he would have them to worship Idolls, they preferred God before him; when he said,August. in Psal. 124. C. imperator. 11. q. 1. lead forth your Armies, and go against such a Nation, they presently obeyed him; they distinguished betwixt their eternall, and their temporall Lord, & tamen subditi e∣rant propter aeternum etiam domino temporali: and they never examined the Justnesse of the war; because in all such cases, mandatum imperantis tollit
culpam servientis,Our reason & judgement misguided se∣ven wayes. How our con∣science may be reformed. the fault must onely rest upon the commander. And there∣fore, as our reason and Judgement may be blinded in all actions, either with ignorance, negligence, pride, inordinate affection, faintness, perplexity, or self-love, so may our conscience too, when it erroniously concludeth upon what our reason falsly assumeth: and then, as I said before, our conscience is rather to be reform∣ed then obeyed, and if we be desirous, we may thus redress it. 1. From igno∣rance. 2 Chron 20.121. If it be of ignorance, let us say with Jehosophat, we know not what to do, but our eyes are towards thee: and let us seek to them that can inform us, the Ortho∣dox not the Sectaries, which will rather corrupt us then direct us. 2. From ne∣gligence. John 3.1.2. If it be of negligence, let us come without partiality or prejudice (as Ni∣codemus did to Christ) to those that for knowledge are well able, and for honesty are most willing, to instruct us. 3. From pride. 2 Cor. 10.18.3. If it be of pride, let us pray to God for humility, and submit our selves one to another, especially to them that have more learning then our selves, and have that charge over us; for he that praiseth himself is not allowed, but he whom the Lord praiseth; and singularity hath been the original of all heresies and not the least occasion of the troubles of these times, and the rebellion of our Se∣ctaries. 4 From in ordinate affe∣ction.4. If it be from inordinate affection, quùm id sanctum quod volumus, when every one makes what he loves to be lawful, and his own wayes to be just, let us hearken to sound reason and prefer truth before our own affections; or other∣wise perit omne judicium,Seneca. cùm res transit in affectum, there can be no true judge∣ment of things, when we are transported with our partial affections. 5. From saint∣nesse.5. If it be from faintnesse, let us be scrupulous where we have cause, lest we should think it lawfull to swallow a Camel, because we are able to straine a gnat; and let us not be afraid, where no feare is, and think those things sinfull that are most lawfull;A heavy judg∣ment upon this Nation by mistaking sins. which is a heavy judgment of God upon the wicked, and hath now lighted very sore upon many of the Inhabitants of this Land, who think it Popery to say, God blesse you, and judge it Idolatry to see a Crosse in Cheap-side. 6. From per∣plexity.6. If it be of perplexity, when a man is close, as he conceives, betwixt two sins; where he seeth himself unable, though never so willing, to avoid both, let him peccare in tutiorem partem, which though it takes not away the sin, yet it will make the fault to be the lesse sin; as the casting away of the Corne, which is the gift of God, and the sustenance of mans life, is an unthankfull a∣buse of Gods creature;Act. 27.38. yet as S. Paul caused the same to be cast into the Sea for the safegard of their lives; so must we do the like, when occasion makes it necessary; as now, rather to kill our enemies the Rebels, though we should think it to be ill, then suffer them to wrong our King, and to destroy both Church and Kingdome;When things are to be judg∣ed inevitable. because that of two things, which we conceive evill, and are not both evitable, the choice of the lesser, to avoid the greater, is not evil; but they are then to be judged inevitable, when there is no apparent ordinary way to avoid them, because that where counsell and advice do beare rule, we may not presume of Gods extraordinary power without extraordinary warrant, saith judicious Mr. Hooker.Hooker Eccles. pol. l. 5. p. 15. 7. From too much humili∣ty. Multos in sum∣ma pericula mi∣sit, venturi ti∣mor ipse mali. Lucan. l. 7. 7. If it be of too much humility, which is an error of lesse danger, yet by no meanes to be fostered, lest by gathering strength it proves most pernitious, they should pray to God to preserve them from too much fear; for though (as Saint Gregory saith) bonarum mentium est, ibi culpas agnoscere, ubi culpa non est, ye (as I said before) it is a heavy Judgement, and a want of God's grace, to be a∣fraid where no fear is, and it makes men to commit many sins many times for fear of sin. And thus having rectified our conscience in the understanding of all these things, we are bound by the commandment of God, to be obedient unto the commands of our King;Act. 15.20. for it is a paradox to say, Christians are free from the Lawes of men; because it was a humane law, touching things strangled and bloud:
and the Apostles do exact our obedience unto humane Lawes,Rom. 13.1, 2. 1 Peter 2, 13. even the Laws of Heathen and Idolatrous Emperours: and therefore, being bound to obey them, they cannot be freed in conscience, from the Religion of them: and so Dr. Whitaker saith, that as the Lawes of God must be simply obeyed, without any difference of time, place, and circumstance; so must the Lawes of men be obeyed, as the circumstances do require; for example, he that is a Roman, and liveth at Rome, must obey the Roman Lawes; and he saith, that the authority of the Magistrate, which is sacred and holy, cannot with any good conscience be contemned; because it is the commandment of God, that we should obey them;Whitaker contra Camp. p. 258. and this (saith he) doth binde the conscience, when, (as the Apostle saith) he is to be obeyed for conscience sake. But you will say, what if the King forbids me to do what God commandeth,  as the high Priest did to the Apostles; or commandeth me to do what God for∣biddeth, as Julian did unto the Christians, and Nebuchadnezzar to the three children? We have often answered, that in such a case, it is better to obey God then man;  Act. 5.25. for it is sometimes lawfull not to obey, but it is never lawfull to resist. What if he compells us by force and violence to do what God forbids us to do, if he playes the Tyrant, violates our Laws,  and corrupts the true Religion with dolatry and superstition? may we not then, as our fore-fathers did here∣tofore unto Chilperick King of France, and to Richard the second of this King∣dome, and others, bridle them, and depose them too, if they will not be ruled by their Great Counsell, the Parliament? I answer, first, Non spectandum quid factum sit, sed quid fieri debuerit,Sol. Heningus Ar∣nisaeus de au∣thor. princi. in Pop. we are not so much to regard what hath been done, as what ought to have been done, as Arnisaeus proveth at large, and sheweth most excellently, with a full answer to all the Articles, that were alleadged against those Kings, how unjust∣ly they were handled, and deposed contrary to all right; and I wish that book were translated into English. 2. I say,2. Of our passive bedi∣ence. that when our active obedience cannot be yeilded, our passive obedience must be used; for, were our King as Ty∣rannicall as Nero, as Idolatrous as Manasses, as wicked as Achab, and as pro∣phane as Julian; yet we may not resist, when as Arnisaeus proveth by many examples,Idem. cap. 3. p. 68. that the Rebellion of Subjects against their King doth overthrow the order of nature; and Justinian saith, quis est tantae autoritatis, ut nolentem prin∣cipem possit coactare? but in such a case, we must do as all the Saints did before us: not as the Heathens, which thought them worthy of divine honour,Cicero pro Mi∣lone. which did kill a Tyrant, and said with Seneca, victima haud ulla amplior Potest,Seneca in Her∣cul. sur. magisque opima mactari Jovi Quàm Rex iniquus. — But, as Christ himselfe suffered under Pontius Pilate, a most wicked Magistrate,Christ and his Apostles suf∣fered, but ne∣ver resisted the lawfull Magi∣strate. and registred in the breviary of our Faith, that we might never forget our du∣ty, rather to suffer, then to resist the authority that is from Heaven; and as Saint Ambrose answered the Emperour, that would have his Church delivered to the Arians, I shall never be willing to leave it; coactus repugnare non novi, if I be compelled I have not learned to resist. I can grieve and weep and sigh, and against the Armes and Gotish Souldiers, my teares are my weapons, for those are the Bulwarkes of the Priest, who in any other manner neither can, neither ought he to resist: so must all Christians rather by suffering death, then by re∣sisting our King to enter into the Kingdome of Heaven. But 'tis objected by our Sectaries, that His Majesty confesseth,  The Author of the Trea∣tise of Mo∣narchy. p. 31. there is a pow∣er Legally placed in the two houses, more then sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny.
The law provi¦des that the king should not be circum∣vented and ronged.I answer, first, when it pleased the King of His grace, to restrain His own power of making Laws, to the consent of Peeres and Commons, that by this Regulating of the same, it might be purged from all destructive exorbitanes, the very Law it self, being tender of the legitimate rights of the King, and consi∣dering the Person of the Soveraign to be single, and his power counterpoysed by the opposite wisdome of the two Houses, allowed him to swear unto himself a body of Council of State, and Counsellors at Law, and the Judges also to advise him and informe him so, that as he should not do any wrong, by reason of the re∣strayning Votes of the Houses, so he might not receive any wrong by the in∣croachment of the Parliament upon his right:The Kings concessions ve∣ry large. and the King, being driven away from his learned Counsel, and forced to make the defence of his rights by writ∣ing, it is no wonder, if his concessions and promises, as well in this point, as in other things, especially in that, concerning the Act of excluding the Clergy, were more then was due to them, or then he needed to grant, or then he ought to observe, being to the dishonour of God, and the prejudice of his Church; when as nothing in Parliament, where the wrong may be perpetual, should be extra∣cted from him, but what he should well consider of with the advice of his Counsel and what he should freely grant; and whatsoever is otherwise done, is ill done, to the great disadvantage of the King, and his Posterity, and the unjust inlarging of their power more then is due unto them; yet 2. I say, if these words of His Majesties be rightly weighed, they give no co∣lour of resisting Tyranny by any forcible armes; but a Doctor Ferne saith most truly of a Legal,D Ferne in his reply to sever. treat. p. 32. Moral, and Parliamentary restraint; for the wods are, there is a power legally placed in the Houses, that is, the Law hath placed a power in them but you shall never find any Law, that any King hath granted, whereby himself might be resisted and subdued by open force and violence: for as Roffen∣sis saith,Roffensis de po∣test Papae 291. Ephanta Py∣thag l. De Regno apud Stobaeum. fol. 335. Reges suo solius judicio reservavit Deus, qui stans in Synagoga deorum di∣judicat eos, God hath reserved Kings to his own judgement: and the Heathen man could say, as, Stobaeus testifieth, primùm Dei, deinde Regis est ut nulli subriciatur, , first it is the priviledge of God, next of the King, to be subject unto none, because the Regal power properly is unaccountable to any man, as Suidas saith: and Josephus saith, that the holiest men, that ever were among the Hebrews (called essaei, or esseni, that is the true practisers of the Law of God,) maintained, that soveraigne Princes, whatsoever they were, ought to be inviolable to their Subjects:A principle tenet of the Essaei. And some think, that the Common-wealth is hap∣pier under a Tyrant, that will keep them, in awe, then under too mild a Prince, upon whose clemency, they will pre∣sume to Rebel. Jer. 27.5, 6. A memorable place against resisting Ty∣rants. for they saw there was scarce any thing more usual in holy Scripture, then the prohibition of resistance, or refusal of obedience to the Prince, whether he were Jew, or Pagan, milde or tyrannical, good or bad: as to instance one place for all, where the Lord saith, I have made the earth, the man, and the beast that are upon the ground, by my great power, and have given it to whom it seemed meet unto me; and now I have given all those Lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my servant, (and he was both a Heathen, an Idolater, and a mighty Tyrant) and all Nations shall serve him and his son, and his sons son; and it shall come to passe, that the Nation and Kingdome, which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon and that will not put their necks under the yoke of the King of Babylon, that Nation will I punish (saith the Lord) with the Sword, and with the Famine, and with the Pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hands: therefore hearken not ye unto your Prophets, nor to your Diviners,— whih speak unto you, saying, you shall not serve the King of Babylon, for they prophesy a lye unto you; which he repeateth again and again, they prophesy a lye unto you, that you should perish; and may not I apply these words to our very time? God saith I have given this King∣dome unto King Charles (which is a mild, just and most pious king) and they that will say, nolumus hunc regnare super nos, I will destroy them by his hand; therefore, o ye seduced Londoners, beleive not your false Prophets, nay, hearken not to your diuiners, your Anabaptists and Brownists that preach lies, and lies upon lies, unto you, that you should perish; for God hath not sent them, though
they multiply their lyes in his name: therefore why will you dye, why will you destroy your selves, and your Posterity, by refusing to submit your selves to mine ordinance? and what should God say more unto you to hinder your de∣struction? and it was concluded by a whole Council, that, si quis potestati regia,Concil. Mel∣dens. apud Roffen. l. 2. c. 5. de potest. papa. quae non est (teste Apostolo) nisi a Deo, contumaci & afflato spiritu obtemperare irrefragabiliter nolnerit, anathematizetur. Whosoever resisteth the Kings Po∣wer, and with a proud spirit will not obey him, let him be accursed. But then you will say, this is strange doctrine, that wholly takes away the liber∣ty of the Subject, if they may not resist regal tyranny. I thinke there is no good Subject,  that loves his Soveraigne that will speake against a just and lawful liberty, when it is a far greater honour unto any king, to rule over free and gentile Subjects, then over base and turkish slaves; but as under the shadow and pretence of Christian liberty, many carnal men have rooted out of their hearts all Christianity;Many evils do lurk under fair shewes. so many Rebellious and aspiring mindes have, under these colourable titles of the liberty of the Subjects and suppressing tyranny, shaked of the yoke of all true Obedience, and dashed the rights of government all to pieces; therefore, as the law of God and the rules of his own conscience, should keep every Christian King from exercising any unjust tyranny over his Subjects; so, if men will transcend the rules of true obedience, the Kings Power and authority should keep them from transgressing the limits of their just liberty: but this unlawfulnesse of resisting our lawful King. I have fully proved in my Grand Rebellion, and it is so excellently well done by many others, that I shall but acta agere, to say any more of it. CHAP. XVII. Sheweth how tribute is due to the King; for six special reasons to be paid; the condition of a lawful tribute; that we should not be niggards to assist the King; that we should defend the Kings Person; the wealth and Pride of London, the cause of all the miseries of this Kingdome; and how we ought to pray for our King. 4. TRibute is another right and part of that honour, which we owe unto our King. Negotia enim infinita sustinet,The great charge of Prin∣ces. equabile jus omnibus admi∣nistrat, periculum à republica, cùm necessitas postulat, armis & virtute propul∣sat, bonis praemia pro dignitate constituit, improbos suppliciorum acerbitate coer∣cet, patriam denique universam, & ab externis hostibus & ab intestinis fraudi∣bus tutam vigilantia sua praestat: haec quidem munera aut opere tuetur, aut quoties opus fuerit, tuenda suscipit; qui autem existimat haec tam multa munera sint ma∣ximis sumptibus sustineri posse, mentis expers est, atque vitae communis ignarus: & idcirco hoc, quod & communi more receptum est, ut reges populi sumptibus alan∣tur, non est humano tantùm jure, sed etiam diuino vallatum:Osorius de rebus Emanuel. lib. 12 p. 386. saith eloquent Oso∣rius. For he undergoeth infinite affaires; he administreth equal right to all his people; he expelleth and keepeth away from the Common-wealth all dan∣gers, when necessity requireth, both with armes and prowesse,; he appointeth rewards to the good and faithful according to their deserts; he restraineth the wiked with the sharpnesse and severity of punishments; and he preserveth his Country and Kingdome safe by his care and watchfulnesse, both from Forraigne foes and intestine frauds; and these offices he dischargeth indeed, and under∣taketh
taketh to discharge them as often as any need requireth; And he that thinketh that all these things, so many and so great affaires, can be discharged without g eat cest and charge; is void of understanding and ignorant of the common course of life; and therefore this thing, which is received by a common custom, that Kings should be assisted, and their royalty maintained, by the publick charge of the people, is not onely allowed by humane law, but is also confirmed by the divine right. Men should therefore consider that the occasions of Kings are very great; a∣broad, for intelligence, and correspondency with Foreign States, that we may reap the fruit of other Nations, vent our own commodities to our best advan∣tage, and be guarded, secured, and preserved from all our outward enemies; and at home, to support a due State answerable to his place, to maintain the pub∣lique justice and judgements of the whole Kingdom, and an hundred such like occasions, that every private man cannot perceive; and think you that these things can be done without meanes, without money? If you still pour out and not pour in, your bottle will be soon empty, and the Ocean sea would be soon dried up, if the Rivers did not still supply the same: and therefore not onely Deioces, that I speak of before, when he was elected King of the Medes, caused them to build him a most stately Palace, and the famous City of Ecbatana, and to give him a goodly band of select men for the safeguard of his Person, and to provide all other things fitting for the Majesty of a King, and all the other Kings of the Gentiles did the like, as well they might, if it be true, that some of them thought, Quicquid habet locuples, quicquid custodit avarus, Gunterus.Jure quidem nostrum est, populo concedimus usum. But also Solomon,1 Reg. 12.4. Tertul. to 3. de pudicit. c. 9. Pamel. in Ter∣tul. and all the rest of the Kings of Israel required no small aid and tribute from their Subjects; for though Tertullian out of Deut. 23.17. reads it, there shall not be , vectigal pendens, a payer of tribute of the sons Israel; yet Pamelius well observes it, that these words are not in the original, but are taken by him out of the septuagint, which also saith not of the sons, but , of the daughters of Israel, that is, ex impudicitia & lupanaribus, for their dishonesty, as it is said in the next verse, that the hire of a whore and the price of a dog,Deut. 23.18. Aug. de Civit. dei l. 10. c. 9. are an abomination unto the Lord, and so S. Augustine useth the word Teletae, for those unchaste sacrifices wherewith such women did oblige themselves: and so doth Theodoret likewise: but that the Jewes paid tribute, it is manifest our of 1 Sam. 17.24. where this reward is promised to him that killed Goliah,1 Sam. 17.25. in vulgata editione. 2. reg. 11.28. that his father's house should be absque tributo, free from all tri∣bute in Israel, therefore certainly they paid tribute, and to make it yet more plain, Solomon appointed Jeroboam, super tributa universae domûs Joseph, saith the vulgar latine, over all the charge or burthen of the house of Joseph, (that is, of the tribe of Ephraim and Manasses) as our translation reads it:Barrad to 2. l. 5. c. 21. p. 340. and he appointed Adoniram the Son of Abda over the tribute, 1. Reg. 4.6. Yea, though the Jewes were the people of God, and thought themselves free, and no wayes obliged to be taxed by foreign Princes, that were Ethnicks: yet after Pompey took their City,Josephus. l. 15. c. 18. they paid tribute to the Romans; and our Sa∣viour bids us nor onely to obey, but also to render unto Caesar what is Caesar's, that is, (not determining the quota pars, how much, as he doth the tenth unto the Priest) but indefinitely, some part of our goods, for subsidies, imposts, aids, loanes, or call it by what name you will; and rather then himself would omit this duty, though he never wrought any other miracle about money; yet herein, when he had never a peny,Barrad. to 2. l. 10. c. 32. p. 317. he would create money in the mouth of a fish, as S. Hierom and the interlin. glosse do think, and command the fish to pay tribute both for himself and his Apostle. Therefore we should render unto Caesar
what is Caesar's: that is, , which the Greekes take promiscu∣ously, though the Civilians distinguish them, de solo & fundo, de bonis mobilibus, & de mercibus, of our grounds, of our goods, of our merchandize, we ought to pay subsidies, aid, and tribute unto our King; and that not sparingly, nor by way of benevolence, as if it were in our power to do it, or not to do it, sed ex de∣bito, but as his due, jure divino, & regulâ justitiae, as his proper importance an∣nexed unto his Crown; for I take it infallibly true, which Suarez saith,Suarez. de leg. l. 5. c. 17. n. 3. fol. 316. Tribute due to the King. accep∣tationem populi non esse conditionem necessariam tributi ex vi juris naturalis aut gentium, neque ex jure communi: quia obligatio pendendi tributum; it à naturalis est principi & per se orta ex ratione justitiae, ut non possit quis excusari propter ap∣parentem injustitiam vel nimium gravamen; the consent of the people is not any necessary condition of tribute; because the obligation of paying it, is so natural, springing out of the reason of justice, that none can be excused for any appa∣rent injustice or grievance: and therefore the Parliaments, that are the highest representations of any Kingdome, do not contribute any right unto Kings to challenge tribute, but do determine the quota pars, and to further the more e∣qual imposing and collecting of that, which is due unto Kings by natural and original justice, as a part of that proper inheritance which is annexed unto their Crownes. And therefore, our Saviour doth not say, give unto Caesar, but , the same word which S. Paul useth,Matth. 22. Rom. 13. Latimer in Mat. 22.21. when he biddeth us to pay our debts, and to owe nothing to any man, saying, , pay to every man that which you owe: and Father Latimer saith, if we deny him tribute, custome, subsidie, tallage, taxes, and the like aid and support, we are no better then Theeves, and steale the kings dues from him;Navar. apud Suarez. de le∣gibus sol. 300. fol. 311. because the Law testifieth tributa esse maximè naturalia, & praese ferre justitiam, quia exiguntur de rebus propriis: and Suarez saith, penditur tributum ad sustentatio∣nen. principis, & ad satisfaciendum naturali obligationi in dando stipendium ju∣stum laborauti in nostram utilitatem; tribute is most naturall and just to be paid to the king for our own good: therefore Christ pleading for the right of Caesar, that was a Tyrant, saith not, give unto him, quia petit, because he demands it, but pay unto him, quae illius sunt, the things that are his, and are due unto him, even as due as the hirelings wages, which we are commanded not to detain for one night; because this is a part of that reward and wages,Deut. 24.15. which God alloweth him for all his pains and cares, that he takes to see Justice administred in the time of Peace, and to protect us from our enemies in the time of War; which makes the life of kings to be but a kind of splendid misery, wearing many times, with Christ, a Crown of Thornes, a Crown full of cares, while we lap our heads in beds of downe; and therefore it is not only undutifulnesse to deny him, or unthankeful∣nesse, not to requite the great good that he doth unto us, but it is also a great injustice, (especially if we consider that as Ocham saith, Qui est dominus aliqua∣rum personarum, est Dominus rerum ad casdem personas spectantium; omnia quae sunt in regno, sunt regis quoud potestatem utendi eis pro bono communi, Ocha. tract. 2. l. 2. c. 22. & 25.) to detain that right from him, which God commands us to pay unto him, and that indeed for our own good; as Menenius Agrippa most wittily shewed unto the People of Rome when they murmured and mutined for these taxes, that whatsoever the stomach received, either from the hand or mouth, it was all for the benefit of the whole body; so whatsoever the King receiveth from the People, it is for the benefit of the people, and it is like the wa∣ters that the Sea receiveth from the Rivers, which is visibly seen passing into the Ocean, but invisibly runneth through the veines of the earth, into the Rivers a∣gain; so doth all that the King receiveth from the People, return some way or other unto the People again. And there be six speciall reasons why, or to what end we should pay these dues unto the King.
Six reasons for which we pay Tribute unto the king.1. For the Honour of his Majesty. 2. For the security of his Person. 3. For the protection of his Kingdome. 4. For the succour of his confederates. 5. For the securing of our 1. Goods. 2. Estates. 3. Lives. 6. For the propagating of the Gospel, and defence of our Religion. But for the further clearing of this point, you must know that every just and Lawfull tribute must have these three essential conditions, that are proprietates constitutivae. Three condi∣tions of every lawfull Tri∣bute.1. Legitima potestas, that is, the Kings power to require it. 2. Justa causa, an urgent necessity, or need of it. 3. Debita portio, a due proportion, according to the Kings necessities, and the peoples abilities, that he be not left in need, nor the people over-charged. For, As the Subjects are thus bound to supply the necessities of their King, so the King is not to over-charge his Subjects; for the King should be the Shepheard of his People, as David calls himself, and Homer tearmeth all good Kings, and not the devourer of his people,Kings should not over-charge their Subjects. as Achilles calleth Agamemnon for the unreason∣able taxes that he laid upon them; therefore good Kings have been very sparing in this point; for Darius, inquiring of the Governours of his Provinces, whe∣ther the tributes imposed upon them were not too excessive, and they answering, that they thought them very moderate, he commanded that they should raise but the one half thereof,A worthy speech of Lewis 9. (which had Rehoboam bin so wise to do, he had not lost ten parts of his Kingdome;) and Lewis the ninth of France, which they say was the first that raised a tax in that Kingdome, directing his speech to his Son Philip, and causing the words to be left in his Testament, which is yet to be sound Registred in the chamber of accounts, said, be devout in the service of God, have a pittifull heart towards the poore, and comfort them with thy good deeds, ob∣serve the good Lawes of thy Kingdome, take no taxes nor benevolences of thy Subjects, unlesse urgent necessity, and evident commodity force thee to it, and then upon a just cause, and not usually; if thou doest otherwise, thou shalt not be accounted a king,King James his golden a∣pothegme, Basilicon doron. l. 2. p. 99. but a Tyrant; and it is one of the gracious apothegmes of our late noble and never to be forgotten Soveraigne, worthy to be written in in letters of gold, where speaking to his son, he saith, inrich not your self with ex∣actions from your Subjects, but think the riches of your Subjects, your best Trea∣sures: and Artaxerxes said, it was a great deale more seemlier for the Majesty of a King, to give, then to take by polling, to cloath, then to uncloath, which be∣longeth to Theeves, not to Princes, unlesse they will stain their names: for as Apollonius saith, that gold, which is taken by Tyranny, is far baser then any iron; because it is wetted with the teares of the poor Subjects: and therefore Peter de la Primauday, saith, they are unworthy of the title of Prince, that lending their eares to such as invent new wayes to get monyes from their Subjects, and having against all humanity,Pet. de la Pri∣mauday: cap. 60. p. 670. spoyled them of their goods, do either miserably consume them upon their pleasures, or prodigally bestow them upon undeserving flatterers, that fat themselves by the overthrow of others. And therefore it behoveth all kings to consider, that all mens goods are theirs only quoad tuitionem, & defensionem, and their Subjects, quoad possessionem & proprietatem; as you may see, where Joseph bought all the Land of the Egypti∣ans for king Pharaoh,Gen. 47.46. and then let it them againe in Fee-farme, to give the King the fifth part of the fruit of it; and as you may conclude it from the eighth Commandment, which saith, as well to the King as to the subject, thou shalt not steale; for if all be his, he cannot be said to steale it; and if this precept concerns not kings, then have they but nine Commandments; and therefore, be wise, O ye Kings, and remember what Saint Augustine saith, remotâ justitiâ quid sunt
Regna nisi Latrocinia? for though you may justly demand Tribute and Taxes, yet you must have just occasions to use them, and you must take but a just pro∣portion, or else they may come unjustly unto you. But who shall be the Judges of the Kings just occasions? in many king∣domes his conscience; as the Roman Consuls imposed what taxes they thought meet upon the Provinces they subdued; so Marcus Antonius being in Asia doubled their Tax, and laid a second charge upon the People, which was very unreasonable, as Hebreas told him, saying,The saying of Hebreas to M. Antonius. if thou wilt have power to lay upon us two taxes in one year, thou must have also power to give us two sum∣mers, and Autumns, two Harvests, and two Vintages: and yet if our king do thus unreasonably tax us with more then we are able to beare, we may reason with him, as Hebreas did with Marke Antony, refel his arguments,Kings herein not to be re∣sisted. and repel his oppressions according to the course of Law, but we may not in any case with the Sword make any resistance, either actual or habitual, against him. 1 Because God hath not made us Judges of the Kings occasions, and we know not his necessities: and therefore we cannot determine what is just and unjust. 2. Were it granted, that the superior demanded without right, yet the inferior not onely may rightly render it without offence unto his conscience, but also ought to pay it without resistance unto the Magistrate: for if the Jews were not free: and the Romans had no right to demand Tribute of them, yet by our Saviours question unto Saint Peter, and his replication unto the Apostles answer, it is apparent, that our Saviour was most free, and was no way bound to pay any thing unto the Romans, not onely quâ Deus, as Hesselius saith,Hesselius in Matth. 18. Barrad. to. 2. l. 19. c. 32. but also as he was a man, as Barradius more truely proveth: yet lest he should offend them, as he saith, tributum solvit quia voluit, he doth most willingly discharge it: to teach us, that we may and ought justly and without any scruple of con∣science pay that, which may be unjustly demanded: and the best Authors, that I have read, are of the same judgement: we have no other remedy but to cry to God, who can judge them for their injustice: & non caret modis,Greg. Tholos. l. 26. de repub. c. 5. n. 25. quibus possit, quando voluerit, hujusmodi principes tollere vel emendare. But, though in most of the Eastern Countries, the Kings imposed upon their Subjects, what taxes and tributes pleased themselves, as Augustus taxed all the world, as much as he would, at his own pleasure, and Charles the fifth (saith Osorius) praeter pecunias quibus illum Hispani juverant, immania tributae populis imperavit, besides those monyes, wherewith the Spaniard assisted him,Osor. de rebus Emanuel l. 12. p. 386. What the Kings of England pro∣mised to their Subjects. laid most heavy taxes upon the people; which is indeed a branch of the absolute right of Kings, and was originally practised by most of them; yet here with us, our Kings out of grace and favour unto their people granted such a priviledge unto their Subjects, and devested themselves of this right, to lay no impositions or taxes upon their Subjects, without the consent of their three States convened in the two Houses of Parliament; and this Princely concession, being truely ob∣served, may procure a great deale of love and peace unto the king, and as much tranquility and happinesse unto the people. Neither do I thinke that he loves his King, but am sure that he hates his Country, that would perswade him for all the wealth of the kingdome, to violate his own grant and faith herein;That we should not be niggards to assist our king. but, as our king granted this favour, to impose no taxes without the consent of his Parliament; so his Parliament in all duty, ought alwayes with all thankfulness, to acknowledge this special grace, and in requital thereof most fully to supply his wants and support his necessities, whensoever he acquaints them therewith. And therefore we ought not to be like those hide-bound Sectaries, and close-fisted Puritans and Brownists, that are so miserably covetous, and extream niggards, that when the king makes known his wants and demands his due, (for it is still his due, though he granted not to cesse it without their consent) for his royal supportation and the safety of his kingdome, they will finde a hundred excuses to deny him, but never a penny to give him out of all their wealth; and this is the cause of our misery, and may prove as fatal to us, as it
hath been to the Constantinopolitans; whose churlishnesse and niggardlinesse to∣wards their Emperour, was the chiefest cause of the losse of that great Empire and to make the Turk sit in Christ his Chaire, to have Mahomet adored where the Gospel was formerly published by as many famous Fathers, as now En∣gland hath Preachers;How Constant. was lost, and what the Turk then said. for the Emperour foreseeing the Siege, made many motions for contributions towards the repairing of the Walls, and continue the military charge; but the Subjects drew back, and pleaded want, until it was too late, and the City lost; for though the enemy having a long time besieged it, was intended to give over the Siege, and to be gone; yet tydings and intelli∣gence being given him, that the Souldiers within the Town, were grown very thin and discontented for want of their pay, the enemy returned and in a short space took the City: and there found in private mens hands, such infinite store of gold and all manner of treasure, (the hundred part whereof would have paid all the Souldiers, kept out the enemy, and preserved them all) that the Turk see∣ing the basenesse of the Citizens, so foolishly hiding their wealth, and denying just aid unto their Emperour, stood amazed, and lifting up his hands to heaven, la∣mented their folly, and asked what they meant, that having such a store of wealth, they would suffer themselves to be thus destroyed, onely for want of wit or of grace to use it? and thence grew the Proverb among the Turkes unto this day, when one becommeth very rich, you have been at the Siege of Constantinople. And I p ay God it may not so fall out with us for our covetousnesse, that we prove not Lucans speech to be true: omnia dat, qui iust a negat, to lose all un∣justly unto strangers, unto rebels, because we deny what is just unto our King. But I will conclude this point with the Poët, Astra Deo nl majus habent, nil Caesare terra, Sic Caesar terras, ùt Deus astra regit. Imperium regis Caesar, Deus astra gubernat, Caesar honore suo dignus, amore Deus. Dignus amore Deus, dignus quoque Caesar honore est, Alter enim terras, alter & astra regit. Cum Deus in caelis, Caesar regat omnia terris, Censum Caesaribus solvite, vota Deo. 5. Defence of the kings per∣son.5. Defence of his Person is another princpal part of that honour, which we owe unto our King. And the very heathens did think their lives well bestow∣ed for their Gods, their family, and the father of the Country; how much more willing should the Christians be, to hazard their lives in defence of their King,2 Sam. 21.17. Lament. 2.4. Ps. 78.71.72. vide Hos. 3.4. c. 10.3. and Lament. 2.9. which is, quasi unus è decem millibus, worth ten thousands of us, being, as the Scripture termes him, the Light of Israel, and the breath of our nostrils, the head of his Subjects, the shepheard and Pastor of the people, and as the word  importeth, , the foundation of the people without which they must all fall unto the ground; for where there is no governour, all must perish, and there will be no Priest, no Prince, no Religion, no Nobility, no good,1 Joh. 3.16. but anarchy and confusion▪ and the destruction of all things. And if we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren, as S. John saith, how much rather ought we to do it for our King? it is recorded in our annals, to his eternal praise,Nulla gent ità sollicita est cir∣ca regem suum, sicut apes, unde rege incolumi omnibus mens u∣na est, & quan∣do nequit vola∣re, seri ipsum turba apum; & si moritur, mori∣untur & ipsae. that Sir Hubert Syncler at the Seige of Bridge-north, seeing an arrow that was shot at his Master, King Henry the second, stepped betwixt the shaft and his Soveraign, and receiving the arrow into his body, was therewith shot through to death, that he might preserve the life of his King, which otherwise had been slain in his stead. So Turnbull had his name for killing a Bull, that had otherwise slain one of the Kings of Scotland; and we read that when David was assailed by a mighty Giant, named Ishibibenob, which was of the sons of Rapha, the head of whose speare weighed three hundred shekels of brass, Abishai the son of Zervia, with the danger of his owne life, runs in, succours the king, and kills the Philistim. 2 Sam. 21.17. and so all other good Subjects have had a speciall care to preserve the lives of their Kings, whom they loved better then their own Parents, yea, then their wives or children, or their own lives, as
it appeareth by the foresaid examples, and abundance of the like, that you may find in the Histories of the Heathens: for they had not learnt the new divinity of our time, to destroy the King for the good of his Subjects, but they thought, as it is most true, that salus regis est salus populi, and they beleeved, as all good Chri∣stians do, that Ʋna salus nobis, nullam sperare salut em, Principe calcato, sublato jure coronae; because as S. Chrysostome saith, ,Chrysost. in 1 Tim. 2.2. Aug. to. 9. tract. 6. in Johan. their safety is our security, and as S. August. saith, si tollis jura Imperatorum, quis audet dicere, mea est illa villa, if you take away the government of Kings, who dares say, haec mea sunt, this or that is mine, as now, God knowes, since these Rebels have abused our King, we can say nothing is our own; our houses, goods, lives and liberties, are at the disposing of them that are strongest; what then shall we say of those Subjects that strive with all their wit, wealth and strength to destroy their King? and if you ask me why? I must answer, as Aristides was banished out of Athens, justus, quia justus, so must our King be killed, if these men could do it with their Cannon Bullets, because he is too good to reigne over them; who deserved not a pious David, nor a wise Solomon to rule over them, but a foolish Rehoboam,Ps. 2.9. that would whip them with Scorpions, or such a one as would rule them with a rod of iron, and breake them in pieces like a potters vessel: for had our King been, not Caesar Augustus, but Augustus Severus, so severe as Henry 8. or some other more unmercifull Princes, these Rebels durst as well eate their own flesh, as thus to devoure the flesh and bones of the Kings loyall Subjects, and seek the death of the King himself. For it is most certaine of the vulgar people, and of ill bred natures, that un∣gentes pungunt, pungentes molliter ungunt; and therefore though the manifold offers of Peace, and the unparallel'd promising of Pardons to most obstinate Re∣bels, do infinitely commend the piety, and declare the mildness of a most clement Prince, and the refusall thereof betray the ingratefull stubbornnesse of graceless Subjects to all posterity; yet, when the hairy scalpe of such as still go on in their wickedness, will not so easily be rubbed off, I should say to every King, put your trust in Gods assistance; and as the Holy Ghost saith to the King of Kings,Psal. 45.3. Gird thee with thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty; ride on with thine honour, and let thy right hand teach thee terrible things: and those thine enemies that would not thou shouldst reigne over them, cause them to be brought, and let them be slain before thee, so shalt thou be a ruler in the midst of thine enemies;Luke 19, 27. and some think that it were but just, if our King, though he be never so loath, should now at last turn the leafe, and follow the example of God himself, (who when his children regard not his grace, and set at naught all his counsels, will laugh at their calamity, and mock when their destruction cometh as a whirle-winde) and should make London as Hierusalem, and as other the like rebellious Cities,Prov. 1.16, 17. (that the Lord in his just revenge of their iniquity hath suffered to be destroyed,The wealth & pride of the City of London have brought this misery and calamity upon all the king∣dom of Eng∣land. and to be made an heape of stones:) because the Londoners have shewed themselves in many things worse then the Jews, and for Rebellion have justified all the Cities of the world: or if the King will not do this, though I dare not say of them, as An∣toninus, after he had heard the confession of a miserable covetous wretch, said un∣to him, Deus misereatur tui, si vult, & condonet tibi peccata tua, quod non credo & perducat te in vitam eternam, quod est impossibile; yet seeing their sins are so intolerable among men, and so abhominable in the sight of God, it is much feared, that , after their hard hearts,Rom. 2.5. which cannot repent, they will still proceed to heape upon themselves the heavy wrath of God, till there be no remedy to preserve them from utter ruine and destruction; though from my heart I wish them more grace, and pray to Al∣mighty God, that — Nullum sit in omine pondus; Or if this cannot be, that they may escape that damnation, which the Apostle threatneth to all them that resist this ordinance of God.Rom. 13.2. 6. Prayers for the Kings. 6. The last but not the least part of that honour which is due to our King, is our
prayers to God for him and as the other duty was to be performed by the practice of all good Subjects;Aenisaeus c 2. p. 38 Tertul ad Scap. Ita Marius. Au∣relius Christia∣norum militum orationibus ad Deum factis, im∣bres & vi∣ctoriam in ex∣peditione Ger∣manica impe∣trait. so is this to be observed by the precept of the Apostle, who though the Kings were Ethnicks and Tyrants, yet commanded us to pray for them and that you may know what manner of prayer the Christians made for their persecuting Kings. Tertullian that lived under the Emperour Severus, saith in behalf of the Church, Omnibus Imperatoribus precamur vitam prolixam, imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, popu∣lum probum, orbem quietum, & quaecunque hominis & Caesaris vota sunt; and I fear me, our Rebels pray for none of these things to a most Christian King: Nam orare pro aliquo & in exitium ejus machinari, annon haec sunt sibi contraria? for to pray for ones health and long life, and to do our best to worke his destruction. Non benè conveniunt.— can never proceed from a true heart, but as the uncharitable Papists prayed for the successe of the Gun-powder Plot (which was a Treason sine exemplo, quia crudelis sine modo) saying Gentem auferto perfidam Credentium de finibus, Ʋt Christo preces debitas Persolvamus alacriter. So the practice of these Rebels makes us believe their prayer is, Regem auferto perfidum Credentium de finibus, &c.I am asham∣ed to set down how the facti∣ous and malici∣ous Preachers of the reblli∣ous Cities, ei∣ther neglect to pray at all, or pray most se∣ditiously and unchristianly for their own Liege Lord, and gracious King: and therefore the curse of Judas lights upon them, that their prayer is turned into sin, which should make them pray, that Judas his end should not fall unto them. But we that desire to follow the Apostles Precept, considering the greatnesse of his cares and charge tha he doth undergo, and the multitude of dangers that he is lyable to, will most heartly pray to God both in our Morning and our Evening Prayers, both at our sitting and at our rising from our meat, Ʋt vi∣vat Rex, exurgat Deus, & dissipentur inimici; that God would give his Angels charge over him to preserve him in all his wayes, that he dash not his foot against a stone: that his enemies may be cloathed with shame, and that he may flourish as the Lilly, that he may raign long and happily here, and raign for ever in Heaven: this shall be my prayer for ever. CHAP. XVIII. The persons that ought to honour the King; and the recapitulation of one and twenty Wickednesses of the Rebels, and the faction of the pre∣tended Parliament. 3 The persons that must ho∣nour the King.3. HAving seen the Person that is to be honoured, and the honour that is due unto him, we are now to consider in the last place, who are to ho∣nour him, included in this word , honour ye him; which being unli∣mited and indefinite, is equivalent to an universal; and so Saint Paul doth more plainly express it,Rom. 13.1. saying, , Let every soul be ubject to the higher powers; which is an Hebrew Ideome, or Synec∣dochical speech, s gnifying the whole man; the word  being usually taken in Scripture pro toto composito, for the whole man composed of body and soul, as where it is said,Gen. 46.62·27. Act. 2. that Jacob went down into Aegypt with 70 soules, and S. Peter by one Sermon converted 3000 soules: and the abstract word  is here ta∣ken , to shew that our subjection, obedience, and honour, which we are to ascribe unto our King, must be not as hypocrites render it in shew, from the eeth outwa d, but really and indeed, ex animo, from our soules and the bot∣tome of our harts, as Aquinas glosseth it: and the concrete  added unto it, makes it the more energetical, to shew that all mortal men, none excepted, are ob iged, to do this honour, and to yield this subjection unto their King: for, seeing every man, both spiritual and temporal; and every sex, both man and
woman; and every degree of men, young and old, rich and poor, one with an∣other, hath an immortal soul, as well as a mortal body, it must needs follow, that all, cujuscunque gradûs, sexûs, & conditionis, are obliged both in soule and body to honour and obey their King. And yet it is strange to see how many men can exempt themselves and grant a dispensation unto their soules for the performance of this duty;The Pope and his Clergy would be freed from the subje∣ction of Kings. for the Pope will be freed, because he hath a power above all powers, to depose Kings and to dispose of their Kingdomes at his pleasure: and the Popish Clergy will perform no duty unto their King, because their Function is spiritual: but to all these I may truly say, as our saviour doth to the lewd servant, ex ore tuo, out of the Fathers whom they acknowledge, and out of their own Authors they are con∣futed, for Saint Chrysostome saith, that whether he be an Apostle, or Evange∣list, or Prophet, Seu quisquis tandem fuerit, or whosoever else he be, Pope, Cardinal, or Deacon, he is commanded to be subject to the higher power: and that you may see what power he meanes, he pointeth out the same by the sym∣bol, that is, of him that carryeth the sword, which you know must be the secu∣lar Prince, and not the spiritual Pope: and so not onely Euthym. Theophylact Oecumenius, and other Greek Commentators do avouch, but also those Epi∣stles, which are recorded by Binius, and quoted by the Bishop of Durham, as Leo 1. ep. 26. & 35. Simplicius 1. ep. 4. Felix 3. ep. 2. Anastasius 1. ep. 78. Pelagius 1. ep. 16. Martinus 1. ep. 3. Agatho 1. ep. ad Herac. Hadrian 1. ep. ad Constant. do make this most manifest unto vs: and therefore Espencaeus, convin∣ced by such a cloud of witnesses, confesseth very honestly, that the Apostle here,Espenc in Tit. 3. 1. Digres. 10. p. 5. 13. Paris. 1568. The wicked∣nesses of the pretended Par∣liament shew∣ed by their actions. Docet omnes credentes mundi potestatibus esse subjectos, nempe, sive Apostolus, sive Evangelista, &c. ut tenet Chrysost. Euthym. & qui non, Graeci? And as the Popelings will be free, so the Presbyterians, and the faction of this Parliament will be as free as they: and (because every wickednesse laboureth to exceed that which preceeded) these do not agree with the Catholiques (as Herod and Pilate did, to crucifie Christ) in the same conclusion and tenet of exemp∣tion, but they will go a note beyond Ela, and surmount both Jesuite and Pope; and therefore they not onely dishonour and disobey their King, but they have violated and incroached upon all his rights, and assumed the same into their own hands; for, to recapitulate some of their choycest wickednesses. 1. As the Church of Rome and the Jesuites teach, in Aphorismis confessario∣rum, ex Doctorum sententiis collectis, p. 249. that Rex potest per rempublicam privari ob tyrannidem, & si non faciat officium suum, & cum est causa aliqua justa & eligi alius à majore parte populi: which falshood their own Divines confute, when Royard saith, Rege constituto, non potest populus jugum subjectionis repellere: so these men maintain that diabolical tenet, that the Regal power is primarily in the collective body, and derived to the king cumulativè, not privatiuè; and there∣fore upon the kings neglect or male-administration, it comes back again to the collective body, in whom it resideth suppletivè, to discharge the royal duty when the king faileth to do the same; and then the king so falling from his right, they may refuse obedience, and if they see cause (which they can soone do) they may depose him from his office; which impudent falshood I have fully con∣futed in this Treatise. 2. They say the Regall Majesty is a humane creature, or the ordinance of men primarily, and therefore may be deposed by men; when as Cunerus could say, Sive electione, sive postulatione, vel successione, vel belli jure princeps fiat, principi tamen facto divinitùs potestas adest: and therefore they have no pow∣er to take away that which God hath given him. 3. They have with Nadab and Abihu adventured to offer strange fire upon Gods Altar, and with Ʋzza to lay their prophane hands upon Gods holy Arke; they have rejected the Lawes that the King with the advice and consultation of all his learned Clergy hath made,Though now I reckon not this among their wicked∣nesses. and they themselves sit in Moses chaire, and have undertaken to reforme the Church, to make Lawes, and compose Articles of our faith, with the advice of a few factious men, that were never esteemed
otherwise then faex Cleri, not wohy to be the Curates of those worthy Di∣vines, whose feet they hurt in the stocks,  the iron into their soules. How they per∣secute the Bi∣shops, and the best of the Clergy.4. They have cast out all the Bshops, and all the faithfull Ministers of Christ out of all offices, that might further the Gospell, and administer justice unto the people; they do rob them of their menes, and count sacriledge to be no sin; and in very deed, they have persecuted the worthiest Clergy, in many par∣ticulars, far worse then ever Julian, that wicked Apostata, did; the Lord of Heaven give us patience to indure it, and suffer us not for feare of any villanie, or calamity, to be dejected, and so fall away from his truth. 5. They have called and continued an Assembly, which the Pope would not do without the Emperours leave, contrary to the Kings command; which is a meere and mighty usurpation of the Regall right. 6. They have seized upon the Kings Revenues, Castles, Forts, Townes, Ships, and all that they could lay hand on, and do in a hostile manner, with all violence, detaine them from him, but what he gaines by his sword, to this very day. 7. They have fought against him, shot at His sacred Person, and sought most Barbarously to kill him, under the colour to preserve him; which is the finest piece of Logicke that ever was read. 8. They have rayled at him; slandered him, and most apparently and falsly belyed him, and laid to his charge the things which we his Majesties Subjects and Servants that attend Him do know, that He neither did, nor knew. 9. They incouraged and countenanced their ignorant brazen-faced Chaplains most uncivily to rayle at Gods Anointed in the Pulpit; and so they brought the abomination, not of desolation, but of most horrible transgression into the ho∣ly place, and made Moses chaire the seat of railers. 10. They taxe the Subjects at their pleasure, and have raised infinite summes of money, and no man but themselves knowes how they have disposed, or what they have done therewith. 11. They discharged Apprentices, they send out their Warrants and their Edicts, without and against the Kings authority, which are but nugae, and the mi∣nims of their doings. 12. They averre, that the King hath no negative voice in making Lawes, but they may conclude them, and make them obligatory without the Kings appro∣bation or ratification; and that they may do any thing conducible to the good of the Church and Common-wealth, any Law, Statute, or provision made to the contrary notwithstanding. What they say of their Cove∣nants.13. They are not ashamed to teach (as they do practice) that it is lawfull for them to make Covenants, Combinations, and Confederacies of mutuall defence and offence against any person whatsoever, whom themselves judge malignant, not excepting the King himselfe; and they say, that it were better for them to renounce their Baptisme, then to forsake their Covenant, which they believe will be more advantageous to the Kingdome, then all the Priviledges that are granted in Magna Charta, or the Statutes that have been made ever since. 14. They jeered at the Kings Proclamations, trampled his Declarations un∣der feet, and incountred the same with rebellious Protestations. To what they liken the kings pardons.15. They perswade the people to give no eare to any discourse of Accommo∣dation, or conclusion for any peace; and say, that the King is not to be trusted; that he will performe no promise that he maketh, either in his Proclamations or Declarations; and therefore that the Kings Pardons may be likened to a buckler of glasse, or a staffe of reede, on which there is no trust, no committing themselves to the defence of any such pardon. So we may say with the Poet, Nos juvat alma quies, gens haec fera bella minatur; Et quoties pacem poscimus, arma crepat. Whence they learned their Divinity.16. They teach the Doctrine of coercion, dedignifying, degrading, and de∣capitating of Kings, when they deeme them unworthy of that dignity; and their arguments and reasons they collect and produce out of Dolman. Bellarm. Suarez, and the Magazine of the most rigid Jesuites.
17. They have so barbarously, and so irreverently, and so prophanely abused our Service-Book that it would ath your eares to heare, transcend modesty to tell you how they have dealt with it; and they threatned, that if the Mini∣sters would read it, they should never read book again. 18. They do agree with the worst of Papists, the Jesuites, in a great many of the worst points of doctrine that they teach; and yet being not well able to understand their tenets, they hate Papists so much,How contrary to Christs do∣ctrine, Matth. 13.29. they would root out all Papists that they would root them out of their very being; they would destroy all the Irish that are Papists, and drive all Papists out of England, out of the world, that the name of Papists should be no more in remembrance; and contrary to all reason, divinity, and humanity, they would force and compell every man to profess the Religion that they are of, though some of them (as their independents) are far on the other side, would have every man to have liberty to profess what Religion himselfe liketh best. 19. They have most ingratefully and disloyally injured a most loving wife, and their owne most gracious Queen, for shewing Her love,How they have wronged the Queen, the Nobility, Cler∣gy, Gentry, and Commons of this Land. and discharging Her duty to Her husband: They have imprisoned, and barbarously used some of the Nobility, most of the Clergy, and abundance of the Gentry, and others of the best account of the common Subjects of this Kingdom; they have plunder∣ed and robbed many thousands of men; they have killed and murdered as ma∣ny; they have made our Cities dens of theeves, our Churches prisons, and all the Land Acheldama's, fields of blood; they multiplyed the number of Widowes, Orphanes, and Theeves without number, throughout the Land, and they filled the whole Kingdome with miseries, lamentations and woes; and they have done so many mischiefes, as if I should set them all down, would fill up another vo∣lume: And, 20. As if all this were not enough, to fill up the measure of their iniquity, they spared neither pains nor cost to call in the Scots to assist them,How they la∣boured to call in the Scots. to perpetuate the War, to fill our Kingdome with strangers, and to make our calamities everlast∣ing, so they fell from evil to worse, from discontent to schisme, from schisme to open Rebellion, and their Rebellion more wicked then any Rebels that we can reade of in any History; which is the just judgment of God upon them, that they which rebelliously run out of the Communion of Gods Church, should most desperately run out of their own wits; and refusing to be guarded by the Hea∣venly Angels, should give themselves to be guided by the infernall Divels; which made a merry fellow, at the enumeration of their abhominable, and indeed in∣numerable wickednesses, to say, Hell was never better then it is now,The speech of a merry com∣panion. because he thought the Divels were all in London, or otherwise it were impossible that the Citizens which have received so many gracious offers of pardons from His Ma∣jesty, and promises of other favours, should still continue so wicked as they are, so gulled and seduced by this Parliament faction, that non suadebis, etiamsi persua∣seris; because, as S. Augustine saith, impia mens nolit intellectum, and they love to cozen and cheat their own souls by new painting these old sins, and calling their faction faith, their madnesse zeale, and their horrid Rebellion fighting for Religion; but as the Poët saith, — Non tanti est civilia bella movere. Whatsoever pretences move them to it, this remedy will increase their miseries; for, if God be no more mercifull to us then their sin deserves, it may end here in an universal destruction, and hereafter in their eternall damnation: for doth not all the world see how God scourgeth us with the rod of our own furious mad∣nesse, and like as it befell the Ammonites and Moabites,2 Chron. 20.23. that fighting against the Israelites, did help to destroy one another; so we, striving not against Israel, but as we pretend, both against the Edomites, against falshood, doe utterly destroy our selves. Exemplóque pari ruit Anglica turba, suóque Marte cadunt coesi per mutua vulnera fratres. And we that did keep our enemies in awe shall be now destroyed by the sons of
our own mother, but I confesse our Land abounds with sins, and our sins have justly deserved this heavy punishment to light upon us; yet I beseech our God to chastise us with his own hands, and let us not fall under the swords of the un∣circumcised Philistines, that are a people much more wicked then our selves; and if he will let our soules live, we shall praise his name. 21. When they had most fraudulently gotten His Majesty to passe an Act (which though really intended,How they in∣tended to get all Ireland to themselves. yet to many men seems a very strange Act) to refer the managing of the affaires of Ireland to the Parliament of England, then they took that course to root out all the Papists, Irish, English, Brittish, and in∣deed all the Inhabitants of Ireland, except their own brotherhood, (for they could have soon descried the marke of the beast in all the rest) which they thought would be most effectual to further their designe, and to bring the whole Kingdom of Ire∣land to be inherited by their own faction; that is, to sell all the Lands of the Rebels to themselves, (for they knew none else would buy it at that time, and in that man∣ner as they determined) and when they had thus locked the doore, and stopped the way of all relief unto the distressed Protestants of that Kingdom, they might sing, Dimidium toti qui benè coepit, habet; For they had setled Scotland, and they had now grasped Ireland, and held it fast in Vulcans net; and therefore now it might stay, till they could reduce Egland (to make a perfect work in all the three Kingdomes) to the same forme of go∣vernment both in Chu ch and State, as they projected for the other; and because they would have some places of entrance into Ireland, and hinder the Rebels to possesse the whole Kingdome, and also blind the eyes of the ignorant, not to perceive their plot,How they blin∣ded the people by their pro∣ceedings. but to keep them still in some hope of redresse, they sent such a party over (and the Scots must be the most considerable part) as might keep their own design on foot, and yet yield not an inch of any comfort to the spoyled and expelled Protestant; for they left that party which they sent thither, ra∣ther as a prey to their enemies, (as having neither cloathes, meat, nor mo∣ney) then inabled by these accoutrements to subdue the Rebels; as it is bet∣ter and more fully declared by the Letter of the State of Ireland to the House of Commons, then I can relate unto you. What the Au∣thor saw in Ireland.And I being in Ireland, seeing the deplorable state of that Kingdome, the miserable distress of the mangled, starved, and naked Protestants; the little children calling and crying for bread, and none to give it them; many worthy Ministe s begging, or dying for want in the streets, and the poore bare-footed and hunger-bitten Souldier lamenting his hard fortune to be transplanted out of Gods blessing into the warme sun; from plenty and prosperity, to be left as the Traveller, betwixt Hierusalem and Hierico, halfe dead, betwixt merciless Rebells, and more unmercifull friends; neither wholly to be destroyed, nor yet to be releived, was much troubled and perplexed at these sad aspects; and be∣ing intrusted by the Bishops my Brethren of that Kingdome, to agitate the cause of the Church for our reliefe here in England; and to that end having a Let∣ter unto his Majesty, and a Remonstrance of our distressed condition, though with the great hazard of my life at Sea, yet I arrived by Gods great bles∣sing in England,How used as soon as ever he came to his House. and before I had been two dayes at home, my house was sur∣rounded with a Troope of Armed Souldiers, they entred in, seized upon my per∣son, searched every roome, and every corner with a candle, not leaving the bed∣straw whereon my children lay unsearched; they took all my papers, and all the money they found in my house, (even my servants money) to the summ of 40, and carried all with me their poor Prisoner to Northhampton, and now I thought it was but an ill exchange, to escape the Sea, and to fall into the fire; to shun the Lion,How a precise Church-war∣den would have hindred a Bishop to preach. and to meeet a Beare, to eschew the Rebels in Ireland and to fall into the hands of T aytors in England; and I knew not why, but onely that I had often Preached at Twster, (where being requested by Master Lockwood to supply the place, the precise Church-wardens very peremptorily told me I should not do it, because I was a royalist, and spake against the Parliament, to whom I replyed, that he had no such authority to hinder a Bishop to Preach, and bad him look to mend
his glasse-windowes, that were all full of holes where the faces of the pictures were plucked out) and in other Churches thereabouts, that they should so honour and obey their King, as God commandeth us: for which refusal to be admonished, I believe they are now (and perhaps will be more) hereafter sufficiently punished. But the Committee there finding in me no cause worthy of death or of bonds, (Gods providence so mercifully watching over me, that it stopped their eyes, that they looked not on my Grand Rebellion, which they had in their hands, and would no doubt have utterly undone me, had they but espied the Capitall title) that I was dismissed; and I confesse courteously used by Sir John Norwich. Then afterwards when time served, I repaired to His Majesty, and having de∣livered my Letters, I spake to Him and drew a Petition, (and I think I was the first that petitioned in this kind, I do not repent it, neither am I ashamed to con∣fesse it) and got some hands unto it, (as that worthy and noble Gentleman Colo∣nel Oneale can beare witnesse, the sum whereof was, that, the Parliament having betrayed the trust that was reposed in them, wholly deserted our relief, and giving us none other comfort then what I expressed in my Discovery of Mysteries,c. 12. p. 24. His Majesty would be pleased to consider, that we were his Loyall Subjects, and that the care of us was committed by God to him, not to his Parliament, who had left us in a worse condition then the Rebels had made us: and therefore, as he justly required our faith and alleageance, so we humbly besought him, that he would graciously vouchsafe unto us his princely care and assistance, some waies to relieve us otherwise then by leaving us still in their hands, till we and our families, in the languishing expectation of our redresse, should finally and irrecoverably perish while these crafty Merchants, thus bought and sold us, and under the pretence of reformation used all their endeavours to bring both Kingdomes to destruction. CHAP. XIX. Sheweth, how the Rebellious faction have transgressed all the ten Command∣ments of the Law, and the new Commandment of the Gospel; how they have committed the seven deadly sins; and the foure crying sins; and the three most destructive sins to the soul of man; and how their Ordi∣nances are made against all Lawes, Equity and Conscience. 22. THey have, in no small measure, transgressed all the Commandments of God, the ten Commandments of the Law,1. They adore and put their trust in that creature. Ps. 74. v. 4.7, 8. ? Quis tibi in men∣tem dolorem imposuit, ut haec perficias magni Dei ore relicto? 2. How they have abused Gods house. and the new Commandment of the Gospel. For, 1. The factious Rebels have other gods besides the God of Israel, when they adore the creatures, and ascribe the incommunicable attributes of the creator un∣to their Parliament, by calling it omnipotent, infallible, invincible, and most bles∣sed Parliament, as some of them have most blasphemously termed it; for which blasphemies, no doubt, but as we by their Declarations and Ordinances know they are not infallible, so God, I feare me, by their destruction will shew they are neither blessed nor invincible. 2. They not onely make an idoll of their Parliament, but are so far from ma∣king to themselues any graven image, that they destroy all images, and are just such as the Prophet David speaks of, which have done evil in Gods Sanctuary, and have broken down all the carved work thereof with axes and hammers, that have set fire upon his holy places, and have defiled the dwelling place of Gods name, even unto the ground: for it is almost incredible how barbarously, worse then any Turkes or Jewes, they haue broken down those rare and sweet instruments of Musick, the Organs of our Churches, and have defaced those excellent pieces of work, that, to the honour of God, were made and set up in the windowes of our Churches in Canterbury, Winchester, Lincoln, and the other Cathedrals, by the best Artists in Christendom: which is a most horrible fact, no wayes commanded in this precept, and an irreparable loss to us and our posterity; and therefore the Prophet David calleth these defacers of such carved and painted works, set up in
his house the adversaries and enemies of God, v. 4, and 5. and v. 11. foolish people, vers. 19, and 23. the haters of God, vers. 24. and the blasphemers of his name, vers. 11. for none but such would have done such Prophanations, as is done in God's house: but let them take heed lest the Prophets prayer should light upon them,Ps. 74. v. 4. Lift up thy feet O God, that thou mayest utterly destroy every one of these ene∣mies, which hath done this evil in thy Sanctuary. 3. How they forswear them∣selves. . Menan l. perju∣rium est, nequi∣ter decipere cre∣dentem. Aug 4. How they prophaned the Sabbath.3. For swearing, not vainly but falsly, most wickedly, and forswearing them∣selves over and over, again and again, and having more dispensations and abso∣lutions for their perjuries by their holy Prophets then ever the Popes gave for adulteries, it is incredible to think, and impossible to number the heads of these transgressions; and therefore if you believe that God was in earnest when he gave this precept, you may be assured he will not hold them guiltlesse that are such transgressors of it. 4. For the day wherein we should serve our God in his Church most reve∣rently, some of them worship him more unmannerly, then some of those blinde Indians, that worship the Devil himself, and others of them muster their men, plunder their neighbours, and murder their brethren, which they believe to be the best way to sanctifie the Sabbath: and for which resting from their work, thus religiously to serve the Lord, let them take heed, lest God should swear in his wrath, that they shall never enter into his rest. 5. How they curse their Fa∣thers and Mo∣thers. Esay. 8.21.5. They curse their Father and their Mother that their dayes may be long in the Land, which their pretended Parliament hath promised to give them; for the King is the Prince and Principal Father of us all; and the Prophet saith of such men, they shall curse their King and their God; and the Bishops are their Fa∣thers too, and they have cursed them long agone; and I fear they will not cease to curse them, till their curses fall upon their own heads: and for all other bonds of duty, and relations of Wives unto their Husbands; Children unto their Parents; Servants unto their Masters: they are preached asunder, to make way for the liberty of the Subject, to rebel by authority against his Soveraign. 6. How many they have murdered.6. Whereas God saith, thou shalt do no murder, they gave that first commis∣sion, though they had not the least colour of any authority to give it, to kill, slay, and destroy; and it is most lamentable to consider how many thousands they have murdered,7. How they loosened the reins to all lust hoc fonte deri∣vata clades, in patriam, popu∣lumque fluxit. Horat. car. l. 3. 8 How they are like Argi∣vi fares. . Ps. 94.12. 9. How they belyed all sorts of good men. Quomodo Deus pater genuis fi∣lium veritatem, nempe sic diabo∣lus lapsus genuit quasi filium mendacium. Aug. super Ioh. Habac. 2.9. Gildas de exci dio Britan. and how they are thought worthy of the greatest honour and the best reward, that have killed most of God's faithfull servants, and the King's loyal Subjects. 7. For adulteries, Fornications and all Uncleannesse, they may now freely do it, lust may flow like the river, whose bankes are broken down, when they have overthrown those courts of Justice, and were never at rest till they had most violently suppressed the power and execution of all Ecclesiastical censures, that were the chiefest bars and hindrances of these unlawful lusts. 8. For stealing, they have changed the name but not the nature of it: for under the pretence of preserving to us the propriety of our goods, they have not stolne, but plundered away, that is robbed us of all our goods, and carried them into those Rebellious Townes, that are now the dens of these thieves, and are stronger in their wickednesse then the hils of the robbers: and that which makes this sin most sinful, is, that it is established by a Law. 9. They have justified the Cretans, and proved themselves the right bastard sons of the father of lyes, filling all and every corner of this Kingdome with palpable, intolerable, and incredible lyes, slanders, and false witnesse-bearing a∣gainst God, against his Anointed, against the Church, and against all the reverend governours of the Church, all religious Protestants, & all the loyal Subjects of this Nation, that the Angels do now blush, and the Devils do laugh and rejoyce, to see they are so fruitful in begetting so many Children so perfectly formed, and so compleately perfected in their own image and likenesse; and if ever the say∣ing of Gildas was true, they have proved it now: Moris continui gentis erat, si∣cut & nunc est, ut infirma esset ad retundenda hostium tela, & fortis ad civilia bella: infirma, inquam, ad exequenda pacis ac veritatis insignia, & fortis ad scelera & mendacia.
10. They have coveted an evil covetousnesse,10. The extent of their cove∣tousnesse. when they coveted all evil unto themselves; not onely their neighbours houses, goods, and lands, and all that are theirs, but also the patrimony of the Church, the revenues of the Clergy, and all the rights and prerogatives of the King, to be entayled upon themselves and their faction, that so they and theirs might be both Kings, and Priests, and all, not to God, but to themselves and their fellow Rebels in the government of this Kingdome. And as they have thus transgressed all the old Commandments of the Law,How they transgressed the new command∣ment of the Gospel. Gen. 4.9. so they come no wayes short in transgressing the new Commandment of the Gospel: for their love to their brethren is now turned to perfect hatred, when they say not with Cain, am I my brothers keeper? but with Apollyon, I will be the de∣stroyer of my brethren; neither will I sell them, as the brethren of Joseph did him unto the Egyptians, but I will send them if I can possibly quick to hell; let those Lyal subjects, that have been unexspectedly murdered, and those many thousands that have beene plundered of all their Estates, testifie to the World the love of these men unto their brethren, who have felt more cruelty and bar∣barity and less charity from these holy Saints, then could be expected from Jews, Turkes, and Pagans. 23. Though every sin deserves the wrath of God,How they have committed the 7 deadly sins. Rom. 6.23. as the Apostle saith in ge∣neral, the reward of sin is death, be it little or be it great: yet because some sins do more provoke the wrath of God, and do sooner produce this deadly fruit then other sins; the Divines have observed seaven special sins, which they terme the seaven deadly sins: and these also you may finde committed in the highest de∣gree by these factious Rebels: For 1. Pride, which is an high conceit of a mans own worth,1 Their Pride. Quid juvat O homines tanto turgescere fastu? Nam ut ait Co∣micus, . far beyond his just deserts, and therefore, believing himself to be inferiour to none, scorns to be subject unto any, is the Father that produceth, and the nurse that cherish∣eth all rebellion: and our Parliamentary faction, together with the Assembly of their Divines, thinking themselves holyer then the Saints, and wiser then their Brethren, have therefore made this unnatural war to destroy us all, because we will not subscribe with them to destroy both Church and State: this is the fruit of pride, but the punishment is, to be resisted by God, who throweth damna∣tion upon their heads, because they resist the ordinance of God. 2. Pride cannot subsist without meanes, therefore covetousnesse must support it; and I shewed you before how covetous these Rebels are, not of any good,2. Their Cove∣tousnesse. Sacrilegia mi∣nuta puniuntur, magna jam in triumphis ferun∣tur. Senec. ep. 87. 3. Their luxury Certa quidem tantis causa est manifesta ruinit Luxuriae nimi∣um libera facta via est. Propert. eleg. 11. l. 3. 4. Their envy. but of our goods, and of our lives, that they may enjoy our lands, even the lands of the Church, that they may take the houses of God in possession: which may prove to them like Aurum Tholosanum, or as Midas gold, that was the destruction of that covetous wretch. 3. Their luxury and lust must needs proceede from fulnesse and pride: and I beleive, it is not unknown to many how these Rebels spend their time in revelling and feasting, chambering and wantonnesse, which though never so secretly done by them in the night, yet are they publickly seene in the day, and seene to their shame, if they could be ashamed of any thing. 4. How envy hath possest their souls, it is almost beyond all sence to consider it, they envy that any man should be king and themselves subjects, that any man should be a Bishop and themseves Priests, or that any man should be rich and themselves not so wealthy; therefore they will needs pull down what themselves cannot reach unto. 5. If Epicurus were now living, or Sardanapalus came to these mens feasts,5. Their Glut∣tony and drunk∣ennesse. they might think themselves the teachers of sobriety, and the masters of absti∣nency, in comparison of these new gulists, who make a God of their bellies, and fare deliciously every day that they can get it, more deliciously then Dives; it is incredible to consider what they devoure in delicates, and how the Sisters teach∣ers, eat more good meat, and drink better wines then the gravest Bishops.6. Their wrath and malices. 6. They are, as the Psalmist saith, wrathfully displeased at us, and I know not whether their envy at our happinesse, or their wrath and anger that we do live, is the greater; yet thanks be to God,
Vivere nos dices, salvos tamen esse negamus. And God I hope will preserve us still, notwithstanding all their malice. 7. Their Sloath.7. For their sloath, I was a while musing how these factious Rebels could any wayes be guilty of this lazie sin: for, as the Divel is never at rest, but goeth a∣bout continually like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devoure; and he saith, Job. 1. he compasseth the earth to and fro; so these children of this world, being wiser in their generation then the children of light,. are as diligent as their Father, they imagine mischiefe upon their beds, and are a great deale more watchfull, and more painfull to do evil, to serve the Divel, to goe to Hell, then the faithfull servants of God are to goe to Heaven; witnesse all the victories and successes that they had by this War, in the night, not by any manhood, but by taking the Kings Souldiers carelesse in their beds; yet, notwithstanding all this diligence to do wickednesse, they are as lazie as any sluggard, and as slow as the snayle to any goodnesse: they are asleep in evil, and are dead in trespasses and sins, and cannot be awakened to any service of God. 24. How they have grievously committed the foure crying sins. 1. How they have shed a∣bundance of innocent bloud.24. The Scripture maketh mention of foure crying sins that do continually cry to God for vengeance against the sinners; Clamitat ad coelum vox sanguinis, & Sodomorum, Vox oppressorum, merces retenta laborum. And they are not free from any of these. For, 1. As the Psalmist speaketh, Psal. 79.2.3. so they have done; and the streames of bloud, that, since the beginning of this unnaturall War, they have most unjustly caused to be spilt, and do flow like the Rivers of waters over the face of this now unhappy Land, do with Abels bloud continually cry against them, and cannot chuse but pull down vengeance upon their heads, when God shall come to make inquisition for bloud: and therefore though Pacem nos poscimus omnes,Psal. 9.12. we all cry for peace, and the Kings clemency still proclaimeth pardon; yet seeing it is God that maketh Wars to cease, and the Prophet saith, how can the sword be quiet, seeing the Lord hath given it a charge against Ashkelon? Jer. 47.7. as the bloudy sin of Saul upon the poor Gibeonites, never left crying for vengeance, untill it was expiated by bloud, even by the bloud of seven of his sons; so I feare me the much bloud that these Rebels spilt, and the bloud of so many innocents that they caused to be slain, can never be expiated, and the wrath of God appeased, untill an attonement be made by bloud, even a judiciarie sen∣tence of death against some of the head Rebels; for it is the voice of God, that whosoever sheddeth mans bloud, that is, without due authority, by man shall his bloud be shed, that is, by the due course of Law, and the power of the Magistrate, that beareth not the sword in vaine, but is bound to punish murders, and the un∣lawfull putting of innocents to death, with the sentence of a just death. If you say, Why may not this Rebellion be concluded with the like peace by a generall pardon, as the other in Ireland is like to be? I answer, the case is not alike, because they had some shew of reason, and were provoked by the faction and emissaries of this Parliament; but our Rebels had not the least colourable cause, nor were provoked by any, but their own bloudy desire to root out Gods service and servants, when they had almost all things that they desired. I am sure more then should have been granted unto them; and therefore in these, and in many other respects that I could, but am ashamed to set down, I deem this Rebellion of our English, and the invasion of the Scots, ten times more odious, then the insurrection of the Irish. Ezech. 16.49. 2. The sins of Sodom among them. 3. Their op∣pression.2. The iniquity of Sodome was Pride, fullnesse of bread, abundance of idleness, and contempt of the poor; and I have already shewed how all these do rule and reign in them. 3. For oppression, let their ordinances to take away our goods, without any co∣lour of justice, and their actions, to make good their ordinances, to take away our states, and deprive us of our liberties, be well examined, and the world shall then see, whether they be oppressors, or I a transgressor for affirming it. 4. For retaining of wages, letting passe their Souldiers that deserve not pay
for fighting so disloyally against their King,4. The detain∣ing of the wa∣ges of God's servants. and transgressing so undutifully the Commandment of God, which so precisely biddeth them to honour the King, I would fain know by what authority, or law, excepting their own lawless Ordi∣nances, have they detained and alienated the wages, means, and maintenance of those faithful Pastors, whom they sent away, and caused them to fly and wander like Pilgrims, from place to place, without any means or subsistence? O let them never think that these things can be buried in oblivion, but that the sighes and groans of those faithful servants of Christ do continually cry,25. How they are filled with the most destru∣ctive sins a∣gainst their soules. And if I should parallel the wickednes∣ses of this pre∣tendd Parlia∣ment with the Sicilian Ves∣pers, the Mas∣sacre of Paris, and the Gun-powder Trea∣son, it would exceed them all. 2. The wicked Ordinances of the pretended Parliament. 1. Their blou∣dy ordinance. 2. Their sacri∣legious ordi∣nance. and cry aloud in the eares of God for vengeance to be poured down upon the heads of these their persecutors, which cannot escape, Cùm surrexerit ad iudicandum Deus. 25. As there be three Theological graces that build up, and compleat a Chri∣stian soul, Faith, Hope, and Charity; so there be three main vices that do poy∣son and kill every soul, Infidelity, Presumption, Philauty; and three others that are destructive to all Christianity, Prophaneness, Impudency, and Sacriledge: The time will not give me leave to tell you how they are chained about with these links of sin, and how indeed they are, as the Apostle saith, filled with all unrighteousness. The works that they do, can sufficiently testifie what they are. God forgive them the evil that they have done, and give them grace to repent in time, that they may not perish everlastingly, Amen. 2. Having treated a little of the wicked practices and abominable actions of the Puritan Faction of this Parliament; I should, according as I intended, set down some of their uniust, impious, and diabolical Ordinances; which I finde to be so many as would fill up a whole Volume, and the poyson of their wicked∣nesse having swelled my Book to such a bulk already, I must therefore, crave leave, to transmit the displaying of these dismal tragedies to some other scene; onely I must remember, which I believe will never be forgotten, while any wick∣edness can be remembred; and that is, 1. Their bloudy Ordinance to kill and slay, while we were all in peace, and all praying for the Houses of Parliament. 2. Their sacrilegious Ordinance of taking away not the twentieth part, nor the tenth, nor yet nine parts of ten, but all and every part of the goods and re∣venues of the Bishops, Deaes, and Prebends; and let them now, in their old-age, after they have wasted their strength, and consumed their years with toyl∣some labours and indefatigable paines, in the Church of God, to save their souls, either dig for bread, or beg for almes, or like out-worn Jades, die in a ditch: their care for these men was to leave them not one penny to relieve themselves while they lived; and I believe the prophanest Pagan, (it may be) the Devil himself, could not shew greater malice, or inflict a severer censure upon the Clergy, then these zealous Christians have ordained; because such a miserable life must needs prove far worse then a glorious death, when as Jeremiah saith,Jerem. La∣ment. 4.5. &c. 1. v. 11. They that did feed delicatly, must stand desolate in the streets, and they that were brought up in scarlet, must embrace dunghills,; they must sigh and seek their bread, and give their pleasant things for meat to relieve their soules. 3. Their unrighteous Ordinance, and ordinances,3. Their un∣righteous or∣dinances, to take away what part they pleased of their Neighbours goods, and all from them whom they deemed Ma∣lignants; and I had almost said, that God himself, which is Lord of all, could not more justly take them, then these men have unjustly decreed to take them from us. 4. Their impious, odious and abominable Ordinance,4. Their impi∣ous ordinance. to compel men by oaths and Covenants to give themselves unto the Devil, and to go to Hell in despite of their teeth; and that which makes me wonder most of all is, that their Synod or Assembly hath prefixed an exhortation to perswade silly souls to take that wick∣ed Covenant; and to cast a mist before their eyes, that they may not onely, let down little gnats, but also swallow this great camel, they would justifie the do∣ing thereof by a twofold example. The first of the Jewes in Ezra's time,Ezra. 10.5. & 8. Nehem. 9.38.10.1. that made a Covenant to serve the Lord, and to put away their strange Wives, according to the Law.
The second of Christians, and indeed of most Christian Kings, and Princes, that is, of Queene Elizabeth's assisting the Hollanders against the King of Spain and of King Charles assisting the Rochellers against the King of France. To both which examples, and all other things, that are conteined either in the Covenant it selfe, or the exhortation of the Assembly thereunto annexed; I do understand, there shall be a full and a perfect answer made by one that hath un∣dertaken the same ex professo; yet give me leave in the interim to say this much. 1. What vows and covenants are allowable.First, touching Covenants and Vowes, it is plain enough, that although the superior may with Ezra cause the inferior to Vow or swear the performance of his duty,Gen. 24.3. that he is bound by the law of God and nature to performe; so Abraham caused his servant to swear fidelity, when he sent him for Isaack's Wife.Numb. 30. per totum. And so the King may cause his Subjects to take the Oath of their Allegiance, and the lawful General, cause his Souldiers to swear their fidelity unto him; yet the inferior subject can not swear, or if he swears, he ought not to observe it, when he doth it contrary to the command of him, that hath command over him; as you may see in Numb. 30. throughout.— There∣fore, as children may not vow any thing, though it be never so lawful, contrary to their Fathers command, or if they do, they ought not to keepe it; so no more may any Subject Vow, or make a Covenant, contrary to their Kings com∣mand, or if they do, they ought not to observe it, and they are, as you see, absolved by God himself, If you say Ezra and the Jewes did it, contrary to the command of Artaxerx∣es, that was then their King, I answer, that it is most false; for, 1. Ezra was the Priest, Nehem. 8.2. and 9. and the chief Prince, that was then over them, and Nehemiah had his authority from the King, and he was the Tirshatha, that is, their governour, saith the text, Nehem. 10.1. and therefore they might lawfully cause them to take that Covenant. 2. They had the leave, and a large commission from Artaxerxes to do all that they did; as you may seeSee Ezra 7.11.22 &c.; neither can you finde any syllable that Artax∣erxes forbad them to do this in any place. For so the text, saith, Let it be done according to the Law. Ezra 10.3.3. This Covenant of Ezra and his people, and Nehemiah's, was to do those things that they had covenanted before to do, which God had expresly comman∣ded them to do, and which they could not omit, though they had not covenanted to do it, without great offence; so if our covenanters swear they will serve God and be loyal unto their King, as they vowed in their baptisme, they shall never finde me to speak against them; but to propose a lawfull Covenant, to do those things that God commandeth, and is made with the leave and commission of the supreme Prince, to justifie an unlawfull Covenant, to do those things that were never done before, never commanded by God, but forbidden both by God, and especially by the King, in the expressest termes, and most energeticall manner that might be, is such a piece of Divinity as I never read the like, and such an argument,2. The exam∣ples of Queen Elizabeth and King Charles answered. 1. By way of Divinity. a dissimili, that never schollar produced the like. 2. For the examples of Queen Elizabeth and King Charles, assisting Sub∣jects for their Religion sake, against their lawfull princes, two things may be said; the one in Divinity, the other in Policy, First, for Divinity, I say, vivendum est praeceptis, non exemplis, we have the sure word of God to teach us, what we should do, and no examples, unless they be either commended, or allowed in Gods word, ought to be any infallible pat∣terne for us to follow;2. By way of Policy. Secondly, for Policy, which may be justified to be without iniquity, I doubt not, but those men, which knew the secrets of State, and were privy to the causes of their actions, are able to justifie the proceedings of these Princes in their as∣sistance, which perhaps they did not so much simply in respect of their Religion, as of some other State Policy, which we, that are so far from the helme, have no reason to prie unto; Besides, you may know that neither King Charles, nor Queen Elizabeth were Subjects to the other Kings, but were every way their equall, if not more, and
independent Princes. And to bring the actions of such absolute Monarchs,How wickedly they deceive the simple. the one against the other, to justifie the actions of Subjects against their Soveraigne, is such Logick, as the other example was Divinity; Queen Elizabeth did so against the King of Spain; ergo, any Subject may do so against his king; or rather Queen Elizabeth did that, which for ought we know, was most lawfull to be done a∣gainst the king of Spain; ergo the Earl of Essex may do that, which we do know to be most unlawfull against King Charles: This is the doctrine that they teach their Proselytes, but that they give this poyson in a golden cup, and hide their falsehood under a shew of truth; but I hope ere long, you shall have these things more ful∣ly manifested unto you. CHAP. XX. Sheweth, how the Rebellious Faction forswore themselves; what trust is to be given to them; how we may recover our peace and prosperity; how they have unking'd the Lords anointed: and for whom they have ex∣changed him; and the conclusion of the whole. AND now, having committed all these things, and much more wickednesse then I, though I had the tongue of Angels, can expresse, I am perswaded many of them, seeing the miraculous mercies of our God in protecting and assist∣ing His Majesty, far beyond their thoughts and imaginations, do begin to think on peace and accommodation, which they presuming on the Kings lenity made sure to themselves whensoever they pleased; and indeed, dulce nomen pacis;Esay. 52.7. and the feet of them that bring tydings of peace, are more specious then the fairest coun∣tenance of Aurora, then the sweet face of Helen;Psal. 85.10. Rom. 1.7. 1 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 2. &c. But seeing righteousnesse and peace have kissed each other, and the Apostle joyneth grace and peace alwayes to∣gether, as two deare friends saith S. Aug. so deare, that si amicam pacis non a∣maveris, neque te amabit pax ipsa; and these men are filled with all unrighteous∣nesse, and have trampled the grace of God and their King under feet, and having sworne and forsworne themselves over and over, as, at their baptisme, that they would keep Gods Commandments, whereof this is one,Rom. 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. How the Re∣bels swore and forswore them∣selves. to be obedient unto our Kings; at their admittance to any office to beare faith and true alleagiance to His Majesty; at the beginning of this last Parliament, to maintain the Kings just rights and all the priviledges of Parliament, together with the liberty and property of the Subjects; and yet immediately to forget their faith, to break all these oathes, and to make ship-wrack of their conscience, to drive the Bishops out of their House, which is one of the first and most fundamentall priviledges of the Parlia∣ment, they being the first of the three Estates of this Kingdome, to take away, not some, but all the Kings rights out of his hands, and to make him no King in∣deed, to take away all our goods, our liberties, and our lives at their pleasure,Holland and Bedford shew'd what trust is to be given them. and then to assure the Divel they would be faithfull unto him, which were thus faithlesse unto God, to sweare again, and make a solemne Covenant with Hell, they would never repent them of their wickednesse, but continue constant in his service, till they have rooted out whom they deemed to be Malignants; though the King, who is wise as the Angel of God, that hath the Kings heart in his hand,Proverb. 21. and turneth it like the Rivers of waters, where he pleaseth, knoweth best what to do, as God directeth him; yet for mine own part, either in Peace or War,No trust to be given to lyars and perjurers. 2 Sam. 20.20.16. I I would never trust such faithlesse perjured creatures for a straw; and seeing that to spare transcendent wickedness is to encrease wickednesse, and to incourage others to the like Rebellion upon the like hope of pardon, if they failed of their intention, if our great Metropolis of London partake not rather of the wise spirit of the men of Abel, then of the obstinacy of the men of Gibeah, and delivered not unto the King the chiefe of those Rebells that rose up against him, I feare that Gods wrath will not be turned away, but his hand will be stretched out still,Judg. 20. until
he hath fullfilled his determined visitation upon this Land, and consummated all with their deplorable destruction, even as he did those obstinate men of Gibeah and Benjamin;How the King desired the good of the Rebels. for though the King, beyond the clemency of a man, and the expectation of any Rebell, hath most Christianly laboured, that they would ac∣cept of their pardon, and save themselves and their posterity; yet their wicked∣nesse, (being so exceedingly great, beyond all that I can finde in any history, Re∣bellion it selfe being like the sin of witchcraft, the Rebellion of Christians far worse, and a Rebellion against a most Christian pious Prince worst of all; and such a Rebellion ingendered by pride, fostered by lyes, augmented by perjury, continued by cruelty,The unspeak∣able greatness of their sins. refusing all clemency, despisg all piety, and contemning God their Saviour, when they make him (with reverence be it spoken, which is so irreverently done by them) the very pack-horse to beare all their wickedness, being a degree beyond all degrees of comparison,) hath so provoked the wrath of God against this Nation, that I feare his justice will not suffer their hearts, that can not repent, accept and imbrace their own happiness, till they be purged with the floods of repentant teares, or destroyed with the steames of Gods feare∣full vengeance; which I heartily beseech Almighty God may (by the grace of Christ, working true repentance in them for themselves, and reducing them to the right way) be averted from them. And the best way that I conceive to a∣vert it, to appease Gods wrath, and to turne away his judgements from us, is to returne back the same way as we proceeded hitherto; to make up the brea∣ches of the Church,How we may recover the peace and pro∣sperity of this Land. to restore the Liturgie, and the service of our God to its former purity, to repeale that Act, which is made to the prejudice of the Bishops and Servants of God, that they may be reduced to their pristine dignity, to re∣call all Ordinances that are made contrary to Law, and derogatory to the Kings right, and to be heartily sorry that these unjust Acts and Ordinances were ever done, and more sorry that they were not sooner undone; and then God will turne his face towards us, he will heale the bleeding wounds of our Land, and he will powre down his benefits upon us; but till we do these things, I do assure my selfe, and (I beleive) you shall finde it, that his wrath shall not be turned away, but his hand will be stretched out still and still, untill we either do these things, or be destroyed for not doing them. King James his speech made true by the Rebells.Thus it is manifest to all the World, that as it was often spoken by our sharpe and eagle-sighted Soveraigne, King James of ever blessed memory, no Bishop no King: so now (I hope) the dull-ey'd-owle, that lodgeth in the desart, seeth it verifyed by this Parliament; for they had no sooner got out the Bishops, but presently they laid violent hands upon the Crowne, seized upon the Kings Ca∣stles,How the Re∣bells have un∣king'd our King. shut him out of all his Townes, dispossest him of his owne houses, took away all his sips, detained all his revenues, vilified all his Declarations, nullified his Proclamations, hindered his Commissions, imprisoned his faithfull Subjects, killed his servants, and at Edge-hill and Newbury did all that ever they could, to take away his life; and now by their last great ordinance for their counterfeit Seale they pronounce all honours, pardons, grants, commissions, and whatsoever else His Majesty passeth under his Seale, to be invalid, void, and of none effect; and if this be not to make King Charles no King, I know not what it is to be a King:Hos. 8.4. so they have unking'd him sine strepitu; and as the Prophet saith, they have set up Kings, but not by me; they have made Princes, and I knew it not;What kings they would have to rule us. but whom have they made Kings? even themselves, who, in one word, do, and have now exercised all, or most of the regall power; and their Ordinances shall be as firm as any Statutes: and what are they, that have thus dis-robed King Charles, and exalted themselves like the Pope, as if they were, , the great Antichrist, above all that are called Gods? truly none other then king Pym, king Say, king Faction; or to say the truth most truly, and to call a spade a spade, king perjurers, king murderers, king traytors;Whch S. Pe∣ter never bade us honour. The Rebells brave ex∣change. Psal. 146.20. and I am sorry that I should joyne so high an office, so sacred a thing as King to such wicked persons, as I have shewed them to be; And what a royal exchange would the Rebels of this Kingdome make? just such as the Israelites made, when they turned their
glory into the similitude of a Calfe that cateth hay, and said, these be thy Gods,Psal. 146.20. O Israel, which brought thee out of the Land of Aegypt; for now, after they have changed their lawful King for unlawful Tyrants, and taken Jothams bramble for the cedar of Lebanon, the Devils instruments for Gods Anointed,Judg. 9.15. they may just∣ly say, these be thy Kings O Londoners, O Rebels, that brought thee out of a Land that flowed with milke and hony, out of those houses that were filled with all manner of store, into a land of misery, into houses of sorrow, that are filled with wailings, lamentations, and woes, when we see the faithful City is become an harlot, our gold drosse, and our happinesse turned to continual heavi∣nesse. But, as the Rutilians, considering what fruit they should reape by that miser∣able war, wherein they were so far ingaged, cried out at last,Virgil Aeneid. l. 12. Scilicet ut Turno contingat regiae conjux; Nos animae viles, inhumata, infletáque turba Sternamur campis. — We undo our selves, our wives, and our children, to gain a wife for Turnus: so our seduced men may say, we ingage our selves to dye like doggs, that these rebels may live like Kings, who themselves sit at ease, while others endure all woes, and do grow rich by making all the Kingdome poore: and therefore O England, —quae tanta est licentia ferri! lugebit patria multos. when as the Apostle saith, evill men and seducers wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived; for God is not mocked, but whatsoever a man soweth,2 Tim. 3.13. Gal. 6.7. that shall he also reape; for, though we for our sins may justly suffer these, and many other more miseries; we do confesse it: yet the whole world may be assured that these Rebels, the generation of vipers, being but the Rod of Gods fury,The Rebels sure to be de∣stroyed. Contemptrix superûm, se∣vaeque avidissi∣ma caedis, & violenta fuit; scires è sangui∣ne natam. 2 Sam. 7.1. to correct the offences of his children, such seeds of wickedness as they sow, can pro∣duce none other harvest, then ruine and destruction to all these usurping Kings, and Traytors, who thinke to please God by doing good service unto the Devil, and to go to Heaven for their good intention, after they are carried into Hell for their horrid Rebellion. God Almighty grant them more grace, and our King more care to beware of them, and when God doth grant him rest with David, on every side round about him, to restore his Bishops and Clergy to their pristine station, that when these bramble rods are burnt, and these rebels fallen, the King and the Bishops may still stand like Moses and Aaron to guide and gouerne Gods people com∣mitted to their charge. And thus I have shewed thee O man, some of the sacred rights of royal Ma∣jesty, granted by God in his holy Scriptures, practised by Kings from the be∣ginning of the world, yeilded by all nations, that had none other guide, but the light of nature to direct them; I have also shewed thee, how the people, greedy of liberty and licentiousnesse, have like the true children of old Adam, that could not long endure the sweet yoke of his Creator, strived and strugled to withdraw their necks from that subjection (which their condition required, and their frowardnesse necessitated to be imposed upon them) and thereby have either graciously gained such love and fauour from many pious and most clement Princes, as for the sweetning of their well merited subjection, to grant them ma∣ny immunities and priviledges, or have most rebelliously incroached upon these rights of Kings, wresting many liberties out of the hands of Government and forcibly retaining them to their own advantage, sometimes to the overthrow of the royal government (as Junius Brutus and his associates did the Kings of Rome) sometimes to the diminution of the dimidium, if not more then halfe his right (as the Ephori did to the kings of Lacedemon) but alwayes to the great preju∣dice of the king, and the greater mischief to the Common-wealth; because both reason and experience hath found it alwayes true, that the regal Government, or Monarchical State, though it might sometimes happen to prove tyrannical, is
far more acceptable unto God, as being his own prime and proper ordinance, most agreeable unto nature, and more profitable unto all men, then either the Aristocratical or Popular Government, either hath, or possibly can be; for, as it is most true, that praestat sub malo principe esse, quàm sub nullo, it is better to live under an ill Governour, then where there is no Gove nment; so praestat sub uno tyranno vivere, quàm sub mille, it is better to be under the command of one tyrant then of a thousand, as we are now under these Rebels: who being not, faex Romuli, the worst of the Nobilty, but faex populi, the dregs of the people, indigent Mechanicks, and their Wives captivated Citizens, together with the rabble of seduced Sectaries, have so disloyally incroached upon the rights of our King, and so rebelliously usurped the same, to the utter subversion both of Church and Kingdom, if God himself, who hath the hearts of all Kings in his hand, and turneth the same, wheresoever he pleaseth, had not most graciously strengthned his Majesty with a most singular and heroick resolution, assisted with perfect health from the beginning of their insurrection to this very day, to the admiration of his enemies, and the exceeding joy and comfort of his faithfull Subjects, and with the best aide and furtherance of his chiefest Nobility, of all his learned and religious Clergy, his grave and honest Lawyers, and the truly worthy Gentry of his whole Kingdom, to withstand their most treacherous, impi∣ous barbarous, and I know not how to expresse the wickednesse of their most horrid attempts: so thou hast before thee life and death, fire and water, good and evil. And therefore, I hope that this will move us (which have our eyes open, to behold the great blessings, and the many almost miraculous deliverances and fa∣vours of God unto his Majesty, and to consider the most horrible destruction that this war hath brought upon us) to fear God and to honour our King, to hate the Rebels and to love all loyal Subjects; to do our uttermost endeavour to quench this devouring flame, and to that end, with hand and heart, and with our fortunes and with the hazard of our lives (which, as our Saviour saith, shall be saved if they be lost) to assist his Majesty to subdue these Rebels,Luk. 9.24. to reduce the Kingdom to its pristine government, and the Church to her former dignity, that so we may have, through the mercy of God, peace and plenty, love and unity, so we may have, through the mercy of God, peace and plenty, love and unity, faith and true religion, and all other happinesse remaining with us, to the com∣fort of our King, and the glory of our God, through Jesus Christ our Lord; To whom with his Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honour, thanks, prayse, and dominion for ever and ever, Amen, Amen. Jehovae liberatori. FINIS. Errata. PAge . lin. 3.5. dele not. p. 5. l. 50. for make, r. made. p. 9. l. 23. for hand, r. had. p. 27. l. 53. dele can. p. 39. l. 25. r. right to be. p. 51. l. 54. r. this day. p. 54 l. 37. dele and, p. 61. l. 21. r. that denyed repentance. p. 62. l. . r. the same hope. p. 95. l. 18. for justice r. injustice. p. 100. l. 49. for ye r. yet.
The Contents of the severall Chapters con∣tained in the RIGHTS of KINGS. CHAP. I. Sheweth who are the fittest to set down the Rights which God grant∣ed unto Kings: what causeth men to rebell: the parts considerable in S. Peter's words, 1 Pet. 2.17. in fine. How Kings honoured the Clergy: the faire, but most false pretences of the refractary Faction, what they chiefly ayme at, and their malice to Episcopacy and Royalty. Pag. 1 CHAP. II. Sheweth what Kings are to be honoured: the institution of Kings to be immediately from God: the first Kings: the three chiefest rights to kingdoms: the best of the three Rights: how Kings came to be elected: and how, contrary to the opi∣nion of Master Selden, Aristocracy and Democracy issued out of Monarchy. Pag. 7 CHAP. III. Sheweth the Monarchicall Government to be the best forme: the first Government that ever was: agreeable to Nature, wherein God founded it: con∣sonant to Gods own Government: the most universally received throughout the world: the immediate and proper Ordinance of God, &c. Pag. 11 CHAP. IV. Sheweth what we should not do, and what we should do for the King: the Rebels transgressing in all those: how the Israelites honoured their persecuting King in Egypt: how they behaved themseves under Artaxerxes, Ahashuerus, and under all their own Kings of Israel, &c. Pag. 17 CHAP. V. Sheweth how the Heathens honoured their Kings: how Christ exhibi∣ted all due honour unto Heathen and wicked Kings: how he carried himself be∣fore Pilate, and how all the good Primitive Christians behaved themselves to∣wards their Heathen Persecuting Emperours. Pag. 23 CHAP. VI. Sheweth the two chiefest duties of all Christian Kings: to whom the charge and preservation of Religion is committed: three several opinions: the strange speeches of the Disciplinarians against Kings are shewed, and Viretus his scandalous reasons are answered: the double service of all Christian Kings: and how the Heathen Kings and Emperours had the charge of Religion. Pag. 27 CHAP. VII. Sheweth the three things necessary for all Kings that would preserve true Religion: how the King may attain to the knowledge of this that per∣tain to Religion; by His Bishops and Chaplains, and the calling of Synods, &c. Pag. 34 CHAP. VIII. Sheweth it is the right of Kings to make Ecclesiasticall Lawes and Canons, proved by many authorities and examples: that the good Kings and Em∣perours made such Lawes by the advice of of their Bishops and Clergy, and not of their Lay-Counsellors: how our late Canons, came to be annulled, &c. Pag. 40 CHAP. IX. Sheweth a full answer to four speciall Objections that are made against the Civill jurisdictions of Ecclesiasticall persons: their abilities to discharge these offices, and desire to benefit the Common-wealth: why some Councels inhibi∣ted these Offices unto Bishops, &c. Pag. 47 CHAP. X. Sheweth that it is the Kings right to grant Dispensations for Pluralities and Non-residency: what Dispensations is: reasons for it: to tolerate divers Sects or sorts of Religions: the foure speciall sorts of false Professors: S. Au∣gustines reasons for the toleration of the Jewes: toleration of Papists, and of Puri∣tans, and which of them deserve best to be tolerated among the Protestants; and how any Sect is to be tolerated. CHAP. XI. Sheweth where the Protestants, Papists, and Puritans do place Sove∣raignty: who first taught the deposing of Kings: the Puritans tenet worse then the Jesuites: Kings authority immediately from God: the twofold royalty in
a King: the words of the Apostle vindicated from false glosses, &c. Pag. 64 CHAP. XII. Sheweth the assistants of Kings in their Government: to whom the choice of inferiour Magistrates belongeth: the power of the subordinate offi∣cers: neither Peeres nor Parliament can have Supremacy: the Sectaries chief∣est argument out of Bracton answered: our Lawes prove all Soveraignty to be in the King. Pag. 70 §. The two chiefest parts of the Regall Government: the foure properties of a just war: and how the Parliamentary Faction transgress in every property. Pag. 74 CHAP. XIII. Sheweth, how the first Gouernment of Kings was arbitrary: the places of Moses, Deut. 17. and of Samuel, 1 Sam. 8. discussed: whether Ahab offended in desiring Naboths Vineyard, and wherein: why absolute pow∣er was granted unto Kings, and how the diversities of Gouernment came up. Pag. 78 §. The extent of the grants of Kings: what they may, and what they may not grant: what our Kings have not granted, in seven speciall prerogatives; and what they have granted unto their people. Pag. 83 CHAP. XIV. Sheweth the Kings grants unto His People to be of three sorts, Which ought to be observed: the Act of excluding the Bishops out of Parliament discussed: the Kings Oath at His Coronation: how it obligeth him: and how Statutes have been procured and repealed. Pag. 88 §. Certain quaeries discussed, but not resolved: the end for which God ordained Kings: the praise of a just rule: Kings ought to be more just then all others in three respects: and what should most especially move them to rule their people justly. Pag. 92 CHAP. XV. Sheweth the honour due to the king. 1. Feare. 2. An high esteem of our king: how highly the Heathens esteemed of their kings: the Marriage of obedience and authority: the Rebellion of the Nobility how haynous. 3. Obedi∣ence, foure-fold: divers kindes of Monarchs: and how an absolute Monarch may limit himselfe. Pag. 98 CHAP. XVI. Sheweth the answer to some objections against the obeying of our Soveraigne Magistrate: all actions of three kindes: how our consciences may be reformed: of our passive obedience to the Magistrates: and of the kings concessions, how to be taken. CHAP. XVII. Sheweth, how tribute is due to the king: for six speciall reasons to be paid: the condition of a lawfull tribute: that we should not be niggards to assist the king: that we should defend the Kings Person: the wealth and pride of London the cause of all the miseries of this Kingdome: and how we ought to pray for our king. Pag. 116 CHAP. XVIII. The persons that ought to honour the king; and the recapitula∣tion of 21 wickednesses of the Rebells, and the faction of the pretended Parlia∣ment. Pag. 121 CHAP. XIX. Sheweth, how the Rebellious faction have transgressed all the ten Commandments of the Law, and the new Commandement of the Gospell: how they have committed the seaven deadly sins; and the foure crying sins; and the three most destructive sins to the soul of man: and how their Ordinances are made against all Lawes, equity, and conscience. Pag. 213 CHAP. XX. Sheweth, how the rebellious Faction forswore themselves: what trust is to be given to them: how we may recover our peace and prosperity: how they have un-king'd the Lords Annointed: and for whom they have exchanged him: and the conclusion of the whole. Pag. 127
PSAL. 39.5. . Verily, every man living, or, in his best estate, is altogether Vanity: Sela. OUR Blessed Lord and Saviour saith, the night cometh,John 9.4. when no man can work; therefore I must work the Works of him that sent me whilst it is day; and S. Paul tels us, the time will come when men will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts they shall heap to themselves Teachers, that is,2 Tim. 4.3. Teach∣ers enough, in every place, and every time, so the word  signifieth; but what kind of Teachers shall they heap unto themselves? the Apostle tels you, they shall be teachers after their own lusts, that is, such Tub-teachers of the new Order, as will study rather to satisfie their lusts, and to preach what they please best, than to edi∣fie their soules. And I believe all wise men see, that time is now, and not till now, fully come; therefore it behoves all the true Teachers to bestir themselves to work the works of him that sent them while it is day, while they have any time, and while there is any true Light yet remaining, before the sad night and darksom clouds of Errours and Heresies be grown so far, and to prevail so much against the Truth, that you shall scarce find any place or person, where or by whom the new lights may be confronted, and the old Truth confirmed unto us. So it behoveth me, and it is my duty, to employ my Talent to the uttermost of my power against these false Prophets of the Great Antichrist, that is now come in∣to the world, and by these heaps of his Emissaries, laboureth quite to overthrow the Church of Christ. And as Clement recordeth, that when Barnabas came to Rome, to preach the Gospel of Christ, and divers rejected it, he briefly said, In vestra potestate est, vel recipere quae annuntiamus, vel speruere; It is in your choice, either to receive what we teach, or to reject it; but we may not be silent, and not speak quod vobis expedire novimus; what we know to be expedient and necessary for you, quia no∣bis si taceamus, damnum est, & vobis, quae dicimus si non recipiatis, pernicies est;Ciem. Recog. l. 1. p. 6. so say I. And therefore, that you may be somthing, and so happy, I beseech you listen to these words, that testifie, that in your selves, you are nothing but Vanity. For verily, every man— And the nearest way to exchange this Vanity for Eternity, and so to make us happy that are in misery, is to know our own vanity, and to understand our own misery: For Knowledge, saith Hugo Card. is the way to God, and understanding,
saith the Prophet David,Psal. 49.12, & 20. is that which distinguisheth and differenceth man from beast; for man, though he be never so great in honour, never so powerful in place, and never so rich in wealth, yet, if he hath no understanding, he is compared to the beasts that perish. And the two chiefest parts, which are like the Body and Soul of all the Know∣ledge that makes us happy, are these two Precepts so much commended, and so often urged unto us, even by the Heathens themselves, that yet notwithstand∣ing were destitute of all true Knowledge, that could make them happy, because they knew rightly neither of those two things that they so much commended; which were, 1. , Know God. 2. , Know thy self. For, John 17.3.1. to know God the only way to make us happy.1. Our Saviour tels us, this is eternal Life to know God (i.e.) to know the Father to be the only true God, and whom he hath sent, Jesus Christ: For the Heathens knew, that God alone is the summum bonum, and the only true and perfect Eter∣nity, to which all men naturally have a propensity and desire to be united; but yet cannot, because they know him not; and therefore is that Precept, to know him, so often urged. The reason why we know not so much of God as should make us happyAnd the reason why we know not so much of God as we should, and which should make us happy, is, because we know not our selves; we know not our own vanity and misery: for the nearest way to bring us to Eternity, is to under∣stand our own vanity, and the first step to happiness is, to know our selves to be un∣happy, and that this unhappiness was derived unto us by that sad accident of sin, which separated us from God, who is felicity and eternity, and made us wholly to become vanity, and replenished with all misery: and therefore, 2. The very Philosophers could tell us, that to know our selves is the ready way both to know God,2. To konw our selves, the best way to know God. and to enjoy God: For as he that knoweth God, will never relie on himself, so he that knoweth himself, will alwaies seek to rely on God, be∣cause he seeth his own vanity, his weakness, and his frailty to be such and so great, that he cannot subsist without God; and therefore Socrates, seeing this sentence, , Know thy self, engraven upon the Portal of the Temple of Apollo, and considering with himself that there could be no access unto God, but through his House, and no entrance into the House, but by the Door; and then seriously musing with himself, why this Sentence should be set upon the door, he conclu∣ded, that the readiest way to come to God, was to know himself; and therefore he left the course and practise of other Philosophers, that searched into the moti∣ons of the Heavens, and the influence of the Planets, and applied their studies rerum cognoscere causas, to understand the causes of all natural things, which they conceived was the only thing that could make them happy, and bring them to en∣joy the summum bonum; and he gave himself wholly to learn the knowledge of himself, and he conceived there was no folly comparable to this, to be painful and diligent to know all other things, and to be ignorant and know nothing of himself; to study Arts and Sciences, and to forget himself; and therefore non se quaesiverit extra, but he employed all his time and his pains to know himself; be∣cause he conceived that the knowledge of himself would be more beneficial to him than the knowledge of all other physical things whatsoever: For which cause and no other, the Oracle, seeing him preferring the moral Philosophy before the Natural, pronounced him the wisest man in Greece, not because his knowledge was more compleat, or his sufficiency greater than others, but because his know∣ledge of himself was far better than the knowledge of others that studied other things, and neglected to understand themselves. And no marvel, that the Oracle should proclaim him for the wisest man that doth best know himself; because it is not only very good and profitable, but also a very hard and difficult thing for a man fully and truly to know himself; that is, to know,
Not only the quiddities and the qualities both of his body and of his soul, which notwithstanding in themselves are most admirable and excellent, if we consi∣der, 1. The Parts and composition of the Body, which as the Prophet saith, are fearfully and wonderfully made, yea so admirably composed, that Galen saith,Galenus de usu partium. 1. The admi∣rable structure of mans body. the true expression, or the tight. Anatomization of them, is as an holocaust, or Sacri∣fice, most acceptable to God, that hath by that excellent composure of this incom∣parable structure, shewed his own most incomprehensible wisdom; as you see, the least finger, and the least Joynt of any Finger, hath his use, and cannot be spared by any means. 2. That far more noble part of man, that Spark of heavenly fire,2. The diffi∣cultie of un∣derstanding the particula∣rities of the Soul. and immortal spirit, which is his Soul, in the Original, Essence, Faculties, Operations, Use, End, and the like, almost infinite Points thereof, wherein and about which the best Philosophers have so puzled themselves, that they rather bewrayed their own Ignorance, than truly expressed any point of the most necessary knowledge of this Substance, as learned Suarez, in his voluminous work de Anima, sheweth; and Aristotle himself confesseth, when he saith, that the more knowledge a man hath of these things, the more occasion of doubting is offered unto him; which made him as many men think, to define the Soul to be , corporis phisici & organici vitam habentis potentia; which is ignotum per ignotius, a definition harder,Arist. de Ani∣ma, l. 2. c. 1. tex. 6. Cicero, l. 1. Tuscul. q. What man should chiefly know concern∣ing himself. or at least as hard to be understood, as the thing defined. Whenas Cicero, reading  for , translateth the same to signifie a continued and perpetual motion, which is far short of the right definition of the Soul. But especially to know mans Original, how he came into the world, his duty, what he should do, and how he should behave himself, while he continueth in the world; his state and condition, how he standeth in relation to his God that made him, preserveth him, and giveth to him all that he hath, while he liveth in this world, and what shall become of him when he dieth, and departeth out of this world; these, and the like Considerations concerning man, are hard to know, and few men do learn them, which is the reason that few do attain to Eternal Life. Yet as the Poet saith, Plagae dant Animum.What effects Afflictions do work in us. And as S. Greg. saith, Oculos quos culpa claudit, poena apperit; the eyes which sin and transgressions have blinded, afflictions and punishments have opened; be∣cause, as the Greek proverb saith, , Persecutions bring Instru∣ctions, and suffering teacheth understanding; as the Children of Jacob, being questioned and afflicted in Egypt, about their Brother, whom they had sold unto the Ishmaelites, had their eyes opened, and their sin, which for so many years they had buried in the Grave of Forgetfulness, and in the Pit, where they had thrown their Brother, is now revived, and makes them to confess, and to say one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the an∣guish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear;Gen. 42.21. therefore is this di∣stress come upon us; and so Crosses and Afflictions do reduce our sins unto our re∣membrance, and extort Confession of their Misdeeds from many others. And therefore the Prophet David, either upon the consideration of Absolons unnatural Rebellion and Persecution of him,What moved the Prophet David to com∣pose this Psal. that was both his King and his Father; or of some other violent and virulent Temptation that had seized upon him, or else upon a Prophetical foresight of the Captivity of his people in Ba∣bylon, as he sheweth in another place, saying, By the waters of Babylon we sate down and wept when we remembred thee O Sion; or, as others think,Psal. 137.1. upon the con∣sideration of the sad state, and distressed condition of many good Christians la∣bouring under the Cross, and Persecutions in this world, he composeth this most Excellent Psalm of the brevity and shortness of mans life, that he need not fear,
he shall continue long in affliction; and he directeth the same to Jeduthim, a chief Musician, because the chiefest Artist can give most grace, and the best life to any thing; and the best is best cheap, Physitian, Preacher, Lawyer, or whom you will. And here in this Verse which I have read unto you, the holy Prophet endea∣vouring to teach us how we may oversome all our maladies and partrbations, even as himself had done, with patience, he setteth down a brief definition, or rather a short description of man;A brief Theo∣logical des∣cription of man. not Phylosophically with Aristotle, to teach us what he is in his Essence; Animal rationale risibile, a reasonable and a sociable creature, but Theologically, by the light of Gods Spirit, to instruct us what he is in his state and condition, and that is, Animal miserable mortale, a most miserable mortal wretch, a worm and no man a vain thing, or meer vanity, and that is to be understood while he liveth in this world; for as all Divines conclude, there be three states of man. That there be three states of man.1. Institutionis. 2. Destitutionit. 3. Restitutionis. That is, 1. Of his In∣nocency, in Paradise, where he was created to holiness and true righteousness, after the very Image of God himself. 2. Of his sinfull condition, and corruption, while he liveth here now in this world. 3. Of his Restauration, begun here by grace in this life, and perfected with glory in the life to come. Of what state of man the Prophet speak∣eth.And, as Origen well observeth, the Prophet David describeth here, not what we were in our Creation, nor what we shall be in our Glorification, but what we are now in out natural state and corrupted condition of our peregrination, or pil∣grimage here in this world, whereof he faith, Verily, every man living, or every man in his best estate, is altogether vanity. Where summarily, you may see, that Man is the subject of the Discourse, and Vanity is the Possession, the Inheritance, and the definition of every man; for though God made not Death, but made man for perpetuity to be united to him∣self in all Eternity; yet Sin brought forth death into the world, and Death went over all, and so all are become nothing but meer vanity. The difference betwixt Vanity and Eternity seen.And truly, there cannot be a greater contrariety betwixt light and darkness, or a further distance betwixt East and West, Heaven and Hell, than is betwixt Va∣nity and Eternity, as you may see by the Names of the one, and the Nature of the other; For, 1. By the names of Va∣nity.1. Vanity, which the Greeks and the Septuagint here call , the He∣breaws, to shew the nature of it, do express the same by many very significant words (as the Learned in that language do declare) and especially by these four words. 1. By Elil, which they say, signifieth nothing, or a thing of no moment; in which sense,1. Elil. 1 Cor. 8.4. . St. Paul saith, That an Idol is nothing in the world; as if he had said, An Idol is Al-el, not God; because the Idols are not Elohim, Gods that shall continue, but Elilim, that is things of nothing, and things, which shall be re∣duced into nothing. And the Hebricians say, that this word Elil hath great affinity with the verb Ialal, which signifieth to howl; because the following after Vanities, and the vain things of this world, or the serving of Idols and worshipping of Images, which is the vainest thing in the world,What the fol∣lowing after Vanities doth bring to us. can bring nothing unto us, but weeping and howling, which the Latines call Ululatus, and Ululatus is derived from the Greek word , or , that signifieth Perire & in nihilum redigere, to perish, and be utterly undone, or to be reduced into nothing; even as the Psalmist saith of all Idolaters,Psal. 97.7. Confounded be all they that worship carved Images, and that delight vain gods; and as St. James saith of those rich Worldlings, that follow atter the vanities of this world,James 5.1. . 2. Hebel. Weep and howl, for your miseries that shall come upon you. 2. By Hebel, which in Eccles. 1.1. is written Habel, from the verb Habal,
which signifieth to vanish as a thing, Qua non est quidpiam, aut qua citè desinit, which either is not any thing at all, or which suddenly perisheth, like unto a blast, either is nothing, or is of such a short continuance, as though it were nothing at all; Sic enim Infantem Habraei halitum appellant, for so the Hebrews do call their Infants blasts, saith Sanctes Pagninus; and such a blast wan Habel, whose righ∣teous soul by an unexpected death was suddenly blown up to heaven, to cry against the unnatural cruelty of his brother. And accordingly to this signification of Hebel, the Greeks express the same thing by , of , vilescere, to grow vile, and to be of no validity or no worth in the world, as are all the things of this world,Philip. 3.8. in comparison of the heavenly things, no better than dung and dross as the Apostle speaketh. 3. By Caza, which signifieth a lie,3. Caza. and hath great affinity with the verb Cas∣chaph, to bewitch, as they are, as it were bewitched, that are seduced to believe lies instead of truth; even as St. Paul saith unto the Galathians, Who hath be∣witched you? That is, deceived and seduced you, from the truth of the Gospel,Gal. 3.1. to believe the lies and false doctine of the Hereticks, and the new-sprung Preachers that are amongst you? And so the Prophet David calleth all the vain things of this world, Lying vanities, saying, O ye sons of men,Psal. 4.2. how long will ye blas∣pheme mine honour, and have such pleasure in vanity, and seek after leasing? That is, such lying things as do bewitch men, to love them, and to hunt after them, like those little children that run up and down all day long to catch Butterflyes or Feathers, and when they have cathed them, they have nohing but such fruitless things as are of no value, but like the Spiders web, that will be no garment for them. 4. By Rik, which signifieth inanity or vacinity,4. Rik. from whence the word Raka, that our Saviour useth in the Gospel, and is taken for a fool, whose head is empty, and void of all understanding, is derived; for as when Kings are deprived of their Soveraignty, disrobed of their power, dis-joyned from their Regality, they are as no bodies, I am sure no Kings; and as Bishops silenced from preach∣ing, and secluded from their Offices, are no Bishops, but, as when Cyphers are separated from their Figures, they do make just nothing at all, though they should be never so many, even so the creature dis-joyned from God, and opposed to the Creator, and so likewise shadows opposed to the substance, darkness to the light, lies unto the truth, and all finite things to eternity; they are inania most vain, and nothing but privations, or things that do suddenly vanish into no∣thing. Out of all which words, and the like, that are used to explain this Vanity,Aristot. Phisie. l. 2. that Definition of Aristotle may well stand, Vanum id esse, quod ordinatum est ad aliquid, sicut ad finem, & non potest attingere; that is vanity, which cannot attain unto the end for which it was appointed; for so the Prophet Esay,Isa. 49 4: after he had preached a long time, and had made many Sermons for the amendment of the Jews, and yet could no more recal that stiffenecked people from their abominations, thin we can reclaim our hearers from their transgressions, crieth out, In vacuum la∣boravi, I have laboured in vain; I have spent my strength for naught; and so man by his sin and disobedience unto his God, not attaining unto his end, that is, his U∣nion and communion with God, for which he was created, and by which he should have enjoyed an everlasting happy Being, is now become vain, and liable to be reduced to an eternal miserable Being, and to a far worser condition than an ever∣lasting nothing. And so you see what is Vanity. But 2. The opposite thereof, which is Verity, and is derived a vero,2. The a∣ture of Verity and Eternity. from that which is a thing real, and not fained, or else a vere, from the Spring-time, because the Truth is alwaies fresh, and springeth, and is sufficient to subsist of it self, and will prevail, as Zorobabel saith, against all assaults; and such a thing is Eternity, which is diametrically opposed unto Vanity, and is called by the Greeks diuria, that is, Interminabilis vit aesimul tota & perfecta possessio,Bettius de con∣solat, Philosop. l. 5. an infinite boundless gulph of time, which no lin can fathom, no tongue can express, saith Bottius;
because not only if you do retrospect and look backward into the time past, you shall find,Cicero Nat. Deorum, l. 1. that, as Cicero saith, Fuit quaedam ab infinito tempore aeternitas, quam nul∣la circumscriptio temporum metiebatur; there hath been a certain Eternity from an infinite space of time, which no circumscription of time could measure; sed qua∣lis ea spatio fuerit, intelligi non potest, but what manner of space that should be, can∣not be understood, quod nec in cogitationem quidem cadit, ut fuerit tempus aliquod, nullum cum tempus esset; neither can it fall into the thought of man to consider truly, how any time should be, when as yet there was no time: but also if you look forward, into the time to come, you shall find that when there shall be nei∣ther Sun nor Moon, which are appointed to be the measure of time, yet there will be an endless infinite space of time, that cannot be terminated. What time is, and how ex∣pressed. Apuleius de dogm. Platonis.And Apuleius, the Platonist, saith, that time is but the Image of Eternity, and that time moveth, but Eternity moveth not, being naturally fixed, and eternally immoveable; and also that time passeth towards Eternity, and endeth in the Perfection thereof, the time being dissolved whensoever the Creator of this world pleaseth; but Eternity abiding for ever. Eternity how expressed.And in this respect the Egyptians, that taught all by Hierogliphicks, represented Eternity by a Circle, which had neither beginning nor ending; and for the same cause, Numa Pompilius, that was unto the Romans, as Moses was unto the Jews, the Author of all their Religion and Religious Ceremonies, and others, the an∣cient Pontifices of the Romans, erected their Temples, which they dedicated unto their gods, whom they conceived to be aeternal, in a circular form; and Mercuri∣us Trismegistus, one of the most ancient Philosophers that we read of, expressed this Eternity by an intellectual Sphaere, whose Center is every where, and Cir∣cumference no where; because Eternity cannot be bounded within any compass, nor terminated by any Limits. The difference betwixt Eter∣nity and Per∣petuity.And the difference which these wise men assigned, betwixt Eternity and Perpe∣tuity is this, that Eternity is that which hath neither beginning of dayes, nor end of time, as is God alone, and none else; but perpetuity is that, which though it had a beginning, yet it shall never have an end, as are the Angels both good and bad, and the Soules of all men, both the righteous and unrighteous. All men desire perpetuity, and to be united to Eternity.And therefore it is naturally ingrafted in the Soul of every man to affect perpe∣tuity, and to desire to have an Union and Communion with God, which is Eter∣nity; because as S. August. saith, God made us for himself, that we might be per∣petually with him; & ideo irrequietum est cor nostrum douec requiescat in eo; and therefore, as no Element, no thing, can rest satisfied and contented, until it com∣eth to its own proper place, as the fire to be on high, and the stone to come to the bottom; so our hearts can never attain to any true rest, until they do rest in God; and nothing in the world can satisfie the mind of man, but that which is above man; neither can all the Gold of Ophir, all the Sand of Tagus, all the Treasures of Egypt, all the riches of the World, and all the allectives under Heaven, make a proportionable Object to satisfie the Soul of man; for seeing, as some Philoso∣phers have observed, the heart of man is after a sort made triangle wise, and the world circular, therefore as a Globe can never fill a triangular figure, so no more can the whole world replenish the vast corners and the illimited desires of mans heart. Therefore the very Heathens, that knew no more of God than what Nature taught them,How the hea∣thens affected to have an uni∣on with Eter∣nity. had an earnest desire to attain unto an Union with this Eternity; as we read how Cleombrotus, hearing the Philosophers discoursing of the excellency of Eternity, and the Felicity of the soul united unto the Deity, in an over-hasty desire of this Unition, tumbled himself voluntarily to death, that his soul might presently enjoy that happy Life; and Socrates smiled upon his Hemlock, that his Adversary gave him to dispatch his life, while he assured himself, that it would send him from this mortal Frailty unto eternal felicity. And not only these particular men, and the like learned Philosophers, and wi∣sest sort of men, but we read also, how those famous Nations of the Brachmans,
Indians, Persians, and indeed all other Pagans whatsoever, had this desire of Im∣mortality and Eternity imprinted in their hearts by the pen of Nature. And no marvel;Why they de∣sired perpetui∣ty. for as thou canst not like so well of the longest Lease of thy House or Lands, as of the Free-hold and Perpetuity; so there can be no true rest, nor any satisfying content, in any transient thing, but only in that which is perpe∣tual; for when we have improved our Ambition to our own content, even to the height of our hearts desire, and have attained to so much happiness as this world can afford us, and are become the only men both in Court and Countrey, both in Church and State, and as able to do so much in the Ecclesiastical Affairs, as Ense∣bius Bishop of Nicomedia could do with Constantius, the Arian Emperor; and as much in the Political State, as Haman could do with Ahasuerus, Sejanus with Ti∣berius, or Hebraem Bassa with Saladine the Great Turk, who were the only Favou∣rites, that were most powerful with these great Monarchs, and as dearly beloved of them, as Ephestion was of Alexander: or more than this, could we come to be the Pope, that challengeth to be the Head of the Church, or to be such a Monarch as was Alexander, Nebuchaduezzar, or the most Illustrious of all the Rom. Emperours, yet then, we may be cut off with Belshazzar, in the midst of our dayes; or if we can be permitted to spin the Thread of our Lives, to the fulness of years, yet at last, and that soon enough, time and age will take us down, and we shall bring our years to an end, even as a Tale that is told; and then as Job saith, the eye that saw us, shall see us no more, and the men that feared us, shall fear us no more; but seeing that, as Solomon saith, a living Dog is better than a dead Lion, the poor living Snakes, that are now trode upon by the Tyrants and Oppressors of this world, may then tread upon the Graves, and trample upon the necks of their greatest persecuters; even as Diogenes did upon those buried Kings and Princes, amongst whom he sought for the bones of King Philip, but could not distinguish them from the bones of a Peasant. But what of that? What matter of all this? when as the Divinity of the School of Epicures is, that after death there remaineth nothing of us to be any waies pre∣judiced, nor any thing any waies at all: and the Doctrine of the Stoicks is nothing different, when as Seneca, though he seemed to be a friend to that Principle of the Immortality of the Soul, yet this is one of his proper Aphorismes, that non potest esse miser qui nullus est; he cannot be a wretched man that is no man; and to shew that after death, there is no more tidings of any man, he writes unto Martia, quod mors omnium est solutio, ultra quam mala nostra non exeunt,How many men denied the immorta∣lity of the soul, and the life that is to come. that death is the resolu∣tion and period of all things, beyond which our evils cannot extend; and Cicero tels us, that his friend Atticus was hardly perswaded to believe the immortality of the Soul; and before him Cebes in Plato, was of the same mind, and Dicaarchus that, as Cicero saith, wrote three Books of the mortality of the soul, and Panetius, whom Cicero in all his Offices doth so much commend, and so often imitate, and divers Philosophers, as Epicurus and Democritus, that lived in the time of Alexan∣der the Great, were in like manner so blinded by the devil, as not only to doubt, but also to believe this damnable Doctrine;Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 2. c. 7. Arnob. in Oct. and Pliny judgeth this Doctrine to be puerile deliramentum, a childish simplicity; and so likewise Cecilius, as Arno∣bius testifieth, calleth these Tenets of the Christians Anniles Christianorums Fabu∣las, old wives Fables; and Nicephorus writeth, that Synesius the Platonist, quoad alia quae Christiani profitentur, promptum se & facilem praebuit,Nicephorus, l. 14. c. 55. approved well of all other points that the Christians professed, sed Resurrectionis doctrinam nefandam ac detestandam judicavit, but the Doctrine of the Resurrection he liked not; and the Poets cried out with Theocritus, Non est Spes ulla sepultis. But as Catullus saith, though Soles occidere & redire possunt,Catul. ad Los, p. 3. the Sun and Moon may lie down and rise again, yet, nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux, nox est perpetua una dormienda; when once our short life is fallen down, we shall have one perpetual
night to sleep, and so Lucretinus and Enninus, and many more, were of the same faith. And which is wonderfull, in the School of Christ, we finde some of the same minde, as of old time, Hymenaeus and Philetus, with whom joyned the Va∣lentinians, Corpocratians, Cerdonians, Gnosticks, Marcionites, Selucians, Mani∣chees, Hieraclites, Priscillianists, and the rest of that litter, as Saturninus, Basili∣des, Secundus, Marcus, Appelles, and some of the Popes themselves, with John the 23, and Leo the 10. that as they were transcendently wicked, so they were wickedly tainted with this errour, and liked not of this truth; and many more of their associates in these our own dayes, that following Hobbs his Leviathan have fallen away from the faith, and as if, per  animarum, the souls of these Hereticks had entred into their bodies, they will neither believe the resur∣rection of the body, nor the immortality of their souls, and therefore they la∣bour not for their union with this Eternity. Yea, and that which is more to be admired, such is the corruption of our na∣ture, and the madness of our mindes, that although the continual sight, and most sensible apprehension of our vanity, and the shortness of our lives in this world, mingles all our best wine with most bitter waters, and puts a stop unto our plea∣sures, and many sad thoughts into our heads, and perplexities into our hearts; yea, though it seemeth that there is in a man a kinde of inclination and dispo∣sition of nature, and an earnest desire to continue and perpetuate his being; and that it is a thing universally, religiously (because it is the principal foundation of all Religion) and peaceably received and concluded throughout all the Christian world, especially by an outward and publick profession, that the soul of man is immortal, and shall so continue for ever, and that there shall be a resurrection of the body, and another life after this; yet seriously and inwardly in their hearts, not onely the Epicures,The many worldly pro∣fessours of the Christian Re∣ligion, do be∣lieve neither the immorta∣lity of the soul, nor the resur∣rection of their bodies, nor any other life after this life. and the Hereticks aforenamed, and the Sadduces, the greatest Lords of the Jews, that did not stick with open mouth to deny it, but also the greatest part of these our Christian Professours, as I fear, do believe neither the immortality of the soul, nor the resurrection of the dead, nor any other life after this, the short life of their vanity. For is it possible that men should be so haughty, and so proud, so covetous, and such oppressours of their Neighbours, so sacrilegious, and such robbers and spoylers of God himself, as we see men are, so as the Poet saith, Ʋnde habent, cura est paucis, sed oportet habere. Is it possible, I say, they should be such, if they did believe, that their souls are immortal, that after this momentary life of their vanity, their bodies shall awake and rise out of their graves, and that Christ shall come to judge them according to the works they have done in this life; and as he saith himself, To render unto every one as his deeds shall be? No surely, it cannot be, that they do believe these things; but, as the Fool, whatsoever he profest with his mouth to deceive the world, yet said in his heart, There is no God; so they, whatsoever they say in words, yet factis negant, their deeds tell us to their faces, that they do but dissemble, and deceive themselves, but they cannot deceive God, nor all wise men, that will rather believe their own eyes, in what they see them do, than their words, in what they say they do believe. What a persi∣dious fellow Carbo was.And therefore as when Carbo swore any thing in the Senate, the Senators and the people of Rome presently sware they did not believe him: So, when these sacrilegious persons, and thefe grievous oppressours of the poor, and the rooters out of the innocent from their possessions, do profess that they believe these things,What Apollo∣orus dreamed I do profess unto you, that I believe them not. But as Apollodorus, the Tyrant, dreamed, that he was taken and flead by the Scythians, and his heart thrown into a boyling Caldron, should say unto him, I am the cause of all this mischief; so I say, The hearts of these men deceive them, for as the Wise man
saith, The heart is deceitfull above all things; and for a man to deceive himself is the worse deceit in the world; for excepting the worst of thoughts, which is the thought of the Fool, that said in his heart, There is no God; there cannot be a more brutish and perverse thought than to imagine that the soul perisheth when the body is dissolved; for what need we care what evil we do, what need we fear what Judge condemn us, or why should we abstain from any of our desires, if our souls dye, when our bodies are dead? But to shew you, that whatsoever they say, yet they do not believe in any eternal being, either of body or soul after the end of this their vanity:The former point proved. I pray you look into an excellent Book, though sleighted by some Fanatick spirits where the Wise-man sheweth how the prophane worldlings, and the worldly Atheists do make this conclusion of their incredulity, to be the ground and foundation of all their impieties; for they say, but not aright, Our life is short and tedious, and in the death of a man there is no remedy, neither was there any man known to have re∣turned from the grave; for we are born at all adventure, and we shall be hereafter as though we had never been, for the breath in our nostrils is as smoak, which being ex∣tinguished, our body shall be turned into ashes, and our spirit shall vanish as the soft air.Sap. 2.1, 2, 3. This is their saith, and therefore they make this conclusion, saying, Come let us in∣joy the good things that are present, and let us speedily use the creatures like as in youth,Cap. eod. v. 6, 7, 8, 9.10, 11, & let us fill our selves with costly Wine and Oyntments, and let no flower of the Spring pass by us, let us crown our selves with Rose-buds before they be withered; let none of us go without part of his voluptuousnesss, for this is our portion, and our lot is this, Let us op∣press the poor righteous man, let us not spare the widow, nor reverence the ancient gray hairs of the aged; let our strength be the Law of Justice, and let us lye in wait for the righteous. And this was the very reasoning of Sardanapalus. Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas. There is no felicity after death, therefore soul take thine ease, sit down and be merry; and I fear it is the occasion of so much wickedness in many men, and of such a deluge of sin in these dayes, that doth overflow both the Church and Commonwealth to the destruction and ruine of many thousand souls, that in their hearts they scarce believe their souls to be immortal, or that there shall be ever any resurrection of their bodies, or any account to be given for what they do, for so you see the reason why they oppress the poor, and rob both God and man, and satisfie themselves with all kinde of delights, because their breath in their nostrils is as smoak, which being extinguished, their bodies shall be turned into ashes, and their spirit, as they suppose, shall vanish as the soft air. And truly, I think the conclusion very good, if there were any truth in the pre∣mises; for though Plato and Socrates and Seneca, and the like vertuous men did so much love vertue, for the very beauty of vertue, and did hate vice onely for the ugliness of vice; and Anselimus is reported to have said, he had rather to be ver∣tuous, though severely punished for it, than be vicious, though never so highly re∣warded; yet, because these Ejaculations spring from more than ordinary know∣ledge, no less than some sparks of the motions of Gods Spirit, which God some∣times wrought in the hearts of the Heathens, and much more in Anselimus that was a Christian: It is contrary to all shew of reason, that a man,The incredu∣lity of the life to come, the cause that men commit much wickedness. which believeth the mortality of the soul, should have any desire to be vertuous, or any fear to be most vicious, unless it be onely for fear of some Temporal punish∣ment. For if our time be but a very shadow that soon passeth away, and after that our end, there is no returning, why should I endure so much labour, and suffer so much want, or want so much pleasure, as the reach of my wit, or the laws of my strength can any wayes afford me? or why should I abstain from any vice, from any villany, and fast, and weep, and mourn, and go in sackcloath and ashes, if after one moment of time, I shall be reduced to nothing, and be never more
questioned, and neither rewarded for my good deeds, nor punished for my evil doings. Therefore I think that this Atheistical conceit of the annihilation of the soul, and the incredulous thought of the immortality thereof, is the main cause of so much wickedness, as is now raging in the world. And on the other side, if men did but seriously think, and faithfully believe, that after this short time of a few dayes pilgrimage, our souls shall remain for ever, and receive either everlasting joyes, if they do well, or eternal punishments, if they do evil, I do assure my self, that men would have some care for the time to come, and like Moses, choose rather to suffer a momentary affliction with the people of God,Heb. 11.25. than to enjoy the plesures of sin for a season, and so engage themselves to en∣dure the punishment of sin for ever. The necessity of rooting out this incredu∣lity.And therefore to root out so pestilent an errour, and to confirm so necessary a truth, as is the doctrine of the Immortality of the soul for the perpetuating of man; all wise men, that had any love of goodness in them, and all the holy men of God, both in the Old and New Testament, and all the Fathers of the primi∣tive Church, and their successours, the Bishops, and other godly Preachers, to this very day, have been carefull to preach this truth, and have shewed themselves very punctual and plentifull in this point; for to let pass what Ovid saith, Morte carent animae,Ovid. Metam. Tibul. l. 4. Propertius. Claud. Manilius l. 4. Plato in Tim. Cicero de re∣pub. somo Scip. & l. 1. Tusc. quest. and what Propertius saith, Sunt aliquid manes, laethum non omnia finit; luridaque evictos effugit umbra rogos; and what Claudian saith, Haec sola manet, bustoque superstes evolat; and to pass over the testimony of Pherecides, that was Master unto Pythagoras, and of Socrates and Plato and Cicero, and the rest of the Philosophers and Orators, that with unanswerable arguments have main∣tained the souls of men to be immortal; and so likewise to pass by the unanimous consent of the Fathers that were so plain and so plentifull to prove the same, as you may see in S. Clement Recog. l. 1. Iren. l. 2. c. 63. & 64. cont. Valent. Tertul. de res. carnis. S. Aug. dogmat. Eccles. c. 16. Arnobius de fide resur. and the rest of them almost in every place, I finde the Prophets, and our Saviour himself, and his Apostles be very exact and diligent to declare the same, and to prove it so fully that the most incredulous heart, if it were not filled with all blindness, could not conceive the least thought against it. Yet because the Devil is still tempting men to incredulity, and to doubt of these things, and is still so powerfull with these worldlings, that he quite blindeth them, so that they cannot see the clearest light, nor understand the plainest truth. Therefore to undeceive these silly souls that do so miserably deceive them∣selves, we are still bound to defend and vindicate these truths; and in that re∣spect, I likewise shall not think much to produce some few Reasons that the Devil himself cannot answer, to make it manifest, that although man in this life is altogether vanity, and but a blast, of no continuance, as hereafter I shall shew unto you, yet God made man to be perpetual, for God made all things that they might have their being, and especially man, not to be reduced to no∣thing, and he made the soul of man immortal, and never to dye, but to live for ever; For, Arguments proving the immortality of the Soul, and the life to come.1. Moses tells you, that when God had framed and made man of the dust of the earth, He breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and so man became a living soul, and not a dying soul, or a soul that should dye; but such a soul, as should live for ever, because the soul is the cause of our natural, spiritual and eternal life; whence the Latines do call the soul, Life, , quia vivificat corpus dum adest, & seipsam cum abest á corpore. And when God threatned Adam, that if he did eat of the forbidden fruit,Or surely dye. Gen. 2.17. he should dye the death; that death signifieth not the death of the soul, or the annihilation of the body, but the dissolution or se∣paration of the soul from the body; that as it was made out of the dust, so it might return to the dust again, which while the soul remained in it, unseparated, it could not return; and this St. Paul sheweth plainly, when he saith,
, If our earthly house be dissolved, that is,2 Cor. 5. dis-joynted, as a house that we pull down is separated one part from another, but not destroyed, so is the soul separated from the body, and neither of them de∣stroyed, and reduced into nothing; but the soul remaineth still immortal for ever, and as God saith,Gen. 3.19. the body returneth to the dust from whence it was taken. 2. It is said, that Abel being unnaturally murdered by his blood-thirsty Bro∣ther, vox sanguinum clamabat ad deum; and the Hebrew word, saith Collerus, sig∣nifieth, ex ingenti animi dolore exclamare, to cry out with a vehement grief of mind, & queritando vociferari, and to complain with a most lamentable voice; there∣fore surely his crying soul was still alive, though his slaughtered body was lain dead. 3. God saith unto Moses, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and the God of your Fathers; therefore Abraham, Isaac,Exod. 3.15. and Ja∣cob, and the rest of their Fathers were still alive, , secundum aliquid, and that is in respect of their Souls; because as our Saviour saith unto the Sadduces, God is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living; and the bodies of these men that were turned to dust, could not be said either to be alive, or to be Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob: therefore Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were still alive in respect of their Soules. 4. Moses is said to have died in the Land of Moab, and to be buried in a valley over against Beth-peor, and yet S. Matth. saith,Deut. 34.5, 6. Mat. 17.3. that when Jesus was transfigured on the Mount, Moses and Elias appeared to the Apostles, talking with Christ, therefore Moses was dead, and not dead, and was buried, and not buried, , (i. e.) dead in respect of his body, and living in respect of his Soul; and so Mo∣ses and Elias were still alive, and they themselves, in respect of their Souls, and not their shadows or phantasmes, which can no waies be faid to be Moses and Elias, did then appear unto the Apostles. 5. David saith, I will not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord; and yet David is dead, and was buried, therefore it is his Soul that liveth. 6. The wise man saith, that when a man dieth, then shall the dust, that is,Eccl. 12.7. his body, return to the Earth, and the Spirit shall return to God that gave it, and being with God, it cannot be dead, but remain immortal for ever. 7. When Lazarus died, he is said to be carried up by the Angels into Abra∣hams bosom (i. e.) in respect of his Soul,Luke 16.22. for his Body was not carried up into his Bosom: And so Dives being in torments, must be understood in respect of his Soul; for it is said, that being dead, he was buried, in respect of his Body; and therefore the Souls both of the good and of the bad do still remain immortal. 8. Our Saviour saith, Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul: therefore the Soul is immortal, whenas all the strength of man,Mat. 10.28. and all the power of Hell is not able to kill it. 9. The hope of Glory and Reputation, and the desire that every man hath of the continuance and perpetuity thereof, how vain soever it be, yet doth it carry a great evidence of the Immortality of our Soules. 10. The impression of that vice which robbeth a man of the knowledge of hu∣mane Justice, and is alwaies opposite to the Justice of God, and indelibly imprint∣ed in every mans Conscience, doth infallibly conclude; that the Justice of God re∣quireth the same should be chastised after death, and therefore that our Soules must needs be immortal. 11. In the Book of Wisdom it is most plainly said, the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment touch them;Sap. 3.1, 2, 3. in the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, but they are in peace. A place so plain, that sense can desire no plainer. And many more Reasons might be produced to confirm this Truth, but these are sufficient demonstrations to shew unto you, that although man in respect of his being in this life, is altogether Vanity, yet simply considered, he is to be eternal,
and to have a perpetual Being; because God never made man to have an end, and to be reduced to nothing; but as the wise man saith, he created all things, and much rather man, that they might have their being. Sap. 1.14.And what madness is it therefore, that men will not believe this Truth? espe∣cially considering, it is most certain, that the remembrance of their end, and the shortness of their time here, how their dayes do pass away like a Weavers shuttle, or like a Post that tarrieth not, will alwaies be such a corrasive to their Souls, as will put an end to all their earthly Comforts, whenas nothing in the world is left us to rejoyce in, but in that thing only which is perpetual and remaineth ours for ever. But then here you must understand, that besides the prime Eternity, which is God, there is a twofold perpetuity of men. That all men both good and bad shall re∣main and be perpetually.1. The one, by our Unition with God, which is perfect felicity. 2. The other, in our Separation from God, which is the Extreamest Misery; And, Seeing the Souls of men are immortal, and do naturally affect Eternity, as not only Divinity sheweth, but also the soundest Philosophers have sufficiently attest∣ed, and every mans Conscience, in the expectation of his reward for his Actions, be they good or bad, perswadeth him to believe, it is most certain, that those wicked worldlings which desire nothing but the Honours and the Prosperity of this present Life, and those incredulous Hereticks, both of the former times, and of this present Age, which against their Consciences do withstand this Truth, shall notwithstand∣ing be perpetual, either in their Union with God, or in their Separation from God, and as it is the greatest Comfort of a Christian man to believe that he shall be ever∣lastingly with God in all happiness, so it is not the least torment unto a damned soul, to consider, that he shall be for ever and ever in Torments, separated from God. And therefore the Errour is not, that men do seek for perpetuity, which they shall be sure to have, but that they seek the same amiss. The twofold error of men in seeking perpetuity. 1. Seecking it too late.Either not that which is with their Union and Fruition of God; or if that, then either not as they should, or not where they should seek it, that is, either not in the due time, or nor in the right place, where it may be found; as, 1. For the time, many seek it, but too late; and so they miss it, because that now is the time acceptable, & ex hoc momento pendet aeternitas, and our perpetuity either with God, or without God, either in Joy or in Torments, dependeth upon our demeanour in this present, and little short time, that we have here to live. 2. For the Place, you may see how most men purchase Lands, build Castles, ga∣ther Riches,2. Seeking it in the wrong place. heap up Treasures, and so lay down such Foundations of perpetuity here on earth, as if they were to live here for ever; and they do so rely upon these transient things, and mortal men, as if they were immortal Gods; and so they seek for their perpetuity in the Regions of Vanity, and they would find perfect Fe∣licity in this Valley of Misery, but as the Israelites, by joyning themselves to Baal∣peor, separated themselves from El shadai, the Almighty God; so these men, by seeking Eternity in these vanities, shall never be able to find it, and to be united with it, because Eternity and Felicity are not to be found here on earth: For as the Apostle saith, we have here no continuing City, and we are but as Pilgrims and stran∣gers here in this world, and our perpetuity is to be expected, not in this life, but in the life to come. And so by this large Introduction that I have made, you see that these words of the Prophet are not to be understood of man simply considered, but of man , in respect of his State and Condition in this life; for though man be to abide for ever, yet as he is in this life, verily every man,— And to prove this unto you, you shall find the wisest King and the most learn∣ed Preacher that aver Israel had, assuring you, that there is nothing here in this world but vanity and vexation of Spirit; and that you might the sooner believe
this Truth, he doubleth and trebleth his words, saying, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity, that is, nothing else but meer vanity. And lest proud Man should think, that this is meant of Gold and Silver, and the like inanimate things of this world, or of the irrational Creatures, whose Souls do perish with their bodies, and not of man, which is the Prince and Lord of all Gods Creatures, the Glory of all Gods works, and the Image of God himself, the Pro∣phet David, that was both a great King and a great Prophet, tels you plainly, that you need not doubt of it; Verily, every man living is altogether Vanity, Sela. Touching which words, I beseech you to consider, 1. The various Lections,Two things to be considered about these words. of this Text. 2. The chiefest Observations of this Text. 1. For the diversity of Reading it.1. The diversi∣ty of reading them. 1 Word. The first word, according to the Septuagint, is , which S. Hierom translateth Enim; For, as the Cause of the brevity and shortness of mans life, that it should be but a span long, as the phrase signifieth, palmares fecisti dies meos, because every man is vanity; therefore my life is so short. Others, as Tremelius, do render it profecto or certe, surely or verily, that we might assure our selves, and make no doubt of the truth and certainty of this point, that every man, be he what he will, never so strong, never so wise, and never so wealthy, yet is he but vanity. But others would have both the Hebrew word, and the Greek Particle  to signifie, solum sive tantum & duntaxat, only, as if the Prophet meant, that, of all Gods Creatures, only man, or man alone is the receptacle of all vanity; and be∣sides man, there is nothing else, wherein the signs of all vanity are to be found so evidently as they are in man; because nothing in the world hath so far deviated and started away from the end for which it was appointed as man hath done; when as all other creatures stand according to Gods Ordinance; the Stars keep their m∣tions, the Moon observeth her Seasons, and the Sun knoweth his going down, only man knoweth not his duty, and so Esayas testifieth, The Oxe knoweth his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel hath not know, my people doth not consider, Es. 1.3. and therefore only man deservedly and signally is vanity. The second word which is used in the Original is Chol, and it is a word of both Numbers, and of all Genders, and the Septuagint read it ,2 Word. which S. Je∣rome translateth omnia, all; the vulgar Latine renders it universa, and Tremelius reads it omnimoda; and if I rightly understand them, they all mean, that man is all manner of vanity, and that there is no vanity in the world, and no foolery in the world, but you shall find the same in man. The third word after the Septuagint, is ; which S. Hierom,3 Word. and the vul∣gar Latine, and Tremelius translate vanitas; but Symmacus read it , a Va∣pour, to which thing S. James compareth the life of man, and useth the same word,James 4.14. saying , for our life is a vapour, that is, such a thing as soon riseth, and as suddenly perisheth. The fourth word, that the Septuagint read, is, , and Tremelius reads it omnis homo, and our English reads it every man; but others,4 Word. to whom I rather assent, do understand it to signifie totus homo, that is, all or whole man, or, a man compleat, soul and body; and accumulated with all the perfections that man can have, and with all the goods either of Nature or of Fortune that he may find un∣der the Sun, yet is he but vanity. The fifth word is , living, every man living, the which word Aquila reads, , trectus, lifted up, and Symmachus reads it , standing or subsisting,5 Word. and Tremel. translates it quantum vis constitutus maxime, how excellently soever he be setled, and the sense is, is most Interpreters will have the Hebrew word nitsan, to signifie, that every state of man, or, man in every state, and in what
condition soever he is, King, Priest, Prophet, Honourable, wealthy, or what you will, yet is he all vanity; and though such a one seems to stand, and to be som∣thing, existing firm in his strength and vigour, yet in very deed and in truth, the greatest, the strongest, the best and most powerful of them, is nothing else, but meer Vanity. And I would that all men would well consider it how vain they are. 2. The special Points consi∣derable in this Text.And so you have the words of this Text explained unto you, , Verily, every man, or, all man, living, or standing in his best estate and condition, is altogether vanity, and all the vanity that can be found under the Sun. 2. For the Observations that may be collected out of this Text. I desire you to note with me these six principal Points. 1. That man is nothing else but vanity. 2. That whole man is vanity. 3. That every man is vanity. 4. That every man in his best estate is vanity. 5. That every man in his beft estate is altogether vanity. 6. What Lessons of Instructions you may collect to your selves, from these Observations of mans Vanity; or what Application you may make of this Expression of the Prophet. And so, as Solomon ascended to the Throne of his Majesty, per sex gradus, by six special steps, so we shall descend to the nothing of our Mortality by these six special Considerations; and then I hope, it will appear unto you all, what a no∣thing they are, that seem now to be so very great, and what little reason we have to be so much afraid as we are, of such great nothings. But though the Application of the whole was the chiefest Point that I aimed at, when I first began to treat of this Text, yet mine allowance of time, not abusing your patience, will not permit me now to proceed any further than the first Point at this time; That Man is nothing else but Vanity. And, 1 Point. That man is Vanity. James 4.6.1. You may remember, that the holy Scripture saith, God resisteth the proud, but he giveth Grace unto the lowly; and yet such is the pride of mans heart, that Alex∣ander would be no less than the Son of Jupiter, Xerxes would correct the Helle∣spont, and write Letters of great threatnings to Mount Athos, that deemed his words no more than the wind: Sapores King of Persia would needs be stiled Bro∣ther unto the Sun and Moon:The palpable pride of men. and Caligula would , coun∣ter thunder God, and would needs be no less than Jupiter Latialis, the very God of the Latines, and of all Italy. And so the rest of the Caesars were so transported with such palpable pride, that all the Moneths of the year must be shared amongst them: and as of old Janus that looked backward and forward,The Moneths shared among the Caesars. to the old year and the new, like unto Noah, that had seen the world before the Floud, and that which was after the Floud, had the Moneth of January dedicated unto him; so Mars the great Warriour, must have March; Nero must have April, Claudins shall have Maii, Germanicus June, Julius July, Augustus, August, Antoninus September, Domitian October, Tiberius November, and he wittily demanded of the Senate, when they dedicated this Mo∣neth unto him, what they would do, when they should have more than 12 Cae∣sars? as Xiphilinus saith. Exod. 5.2.So Pharaoh demands, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice, to let Israel go out of my Service, to serve the Lord? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.Isa. 14.13, 14. And the King of Babylon said in his heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will ex∣alt my Throne above the Stars of God; I will ascend above the heights of the Clouds, and I will be like the Most High. The pride of many base fel∣lowes.And not only these great Kings and Emperors, that had some small kind of greatness in them, had such aspiring thoughts, and seed of Pride in them, but we find also that Clearchus, a base Fellow of Pontus, would needs be worshipped as a God, and his Son must be called Lightning, as Suidas testifieth; So Menecrates, a mean Physitian, would fain be taken for Jupiter, and Empedocles the Philosopher,
would in like manner have been deemed for immortal. And so many more the like unlikely fellows would fain challenge to themselves Temples, Altars, Sacrifices, and other services proper and peculiar to the Eternal God: And if we our selves ascend not so high to be such prodigies of pride, as these Heathens were, yet I am afraid, there are but very few of us that are not some wayes blasted with a vain conceit of their own worth; as you may see some Deifying their own persons, and as it were adoring either their fair faces, or their lovely eyes, or their goodly hair, now adayes idolized by many youngsters, as Ab∣salon in former time seemed to do, or their exquisire hands, or some other part or parcel of their well-shaped bodies. Others, as the Prophet saith, do sacrifice unto their net, and admire their own wit, whereby they have drawn so much wealth into the same, and yet preserve it from breaking, as the Apostles Net was preserved unbroken? when it drew to land an hundred fifty and three great Fishes.Joh. 21.11. A third sort of men make their strength to become the Law of Justice, and they that are weak are just nothing. A fourth sort are bubled up with an high conceit of their honour, and with Ha∣man, they are ready to burst if every knee doth not bend, and every head be not bare to them; and the golden Asses that have their purses full of Angels, and their coffers replenished with such Deities, do think they should be adored above all other creatures. And as Fastus inest pulchris sequiturque superbia formam, Beauty maketh many proud, so likewise Fastus inest sanctis, sequiturque superbia doctus; The Scholar is often proud of his Learning, and the Holy Saint is not alwayes free from too high a conceit of his Sanctity. And then as St. Aug. saith, Super∣bia destruit quicquid justitia adificat. And in brief, as the Devil told Adam and Eve, that they should be like gods;The vain con∣ceits of all the sons of Adam: so there is not scarce any one of all the sons of Adam, but for some one thing or other, though he will not say it with his tongue, yet will his heart conceive, that he is similis altissimo, as good as the best. And such are the thoughts of men. And holy Job saith, that these men are so impudent and so graceless, that they say to God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy wayes;Job 21.14, 15. what is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto him? But the Prophet David, that knew what is man better than all these men, to pull down those high looks of the proud, and to batter the muddy walls of flesh and blood, saith, Man is like a thing of naught, his time passeth away,Psal. 14.4. nay flyeth away like a shadow; and here he saith, Verily, every man in his best estate is altogether vanity: So you see, man is but a vain thing; nay more he is vanity it self, yea and more than that, which is a note above Ela, he is altogether vanity. And because, as St. Ambrose saith, Amaritudo sermonum, the bitterness of words, and the sharpness of our reproofs is oftentimes, medicina animarum, the salve of our souls, I must crave leave, depreciari carnem hanc, as Tertullian speaketh, that is, to batter down the lofty towers of proud flesh, and to vilifie those that overprize themselves, like Simon Magus, that gave it out he was ,Act. 8.9. . some great one, and to shew unto you what a vanity or vain thing is man, and that 1. In his ingress, or coming into the world. 2. In his progress, or continuance in the world. 3. In his egress, or going out of the world.
1. His ingress.1. I will not go about to shame you with the narration of your conception any further, then what the Prophet saith, In sin hath your mother conceived you. The purest Embrio was impure; and how many sins the Mother doth commit, while the childe is in her womb, her self and God onely knoweth: but when the Infant comes forth, out of the narrow prison of his Mothers womb into the large field of this wide world, you may consider, that the first act of his Tragedy is to salute his distressed Mother, for all her pains to get him out of prison, with cries and la∣mentations; and much more he would cry, if he knew, or could know the many miseries, that he is to pass through, and must pass through them, if he liveth. 2. His progress. Ezek. 16.6.2. The Infant being born, and as the Prophet saith polluted in his own blood; and the Lord saying unto it, Live, he hath his progress and journey to pass, into which he could never proceed any further, but make faces and noyses, and lye and then dye, if he were left alone, and not tended by his Mother, or some other Nurse, that must look unto him, and that for no few dayes, or months neither, but some certain years at least. And as soon as ever age hath brought him to any wit, he falls to his shifts, to delude his teachers, and co decline his own good; and when by his Parents care and his Tutors pains, he is become ripe in his profession, a learned Lawyer, a skilfull Physitian, a deep Politician, a great Artist, or a valiant Souldier, what doth he then, but use all his endeavours to supplant others, to advance himself? and he cares not how, nor how many others he maketh poor, to make himself onely rich. Aug. de. verb. Dom. Ser. 17.And yet, this is not all, for you may remember what St. Augustine saith, Quid est diu vivere nisi diu torqueri? nam vita presens est aerumnosa, quam humores tumi∣dant dolores extenuant, ardores exsiccant, aera morbidant, escae inflant, jejunia mace∣rant,Augustinus. joci dissolvunt, tristitiae consumunt, solicitudo coarctat, securitas hebetat, divitiae jactitant, paupertas dejicit, juventus extollit, senectus incurvat, infirmitas frangit maror deprimit, & post haec omnia mors intermit & universis gaudiis finem imponit, ita cum esse desserit nec fuisse putetur. And you may remember also that Job tells you, and Seneca tells his friend Lucilius the very same, that vivere est militare, the life of man is a warfare here upon earth; and Lucan saith, Nulla fides pietasque viris, qui castra sequuntur. Whether this be true or no, let the Warrior himself, and not I, be the Judge; but for what Job saith, you may see it literally verified throughout all the world and all Christendome now to become the shambles of Christian blood. The many mi∣serable Wars of these last centuries of years even in Christendome.The which men, if you consider their Civil breeding, and their much teaching in the School of Christ, that doth so straitly forbid all ambition, and all revenge, and so earnestly enjoyn all men to love one another; you may admire that as Je∣rusalem justified Samaria, so the pretended Christian should justifie the bloody Turks, or men-eating Canibals, that glut themselves upon buried carkasses, and do use as the Poet saith, Pinguescere corpore corpus; and are therefore deemed by the more civil Nations to be but the remote prodigies of lost humanity. For, If you now let your thoughts to consider, and your eyes to wander throughout all the Christian Kingdomes of Spain, France, Germany, Poland, Sweden, Italy, and the rest of the neighbouring Nations that profess to believe in the same Jesus Christ, and do hope to be coheirs of the same Kingdome of heaven, they shall see most of these men striving to be, not homicidae cucurbitarum, the cutters down of Cucumbers, as St. Aug. stiled the Manichaeans; but Homicidae Christia∣norum, the bloody killers of many good Christians, and so make Rivers of blood, and Hills of Christian carkasses: And how he, that shed his blood to redeem those carkasses, will judge of this, I am atfraid to speak, and tremble to think of it. And yet, you must not think that I say this to retard the courage, or to blunt
the Swords of our gallant Souldiers, that have just causes to make War; for when wickedness groweth so wilfull, as to seek our lives, that desire to live in peace, or to rob us of our livelihood, lands or goods that God hath justly given us, then you must know, that out God is the God of War, as well as the God of Peace, and his name is the Lord of Hosts, and he will make his sword drunk with blood, and will strengthen our hands, if we trust in him, to scatter all those people that delight in War, and to destroy those Enemies that maliciously labour for our de∣struction.What Wars the Author blameth. But I blame all shedding of Christian blood in any War, either to plant Reli∣gion which should be done by preaching, and not by fighting, which in seeking to make them Christian men, will make them no men, or dissembling hypocrites, in stead of faithfull believers, or else to satisfie the ambition of any man that de∣sires to inlarge his Dominion, and so unjustly to wrong his neighbours, when as every man, from the King unto the beggar, should be contented with what God hath justly given him; and that policy can never be justified, which is not every way consonant to equity, or especially for any subjects put of a rebellious dis∣content, or ambitious desire to usurp the Power and Authority of their Sove∣raign, to turn the sweet waters of Peace to become rivers of Christian blood: This is that warfare which I chiefly discommend, as the greatest of all vanities. But, 3. If the Sword or Bullet in this warfare, taketh not man away,3. His egress. yets Age and Sickness will soon summon him to his death and dissolution; and till then his whole life is spent inter suspiria & lachrymas, betwixt sighs and tears, troubles of minde, and distempers of body, and a thousand such sad accidents, that will soon bring hoc vitrium corpusculum, this our frail and brittle body, and our distressed life to a miserable death; and when we dye, or, as the Psalmist saith, When the breath of man goeth forth, he shall turn again to his earth, and then all his thoughts,Psal. 146.3. and all his high designs, and vain conceits perish; and then it will appear, which till then proud man will not believe, that the life of man is but a flower that soon wi∣thereth, a smoak that soon vanisheth, and a bubble that suddenly falleth; or as others say; a shadow, a dream, a nothing. And it were well for many men, if, as their great thoughts, either on some deep plots of state, or how to hook unto themselves their neighbours inheritance, or to wreak their malice on their poor brethren, or the like , Castles in the air, as Aristophanes calleth them, do vanish into nothing, when their soules part with their bodies, so likewise their bodies and their soules should then, with their Thoughts, return to nothing. But that cannot be, for that now mans soul must pay for all his evil thoughts, and suffer for all the wicked works, and the great wrongs that he hath done; and though à corpore vermis, & é vermibus foetor, his body turnes to worms, and those wormes yield such Sent, as all the Spices of Arabia cannot keep away, yet the li∣ving spirit of every wicked man, that cannot, and shall not die, must now for his unrepented evil, be hurried into the dreadful Regions of all horror, where it must live and lie for ever and ever, to suffer unsufferable and unconceivable torments, a life that lives not, and a death that dies nor. And so you see, that man is Vanity, and a wicked man in misery, worse than va∣nity. And therefore Reason should perswade you all to labour to become more than men, that is, more than meer men; and to desire to be born again, not of flesh and bloud, but of water and of the Spirit of God, that you may be brought again to that Union and Communion with God, which you had when we were first made by God. 2. The Prophet saith, that totus homo vanitas, all the whole man, that is, both his Body and his Soul is vanity; for what is this body of ours, but a piece of earth,2 Point, That whole man is vanity. 1. The Body. which we tread upon, Saccus stercorum, saith S. Bernard, a sack full of dust, to say no worse, and a Magazine of all Diseases, Coughes, Agues, Feavers, Gouts,
and what not? and when these have satisfied and feasted themselves upon our bo∣dies, what are our bodies but a feast for Worms? And the Soul, though it be a pure Spirit, as it proceeded from God, yet as it is now,2. The Soul. traduced from our Parents, as many Divines think it is, or as it is infused into our flesh, as others do believe, and remaineth in our bodies; all the Facul∣ties thereof are corrupted; the Understanding is darkned with ignorance, the Memory dulled with forgetfulness, and the Will defiled with Misse-affections. And so as Earth is good, and Water is good, yet being mingled together, they do make, a dirty Puddle, and neither of them can be said to be then a pure Element; so the body and soul of man, though both were good in their Originals, and good in their own kind, yet now being both coupled together, as Mezentius coupled the dead bodies to the living, they are both marred, and become so deformed by corrupting one another, and associating themselves in their desires, that now the eyes are the burning-glasses of Concupiscence, and lusting after our neighbours Wives, Lands and Goods; the Tongue is a Razor of detraction, to defame and slander our own Mothers Sons; the Throat is an open Sepulchre; the Hands, En∣gines of violence, to rob, wound and kill; the Heart a Mint of all Villanies; the Feet swift to shed bloud; and the whole man is become a Beast, saith the Psalmist, and a Devil,Psal. 74. John 6.70. saith our Saviour, for one of you is a Devil. And so you see that all the whole man, if he be but meer man, as he is begotten of flesh and bloud, in his best, is but vanity, in his next, inquity, and in his worst consi∣deration, a meer misery; and so miserable, that being but meer man, he hath little cause, with the Philosopher, to thank God that he was made a man, when it had been better for him, as out Saviour saith of Judas, that he had never been made, and never born. Mark 14.21.And therefore if we labour not to become more than men, that is, to be like Bacchus,That we should labour to become more than meer men. bis genitus, as the Poets faign of him, to be born again, of another Mo∣ther, the spouse of Christ, and so to become double men, and to consist of the old man, begotten of mortal Seed, and of the new man, that is, begotten by the im∣mortal Seed of Gods Spirit, we shall never be happy, and never otherwise, than, as I said, vanity and misery; for though the old man be never so Glorious, and never so honourable, the Off-spring of Kings and Princes, and though outwardly it appears never so beautiful, without blemish; yet if the Inner man of the heart, that is be∣gotten by Gods Spirit, be not found out,1 Cor. 3.3. the other is but , flesh, as the A∣postle termeth it; and flesh is an Epithere given to Beasts by the Prophet, and that by way of disparagement too, where he saith, their horses are but flesh, and which is viler,Esa. 31.3. all flesh is grass, that soon withereth and rotteth, and becometh the Dung of the earth:1 Cor. 15. and the Apostle saith, that flesh and bloud shall not inherit the King∣dom of Heaven, because that, as I shewed you before, flesh and bloud being but meer vanity, which is the most opposite to Eternity, they can inherit nothing but eternal misery. 3 Point.3. As totus homo, so omnis homo vanitas, every man is vanity, that is, not only the Fool, but also the wise man; for there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for ever; but as the fool dieth, so dieth the wise man; therefore the wise man concluded,Eccl. 2.15, 16. that this also is vanity. And so likewise the young man as well as the old man, the rich as well as the poor, and the strong as well as the weak, the heroick Achilles, as well as base Thersites; may soon die, and vanish away to nothing. How all the world is round and all things in the world in a perpetual motion.And to be brief, you see, how the gallant Courtier, and the Royal Majesty are no more exempted from vanity than the poorest Clown and meanest Subject; for as Eternity is said to be an intelligible sphaere, whose Center is every where, and his circumference no where, but in it self, as I shewed to you before out of Trisme∣gistus, so the form of the whole world is sphaerical, and the  or little world, which is man, in state and condition is also sphaerical and round, even as round as a hoop, or rather indeed a meer circular-center, without any circumfe∣rence at all; and as the primum mobile, the first wheel of all the Sphaeres of this
whole frame, is ever in motion, and by that motion we see that part which is now the highest, within a dozen hours to become the lowermost; so suddenly is the change of the highest things; even so it is in all things than are under the Sun; there is a perpetual motion, and that motion changeth all things; which made holy Job to say, a Saying worthy to be remembred, that although man is but of few dayes, few indeed, God knoweth, and those few dayes are full of troubles, and that we all know; yet in those few dayes he cometh forth like a Flower, that is, by little and little, and he is cut down, that is, in a moment, he flieth also as a shadow, that is, very swiftly, and never continueth in one stay, but is still divolved from one conditi∣on to another: For our blessed Lord God and loving Father,Job 14.1, 2. out of his wise Provi∣dence, and secret love to man, hath so tempered all the Accidents, and the whole course of mans life, with such proportion and equal counterpoyze of occurrents, that ever and anon Joyes and Sorrows are mixt together, good haps and sad tidings succeed one another; as for example, David, as it were to day, is a poor Shepherd,The vicissitude of King Davids condition. keeping his Fathers Flock, and pulling away his sheep out of the Lions Claws; and as it were to morrow, he is magnified in the Court of Saul, he is matched with the Kings Daughter, and saluted for the Kings Son in Law, and his epithala∣mium is, Saul killed his thousands and David his ten thousands; yet presently he fleeth as a banished man, and he is prosecuted and persecuted, as a Partridge is hunted upon the Mountains; but within a while he is crowned King, and reign∣eth in a short space over all Israel, even from Dan to Beersheba, and as a gallant Conqueror overcometh all his enemies round about him; yet that Glory must not last long, but his own, not only undutiful Subjects, but also his ungracious and un∣natural Son Absalon must drive him once again to flee, not to preserve his King∣dom, but to save his Life; and because the Wheel turns round, this Cloud sud∣denly vanisheth, Absalon is hanged and the King is joyfully received, and honou∣rably restored to his Royal Throne; and after all this, he had many the like chan∣ges, of sundry kinds of Accidents, somtimes gladsom, and somtimes doleful, while he lived. So the Son of David, and the Son of God, Jesus Christ, in the second of Math.And of the condition of Jesus Christ. is presented with Gifts, and worshipped as a God, by the Kings and wise men of the East, and in the same Chapter he is persecuted by King Herod, that he was fain to flee into Egypt to save his life; yet afterwards, he was so magnified by the people, that he was fain to hide himself, to prevent his being crowned King, and upon Mount Tabor he was to transfigured in Glory, that his Face did shine as the Sun; and not long after, upon Mount Calvary, he was so disfigured with sor∣row, that confusion went over his face, so far, that as the Prophet saith, in him there was neither form nor beauty; so upon Mount Olivet, even now, there was an Angel comforting him, and by and by, an Agony affrighting him: and so upon the Cross, even now, he crieth as one destitute of all help, My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me? and by and by after, as a man full of comfort, and con∣fidence in Gods favour, he saith, Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit. And if the time, and your patience would give me leave, I could amplifie to you this Point, in the like revolution of this wheel, I dare not call it of Fortune, as the Heathens did, but of Gods Providence, as the Scripture sheweth it is, in Abra∣ham, in Joseph, in Moses, in C. Marius, in Alcibiades, and in abundance more of those Worthies, whose lives you may read in the holy Scripture, in Plutarch, and in many other Authors; and which were variarum for tunarum viri, men that had tasted of all conditions, and had experience of all kind of Life, being tossed up and down, and up again, and so still turn, and turn again and again, from a good condition to a bad, and from a bad to a good again. But I had rather perswade you all to make that use of this variable vanity which Sesostris King of Egypt did of the sad condition of those Kings, that horses-like he compelled to draw about his Caroach: for he having four captive Kings, set them like horses to draw his Caroach (even as King Edgar is reported to have Kennady King of Scots, Malcolme King of Cumberland, Duffnal and Gruffith Kings of
Wales, Maxentius the Arch-Pyrat, and Huval a great Prince, to row his Barge up∣on the River Dee) and Sesostris marking how one of his caroached Kings,Speed Chron in the life of Ed∣gar, p. 349. still as he drew, looked back upon the Wheels of his Chariot, demanded of him what he meant, so often to look behind him? the poor King, unaccustomed to such a trade, submissively answered, it was to see how that part of the Wheel which is now highest, becomes presently the lowest, and then again immediatly the lowest becom∣eth highest, and so still wheeles his round, and never continueth in one stay. Whereupon, the wise Sesostris, rightly apprehending that serious Embleme, pre∣sently commanded the Kings to be set at liberty, as well weighing with himself, how suddenly God can change the course, and turn the Wheel of all mortal things; and as he can loose the bonds of Kings, and cast them down with Nebuchadnezzar from their stately Palaces to dwell among the Beasts of the field, as he did great Bajazet from his Royal Empire,Turkish Hist. in the life of Ba∣jazet, p. 220. to be carried about with Tamerlane in an iron cage; so he can bring them again out of prison, as he did Joseph, Manasses, and Henry the Third, of this Kingdom; he can raise them again out of the dust, as he did Job, to his former dignity, and Nebuchadnezzar from the fields, to be re-established in his Royal Throne;As now bles∣sed be God he hath most gra∣ciously done to out most Gracious King and he can if he please, add more Glory unto them than ever they had before. This is the Lords doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes; and this he can easily do, and he can suddenly do; and we are not worthy to know how soon he will turn our wheel, and make the poor men rich, and the mean men Lords, as he hath lately made the rich men poor, and the great Lords to be without their Lordships; for there is nothing biding, but as my Text saith, omnis homo vanitas, as well tne com∣manding Lords, that do now reign as Kings in the great Babylon of this world, as the poor ejected Bishops and other Servants of Christ, that are wandring, and per∣haps wanting bread in the wilderness of this world.What the for∣mer Doctrine should teach us. 1 Lesson. And this Revolution of all men, and of all earthly things, should teach us all these two special Lessons. 1. Never to be exalted or puffed up with pride when we are lifted up to honour and greatness, nor to be troubled and discontented when we see them that were Servants,Eccl. 10.7. ride upon horses, as the wise man speaketh, that is, when we see such as were Vassals, made Lords, and many wicked mean men magnified as Princes; which now you may behold in many Kingdoms of the world:These Ser∣mons were firs preached in the time of the usurping Re∣bels. For though as the Poet saith Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum. None is more insolent than the Beggar when he is on horseback; none more ty∣rannical than Servants or women, that were made to obey, and not to rule, when they become to be the Masters of their Masters; of which thing the Prophet com∣plaineth, that Children and such as should be ruled, are the Oppressors of the peo∣ple,Es. 3.12. and women do rule over them. Yet they may remember, that the wheel of such prosperity hath often turned, and the Horse hath many times cast his Rider; and you know what the Prophet David saith, I my self have seen them in great power, ruling and domineering over their brethren, and flourishing like a green Bay-tree: and I went by, and perhaps durst say nothing to them, but Io, within a little while they were gone, and I sought after them,Psal. 36.37. but they could no where be found; and we may chance live to see the like Changes, and tumbling down of many of such wicked men, as the Prophet David hath seen. 2. The former Point should teach us never to be dejected, or cast down with grief and despair,2 Lesson. when we see our selves, or our friends, that were Lords and Com∣panions of Princes, walking alone as servants upon the earth, or when we see the Prelates of the Church jeered at with the good Prophet, or abused with the holy A∣postles.
For as the prosperous wheel of the wicked may soon turn, and their great honours be quickly brought down to the dust; so the adversity of Gods Servants may like∣wise turn, and these poor nothings may soon be raised to great honours; when as the Poet saith, Nocte pluit tota, redeunt Spectacula mane. And as the Prophet saith, heaviness may endure for a night, but Joy cometh in the Morning. So we may be to day sick, and at the point of death, and to morrow sound and well again: and to night, with Joseph, clapt up in prison, and perhaps with Mar∣dochaeus, condemned to die, and yet before the next night be exalted as they were, to great honour; for God who is just and Omnipotent, can turn man to destruction, and immediatly say come again ye children of men;Psalm 90.3. and you know what the Prophet saith, For a little moment have I hid my face from thee, that is, for thy trial, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord, thy Redeemer,Es. 54.7. that is, out of prison, and out of all other troubles whatsoever. And therefore whatsoever thy troubles be, and how low soever thou art deject∣ed, yet as the Poet saith, Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito. Let no Misery prevail against thy Manhood, but to strengthen thy heart, and to rowze up thy Courage, remember, not only what the Scripture saith, but what also the very Heathen could tell thee, saying, Rebus in adversis facile est coutemnere vitam.Martial. in Epigt. Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest. It is the property of a poor spirit to be weary of life, and to wish for death, when we are cast down with miseries and contempt; quia dulce mori miseris; because death is a sweet Guest to all miserable Hosts; but the true Christian Fortitude, yea and true Manhood is couragiously and pleasantly,Vanities do make no man better. with no dejected countenance to pass, and pass through all adversities, and to deem himself never the better when he is clad like Herod in his royal Robes, nor one jot the worse, when he is cloathed like John Baptist in Hair-cloath, with a girdle of Leather about his loyns, because the accessions of these vanities, silks, velvets, or gold laces, do make no man better, nor the want of them any man the worse. But he that goeth like Hercules, in the Lions skin may prove as brave a Souldier, as any of them that like the Com∣manders of Darius, do glister in their Gold and Scarlet; and yet many times to save their heads, betake themselves like Dromedaries, unto their heels, and the poor ejected Bishop, in his bare Coat, may make as heavenly a Sermon, and convert many more souls, than the hundreth pound Independent, or the false Presbyterian tone, in his long Cloak, and velvet Jacket. Which makes me never to be much troubled or moved at the revolution of this Wheel, or the loss of these vanities, but to say with that Heroick Pompey, when after he had been crowned with the greatest honours of Rome, and now fallen into the greatest calamities, he cheerfully said, as Lucan witnesseth, —Non me videre superbum Prospera fatorum, nec fractum adversa videbunt. His prosperity never made him proud, and adversity should never cast down his courage; and my witness is in Heaven, that I am a thousand times more grieved, to see the prophanation of Gods service, and the poor worship of him, now used in very many places; that is, how meanly, sluttishly, negligently and disorderly
our good God is served, than of mine own losses, how great soever they are For we brought nothing with us into the world, neither shall we carry any thing out of this world; and I know not whether I shall live till to morrow, when, as the Tragedian saith: Quem veniens dies vidit superbum, Hunc fugiens dies vidit jacentem. Whom the Sun rising hath seen strong and lusty, the Sun setting, saw him dead upon the ground, because as my Text saith, Every man is vanity: Yea, 4. Point.4. , Every man living, or every man in his best estate is va∣nity: And you know there be but two states of every man, A twofold state of man.1. Living. 2. Dead. And when a man is dead, he soon becometh vanity indeed, he is reduced to nothing, he knoweth nothing and he can do nothing: And therefore let us have but a little patience, and within a very little little while, those mighty men, that now oppress their neighbours, and tyrannize over Gods servants, shall return to nothing, and be able to do just nothing against us; and then as Solomon saith, A living Dog is better and can do more, then these dead Lions. I, but you will say, Interim ego ringor, and we may suffer very much before these Lions become dead; therefore, it were well for us that they were dead be∣fore we suffer, and that, as Caracalla said of his brother Geta, Sint divi modo non sint vivi, they were Saints in heaven, so they might not be such Devils as they are here now on earth. I answer 1. To thee, that art thus troubled, as the Prophet saith unto the Jews, The Vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie; and though it tarry,Hab. 2.2. yet wait thou for it, because it will surely come, and not tarry; that is, any long time, or longer than the appointed time, so tarry thou the Lords leasure, and thy deliverance will come in his appointed time; and if thou thinkest, it tar∣rieth long, then pray thou to God, that it may come the sooner; and though the young teachers of the new way to heaven, have obliterate it, yet do not thou for∣get that good old Prayer of our Liturgy, but say, O God make speed to save us, O Lord make haste to help us; and God will hear thy prayers, and will help thee, be∣cause as the Poet saith, How powerfull prayer is.Offendunt nunquam thura precesque Jovem Sed dominum mundi, flectere vota valent. Prayers and Supplications are the most powerfull prevailers to obtain any thing at the hands of God. 2. For those that wrong thee, and trouble thee, I pray thee remember but what my Text saith, Every man living, or in his best estate while he liveth is alto∣gether vanity. And therefore, the greatest men can never be able to do what they would do, either for themselves, or against others: And this will the more plainly appear, if we take but a little view of all the estates that are accounted the best estates of men; for though there be many states and kindes of life, that are deemed very good, yet there be four Estates of men, that I finde, by the worldly wise, to be judged best; and The The four states of men that are accounted the best.1. Is of them that excel all others, , in health and strength of body. 2. Is of them that abound in wealth, in riches in prosperity. 3. Is of them that are , most eminent in fame, glory and ho∣nour. 4. Is of them that have plenitudinem , the fulness of Power and Authority to rule and govern the rest of the people.
These are accounted the best estates of men; and yet man in all, and in every one of these four estates, is a poor vain thing, and altogether vanity; For, 1. Health and strength of body are but vanity;1. Satate. and though the Tyrants and Oppressours say, come, Let our strength be the law of Justice;Sap. 2.11. for that which is feeble is found to be nothing worth, therefore let us crush the righteous, and ba∣nish all those honest men that are not for our turn,Vers. 12. & 16. but do upbraid us with our of∣fending the Law, and do abstain from our wayes as from filthiness; yet we see that a little sickness can bring down the greatest strength, and waste the health of the strongest and the stoutest men. And besides, we know that, as the Lion which is the strongest upon earth, and the Whale, which is strongest in the Sea, and the Serpent or the Eagle which are the strongest in the Air, are of more strength than is in any man, were he as strong as Hercules; or were they as strong as all these, yet their great strength cannot pre∣serve them from death, nor keep them without sickness. And if you will compare them unto other creatures, you shall finde that the Peacocks train is more beauti∣full, than all the trimmings of the proudest Galland; and as the Dromedary is swifter than any Foot-post, so the Nightingal hath a sweeter voice than the best Musitian. And in a word, the basest creatures have been found able enough to be the death of the strongest men, for a little Steeletto killed Eglon King of Moab,Judg. 3.21. 1 Sam. Goliah the great Giant, was strucken down with a peble stone. Anacreon was choaked with the stone of a Raison, Fabius strangled with a hair, Herod the Proud eaten with Lice, and Antiochus the Cruel, destroyed with Worms, and Hatto the Traytor, pursued to death by an Army of Rats: These were but poor things and weak instruments to destroy strong men, and to cispatch great Monarchs, and yet we see how they have done it. And therefore, thou, that thinkest thy self a brave, strong and stout Souldier, remember what good counsel the Prophet gives thee, saying,Jer. 9.23. Let not the strong man glory in his strength; so let not the healthfull man promise any long life un∣to himself, whereas our life and fortune, and all that we have, are as the Poet saith, — Tenui pendentia filo, hanging upon a weak, feeble Spiders thread, Quod attropos occat, which the least blast of Gods displeasure can break all to pieces. 2. Wealth and riches are more vain,2. State. and of less value than our health and strength, when as all the wealth in the world yeelds but small comfort to him that is full of sickness, and wants his health; therefore the Prophet David speaking of those wealthy worldlings, that do relye, and are so proud of their riches, saith, Man walketh in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth up riches and cannot tell who shall gather them. And we know, saith Holcot,Psal. 39.7. that in a shadow there is a threefold consideration: 1. Indigentia luminis, 2. Assistentia frigoris, 3. Apparentia corporis, And that is, a threefold want, 1. A want of Light, 2. A want of Heat, 3. A want of Substance. Which are easily seen and perceived in every shadow. And so all the greedy worldlings, and the covetous hunters after wealth are invironed with these three main indigences and wants; For, 1. They have no light in their understanding, but their heads and brains are empty, when their barns and their shops and coffers are full; and so at last, they themselves do most wofully confess it, saying, We have erred from the way of truth, and the light of understanding hath not shined into us;Sap. 5.6. for if men had but the least understanding in the truth of things, they might soon perceive, that riches are neither simply ours, nor very precious, or of much value in themselves; but they do, as Boetius saith, make a fairer shew, and bring more benefit unto us,Boetius de con∣sol. Philos. l. 2. c. 5. when they are spent, than when they are kept, because liberality makes men famous, and to be loved, and covetousness makes them odious, infamous and ridicu∣lous;
and Solomon saith, this is a sore evil which he saw under the Sun, namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt;Eccl. 5.13. when it had been better for them to have been without them than to have them. For as the rich Citizen of Rome that never offended the Commonwealth, nor medled with either of the two opposite factions of Sylla and Marius, yet being desirous to know who were pro∣scribed for the Enemies of the State, and running to see their names, he finds him∣self among the first, and then he cries out, wo is me, that my wealth and my fair house at Nola do cause me to lose my head: so the riches of many a man have be∣got him enemies, and those enemies, for none other cause or crime, but to get his Lands or his wealth, have brought him to his end; as perhaps the riches of many a Protestant will conclude them to be Roman Catholicks; as we read the like in the case of the Guelphes and the Gibilines, when the Gibilines proving themselves to be no Guelphes,And I wish the Lands and fair houses of ma∣ny innocent Papists may not be proved to be the lands of Irish Rebels. yet was their riches and their treasures seized upon, as the wealth of the Guelphes. And yet as the hoording up of riches, and the growing great and wealthy in the world makes us miserable and hated, so the dispersing of them abroad, and the profuse wasting of our wealth, makes us poor, and to be despised, yea and to be neglected of our friends, and scorned of our enemies. And therefore surely riches are but very poor things, when we can neither pos∣sess them without envy, nor bestow them without penury, neither have them with∣out danger, nor want them without contempt. 2. The wealth and riches of the worldlings can yield them but cold comfort, when God turneth away his face from them, and they are left to the counsels of their own hearts; for though the glittering of the Jewels may draw thine eyes after them, the pleasant prospect of the Fields may delight thine heart, thy gay apparel may make thee shew very fair and beautiful to the beholders, and the multitude of thy servants may seem to prove thee very happy among thy neigh∣bours; yet we all do or may know, that there is none of these things but at some time or other hath proved to be the destruction of their possessors: For, as when the poor Passenger may rejoyce and sing before the most ravenous Robber, and in the sight of the most barbarous Plunderers, so thy wealth and thy Jewels, thy pock∣ets full of Gold, and thy back full of bravery, may make thy heart sad, and thy head full of perturbations, and in every moment to be afraid to be assailed and slain in all the paths that thou shalt walk. And whereas the man that hath none but himself to serve himself, need not fear to be betrayed by his Servants: the rich man that needeth more, and the no∣ble man that keepeth many Servants, may well fear there may be a Judas among twelve, and a Traytor in his own house; and as Humphrey Banister betrayed his Lord and Master, Henry Duke of Buckingham, that had been too good a Master to him;Speed, l 9 c. 19. p. 927. so may one of thy chiefest Servants sell thee and betray thee too, into the hands of thy greatest Enemies, even as we read in Stories of many Kings that have been so likewise dealt withal. And therefore Wealth and Riches can afford us no true comfort, nor yield us any certain assistance, even in this life; when by getting them, we do oftentimes lose our selves, or at least hazard our safety by saving them. 3. Our Saviour Christ speaking of the deceitfulness of Riches, and S. Paul cal∣ling them uncertain riches,Mat. 13.22. do sufficiently shew unto us, that the wealth and riches of this world do but promise fulness, when they intend to bring us nothing but emptiness;1 Tim 6 17. for you see, all our Money is, as it is called, currant, and all our riches transient, like a torrent stream that floweth apace, or as the summer snow, that presently melteth, somtimes before it falleth; and all the wealth in the world is but contingent, with one man to day, and with another man to morrow; as your selves may see, how within these few years, many men scarce worth a Groat, be∣came worth thousands; and as many others that were worth thousands, became not worth a Groat. Aug. Confes. l. 6.And therefore S. Aug. speaking of the things of this world, saith, Si quid arri∣sisset
prosperum taedebat apprehendere, quia priusquam pene teneretur, avolabat; if any worldly prosperity smiled upon me, and seemed to offer some happiness unto me, yet I was loath to accept it and to lay hold upon it, because commonly all the plea∣sure of this world is fled from us before we can scarce fasten on it; and as the wise man saith, extrema gaudii luctus occupat: Sorrow and sadness do follow both out Profits and our Pleasures hard at the very heels: For as the Player appeareth upon the Stage, and then presently after few words, exit, he is gone; so the wealth & pros∣perity of this world do but salute us, and then immediatly depart from us, even while we are most busie about them, and when they seem to smile most of all upon us. And I could make this plain unto you by more examples than I have time to ex∣press: For we read of Marcus Attilius Regulus, that was a Roman Consul,Boetius de con∣sol. l. 2. c. 5. and had laid Fetters upon many Africans, yet being unhappily taken by the Carthagi∣nians, he found himself presently environed, and then miserably tied in the Con∣querors Chains; and it is written of Cheops King of Egypt, that erected the Py∣raemides, which were all built of Theban Marble, and were of that huge height, and monstrous Magnitude, that one of them was 20 years in building, though it is reported there were circiter decem hominum miriades, about 10 Myriades of men, as Herodotus saith, or 100000 men,Herodoc. l. 2▪ p. 2. Sandys, l. 2. as others write that did continually work upon it (the same containing, as Sands affirmeth, eight Acres of ground at the bottom, and ascending by 255 steps to the top, and every step being of three foot in height, and of a proportionable breadth) and yet this great King that was of this great power, before his death, became so poor, that he was compelled to prostitute his own Daughter to relieve his wants. So Belisarius, that in the dayes of Justinian 1. was one of the bravest Souldi∣ers and of the greatest Commanders of the world, to whom the Lady and Em∣press of the world, Rome it self owed her self thrice at the least; and who took two mighty Kings, Gilimer King of Africa, and Vitiges King of the Gothes, to be his Prisoners, yet within a little while this great man, as some writers do report, came to that poor pass, as he was fain to cry, Date oblum Belisario, quem virtus exalta∣vit, malitia depressit, & fortuna caecavit; O give one half-peny to Belisarius, whom vertue hath honoured, envy hated, and fortune spoyled and made him now a poor blind Beggar., And Pedro Mexia setteth down the miserable ends and other strange traverses endured by divers Kings, Emperours, Dukes, and other great Princes,Treasury of times, l. 4. c. 37 Pope John whom Mart. 5. succeeded, An. 1410. Pope Clement, that was im∣prisoned by Charles 5. 1527. Archbishop of Flor. and four Cardinals but∣chered, 1448. The Bishop of Liege Brother to the great Duke of Bur∣goyne, and 10 Abbats massa∣cred in his pre∣sence. whereof he accounteth no less than 13. besides 2 Popes, 2 Bishops, 4 Cardinals and 10 Ab∣bots, that within one hundred and fifty years, were thrown down from the Pina∣cle of Prosperity, to the lowest Gulf of Adversity; as George King of Bohemia, Charles Duke of Burgoyne; Uladislaus King of Poland, Constantinus Paleolagus Empe∣ror of the East, Charles 8. King of France, James 4. King of Scots, John de Albret King of Navarre, Lewes Sforza Duke of that rich and goodly Countrey of Millain, Francis 1. King of France, that was the Patron of all Learning; and those three great Kings, Muley Mahomet King of Fez and Morocco, Abdelmelec his Unkle, and Sebastian King of Portugal that came to a miserable end, and died all three in one day, being Monday the 4th. of August, 1578. and which is worthy to be re∣membred above all, John Justinian that trayterous Villain, who covenanted with Mahomet to betray Constantinople, so he would make him King, which the great Turk promised, and accordingly performed; but after three daies struck off his head, as his Treason well deserved; and so I wish may be the reward of all dis∣loyal Traytors. And therefore seeing not only wicked Potentates, but also most famous Kings and Princes and most excellent Prelates have been reduced to such ends, what wonder is it that many great Scholars, and many reverend Bishops (whom their worth and learning raised to some height of dignity) should be thrown down, as they were of late by envy and hatred, into the depth of misery. The time would be too short for me to tell you of Craesus the rich King of Lydia, Darius the great
Monarch of Persia, Manius Acilius the proud Consul of Rome, holy Job, the rich∣est in the Land of Hus, and warlike Caius Marius, when he had hid himself in the Fens or Bogs of Mynturnes, and of many thousands more, that were exceeding rich, and most honourable, and in a moment of time became extream poor and miserable. But you may see it every day, that as the Poet saith, Rich Cresus may suddenly become as poor as Irus.Irus & est subito qui modo Croesus erat. And there is none of us but he may consider how many great and honourable per∣sons have been suddenly disgraced, and how many well left Heirs and wealthy men have in an instant consumed all their wealth, and wasted their Patrimony like a Snow-bal, and then came to be pitied by their Friends, and scorned by some others, whom formerly they despised, and thought them not worthy to eat with the dogs of their Flocks; such is the nature of wealth, and so great is the vanity of all worldly riches, that the wise man saith, They betake them unto their wings, and flee away like an Eagle (i.e.) very swiftly.Prov. 23.5. And yet for all this, it is a wonder to see the folly of most men shewed in the pursuit of this idle vanity;Plutarch in vi∣ta Phyrri, p. 404. for it is reported how Cyneas, a most excellent Orator, endeavouring to disswade King Pyrrhus a brave Souldier from his expedition against the Romans, asked him, what he would do when he had subdued them? and he answered, that he would bring Cicily into his subjection; and what will your grace do then, said the Orator? the King replied, then we have a fair passage to go to bring in Carthage, and to conquer Africa: And when you have conquered them, what will you do, said Cynaeas; We will then, said the King, bring all Macedon under the yoke of our Obedience. And when both Rome and Cicily and Carthage and all Macedon have felt the stroke of your Majesties Sword, what will you do then I pray you? said the Orator; then the King perceiving what he meant, smilingly answered, we will then take our ease, and begin to make Feasts, and continue so every day, and be as merry together as possibly we can be. And what letteth us now, my good Lord, said Cyneas, but that we may be now as merry and more quiet, sith we enjoy enough to effect all that presently, without any further travel, or more trouble, which we are about to go to seek with such shedding of humane blood of others, with so much manifest danger unto our selves. Yet notwithstanding all this, the Learned Orator could not disswade that am∣bitious Prince from this his high attempt, he could no waies prevail to make him desist from that uncertain Enterprize; but he would rather hazard all that happy estate which he did now enjoy, than leave off the deceitful hope of those things which he did so much desire. And indeed such is the condition of all the sons of men, most dangerously sick of the same desperate disease; for though as the Poet saith, and he saith the truth, that man is but, Somnus, Bulla, Vitrum, Glacies, Flos, Fabula, Foenum, Umbra, Cinis, Punctum, Vox, Sonns, Aura, Nihil. That is in few words, a dream, a shadow, a thought, a nothing; yet all or most of this little time that we do enjoy, we expend in following after the vain wealth, and deceitful riches of this world, that we shall find to be but empty clouds, without water, or like the Apples of Sodom, that being greedily grasped, will soon turn to smoak, and then speedily vanish into nothing; and we shall find our selves at last just like the Mill-wheel, that turneth still, and turneth round from day to day, and yet at the years end is in the same place where it was at the beginning. So we tumble and tosse and turn to gather wealth, and to grow great in this world, and yet in the end we shall find our selves just in the same condition as we were at the beginning; for naked we came into the world, and naked we shall re∣turn again.
What need we then be so unjust, and shame our selves, either unduly to seek what we ought not to have, or unhonestly to deny what we ought to pay? Truly I am ashamed, that should be verified among Christians, which was complained of by the heathens, Terras Astraea reliquit; that Justice could not be found in any Court on earth; or what Solomon said of the Jews should be found amongst us, I saw the place of Judgment (the highest Court he meant) and wickedness was there, and the place of Righteousness, and iniquity was there.Eccl. 3.16. But though neither shame of men, nor fear of God can make us leave this ini∣quity, but that we will continue still like Jews and Pagans, yet the truth is, that man in this rich estate, that is yet so palpably vain, when it is so unjustly procured, can be nothing else but meer vanity. 3. Honour, Glory, and a high esteem, to be famous among men, are accounted great in this world, and so they are indeed; but I mean great vanities, and the greatest of all vanities: For health is a happiness, especially while it lasteth, and Riches have some substance in them, and we may do good with them, as others do much evil with them; but honour arid fame are nothing else, but a vain blast of a poor mans breath, or a little bending of a Beggars knee, an idle Ceremony, fruit∣less I am sure (therefore a great vanity) and it may be out some fair shew of some outward reverence, when perhaps there is indeed much inward hate; because the Tongue oftentimes praiseth those most highly, whom the heart detesteth most deadly. Or were it not so, yet all honour is accounted, but 1. Of a short continuance, and therefore a great Vanity: For, 2. Of a small Extent, and therefore a great Vanity: For, 1. Behold how great was the honour of Haman, and how suddenly was he hanged: Look upon Nebuchadnezzar, how he is to day saluted with Haile, Glory of the world; and to morrow scorned like a Beast: and consider how glorious were Pharaoh, Senacherib, Alexander, Cyrus, and others; and yet, behold how spee∣dily they were vanished into nothing; and how many great men and most honou∣rable Personages have you lately seen so highly honoured and magnified both in Court and Countrey, as the only Emblemes of all honour, and how suddenly have they been either killed or headed, and their Glory buried in the dust, if not turned into worse? For the Scourge of Envy from below, and the Twigs of Am∣bition from above, do hunt and whip all honour unto death: And we know that many men while they lived, have been so unhappy, as to see their own honour bu∣ried: Or, if some have left a glorious Name behind them, as Josias did, when they left the world; yet we find that many famous men while they lived, have been quite forgotten, for want of Writers, when they were dead: For how should we have known the valour of Hector and Achilles, and the wisdom of Nestor and Ulisses, if Homer had not recorded the same unto posterity? Or how should we have understood the Piety of Constantine, and the Clemency of Theodosius, if Eu∣sebius, and other Ecclesiastical Writers had not declared the same unto us? And of those that have been as happy in the Trumpeters of their Fame, as themselves have been Famous in the Actions of their Lives: we see, that as Death took away the Authors, so time hath wasted away their Writings; and (as the Poet saith) What wonder we that Writings fail, When stately Tombes do wear; The very Stones consume to noughts, With Titles they did bear. Or be it granted that a man might truly say, I shall live when I am dead; and as Ovid saith,
Per{que} omnia se∣cula Fama Si quid hobent veri vatum prae sagia, vivam, Ovid. Meta∣morph. l. 12. in fine.—Nomen{que} erit indelebile nostrum. My name shall remain indelible among the Posterities; yet if you do attentively weigh the most infinite spaces of Eternity, you shall find that the prolonging of our Names on earth can yield us no great Felicity; for if we compare the stay of one moment with ten thousand years, they have some proportion, though it be but very small; but this number of years how oft soever it be multiplied, yet it is no way comparable to Eternity, because limited things may in some sort be compared among themselves, but that which is infinite admitteth no comparison at all, saith Boetius; And therefore the longest Fame, be it as long as you can ima∣gine,Boetius de con∣sol. Phil. l. 2. c. 8yet it is but of a very short continuance. And, 2. It is of a very small Extent; For you may learn by Astronomical Demonstrati∣ons, that the compass of the whole earth in comparison of the Heaven, is no bigger than a Pins Point; and of this earth, not above the fourth part is known to be inha∣bited, saith Ptolem. and that which is inhabited, is distinguished by many Nations of different Languages, Fashions, and Conversations, whereby it happeneth, that the same Fact which in some Countrey is laudable, in another place is punisha∣ble: therefore our Fame and Glory must be penned up in a very narrow bound, commonly within the compass of one Nation: For if it should go further, yet the difficulty of travel over many Seas, the diversity of Speeches, so hard to be un∣derstood, and the scarcity of Traffick to be generally transported, will never per∣mit our Fame to spread it self very far: For if the Glory of the Roman People, in the time of Cicero, when it was most flourishing, and they were Terrarum Domi∣ni, Masters of most places that they knew, yet did not passe beyond Mount Cau∣casus, that lieth betwixt Scythia and the Indians, as the Orator confesseth, then certainly the Glory and Fame of any particular man can never penetrate, where the Glory and Trophies of such a Glorious Nation could not pass. And therefore all the Honour of this world, and the greatest Fame of the No∣blest men, whether it be for Birth, Wealth, Valour, Learning, or what you will, yet can it neither last long, nor extend it self very far; and therefore must it needs be a very great Vanity. And so you see that every man in his most Honourable estate is Vanity. Nay more than that, 4. The most excellent state is thought to be that, which is most powerful in Au∣thority to rule and command all others; but the Vanities that are incident and at∣tendant on this state, would require a Volume to display them: I will only say what Horace hath most truly, and you may daily see, how that, Saepius ventis agitatur ingens Pinus, Et decidunt Turres, feriunt{que} summos Fulmina Montes. And so you see that every man in his best estate, let his state be what you will, yet he is but Vanity: Nay that is not all; For, 5. Every man living is , omnimoda Vanitas, altogether vani∣ty; and this is one degree of Calamity further than all the rest: For to consider that every man is vanity, is bad enough; but to be vanity in our best estate, is worse, and in that estate to be altogether vanity, is worst of all: because this sheweth unto us that man is but meer Vanity, and nothing else but vanity, or vain in all that he is, and vain in all that he doth; as 1. Vain within, and vain without; vain in his Body, and vain in his Soul. 2. Vain in his thoughts, vain in his words, and vain in all his works; And, 3. Not only totaliter vanitas, wholly vanity, but also universa vanitas, all va∣nity; so that there is no vanity in the world that can be named or found out, but you may find the same in man; as, Pride is vanity, and you may find enough of that in man; lies are vanities, and most men are so addicted and delighted either
to invent lies, to hear lies, or to relate lies, that you shall almost finde nothing in most men but lies; and so of all other vanities whatsoever they be, they are to be found in man; Antoninus for methods sake, ranketh them into three special Series; 1. Iustalitatis,Antoninus part. 1. tit. 2. c. 8. Sect. 3. of instability, which the Preacher handleth from the first Chapter, unto the fourth Chapter. 2. Iniquitatis, of iniquity, whereof the Preacher treareth from the fourth Chapter unto the twelfth Chapter. 3. Paenalitatis, of penalty, which the said Preacher setteth down in the last verse of the twelfth Chapter, For God shall bring every work into judge∣ment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. Others terme the first degree of Vanities, to be the vanity of our Creation. The second degree they call the vanity of our Condition. The third is the vanity of our Dissolution. 1. Touching the vanity of our Creation, God put no trust in his servants, saith holy Job; that is, he trusted them not with such a stability,Job 4.18. or he made them not so absolute that they should be independent, and free from all possibility of fal∣ling; and therefore seeing that nihil est omne quod ex nihilo est, all in themselves are nothing, which are made of nothing, as Origen saith, this possibility to vary, and to be reduced to their first privation and non-entity, is nothing else but an innate vanity, or a momentary nothing, if they be not still upheld and sustained by their Creator, who as the Apostle saith, Beareth up all things with his mighty word,Heb. 1. or with the word of his power, that is, Jesus Christ; Yet, 2. The vanity of our Creation was but comparative, as the creature stood in collation with Gods infinite purity; but when Adam sinned, he made himself the destroyer of his own stability, the defacer of his own excellency, and to be come nothing but meer vanity; so that every creature now, the worst of all the creatures, and all creatures might insult over his Apostasie, and say unto him, Art thou become like one of us, art thou become as vain as we? And because all of us were then in the loyns of Adam, as Levi was in Abra∣ham when he met with Melchisedech, therefore his calamity was not personal, but specifical; and his iniquity brought a vanity upon us all, which is the vanity of our condition; so that now every man is nothing else but vanity, the Saint as well as the sinner, the rich as well as the poor, and the Noble man as well as the beg∣gar; for as soon as the noblest of men is inobled with the name of a man, so soon doth he inherit the title of a vain man, or a man of vanity, that is replenished with all vanity, because filled with all unrighteousness. But 3. The vanity of our Dissolution is the last and the worst of all vanities. And this is, 1. When they see that they themselves are Beasts (these are the very words of the Scriptures) For that which befalleth the sons of men, befalleth beasts,Eccles. 3.18, 19, 20. even one thing befalleth them; as the one dyeth, so dyeth the other, yea they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preheminence above a beast, for all is vanity, all go unto one place, all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again. 2. When they finde that they themselves are worse than beasts, when the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth, vanisheth, and is reduced to nothing; but the spirit of the man that should go upward, and be united to Eternity, shall descend to be chained in everlasting misery; Ʋbi nec tortores de∣ficientur, nec miseri torti morientur, sed per mille millia annorum cruciandi nec ta∣men in secula liberandi. Where they shall have torments without ease, and be tormented without end; and this is a vanity indeed, Vanitas vanitatum, the
greatest of all vanities, because the bond of our union with God is here dissolved, and we are divorced from all the happy Eternity. And thus I hope you see that man, be he never so excellent in condition, so eminent in place, or so powerfull in authority, yet here is no exception, no ex∣emption, no limitation, but he is altogether vanity. And, though the time will not give me leave to amplifie all the particulars that might be shewed you out of this Text; yet I desire your patience to give me leave to apply all briefly unto our selves, and to learn from hence this fivefold Lesson, which may serve as a fivefold shield to preserve us from all iniquity here, and from all misery hereafter. 1. To eradicate and root up that stinking weed of pride and haughtiness that Lucifer laboureth to spread so far, and to stick so fst in the heart of every man; for why shouldst thou be proud, thou vain thing, that art but dust and ashes, and altoge∣ther vanity? what hast thou to be proud of? the Lion may boast of his strength, the Bezar of his precious stone, the Panther of his colours, and all other creatures of some singular excellency that is in them; but what hast thou, that standest there with a stiffe neck and proud looks, but what thou hast received, and art just like the Jay decked about with borrowed ornaments, and hast nothing of thine own to animate thy pride but what thou robbest from the bruit beasts? and yet the fair Lady is proud of her white hands and pleated hair, & lumina quae possunt sollici∣tare Deos; but alas two or three fits of an Ague will spoyl all, or else Age will make fair Helen to become as wrinkled as Hecuba. Nay more than this, I have seen too much pride and arrogancy in some, that of all others should be most humble, and teach others to be meek and lowly, which is a great shame, that thou, which teachest another, teachest not thy self, and considerest not what a vain thing thou art, and what little reason thou hast to look so big, and to lift up thy head so high. Yea, the Saint-like Separatist, like the boasting Pharisee, will be proud of his holiness;Aug to. 2. Epist. 58. but as St. Aug. saith, Quod justitia aedificaverat Pharisaeus, superbia destruebat, atque ideo non placuit Deo, quia placebat sibi; this pride spoyleth and poy∣soneth all our goodness, because that as humility maketh men like unto Angels, so pride made the Angels Devils, and men to be like Devils. 2. The consideration of our vanity should ever put us in minde of what the Prophet saith, Put not your trust in Princes, nor in any childe of man; relye not on them, for there is no help in them, and the best of them, and greatest, is not able to do the good he would do, because he is altogether vanity, and when his breath goeth forth,Psal. 146.3, 4. he shall turn again to his earth, and then all his thoughts perish; and as Strigelius saith, Omnia sunt hominum tenni pendentia silo. And many times the greatest friends, that we relye upon will shew themselves like Theagines, that was sirnamed , smoak, Quia magnifice pollicebatur, cum esset pauper, because he promised great and mighty things when he was but a poor scoundrel. And therefore it is but a great vanity to relye upon vain man that is altogether vanity, and will let thee fall, when thou hast most need of help. 3. This may encourage us not to fear what man can do against us; let men threaten and fret and storm as much as they will, and do as much as they can, yet fearing God, we need not fear any of them, because the greatest and most power∣full man is but vanity, and altogether vanity; and if God be with us, who can be against us? Quia non plus valet ad dejiciendum terrena poena, quam ad erigendum divina tutela. 4. This very point should teach us wholly to relye on God, that never faileth them that put their trust in him; but is, as the Prophet saith, Deus in opportunitati∣bus, a present help in trouble, and helpeth us alwayes in the most needfull time of trouble, holding us up by his hand, as he did St. Peter, when we are ready to sinke.
5. And lastly, this onely lesson of mans vanity, should ever put us in minde, not to waste and trifle away our short time in the pursuit of vain pleasures and loathsome vanities, when as the hunting after honours, and the scraping of wealth and riches together, is none other, than like silly childrens running up and down to catch Butterflyes, or as the Prophet saith, Like the Spiders web, that will make no garments for them, or rather like the Cockatrice Egge, that brings forth a fiery Serpent to be the destruction of him that hatcheth it, and so are the vanities of this world. And here I should shew the folly and vanity of those vain men, that to pur∣chase unto themselves the reward of their impety, and the wages of their unrigh∣teousness, are so greedy to rob the Church of Christ, and to snatch away the lands and houses of God into their possessions; but that I intend, if God lend me life and health, to set forth a full and ample Declaration, to be exhibited to the high Court of Justice before Jesus Christ, the righteous Judge, against Sacriledge, and all sacrilegious personsWhich I have now published in the beginning of this Book. to shew what little reason vain man, and proud vanity hath to soyl his God, to rob the Church, and to destroy himself. And therefore this much shall serve at this time to shew unto you, that it is most certain, That every man in his best estate is altogether vanity. And God grant that all my hearers may make the right use of what I have said, Amen. O Lord my God; DIdst not thou save me, and deliver me from my most malicious enemies, that sought my life, and hast thou not snatched me out of the jaws of death? And did not I then promise and vow,In the Epistle before the se∣ven Golden Candlesticks. to do my best endeavour to serve thee, and to honour thee without the fear or flattering of any man? And hast thou not since many times delivered me from the mouth and teeth of that , the Beast that ascended out of the bottomless pit, the great Antichrist that was so wrathfully displeased against me? Therefore by the grace and assistance of thy blessed Spirit I am resolved, and I will continually pray to thee, for thy help, to perform the promise and vow that I made unto thee; and for that cause, I will take no Fine for any of the Bishops Land but what shall be given to repair the Church, while I live; neither will I Lease any of it for any longer terme than 21 Years, unless it be for the better improvement thereof unto my Successour, nor any otherwise than my conscience shall tell me the same to be most just and indiffe∣rent both for my self, my Successour and the Tenant; and I will do my best and utter∣most endeavour to do and to perform all that I say and set down in this Treatise to be the duties of a faithfull and godly Bishop: And I wish with all my heart that all my Reverend and Learned Brethren, the Bishops, would do so likewise; yet I blame them no wayes, if they see good reasons and just cause to do otherwise, Quia plus vident oculi quam oculus; and I were too sawcy and peremptory if I thought my self wiser or juster than my Brethren. Jehovae Liberatori. FINIS.
The Authour of the foregoing Treatises hath Published another Book, Entituled the Best Religion, wherein is largely handled the Texts of Scripture following, which do contain the Fundamental Points of Christian Religion. Sold by Ph. Stephens at the Gilded Lion in S. Pauls Church-Yard. 1 THe Mysteries of the Rainbow, Preached before the King, upon Gen. 9.13. I do set my Bow in the Cloud, &c. 2 Gods Love to the World, Preached before the King, upon John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, &c. 3 The worthiest Saying, Preached before the King, upon 1 Tim. 1.15. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation, that Jesus Christ, &c. 4 The Best Helper, Preached before the King, upon Rom. 8.31. If God be for us who can be against us? 5 The Way to happiness, Preached at Westminster, upon Matth. 11.28, 29, 30. Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, &c. 6 The fruitful Knocking, Preached at Westminster, upon Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voyce, &c. 7 The Celestial Fire, Preached before all the Judges, upon Luke 12.49. I came to send fire upon the earth. 8 The Necessity of Repentance, Preached at White-Hall, upon Luke 13.5. I tell you nay; but except ye repent, &c. 9 S. Peters Charge, Preached at Westminster, upon John 21.21, 22. Peter seeing him, saith to Jesus, Lord, what shall this man do? &c. 10 The Royal Feast, Preached at Westminster, upon Matth. 22.11, 12, 13. And when the King came in to see his guests, &c. 11 The Paschal Sacrifice, Preached at Westminster, upon 1 Cor. 5.7. For Christ our Passeover is sacrificed for us. 12 The three chiefest Graces, Preached before the King, upon 1 Cor. 13.13. Now remain faith, hope, and charity, these three. &c. 13 the Foolish Builders, Preached at White-Hall, upon Mat. 7.26, 27. And eve∣ry one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doth them not, &c. 14 The weeping woman, Preached before the King, upon John 20.11, But Ma∣ry stood without at the Sepulchre weeping. 15 The Dove-like Wings, Preached before the King, upon Psal. 55.6. O that I had wings like a Dove, then would I flie away, and be at rest. 16 The Resolution of Pilate, first Preached at S. Pauls Cross, afterwards enlarged, upon John 19.22. What I have written, I have written. 17 The Delights of the Saints, first preached at S. Pauls Cross, afterwards enlarged upon Rom. 1.7. To all that be at Rome, beloved of God, &c. 18 The Misery of Man, Preached at S. Pauls Cross, upon Rom. 6.23. The reward of sin is death. 19 The Knowledge of God, Preached before K. James, upon Exod. 34.6, 7. The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful and gracious, &c. 20 The Incarnation of the Word, Preached at S. Maries in Cambridge, upon John 1.14. And the Word was made flesh. 21 The Passion of the Messias, Preached within the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, upon Luke 24.46. Thus it behoved Christ to suffer. 22 The Resurrection of Christ, Preached within the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, upon Mat. 28.5, 6. He is not here, for he is risen, &c. 23 The Ascention of our Saviour, and Donation of the Holy Ghost, Preached at S. Maries in Cambridge, upon Eph. 4.5. Wherefore he saith, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, &c. 24 The Duty of Christians, Preached before K. James, upon 1 Thes. 5.28. Bre∣thren pray for us.
