D1414A M2807A 99825351 29731
DIEGO REDIVIVUS: OR THE Last WILL AND TESTAMENT Of the Pretended Humphrey Wickham, Esq Alias WILLIAM MORREL, alias BOWYER, &c. WITH A Full RELATION of his Notorious CHEATS and IMPOSTURES: Who dyed at Mr Cullins House, the Third of this Instant January, in the Parish of St. Clement Danes, &c. LICENSED and Entred in the REGISTER-BOOK of the Company of Stationers. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Mitre near Temple-Bar. 1692.
ADVERTISEMENT. THis is to give notice, That the Fine COF∣FIN, mentioned in the following Rela∣tion, is to be sold in Ship-yard, without Temple∣bar.
The Last Will and Testament of the pretended Humphrey Wickham Esq alias William Mor∣rel, alias Bowyer, &c. with Annotations there∣upon. THe Publick undoubtedly cannot be better en∣tertained, than by the following Relation, of one of the most notorious Cheats as has been known in an Age, which has already made a very a∣mazing Noise in the Town; and the Particulars where∣of, may be no disacceptable Entertainment. A Person not over-well Clad, was seen standing ga∣zing about him in the Streets, over-against Arundel-Buildings in the Strand; but the gravity of his Age (be∣ing a Person between 50 and 60) invited the Curiosity of Mr. Cullin the Baker, to ask this unknown Person what he wanted? To which he replied, He wanted a Lodging. Upon this, Mr. Cullin very courteously made answer, He should be welcome to his House; which he very easily and readily accepted; and accor∣dingly was received very kindly. Now having no ex∣traordinary Stock of Money, viz. but Two Shillings in his Pocket, he was exposed to the necessity of making use of some Romantick Narrative of his Quality and Condition, to make good his Quarters with so slender a Purse, to hold out payment. Accordingly the Cu∣riosity of his Landlady enquiring what Country-man he was? He replied, Of Oxfordshire; that his Name was VVickham, a Person of a good Estate near Banbury;
and that the occasion of his coming to Town, was only to avoid the payment of 500 l. which he stood engaged for by Bond, in behalf of a Person that was run away, and had left him to pay that Money, and which truly he had made an Oath to himself he would never pay; not that the Summ was so considerable to a Man of his plentiful Fortune, only he was resolved to keep his Vow; and that had made him retire a little from being arrested for it. The Affability and good Language of this Person of imaginary Quality, soon found Credit with his belie∣ving Landlord and Landlady, and no Garess was thought kind enough to a Person of his eminent Figure and Extraction. His first entrance into this indulgent Family was about a fortnight before Christmass, where he gained that daily ground, that no Respect could be sufficiently paid him: His little Pocket Strength signi∣fied nothing, for his Host was not a little exalted with the Honour of such a Guest under his Roof. But, as Providence was pleased to order it, his Reign was ordain'd to be but short; for he soon fell into a lan∣guishing Sickness, in which time neither Doctor, Apothe∣cary, Nurse, or any other Assistance was wanting. Now our pretended Captain, whatever other Faults he had, was resolv'd not to be guilty of Ingratitude, and accordingly made an ample Last Will and Testament, and most▪ liberally gave extraordinary large Donations and Legacies to his kind Landlord, &c. It was very remarkable, that during his Sickness, his Landlord, being Overseer of the Poor, had requested a kind Brother in Office, the Church-Warden, to pay a small Office of Christian Duty to this poor languishing Gentleman; who making him a condoling Visit, with wet Eyes and uplifted Hands, was so kind as to wish his
Worship's Soul everlasting Rest, which was seconded by manly a repeated Sigh from the rest of the Condolers about him: And one more especially, having heard of this great Wind-fall, lamented much his Unhappiness, in▪ not visiting this Gentleman, saying, He was never born to do himself good, having lost by his Negligence at least 1000 l Also another eminent Man of the Parish, being dissatis∣fied that he did not come in for a Share with the rest of his Neighbours, went and told them, That the Coroner ought to be sent for, and an Enquiry made how he died. All Care and Application signified but little, for his last Exit was drawing on; in which time, not in the least to shrink from his Character of Quality, he still kept up the Honourable Figure he had so long pre∣sented; and accordingly made most prodigious Pro∣testations of Good-will and Acknowledgments to the Family, avowing that the few Hundreds he had be∣queathed them, was nothing to what he would do for 'em, if please God to lengthen his Life to serve them and theirs. And now having performed the Part of a good Patron and Friend, as his last Legacies do sufficiently testifie; he was resolved to be as good a Christian too, and thereupon requested the taking the Sacrament: To which, being admitted (with what Integrity you'll find by the Sequel) with a grave Countenance to the very last, he was very ready to receive the Sacra∣ment; and upon so serious an Undertaking, was pleas∣ed to put a Case of Conscience to the Minister, viz. having made a Vow never to pay the 500 l. he stood engaged for, Whether he was obliged to keep his Vow, or not▪ To which being answered in the Negative, That he was obliged to pay his Debts, notwithstanding his
rash Vow. He made answer, That truly now draw∣ing near Heaven, he considered the point, and acquie∣sced with his Ghostly Monitor; and thereupon incerted the 500 l. into the Will. This piece of extraordinary Justice being perform'd with a very composed and setled mind he left this trou∣blesom World on Sunday the Third Instant, seeming very well contented to part with his great Riches and Lands, for the more valuable consideration of fu∣ture Happiness. Now I must do the Family this Right, That notwith∣standing the great Sums they gain'd by so ample a Testa∣ment, and such bounteous Legacies, however their sor∣row for the lamented Departure of so worthy a Gen∣tleman was very hearty and cordial: Nay, some are of Opinion, that instead of diminishing (as Sorrow generally wears off) theirs, on the contrary is daily encreasing. But perhaps nothing was so unkind as excluding the poor Prentice from visiting the sick Gentleman. For, alas, the poor Boy has been heard most dolefully to bewail the unkindness of his Master; for undoubted∣ly the worthy Gentleman would have left him enough to have set him up, had he been amongst the Throng of Visitants, who all tasted so highly of his extravagant Liberality. Now to assure you that the Kindness of his Execu∣tors continued beyond his Death, they thought them∣selves so far indebted to his Memory, that not only the Embalmer was sent for, but likewise a Coffin, price  l. was made, and all little enough for so generous a Patron, so much as Mourning, and Rings, and what else bespoken, &c.
But before these Honourable Exequies could be per∣formed, an unhappy Letter from the True Humphrey Wickham Esq a Person of a great Estate and Reputati∣on, detected the whole Fraud and Delusion, and the Remains of our Quandam Person of Honour is to be committed to Earth, in a Coffin, price 4 s. with Shrowd and other Funeral Materials accordingly. You are hereby informed, That this grand Impostor, whose true Name was VVilliam Morrell alias Bowyer, formerly a Surgeon in Banbury, had been two Months a Guest at Mr. Wickham's, and thereby so acquainted with his Family as enabled him to personate the Cheat so ar∣tificially, and so we leave him. His WILL. IN the Name of God, Amen, I Humphrey Wickham of Swaclift, in the County of Oxon Esq being sick and weak in Body, but of sound Mind and Memory, do make this my last WILL and TESTAMENT, revoking all Wills by me formerly made: And as touching such Worldly Estate as God hath been plea∣sed to bless me withal, I do hereby give and bequeath the same in manner following: Imprimis, I do give, devise, and bequeath to my Kinsman William Wickham, Son of George Wickham, of Gazington in the County of Oxon, all that my Mansion-House of Swaclift aforesaid; and all the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments thereunto belonging, to hold unto him the said William Wickham, and his Heirs for ever. Item, I give and bequeath unto John Cullin, Son of Thomas Cullin, of the Parish of St. Clement Danes, in the County of Middlesex, Baker, all that my impro∣priated Parsonage of Sowgrate, in the County of Northampton, with the Rents, Issues, and Profits thereof.
Item, I give unto Anne Cullin, Sister of the said John Cullin, the Summ of Two hundred and fifty Pounds. Item, I give unto Thomas Cullin, Son of the said Thomas Cullin, the Summ of Three hundred Pounds. Item, I give unto Dorothy Halford, Daughter of Thomas Halford of Halford, in the County of VVar∣wick, the Summ of Two hundred Pounds. Item, I give unto Richard Davis, Son of VVilliam Davis of the said Parish of St. Clement Danes, the Summ of Four hundred Pounds. Item, I give unto VVilliam Davis, Son of the said VVilliam Davis, the Summ of Two hundred Pounds. Item, I give unto Anne Fowkes, for her Care and Diligence in Looking after me in my Sickness, the Summ of One hundred Pounds. Item, I give unto Robert Croker, Son of VVilliam Croker of Sanford, in the said County of Oxon (be∣ing my God-son) the Sum of Five hundred Pounds. Item, I give unto the said VVilliam Croker, the Summ of Five hundred Pounds. Item, I give unto Robert Penniston, Son of Sir Thomas Penniston, and younger Brother to Sir Farma∣lis Penniston of Cornhill, in the said County of Oxon the Summ of Three hundred Pounds. Item, I give unto Mrs. Jane Penniston, Sister of the said Mr. Robert Penniston, the Summ of Two hun∣dred Pounds. Item, I do hereby give, devise, and bequeath, all my Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments whatsoever, called by the Name of Apple-tree Ducy, in Cropridee, in the County of Northampton, unto John Brooking of Rashly, in the County of Devon, Esquire, and the said VVilliam Davis Senior, and Thomas Cullin Senior,
and the Survivor of them, and their Heirs, and the Survivor of them upon Trust and Confi∣dence: Nevertheless, that they the said John Brooking VVilliam Davis, and Thomas Cullin, shall sell and dis∣pose of the same; and out of the Money thereby raised, pay, or cause to be paid, the respective Le∣gacies herein before bequeathed unto the said Anne Cullin, Thomas Cullin Jun. Dorothy Halford, Richard Davis, VVilliam Davis Jun. and Anne Fowkes. And where∣as I have herein before bequeathed unto my Kinsman VVilliam VVickham, and his Heirs, all my Mansion-House at Swaclift aforesaid, with the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments thereunto belonging; y true Will and Meaning is, That the same Devise is upon this special Trust and Confidence, That the said VVilliam VVickham shall pay, or cause to be paid, the several Legacies herein before bequeathed unto the said Rob Croker, and VVill Croker, Robert Penniston, and Jane Penniston; and also pay and discharge one Bond for the Principal Sum of five hundred Pounds, with Interest, which I became bound for and with Thomas VValker, to one Thomas Irons, any thing herein before-contained to the contrary there∣of in any wise notwithstanding; and also that he the said VVilliam VVickham, shall out of his Legacy, and Lands, and Premises aforesaid, to him devised, pay, or cause to be paid unto my Executors hereafter na∣med, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds, to be by them bestowed distributed, or employed for the use and benefit of the Poor of the Parish of Swac∣lift aforesaid, in such manner as they, or the major part of them shall think sit and convenient. Item, I give and bequeath unto the said John Brooking out of the Moneys that shall be raised of the Sale of the said Lands and Tenements,
called Apple-tree Ducy aforesaid, the Summ of Five hundred Pounds: And all the rest and residue of the Moneys that shall be thereby raised. I do hereby give and bequeath unto the said William Davies Senior, and Thomas Cullin Senior, to be equally divided between them and the Survivor of them. Item, I give and bequeath unto Alice Cullin, Wise of the said Thomas Cullin Senior, the Sum of Six hun∣dred Pounds to her own proper Use and Dis∣posal. Item, I give and bequeath in like manner the Summ of Six hundred Pounds unto Jane Davis, the Wife of the said VVilliam Davis. Item, I give unto the said Robert Croker and VVill Croker, the Summ of Ten Pounds a-piece to buy them Mourning: and also to each of them a Ring of Twelve Shillings. Item, I give unto Jane Croker and Mary Croker; and also to the said Robert Peniston, and Jane Pe∣niston, and all other my Legatees herein before men∣tioned, and to every of them the Summ of Ten Pounds a-piece to buy them Mourning, and a Ring of Twelve Shillings. Item, Whereas I have the Sum of Seven hundred Pounds, lying at Interest in the hands of Mr. Am∣brose Holbitch, in the name of Oliver Charles, my Ser∣vant, I do hereby give and bequeath the same to and amongst my Four Servants, Oliver Charles, John Harbert, Sarah VVinn, and Margery Smith, and the Survivor of them, to be equally divided amongst them, share and share alike. Item, I give and bequeath my Three Geldings, and all my Accoutrements belonging to them unto the said John Brookcing, VVilliam Davis Senior, and
Thomas Cullin, Sen. viz. my Bright Bay Gelding to the said Thomas Cullin, and my Black Gelding to the said VVilliam Davis, and my Dapple-grey Geld∣ing to the said John Brooking. All the Arrears of Rent in my Tenants Hands at the time of my De∣cease I do hereby freely acquit and discharge. And all the rest and Residue of my Personal Estate, not herein before devised, after my Debts, Legacies and Funeral Expences, paid and discharged, I do hereby give and bequeath unto my said Kinsman VVilliam VVickham. And, lastly, I do hereby nominate, constitute and appoint the said VVilliam VVickham, John Brooking, VVilliam Davis Senior, and Thomas Cullin Senior, Executors of this my Will; hereby revoking and making void all other, and former Will or Wills by me made. In Witness whereof I the said Humphrey VVickham have to this my last Will, containing one side of a Sheet of Paper, and almost half the back thereof, set my Hand and Seal this Twenty seventh day of December. Anno Dom. 1691. Humphrey Wickham. Signed, Sealed, Published and Declared in the pre∣sence of us, with the Words (VVill. VVickham) being first interlined, Rob. Smith, Jo. Chapman, Rich. Chapman, Mart. Pinckard. I, the above named Humphrey VVickham, having o∣mitted out of my Will above-mentioned, the Disposition of my Estate in Huntingtonshire, do hereby make this Addition to, and part of my said Will, in manner fol∣lowing. I give and bequeath all my Lands, Te∣nements and Hereditaments, called Pryor's Farm, and all other my Estate in Hollywell and Needingworth, or else where, in the said County of Huntington, unto the above named John Brooking, VVilliam Davis Senior,
and Tho. Cullin Sen. and the Survivor of them, and their Heirs, and the Heirs of the Survivor of them, under this special Trust and Confidence, that the said Jo. Brooking, William Davis, and Thomas Cullen, shall sell and dispose of the same; and out of the Moneys thereby raised, pay, or Cause to be paid the respective Legacies hereafter na∣med, viz. I give and bequeath, to Humphrey Longford the sum of six hundred pounds, and to his Sister Mary Longford the like sum of six hundred pounds. Item, I give and bequeath unto the said Tho. Cullin Sen. the further Summ of 800 l. and all the Remainder of the Moneys thereby raised, I give and bequeath unto the said Will. Davis Sen. and Jane his Wife, and the Sur∣vivor of them. Item, Whereas I have by Will above-said, given un∣to John Cullin, Son of the said Thomas Cullin, the impro∣priated Parsonage of Sowgrave; my true meaning is, That I do give and devise the same to the said John Cul∣lin, and his Heirs for ever. In Witness whereof, I the said Humphrey Wickham have to this Condicil Addi∣tion, or further part of my said Will, set my Hand and Seal, this Twenty eighth Day of December, Anno Dom. 1691. Humphrey Wickham. Signed, Sealed, Published, and Declared, in the Pre∣sence of us, Robert Smith, John Chapman, Rich. Chapman, Martin Pinkard, Probatum fuit hum. Testium. cum Codicillo eidem annex. eo∣ram Venerab. Vir. Henrico. Fauconberge Legum Doctore, Surr. Venerab. & Egregii Viri Dom. Richardi Raines Militis, Legem etiam Doctoris Curiae Praerogativae Cantuar. Magist. &c. Quarto die Mersis Januarii, Anno Dom. (Stilo Angliae, 1691. Juramen∣tis Willielmi Davis, & Thomae Cullen, duorum ex Executor. &c. Quibus, &c. de bene & fidel. Administrand. eadem ad Sancta Dei Evangelia Jurat. Reservata potestate similem Com. faciendi Willielmo Wickham & Johanni Brooking, alteris Executor. cum venerint seu eorum ater venerit cand. petitur. FINIS.
