u132.3 12072949 53528
THE THIRD AND Last Volume OF ASTREA A ROMANCE WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY Messire Honorè D' Ʋrfe; AND TRANSLATED BY A Person of Quality. LONDON, Printed for Hum: Moseley, Tho. Dring, and H. Herringman, and are to be sold in S. Pauls Church-yard, Fleetstreet, and in the lower walk in the New Exchange, 1658.
Reader, YOu have in the Epistles to the first and second Volumes of Astrea, the design and tendency, as also the advantages of it, & of works of its nature I mean Romances) 'T will therefore be unnecessary to use repetition thereof: This ensuing (being the continu∣ation and conclusion of the work) exposeth it self to publick view, as necessary to the compleating of its Individuum. I can believe it will meet with such only, who prefer and industrious and strict Scrutiny, before a superficial and easie Censuring; such I am sure are nearest the confines of Reason and Civility. The floridness of its Discourses will Apologize for your pains in reading, and its price in your pur∣chasing. Nor needs it other Complement to indulge and ingratiate, then its own suavity, which being degusted, will delight the pallate of the candid and ingenuous, for whom it is accommodated.
ASTREA. Volumne III. BOOK I. DORINDE and all those that accompanyed her unto Marselles, as soon as Supper was ended, were conducted unto their Chambers by Clindor and Leontidas; the time of the night, and their wearied Limbs, inviting them thereunto: But before they parted, it was resolved amongst them, that Periander, and Merindor should pre∣sent themselves unto the grand Druide in the morning, and beseech him that he would present them unto the Nymph; conceiving the protection which they desir'd to be so just, as he would willingly mediate in their behalf: And afterwards, if the Nymph thought good, Dorinde would acquaint her with the cause of their voyage. This course being resolved upon, every one retired into the Chambers which were prepared for them: Dorinde, Florice, Palanice, and Circenea, would needs lie all together; and Dorinde who was full of perplexities, not being able to take any rest, she kept all her companions awake by asking a thousand Questions; at last Florice asked her this Question: Cosin (said she) from whence do you con∣ceive King Gondebaut's desire of getting you into his hands, doth proceed? For truly we do not know of any interest that he has in you: Oh Florice! (answered Dorinde and sighed) did you but know my miserable fortune, you would never have asked this question: I had begun to relate it unto you, but the surprisal of Gondebauts men interrupted me; but let me tell you, I am sure that this Country never produced a more unfortunate woman than Dorinde is. I conceive it very necessary (said Palanice) that your friends should be acquainted with the state of your fortune, that they may contribute their assistance for your preservation. Alass (said Dorinde with tears in her eyes) had I not some hope in the Justice of Heaven, I should never expect any help: And yet (said Circeusa) you ought to help your self as much as you can; for the Gods do bestow Prudence unto men to help themselves in such occasions: and they will assist such as through courage to¦ward themselves against the blows of fortune, either by prudence or strength; Therefore (said Florice) it is very requisite we be acquainted with the state of your fortune, that we joyning our assistance unto yours, we may be the better able to advise you, and you also better enabled to make use of us: for beleeve me Cofin, two eyes see more then one; and I conceive we cannot have a fitter opportunity of privacy then this, for perhaps your story contains many passages nor fit to be published, and now all ears are asleep but ours. Dorinde, who saw a necessity of acquainting them with her Story, and that a better opportunity could not be then this; She began thus,
The History of Dorinde, King Gondebaut, and of the Prince Sigismond. SOme are such Favorites of Heaven (my dear companions) that their happiness doth transcend even their very desires; Some, on the contrary, so hated by fortune, as she doth blast them with greater disasters, then are imagina∣ble. I may, with too much reason, rank my self among the last of these; for my misfortunes are much beyond my imagination, and of worser strain then any other had: And yet, (as I hope you will judge by the relation of my sad story) I am not in any fault, unless in that I do not put a period to my days by some vi∣olent act. Perhaps (my kind companions) you know as well as I, That Gondebaut had three brothers; to wit, Chilperick, Godamar, and Godegeseles, of whom none remains but Godegesiles the youngest, Lord of the higher Burgundy. For the other two, having gathered together a great body of Germans possessed them∣selves of the Kingdom, by winning of a battle which was fought in the fields of Authunos, which Gondebaut and the young Godoge les lost: These two young ones thinking themselves now to be Kings, and all quiet in the state, they sent away their Auxialiary Troops beyond the Rhine: Gondebaut seeing them to be disarmed, and living securely without any suspition of hm whom they thought to be dead he presently raied together all his forces, and be sieged them in Vienna, & pressed so hard upon them, as he forced the Inhabitants to render the Town and Chilperick into his hands, whose head he chopped off the same hour he entred the Town: he threw his Wife into the Rosne, with a great stone about her neck; and afterwards burned Godomar in a Tower unto which he was retreated Chilperick left two Daughters; the elder called Muutuna and the other Clotilda, both so young, that the innocency of their age obtained their pardon for the offence of the father; And yet Mutucana was presently after by the Kings command, placed amongst the Vestals, there to pass away a retired and solitary life. As for Clotil∣da, her beauty and discretion was such, as got her the esteem of all, particularly of the King, who loved her as his own child; Sigismond his Son was not dearer unto him then this fair Princess. This Prince had marryed mlberge, the Daughter of Thierry, King of the strogtt; by whom (though they lived but a little while together, for she dyed shortly after) he had yet a Son and Daughter: The Son named Sigerius, and the Daughter Amasinda. I do revive your memory of these things least perhaps you should have forgotten them; for the memory of them is very necessary and pertinent unto what I am to tell you. Now, King Gondebaut after many Conquests beyond the Alpes, and Victories over the Gallo Lgurians, and other Nations, thinking he might very well devote some, days unto Sports and Pastimes, he resolved to shew the grandure of his Ma∣jesty as well in Courtly exercises, as he had in Martial exploits. In order to this design, he made choice of the great and rich City of Lions, where he proclaimed open house: Prepared so many Masques, Tiltings, Tour∣nemets, and Skirmishes upon the water, that the magnificence of them did asto∣nish all those who out of curiosity came to behold them. He having been long a Widdower, and the Princess Amalberge, wife unto the Prince Sigismond dead two years ago, there was no Ladies that lay in the Palace Royal: But the more to il∣lustrate this Assemb;ly, he sent for the young Princess Clotilda from Viennae, where she had been educated since the death of Chilperick her father; As for Amasinda, the Daughter of Sigismond, she was yet in the Armes of her Nurse; Sigerius, her elder Brother, being not above four years of age. When Clotilda came into the presence of Gondebaut, she carryed her self so prudently and sweetly, and appear∣ed so fair in the eyes of all, as the Kings good will towards her was much encreased,
and as if he had forgotten she was the child of Chilperick, he made no difference betwixt her and his own child. It is worth observance, that his equal affection unto Sigismond and Clotilda, in lieu of kindling any sparks of envy or jealousie betwixt them (as is very usual in persons of that age) it produced quite contrary effects in them, and tyed them together in fast knots of amity, not inferiour unto any ligaments of consaguinity whatsoever. When Clotilda was come and her lodgings prepared for her, the Court ap∣peared in greater luster: for Gondebaut had preferred unto her service twelve young Ladies, the principal of all his Kingdom, called out amongst the fairest, and best qualified in all his Dominions; It was my hap to be one of this number, chosen not for any manner of merit in me, but rather for the place sake where I was born, or indeed rather to give fortune, an occasion of afflicting and persecu∣ting me the more. I thought that now I was quite rid of the importunities of Periander, by reason of his levity; of Bellimartes, by reason of his falshood: and of Merindor, by reason of his preferring his brother in his room. But I found, that as soon as the deformity of my face was with time vanished away, Periander was as bussie as ever about me: and as if he had been only asleep all the time of my sickness, will needs have me believe that he was ever my servant, using all his arguments and rethorique to glosse over his levity, and sparing no manner of oath and protesta∣tion to purchase belief. On the other side, to my misery, Alderina chanced to dye, leaving the false Bellimartes at liberty to persecute me. And to make me most perfectly miserable, Merindor did the like; as if he had drunk of the water of oblivion, and would have me pledge him, he accosted me with a smiling look, seeming to wonder I should not be as free with him as I was wont to be before his treason, and making horrible complaints against my wavering and unequal hu∣mour. Oh Heavens! was ever such impudence heard of? especially Merindors: As for Periander, though he did quit me, yet it was after my disease had made me ugly; and if he did return, when my disease was over, he was in some sort ex∣cusable, because it was never me that he loved, but that fading thing which the world cals beauty, so as this is some kind of excuse for him. As for Bellimartes al∣though he did commit a most grosse fault, yet I can find some excuse for him; for though he was married, yet it was his love and esteem of me which prompted him to marry me, But for Merindor, I cannot find any collour of excuse for him, but only that he is a man; and being so, he is allowed to be inconstant and false. Yet I must needs confesse, I am most sensible of his disloyalty, because he had least reason for what he did, and I a greater inclination unto him then any other. During the time of these Baccanalian Feastes, it hapned that the King one day after he had delighted the Princesse Clotilda, and the Ladies with several shews, they went all to walk in the Athenian Gardens, where the Rosne and the Arar meeting, there is a most dilectable Isle betwixt two great Rivers, which several Kings have imbellished with abundance of Art: planting it with trees, and adorning it with magnificient Fountains, Walks, Turrasses, and Arbors, which being contrived with excellent design; and order out of so much confusion, does still take the eye of the walker with somthing of novelty and wonder. But indeed at that time, the trees were not decked in their mantles of green, nor cast of their gray garments of winter. Yet the King, to supply that defect; brought forth abundance of Orange Trees, which he had preserved in vaultes from the storms of Frost and Snow, and planted them in such industrious order, as it seemed as if the Summer had preceded the Spring. It was at this time, and in this place, when and where Periander, Bellimartes, and Merindor, intended to renew their importunities: Periander who first pro∣ved false, was the first also that accosted me with this language. This, fairest Do∣rinde, is the day of your Triumph and Victories, for which way soever you cast your eye, you cannot see any thing which does not yeild and submit unto your beauty. I looked coldly upon him, and then without any answer turned the other way, and continued my walk with my Companions. But he, nothing daunted at my cold looks, followed, and taking hold of my Gown; what fair one? said he
unto me) not one word by way of answer? Is it unto me (answered I very dis∣daignfully) that you speak? Can you doubt it (replied he) since I called you by the Epithite which is most your due? How did you call me (said I unto him) I called you, said he, by your own right name; did you not hear me call you fair Dorinde? I know none of that name, replied I; for do you not remember that she dyed of the smal Pox. At this he blusht, yet answered; yes, yes, but she is risen again: I cannot tell, answered I, whether she be risen as to others, but I assure you, she is for ever dead as to you: After this, say what he would, I would not turn any longer towards him. Then Bellimartes, seeing his Companion dis∣engaged, he accosted me, and would needs take me under the arm: but I faign∣ing that I had not yet seen him, I looked him stedfastly in the face, and said unto him, Sir, Alderina whom you look for is not here: Alderina (answered he) was once the cause of my misery, and now she is dead, her memory I hope will not be as fatal to me as she was. The Gods are so full of all goodness, answered I, as that they can make the happiness of one out of the misery of another: and this misery of which you complain was my happiness; So as I should be very ungrate∣ful if I should lose the memory of it. But in good earnest, said he, I hope you do know that Alderina is dead, and that she will never trouble either you or me. Bellimartes, answered I very faintly, be most confident of this that though Al∣derina be dead, yet I shall never be inclinable to marry you, least I should be the Alderina of some other Dorinde. Upon this Bellimartes left me, as much asha∣med as Periander was, and Merindor immediately stept into his place: and I most ingeniously confess, as I told you before, that I was more offended against him then all the rest. Madam (said he unto me after a low conge) thanks be to the fates, I am now such an absolute master of my self, as that I am able to assure you I am your most humbly devoted servant. Merindor, answered I, is this the language which you taught your brother when you sent him unto me? Oh fair Dorinde (answered he immediately) when I wished that happiness unto my brother, it was when I could not render you a greater testimony of my affection: but now I am free, I speak unto you in the behalf of Merindor, who still loves and adores you, and ever shall; These expressions Merindor, said I unto him in a little impatiency, might well deceive any other but Dorinde; and yet truly be∣cause I would be not be ungratefull, if I had a sister I would advise her to accept of your good will: but as for me, never think any more of it; for I was told by a very good Astrologer that your marriage and mine together was never made in Heaven. Then turning away towards my Companions, and declining any fur∣ther talk with them, we began to dance after the Gaulish mode. Many Caveliers of the Court did hear all our discourse, and what answers I gave unto them: and as there are alwayes some whose practice is to carry tales unto the King, thereby to insinuate themselves into favour, so some pick-thank, or other acquainted the King immediately with all my answers; The King who was much taken with them told them again unto several persons, laughing at these three Cavaliers. But see if I had not good reasons to say that fortune which makes some happy beyond their desires, did make me more miserable then I could imagine; for who would ever have thought that these reproaches which I gave unto these impudent men, should have cost me so much misery as I have endured? And yet so it hapned that the King being pleased with them, and hearing what great affection those three Cavaliers did bear unto me, he began to entertain some good opinion of me, and from that day to this would never let me live in quietnesse. Oh Heavens! how dear did his favours a while after, cost me? For, I cannot tell upon what reason, but the King, to my misery, took a liking unto me: and I do protest, I never took any notice of it until it was too late be remedied. Though Heaven has elevated great Princes much higher then those over whom they command: yet they do want that liberty which private persons do enjoy; for even as high Towers are seen farther then the humble Cottages of Shepherds; so the grandure of Kings is so obvious unto all eyes, that they cannot stir a step but they are seen by all, and the very least of their actions is subject unto the cen∣sure of hn multitude; and therefore it is a thing impossible that a Lady should be
courted by them, but all the Court most presently perceive it. Gondebaut who knew this very well, and being desirous to apply some remedy unto it, (for he knew that if he did not, Arcingeutorix, and the rest of my kindred would be of∣fended; and that the Princesse Clotilda would have a just cause of complaint) and therefore his design was to carry this courtship as covertly as he could, and with such close circumspection, as should delude the eyes of the most clear sighted. As for me, I was altogether ignorant of the Kings design, and minded nothing but my attendance upon that wise Princesse endeavoring by my service to gain her favour; and I found by many of her noble expressions to me that my endeavours were not in vain; which was such a high contentment unto me as every one might see it in my face; so as I found the Proverb to be true, which sayes, that con∣tentment is the best painting; and truly me thought, that I had quite another kind of a face, and was not as I was wont to be: Also my judgment in this was not singular; for all my Companions thought so as well as I, even the prudent Princesse her self whose kindnesse unto me was the principal cause of it. The King whose design was to render me miserable, was very studious how to acquaint me with his intention, and was a long while before he could tell which way he should begin the work; for seeing me to very young, he could not tell whether I had so much government over my self as to keep secret. But one night when we were all dancing, and when, according to the custome, they stole her away which danced, the King in his turn, came towards me; and as soon as he touched my hand, he said unto me, I should think my self more happy if I could steal away this treasure, then I am in the conquest of all Gaule. Unto which I smi∣led and answered, the theft Sir which you are pleased to mention, is exceedingly small, especially compared unto so great an Empire. If this which you esteem so trivial (said he unto me, and grasped my hand) could be as soon atchieved, as I could conquer all Gaul, I would this very hour put on my Armor, and never put it off until I had made an absolute conquest. Upon this, not staying for my answer, he passed on to another. I must needs confesse, that I was much surpri∣sed at this expression; but not being able to perswade my self that there was any thing in me that was worthy either of the eye or thought of a King, I believed it to be his custome of speaking so unto all, and only to passe away time: so as in this belief, I grounded nothing upon those words. The King in the mean time, who was very observant to see how I would take this expression; hearing no more talk of it, he thought me to have more judg∣ment, then those of my age use to have: and as it is common with Lovers to Flatter themselves, so he perswaded himself, that the knowledge which he had imparted unto me of his good will, was not displeasing unto me. And therefore growing more confident in my discretion, and more encouraged to discover himself: one day when we were all in the Athenian Gardens, and when my Compa∣nions were a little seperated from me, as I was reaching at a flower which grew upon a tree that was a little too high for my arm, he left the Princesse walking and came and pulled the flower; here fair one, (said he and gave it unto me) take this flower as a pledge of my heart which I have already given unto you: then he went presently to the Princesse again. I must needs confesse that this second de∣claration did open my eyes; but yet I thought it a thing so impossible that the King should ever have any thoughts of me, as I still remained in my blindnesse and would take no notice of it, nor mention it unto any. The King finding by these two testimonies that I could keep secret, he thought it now high time to trust himself wholly unto my discretion: so as a while after, when the Princesse Clotilda was making preparations to disguise herself, and to dance in the habit of the Druyde and Nayade Nimphs, he was very desirous to see how she dressed her self: so as he came unto her all alone by himself, and first of all began to commend Clotilda very highly, who indeed was a Princesse of most rare beauty as well of mind as of body: then he seemed desirous to see us all; and when he saw all very busie in triming up themselves, he came unto me, and said in a low voice, as for you fair one, your beauty is so transcendent, that nothing can ei∣ther be added or diminished without doing you wrong. Shame would not per∣mit
me to return an answer: and he perceiving it by the blushes of my cheek: If you be as discreet for the future (said he) as you have been hitherto, I will make you the greatest and most happy of all your family; upon this he put a note into my bosome upon such a suddain, that if I had not felt it, perhaps I had never taken any notice of it. This brought blushes into my face as red as if my cheeks were all on fire; and a thousand to one, but it had been perceived: yet all my Companions were so busie in tricking up themselves, as they never saw when the King went out; and from that day I never doubted what the design of Gonbebaut was, though till then, I must ingeniously confesse that I could not imagine his meaning. My know∣ledge of this did not perplex me so much as did my ignorance; not knowing how to carry my self in a businesse of that concernment. For I thought it a crime in me to hide it from the Princesse Clotilda: and to acquaint her was the way to make Gondebaut my foe, and make that Princesse much offended at him. On the other side, I knew that all men were false, and the experience which I had of it, was fresh in my memory. Besides all these considerations, could I ever imagine the King did court me to any other end but to stain my honour? This considera∣tion touched me so neerly, that I once intended to go that very hour unto Clo∣tila, and shew her the Letter which he had put into my brest: but then consi∣dering how extreamly it would perplex that Princesse, and how it would disturb all the Jocundry of the Bacchanals▪ I deferred it until the Feast was over, and then intended to acquaint Clotilda with it, who honouring me with her favours, would give me the best advice she could. And least the Paper which the King had put into my bosome should chance to be lost, and so seen by some or other. I went to lock it up in a little box where I used to keep such things. When I retur∣ned, I found all my Companions almost all ready to dance; and the Princesse see∣ing me so backward, she called me sluggard, and honoured me so far as to help me her self to dresse my self. The King in the mean time, whose love was like unto all the rest of his sex, who are alwaes at the first full of raptures and impatienties, his mind was wholly upon this passion, which did encrease by my silence: This swelled him with a thousand chimeras and fancies how he should contrive the businesse. And at last returning one night very late from the ball, and when all were retired from him, after they had gotten him to bed, he called unto one that waited upon him in his chamber, and one whom he used to trust in such like occasions. He caused him to kneel down by his bed side; acquainted him with his extream affection unto me; and commanded him upon his life to keep it secret, and to contrive a means for his contentment. The young man, who was accustomed unto such discourse, did not at all wonder at the violency of his passion; for not long be ore he had seen him as hot upon Cryseide; Sir, said he unto the King) this Lady has been cour∣ted already by very many, and has been deceived b them all, so as she will hard∣ly ever trust any again. The King, according to the Nature of all Lovers, did flatter himself with a conceit that I had some good will towards him; and there∣fore answered him very confidently, that he himself had already broken the Ice, that I knew he loved me, and perhaps bore no ill will unto him: but all the diffi∣culty was to find out a trusty confident▪ by whose means he might let me under∣stand all that he dered I should know: for there was so many eyes upon him that he could not speak unto me but by short and interrupted sentences, least Clotilda or some of my Companions should observe him; that this fear kept me from re∣turning unto him any answers, and him from coming unto any conclusion with me; and therefore he propounded unto him whether it was expedient to imploy Periander, Bellimartes, or Merindor in the businesse, who might without any suspi∣tion talk with me as long as they pleased: for though they were in love with me, yet he knew they durst not contradict what he commanded them. Ardilan (for that was the name of the young man) after a silent hearing of all this, answered thus; I have heard Sir, all that you have been pleased to tell me, and have thought up∣on a course, by which I hope you may effect your desires. First, I do not like you should imploy any of these three Cavaliers whom you have proposed, and that
for several reasons: for though they be all in love with her, and would marry her and dare not disobay your commands, yet you may be pleased to consider, that Dorinde will never trust them; they have already deceived her; she hates them, and therefore she will not confide in any thing they say: the only way to marr all, were to put it unto any one of their management; I have heard say, that if one would obtain any favour from another, it must be asked by one who is in fa∣vour with that party: but those whom you have mentioned are her enemies, or at least, she thinks them so, and has found them all to be false unto her. What∣soever you do, you must not imploy any of them in the enterprise: Next, you must be sure you never speak unto her in any place where you may be seen; for if you do, then the jealousie, or rather the envy of her Companions, will make such a noise of it in the Court, that you will be constrained upon a thousand con∣siderations, to make a retreat. But the only way is to gain one that is frequent and familiar about her person; one that she dares trust: and I cannot think upon any more fit for the businesse then that maid who waites upon her in her cham∣ber; for she has the opportunity of talking unto her at all times when she please: and moreover Dorinde having a great confidence in her, she may the sooner be perswaded unto what you desire: and because the greatest difficulty is to gain her whom I speak off, I have contrived a way to bring it about; you must Sir, in the first place dazle her eys with that mettle which very few have power to resist▪ next, I am resolved to make her believe that I am in love with her, and that I will marry her; she is tollerably handsome, and will be apt to believe it: for almost all wo∣men will hearken unto any commendations of their beauty and credit it: and by these two wayes I intend to make my accesse unto her. The King hearing the Proposition of Ardilan, did like it, and think it feasa∣ble and easie: so, as if he had already obtained what he desired, he raised him∣self out of bed and embraced him saying thus unto him; I see Ardilan that thou dost love me, and that without thee I shall never arrive at my contentment; as∣sure thy self thy services shall find an ample recompence; as I have one, the best of servants, so thou shalt find me the best of Masters: Then lying down in his bed, go friend (said he unto him) contrive the business as thou wilt; I referre it whol∣ly unto thee, and to morrow I shall furnish thee with whatsoever thou shalt think fit for Dorindes Chamber-maid. The next morning Ardilan being furnished with all that was requisite, he sought for an opportunity of speech with Duriana (for that was the name of her that served me) and because it was a season when every one seemed to be out of their wits, and a time when to be wise seemed to be a kind of folly, he met with an opportunity presently; for that night he and some young men of his pack dressed themselves in the habits of women, and came unto my Fathers house, un∣der the notion of Mummers, as they are called. It is the custome of the place, and I think of all Gaul, for these Mummers in vizards, to enter freely into all houses, none asking the question who they are, or from whence they came: presently they did lay upon the table a Bag of Mo∣ney, which they intended to venture at play; and what they do they do all in si∣lence: for if they speak one word, they lose all they play for: Ardilan having thus entred into my Fathers house, one of his company who took upon him to play, laid down his mony and dice upon the table, and several Cavaliers who supped that night with my Father, began to play with him: In the mean time Ardilan walked half a dozen turns up and down the great chamber, looking whe∣ther Duriana was there; and at last, he found her dancing amongst others in ano∣ther room: after a while, he thrust himself amongst them, and taking her by the hand made one with them in the dance; and because he danced extraordinarily well, he drew the eyes of all the company upon him, especially Duriana, who was extreamly desirous to know who he was. The dance being done, and she thinking him to be a woman, she sate down by him, and put a thousand questions to him, purposely to make him speak. As long as any was so near as to hear, he made no answers but only by signs, but when all the company was parted from her, he took Duriana by the hand, and said unto her in a low voice; it is very
strange Duriana you should not know that person who loves you above all the world. She who had little or no acquaintance with him, and perhaps had never heard him speak before, she did a little wonder at his words, and not knowing his voice, she was more inquisitive then she was before, I beseech you (said she unto him) if you do love me so well as you say you do, why will you not let me know who you are? Because (said he) I am of so little worth, that when you know me I am afraid you will scorn me: I do not use, answered she, to be so uncivil as to scorn any who are owners of so much merit, as I see you are: upon this assurance, replied he, I will tell you that I am Ardilan, who ever since your Mistris came to Court, is so wholly devoted unto your service as I cannot enjoy any contentment unless my vowed service find some acceptance. But why should I trifle away time in relation of such things as these? It is enough to tell you, that before they parted, Duriana who thought all in earnest, and that it would be a match very advantagious to her, she was contented to accept of his service, upon condition he would not deceive her, as she had seen many deceive me. The sub∣tile Ardilan vowed and protested fidellity; and gave her so many assurances of it▪ as she who had no more wit then she stood in need of, was won to do whatsoever he would have her: and the more to engage her, he gave her a Ring, and be∣seeched her to wear it for his sake; at the first she refused it, because she thought it to be of too great value. But he was so urgent with her, that at last she took it, upon condition I should not dislike it. Fye, fye, said the crafty Ardilan, no∣thing does more ruine Loves then divulging them; and if you be pleased that you and I should continue kind, as I do heartly desire. speak not a word of it unto any; for if you do assure your self, some or other out of envy will ruine our de∣signs. But if my Mistris should be advertised of it by another (said Duriana) would she not have reason to be angry and chide me? Oh my Sweetheart (an∣swered Ardilan) how can she ever come to know it by any other, if you never speak of it unto any? For my part, I will set a lock upon my lips, and I beseech you to do the like upon yours, especially from Dorinde; why should you acquaint her? Alas Duriana she stands more in need of your advise, then you of hers▪ and had she been as wise as Duriana is, she had never received so many displeasures as she has, I am afraid we should be too much observed, and therefore I cannot now say all I would; the next time we meet, I shall tell you more, and plainly shew you that Dorindes displeasures proceed from her self, and perhaps may be remedied, if she will but believe you. Upon this, he left her, and would not stay for her answer, being very glad, and thinking he had done more for the first time, then ever he could have hoped. Some two or three dayes after Ardilan had talked with Duriana, my good genius put me in mind of the danger that might ensue by keeping the paper, which the King gave me, any longer, I was in two or three minds, and ready to cast it into the fire, so to extinguish one flame with another; or else to carry it unto Clotilda, and so discharge my self of that blame which might be imputed unto me. But as to the first course, I thought that if I did burn it, then if the King should come to know it, he would be extreamly offended at this scorn: and how could I answer him, if he asked me my reason for it? I thought it therefore bet∣ter to read it first, and then to burn it: but then, if Clotilda should come to know of this▪ either by the King or any other, how unkindly would she take this from me? Questionlesse Gondebaut himself would be the first that would tell her, when he sees I will not consent unto all that pleaseth him; or if he should alter his hu∣mour; as to my sad experience, I find Merindor and Periander hath done; their examples teach me at a dear rate, that the constancy of a man, lasts no longer then till his eyes finds an object that pleaseth him better. This Princesse (said I to my self) does me the honour to love me, and I am most confident of her good advice; and say the King should come to know that I have acquainted her, he cannot chuse but know withal, that my duty obliged me unto what I did; and I am very confident that when the heat of the humour is a little over, he will esteem me more for it, and say I did well. According to this last resolution, I took the Letter and went unto Clotilda
and as fortune was, found her in her Closset, passing away the time with many of my Companions. And because she honoured me so far as to love me above any of the rest, as soon as she saw me she was pleased to come unto me; and because all young persons have alwayes some trivial news to tell one another, she took me aside unto a window of a little distance from the rest of the company, where she related unto me not only all she had done since the last time she saw me, but also, all her most intimate thoughts: at last she said unto me, but good Dorinde tell me what you have done since last you were with me; come, come, give me an exact accompt not only of your actions, but even of every thought. Madam, (said I unto her) at another time I shall most willingly tell you what you please; but at this time, I beseech you give me leave to intertain you with a businesse of a very great importance; and because I would not have any observe us, I beseech you go into your Inner Closset, and call me unto you, that when we are alone, I may impart a businesse unto you, which is fit you should know. The young Princesse longing to know what I had to tell her, and being also very desirous to give me contentment, she did as I desired her; and when we were both in the Closset, the door bolted, she sat down, and I according to my custome, kneeled down before her, most humbly beseeching her to think, that my desire of keep∣ing my self within the compasse of my duty, and to carry my self in all things ac∣cording to her commands, did prompt me to impart unto her what I then would; then I did not only shew her the Kings Letter, but also imparted unto her all the passages of my three last encounters with Gondibaut, which I did with that free∣dom, as she knew me to be in no fault. especially when she saw the Letter still sealed, which after much commendations of me for it, she opened, and read these words. King GONDEBAUTS Letter unto DORINDE. YOu cannot, Fairest, think it strange that one should love you, since you have already been loved by so many; but perhaps you will wonder when you consider that he whom you have captivated, was never conque∣red by the most powerful upon earth. As there hath been nothing hitherto invincible unto my arms, so, Fairest, use your conquest kindly, for unto you, I submit my Crown, my Scepter, and all my Triumphs and Lau∣rels. Clotilda, stood mute, after the reading of this Letter; and after she had long pawsed upon it, Dorinde (said she unto me) you need not entreat me to con∣ceal a businesse, which is so unfit to be published: and because you desire my ad∣vice, and I am obliged to give it, not at random, but upon mature deliberation, I will take this night to consider upon it. Thus we parted; and because none of my Companions should suspect any matter of secresie to be betwixt us, the wise Princesse went out laughing, and commanded me to do the like, as if we had been talking upon matter of mirth and jollity. You know, that the Prince Godomar, younger brother unto Sigismond, went to travel into the Courts of Neighbour Kings, there to learn the Customs, Laws, and Manners of other Countries; to be acquainted with their Countries and strength, and the better to improve himself in his travels, he carried with him the great and wise Avitus, who had been Go∣vernour, not only unto him, but to his brother Sigismond also. Now this young Prince was lately returned to the great contentment both of King and people; for truly both Sigismond and Gondemar being instructed by such a Sapient Tutor, wer both very hopeful. This prudent Governour, above all other documents, did most imprint amity and concord betwixt them; shewing them that little
things grow great by union; and great things become nothing by discord; he hinted unto them, the jars betwixt their father and his brothers, how their am∣bition and emnity did draw upon themselves the odium of the Gaules, and their own ruine: that this wound would be long in healing in their family, unlesse they with a contrary design did remedy it, to wit, by mutual love, as the others did make the wound by hatred. These sage instructions, imprinted themselves so upon the spirits of these two young Princes, that a greater league of Love and U∣nion cannot be imagined then was betwixt them. This wise man finding by the phisiognomy of Clotilda, that she would prove a most Excellent and Wise Princesse; he thought it would be advantagious unto these two Princes to contract a league of amity with her: for consanguinity was not enough to salve up those sores which former dissentions had made. This wise advise, together with the sweet inclination of Clotilda, did make these two Prin∣ces so exceedingly love her, that all the animosities of their fathers hatred were not only rooted out, but these young hearts did link themselves together in such strong tyes of affection, as each of them had as kind a care of the others good as of their own: nothing was in secret amongst them: and knowing the humour of Gondebaut to be collerick and violent, they after consulted together what was the best course to be taken in any affair, and above all, they followed the Prudent ad∣vice of their wise Governour. And yet, as there is often a certain kind of blind in∣clination which moves some to affect one person above another, so this Princesse had ever a kind of natural affection more towards the Prince Sigismond, than to∣wards his brother Godomar: and this was the reason that at this time she acquain∣ted him only with my businesse; she related the whole passage unto him, shewed him the Kings Letter, and asked him what she should say unto me and what she should do. Sigismond was at the first extreamly astonished; afterward he asked her, how she came to know the businesse, and how I carried my self in it; to whom the Princesse answered, Dorinde carries her self as she ought to do, and will not do any thing without my advice; for it was from her I came to know the businesse. Now, observe, I beseech you, how dangerous it is to acquaint young men with such matters; Sigismond had never cast his eyes upon me but only by way of in∣differency, as upon the rest of my Companions, had it not been for this. But dear Companions, well may we say some are happy beyond their hopes, and others more unfortunate then they could imagine: and I am one of those whom fortune has made the butt for the worst of her arrows. Could any ever have imagined, that Clotilda by reprehending the Fathers fault should cause the Son to commit it? No certainly, and but my cross fate must needs have it so, surely it had never been. Now the designs of the young Prince is wholly upon me, and because he did not know whether his addresse would be as welcome unto me as his Fathers, he re∣solved at the first, to hide his affection from Clotilda, knowing very well that she would diswade him from it if possibly she could, and perhaps divert me also. But he did extreamly disapprove of the Kings intention, seemed to wonder at it, and to vilifie me in such a manner as if I should be the last of all the Court whom he could love. Then turning his discourse upon Gondebaut, sister (said he, for so he called her) we must upon any terms take some course or other to prevent this bu∣sinesse from going any farther; for though Dorinde has hitherto carried her self very well in the matter, yet it is to be feared that a long continuance of Court∣ship may make her change her mind: A place may make a brave resistance to the first and second assault, yet yeild at the third: besides, Love you know is a con∣tagious disease, and infects another party. Truly brother (answered the Prin∣cesse) I am not well acquainted with the nature of that disease, but adhere much unto your opinion of it, and therefore I desire your advice. I should be very reserved in giving it, (answered the Prince) as well because it concerns my King, as because that King is my Father, but that the honour of our family, and parti∣cularly yours, dear Sister, is at the stake, and therefore I shall be the more open and free in giving it. Let me tell you therefore, that considering the Kings hu∣mour
and disposition, I do foresee much mischief may come of this matter, if you if you do not oppose in its first beginning; and believe this for certain, that when it has once taken root, you can never do it: or if you do, it will be with much heartburning and discontent. Let not the disease gather strength, it is very dan∣gerous in all diseases, but most especially in Love, above all others. This is my advice at the first: and if we find that the disease do yet still increase, we must have recourse unto other remedies, which time and occasion may discover unto us; but above all things, make sure that Dorinde do not deceive her self, and that she do not deceive you; for Love is a thing of such a subtle nature, as that it does seise upon a heart unperceived; and if it do so in her, assure your self Sister, your labour will be all lost. Such a thing may be, answered the Princesse, but I fear it not; for I know Dorinde to be so discreet and wise, that she will never do any act prejudicial unto her self or me. The next morning, Clotilda took me aside, and said thus unto me; I have thought Dorinde upon your businesse or indeed ours, for I am concerned it it, and perhaps more then you are. It is a business wherein you must shew both your prudence and your courage: your courage, in scorning any thing that may wound your reputation, and your prudence, in doing it so that the King may not be of∣fended either against you, or me. First you must conceive, that the King courts you only to ruine you, and that as soon as it is known, your honour is lost; think upon those noble Ancestors from whom you are descended; consider what abun∣dance of hazard and pains they took in getting that reputation which they left un∣to their posterity. I hope you will not be the first that for want of courage will suffer this anciently descended reputation to be stayned: as for matter of prudence, you must Dorinde fight this enemy, not by striving and contending, but by flying from him; Love is of such a nature as is sooner overcome by flight. then resi∣stance; and the Love of Kings above all others; for puissant Princes are alwayes extreamly offended against any thing which does resist them; they are jealous of their power, and will at any rate preserve it unresistable. I advice you therefore, that in the practice of this prudence, you do not resist, but flye from this enemy; that is, that you shun all occasions of being in any place where Gondebaut may have any discourse with you; and if he chance to find such an opportunity, seem as if you did not understand what he said; and be so far from being perswaded that he loves you, as to seem absolutely ignorant in all matters of love. If you carry it so, perhaps you may divert his intention, or at the least tyer him out: and above all be sure, that I be advertised of all passages betwixt you; and be assured, that as long as you do so, I will never forsake you. This was the sage counsel which Clotilda gave me▪ and which I resolved to fol∣low most punctually, as well because of her reasons which she alledged unto me, as because I had been formerly deceived by such as used the same language, he did in his Letter. I returned the Princesse, most humble and hearty thanks for the honour of her advice, and promised all exact observance. Afterwards I kissed her hand, in testimony of my devotion unto her service; and so went out of the Closset, least any should observe or suspect any businesse more then ordinary to be betwixt us. The King rested some dayes, and never spoke unto me, to see what effects his Letter would produce. But Ardilan in the mean time was not idle; for being a subtle and witty fellow, and having found the opportunity of talking with Du∣riana every morning as she went unto the Temple, he had so gained her, what by his smooth language, and what by gifts, that the wench was wholly his: and the matter was carried so close and cunningly betwixt them that none in the Court perceived it: The King on the other side having discovered himself unto this man, and much confiding in him, he was so reserved, that had I not acquainted Clo∣tilda with his design, she had never taken any notice of it. Every hour in the day, she enquired of me whether any new accident had faln out, and was still gi∣ving me instructions how to behave my self: at last, I told her that I was in hopes the Kings mind was changed, since he was so long silent: ah Sweetheart, (said she unto me) that fire which is covered in the embers, may flash out before you
be aware: never think your self out of danger till you see Gondebaut love another; and then I will believe it, knowing very well, that new thoughts are apt to smo∣ther the old ones: But till then, stand upon your guard, and assure your self, that when the enemy seems to sleep, then is he preparing himself for a most dangerous assault. The Forrest of Ereiwe, which some call the Forrest of Mars, is distant from e Town about a mile and a half; Clotilda did much delight in hunting when the sweather was fair, and the Suns heat would permit. My Companions and I re∣embled Harpalice, that generous Thracian Lady, when she galloped over the plains after after the lively Hart, or when with her Javelin she assaulted the furi∣ous Bore: our habits were as gay as hers, all glittering in Gold, Silver, and several coloured Silks; our rich Scarfs waved in defiance of the wind; Diamonds did vye glistering with the Sun; and Pearles looked like so many chains of Stars about our necks; our Feathers and every thing set us out to the best advantage: the custome was, that we might go as best pleased us, either together, or several provided it was not out of the sight of our Governesse: and if any Cavalier had any disposition to talk with us, he freely might as long as he pleased. That day Merindor was next me, and though he received no answers from me, yet he still continued his ordinary importunities. Gondebaut whose eye was alwayes upon me, as soon as we were passed over the bride of Rosne, and were entred into the plain, he seemed as if he did not observe me but called Ardilan unto him, and commanded that as soon as I was lighted to go up the Scaffold where we were to view the combate between the Cavaliers and some wild Bores which were taken in Toyles, then he should find fault with the shooe of my horse, as if it were loose, and in taking up his foot, to thrust a nail into his hoof and make him lame: you must also know, that after several combates before the Ladies, they use to let some Bores loose and hunt them with dogs. After many Cavaliers had shewed much courage in the death of many Bores, the King commanded all the company to take horse and follow the chase; upon this, the Ladies and the Cavaliers all mounted, and followed the Huntsmen, Me∣rindor, as his custome was, would needs help me up, and afterwards▪ my Com∣panion; I seeing Clotilda far before me, began to gallop after: but after twenty or forty paces, my horse fell so lame; that he could hardly set his foot upon the ground, and therefore we could not overtake Clotilda, who followed the chase with full speed. The King who stayed purposly behind with a small company▪ did quickly overtake us; and seeming to be ignorant of my horses lameness, did ask me how it came to passe, and whether it was by leaping over some ditch? I told him that I know not by what accident it was, but was sure that if he conti∣nued thus lame; I should not be able to follow the chase. The King looked a∣bout if there was any horse in the Company upon which I might mount, but find∣ing none good enough, he commanded Merindor to ride after Clotilda and ac∣quaint our Governesse, that I could not overtake the Company, and that she should take order for another horse, or else to come and keep me Company, it not being fit I should be left alone. Oh good God, how desirous some seem to mend things, when they themselves would have them more in disorder? Me∣rindor he set spurs to his horse and rid away, and my Companion, out of respect, kept at a distance behind, where some Cavaliers of the Kings held her in talk. But the King, to lose no time began thus; Come fair one (said he) what answer will you give unto my Letter? Will you doom me to live or dye? As soon as ever I saw the King, I expected an assault, and saw no way to avoid it; so as I began presently to consider with my self what answer I should give him. I did very well remember Clotildas instruction, and was fully deter∣mined to follow them: but the grand Feast not being yet past, and I fearing to make any blander of the matter which was principally forbidden me, I resolved to defer my answer until another time: so as with a smiling look I said thus unto him; The answer Sir, which you require of me, I cannot give at this time: but I most humbly beseech you to give me the respite of fiveteen dayes, and then you shall know the reason of my delay. I shall (answered he) and will wait your
pleasure as long as you will; but let me tell you, that I think this delay to be to no purpose: bu fairest, since you will have it so, I am resolved to submit; yet upon a promise now that yu will give me an answer then. Sir, answered I, I do most faithfully it. Then my fairest (said he unto me and smiled) let me tell you, that to get this opportunity of speech with you, it was I who caused your horse thus lame; and by this you may see that my invention is not so barren, but I can find out opportunities when I please. Give me leave to tell you Sir (answered I) that it was but a cruel invention to lame a poor horse, which did you no harm: Consider, fair one, replied he presenty, that I do love you with such a perfect affection, that I would do any thing whatsoever to obtain your favour. You put your self Sir to abundance of trouble (answered I) for a thing that is not valua∣ble; but Sir, since it was you that lamed my horse I beseech you, pitty him so far as to cure him again: I spoke this purposely to interrupt him as he was offering to speak. It seems you think (replied he) that I have the same power which you have, who can when you please cure the wound which you make. Oh Sir (said I and interrupted him) I beseech you let us talk of that another time, and for the present, talk of my poor horse who is not able to carry me. This compassion, re∣plied he, might be better imployed another way: but since you command it so, I will not disobay in the least: then turning towards Ardilan, he commanded him to send for a Smith; who being brought presently, come friend (said the King) look at the foot of that horse, there is a nail that stands higher then the rest, pull it out, for question lesse that is the cause of his lameness: the Smith looking at the horses foot, found it presently as the King said; and pulling the nail out, the horse was as well as before: In the mean time Merindor delivered his message, and the Governess returned with him bringing another horse for me; which the King seeing, farewel (iaid he unto me) all contentment for this day: and setting spurs to his horse he rid away the same way that Merindor came, leaving me alone with Companion, and two Cavaliers that stayed with us. The King in the mean time, meeting Merindor and his Company, go, go, said he unto him, you did not observe that the horse was only stamped with a nail, which being pulled out, the horse will be as ever he was. The King spoke this, as he galloped away, to shew that this was all he cared, and so he rode till he over∣took the chase. Consider now, I beseech you, what mortal enemies men are unto us; and what abundance of pains they will take to ruine poor women: but oh Heaven! how hard it is to avoid their treachery, especially when we fall into the hands of a subtle person that has authority? I had sufficient experience of their falshood, and the wounds which their persidy had made in my soul were yet fresh: I wanted not any good counsel, and yet I must confess the flatteries of Gondebaut were pleasing unto me, maugre my resolution, and I delighted the submission of so great a King: so as I advise all women to beware of such enemies, and shun them as Syrens, without lending the least care unto them. As soon as I was come up to the company, I acquainted Clotilda with all that Gondebaut had said unto me, and with all my answers, and she thought that I had done very prudently in it; but when I told her of his invention to lame my horse purposly to speak with me, Oh Dorinde (said she unto me) I am extreamly a∣fraid of some mis-fortune, and let me tell you my mind freely, that if he do not fall off as soon as you have given him his answer, you must marry. Madam, an∣swered I, I hope to carry my self so as shall never displease you, but as for mar∣riage, I must heartily beseech you, let it be the last remedy, for I do so much a∣bominate all men living, that the very name of a husband is odious unto me, and I can never live with one but be most miserable. As soon as night came Clotilda acquainted Sigismond with the passage, who seeing the freedom of my discourse, did plainly perceive that I had no mind to the King: but fearing least I should change, and desiring to prevent it; Sister, said he unto her, I have a great desire to speak with Dorinde, I can discover her intention better then you; for you must know, that if she do dislike the addresse of the King all his labour will be but lost; but on the other side, if it please her
all our pains will be to no purpose, and you may incur much danger. I cannot believe her so subtle (answered Clotilda) as to hide any thing from me; and be∣sides, if you should sound her, she will be much more reserued to you then to me. Refer that unto me (answered he) and after two or three tryals, I shall tell you more of my mind. The King on the other side, told Ardilan, all that I had said unto him, and it was resolved as necessary that Duriana should be acquainted with the Kings af∣fection unto me; for the crafty Ardilan had so tampered with her, what by gifts and what by promises of marriages, that in all likelyhood she was wholly at his dispose. But to set a handsom glosse upon the matter, they must seem as if the Kings intention was to marry me, thinking by this gilded bait to draw both Duriana and me to swallow the hook sooner. The next morning Ardilan failed not to speak unto Duriana; after many protestation of affection and promises of mar∣riages, Duriana (said he unto her) to let you see how inseperably in am yours, I will trust you with such a secret as if ever it be discovered, I am utterly ruined, and I will so tye my self unto you by this freedom, as you may see nothing can seperate me from you. Know therefore Duriana, that the King is so extreamly in love with Dorinde, that he never enjoys any contentment or rest, but when he sees her, and yet carries it out so discreetly, that I believe none takes any notice of it. I protest (answered Duriana with much admiration) you amaze me in telling me the King loves my Mistris; for such persons can hardly, love without discovery: but I beseech you tell me, how does she take it? I cannot tell (an∣swered he) she has not given him his answer; but I am sure she is ill advised if she reject such an advantagious fortune. Advantagious? (answered Duriana presently) how do you mean it? Without all doubt highly advantagious (re∣plied he) and so perhaps that when you know all you will wonder more; for most certainly, if she carry her self towards him as she ought to do, the King will mar∣ry her. How, how? (said she and clapped her hands together) the King marry Dorinde? and my Mistris become Queen of the Burgundians? doubtless she may (answered he) if she will but accept of her fortune. Oh Ardilan (said she, and took him about the neck) doubtless you but mock me. I protest before Heaven I do not mock, answered he, and you will find all I say to be most certainly true, if she be well advised; why should you think it a thing so strange or impossible? Do you not remember his affection unto Criseide, and how he would have mar∣ried her? And can you think that stranger of a better family or more meritorious then Dorinde? No Duriana, believe me, the King is resolved upon it, he has told me as much, and I know his mind most perfectly; but to tell you truly I am afraid your Mistris is not so well advised as she should be, and in lieu of being Queen of the Burgundians, will make her self the most miserable woman in all the King∣dom; for if ever she acquaint Clotilda with it, most certainly she will give her ill counsel, and strive to divert her for many reasons, especially because she cannot brook that a person so inferiour should become her Lady and Mistris, nor obey one who obayes her now. Moreover you must know (but of this my dear Du∣riana you must take no notice) you must know I say, that Clotilda is none of the Kings welwishers; the quarrel is irreconcilable, for Chilperick her father ha∣ving usurped the Crown of the Burgundians from Gondebaut his elder brother, he took his measures so ill, that he suffered himself to be besieged in Vienna, where afterwards he was taken and lost his life by the Kings just command; and though this punishment was no more then due, yet the wound smarts still in the heart of Clotilda, and I do not think it will ever heal or be forgotten: so as she will most certainly do the King all the displeasure she can, and therefore your Mistris must be sure to speak nothing of it unto her, unless she will ruin the whole businesse. Indeed (said Duriana) you have imparted a thing which I am very glad to know, for it is of great importance, and I perceive by your expressions you desire I should interest my self in the business, which I promise you to do, as well be∣cause I shall be glad to give you any contentment, as because if the Kings inten∣tion be so as you say, it will be so great and honour and advancement unto my Mistris, as I must needs say, she is ill advised if she refuse it. Within a few dayes
I shall tell you more, and in the mean time, take special care least the business be discovered until it be fully resolved upon; for publication of it may be a great im∣pediment to the progresse. This was the Discourse betwixt Ardilan and Duriana, who believed all for most infallible truths: and I have since found the saying of my Father to be most true; which was, that if any Prince have a design to deceive another, he must first deceive the Embassadour which is employed betwixt them, because he once ha∣ving an opinion that what is told him is true, wel invent reasons and expressions to imprint belief, better then he could if he had lyed, So Duriana, believing my marriage as a matter most certain, and foreseeing future grandures upon me and her self, above al hopes, I knew she watched for an opportunity of talk with me: but thinking it to be only about some domestique affaires, and never dreaming she could know any thing of this business, I did not give her that opportunity she longed for. Yet at night, when we were al alone, because I did love her for the fidelity and affection to me, and seeing her so desiring to speak unto me; wel Duriana (said I unto her) what news have you to tel me? She answered with a smile, news Madam unto you it may be none (said she) but unto me it was news, and news which gave me abundance of contentment when I heard it: good Duriana (said I unto her) what dost thou mean? for my part, I do not under∣stand thee: Madam, replied she, you do but dissemble when you say so: but do you think there is any under the Cope of Heaven, that loves you better then I? I protest Madam, I wil not yeild unto that love which you hear unto your self, and yet you are pleased to conceale your self from Duriana: From Duriana I say, who to serve you would forsake Father, Mother, and al the kindred she has in the world: I could justly complain against you if I would, but I dare not sin so far as to disapprove of any thing you do. I protest, said I unto her and smiled, I know of no cause you have to complain against me: I protest, answered she again, you do not speak as you think: but Madam, why should you hide a thing from me, which I desire so much to know? but do you think I am ignorant of it? Mistake not your self, perhaps I knew more particulars of it then your self. Good Duria∣na (said I unto her) what is it that you mean? Wel, said she, since you wil have me tel you that which you should have told me long since, I wil; upon con∣dition that you conceal nothing hereafter from your most faithful Duriana. Do you think Madam I do not know, that thanks be to God, the King is in love with you? With me, (answered I, and laid my hand upon her mouth) be silent you fool, and say no more; I see you talk you know not what: Duriana went back a pace or two; talk I know not what? replied she: Yes, yes, assure your self I do know what I say, and know it very wel, and must tel you again that it is your own fault if you be not Queen of the Burgundians. At this word Queen, I blusht, and holding one hand before my face; I think (said I unto her) that you are out of your wits, and if any heard us, they would think us both so: I see, replied she, that none does hear us; but believe me were I in your room, the business should be quickly concluded: say and do what you will, if you refuse such a favour from fortune, she wil never offer you the like again: How Mistris? May be Queen of the Burgundians and wil not? You say I am mad, but if you refuse such a fortune, I wil say you are ten times madder. This she continued a long while, and I seeing her affection and manner of expression, could not chuse but smile: which when she saw, she grew half angry, and shaking her head, said unto me; Wel, wel, Mistris, you laugh now at what I say, but I dare venture a good wa∣ger that if you wil not believe me, we shal see you ere long with tears in your eyes. I could not forbear laughing out right at this, which caused her to be an∣gry in good earnest, and would have gone away, swearing that since I so mock∣ed her she would never speak to me of any business again, nor tel me any thing she heard. But I being desirous to hear what she could tel me, and what she knew, I catched hold of her, saying, Why Duriana? wil you not let me laugh when you tel me any thing that pleaseth me? Do you think that to be a Queen is such bad news, as to make me cry when I hear it? The truth is you tel it in such a manner as I cannot tel whether you be in earnest or in jest; come, come, tel me
the whole story of the business, and how you come to know of it. Madam, re∣plied she, let me then tel you truly, that King Gondebaut will make you Queen of the Burgundians if you will, and that presently unless you your self hinder it. What, good 'Duriana, said I unto her, should I do, to bring this to passe? Only marry the King, answered she, who loves you above his life. How came you to know thus much? said I unto her, nay, nay, answered she presently, you shall not know that til you tell me whether you will have him to your husband or no, for if you refuse the offer, why should you desire to know any more of it? Canst thou doubt Duriana (said I unto her) that I will not receive the Crown of the Burgundians most willingly if there be any likelyhood of getting it? Surely I were out of my wits if I did; but the fault is not in my will but the Kings, who perhaps is only in jest. The King, answered she is not in jest; but if you will be∣have your self as you ought to do, I lay my life you will see it come presently to passe. This Wench spoke with such confidence, as I must needs confesse I began to believe that she knew more then I did; and presently after, ambition did so swel me, that forgetting the commands of the wife Clotilda and my promise to her, I resolved to follow the Councel of Duriana if I saw any probability in it; and therefore, after I had a while thought upon it, fixing my eye upon the ground I made her this answer; Be sure Duriana that you speak nothing but the very clear truth; and if I do find any probability in what thou sayest, I promise to do what∣soever thou wilt have me; I know thou lovest me, and therefore art desirous of my welfare and advancement. Be confidently assured Madam, (said she unto me) that I do love you, and that I desire your welfare and advancement more then you can do your self: I have received my education from you, and God willing Madam, I wil end my life in your service, and therefore you may well believe me most desirous of your happiness and advancement. Now Madam, since I see you inclinable to do as you ought, be pleased to know that the King does so dote of you, that if you wil, he will marry you; and Ardilan whom you know very wel, told me as much five or six dayes since, and because I would not at the first credit what he said, he confirmed it with many oaths. But Duriana (answered I, and sighed) doest thou not know that all men are false and deceitful? What should invite the King to this? Madam, (answered she presently) al those who hath hitherto courted you, they did it for their advantage, because you had been a fortune to them, if you had married them; but the Kings courtship pro∣ceeds from nothing but the Love which he bears unto you, for he cannot pretend unto any advantage. Do you not remember how he would have married Cry∣seide, and are not you in al respects as good as she? Your beauty will not yeild to hers; your descent is before her, and your alliance also, you are no stranger as she was; you are no captive, nor thanks be to God was ever the booty and plunder of Souldiers: and therefore Madam, since the King took so much pains to marty Cryseide, who was every way your inferior? Why should not he be as earnest, nay more, to marry Dorinde, who every way excels Cryseide? But, said I, suppose al this to be so; what would Ardilan have me do? In the first place, an∣swered she immediately, he would have you love the King; next that you have a great care to speak of it unto none, especially unto the Princess Clotilda: For Madam, you must know that this Princess bears ill wil unto the King, because Chilperick her Father, who usurped the Crown, was by him put to death. Clo∣tilda knows it, and being in his hands, dares not speak againss it, least she should be mued up amongst the Vestals as her Sister was; but assure your self that if she were at liberty, she would shew the effects of her ill wil, though now she wil not shew teeth, til she be able to bite: therefore Madam, you must conceale it from her above all others, because you being her servant she wil not endure to see you raised unto such height as that she must be your vassal and inferior. Duriana did know how to represent these considerations so wel, that she found a disposition in me to hearken unto her: so as before we parted I promised to do as she would have me provided, she would have a care we should not be de∣ceived. Oh how dangerous it is, to place persons that are interested, about
young women? From that time I forgot all the wise instructions of Clotilda, and all the oaths which I swore unto her; I resolved to speak unto her no more, or at least, would stay till I saw whether the King was in earnest or jest. Duriana trans∣ported with joy, seeing me so resolved she took my hand; now Madam (said she) I kiss this hand not as Dorindos, but the Queen of the Burgundians, for so I hold you to be already. Thus we parted, and the next morning letting Ardilan know that she desired to speak with him, she acquainted him with all that had passed betwixt us, at which he seemed to be so well contented, that this foolish woman was more gul∣led by him then she was before. The young Prince Sigismond by the advice of the prudent Avitus, had se∣cretly procured one of Gondebauts Bed-chamber to acquaint him with all the pri∣vacies of that King: and this not out of any ill design, but only to prevent the fury of the Kings passionate humours when he was angry with any one, as he saw cause, or else, to order himself the better in matters of state, to the contentment of Gondebaut. Now so it fortuned, that as subtle as Ardilan was, and careful least any should hear when he spoke to the King of this businesse; yet so it was, that this man heard all the story of it; and as soon as any began to be secret with the King, he used to creep so behind the hangings, that he could hear any thing that was said. This time therefore, having observed that Ardilan was of late very close with the King, as soon as he saw him coming he got behind the hangings, making no question but the King being alone, there would be some conference betwixt them▪ and he was not mistaken: for as soon as Ardilan came into the room, and seeing none with the King, he went unto him; at first he began to speak in a low whis∣per; but afterwards seeing the cost clear, he raised his voice and named Duriana and Dorinde, which made the man to suspect some matter of Love: afterwards as they walked up and down he heard as much as he could desire; which pre∣sently he imparted into the young Prince, which received this advertisement with much contentment: not but that it vexed him to the soul, the King should con∣tinue his courtship, he himself having the same design; but he was glad to know it, that he might use the best remedy he could against it: he gave the man there∣fore many thanks, and after a present of gratification, desired him to continue his intelligence with great promises of further reward when occasions presented themselves. The next evening, when we were all in Clotildas chamber, and my Compani∣ons, very earnest at play, by fortune I was alone at the farther end of the cham∣ber, and he came unto me; and seeing that I took no notice of him, as being wholly taken up with my own thoughts, he waved his hand two or three times before my eyes, ere I did see him, so much was my mind distracted another way. I perceive Dorinde (said he unto me) that you entertain your thoughts in very se∣rious earnest: at this voice I recollected my self, and rubbing my eyes as if I were newly waked out of a sound sleep, I would gladly have excused my fault. Nay, fair one (said he unto me) you need not be ashamed of your contemplation, for I am most confident it is very good, and you could not entertain your self better then with it. Sir, (said I unto him) I have more manners then to contradict you in any thing; but I beseech you give me leave to say, that your language proceeds either from your excess of courtesie, or from flattery. Could you but see your self, fairest, with my eyes (said he unto me) you would not say so; I as∣sure my self every one will be of my opinion; and if you please to give me leave, I dare venture a wager, that I can tell what you were thinking upon when I came unto you. Sir, answered I, it will be very hard for you to do it, since I can hard∣ly tell my self, and I dare accept of your wager without any fear of losing. You need not fear any losse by me (answered he) but what you please; for▪ I am so much yours, that none can be more, and if you would have any thing of me, though it be my life, ask, and it shall not be denied. Doubtlesse Sir, said I and smiled) you are this night disposed to jear me; but the power is yours, and I take all that comes from you with reverence and respect, as is my duty. This
Language (replied he) were fitter bestowed upon another then me; I mean up∣on him whom you were thinking upon when I came towards you. I know not Sir what you mean, replied I, nor him whom you say I was thinking upon; for I had no other thought but upon sleep: You do dissemble fair one, said he, for you were thinking upon the Discourse the King had with you, when he lamed your horse. At this I began to blush, and was extreamly surprised: Nay, nay, fairest (said he) never blush at what I say, for when you know with how much affection I adore you, you will not be sorry that I am acquainted with the busi∣ness whereof I speak: I offer unto you my self and service most freely; and to let you see the truth of my words, I know the Kings design, and advertise you, that if you do not look very unto your self, he will deceive you. Ardilan and his accesse unto Duriana is discovered in the Court, and every one thinks it tends to your disadvantage; and be assured that this advertisement which I give unto you is the best you can receive from any. He added unto this other discourse, which did plainly evidence unto me that he knew all the Kings design, and the pandarisme of Ardilan; and because, I thought that to deny it absolutely, would but more confirm him in his belief, also because I thought his advertisement not without some colour of reason, I answe∣red him thus; You tell me of a thing Sir, which if concealing it from you could hide it from my self, I would sooner dye then confesse it to you; but since I can∣not, to my misfortune make my self▪ignorant of it, I do confess that the King has made such an overture unto me, and I do know that Ardilan has held more communication with Duriana, then I would have her; but Sir, what remedy is there against all this, since it is the King, unlesse I should get out of his Domi∣nions so far that none who knows me shall ever hear the sound of my name, Do not think Sir, but I know, that the King is only pleased to make himself a little sport by mocking me; but that which most vexeth me, is, that every one will be apt to censure as they please; and since Sir your are pleased to speak so much upon this subject, and since the Title of Cavalier, beside that of a great Prince, does oblige you to assist afflicted and distressed Ladies, I beseech you tell me, what you think to be my best course. Believe it, fairest, answered he, that the affection which I have unto you will not permit me to refuse you the best counsel and assi∣stance that I can give or you desire; I am afraid that too much notice will be taken of our being so long in discourse together; all I can say at this time, is, reject the Kings Love, for believe me it will ruine you and your honour, and above all, take heed of Ardilan. This was the first Discourse he had with me, and because he observed Clotilda cast an eye two or three times upon us, he went presently towards her to acquaint her with what had passed betwixt us: but he never told her what expressions he had used of his good will unto me; only told her what he had said unto me con∣cerning the King, and Ardilan. And see, how subtil he was, to make her more zealous in diverting me from the King; he seemed unto her as if I was not so a∣verse unto this business as I seemed unto her; and that Ardilan was crafty and subtil, that if good heed was not taken he would insensibly prevail with me. Clo∣tilda who was very unwilling I should be deceived, did promise him to have such a vigilant eye over me, that neither she nor I should be deceived; and he also was very assistant in it, so as when to conjoyn the matter was not so difficult, to divert the King, and find out the subtilties of the man. Oh Heaven! how cruel are our distinies, in being constrained to live a∣mongst our enemies? For what more Tyger enemies can we have then men, since they never rest till they ruine us? Were it not for this pittyless nature which is in them all, why should not the King at his age let me live at rest in the service of that prudent Princess? Why should Ardilan take such abundance of paines and care to corrupt Duriana? But why should the young Sigismond leave off so many other good imployments, to delude both Clotilda and me? When I think seri∣ously upon these things, I must needs confess the saying true, that all the universe is maintained by contrarieties: and our contrary, is man; or to say better, that the Gods not willing we should enjoy any perfect contentment upon earth, pro∣duced
men only to torment us. And see I beseech you, how crafty this young Prince was; since this day he never talked to me of any thing but expressions of his affection to me; yet told Clotilda that he spoke against Gondebaut and Ardi∣lan. And they laboured the business so betwixt them, that I began to enter in∣to doubt of the Kings promises, and approve of those reasons which Sigismond alledged: but my greatest wonder was, the long delay of the King since my last answer: and because I had till then concealed from the Princess, the last discourse which Ardilan had with Duriana, I resolved to acquaint her with it, as well be∣cause I feared least the Prince should tell her, and so she be angry with me, as be∣cause being confident, that the Princess loving me as she seemed to to, she would be glad of my future grandure of it came to pass, or else would help me to unde∣ceive my self. One night therefore when she was in bed, and according to her custom, called me, I said unto her, not without a blush; This candle, Madam, which I hold in my hand (for I alwayes used to hold one by her as I kneeled) will let you see that I am ashamed of what I shall say unto you; but since it is ne∣cessary you should know it, my duty bids me not conceale it. Be pleased there∣fore to know, Madam, that Duriana brought me a very pleassant news this morning, but truly, Madam, I cannot well tell whether I should assume so much boldness as to tell you: Dorinde, said she, out with it freely and boldly, and be assured that though it make me angry with him; yet it shall make me pleased with you: what? is it some Letter? Oh Madam, answered I, it is some thing else then a Letter: what then? (said she) some present? Yes a present, answered I, and the great∣est that could be sent; but it is only in words: But tell me (said she) what mes∣sage did Duriana bring you from him? I beseech you Madam (said I, and smiled) first laugh before I tell you, for I assure you it will make you laugh when you hear it: be pleased to know then, that Duriana came to me in post hast when I was in bed, to tell me that the King would marry me. How? (replied Clotilda) the King marry you? Ardilan, replied I swore it unto Duriana with a thousand oaths, and gave her in charge to tell me as much. Oh Sweet-heart (replied the Princesse prensently) take heed of believing it; it is mear poyson under a gilded Pill, and will ruine you; bid Duriana return this answer, that if the Kings inten∣tion be honourable and advantagious to you, let him acquaint me with it, and most certainly I shall never contradict him; which if he do not do, then believe it, that he would deceive you. For why should the King marry in secret? Or if he would, how can he think it will be concealed? No, no, Dorinde, assure your self, it is not the Kings design, but only Ardilans, who cares not how he does engage his Master, so he can but obtain his desires; and therefore my advice is, that if you do not presently see these words made good, to forbid Duriana strictly from having any farther conference with Ardilan, so as he may have no farther hopes of deceiving you: I wonder Duriana should have so little discretion as to bring you any such messages: assure your self this subtle fellow has suborned her, either by gifts or some trick or other; and if so, I advice you to be rid of her assoon as possibly you can, for there is no wisdom in keeping persons of that temper about one. Madam, replied I, I shall be alwayes most observant of all your com∣mands: and as for Duriana, I do wonder at her as much as you, and shall keep such an observant eye over all her actions, as I shall discover the truth. Some dayes passed before I could find a heart to break off quite with the King: for hopes of grandure had so dazled my eyes as caused me to delay it. In the time the young Sigismond, who was advertised of all passages, seeming to di∣vert me from the Kings Love, lost no occasion to expresse his own, but so cau∣tiously that Clotilda did not perceive it, but on the contrary would sooner have believed any thing else: but when he was in a place where none could hear his discourse, he did nothing else: but express his affection: and I must needs con∣fess, that if I were to chuse, the sons Love would have made me reject the Fa∣thers; and therefore it was, that I never acquainted Clotilda with it as I ought, though I knew it to be my duty: for I was afraid to incense both the Father and the Son against me at one time. One day when we were in the Athenian Gar∣dens, for winter was then past, and Trees began to put on the livery of the
Spring, Sigismond, who of late was continually amongst us, took me under the arm, and having seperated me a little from the rest of the Company, my dearest fair one (said he unto me) I assure my self that you cannot chuse but see the ex∣tream affection which I have unto you; and since it is so, it seems somthing strange that no symptomes of any pitty should appear unto you. Sir, (said I unto him) though your language he only to make your self merry in jesting with me, yet I think my self much obliged unto you for it; and be what it will, I take it as coming from Prince Sigismond, in such a reverential manner as I ought to do. Did I think (said he) that your heart consented unto your tongue, I should ex∣treamly complain against you: but I know such answers are ordinary in the mouths of such fair ones as you are, and therefore, I conjure you by what you esteem most dear, to tell me whether you do not know that the Prince Sigismond is really in love with you. Your conjuration Sir, (said I unto him) has so much prevalency in it as to draw any truth, be it never so secret, from my soul. Be pleased therefore to know Sir, that it is true, I think you wish me very well, but it is no more then you own unto any that honours you, as I do. Fair one repli∣ed he presently, you think a right; for there is nothing under the Sun more cer∣tain then my affection unto you; and I will sooner hate my self then not love you in the highest degree. These thoughts Sir (said I unto him) cannot avail you any thing at all, and may be very prejudicial unto me. These thoughts, replied he, are they which can give me the greatest contentment that I can hope for in this world, and cannot be any way prejudicial unto you; for take this as a most in∣fallible maxime, that nothing which brings you any displeasure, can be pleasing unto me. I do know very well Sir, said I unto him, that Prince Sigismond is courtesie in the very abstract, and a servant unto all Ladies in general. Truth is, replied he, I do infinitely honour all your sexe: but, my fairest, it is for your sake. Good Sir, (said I and interrupted him) consider this, that all the pains you take in your fluent Language, (admit your words to be true) is but so much labour lost; and an honour unto me, so dearly bought, as if ever it be known, will un∣do me: for what can you hope for Sir, from me? And if this Discourse should ever come to be known, it would turn to my disadvantage. Dorinde (answered he with a more serious look) I will not say unto you as the King does, that I will marry you, for I will never deceive you; but I will say, and swear by all that is Sacred, that I wish with all my soul I might marry you. And I cannot think that though this should come to be known unto the world, any would blame you for it, but rather honour and esteem you the more, and censure it by way of ad∣vantage unto you. As for the advantage or utility which I can hope for, know this my fairest, that I do esteem you so much, that I desire no other advantage but the contentment of loving you: and if the affection be but pleasing and ac∣cepted I may say that my greatest desire is accomplished. I was ready to answer him when one of my Companions came to tell me, that Clotilda would speak with me, and s our conference broke off; for which I was not sorry, because I found that the affection and submission of this young Prince, began to work upon me. But oh, how careful ought all of our age be of such encounters? I had been already deceived by three or four smooth tongued lovers. I was not yet un∣fettered from those fallacies which the Father had laid to entrap me, and yet I know not how, I began by little and little to hearken unto the candid flatteries of the Son, and which was worst of all, I was so taken with them that I could not guard my self from them. Ever since this day, that Prince did so continue his courtship, that Clotilda took notice of it; but he, crafty and wary as soon as ever he saw that, he so retired himself, and kept such distance of indifferency towards me, as that opinion quickly vanished: and besides, I did contribute my assistance towards it, and did adver∣tise him when at any time he discovered himself too freely; conjuring him to keep it close, and to carry himself discretly and warily: These advertisements which I gave unto him, were certain assurances of the good will which I had unto him; which begot such a confidence in him, that he began to write unto me, & present∣ly after to send me presents under the notion of the good will he bore unto all that
waited upon Clotilda, unto whom he sent the like presents, purposly to collour his present unto me: He would also play with me very often for wagers, and lose purposely; and though his presents were never without the Princesses leave, yet he did alwayes accompany them with some secret Letter, or copy of Verses: and I received many Letters and Papers of Verses from him, according to the sub∣ject of the presents on the accidents which hapned; but with so much discretion, that neither the Princess nor Gondebaut perceived them. And because I knew what intimacy there was betwixt Ardilan and Duriana, I kept the matter all close from her as from any other. For I confess that the young Prince and the sweet dispo∣sition which I found in him, had such an influence upon me, that I fell of by de∣grees from Gondebaut: for besides the affection of Sigismond, Clotilda was con∣tinually buzzing in my ears the wavering humour of the King, and how reasons of state would quite blast al those hopes which he had given me. I was in a long dispute with my self; but at last some good genius opened my eyes, and let me see how all that Ardilan said unto me was only tricks and falsities. I resolved there∣fore by the advice of Clotilda to put him to the tryal, to the end I might no lon∣ger be deluded: so one night when Duriana by the instigation of the subtle Ardi∣lan was harping upon the old string, and pressing me according to her custom, to hearken unto the Kings motion. Duriana (said I unto her) do you think. Ardi∣lan is honest, and speaks truth? Ah Madam, answered she, I dare swear he had rather dye a hundred deaths then tell one lye; I believe (said I unto her) you are mistaken in him, and am confident he does but mock both you and me; and to shew you that I have good intelligence, did he not promise to marry you? In∣deed he did, answered she, but Madam, alwayes with a condition of your leave. Well (said I) but if he be not a deluder, why does he not make good his pro∣mise? Madam, said she, I never urged him unto it, but I believe, that as soon as I shall desire such a thing, he will be as forward to embrace such a motion as my self. Well Duriana (replied I) by little things we do often come to the know∣ledge of the greater; if Ardilan should prove false in his promise to you, is it not probable he is likewise false in all his negotiations concerning me? Most un∣doubtedly true, answered she. Then, replied I, to try whether all he has spoken from the King be true, I would have you presse him to marry you; and tell him, by way of excuse, that all your fellow servants and Clotilda also dislikes of the familiarity betwixt you, and therefore it is necessary that he either keep his pro∣mise in marrying you, or else withdraw himself absolutely from you; I am most confident, that this proposition will startle him, and make him quickly very cold in the matter. I cannot imagine (said Duriana) that such a man as he should fail in his promise; that which most grieves me, is, that I must by this marriage lose your service, which is the greatest grief that can come unto me. As she utte∣red these words, tears began to trickle from her eyes: and I could not chuse but smile at her simplicity; nay, nay, said I, never cry for the matter, I warrant you, your marriage with Ardilan will never part us. Now see the consequence; Duriana spoke to Ardilan the next time she saw him, as I had commanded her: and though he was as subtle a fellow as any was about the Court, yet was he so damped at her speech, that he was not able to an∣swer one word; at last, he recollected himself, and asked her, who gave her that counsel? Those that gave it me (answered she) will never deceive me, and is sorry to hear what reports are raised concerning our familiarity: do not think that you are exempt from censure more then I, for they say, you intend to deceive me which I cannot believe; but reports go that you make addresse unto me, only to make me an instrument of delivering the Kings message unto Dorinde. Oh Hea∣vens, answered the cunning man, certainly you have devulged the Kings secrets unto some or other, and by this means have for ever ruined me in the opinion of my Master: Do not think me so indiscreet (answered Duriana) but it is true, I could not tel Dorinde those things which you desired me, but I must also tell her my Author: And is it Dorinde (replied he) who gave you counsel to speak thus unto me? Suppose it he (said Duriana) or whoever else, it was good; for I know that most of my fellow servants do grumble extreamly at our secret familia∣rity.
The reason of that is, replied he, because they are ignorant of our inten∣tion: Well, well, answered she, however they have an ill opinion of me, and if you have any mind to marry me do it quickly; for to tell you truly, Clotilda is offended at me, and does not like I should live in that manner: He stood silent a long while, and fixed his eyes upon the ground, which offended Duriana ex∣treamly, and moved her to say, what is the reason Ardilan you do not answer me? Is the news so bad you cannot endure to hear it; I thought that when I made this motion you would have entertained it with open arms, and given Hea∣ven thanks for it; but on the contrary, you are as mute as if you were tongue tyed. Duriana (answered Ardilan) the silence which you observe in me, and which makes you suspect my good will towards you, does not proceed from that cause which you imagine, but from abundance of difficulty which I do foresee in the business, and which you your self will confesse. When I acquainted the King with my desires of marrying you, he told me, that as soon as I was once mar∣ried, I would then no longer care for the love which he bore unto Dorinde; and when I vowed the contrary unto him, no, no, replied he, I know better then you do how the enjoyment of the party loved, will take up the mind of a man: and if it should do the like by you, then I am no better then dead; for unto whom then can I speak concerning this businesse? and therefore I do positively command you, as you value my Love, not to think upon any marriage, until mine be past, But Duriana (said he and took her hand) be assured that ere it be long I will give you your desired satisfaction. Duriana, smelling his falshood, and not being able to dissemble her displeasure; if it be so (said she) that the King does really in∣tend to marry Dorinde, why does he not do it? Where is the stick? Oh Duriana (answered he) the affaires of Kings are not so soon dispatched, as the affaires of a private person: A great Prince has considerations of his estate and good of his people, which we cannot dive into. Did you but know what affection the King has unto Dorinde, you would wonder at it, as I have done many a time; but he cannot nor ought not lay aside all other considerations, and rush hastily upon marriage: but on the contrary he is Wise and Prudent, and can lay aside his pas∣sion, until he has put every thing in order, and so as he may enjoy his content∣ments without any danger or inconveniency: believe it, that when the time is fit, he will not need any Solicitor, nor any to put him in mind of Dorinde, for his love unto her, is enough to bring her into his memory. Then Duriana finding that the advice which I gave her was but too true. Well Ardilan (said she unto him) I am so little versed in the business of State, that I will leave it unto those who know how to manage it; but since you cannot marry me until the King be mar∣ried; and since his marriage cannot be accomplished until business of State gives him leave, I think it fit that you see me no more, nor speak unto me concerning Dorinde until the Wisdome of the King hath set all his State affairs in order, so as he may have leasure to make good his word, and give you leave to make good yours. Upon this not staying for his answer, she came into my Chamber in a pelting chase against Ardilan, and against the King, and told me her whole Discourse in such a passionate manner, that I could not chuse but laugh at her anger. But see how fortune was bent to disturb my tranquility; and to shower miseries upon me: Duriana as she talked with Ardilan, and pulled her handkerchief out of her pocket; she pulled out also the paper of Verses which Sigismond sent unto me; and which she unknown to me had taken out of my pocket, as she looked for my handkerchief to be washed. This paper being but little, and she half out of her wits, she dropt it on the ground as she came away from him. The crafty fellow, did presently take it up, and went away with it as fast as he could to his lodging: there unseen by any, he unfolded the paper, and read it over several times, but could not judge who write it, nor to whom it was directed; yet he had a strong opinion that it was intended either unto her or unto me; and to which of these two soever it was, it would serve him for a good excuse to the King concerning his negotiation. To lose no time therefore, he went as fast as he could to Gondebaut, from whom he did not conceal a sillable of his conference with Duriana: after a long discourse together, and when the Kings hopes were
all blasted, Ardilan continued thus; I cannot imagine Sir what divel it is, that thus thwarts your desires: I cannot think it to be Clotilda, for I hold her to be more discreet and better advised then to commit such a fault: and besides her obli∣gations unto you are so great; as it were the height of ingratitude if she offer to displease you in any thing; but yet it is very strange▪ yonder fool Duriana as she pulled out her handkerchief did drope this paper, which unseen to her I took up, and by it, I find that there is some lurking Lover or other that courts either her or Dorinde: I know not the hand, but you may see Sir whether you can pick any more out of it then I can. Upon this the King took it, and no sooner cast his eye upon it but he knew it to be the hand of the Prince Sigismond: Oh Ardilan (said he in a great fury) wonder no more from whence the alteration in Dorinde pro∣ceeds; It is Sigismond that loves her, and doubtlesse she loves him also: heer's his hand, and from hence Durianas discourse was grounded. Upon this laying the paper down upon the Table, and folding his arms together he began to walk a great pace up and down the Chamber, and was a long quarter of an hour be∣fore he uttered one word. At last in a great rage, I will make them both repent it (said he) and if I do not punish them according to their deserts, let me no longer be taken for King Gondebaut. And to begin, go Ardilan (said he) go immediately unto Clotilda, and tell her from me that I understand Dorindes be∣haviour is so scandalous and shameful, as I would have her send her away this ve∣ry night unto Arcingentorix her father, and let her understand the reason why I would not have her entertain her any longer: From thence go unto Sigismond, and command him from me to retire himself into Gallogurio; unto which place I confine him until he further hear my pleasure: bid him begone in the morning before day, and let none seen him; and that if he fail in my commands, I will put him into a place where he shall lear his duty. Afterwards, beginning to walk again, stamping his foot against the floor, and pulling his hat over his eyes, he used all the actions of a distracted person. Ardilan seeing him in this condition, he was the most perplexed man in the world: for he foresaw, that to carry these messages unto Sigismond and Clotilda, would be his ruine: and on the other side, not to do the Kings commands was worse, and more certain ruine; so as he knew not which way to turn himself, and repented heartly that ever he shewed this pa∣per unto the King. There was none in the chamber, but the King and Ardilan; but in the War∣drob which was close by, it fortuned that Sigismonds intelligencer was there, who hearing the name of Sigismond, began to hearken very attentively unto what the King said; and heard the harsh command which the King imposed upon Ardi∣lan; of which he thought to acquaint Sigismond immediately; and in order to that he went down a back pair of stairs and ran as fast as he could to the young Prince, who he found in his Closet. Sir, said he unto him, I made all the hast I could, to advertise you of a thing which your prudence must prevent, otherwise, I fear a great storm will fall upon us. I understand that the King is extreamly in Love with Dorinde, and Ardilan is his Agent in the business, who brought him a paper of Verses which you had writ unto Dorinde: and because Duriana, Dorindes Chamber-maid, gave Ardilan some answer contrary to her custom, the King conceives the reason of it to be from Dorindes loving you: you know Sir, that no passion is more violent then jealousie in Love; and the King is entered into such a passionate anger against you and against her, as he has commanded Ardilan, to did Clotilda from him, to send away Dorinde immediately unto Arcingentorix her Father, and to tell her withal that her behaviour is so scandalous, that he would not have such a one to keep her company; Is it possible (said the young Prince) that the King should be so far transported with passion, as to commit so great injustice against that wise Woman? Nay Sir, replied the man, this is not all, his anger does reflect also upon you: Against me? (said the Prince) yes Sir, said the man, against you, and I cannot tell whether or no I dare acquaint you; Speak freely, replied the Prince, and fear not that any thing can anger me more, then the disgrace which is prepared for Dorinde. Then Sir, continued the man, he has commanded Ar∣dilan
to come unto you, and bid you from him, depart to morrow before day and confine your self unto Gallo-Liguria, till you receive his farther commands; ad∣ding such menace unto his message, as I cannot well tell whether or no he be in his right senses. Friend (said the Prince) I hope the Kings anger will wear away with time, and haply he means not so ill as he says; however, I thank you heartily for the pains you have in my behalf, I desire you to continue it, and believe in that I shall die very young if you die unrewarded: Go therefore, and hear what fur∣ther news, and advertise me with all speed, that I may prepare as good remedies as I can. Thus they parted; and Sigismond came to me in such a rage against Gondebaut, that had not I restrained him, I think he had gone beyond the respects of a son due to a Father; and I must needs confess, that this action of this young Prince, did infinitely please me. Dorinde (said he unto me, after he had told me all he heard) I see that my affection unto you procures you all this misery, and my misfortune is the cause of yours: But let me tell you my opinion, which is. That I do not think the Kings anger proceeds only from the love he see. I bear unto you, but much more from the good will he fears you bear unto me; and were I as happy as that his fears were true, I would give you the same counsel that I will take my self. You may be assured, Sir, said I unto him, that your good will has obliged me to honour you, as I ought to do. Honour (answered he) I do look for from those who must hereafter be my subjects; but from Dorinde, I require love. If that word, replied I, were handsome in the mouth of a woman, I think (to content you) I should speak it. Dorinde, replied he presently, be assured that my affe∣ction unto you is such, as I had rather die, then entertain any thoughts which are dishonourable to you; and since you are pleased to give me this testimony of your good will, I am fully contented and shall from this hour, think my self the hap∣piest man that lives: and I am resolved, my Fairest, in despite of the King, ne∣ver to call him Father; and will in spite of him, love you double to what I did before: and dearest Dorinde, if you do love me, put you on the same resolution. Sir, answered I, I do protest to love you in spite of all the world, as much as my honour will give me leave. Then did I see in this young Prince such a sudden and great alteration, as assured me of the contentment which my words did give unto him; but the expressions which he used at the same time, did much more assure me. For my part (said he unto me, and took my hand) I do promise and vow unto you, my dearest Dorinde, by all that is most sacred and holy, that I will en∣deavour to the very utmost of my power, never to have any other wife but you: and were it in my free dispose, I would this very hour receive you as my wife, but since my will does depend upon another, I cannot, unless I should abuse you, say any more; only I beseech you (continued he, and put a Ring upon my fin∣ger) to take and keep this Ring as a pledge of what I now do promise. and more, that I will never marry, unless your bad Fortune constrain you to marry before me. Sir, said I unto him, and blushed for shame, though I never receive any other contentment then this honour of your love, yet I shall esteem my self, as long as I live, the happiest woman that ever was; and in testimony of this, I take this Ring, with the same protestations and vows that you have made. But Sir (con∣tinued I) notice will be taken of our actions, and therefore (I beseech you) let us break off discourse. Now, my Fairest (said he unto me) I have so much interest in you, as I must needs be careful of any thing that concerns you, and therefore I cannot brook that the fury of the Kings passion should offer this injury unto you: if you think it expedient, I will tell him as much to his face, and will not startle at all his anger; for it is no such capital crime to love a fair Lady: I do believe that at the first he will be extreamly angry at it, but he will cool again at last, and be∣come himself; then he cannot chuse but confess, that the equality of our ages pleads more reason to love each other, then he has to think, that the flowers in your fair face will ever grow in the winter of his age. Oh Sir, said I unto him, take heed of the fury of a King. Dearest (answered he) we will use all the pru∣dence that we can; but the very truth is, I value not any misery that can full out,
so Dorinde be not comprised in it. Upon this, without stay for any answer, he went away to enquire what news of the King, who in the mean time was in close counsel with that arch Traytor Ardilan: for as soon as ever Sigismonds intelligencer was gone, the King turning about, and seeing Ardilan still there? How now? said he unto him, are not you gone yet whither I commanded you? Sir, answered be, I stay to know whether you will please to command me any thing else: No, no, replied he, but go immediately and execute my Will. Ardilan then drawing neerer him, But Sir, said he unto him, If the Prince should ask me the reason why you send him this command, what shall I say? Tell him (replied Gondebaut, It is for his dis-respect of me in the business concerning Dorinde; and to stop his mouth if he offer to deny it, take that paper that lies upon the Table, shew it him. Sir, said Ardilan, and took the paper, I know what answer he will make, and if you please I will tell you. What answer can he make (said the King) but only confess his fault, or tell a lye? No Sir, replied Ardilan. not lye neither; for he will say that he never knew of your love to Dorinde; if he had, that he would never have offered it: And truly Sir, it is impossible he should: for the matter has been carried so close, that I believe none in the world knows it, but on∣ly You, Dorinde, Dariana, and I: and since it is so, me-thinks his crime not so great, as at the first you thought it. What then (said the King) would you have me to do? Upon this he began to walk again, but a little more calmly then at the first. Ardilan seeing the Kings anger begin to cool; Sir (said he unto him and smiled) I could never have believed that great Kings could ever have loved so per∣fectly as I see you do; I am confident you are not a little sensible of it: for I see a little blow makes a great wound in you, else you would never let a poor silly pa∣per of verses, which perhaps were writ without designe, only to pass away the time, to put you into such a strange disorder: Pardon me Sir, if I say you were a little too hasty. Well, well (said the King) but Ardilan, you have no reason to blame me for a fault which you are guilty of your self; for was it not you that told me first, Sigismond loved Dorinde, and that this was the only reason of her rejecting me? True Sir (said Ardilan) I did say so, but it was only out of opinion; and I must confess, had I thought it would have thus offended you, I should not have acquainted you with it, till I was better informed: for Sir, see into what a strange confusion you are ready to bring every thing, for to ruine all your hopes in the main business: Secondly to blast the honour of Dorinde, and all her Family. Thirdly, To scandal the house of the Princess Clotilda? And lastly, To ruine your own Son. But now, I hope your goodness and prudence, which hath furmounted the fury of this violent passion, will denote this day to be the happiest of all your Raigne; for on it you have obtained the greatest victory that ever youd id in all your life; for you have overcome your self. Ardilan continued on his flatteries, and as we understood by Sigismonds Intelligencer, at last concluded thus: Now Sir, this is my opinion upon the whole matter, If you should advertise the Prince of his affection unto Dorinde, and desire him for your sake to retire himself from that affection, and keep the matter secret; if he after this overture should still continue, then had you just cause to complain against him for his small respect of you: But however you have no cause, nor colour of a cause to blame Dorinde, before you know whether she loves him or no: for Lovers do often convey such papers unto their Mistrisses, and they not know from whence they came: I should advise therefore, that Clotilda forbid her from you, from having any more talk with him, or receiving any more presents from him; after this, they are both with∣out excuse if they continue. This was the advice of Ardilan, who added still more expressions by way of explanation: and the King who had a great confidence in him, after some consi∣deration, did approve of it; and thereupon commanded him to go presently and put what he had proposed in execution; which he did with more alacrity then he should the first commands. He went therefore first to the Princess, unto whom he made known the opinion which the King had of Sigismonds address unto Do∣rinde; and to shew her upon what grounds it was, he shewed her those verses which Dariana lost; at which the Princess was much amazed: yet like a wise and
prudent Princess, she answered, That perhaps those verses were composed with∣out any designe, but however she would obey the Kings commands. As fortune was, Sigismond was not then in the Town, being gone after dinner to hunt towards the Forrest of Eriu; and at his return, it was always his custom to alight from his horse at Clotildas house. And because it was very late before he did return, Ardilan could not speak with him that night: In the mean time, Clo∣tilda who loved the Prince no less then he did her, as soon as Supper was done, she took him aside, and acquainted him with the Kings message by Ardilan: Then, Brother (said she and smiled) I should be angry with yuu, if I thought you had thus deceived me. Sister (answered he very faintly) you have very much obliged me in this; but be pleased to let me answer unto this in the presence of Dorinde her self. Clotilda who had an opinion that he would clear all doubts, did present∣ly call me; and drawing us as far off as she could from the rest that were in the chamber, The Prince began thus, in as low a voice as he could, left any should hear. Sister (said he) I had no mind to answer unto your question, but in the pre∣sence of her who is most interessed in it, to the end the answer which I shall make may be sooner credited, and she exempted from all suspition of dissimulation. You are let understand, that the King knows I love Dorinde, and that she entertains my affection, and thereupon will have you to forbid this fair one, not only from entertaining my love, but also that I must never speak unto her; and that the ground of all this is, some Verses which I writ, and which Dariana lost: I think this is all the message which the King did send unto you, upon which you have grounded your question, to wit, whether it be true that we do love each other or no? Unto this I can return no other answer but this, and bid you look well upon Dorinde, then tell me whether it be possible to look upon her, and not love her. If this be a fault, Sister, it is yours, who has added unto her Beauty many ex∣cellencies and perections by your good education and converse: If it be a fault to love one of such superlative endowments then, You and Nature must plead my excuse. But I must say further yet, That the honour and respect which I owe un∣to you, shall never receive the least blemish by this affection; Protesting by Her∣cules, and all that have power to punish perjury, that I had rather die, then have any attempts upon her that may in the least degree stain her honour▪ This Sister, in answer to your Question. And now as to the Kings message, who thinks by these Forbiddings to divert me from this affection: I do declare unto, and I be∣seech you tell him as much when next you speak with him, That all the whole U∣niverse together, is not able to hinder me from loving Dorinde; That she must not speak unto me, but fly me, and keep at a distance from me, this may indeed put me to abundance of grief and torment, but never whilst I breath divert me from that lasting affection which I have unto her▪ This (Sister) is a most true answer unto the Question which you asked: Now it is Dorindes part to answer the King, as concerning her self. The young Prince spoke this in such an emphatical manner, that Clotilda smi∣led. Truly Brother (said she) a most excellent invention to divert Dorinde from the Kings love: But you Dorinde (said she, and turned towards me) what answer do you give unto all this that the Prince hath said? Madam, answered I, and blushed, I cannot give any answer, but that I do not (yet I wish I did) merit so great an honour. How? replied Clotilda, Dare you presume to love the Prince Sigismond, and would have him love you again? The young Prince then interru∣pted, for he saw that modesty would not permit me to speak. Sister, said he, you can hardly have a more ample declaration then this Fair one hath given you; but I will make it for us both, and I think she will second me. Then taking my hand, See Sister this Ring (said he unto her) which Dorinde wears; I did give it unto her as a Pledge, that if I could marry her at this very instant, I would: but being un∣der the authority of a Father, and not able to dispose of my self, without offence to the Laws of God and man, I will stay until I have his consent, or till time dis∣pence with me from that duty. The Princess hearing this, stood amazed, and in such a confusion, that she did nothing but look, somtimes upon one, and somtimes
upon another, not being able to speak one word; but at the last after a long muse, she recollected her self, and turning towards the Prince, Truy Brother (said she unto him) were not my love above all injuries, I should be exceedingly angry with you for thus contracting your self with one who is in my service, without my knowledge. Sister, replied the Prince, If I have offended you, I must heartily beg your pardon; and above all, I most earnestly beseech you to let all the blame reflect upon me, and nothing upon this Fair one; and if my life, or any thing else will expiate the crime, I am here most ready to obey whatsoever you please to command: only I beg of you, as you love me, not to be angry in the least manner with Dorinde: for I assure you Sister, that if we have offended, it was only in point of time; for we were both of us fully resolved to acquaint you and put our selves into your hands. But dear Sister (continued he) must I be so un∣happy as to incur your displeasure? I swear by the great Tautates, I never en∣tertained the least thought but which conducted to honour and respect you; so as should I lose your favour, I should think my self undone. But Brother, re∣plied the Priness, Why did you not acquaint me with your intention at the first? At the first, I could not, replied the Prince, because then I could not tell whether I should love her, or whether she would entertain my affection. But since (said Clotilda) why did you not tell me, when you were assured of both? And she, who talked so freely with me concerning the Kings address, why did not she as well acquaint me with yours? Sister, replied the Prince, If ever you chance to love any one, you will answer this Question: You must know, that when one loves, it is not a work that is begun with designe: He that walks upon a piece of Ice, do you think his designe is to fall? No, it is a surprize caused by the slipperiness of the Ice: so it is in Love, When one sees a Beauty, this Beauty does surprize, and makes us insensibly glide into love, and we are become Lovers, before ere we thought of being in love. We do protest unto you Sister, and I can answer for this Fair one as well as for my self, that within these two days we did not think it would ever have proceeded so far; but the Intelligence which we had that the King would by extream tyrannry break off all affection betwixt us, was the cause of our resolution to contract: and it was no sooner resolv'd upon, but we intended to ac∣quaint you, and follow your wise and prudent advice in every thing; and sorry we are you knew it no sooner. But sister, the thing is past and done, and now all counsel comes too late, and we can do nothing else but most earnestly beg your pardon. Brother, said the Princess, two things do give me great satisfaction: The one is, to see the confidence that you have in me, in freely acquainting me with a bu∣siness, which if known to the King, would certainly be very prejudicial to you: and the other is, To see your affection aim at a noble and honourable end; and in this I cannot charge you with any fault: But all the errour that has been commit∣ted, is in Dorinde, who knew very well that it was her duty to tell me; she could be free enough in acquainting me with the Kings Courtship, but concealed yours so subtilly, that God knows whether I should ever have known it, but for the fool∣ish Duriana; yet Brother, for your sake, I will not only pardon her, but more, I promise you both to forget it; or if I do remember it, it shall be only to assist you as much as I can, for I do foresee a great controversie to ensue betwixt the King and you. Sister, said the Prince, this Fair one and I are infinitely obliged unto you for your pardon, and promised assistance; and as for the King, we have armed our selves with resolution to resist all that he can do against us: we are not culpable of any capital crimes: If the King transgress the bounds of a Father to a Son, I shall transgress the bounds of a son to a Father; and since we have right on our side, we shall be more contented then you can imagine. The Prince after this, and some expressions of thanks, would have gone away, because he was weary with hunting, but Clotilda stayed him; Brother (said she) before you go, let us advise what I should say unto the King concerning the mes∣sage which Ardilan brought unto me from him. Sister (said the Prince, you may tell him, if you please, That you have charged Dorinde according to his command, and that she answered, that she durst not stand mute when I spoke unto her, nor
much less forbid me from speaking to her: That for her part, she would neve court me, nor durst she shun me; for Sister, I have a great desire the King shoul speak unto me. Then prepare your self for it, said Clotilda, for I am confiden that he will either send for you, or send Ardilan with a message to you; which if he do, I beseech you consider that Gondebaut is your King, and more, that he is the Father of Prince Sigismond. Upon this he left her, and went to rest himself, if at the least this news would give him leave. In the morning, Ardilan was so early at the house of Sigismond, that he found him in bed; and saying that he came from the King, he was presently admitted. Ardilan desiring that none might hear what he said, beseeched the Prince to command all the servants to with-draw, which Sigismond did; and then he began thus. I come Sir, from the King your Father, to communicate unto you some news which he hath received from King Alerick, and which he thinks it requisite to ac∣quaint you withal. Ardilan made this his Prologue by command from Gondebaut, who thought it good to begin with that preamble. Sigismond who was no lover of Ardilan, did answer with a smile; I thought Ardilan your service of the King had been only in negotiations of love; but I see you are become a Statesman, since the King communicates unto you such Forreign News. Ardilan who was doubtless as subtle a man as any of his time, did very well understand the Princes meaning: but seeming to take no notice of it, Truly Sit, said he unto the Prince, you are not much beside the mark, for the message which I am to deliver, is indeed matter of Love: for the King has received an answer from his Ambassadors which he sent unto the King of the Visigots, to treat about a marriage betwixt you and one of his daughters; that they have received a very good answer, and hope to bring the matter to a good conclusion. Now the King who studies your welfare and gran∣deur, has sent me to acquaint you with it, to the end you may prepare your self for a voyage which he would have you make in an equipage besitting the Burgun∣dian Prince. The Prince Sigismond who was advertised betimes in the morning of all the stratagem, did ask Ardilan where those Letters from the Ambassadors were. The King keeps them, replied Ardilan, because (as I believe) they contain some things which he would have kept secret from me. How Ardilan, replied the Prince) does the King keep any thing secret from you? Surely it is not so; for me-thinks he who does not hide his most secret thoughts from you, should hide nothing else. Does not the King Sir (said Ardilan) hide his most secret thoughts from me, I beseech you Sir, who tells you these Tales? Why all the Court can tell it (an∣swered Sigismond: Witnese the marriage that you did negotiate for him so slily: Witness the poor Horse that you lamed, and witness all your negotiations unto the Princess Clotilda, to assist you in your designs; and would you now make me believe that the King will not trust you with a Letter? No, no Ardilan, I am too neer a neighbour to you to be ignorant what credit you have with him, I would to God his Son had as much. Ardilan hearing this, was so blank'd, that he knew not what to answer; but like a man of a quick and present wit, he soon recollected himself, and thought it best to turn all to Rallery, and so divert the discourse. Ah Sir (said he) I see you are pleased to make your self merry these Bacchanalian days, when every one strives to be pleasant; but I am serious, and in good earnest. Be pleased Sir to know, that what I say does neerly concern your estate: You have no Neighbours whom you need to fear, but Thierry, Alarick, and the King of the Franks; As for Thierry, you have alliance with him already: As for the King of Franks, he is a Neighbour to be feared, and watches his opportunity to make attempts upon your Dominions, he wants neither will nor means to do it: And this consideration invited the King your father to send his Ambassadors unto the King of the Visigots, whose power once joyned with yours, and the Ostrogots is such, as will give a check unto all the ambitious designs which the Franks can have against you. Now Sir, this Treaty is brought to as good a period as you can de∣sire; but it seems in lieu of being glad, you mock at it, as if it did not concern you. Ardilan (answerd the Prince in a scornful manner) I must confess you are
a person of great policy, and my Father does you abundance of wrong if he does not make you his prime Counsellor of State: But as for me, who am not so knowing as you are, I can give no other answer but this, that I think it more expe∣dient for the King to negotiate his own marriage then mine; for it is but reason he should marry before me, being my elder: You Ardilan can best instruct him, and transact it for him: Upon this he drew his Curtain, turned away, and would not talk any longer with him. Ardilan, who extreamly feared the anger of Sigismond, after he had waited a while, was constrained to go away without any discourse of the love which he bore unto me, and much less of the Kings, unto whom he related word for word all that the Prince had said unto him; and afterwards added, Give me leave to tell you Sir, said he, that I think there is none can compose these disorders better then the Princess Clotilda: For first, she has the sole power over Dorinde. And secondly, I see the Prince does love her, and has a great confidence in her. If she have any power, replied the King. I make no question but she will employ it, when I command her, for she dare not displease me; she knows her obligations to me, and what good or harm I am able to do her: But my greatest fear is, that Dorinde is taken with the springing youth of young Sigismond: and if so, then there is no other remedy but to sever them asunder. Sigismonds Intelligence had his ear listning unto all he said, and therefore did hear the Kings resolution, which was, that he himself would speak unto Clotilda, and command her to divert Sigismonds affection from me. As soon as the Prince was advertized of this, he went unto Clotilda, and acquainted her with all the discourse betwixt him and Ardilan, and afterwards added. Now Sister, the King intends to come unto you and to command you to use your power in breaking off all amity betwixt Dorinde and me; for my part, I protest by heaven, that death shall sooner seize upon me, then any separation from her: and yet the cunning Ardilan, who loves neither you nor me, would make the King believe, that you have the absolute power over Dorinde, and that you can do what you will with me: so as you must take good heed of the King, for he will employ you; and if all succeed not to his mind, he will be apt to do you some mischief; the only re∣medy that I know, is to prevent him, I mean, that before he come to you, send you unto him, and beseech him to let you come and communicate some affairs un∣to him, which are necessary he should know; when you are with him, I would have you make a great complaint unto him against me, and my love to Dorinde, Beseech him to employ all his prudence in preventing it; that for your part, you have done all you can, and all to no purpose, for when you spoke unto me of it, I told you plainly that I did love Dorinde, that it was a thing impossible ever to se∣parate me from her; and the worst of all is, that you think Dorinde also loves me, and that things are gone so far, that you fear there is some promises past betwixt her and me. I make no question (continued the Prince) but the King will be very much in∣censed against me; but Sister, of two evils, the lesser is to be chosen: should his fury be turned towards you, it would be worse; you know how he used Chilperick, the cruel death of Godomar, the massacres of his male children, the hard usage of your Sister Mutucuna, in cloystering her up amongst the Vestals: To be brief, Sister, these bloody cruelties upon those from whom you are descended, makes me extreamly fear his fury should fall upon you: But for my part, what can he do but drive me out of his presence as he would have done before? And I protest Clotilda, that I do so much abominate his violences, as were he not my father, and so consequently I bound to honour and serve him, I should sooner desire to be out of his sight, then any ones living; so that his punishment will be a kind of a pleasure unto me. The Princess who did extreamly love Sigismond, as well because he loved her, as because of his many other good qualities, after many thanks unto him for his indulgent care of her, she endeavoured by all her arguments and reasons to divert him from his affection to me, demonstrating unto him the great inconveniences he would draw upon himself by it; instancing the lowness of my quality, what a dis∣graceful
graceful alliance it would be to his Royal Family, how much it would displease the King, hinting unto him the duty and obedience that he owed unto him as his Fa∣ther, and as his King; Briefly, she laid before him all the inconveniencies and dis∣contents that would ensue upon it. Sister (said he) in answer unto all these con∣siderations, I will use but one word, and that is, I Love: and did you but know the validity, extent, and power of this word, you would confess all these consi∣derations to be poor and weak arguments to divert me from my unalterable reso∣lution. Since it is so, said Clotilda, and since you advise me to it. I will talk with the King according to your directions, and will let you know his answer. Upon this, she dispatched one of her servants to the King immediately, according as it was resolved upon. Gondebaut hearing this message, sent her word, that he also had somthing to communicate unto her, and that after dinner he would come unto her. The Prince knowing this answer, and having no mind to be in the way, he took horse, pre∣tending to hunt; and so kept himself out of Town all the day. Whilst these things passed thus, Arcingenterix my father being very old, and fallen sick of a Fever, he grew so ill, as being past hopes of life, he sent unto Clotilda, to beseech her that I might come and see him before he died: Upon this she commanded me to go in all possible haste, and to tell him from her, that she would send him some things which haply might conduce to his preservation, and thereupon gave me some excellent receipts, which I carried with me. My poor father, as soon as he saw me, and heard what the Princess had sent unto him, he seemed to receive much contentment; and taking me by the hand, I hope (said he unto me) Tautates will provide one that will be a stay unto thy youth, for now daughter reckon your self without a father; and therefore beseech the Princess from me, to have pity upon Dorinde, as upon an Orphan left to the wide wicked world, without any support and assistance, but from God and her; it will be (tell her, a charitable office, and God will reward it double: after this, my father be∣gan to faint, notwithstanding all remedies that could be applied, and in the night after he died. The King in the interim, as soon as dinner was done, failed not to go unto the Princess; and taking her aside, he began to make great complaints of the Prince; but she who had been well instructed, prevented him, and told him, that she had a very great desire to talk with him about a business of great importance, in which she most humbly beseeched him to take some order: And thereupon she related unto him how she had chidden me for those Verses which were sent unto me and which I had received unknown to her: Afterwards she complained against the Prince Sigismond for tampering with one of her women; nay worse, that she had discovered an intimate affection betwixt us: Nay worse then all that, she was afraid the business was gone so far, that the Prince had engaged himself by some promises. Oh Heavens! cryed out Gondebaut, has Sigismond engaged himself by promise unto Dorinde? Is he so far out of his wits? Sir, said Clotilda, I will not absolutely assure you of it, but some probable circumstances induceth me to think so; and when you know as much as I do, I am confident you will concur with me in opi∣nion. When you commanded me to forbid Dorinde from any speech with the Prince, she answered me, That if he came to her, she could not drive him away: And when I asked her why she received those Verses without my knowledge, she replied. That the good will which the Prince was pleased to honour her withal, was to such intentions as could not offend any. And when I urged her to tell me what those intentions were; Madam (said she) the Prince can tell you better then I, if you please to ask him: and afterwards do what I could, I could not draw one word from her. This discourse Sir, did exceedingly trouble me; and this morning when he was pleased to come unto me, I resolved to speak unto him as privately as I could; when I was urgent with him to discover the truth, and com∣plained against the discourse of Dorinde, he gave a cold faint answer, in these terms. Good Sister, Do you love me as your Brother? And I answering, yes; Then Sister, said he, Love Dorinde as your Sister: Judge Sir the meaning of these
words: For any part, I was mute when I heard them, he went presently away: and then I thought it my duty to acquaint you Sir, that you might take such fur∣ther order, as you prudence shall think fittest. This News did so nettle the King, that though he was a man which could com∣mand himself well enough when he would, yet could he not chuse but give great signs of his displeasure: for after he stood a while mute, he grumbled to himself in a low voice; Is the heart of Sigismond so ase, as to marry one; whose highest honour is to serve such a one as he should marry? Dare he dispose of himself without me? And, if he will needs marry without my approbation, must he needs make such a misbecoming choice? This is such a fault, as if I did not resent it, I might be censured as dulpable as he is: And therefore I will make appear to all the world, that Gondebaut does not consent unto the sin of his Son. Then turning towards Clotilda; I thank you (said he unto her) and think my self much obliged unto you for your advertisements; and to make it appear how kindly I take them, you shall obtain from me whatsoever you can desire: I was very desirous to talk with you about the same business, though I could not imagine things to be at this height; but I see you have prevented me, and are desirous to turn this rash incon∣siderate young man from his destructive designes: if you continue thus obliging me, I shall set you in Sigismonds room, and he shall be as indifferent unto me, as the meanest man in my Dominions. Sir (answered Clotilda, and accompanied the King, who was going away) I can never do you such services as your good∣ness obligeth me unto: But Sir, I most humbly beseech you not to deprive the Prince (my brother) of the honour of your favour, for a few extravagancies of youth, which doubtless he will repent, when he knows that they displease you. Consider Sir, he is your son, and young, and it is unto Fathers whom God has given wisdom and prudence to instruct, not to destroy their children. Clotilda replied he, and took his leave, you are too wise for your young years; I would to heaven Sigismond would imitate you in obedience, or else that he were in his grave. Then the King went presently to his chamber, and related unto Ardilan all that Clotilda had told him: and after a thousand menaces, somtimes against the Prince, and somtimes me, the Kings mind was so enflamed with two violent pas∣sions, Love, and Anger, that he could not possibly resolve upon any setled course. On the other side, the Prince being returned from hunting, he came presently to the Princess, to know what had passed betwixt Gondebaut and her; and she re∣lating all that was said and done; Sister (said he) I thank God with all my heart, that the anger of the King reflects only upon me, and that you are exempt: I shall now with a calm mind undergo whatsoever he will please to impose upon me▪ for though he lay the fault upon me, yet all the world will excuse me; Then ask∣ing where I was, and being told that my Father was dead: If I durst (said he) I would go and help to lament her loss, but since that is not permitted, Sister (said he) do you think it would be amiss if I sent unto her? No, answered the Prin∣cess, but I think it would be very prudently done. Then the Prince bade her good∣night, and went to his chamber, where he writ this Letter. Prince SIGISMONDS Letter unto DORINDE. I Know very well that for the loss of such a person, grief is so natural, that it were absurd to disswade the Fair Dorinde from it: But though it be allowable, yet it is upon an implicite condition, of being in measure: for excessive sorrow is not allowed for a Father, nor any else, except a most perfect Lover. Preserve those tears (my dearest Dorinde) untill you have such a loss, which will not be till the death of Sigismond, who loves
you infinitely beyond all dimensions, and whose extream affection merits the like measure of Love from you again. I received this Letter by a servant of the Princes, and I assure you my compa∣nions, I found the Proverb by experience true, which says, That Physick works good effects when the Patient has a good opinion of the Physitian: For believing that Sigismond was the only man that did love me; or to say better, the only man that was no deceiver, this short letter was such a comfort unto me, as wrought better effects upon my excessive sorrow, then all other admonitions whatsoever: And besides, I thought it an offence against our amity, if I did not do as he desi∣red me. The King in the mean time whose mind was all night long upon this business, as soon as day appeared, he called unto Ardilan, who lay all that night in his chamber by express command: and after he had complained against the Prince and me, but much more against me then the Prince; and after he had sworn and protested that I was unworthy of that honour which he intended unto me, he said, that now he hated me double to his love beore: he asked his opinion which way he might be revenged of me, and reclaim the Prince to his duty? To which Ardilan answered▪ Did I think Sir, that you were fallen from your affection un∣to this woman, I could advise a course which would have the two operations which you desire. Know Ardilan, said the King, that now I do extreamly hate her; and as I thought her fair and handsome before, so I do think her very ugly and ill-favoured now, insomuch as I do much admire I should find any thing in such a face worthy of my thoughts, and am extreamly ashamed I should be so silly as to love her. Thanks be to God, Sir, said Ardilan, that Truth triumphs o∣ver your passion; and to tell you truly Sir, I have admired a thousand times that you should so dote upon a woman, who was neither fair nor wise: Alas Sir, it was not any beauty or merit in her, and a madness in you, that blinded your eyes; and therefore you ought to render thanks unto the good genius that opened your eyes, and restored you to your senses: Now Sir, since you are your self again, this is the way to be fully revenged, and to recover the Prince out of that gulph which once had almost devoured you. You must force Dorinde to marry, for if she do love the Prince, no punishment can be more sharp; the Prince also will vex to see her whom he loved so dearly, in the arms of another, and be out of all hopes to see her his. But (answered Gondebaut) Dorinde will not consent unto any marriage. Sir (replied this wicked fellow) Kings are the Tutors of their sub∣jects; and as the Gods know better what is good for men then men themselves do; so Kings (who are gods upon earth) do know what is good for their subjects better then they themselves; and therefore if you do provide a husband for Do∣rinde, who will say that you have not provided that which was necessary for her? And if she be stubborn, and will not marry him, who will blame you if you force her. The Physitian knows better what is good for the disease then the Patient; some Physick must be taken by force; and her father being dead, you may cover your designe with a cloak of piety, and will not see the childe of Arcingenori without a Guardian: Besides, there is a way to make her marry without using your Royal Authority. There is a Law Sir, which from the Visigots is come to us, by which it is ordained, That the Father having made a promise of his daugh∣ter unto one, and die, she being unmarried, his promise shall be made good after his death. But Clotilda told me (replied the King) that there is some promises already past betwixt them. No matter for that (replied Ardilan) for you must know Sir, that there is another Law which ordains, that if a woman dispose of her self otherwise then as her Father would have her, both she, and he who married her, shall be put into the hands of him to whom the Father did promise her, to be sold or used as he pleaseth: Since Sir, since these two Laws are in force, why may not you marry Dorinde unto Periander or Merindor, since Arcingentorix did pro∣mise unto them both: In the first place, send unto her, and let her know, that
you will provide her a match for her contentment; that this your care proceeds from your love unto her father and her; and that you will give her the choice of one of those two Cavaliers for a Husband: You may send the same message unto others of her kinred, and so oblige them likewise; for it is no mean prudence in a Prince, to oblige many by one benefit; I am confident that if she make a dor at the motion, her friends will perswade her; and if she be obstinate, they will be the first that will blame her, and commend you though you should compel her unto it by force: And then God knows what will become of her, when she has none to support her: For the Princess Clotilda, I dare say will have nothing to do with her, she is betrer advised, and will not do any thing that shall displease you. The King liked this advice, and resolved upon it. He commanded Ardi∣lan to go from him unto the Princess; who could give no other answer, but that she would perswade her with all the arguments that possibly she could. She sent immediately to the Prince, to let him know she would speak with him, and when he came, she acquainted him with the designe: for though she saw much danger to her self, she would run the hazard, rather then do any thing that should displease him. Sigismond was much amazed at the designe; and the more, because his Intelligencer failed him at this time; but the reason was, because he was not present at that time when it was resolved upon: but he came time enough to hear the King protest and swear. that he would marry Dorinde by fair means or by foul; and that if neither of those two Cavaliers would accept of her, some other should, though it were Ardilan himself. The Prince hearing this news, and seeing the King had recourse unto extream remedies, he thought that nothing would cure his extream violences, but extream resolutions. He proposed therefore unto Clotilda, for him and I to go out of Gondebauts Dominions, and there consummte the marriage which he had promi∣sed unto me: But she extreamly disliking this course, thought it better for me to go alone, and shun the storm which he had threatned, but he to remain still with the King, and endeavour to perswade the King unto reason. But when this re∣solution of absence was pitched upon, it was long in debate whether I should go: for, beyond the Alpes I could not, because they were allied with the Ostrogots; To the Franks was less likely, because they were all in such combustion amongst themselves, about the new election of a King, that all was in disorder there: Be∣sides, the Queen Methina was in such necessity of aid and assistance, as it was not probable she would entertain me against the will of so potent a King her Neighbour. As for the Visigots, the journey was too long, for I was to pass through all Spain; besides, there being a Treaty about a marriage with Sigismond there was no safety for me in that place: At last, they concluded I should go into For∣rests unto Amasis, with whom Clotilda held much correspondency: and because they knew not whether the authority of Gondebaut would not deter her from gi∣ving me safe protection, they thought it expedient for me to disguise my self in this habit wherein you see me, to the end that if the protection of Amasis did fail me, the solitary habitation among the Shepherdesses of Lignon might preserve me unknown. This resolution being taken, the Princess sent for me; and though the loss of my father might well have pleaded my far longer absence from Court, yet since she sent for me, I conceived it was upon some important occasion. And there∣fore in the night time, I repaired to her, who as soon as she saw me, she carried me into her closet; where being alone together, and seeing me weep, Dorinde (said she) it is not now a time to weep and complain; you must arm your self with a more couragious and generous resolution. But consider Dorinde, that in what condition soever we be, heaven never will afflict us more then we are able to bear, and therefore droop not, but rouse up your spirit, and take courage, and then you shall see, that neither God, nor persons of honour will never forsake you: The King gives you the choice of Periander or Merindor for a husband, and will by all means have you marry one of those two; if you will not in good will accept of this, or if they refuse, he is fully resolved to make you marry Ardilan: See, Sweetheart, what need you have of courage and generous resolution. How,
Madam (answered I, and grew as pale as death) must I marry either one of those two, or Ardilan? What Law is there for that? The same Law, replied she; that the stronger will impose upon the weaker. He will have Sigismond marry a Prin∣cess, whom he pretends will bring great advantage; and he knows that he will never be perswaded unto it, till you be married unto another; and therefore he is resolved to sacrifice you unto the marriage of his Son, and has given me in charge to tell you as much, and to know what you resolve upon. Upon death, Madam (answered I presently) yes the most cruel death that ever any Tyrant like himself invented. Upon this, the Prince Sigismond knocked at the door, and interrupted us: Clotilda not knowing who it was, went her self to open it; and seeing the Prince, Come Brother (said she unto him in a low voice) and see here a poor desolate wo∣man; and having shut the door, she conducted him unto me all in tears. My dearest Dorinde (said he) comfort your self with this, that he for whom you suf∣fer this displeasure, will help you to bear a share, every tear you shed, is a drop of blood from his heart: But I vow by all that's sacred, that neither the power of a King, or commands of a Father, shall ever make me shrink from my promise un∣to you. I know that Gondebaut intends to force an injurious marriage upon you, only because he thinks that I will never marry till then; but he is grosly mistaken if he think to bring his enterpize to pass that way; for I will sooner lose my life, then consent unto it; protesting that if he do constrain you to marry against your will, he shall not survive an hour after I hear of it. He would have proceeded further, but Clotilda interrupted him, saying, That when things are come to that height, as extream resolutions must be taken, then perhaps none will blame you if you do so; but yet (thanks be to heaven) they are not, and therefore it is more requisite to endeavour the prevention by prudence: It was upon this subject I was talking to this poor woman but now, and before I gave her my advice, I asked her what she resolved upon: Upon death replied she again, and with as good a will as ever any desired to live. Death, replied the Prince, is the last remedy; but be∣fore you have recourse unto it, as I live, half of the Burgundians shall die in de∣fence of so just a cause. Oh Sir, answered I, heaven forbid I should be the cause of a War betwixt the Father and the Son, and it were better a thousand times that Dorinde were in her grave. No, no, replied Clotilda, there is no necessity of having recourse unto death, until there be no other remedy; nor is there any ne∣cessity of submitting unto the unjust violences of a Tyrant, as long as they may be avoided; Heaven has given us prudence to preserve our selves against such de∣signs: Let us therefore make use of it as we ought to do, and I assure my self hea∣ven will prosper our endeavours. Upon this she proposed unto me what Sigismond and she had before resolved upon; and told me, that if I took this course, she might be much assistant to me, because there was very good correspondency betwixt the sage Amasis and her, and that if upon any consideration that Princess could not protect me, I might keep my self concealed amongst the Shepherdesses of Lignon, (Astrea and Diana) with whom I might live very happily, they being the fairest, the most vertuous, and the best accomplished women in all Europe: And when I answered, that to fly from this unjust violence which was threatned, I would not only go into Forrests, but into any other place of the world; and that my only fear was, that I should not hit the way, or else be taken by some or other. The Prince answered, I will be your guard, and see you so safely conducted, that none dare do you any harm: Then turning towards the Princess, Sister (said he unto he) I beseech you let her return unto her house, to take order for her departure, before any take notice of it; for if you approve of it, I conceive it best for her to be gone as soon as she can, nor shall I be at rest, till she be out of that place where injustice is so pre∣dominant. The Princess who pitied my misfortune, and was a true wisher of my welfare, did willingly consent unto it; and at parting, she said unto me, Remember Do∣rinde that you take your best Jewels with you, which are most portable, and may best be hidden; for Necessity is a monster that has no Law, no shame, nor reason;
and a woman above all ought to fear meeting with such a fierce and dangerous beast. This counsel caused me (as soon as I came home) to seek out the best of my Jewels which were portable, of which I made a girdle in a linnen bag, and wore it about my Waste: and as I was very busie about it, the Prince having none with him but one man, in whom he had great confidence, came into my chamber; at which I was so surprized, as I ran into the next room, and locked up my self: but considering the sweet and discreet behaviour he always used towards me, I thought this flight from him was a kind of offence unto him, and that I had no manner of reason to fear him. I see Dorinde (said he unto me) that my co∣ming does put you into fears; but know, that my coming is to no other end, but to continue those assurances which formerly I have given you of my unalterable affection: and to tell you, that such is my love, as you shall never be banished from your Native Country for my sake, without me; I mean, that I will accom∣pany you into all places where you go, and nothing shall separate us, but only death. Oh Sir (said I unto him) will you go with me? What then will the King your Father say? Let Gondebaut (replied he) say and do even what he plea∣seth, for I will not acknowledge him either for my Father or my King: I would have him know, that Kings are lords of our bodies, but not of our minds, and that nothing is more insupportable unto a generous courage, then an unjust con∣straint: You need not (Dorinde) refuse my company; for I protest before the great Tautates, I will never desire any thing from you, until we be married to∣gether, so as I may be for ever the husband of Dorinde, and Dorinde the wife of Sigismond. Sir (said I unto him) the hopes which you are pleased to give me, do give me such abundance of contentment and satisfaction, that though never any other advantage befal me, yet would I not change my happiness with any woman in the world: But Sir, if you intend to go with me, what will the world censure of my flight with you? What need you care what censures the world gives (an∣swered he) as long as we intend never to return till we be married together? But good Sir, said I, what will the King say when he sees he has lost you? If the King replied he, would have a Son without courage, let him get one who does not re∣semble me: and if he would have him to be a man of spirit, he must treat him otherwise then he does me, if he desire to keep him long. But Sir (said I unto him) is the Princess Clotilda acquainted with your intention? No, answered he, I would not let her know it, for her affection unto you being not like unto mine, she (I know) would not approve of it: But if ever she chance to love, she will not only excuse the action, but esteem me the more, and love me better for it. Our discourse was long upon this subject; but at last we resolved, that the third day betimes in the morning, we should meet at the Temple of Venus, because we were to go forth of that Gate; and the first that came there, was to consult with the Oracle, to know which way we should go; being certain that this Goddess (who was a great favourer of Lovers) would give us good counsel: and lest we should be known, Dariana and I were to be disguised in these habits which you see me wear, and he in the habit of a Shepherd: with him there was only that young man in whom he had so much confidence: We promised each other to stay in the Temple until five of the clock in the morning, but if that time were past, if the one did not see the other coming, then to stay at a little Bridge out of the Town, in the way to Isseron, until four of the clock in the evening; because at that place there was a thicket of wood where one might hide themselves as long as they plea∣sed, and that our horses should stay also in that wood. This being resolved upon, and the third day being come, I failed not to rise betimes in the morning; and as soon as day appeared, I consulted with the Oracle of the Goddess Venus, which gave me this answer:
The Oracle. TO Forrests go; there find a Cure, For all the sorrows you endure. I had forgot to tell you, that before I departed, I writ a Letter unto the Prin∣cess Clotilda, to discharge her of my flight from the cruelty of that Tyrant: and I left it lying upon my Table, assuring my self it would be conveyed unto her when I was gone. Hitherto the Prince Sigismond did make me believe that there were some men that were not false and perfideous: But now he made it appear, that Nature can never be so well corrected, but there will alwaies remain a smack of the old vice. Oh God! How difficult it is for a soul to counterfeit a thing long, which is contrary unto it. But where was my wits? What was become of my judge∣ment, after three times being deceived? Had I not sufficient experience of mens falshood? And if now I have occasion to complain that Sigismond hath deceived me, of whom can I complain but my self? Could I be such a fool as to believe the Prince, or trust in any mortal man, after so much experience? Well, five a clock struck, no Sigismond appeared; and see how I was deceived by his smooth language: Though I saw he did not come according to his promise, yet I could not believe he would deceive me: Oh God! What will a good opi∣nion which one hath conceived of another do? Though I saw he came not, yet I could not but imagine that he would come: And thus I fancied occasions of his stay so long, that but for Dariana, I had stayed at the Temple door all the day; but she perswaded me, and not without some probability, that perhaps he was staying for us at the Bridge where we appointed to meet, and that not daring to come unto the Temple lest he should be known, he stayed for us there, where per∣haps he is blaming us for that whereof we accused him. This advice caused us to walk through the street, not without much fear of being known; yet my fears for the Prince were double to my own, so much did his affection which I believed he bore unto me, oblige me to wish his welfare. When we were out of the Town, we were much amazed when we found our selves in the wide fields, and knew not which way to go; and that which most troubled us, was, that all along the high way, there were so many passengers, that we were still out of our way to miss meeting with them. At last, after much a do, we saw the Bridge, and as we thought, the Prince staying for us; this, though we were very weary, made us double our pace: But when we came there, and found no body, then were we much astonished, especially when we considered that now Noon was past: we looked many a long look back the same way we came, and every thing we saw, seemed to be what he looked for, and at last every thing de∣ceived us. The Sun began to grow very low, when I (out of all patience) resolved to re∣turn unto Lyons, to know the reason why the Prince came not: But as I was set∣ting forward, I saw coming the same way that we were to go, five or six Horse∣men, which constrained me to retire into the thick of the Wood, lest they should see me. Dariana, who was alwaies of a contrary opinion, and would not have me return back; Well Madam (said she unto me) if these men had met you, I pray tell me in what a case had you been in? Very true, said I unto her, but is it not better to un the hazard of being known, then to stay here all the night? Oh (said she) the days are long, and it will not be night above eight hours; let us not despair, perhaps the Prince may come some other way when we are gone; but if you be so impatient, I will tell you what I will do, I will take some of yonder dirt, and rub my face all over with it, afterwards I will be walking up and down the high way as soon as I see him, I will run to advertise you, by this means I shall not be known, and you may rest your self in the Wood; so as when the Prince does
come, you may be able to go whither you will in the night. My longing desire to see Sigismond, made me consent unto this motion though it went somthing against my mind to stay in the wood by my self; yet in hopes that she would go into the Town, and make him come the sooner, and because I was confident none could see me in that place, I took so much courage as to stay by my self. Dariana then daubing all her face over with dirt, I could not chuse but laugh in the midst of my misery: Go Dariana, said I unto her, and return quickly. Did Ardilan see me in this pickle (said she) though he did not die be∣fore for the love of me, yet I am confident he would now die with laughter. Up∣on this she embraced me, and went to the place from whence we came. Alas! Could I have foreseen the sorrows which that departure cost me, I would sooner have consented unto my death then it: But Heaven, not contented only to banish me my native Country to satisfie a perfideous man, but would have me also resent the sorrows of a sad and terrible solitude: And as I had forsaken all for this mans sake, so was I for his sake also left destitute of all humane help and consolation, As long as I could see her, I did accompany her with her eye; but when she was out of sight, then began I to be apprehensive of my fault: At the first I went into the thick of the Wood to hide my self, but impatience soon invi∣ted me out again, fearing lest if Sigismond should come, and not find me, he would not stay, but return back again; otherwhiles I was afraid left some Wolf should do me harm; somtimes I had a design to go after Dariana, and setting forward in the way two or three times, I either saw or heard some passenger, which made me retreat again into the Wood: These frights were nothing unto those that sei∣zed upon me when the Sun was set; and more yet, when all light was gone▪ Oh Heavens! In what a horror was I then? The least blast of wind made me start, and shake like a leaf; and when any Bryer took hold of me, I thought it to be some Wolf, or other wilde Beast that would devour me: When I heard any noise, or any Owl scrick, I was ready to fall down for fear; There was not a tale of Hags, Hobgoblins, and night walkers, that ever I had heard in my life but they came all into my fancy, and seemed real unto me: And being neer a high Road, I heard Horsmen pass by several times; and God knows how careful I was then to hide my self in the thick of the Wood. I cannot relate all the Tears, the sighs, the groans and complaints that I made against the perfidie of Sigismond, and against the hollow affection of Dariana, who then I believed went away purpose∣ly to forsake me in this extream necessity, because she would not run the hazards of this enterprize. Oh how true it is (said I unto my self) that every one is afraid to keep company with an unfortunate person? Oh the misery of us humanes, that can never know our friends, till we be in adversity! And as soon as we know them, we are sure to lose them! Oh the dismal lodging of a dark wood in a clou∣dy night, unto one whose spirit was so timerous and afflicted as mine was at that time! So it was, that it was day before I durst offer to close an eye to sleep. When the Sun appeared, I was so weary with my walking, so tormented with my fears, and so hungry, having eaten nothing all the day before, that as I had taken a little better heart at the coming of day, I fell asleep, and slept so soundly, that it was late before I waked; and then seeing the Sun somthing low, fear and hunger for∣ced me to take the next path I set my foot into, and to follow it until I came to some Vilage, or till I met with some charitable person, who perhaps out of pity would direct me in the way I was to go. Now did my tears renew and my sor∣rows, to see so many high hopes all dashed; and I that the day before thought of nothing else but being Queen of the Burgundians, now saw my self the most mise∣rable and desolate woman in all the Kingdom: And in this consideration, you may imagine that the Tyrannie of Gondebaut was not forgotten. This thought brought into my memory all the fair promises of perfidious Si∣gismond, who as I thought, did seem to love me, only because he would shew him∣self to be a man, and consequently a Traytor. But what a fool was I (said I to my self) and where was my judgement, that I should ever believe him to be other then a Traytor if he was a man? And since all men are so, how could I think him only to be different the rest? Could I be so silly as to think Crab Trees would bear
any other fruit then Crabs? And could I hope that a son of the perfideous Gonde∣baut, would not (like his Father) be disloyal? These sad considerations enter∣tained me till it was almost night, whilst I hardly took notice which way I went; at last, recollecting my self a little, and seeing it so late, I looked about to see if I could spy any Village or Cottage where I might receive some consolation, and by Fortune, I saw a little house thatch'd with straw, upon my left hand, and not far distant from the way. I turned my self therefore that way, in hopes of meeting with some good woman, who perhaps would compassionate my case, for I had such an horrour against all men that I feared meeting any, as much as the most salvage beast in the woods. When I was come neer this homely house, I saw six little children about an old man, who in wooden dishes, was giving them some milk: the eldest of them could not be above eight or nine years of age, but so cleanly and neat, as they seemed to belong unto some better people then used to inhabit in such a poor place: as soon as these little ones saw me, they left the old man, and flocked about me; the youngest offered me to eat such as they had, and the eldest invited me into the house: The old man wondering wither his little children were gone, he looked about for them; and seeing me alone, he came presently unto me, offered me his house, or any thing in it, and was so curteous and civil, as I thought that heaven having some pity upon me, had moved the heart of this old man to be so kind, and though he was a man, yet perhaps I should find him pitiful; and truly I was not deceived; for having received me with so much kindness, and seeing by my eyes and face that I was extreamly trou∣bled, he made me sit down by the fire, offered me some milk, and some fruit, which hunger made me eat: afterwards seeing me cry continually, and sigh, Daughter, said he unto me (for my age will allow me to call you so) the Earth, they say is not firm and immoveable, heaven only is so, the place where we are never rests one moment in one point; to teach us, that we must not be too much elevated, nor too much dejected by any prosperity or adversity that happens un∣to us: for as a wheel which turns, that part which is lowest one while, is highest another; even so it is with men, as long as they are upon this inconstant earth, we must look upon prosperity as a thing that will vanish and fade away; and also we must look upon adversity as a thing which will not last long: You see I have lived long enough to have tryed variety of Fortunes, the wheel has often turned, and in what state soever I was, I alwaies found the sweets and bitters of this world, to be less then the apprehensions I had of them: you will think the same of this misfortune which now troubles you; Time will tell you that by experience I speak truth▪ But in the mean time, lift up your eyes to heaven, and believe, that the great Causer of all things, knows what it best for you: Mistrust not his provi∣dence, his prudence, his prudence, nor his puissance, nor grumble at any bad Fortune which he sends; for this soveraign Wisdom knows best what is fit for mortals: Comfort your self therefore, and hope that in their turns you shall enjoy all delights and contentments that are necessary for you; and in the mean time, I offer unto you all the assistance that your desires and my ability can make. The wise discourse of this old man, made a deep impression in my heart inso∣much as I thought some good Angel had directed me unto this place; to keep me from despair; and therefore after I had wiped away my tears from my eyes, I an∣swered him thus: Father, for well may I call you so, since you bestow such pa∣ternal counsel upon me; I would to God I knew the stability of heaven, as by experience I know the inconstancy and instability of the earth▪ Let the Gods do what they please, and give me contentment when and in what measure they think most expedient for me; but hitherto they have poured upon me such torrents of afflictions, that I verily believe, but for your consolation, I had been overwhelm∣ed with black despair. Daughter (replied the old man) I am very glad that hea∣ven hath made me an Instrument of any comfort unto you; and since you do find some amendment, hope that ere long you will be quite recovered: for as you see bodies are subject unto infirmities, so are our souls; bodies by sensible disea∣ses, souls by passions, which are moved in us by good and evil fortunes; and as the diseases of the body have their beginnings, progress, and declines, even so it
is in the diseases of the soul; and I have experimentally found, that when a dis∣ease either of body or soul begins once to decline, it is presently after cured; for then the body assumes its vigour and strength, and expels those evil humours which caused the disease: so likewise, when it once re-assumes it strength, it pre∣sently expels those opinions which troubled the soul by false appearances: But I must tell you withal, that diseases are seldom cured without remedes: and the remedy for an afflicted soul is commonly to open and reveal the affliction unto some that can administer consolation: for then the soul does vomit up that ob∣noxious humour which offended it, and is afterwards capable of receiving the comforts and counsels of a prudent friend. I know that I am not he who can give you consolation; but if you will trust me, I will try if I can give any ease un∣to your malady. Father (said I unto him) the wounds which I have received from Fortune are such, as cannot be cured by any words; but if you be as pitiful and charitable as you seem, the best remedy you can give, is to conduct me to my Native Country, which is Forrests, where I am most confident of some consolation: The Gods will recompence you for so charitable an office; and I am not in so miserable a con∣dition, but I am able to satisfie their pains. The old man then looking upon his children with an eye of compassion, see what here is (said he unto me) It is not many moneths since my wife who was all the comfort I had, left me with these little Infants, loadned with age and poverty As for poverty, I strive against it as well as I can, by my wary management of that little which I have: Alas, should I leave these little ones but one day, they would starve; you see I have none but they with me; As for neighbours, I know none whom I would commit your tender youth unto, for I should think my self culpable, should any harm happen unto you: What then should I do? I am loth to leave you destitute of help, and should I leave my little ones, I know not what would become of them. But daughter, here is my bed, which I will leave unto you, if you will but be pleased to let two of my eldest children lie with you, and for this night let us recommend our selves unto the protection of the great Tau∣tares. Upon this, it being dark, he lighted a little dry wood, which served for a can∣dle, and stuck it in a Turnip, which supplied the want to a candlestick, and set∣ting it upon the Table▪ he bolted the door with a Hazle-stick, and went to his homely hard bed with his little children. As for me, I laid me down upon his bed in my clothes, and being weary with travel, also having confidence in the man, I slept soundly. In the morning I waked very early, yet not before the old man, had al∣ready ordered every thing for his little family, with a resolution of going with me, and not leaving me till he had shewed me Forrests; hoping (as he told me) that God would keep his children better then he could himself, whilst he was do∣ing that office of charity for me. I gave heaven humble thanks for moving his heart unto it; and after he had given directions unto the eldest of his children what to do, he offered himself unto me as my guide▪ with a promise unto them, to return before it was night; because (as he said) it was not above four leagues from thence to Forrests, and that though he was very old, yet his desire of doing me that office, and returning unto his children again, would add wings unto his feet, and make him go as fast as if he were younger. So we set forwards with each of us a staff in our hands; and because I desired him to conduct me the least frequented way he could, he was so observant of my request, that before it was noon, without coming into any high way, unless to cross it, he brought me unto a high mountain, where staying, he shewed me the Town of Fevres not far off, and a little from thence, Marcelles, and by conse∣quence, the great plain of Forrests: Upon this I asked him where was the River of Lignon. Yonder it is (said he) and that which runs by that Town which I call Fevres, is the River Loire. Then cast your eye a little upon your right hand, and there you may plainly see the River of Lignon: Yonder Town under those two great hills, is called Boen, and the River of Lignon washes the walls of that Town:
From hence you may observe its whole course, which turning and winding it self through yonder delectable plain, makes it the most pleasant place in all Europe. Then the good old man desired leave to return back, lest he should be too long from his little Family: and I, taking a Ring from my finger, Here Father (said I unto him) take this in testimony of my thanks for your pains, and I acknowledge my self infinitely beholding unto you besides. Daughter (said he unto me) you take from me a greater reward which I expected from heaven; and yet I will not refuse what you give me, that you may not appear before heaven ungrateful. Up∣on this he left me, about an hour after noon, being able to say, that I never met with a good man but only him. Thus ended Dorinde, not being able to with-hold her tears at the memory of these cruel adventures. And because her discourse had been long, and also time to rise out of bed, they all gave her the best consolation they could, and then they dressed themselves. Adamas fearing some surprize from Rolemas, gave strict charge at the Gates, that all strangers who entred, should write down their names, and the place where they intended to lodge. That same night he was advertised, that Merin∣dor and Periander with Dorinde, and the rest of the Shepherdesses and Shepherds, were in the house of Clindor. But having passed away most of the night with A∣masis, the advertisement which the Guards of that Port gave him, came very late unto him. The names of these two Cavaliers were not unknown unto him, and knowing them to be subjects of the Burgundian King, their arrival at that season made him suspect left they came for the service of Polemas; and had it not been at a very unseasonable hour, doubtless he would have sent for Clindor, to under∣stand from him the cause of their coming, and what acquaintance he had with them, to entertain them in his house. This troubled him all the night long, and therefere he took but little rest: As soon as day appeared, he arose, and sent for Clindor; and his chamber door was no sooner open, but a young man came and presented himself, very desirous to speak with him. The man was not unknown unto him, for he was brought up in his house from a childe. Sir (said he unto Adamas) I come unto you about a bu∣ness which may perhaps prove of great importance, and perhaps may not; But since such a thing came to my knowledge. I thought I should be extreamly too blame if I did not acquaint you with it: And therefore I have made all possible haste that I could to let you understand, that yesterday about two hours after noon, some men who said they belonged unto King Gondebaut, came in a body toge∣ther armed, to carry away a young woman which was upon the Banks of Lignon, betwixt Julieu, and the Temple of the good Goddess: When they had taken her, another company (though fewer in number, yet much superiour in strength and courage) followed them, and rescued this woman out of their hands, and since (as it is said) have brought her for safety into this Town, with some Shepherds and Shepherdesses. The Combat was very hot and those who would have carried her away, were almost all slain, and the rest rid away. Now Sir, it was my fortune to be there at the same time, where many Druids, Vaces, and Eubages assembled themselves, to Interr three Cavaliers of those who rescued the woman, and were killed. But because many of their enemies were killed also, the Commander in chief, and the Ancients, thought good to bury him according to custom, and not let their bodies be devoured by Dogs and Wolves, or lie there to infect the Ayr. As I pulled off the clothes of the chief of them, I found some papers in his pocket, which I thought might perhaps be of some importance to the Nymph; I found therefore this Letter Sir, which is di∣rected as you see unto Polemas; and afterwards, as I searched his Helmet, I found this little one, lapt up very close in a corner of his Helmet: This Sir, I should have acquainted you withal the last night, but your stay so long in the Castle, was the cause why I could not make my address until this morning.
Adamas then taking the Letters, and seeing written upon them, To POLEMAS, Count of the Segusians, Our Faithful Friend. He thought as well by the Superscription as by the Seal, that they were letters from the King of the Burgundians, and that questionless they contained matter of high concernment; yet not thinking fit the young man should know the distrust which Amsis had of Polemas, he seemed to take no great notice of them; only commended his fidelity, discretion, and care, and assured him that he would ac∣quaint the Nymph, that when time and place served, she might take notice of his good will: Afterwards he commanded him to continue the same upon all occasi∣ons that should present themselves; and above all, to be secret; to the end Pole∣mas should not be advertised of it, lest he should be offended that his Letters should be brought hither; and yet that it was necessary the Nymph should see them. The man was no sooner gone out of the chamber, but Clindor entred; from whom the Druide understood who Periander and Merindor were, and the cause of their coming to that place; for Clindor understood it from them the night be∣fore, when they asked his advice, how they should address themselves to obtain audience from the Nymph. Then replyed the Druide very joyfully) as soon as those Cavaliers are out of their Beds, you will do an acceptable piece of service unto Amasis, to conduct them to her; and I will let her understand who they are, to the end she may re∣ceive them according to their merits: And as for Dorinde, my Neece Leonide shall wait upon her unto the Castle. Upon this, hearing that Amasis was by her self, he went unto her. When he came, he acquainted her with all that he understood from Clindor, concerning the fortune of Dorinde, and the cause of Periander and Merindor's coming: Then afterwards continued, By this (Madam) you may see the goodness of Tautates towards you, in sending strangers to defend you against the wicked∣ness of your own subjects; for it cannot be doubted but these two Cavaliers will faithfully assist you against Polemas, although they be subjects unto the Burgun∣dian King; their rescuing this woman from him is an infallible argument of it, But (said the Nymph) you mention King Gondebaut as if you were assured that he is no friend unto us: Do you know any thing more then yet I am acquainted with? No Madam, answered Adamas, but I conclude by the rules of reason that he must be so of necessity: for it is likely that Polemas, who is a man of deep wit, and has plotted his designe cunningly, should not make sure of a King so potent and near: should he commit such an error, I should then think him the most silly man that ever plotted any Treason; and I should think it as weakly done of you, if you did not prepare your self to find him so: I believe that I have some letters here which will put you out of all doubt: Upon this he presented the first letter to her, which the Nymph looked upon a while, and said nothing, wondering at the Title of Count of the Segusians given unto Polemas; afterwards asking who writ that Letter, and where he had it; I cannot assuredly tell you, Madam, answered he, unless that Seal be the same which Gondebaut useth; but that CAT (said he) with this Motto, LIBERTY, maketh me think it his: and besides, those who would have carried away that young woman whom I mentioned unto you, and were kil∣led by these three Cavaliers, did bring them, and they were found in their pockets by a young man, who brought them unto me with all speed. Upon this the Nymph broke open the Seal, and found these words.
GONDEBAUTS Letter unto POLEMAS. OUR dear Friend; If Clorantes the Captain of our Guard stand in need of your help, let him see what Friendship and Re∣spect you bear unto his Master: He goes about a business which he will communicate unto you, and it is a business of greater im∣portance then it seems to be: If Polemas will have us think him to be our Friend, let not upon any consideration whatsoever, the Bearer hereof re∣turn without that satisfaction which we expect from his Voyage. I perceive (replyed Adamas) that this Letter, though it do sufficiently argue the good correspondency betwixt them, yet it was written purposely to be seen by any: But Madam, this other which was found in the Helmet of the same man, I believe will speak a little more plainly. The Nymph taking it, I know not what will be in it (said she) but me-thinks the first not very obscure, since Gondebaut writes unto Polemas as if he were ab∣solute Lord of my Dominions, and calls him Count of the Segusians; a new Ti∣tle, and which appertains unto none but him wo shall marry Galathea. Then these words, Let him see what Friendship and Respect you bear unto his Master: And afterwards, If Polemas will have us think him our friend, let not the Bearer here∣of return upon any consideration whatsoever; as if it were in the power of Polemas to permit or forbid any thing without my knowledge in my Dominions: After this she opened the little Note, and found these words. GONDEBAUTS Note unto POLEMAS. NOw is the nick of time that Polemas must be Count of the Se∣gusians; I understand that Clidemant is dead, Lindamore extreamly wounded, and almost all his Forces squandred. Now let us see whether your Courage can equal your Ambition; and in this Gondebaut will manifest himself to be your friend. Oh Heavens! cryed out the Nymph, now it is past all question, the treason is all discovered: What human force is it that can help us? The Druide not think∣ing it fit to spend that short time which they had to order their affairs, in tears and complaints, he beseeched the Nymph to call for Galathea, to advise with them upon the course that was to be taken: And when she was come, the Druide ad∣dressing himself unto Amasis, who was all in tears; Madam (said he unto her) Tears will not help; you must now shew the magnanimity and generosity of your mind, and make your courage appear to all your people. The great God does promise you by me, that he will never forsake you, if you will nor forsake your self: You may see his favourable providence already towards you in sending Al∣cidon and Damon so opportunely hither, as if you had purposely invited them. Periandrr and Merindor two Cavaliers very well known to be men of heroick spi∣rits, and great valour, questionless they will freely arm themselves in your defence, their generous behaviour yesterday is an argument of it: for Madam, be pleased to know, that the daughter of that good old Cavalier Arcingentorix being fled in∣to your Dominions from the tyrannie of Gondebaut, was yesterday violently taken away by some souldiers of his Guard, and doubtless had been carried away unto
Lions (from whence she escaped in a disguise) had it not been for the valour of these two Cavaliers who rescued her, and brought her into this City for safety, and to beseech you that you would be pleased to receive her into your protection. You must Madam, put your trust in the goodness of the great Tautates, and make it appear, that Amasis is the Lady of all these Countries, not only by succession, but much more by vertue and merit. The Nymph wiping away her Tears, and taking Galathea about the neck, Daughter (said she unto her) if heaven have or∣dained the ruine of our Dominion, let us however do nothing unworthy of our selves, nor which may make it thought that it was our fault: Then taking her by the hand, she went into Damons chamber, where she knew Alcidon was; and the doors being shut, Adamas by her command spoke thus. Perhaps Sirs you will think it strange, after you have heard what I shall say by the commands of the Nymph, that the Gods who sent you into Forrests to find a remedy for your miseries, should destiny you for the preservation of that Country, which I may say is ruined, unless preserved by your Arms and Valour. The truth is, Amasis, and us all, have no hopes in any humane force but what is in you, to defend us from a shameful and insupportable servitude, which rather then endure, we would die. This great Nymph whom you see so much honoured by all the Gauls, and whose vertue has been ever without the least stain, is by the inevitable judgment of heaven, reduced to such a point, as not only to be deprived of her Country and Dominions, but also to have the Nymph Galatea (her daughter) ravished from her, by the most horrid treason that ever was. 'Tis true, that your arrival here so opportunely without any other designe but by the good will of hea∣ven, does give us a most assured confidence, that you will become instrumental in the preservation of so good a Princess, and in the punishment of such wicked men as dare so unjustly attemt against her authority. This action, Sirs, when it shall be fam'd among the Gauls, will not add a little luster unto your glory; for it will have all the qualifications that are honourable, and esteemed by persons of vertue, as well for the equity of it, as the danger, which (to any courage but yours) would be terrible, and affright them from undertaking it. He would have conti∣nued, but Damon being all impatiency, interrupted; Madam (said he unto the Nymph) I protest and vow unto Grand Hesus, never to leave you, until you be out of all danger, and will spend every drop of my blood in your service, against all men in the world: and when I must arm my self in your defence, no wound shall keep me a minute longer in my Bed. Alcidon assured the Nymph of the same with so much alacrity and freedom, that Amasis and Galathea could not find words full enough to express their thanks. Afterwards Adamas acquainted them with the plot of Polemas, and the means by which he hoped to effect it. The great preparations he had made before hand, as well within and without the Dominions; his correspondency with Neighbour Princes; the authority he had cunningly usurped in the Country; the means he had used to make himself master of all the Forts, and to win the good will of all the Souldiers and Officers; and briefly, that having impoverished the Nymph of money and men, nothing did hinder him from executing his pernitious design, but only his fears of Clidamant and Lindamore. And now the King of the Burgun∣dians hath written unto him of Clidamants death. To be brief, he omitted nothing which he thought expedient for them to know. But all the extream dangers and perils which he represented unto them, did exasperate their courage to undertake the defence of the Nymph: And to joyn prudence unto their valour, the enqui∣red what safety there was for her residing in that place, and what orders she had taken. Adamas satisfied all their demands, and assured them, that nothing would be wanting but men: As for Arms, he had a magazine stored with all sorts in the Castle: As for provision, it was not a moneth since harvest, so as their Granaries were full: But as for men, he knew not where to have them, nor whom to trust. My opinion is (said Alcidon) that the way to get souldiers unperceived, is to appoint some publique sports, and set up Prizes, for shooting in the Bowe, for Wrestling, and such like; and when they are assembled, we shall order them into
Arms. I think Madam (said Adamas) that the counsel is good; for if there be any Traytors, they are persons of quality; it being not likely that Polemas would declare himself unto any others; and we have an excellent pretence for it, because seven days hence is the sixth of July, a day destined to gather the Misleto of the New year; It shall be given out, that you intend to be present, to invite many unto it; and you know it is the custome for every one to bring what Arms they will in honour of the Feast; when they are come together, we may cull out those whom we like best. This was the resolution, Adamas went immediately to put it in execution; and as he went out, Clindor came in, who by the Druide's command presented Me∣rindor and Periander unto the Nymph: Amasis and Galathea received them with abundance of curtesie: And because they intimated that they had somthing to say in private, the Nymph causing them to sit down by Damons bed, she told them that they might speak freely before those two Cavaliers, from whom she concealed nothing. Madam (answered Merindor) since it is your pleasure to have it so, we shall be obedient, although we were charged to speak unto you a∣lone, and so we will, though it be your pleasure to hear us with many ears. After∣wards he continued thus. The Sequel of the History of DORINDE. IF great Princes were exempted from Passion, unto which others are subject, we might well esteem them Gods upon earth; for if their high puissance were ac∣companied with this priviledge, I know not wherein they would be inferiour un∣to Gods: And hence it is that immortals being unwilling that men, be they ne∣ver so great, should equal them, have submitted Princes as well as other men, un∣to unruly passions, which torments them. I use this preamble Madam, to the end that when you have heard me out, you may not blame those great Princes of whom I am to speak, for want of Vertue, nor Weakness; but that you may think these imperfections in them, to be only Tri∣butes which they must pay unto their humanity. Be pleased to know Madam, that King Gondebaut having cast his eye upon a young Lady named Dorinde, he fell so desperately in love with her, that the affe∣ction which he bore unto Cryseide, that fair Trans-Alpine, was not equal unto the affection which he bore unto her. This Dorinde was the daughter of Arcin∣gentorix, one of the most illustrious Families of Gaul. But as all great Beauties are subject to be seen and loved by many, so many cast their eyes and hearts upon her; and amongst the rest, Prince Sigismond; yet both the Fathers and the Sons Loves were carried so closely, that it was long before one another, or any else per∣ceived it. But Dorinde receiving the love of Prince Sigismond more favourably then the Kings, it hapned that jealousies did arise betwixt these two great Princes; neither Father nor Son could brook any competitor, so that Dorinde was constrained to fortifie one side by her consent. She therefore turned to Sigismond with such a full resolution, that he who negotiated the matter for the King, had command from her to speak no more unto her concerning it, unless the King resolved to keep his promise: for Ardilan (so was he called who solicited for the King) had pro∣mised her marriage, though perhaps without any intention of his master. This man seeing his negotiation to thrive no better, did believe that some new Love was the cause of it; and being a sly and crasty fellow, he presently after discover∣ed the affection of Prince Sigismond, with which (for his own discharge) he pre∣sently acquainted the King, who was so extreamly displeased at it, that great dis∣order and inconvenience was like to ensue thereupon. At last, the King by way of revenge, resolved to marry her by fair means or foul, unto one of the Court: whereof Sigismond being advertised, and not being able to endure such an injury should be offered unto one he so much loved and honoured, he went unto her
house (for her Father died a little before) and acquainting her with the Kings de∣signe, they resolved to go both together out of Gondebauts Dominions; and (be∣cause they would not be known) to disguise themselves in other habits, then to consult with the Oracle of Venus, to know which way they should go. The Prince would have only one man with him, whose name was Cerastes, in whom he had great confidence; and she only one woman who had long served her, and in whose fidelity she could not doubt. Ceraestes was to lead the horses for all four, unto a certain place which they had appointed without the Town: And the Prince with her and Dariana (for that was the name of her who served her) were to go on foot to the place, where Cerastes stayed for them. But how hard a thing it is to deaf the ears, and blind the eyes of jealousie! The King, or Ardilan, or rather both, had set spies over the Prince and Do∣rinde; and therefore when they perceived that Sigismond went one evening unto Dorinde, though he carried with him but very few men, yet so it was, that one of those who took notice of their actions, went into the house amongst the rest, who took no notice of him: but he carried himself so confidently, that the Princes servants took him to be one of Dorindes domestiques, and Dorindes domestiques took him for one of the Princes servants. This man saw the Prince talk with great modesty and respect unto the Lady, and that beginning of their talk was on∣ly condoling the death of Arcingentorix, the father of this Fair one. After∣ward he observed them to talk very low, and the Prince to be very angry; for the actions of his hands, his head, and the rest of his body, shewed as much, though he did not hear one word, unless when he bade her good night, he chanced to raise his voice, and utter these words: Do not fail on your side, and be sure that I will be there. These words were well observed, and presently carried to the King, who entring still into greater doubts, charged some of his confidents to have a special eye over all the actions of Sigismond, that they might discover his design. And Ardilan, who was no friend of the Princes, resolved not to sleep a wink all night, purposely to see if he could discover any thing. In the morning therefore he saw Cerastes take Horse, and caused three others to be brought after him by some certain boyes: He sent commands immediately to the Gates, from the King, to let none out; and in the mean time ran himself to advertize the King, who judged these three horses to be for the Prince, Dorinde, and Dariana; and that doubtless they had a designe to go together. This was the reason that he com∣manded all the Gates of the Town to be shut, the keys to be brought unto him, the River Arar to be blocked up with chains, and afterwards sent for Prince Si∣gismond and Godomar to come unto him. By fortune, he who went unto Prince Sigismond, was the Prudent Avitus, who had been his Governour; but the commands came not so soon to the gates, but Dorinde was first gone out: for she being more quick then the Prince, or to say better, had less to do in ordering her domestiques, was before him. When the prudent Avitus came into the Princes chamber, he knew that his presence would be unwelcome, and that the Prince would be very busie about the execution of his design; for the king had acquainted him with it: The sage Governour loving Sigismond extreamly well; Sir (said he unto him, and took him aside) I come to acquaint you that your intentions are discovered, and I am sorry that the King knows of it, then for the discovery of the enterprize. What enterprize do you mean? said the Prince. If we were in a place where our actions could not be observed, replyed he, I would tell you. The Prince then (who had a great confidence in the wisdom and fidelity of this man) went half drost into his Closet with him. Then Avitus began thus, Sir, the King hath sent me to tell you, that he de∣sires to speak with you, and with the Prince Godomar your Brother: In the mean time, he hath commanded to shut up all the Gates of the Town, and keeps the Keys himself; Judge therefore whether or no he knows of your Designe. My Designe! replyed the Prince, what does he think it is? He hath an opinion (an∣swered Avitus) that you intended to go out of his Dominions with Dorinde. Who put him into that opinion? said the Prince. Many circumstances (answered he)
and conjectures; for he knows that you do love her. I never concealed it, answer∣ed the Prince, either from him, or any else; But I pray, is there any Law enact∣ed, that one must not love in his Dominions? No, replyed he, but he knows more then that, for he hears that you intend to marry her. If he (replyed the Prince) were a good and kind Father, he ought to give her unto me, and not thus to cross me, and deprive me of all contentment. Most true, replyed the prudent Avitus, if you were a private person; but Sir, as all the subjects of the Realm are not their own, but the Kings who governs them, so the King is not his own, but the peoples over whom he rules. Great Princes (such as you) never use to marry to please themselves, but for the welfare, grandeur, and safety of their King∣doms. Did you ever see (said Ssgismond) any Sacrificer to sacrifice one Victime twice? That is not the custome, answered Avitus. Why then will the King sa∣crifice me twice for the welfare of his Dominions? For he has once sacrificed me, when he married me against my mind to the Kings daughter of the Ostrogots. That which is allowed unto women▪ ought also to be allowed unto men: Women marry the first time by obedience, but the second time by election. Sir, answered the wise Governour, Those that are subject unto the Dominion of another, ne∣ver ought to use these terms, I will, and I will not. That is right, answered Si∣gismond, in those that are born subjects; but I am born the son of the King. Ad∣mit (replyed he) that you be born the Kings son, yet the King is then your Fa∣ther; and does not a childe owe all duty unto a Father? Give me leave to tell you Sir, that by the Law, the Father may sell the Son in his necessity. Laws, an∣swered the Prince, are but Spiders webs, which hold the small flies, but the great ones easily break through. The truth is Father, (for so he called him since he was his Governour) I do love Dorinde, and I will never marry any other but her. Will the King then force an unjust marriage upon her? Let me tell you freely, I cannot suffer it; acd therefore I did resolve to fly from a Prince that is so violent, and has so little regard of equity: If you do love me, as I ever thought you did, I beseech you contrive my departure, for I am as fully resolved upon it, as I am to die. The wise and prudent Avitus. seeing it was no time to press him any further, Sir (said he unto him) your designe might at any other time be accomplished, but now it cannot; for the Gates are all locked, the Guards are set in every quarter of the Town, and without wings there is no getting out: and that you may know I speak truth, Cerastes cannot get out with your Horses. Oh heavens! cryed the Prince out, and what is become of Dorinde? Upon this word Cerastes entred into the Closet, and seeing Avitus there, he would have gone out again, but the Prince called him in. No, no Cerastes (said he, come in, and speak freely before Avitus, for he desires my contentment as much as I can my self. Sir (said Cerastes with a sad look) I have been with your horses at the Port of Venus, but they would not let me pass: And because I thought that perhaps I might get out by the River Arar, I went thither also; but I found all shut up, and the Keys carried to the King. Oh God! said the Prince, and what is become of Dorinde? Sir, answer∣ed he, I hear nothing of her. Then Cerastes (said the Prince, go as fast as you can to her house, and if she be there still, bid her not stir till she hear from me. Then turning towards the sage Avitus, I see Father (said he unto him) that I shall stand in need of your counsel. Sir, answered he, not only my counsel, but my life, and all I have, is dedicated to your service, But Sir, the King has sent me to you, what answer shall we return him. The King (answered he) does use me so harshly, that I know not how to be∣have my self. Consider Sir, said Avitus, that if you do the duty of a Son, eve∣ry one will esteem you; and the fault of one, ought not to exempt another from doing his due. The great Tautates, who is the universal father of all men, is ve∣ry partial in the behalf of Fathers; and therefore he has promised a greater re∣compence upon children that are obedient, then for any thing else upon earth. I have often told you Sir, that a good man will not only follow vertue in things that please him, and are easie, but in things that are harsh and hard, though never so displeasing: for otherwise those animals which are guided only by sense, and have no other light but their own appetites, might be as vertuous as men, since they are as
prompt unto things that please them, and more then we are: But in things that are cross and averse to our minds, we do shew our selves rational, and not sensual. Now Sir, I beseech you set these considerations before your eyes, and say when you are before the King, I will do my duty Sir, though it be never so much against my mind, because yon are my King, and because you are my Father: and you shall see heaven will infinitely reward your obedience. Father (said Sigismond) I will do whatsoever you would have me: But truly, if the King marry Dorinde by force, I profess that I cannot suffer it; I had rather render back unto my fa∣ther that which he hath given me, which is my life, then suffer such an injury to be offered unto her. No, no (answered the prudent Governour) the King does only make a shew of doing it, but indeed he dares not; for the Laws are absolutely against any force in marriages: But yet (said the Prince) he grounds upon a Law, which ordains, That if a Father promise his daughter unto one, and die before the marriage be effected, the daughter cannot otherwise dispose of her self; and if she marry another, they are both to be in the power of him unto whom she was promised, to do what he pleaseth with them. How (said Avitus) does this Law concern Dorinde? It concerns her very much (answered the Prince) or at least they say so; for Arcingentorix had promised her unto Bellimartes, unto Perian∣der, and unto Merindor. She will want no Husbands then (answered Avitus) but because it is impossible she should be the wife of three, therefore the promise is null, and of no effect. But Sir, you must know, that those promises which the Law intends, are such as are passed by Writings, and parole promises are invalid; for otherwise this Law would prove a gross inconveniency: But besides all this, I have heard say that Merindor and Periander during the life of her Father, did disclaim that marriage, and Bellimartes (who was married before) had married her, if his wife had not come in and prevented it: All these promises were made void during the life of her father; and they may fright Dorinde and you, but no Judge will give any sentence to enforce her upon those promises. Oh Father! replyed the Prince, had I spoke with you before I fixed upon that resolution of going away, we had taken a better course. Upon this Cerastes returned, and told the Prince that Dorinde was not in her house, and that going into her chamber, he found a Letter upon the Table, which he presented unto the Prince. Oh Heavens! said he, whither is she gone? Doubtless Sir, said Cerastes, she is gone out of the Town; for otherwise, when she found all the Gates locked, she would have returned to her house. Avitus in the mean time having opened the Letter which the Prince gave unto him, they sound these words. DORINDES Letter unto the Princess CLOTILDA. CAnnot your Candour, Madam, pardon my crime in leaving you without your leave? I should think my self the most lost woman upon earth, did I not hope your goodness will not only pardon, but pity me; and accompany my Voyage with some Tears of Compas∣sion: Especially when you consider, that I had no way to defend my self from violence: but my flight. Alas Madam, it had been enough, and too much to be deceived, without an addition of such grand Injustice unto Trea∣son. I have heard say, and I hope its true, That the Gods cannot endure any unjust Marriages. In the mean time, I will absent my self, and since I am born free, fly from such cruel servitude. I protest by all my Obliga∣tions unto you, nothing grieves me more, then my loss of the Princess Clo∣tilda:
It grieves me, as well to be out of her service, as that she is in a place where I fear the sins of another will be charged upon her, though in∣nocent. This Letter (said Avitus presently) is a full discharge for the Princess, if Do∣rinde be gone away; and I conceive it very expedient to keep it, until the truth be known whether she be gone or no, and afterwards that it be carried rather unto the King then the Princess Clotilda, to free her from any suspition. To this end, let it be sealed up with some unknown Seal, and carried to the place where it lay, to the end, that those who doubtless will carry it to the King, may find it there. But in the mean time Sir, I conceive it requisite that you go unto Gondebaut, with∣out taking notice of any thing. If he ask whither Cerastes was leading the hor∣ses, both he and you may answer, that you were going to course a Stag, and that he was carrying them to the stand; and for a better colour of it, it is expedient you put on your hunting habit. All things were done as Avitus advised; Cerastes carried back the Letter, and laid it upon Dorindes Table; in the mean time the Prince drest himself, and pre∣sently after went to the King, accompanied with a great number of Cavaliers; who seeing men armed walk up and down the Town more then usual, and hearing that the Gates were locked, did flock unto his lodging to receive his commands, for his sweetness and goodness made him beloved by all. As soon as the King saw him in that habit, he asked him the reason of it: To course a Stag, Sir, said he, and I was ready to take horse when Avitus told me that you would speak with me. I believe (answered the King and smiled) that you were going to course rather an Hind then a Stag. The Prince seeming not to understand him; That might have been Sir (said he) if the Huntsmen should mi∣stake the one for the other, but it was not my intention. I commanded the gates to be locked, and the Guards doubled, upon some intelligence which much trou∣bled me, and which I will impart unto you; and to that end, follow me into my Closet: Upon this he went into his Closet, and called with him none but Sigis∣mond, Godamar, and the prudent Avitus▪ The door was no sooner shut, but Ardilan knocked, and Avitus by the Kings command went to see who it was. As soon as the King saw him, he went unto him; and the Prince observed that Ardilan talked to the King with a face of asto∣nishment, but he could not hear a word, for he spoke very low; their discourse was very long, and in the conclusion he gave the King a Letter, and went away. Gondebaut in a great sume, as one might see by his countenance and eyes, did sit him down in his chair, and shewing the Letter which Ardilan gave him, here's news of our hunting, said he; then holding it unto Avitus, who knew it pre∣sently, he commanded him to read it, which he did; yet in reading it, did sweeten the sharpest places as well as he could. What do you think Sigismond said Gondebaut) had not I good cause to say that you were going to course the Hind? Do you think that any of your designs can be concealed from me? Can you believe that I am ignorant of your fond and foolish affection, and unto what height it is grown? And yet because I seemed deaf unto all reports that was told me, and would not see what all the world did, this connivance has made you forget your duty both unto me and your self. Sir, said the Prince, if you will be pleased to hear my reasons without being swayed with too much prejudicated passion, you will not think me so culpable as I am falsely reported to be. Can you think it possible (replyed Gondebaut) that I should not be extreamly passionate in a thing which so much concerns you? For you have forgotten the duty of a son, yet I cannot the duty of a Father: But to let you see how much you are mistaken in thinking me so swayed with passion, I will give half my Kingdom upon condition that I were now in the wrong, and you in the right; I had rather the fault should be branded upon me then you; for alas, I have almost finished the course which the Fates have destined me to live, and for that poor pittance of time which remains for me, it is no matter what opinion is
conceived of me; but you who are beginning that course which I have ended. O Sigismond, did you know how much it concerns you to keep an unstained repu∣tation, you would esteem your loss of it by this occasion, to be the greatest of your life. I know very well Sir, replied the Prince, that I can never satisfie those obligations wherein I am bound unto you, and I would beseech you to add this unto the number, and tell me wherein I have stained this reputation, which I ever held so dear unto me. You have judgement enough, replied the King, to know it without my telling you, but since you desire to have it from my mouth, is it not true that you do love Dorinde? most true Sir, answered he, I do love her; but I never knew that it was ever any shame to love a fair and a wise Lady. But, said the King, she is below your quality. If Kings and Princes, replied he, ought to love none but Queens and Princesses, then truly I should confess my fault, but if it be a fault, it has been committed by example. Though it be permitted us, repli∣ed the King, to love persons of lower rank then our selves, yet their loves ought not to go so far as to marry them: for when I bestowed some good language up∣on Cryseide, do you think it was ever my intention to marry her? for my part Sir, said the Prince, if ever I should promise any marriage, I would perform it as religiously, as if all the Druides in Gaul had married me. What? said the King, would you marry Dorinde? I do not say I will Sir, answered the Prince, but I say that if I did promise to marry her, I would perform it, though I became the poor∣est Cavalier in your kingdome. The King then pulled down his hat over his eyes, and said unto him, I know most assuredly, that you have promised to marry her. Sir, answered the Prince, you are ill informed: It is very true indeed, I did pro∣mise. that if I were at my own dispose, I would marry her; and whether I have not in this made my duty unto you appear, I refer it unto your self. But I hope to find you so kind a father, as not to give me any occasion to complain against you. O Heavens! replied the King, is Sigismond of so a base a spirit, as to marry such a woman, if I should give him leave, and ask wherein he has stained his re∣putation: Well, well, I will take an order to apply such remedies, as shall pre∣vent any such inconveniencies. Uoon this Gondebaut rose up, and commanded Si∣gismond to his house, and to stay there until he received further commands: then the Prince went away extremely vexed, and gave no reply. Their discourse had continued so long, that before they parted the sun was low; and the Prince, by fortune, as he was going to his lodging, he saw a great crowd of people in the street, which caused him to stay, as if his heart had told him, that perhaps they had found Dorinde, and were carrying her away: her thoughts were partly true, for he saw that it was Dariana, whom he knew better by his ha∣bit then her face, which was so dawbed with durt as he wondred that any should know her, As soon as ever the Prince saw her he went unto her, took her by the arm, and by his authority carried her to his house. The poor wench did tremble so, as caused all that saw her to pity her. But when she was in the Princes cham∣ber, she took some heart; O God Sir (said she to the Prince) what do you think is become of my Mistress? where is she? (said the Prince presently) at the brtdge (answered she) where you assured her to be with her: And who is with her? asked the Prince: Alas Sir, said she, with tears in her eyes, she is all alone, and if some good Angel have not pity upon her, I cannot tell what will be∣come of her; you must know Si hat we were up very early, we consulted with the Oracle as soon as any day appred, and seeing the time of your appointment past, we thought you were gone to the bridge, unto which we went, and finding none there, my Lady commanded me to go back and see if I could find you: and as ill luck was, I was seized upon by those, out of whose hands you have rescued me, who seeing me alone, and my face so dirty, did at the first nothing but laugh at me: but afterwards, one of them looking better upon me did unluckily know me, and but for you Sir, would have set me in the stocks. By the way, they asked me many questions concerning Dorinde, but I alwayes answered that she was not with me, for I was come into the town to seek her. Ardilan was at the Port with the keyes of the gates when I was seized upon, and gave most base language a∣gainst the honour of Dorinde, which I shall never forget nor forgive: But Sir,
when fortune will run a business, see how all ill chances will fall upon the neck of one another: as this Traitor Ardilan was thus belching out his venome against Dorinde, one of the Temple of Venus did say aloud, that one in such a habit as I had, came that morning to consult with the Oracle: Ardilan hearing this, did ask him what answer the Oracle gave. I cannot tell (applied the man) but as I remember, the substance of it was, that in Forrests they should find a re∣medy for what they sought after; I saw that this wicked varlet went as fast as ever he could towards the Kings Pallace. But all this while, said the Prince, what is become of Dorinde? Alas Sir, said Dariana▪ I can tell you no more, but that I left her at the bridge, hid in a bush which is on the other side of the river. O God, cried the Prince, some wolf will devour her. O most cruel father (if it be lawful for me to call thee so) canst thou find a heart to murder me in this manner: upon this he was silent, and sighed and walked up and down the chamber. Afterward he commanded Dariana to go out unto Dorindes house as soon as it was night; he bad her fear nothing▪ and com∣manded Cerastes to conduct her thither in the evening. Almost at the same time, the Price Godomar and the prudent Avitus came in to his chamber, and told him how extreamly angry the King was that he had re∣scued this woman out of the hands of those who were bringing her unto him. Father (said the Prince unto the wise Avitus) I beseech you tell the King that I cannot endure any should do Dorinde a displeasure, or any that belongs unto her: I will hazard the last drop of my blood but I will make them repent it, whosoever they be, except the king; Let him not think strange at what I have done; as for this woman, she is as safe in my hands as amongst those varlets that used her so ill, and when he pleaseth, I will bring her unto him: beseech him from me to trou∣ble himself no further, for it was I who, caused Dorinde to do what she hath done, and if he do hinder me from following her, so that any harm happen unto that fair one: Let him consider that he has no more a son of me, for I do solemnly protest, that I will not live to be his son any longer. O Sir, answered the prudent Avitus, is it possible that passion should have such a power over you? Do you not consider who you are? and what duty you ow unto him: I know not father, answered the Prince, who I am, but I know what I would be: for I wish that I had been in my grave ten years ago. Then walking up and down very fast; he did nothing for a long while together, but sigh so extreamly, as if his soul were ready to depart from his body. Prince Godomar, who loved his brother most tenderly, intreated the wise govern∣our to go unto the King, and allay his anger as much as he could; and in the mean time I will (said he) use my best arguments to perswade Sigismond unto his duty; for I am afraid lest the King, through the councel of the wicked Ardilan, should make him take some violent course, if not prevented by your wise admonitions. Avitus, who thought he spake very prudently, went away without saying any thing to the Prince, whose anger had so blinded him, as he scarsly saw any thing that was before his eyes. When they were alone, the young Godomar lockt the dore, and after he had walked two or three turns with him, he said thus: I cannot, brother, indure to see you thus extreamly troubled: and I beseech you most heartily to make use of me, and believe, that no consideration whatsoever, shall make me shrink from any service that you will require from me. Brother, said Sigismond unto him, pardon me if I do not answer you, for I am so much distracted by these accidents, that I assure you, I did not understand what you said: I said brother, applied Godomar, that I am so sotry to see you thus per∣plexed, as I will do you any service in the world you shall command me. Brother, answered Sigismond, I never doubted your kindness unto me: but brother, said Godomar, if you do not imploy it in any service, I shall not think you love me: for I see how much you are troubled, and when will you make use of your friend if not now? Brother, answered Sigismond, I will acquaint you with my perplexi∣ties and then we will consider upon the best expedients. Brother, answered Sigis∣mond, you must know that Dorinde is gone, and I should have accompanied her, but the malice of Ardilan hath hindred me. This poor Lady had none with her
but Dariana, and she has left her as you see, so as she is in the wild woods all night long, and knows not whither to go: but I am most troubled that Ardilan, knowing the answer of the Oracle, will most undoubtedly acquaint Gondebaut with it: and he who is enraged against her, because she hath preferred my affecti∣on before his, will infallibly pursue her, and if he find her do her some harm: which if he do, I vow by Hercules and all the rest of the gods, that no respect, neither of King nor father shall hinder me from taking such revenge, as it shall forever be remembred: and that Traitour Ardilan may be sure that I will pull his heart out, though he should hide himself in hell. The young Godomar stood silent a while, and then said unto him; I do foresee brother, that all these things which you do fear, may come to pass: for when I was last with the King, Ardilan came unto him, and told him all that you tell me concerning the Oracle: and pre∣sently after I saw them whisper together very close, and at last the King raising his voice, he called for Clorantes the Captain of the guard, and after another close consultation with him, go, said he unto him, and prepare your self with all the hast you can, and in the mean time your dispatch shall be made. I do ingage that he sent Clorantes to follow Dorinde, you know that of all the Guard, the King hath greatest confidence in him, and he the least respect unto us: so as if you think good, I will tell you what I will do: I will with some of my friends take horse, and follow after him, to hinder him from offering any violence unto that Lady. O brother, said Sigismond, may I exspect so good an office from you? I am extreamly offended, answered Godomar, that you should make any question or doubt of it. Brother, said he unto him then, I beseech you pardon my passi∣on, I do accept of your offer, and believe it there is no other way under heaven to preserve my life; let us then see, said Godomar, whom I should carry with me, and assure your self I will guard Dorinde safe from their hands. After some more such discourse as this, they advised together which of all the Cavaliers in the court they should chuse, who would be faithful unto them; of whom they found nine, and of which number Periander, Bellimartes, Cerastes, and my self, were four: and because time was not to be lost, they sent for us im∣mediately, and without any concealment of their designe, they asked if he would accompany Brince Godomar. As for Periander, Bellimartes, and I, we answered, that we would not only accompany him: but rather then Dorinde should supper any injury, we would leap down the walls of the Town, and follow him, to rescue her, And the rest said the same; and then they commanded us to arm our selves and be ready within two hours to depart, that each of us should bring along with him a confident friend: aud for fear of discovery, to rendezvous at the house of Bellimartes, because he had the command of the Town souldiers, it would not be thought strange to see so many persons together, but above all, to be secret. Not one of us failed according as was commanded, and the young Godomar was there at the time appointed; so taking horse as soon as we were all together, (because we heard Clorantes was gone with a good Troop,) we came to the gate. Ardiln who was there and very officious, would needs know whether we were going: After Clorantes, answered Bellimartes; but the King hath commanded, said Adilan, to let none go out. Then Godomar advancing; How dare you sir∣rah, said he, be so bold as to controul me and my actions? open the gates without any further replies. Sir, answered Ardilan, I did not see you; but since the King hath commanded me, I hope you will not take it ill, if I do not open them with∣out a further command from him. Ah Traitour (said Godomar then, and laid his hand upon a Pole-ax which he wore at the pomel of his laddle) I will with one blow, give thee the just reward of all thy treachery; and gave him such a blow upon his head that he clove it quite in two. Those at the gate were so affrighted at this man, that not one durst deny opening the gates unto the Prince: For he being very well beloved amongst the souldiers, and Ardilan hated for his intollerable arrogancy, the gates were pre∣sently set upon: and Godomar with all his company went out without any diffi∣culty.
As soon as we were out, it was night, yet not very dark, though the Moon appeared not: We came to the Bridge from whence Dariana came; but finding none there, we went on towards Forrests; I think we lost our way twenty times amongst the mountains, not one of us knowing the right way unto Fevres, whi∣ther we aimed to go; and therefore our horses being almost tyred, we resolved to stay until it was day at the first villages we came unto, and to take some guides along with us. We did as we resolved; and when we asked where we were, those of the place told us, that we were far out of our way, and should have taken much more upon the left hand, and must of necessity return back so far as within the sight of Lions; which caused the young Prince almost to despair: yet one thing was a comfort unto us; which was, we understood that Clorantes was not far be∣fore us, and that his horses were almost quite tyred. And asking which way he took, it was answered, that he enquired the way towards Fevres; and therefore, as soon as it was day, we departed; but because our horses were as ill tyred as those of Clorantes, it was somthing late before we set out. One passage by the way did much please us, which was, that we met with an old man who was coming from the place unto which we were going, and who for his age walked very fast: The Prince riding up unto him, Father (said he) did you see a Troop of Horse pass this way towards Fevres? No Sir (answered he) I saw none: But I observed all along the way which comes from yonder Town which you may see upon your left hand, a great track of horses: yet (replied the Prince) did you come from Fevres, and meet none? I was but a league further Sir (said he) and have been guiding thither a young woman that is extreamly sad. That's she whom we do seek (said the Prince, and turned towards us) Good Father (said the Prince) tell us where she is whom you guided? Sir, said the man, you shall know no more from me, for I know not whether you intend good or bad unto her. It is for her good (said the Prince.) If it be (replyed he) the great Tautates speed you, and guide you where she is, for he knows your intentions, but I do not, and therefore dare not tell you any more, for she is worthy of assistance; and since she did commit her self unto my guarding, I should be guilty of all the harm that befalls her. The young Prince admiring the vertue of this country fellow, did put his hand in his pocket, and gave him a piece of gold, and desired him to be as wise unto all as he had been unto him: Then passing on, we had not gone far, before we found the track which the old man told us of, and we followed it unto Fevres, where night coming on us, we resolved to stay, and enquire further news of Clo∣rantes, which we did; for by fortune he had lodged in the same place where we took up our quarters. Godomar then knew that he had found him whom he looked for, which was no small satisfaction unto him. In the morning, enquiring which way he took, it was told us that he was passed over Lignon, and indeed we found again the track of his horses feet, which con∣ducted us unto a place where there was four ways, where we perceived he had made a Halt; for the track was very fresh and new: but we were most troubled to find, that of those four ways, three of them were printed with horses feet, which made us think that they were divided into three Troops. The generous Prince (who was infinitely desirous to serve his brother) was of opinion, that it was best for us also to divide our selves into three companies, and each company take one of those ways. We being unwilling to leave him so slen∣derly guarded, did a little dorr at it; but he perceiving it; No, no said he, you all promised to obey me, and I had rather die then fail in this first occasion, upon any consideration of my person. And therefore let Bellimartes, Periander, and Merindor, with their three friends take the way that passeth over Lignon, Cera∣stes and five other Cavaliers take the way upon the right hand, yet not to pass over the Loire, and I (said he) with six others, will also pass over Lignon upon the left hand; and at three days end, we will all of us rendezvous at yonder Temple which we see stand in the midst of that plain, that we may consult what course we should take. Then after we had embraced each other, he was the first that st for∣ward. We were all forced to obey his commands, though with much sorrow to part,
yet some good angel inspired him; for Bellimartes, Periander, and our small Troop had not marched above a League and a half, but we overtook Dorinde yet in the hands of Clorantes, who was carrying her away: Heaven was so favourable unto our enterprise, that though we were but six, and they fifteen or sixteen at the few∣est, yet we defeated them, and took Dorinde from them, although our victory was very dearly bought; for we lost there the valiant Bellimartes, Periander lost a cosen german, and I a brother; yet since the Gods had made us so happy as to serve the Princes Sigismond and Godomar, and that fair and vertuous Lady, we en∣dured the misfortune with much patience. Now Madam, we have brought Dorinde into this City, who casts her self un∣der the shelter of your protection as a safe Sanctuary; we hope that you will ob∣lige these Princes, and shew your self to be a pious refuge for innocents. Thus ended Merindor; and Amasis began to speak: Generous Cavaliers (said she unto them) Dorinde is by your valour brought unto a place where she shall find no worse usage then Galathea my daughter; and had I been sooner informed of your Quality, I would not have suffered either her or you to have had any other lodging then my own house, which I offer unto all, with as much freedom as I have my self: Also I conjure you by your order of Cavalry, to promise me that you will go unto Prince Godomar at Mount Verdune, for I suppose that to be the Tem∣ple where you are to meet him, and beseech him from me, to honour me so far as to come hither; where I have a most extream desire to render unto him such ser∣vices as are due unto such a great and generous Prince. Madam (answered Peri∣ander) I know the Prince so civil, that he will not be so neer, and lose the honour of kissing your hand; besides, I assure my self, that when he knows Dorinde is with you, he will (in satisfaction of that duty he owes unto his brother) come and thank you for this favour. They had no sooner spoke these last words▪ But Leonide did acquaint Galathea that Dorinde and her company were in the Hall; of which Amasis was so glad, that she bade Galathea go and receive them, and conduct them unto her; which office Galathea undertook very willingly; for understanding that Lycidas the bro∣ther of Celadon was there, she was extreamly desirous to speak with him: She went therefore with a great number of Nymphs, who could not chuse but admire the beauty of these strangers, though the habits of Shepherdesses did much dim the luster of their faces. Galathea who was informed who Florice, Cercinea, and Palanice were, after she had complemented Dorinde, she went unto them, and treated them so kindly, as was beyond their expectation. Madonthe hearing that these strangers of her acquaintance were so near, she went unto them, and ac∣knowledged her obligations unto them all, especially Hylas, Lycidas, Tircis, and Palemon, and bade them most kindly welcome: But when she first saw them in those habits, she hardly knew them; and they seeing the rank which she held, did begin to blush, and out of respect, keep at a distance. But Madonthe who loved the women very well, and desired that they should use the same freedom with her, which they were wont; Did I think (said she un∣to them) that the gaudery of my garments would make you keep at a greater di∣stance from me then you were wont to do, I protest I would this very hour leave them off, and never wear them again. Madam, said Lycidas unto her, your curtesie must not make us continue in that crime which our ignorance of you cau∣sed us to commit. Alas Lycidas, replyed she, it cannot be called any crime, for am I not the very same I was before? Doubtless you are, Madam, replyed Lyci∣das, but we are not in the same errour that we were. Shepherd (said she) unless you will cancel all those obligations wherein I am bound unto the curteous Shep∣herds, and fair Shepherdesses of Lignon, I conjure you to be as familiar with me, as you were wont to be; and then (with Galatheas leave) I will shew you what I was in quest of amongst you in my disguise. Upon this, taking Florice by the hand, and Cercinea in the other, she carried them all into Damons chamber: A∣masis was there, who embraced all these fair ones, and received them so kindly, that they were all very well pleased. But when Galathea presented Dorinde unto her, she shewed her self more respective of her, then any of the rest, for Prince
Sigismond's sake; and carried her unto Damon and Alcidon, they, Madonthe and Daphnide, saluted her. Hitherto neither Adrastes nor Hylas had spoke a word; the first because he was ravished to see the house adorned after another fashion then the rusty cottages wherein he was brought up; and Hylas, because there was none in all the compa∣ny who did put him into a mood of discourse, but Madonthe, who till then did not see him; Oh Hylas (said she) are you there, and I not yet paid those devoirs which are due unto our ancient Friendship? What opinion will you have of me? Better Madam (answered he) then ever I had before. And yet (said she) my in∣civility does not deserve it. You are mistaken, Madam, replyed he, I have a bet∣ter opinion of you then ever I had; for me thinks we two are of humours alike. Oh heavens defend Hylas, (replyed she presently) for I would not resemble you in Inconstancy. Nay, never fear it (said he) for you can never arrive at that per∣fection; but my meaning is, that when I have that contentment which I desire, I care for nothing else; and me thinks you do the same now you have found this Cavalier; and I do so like the humour of it, that I do esteem you much more. Damon who could not chuse but laugh at the answer, did ask Madonthe in a low voice, who that Shepherd was; and being informed, Kind Shepherd (said he unto him) will you give me leave to believe what this fair Lady tells me? Sir, answered Hylas, doubtless you may, for nothing but good can come from so sweet a mouth. yet answered Damon, what she tells me, makes not for your advantage. Perhaps Sir, replyed Hylas, you may be mistaken; the same merchandize bears not the same price in all Countries; That which is extreamly dear in one Country, may perhaps be dog cheap in another. But that merchandize wherewith your pack is stuffed, as she tells me, replyed Damon, is not dear in any place of the world, es∣pecially as I have heard amongst the Shepherds of Lignon; for she tells me, that you are full of inconstancy. Me thinks (answered Hylas) that you are so much obliged unto those of Lignon for keeping this fair Lady so long amongst them, that you should have a better opinion of them; for had not their curtesie and civilities stayed her so long there, perhaps you would not have found her there, but had wandered God knows whither before you had met her. I do most thankfully ac∣knowledge my obligations unto them (answered Damon) and should be very sorry to displease them; but I thought that I had obliged them by what I said. Did you not say, replyed Hylas, that Inconstancy was not dear in that Country? I did so, answered Damon. Why then did you as good as say, replyed Hylas, that there is great abundance of it; for abundance of any thing, be it never so good, makes it cheap. I did not so intend it, answered Damon; but on the contrary, my mean∣ing was, that on the Banks of Lignon your merchandize is not a saleable commo∣dity, because none ever makes any use of it. Oh Sir, replyed Hylas, you are ex∣treamly mistaken in that belief; for there is not a place in all Gaul where the peo∣ple know better how to love then they do who inhabite about those happy Banks of Lignon: That is the reason, replyed Damon, why I believed that Inconstancy was banished from thence. Nay, said Hylas, since you are in that errour, I be∣seech you tell me, is not this the quality of all those that love well, to change them∣selves (as much as possibly they can) into the humours of those they love? And if it be, there is not one Shepherd who is not inconstant; and where can you find one Shepherdess who does not so? Oh Hylas, said Madonthe, and interrupted him, you know very well that now you speak against your conscience. I hope Madam, answered Hylas, that▪ if I prove it, then you will say as I do. I cannot believe (said Daphnide) that you can prove it. Then answer me unto these questions, said Hylas: You say that Hylas is inconstant; and if Lovers do change themselves as much as they can into the homours of those they love, is it not certain that I loved Laonice, Phillis, Alexis, Stella, and many others? I do believe it, answered she, since you say it. If so, said he, then they were inconstant, or else in loving them I was not changed into them: And Lycidas, Corilas, and many others who loved them, they also were in∣constant; or else in loving them, they were not changed into them: so likewise all those who call themselves lovers of those whom I loved, do but call them to
account, and you shall find, that they have all taken of my merchandize, Damon could not chuse but laugh at his conclusion▪ But Hylas, said he unto him, though a man do change himself as much as he can into the humour of the woman that he loves, yet the woman loved does not change her self into the man lover▪ and therefore if Phillis Stella, Alexis, and the rest did not love you, they did not par∣ticipate of your Inconstancy. They did love, answered Hylas, there is no doubt of that; but yet my meaning was, that since in loving them I remain inconstant, it is to be believed that they are inconstant also  otherwise, since I had loved them if they had been constant, doubtless I had become constant. And therefore Ma∣dam, you must needs confess, that all about the Banks of Lignon are of the same humour with Hylas. However (replyed Madonthe) you do not prove unto me that all are inconstant: I will only instance poor Adrastes there; for he would not be in that condition he is, if he could be inconstant. Oh Madam▪ answered Hy∣las, he is not inconstant, because he is mad, as all are that are not inconstant. Damon hearing that Adrastes was out of his senses, he was very desirous to know all the particulars of that sad accident; and when he understood it, he pit∣tied him extreamly. Palemon then, who silently listned unto all the discourse of Hylas, Madam (said he unto Madonthe) if the miserable condition of this poor distracted Shep∣herd have moved you unto any compassion, I beseech you become a mediator un∣to the Nymph Amasis for his former liberty and senses. Why Palemon, answered Madonthe, Do you think it in her power to cure him? We are so informed Ma∣dam, answered Palemon; and since the tryal will not cost any thing, we beseech you to intercede in the behalf of this poor Shepherd. I assure my self (said Ma∣donthe) that if it be in her power, she will not deny us. Then taking the Shepherd by the hand, she carried him to Amasis, who was talking with Dorinde; and just at the same time as Madonthe was presenting him unto Amasis, the sage Adamas returned from out of the Town, where he had given orders for every thing as was resolved upon. And because the Nymph saw him look with a countenance of much contentment, she was exceedingly desirous to speak with him: but being unwil∣ling to interrupt Madonthe, who had already begun to supplicate in behalf of poor Adrastes; and the Druide hearing her, Madam (said he) Madonthes desire is just; and though this be not concurrent with the Religion of Druides, yet since the Romans first began it, and it has continued a custome ever since, it is seen by experience that it cures. Oh then (said Amasis) I will do all that is in me to re∣store this poor Shepherd unto his first condition. The great Tautates Madam, said Palemon, will reward you: and for my part, I do here make a solemn vow, that if he be cured, I will grant the first request that afterwards shall be asked of me, if it be within compass of my power, and be lawful to be done; since the happiness which I enjoy is partly a cause of his misery. The Druid then, seeing every one silent; Madam (said he aloud, and addres∣sed himself to the Nymph▪) I come to acquaint you, that there are seven Cava∣liers come into the town, who inquire for Prince Godomar. Do you know their names, asked Periander and interrupted him; one of them, answered he, is called Alcander, and the other, I think, Amilear. They, answered Periander, they are none of our Troop; but they are of our acquaintance and are our friends. Circienea, who heard Alcander named, could not chuse but blush: and Florice, approching to the Druide. These two, said she, whom you have named, are my brothers, and it is the most happy news that could come unto me; and if we heard the names of the rest, perhaps also, we should have interest in some of them: you may see that, said Adamas▪ (and pulled out a paper which the guard at the gates had sent unto him) then they read the list of them, Alcander, Amilcar, Silcines, Lucindor, Clorian, Cerintes, and Belisard: O heavens! cried out the strangers, the best news that ever came: For, said Circinea, Silcines and Lucindor are my brothers; Clorian and Cerintes are brothers unto Palanicae. I beseech you Ma∣dam, said Florice unto Amasis, give us leave to go and meet them: for it is so long since we saw them, that we should be extreamly grieved, should they go a∣way before we speak unto them. No, no, answered the Nymph, I will send to in∣treat
treat them they will favour me so far, as to come hither, if they inquire of Prince Godomar, and I am very confident, that being your brothers, I shall find them so courteous as not to deny my request. I beseech you Madam, said Merindor, let us have the honour to go and let them know your pleasure, for I am most confi∣dent they will obey you. So Merindor and Periander, having the Nymphs com∣mand, did go together with Clindor. They were not gone half down the stairs which descend from the Castle, but they met them, and being advertised of their arival, they judged it to be them, though they were armed. Their meeting was with many demonstrations of good will, as if the amity betwixt them were much augmented, since the last sight; and Merindor, having acquainted them with the desire of the Nymph Amasis, they went altogether unto the Castle where they were entertained by the Nymphs and Cavaliers, with all manner of welcome; but those who saw the Caresses which Florice, Cercinea, and Palanice, made unto their brothers, would have thought some greater interest to be amongst them then that of kindred. After all complements of civilitie were past on both sides, for the Nymph was pleased to permit to contentment unto the three sisters, though it was her pre∣sence; Alcander addressed himself unto her and said, Madam, we have commis∣sion from the Prince Sigismond, who hath sent after the Prince Godomar his bro∣ther, to assure you of his service: and that if any occasion present it self where∣in he may give a testimony of his affection, he will think himself infinitely happy to receive your commands. Sir, answered Amasis, it is the excess of that Princes civility, which makes him use such language: but it is no wonder in him who is such a professed servant unto all Ladies, but I should rather wonder if he did not, since I am of that number, But we are all so much obliged unto him, that we are bound to honour and serve him, as I for my part will do as long as I live: and since you are in quest of Prince Godomar, I am very glad that you may hear such cer∣tain news of him here, that your journey will not be lost. Then Periander and Merindor acquainted Alcander where he might find him in the morning; and Alcander, looking about him, he saw Dorinde. This, this, Ma∣dam, is she (said he unto the Nymph) which is the happy accomplishment of our journey, Dorinde is she that is the principal cause of Prince Godomars depar∣ture. I assure you, Madam, that when Prince Sigismond shall be advertised of it, he will recommend her unto you with all manner of affection, and will think him∣self infinitly happy she is in your hands, I do also think my self very happy; an∣swered the Nymph, that such an occasion is presented unto me, wherein I may do him this small service untill a greater present it self. Whilst they were thus discoursing, one came to advertise Adamas, that a Cava∣lier, whose name was Cerastes, was at the gates, with twelve others armed, who desire to enter: the Druid told it unto the Nymph aloud. But Periander and Me∣rindor, hearing the name of Cerastes, and that there was twelve in his company, Madam, said they, assure your self that it is the Prince Godomar, who has heard that Dorinde is here. I would I were so happy, said she, as to see so great a Prince in my house, that I might offer unto him all that is with in compass of my power: will you be pleased Madam, said Periander, to let us go unto him and command that they may have entrance: for upon our words Cerastes, and all those in his company are your servants, and come hither only to render unto you all honour and obedience. Cavaliers, answered the Nymph, command that all whom you shall please may enter, for I refer all unto your disposition. Did I think that the Prince were in the company, I would go and eet him, and offer him my Domi∣nion and that is in my power. Adamas hearing the opinion of these Cavaliers, sent in all haste to cause the gates to be opened, and to advertise him, as near as could be, of the truth. When all the Cavaliers were gone, he returned to the Nymph: Madam, said he unto her, assure your self that God has taken upon him your defence: See what unlookt for aid, he sends you. I conceive it fit, if Al∣cidon and Damon approve of it, that when this young Prince is come, you acquaint him with the state of things, as well with the death of Clidamant, as with the treachery of Polemas: For it is out of all doubt, that the correspondency which
this wicked man holds with Gondebaut, will hinder from your assistance; this acti∣on in killing Ardilan at his coming out of the gates, does shew that this Prince loves his brother better then he does his father. For my part, answered the Nymph, I will be ruled by you in all things: and calling for Damon and Alcidon, she command the Druid to acquaint them with what he had propounded, which they hearing, they were of the same judgement, and advised Nymph to ob∣lige the Prince as much as she could: for most certainly Sigismond, (she having with her two persons so dear unto him) would send her relief if she stood in need of him. Whilst they were talking of these things, and putting all things in the best or∣der they could in the Castle to receive Godamar, all the Cavaliers came to the gates of the Town, in which the Prince was already entred unknown; but when they met, their joyes were so great, as it was impossible any longer to hide them. For they all run to kiss his hand with so much affection and reverence, that every one knew him to be the Prince Godomar, of which the Nimph was presently advertised by those whom Adamas sent thither, and she was extreamly joyed at it. At the same time Adamas, by her command went to receive him: and she accompani∣ed with Galathea, Madonthe, Daephnide, her Nymphs, Dorinde and all the stran∣gers, went all to the gates of the Castle, at which she was no sooner come, but the Prince with all this Troop arived, and in such Majesty, as made him manifestly appear to be the master of all those that were with him. As soon as he saw the Nymphs he alighted from his horse, and disarming his head, he appeared so handsome and fair, that he attracted the eyes of all the La∣dies upon him: and taking a hat, he went to salute Amasis with such a grace, that every one admired his deportment. After some complements of civility, to which Amasis answered with the like respect, he addressed himself unto Galanthea, and professed abundance of service unto them both: I come Madam, said he▪ to pay that duty which all Cavaliers are obliged unto, and to assure you that Prince Si∣gismond and I are wholly devoted unto your service, and so are all those that have any dependency upon us: of which number, here are some which we offer unto you, and all most ready to defend you against any that shall offer any wrong unto you, upon condition (added he and smiled) that you will defend us from any wrongs we may receive from the beauty of these Ladies, whom we see about you. Sir, answered the Nymph, were the defence which you are to undertake, no harder then that which you propound unto us, the danger would not be great: and yet said she (with a smiling countenance) since generous Cavaliers are obliged to take upon them the protection of Ladies, my daughter and I do accept of your offer, and we beseech you to consider that we are not able to defend you from those wrongs which you foresee: For it were a shame unto so brave and valiant a Prince, to look for any relief from Ladies who are feeble and so timerous as we are. Upon this Dorinde came and cast her self at his feet, to thank for the pains he had teken for her, beseeching him not to forsake her; and I believe, the Mymph Amasis had said something unto her which prompted her thereunto: the Prince seeing her in that habit, did hardly know her, if she had not spoke; but knowing her rather by her tongue then face, he very graciously took her up and saluted her: Fair one, said he unto her, the Prince Sigismond has so great a care of you, that you need not doubt any of those who have any dependency upon him, will ever forsake you: besides, you are now under the wings of this great Nymph, who is pleased to honour you so far as to take you into her protection, as I have commission from Prince Sigismond my brother' most humbly to beseech her to do: Your virtue and merits will also oblige her unto it, and us to assist you, in all that we can to the uttermost of our power; upon this turning towards Amasis, he said unto her in a loud voice: The cause, Madam, of my voyage, and why I armed my self, was only in defence of this fair one, and most-humbly to beseech you that you would be pleased to let her remain safe in your dominions, and in requital of the favour, the Prince Sigismond (my brother) and I, do promise for us and all our friends, to serve you upon all occasions whatsoever. Sir, an∣swered
the Nymph, I do receive this fair Lady into my protection, as well for her own merits and virtue, as at the instance of two such great Princes: I do give unto her, as much power and freedome as I have my self, assuring you, she shall sure no worse then Galathea my daughter. After such thanks as are usual up∣on such offers, Alcidon saluted Godomar, who understanding by Adamas who he was, did receive him with so much honour and so kind an aspect as from that day this Prince won the heart and affection of that generous Cavalier. At last Godomar, after much other such discourse, was conducted to his cham∣ber, where the Nymphs left him to disarm and refresh himself, for it was extream∣ly hot: and whilst his arms were taking off, he related unto Periander and Me∣rindor, how since they parted, he marched a long way without meeting any. At the last, said he, we came to the top of a hill, where we discovered all this goodly plain; and looking about every way, we espied about half a league from us, a troop of horse, which we thought to be Cloraentes: This invited us, after we had observed which way they took, to take the same track: and sometimes upon a Trot, and very often upon a Gallop, we made such haste, we overtook them, as they were passing over a little river, where they watred their horses, We found it to be the Lieutenant unto lorantes, with fifteen or sixteen horse; we understood from him, that they divided their Troop where we did ours: and because they said that they had commands to be that evening at the same place where they part∣ed; I thought it not good to leave them, since if by fortune any one of the companies had met with Dorinde, we should find them with their Rendezvous. Not making my self known unto them, one of my men told them, that the king having sent us upon the same designe, we thought that we could not do better then to stay togeher, and help each other if occasion were. They were very glad of the motion, and so we mrched all the rest of the day together: At the even∣ing we came to the place of appointment, where we found Cerastes, who had met with the very same encounter, and who told me, that Clorntes was killed, and almost all his Troop, as he understood by some wounded men that had esca∣ped: That Dorinde was the cause of it, and that of necessity, it must be the Troop of Bellimartes which had met with this happy encounter. You may imagine that the Lieutenant was much astonished at this accident: and being a man of courage, I saw him resolved to follow after those that had relieved Drinde, know∣ing that their enemy was but a few in number, Then discovering my face, I said unto him▪ nay Sir, if you intend to revenge Clorantes, never look any further, for it was I, and those that belong unto me, that rescued this innocent woman out of his rude hands: Tell king Gondebaut, it was his son that did it, and will do so as of as I find any Lady injured. If he complain, tell him that the order of Knight∣hood which he hath conferred upon me, obliged me unto this defence: if he dislike the action, let him complain against himself for getting such a son that has too much courage, to suffer any woman to be injured in his presence, and he not re∣lieve her. The souldiers were so damped at the sight of me, and to hear this language, that they were all ready to run away. At last, doing me that honour which was due unto me, they excused themselves as well as they could, and were extremely glad when I gave them leave to be gone. That night they went no further then the town where we had quartered, because their wounded fellows were retired thither: but I assure my self, that the next day they told Gonebaut such a story, as will not incense him a little against me: but when the heat of passion is cooled, I hope he will think we have done no more then Cavaliers of honour ought to do. As for us, when these men were gone, because it was very late, we lodged in a place which is called Ponsius, where we heard the whole story of the combate with Clo∣rantes, and that three of our Cavaliers were slain, which grieved me extremely. And lastly, that you had carried Dorinde into this Town for safety. This news, made me resolve to wend my course this way, and not unto the appointed ren∣dezvous. Thus Godomar related all his adventure, and had dressed himself, when Alcan∣der and those of his company came to kiss his hands: for though he had seen
them, yet had he not spoke unto them. After he had imbraced them, what good fortune, my good friends (said he unto them) brought you hither, where I am very glad to see you? Sir, answered Alcander, when your going out of the Town, and the death of Ardilan was nois'd about the Town, we were extremely sorry that we had not the honour to wait upon you: and because we heard that the Prince Sigismond was detained, we had an opinion that perhaps he could tell us which way you went, to the end we might be the first that would follow you, though we were not so happy as to accompany you. Prince Sigismond did highly commend our designe, and onjured us to make all the haste that possibly we could to overtake you, fearing that you might stand in some need of our service; he told us you were gone towards Forrests, and we could not be long about the river of Lignon before we heard of you: that if he could, he would follow us ere long, and that however, he would send unto you all those that declared them∣selves his servants. The next morning we departed, though not altogether, but at several part and without arms, having conveyed them out secretly before. But I pray, said the Prince, what said the King when he heard of Ardilans death, and of my departure? Sir, answered Alcander, I cannot relate the bitter expressions of his anger against you, nor his sorrows for the loss of that pernici∣ous man. But Sir, though the King do blame you, yet all the people bless you, and the Court commends you: The Prince your brother is so joyed at it, that he cannot chuse but shew his extream contentment: so as the wise Avitus was forced to beseech him he would at the least hide it, lest it should too much exasperate the King: Also I assure you, the joyes of the Princess Clotilda were no less, who extremely commended you, so as Sir, this action has gotten you that glory which you will never lose: Besides, all the Ladies think themselves highly obliged unso you, for attempting the defence of this innocent woman. The Town does uni∣versally abominate the violence which the king offered unto her, to make her mar∣ry Adilan by force: and therefore you may expect a great number of Dorindes friends to assist you, as soon they know where you are: for they are all more ge∣nerous then to be slack in the acknowledgement of so great an obligation unto you. Then, said the Prince I give thanks unto God for directing us so well, and bringing our intentions to so good an end: If the King do but consider who I am, he will love me better then he did Ardilan; if he do not, then I am resolved with such good company as will follow me, to follow such fortune as heaven will please to give me: I assure my self it will be good, and give us all contentment, since justice and equity are the ends which all our designes do aim at. Sir, said Alcander further, the Prince your brother hath so loadned me and all my compa∣nions with so many jewels to bring unto you, as I think they out-weigh our arms: And I believe, if we had been able to have carried more, he would have sent them unto you, lest you should stand in any need of such things in your voyage. Upon this, they laid them all down upon the table, to the admiration of all beholders, at the sight of so many and so large and precious jewels together. The Prince re∣ceived them in testimony of his brothers good will, and care that he had of him: Not, said he, that I think I shall stand in any need of them, as long as I have a sword by my side, and accompanied with so many brave men as I see about me; but only because I will not refuse the kindness of my brother. Upon this, im∣bracing them all once more, he commanded one of his servants to have a care of those things which his brother had sent unto him; and then, he with all the com∣pany, went out of the chamber unto the place where the Nymphs were, who stayed for him in the great chamber, where the cloth being laid, Amasis would have him to dine. But he being advertised of Damons quality, and that his wounds kept him in bed, beseeched the Nymph to let him go and see him before dinner, and testifie that esteem which he had of his valour. Madonthe hearing this resolution did presently advertise Damon, who received that honour which the Prince did him, with much acknowledgement; and esteemed this favour at such a rate, that it ever after obliged him unto his service. Every one admired the nobleness and generosity which appeared in all his actions, and his curtesie and
sweet deportment, did generally get him love of all. After the first salutions, they entred into some discourses of civility, which lasted not long, because dinner was upon the table, and therefore the Prince as constrained to abridge it, with a promise to continue longer in his company after dinner. Thus therefore they parted: and Clindor in the mean time had obtained leave of the Nymph to take his guests unto his house to dinner, because that abundance of company was come in upon a sudden: He therefore carried with him all the Shepherds and Shepherdesses, except Dorinde, whom Amasis would needs have dine with Galthea; but then in lieu of her, he carried with him the six brothers of Florice, Cercinea, and Palanice, who were not sorry for it, because of the In∣terest which each of them had in those disguised Shepherdesses. The Prince in the mean time sate down to dinner; and because the Nymph would have him waited upon with such observance as was due unto so great a Prince, he beseeched her to use him only as a Cavalier, and a stranger, that would not yeild unto any in devo∣tion to do her service; but not as the son of King Gondebaut, since hereafter he would decline both that name and that quality. Sir, said the Nymph unto him, I know that I shall pay that debt which I owe unto you, better by my obedience, then by any other way; command therefore what you please, both I, and all that depend upon me, will exactly obey. With such discourse as this, they all sate down; and all dinner time the dis∣course was only upon Dorindes fortune, and the extream sorrows of Prince Si∣gismond, that he could not follow her; Dorinde, who saw and heard all this, she was so ravished and confused, as she knew not what to judge of her fortune. 'Tis true, that when she called to mind the coming of Prince Godomar, the discourse of his brothers sorrows, and how he had recommended her unto the Nymph Ama∣sis, she thought that she was to blame in having conceived so ill an opinion of Sigismond: yet not knowing the reason why he failed to meet her at the place ap∣pointed, according to his promise, she had a great desire to speak with Periander and Merindr, assuring her self that they would not conceal the truth. And be∣cause she sate very sad and pensive all dinner time, and the Prince observing it: Dorinde, said he unto her, confess the truth; are you not now thinking upon those frights which you were in? Sir, answered she, I am now in the protection of such persons as have power to banish all fears; but I must needs confess, that never woman so affrighted as I was, when a souldier seized upon me in Florices Cabin: And had you seen us, you would have said there was a wolf was seizing upon a lambe; and how, said the Prince, did you escape out of his hands? A∣lxis, answered she, the daughter of wife Adamas, who was in that place, gave him such a blow with her fist upon his temples, as so astonished him, that he was forced to let me go; but I believe, if you had seen me running in the fields, and a great number of men following after me, you would have said, that fear had fixd wings unto my feet: and yet for all that, but for Bellimartes, Merindor, and Periander, they had carried me away; for one of them had seized upon me, but those Cavalies taught them what it was to injure a woman. I wish that I had been there, replied the Prince, for if I had, I promise you, not one of them should have escaped with his life. Sir, said she, had you seen them run away, I believe you would have pittied them: for I, who had most reason to be offended with them, I protest I had compassion upon them, when I was told what haste they made to return unto the place from whence they came: why, said Amasis, did you not see him when they fled? I Madam? answered she. I was so affrighted, that I ran and hid my self in the closest corner of the Cabin, and crowded my self into as lettle room as ever I could. But Sir, I beseech you consider the ma∣lice of my fortune, who in denying me the honour of your enterprise, would afflict me so for as to give me my deliverance from them, that next Ardilan, I hated the most of any men in the world, and to oblige me the more unto them, the one of them was killed, another lost a brother, and the third a Cosen ger∣mane. I swear I was so sensible of this displeasure, that I hardly resented any contentment in my deliverance. By this, replied the Prince, (and smiled) heaven shews us that hatred ought not to be perpetual, nor obligation forgotten. O
Sir, replyed she, be pleased to know, that I had good cause to hate those, unto whom I am now in spite of my teeth obliged. At this Alcidon began to speak: In this Madam (said he) you shew the nature and humour of all Fair ones; for I never yet saw one of your beauty. that did not always prefer offences before ser∣vices; and which is worst of all, those offences are commonly imaginary, yet have as much force in them, as if they were real. I cannot tell Sir, answered she, of what nature and humour fair ones are, but only by hear-say, but I have had suffi∣cient experience of the nature and humour of men, out of whom hitherto I ne∣ver yet found but one who did not deceive her▪ unto whom they promised fidelity. I would gladly know (said the Prince and smiled) who that Phaenix of Lovers is? It is Hylas Sir, answered she. Hylas! said Madonthe, why he is the most incon∣stant Lover that ever was, So he is (said Dorinde) and therefore I think him the least Deceiver; for he will say freely and ingeniously, that he will change as soon as he finds another that will please him better; and in doing so, he deceives no bo∣dy: whereas others will swear and promise the contrary, yet afterwards do as he doth. I beseech you (said Godomar) in what rank do you hold the Prince Sigis∣mond. I assure you Sir, answered she, that upon a sudden I am much put to it for an answer; yet I will tell you, that till I had the honour to see you, I placed him in the rank with other men. But Fair one (replyed Godomar) what do you now? Now Sir, said she, I have heard you speak highly in his behalf: But Sir, I consider that you are his Brother, and perhaps are partial in your relations: You are ve∣ry incredulous (answered the Prince) if you believe neither words nor deeds. I will believe (said she) whatsoever you pleese, but I am afraid to be deceived again by any man. That shall never be by Godomar, replyed he, for if I should, I should too much injure the affection which my Brother bear unto you. At the same time Periander and all his company whom Clindor had carried with him, returned, and came into the great chamber, and because 'Dorinde was desi∣rous to break off discourse with the Prince; Sir, said she unto him, if you do not know Hylas, cast your eye upon that plain Shepherd, whose hair is a little in∣clinable to red, and you may see the man that of all Lovers living is the least dis∣sembler. Upon this Godomar, and all those that heard Dorinde say so, did cast their eyes upon Hylas; who seeing so many look upon him, did think that somthing was amiss about his clothes, and therefore began to look on himself round about: But Daphnide who observed him; No, no, Hylas (said she unto him) they do not look at any thing in your habit, but at somthing in your soul. My soul, said he, then they must have more piercing eyes then ever Lyx had, if they see it. I believe it so (said Dorinde) to see the inside of any other but Hyla Hylas (replyed he) is the son of a woman. Then Shepherd, said Godomar, if you de∣light in changing, you have some to resemble. Sir, said Hylas, I leave the La∣dies to draw the conclusion which you intimate. But Hylas, said Dorinde, I hope you will confess with me, that there are more men persidious unto women, then there are women perfidious unto men: For there is not one woman which does not complain against some infidelity or other, but I never find any man that complains he hath been deceived. Your argument Madam is very naught (replyed Hylas) for if men do not complain against your infidelities, it is because they are ashamed to complain against a thing so common and ordinary. Godomar began to laugh, and so did Amasis at this merry answer of Hylas; and interrupting Dorinde who was about to answer, me thinks (said he unto her) this Shepherd has in a few words very well defended our cause. She would have replyed. When Amasis and the Prince did rise from the Table, so as this discourse was referred until another time: But Godomar drawing to Do∣rinde, Believe it fair one (said he unto her in a low voice) the Prince my Brother loves you above his life, and when I have leisure to talk with you, or you know what message he hath sent you by me, you will confess that he deserves to be rank∣ed in the number of those who do most perfectly love; and because he turned sud∣denly towards Amasis, he gave her not so much time as to answer him; yet she blushed, not being able to hear this news without much resentment: and turning towards Florice, Palanice, and Cercinea, my companion (said she, to hide the al∣teration)
of her face) I should be sorry to disturb your company, but the Prince Godomar does oblige me so many several wayes, that I am resolved not to forsake you this night; for though the Nymph has lodged me in the Castle, yet I think it better to return unto our first Host, since he desires it, and since this house is so full, that one can hardly turn themselves in it. I am afraid (answered Florice) that the Prince is so fearful to lose you, that he will not permit it. Yet, said Cer∣cinea, it would be more convenient for us to lodge out of this house, where we must be in a continual constraint. Godomar in the mean time who was very desirous to get the friendship of Damon, of whose valour he had received good information; he beseeched Amasis to give him leave to spend part of the afternoon with him; and she answering that she would accompany him, Madonthe sent presently to advertize him; and those who went to tell him, found already with him Thamires, Celidea, Palemon, Doris, and the poor Adrastes, who never forsook Doris, but followed her, as if he were en∣chanted, unless when she went to bed and bolted the door: for the poor Shepherd slept there, or at the least lay there, and never stirred from thence until she went out again; and had not Palemon given him a Blanket, he had lain upon the hard boards, rather then have stirred from the door. When the Prince entred, Thamires was beseeching Damon to remember his promise concerning Celideas cure: And because Damon told him that he was ready so any would go with Halladine his ser∣vant, Thamires offered to undertake the voyage himself; Celidea being unwilling to let him go so far from her, had rather never recover that Beauty which she lost, then let him undertake a voyage so dangerous, for a thing of so worthless a value; she resolved that if he would needs go, she would accompany him. And because Thamiris would not upon any terms suffer that, the woman cryed so, that when the Prince entred he pitied her, to see her eyes so swell'd with tears; and enquiring of Thamires (whose daughter he thought she was) what wrong had been done her; Sir (said Damon, and answered for him) you desire to know a thing which I believe is without example. Be pleased to know, that this young Shepherdess was one of the fairest women in all the Country, you see how her face is now; they offer to restore unto her that Beauty which she lost, and she cries at the motion. Certainly (said Godomar) this humour is singular. But Sir, said Damon, stranger yet; she her self did make her face so. How? said the Prince, Did she disfigure her self? Yes Sir, said Damon, and upon as strange a reason; for it was to keep her self from being loved. Heavens! said the Prince, a woman not to be equall'd, who being fair, makes her self foul, because she would not be loved; and after∣wards angry when they offer to restore that Beauty! Sir, said Celidea, and inter∣rupted, Things that give us no contentment, and which bring us much inquietude, ought to be so rejected. I must needs confess (said the Prince) that I see such te∣stimonies of Vertue in this place, as cannot be enough admired. But Sir, replyed Madonthe, I beseech you cast your eye upon this poor Shepherd here, who is ga∣zing upon this Tapestry; did you but know his fortune, you would admire it more, and if Dorinde would tell the truth, she would confess that all men are not decei∣vers when they profess to love: for he having long loved this Shepherdess, when he was out of all hopes of her being his, he lost his wits, and has ever since so re∣sented his loss, that when he has any good intervalls, he employs them in nothing but in complaining against her. I have heard say (answered the Prince, and looked upon him) that Love may make one mad, but not grief, nor displeasure. But Sir, said Amasis, they tell us of a Receipt which may cure him, and which we intend to try. What is that? asked the Prince. It is Sir, replyed Adamas, to drive a nail unto the Temple of Jupiter, in the wall which is toward the Vestry of Miner∣va; and this nail must touch the Temples of the distracted party. Indeed an∣swered Godomar, beyond the Alpes I have seen it used, and many have been cured. I assure you Sir, replyed Amasis, if you think it good, we will make tryal of it; for we have those two Temples of Jupiter and Minerva very near one another. I think it a work, replyed the Prince, very pleasing unto the Gods; for me-thinks there is no sight under heaven so sad, as to be deprived of his wits, as if Nature had failed in her work, and made a brute Beast in lieu of a rational man. Then (said
the Nymph, I think it fit to advertise the high Priest of it, that he may come and let me understand what is requisite to be done: and Adamas (said she) I commit the charge of it unto you. And I (said Damon) as soon as I see what will be the effects of it, I will dispatch Halladin about the cure of this wise and vertuous wo∣man, according to my promise; and I think it a work no less pleasing unto the Gods then the other: for they are much more pleased with the Beauty of Women, then they are with the wits of men; and, as they say; have often descended from heaven to behold these mortal Beauties, but very seldom have lest heaven to take the advice of any man upon earth. Whilst the Prince was thus discoursing with Damon, Adamas took Amasis a lit∣tle apart, and represented unto her, that it seemed Tautates took a more particu∣lar care of her business then ever she could hope for, since he had sent this young Prince so opportunely, and of such near concernment to his brother Sigismond, as she might in all probability hope for all manner of help from him, as long as she had Dorinde with her: But it was most requisite that she should prudently take hold of that occasion which presented it self: for nothing upon earth was better pleasing unto the Gods, then to see a man prudently defend himself against the blows of Fortune: Now Madam, the greatest thing you have to fear, is the Intelligence which the Traytor Polemas holds with the Kings your Neighbours; the most powerful of all which, and the most dangerous, is Gondebaut: And see how this great God hath enfeebled his arm, by giving you, as it were two of his children; and in as much as there are always more persons that do adore the rising Sun then the setting, assure your self Madam, that these two young Princes well united as they are, will have more partakers then their Father. That which depends upon your prudence is, to interest these two Princes so in your preservation, that they may embrace it as a thing wherein in themselves are concerned. Sigismond is already ob∣liged to assist you, by the protection which you give unto this woman, whom he loves so extreamly, that I hope to see her Queen of the Burgundians, if I survive King Gondebaut. All the work is to find out a way to interest his brother Goomar, for my part, I conceive, that besides the dear affection which he bears unto his Brother, you ought to oblige him further by the ways of curtesie, till time pre∣sent a better occasion; for a soul so generous as his, cannot be faster tyed then by honour, reverence, and kindness. And because these Letters which Gondebaut writ unto Polemas, and which are fallen into our hands, may be redoubled, and so Polemas come to be advertised sooner then we are aware, of your loss, I conceive it good to prevent his designs; which you may do this way that I shall propose unto you. You intend that a nail shall be driven into the wall of Jupiters Temple for the recovery of this poor Shepherd: I conceive it Madam, to be a good work, and pleasing unto the great Tautates: and I conceive, that by this occasion you may preva with Prince Godomar to stay here. It is requisite that he which drives this nail, must be the Prime Magistrate; and because you are not a man, it is ne∣cessary that you make a Dictator expresly for this ceremony; for that's the phrase and title which the Romans give unto such a one: Now Madam, I believe that when you have well thought upon it, you will not make choise of any other per∣son but Prince Godomar, as well in consideration of his quality, as the welfare of your affairs: And I assure my self, that upon this occasion he will take this honour upon him, which perhaps he would refuse at another time: And if he do once take it upon him, then let him continue it until you be freed from the treason of Polemas: By this course you will make him as tender of your preservation, as of his own, and thereby also engage the Prince his Brother, and all his Friends. The Nymph did hearken very attentively unto the Druide; and when he had done, I do approve (said she) of all you say); But what must I now do? You ought Madam (as I humbly conceive, said the Druide) to acquaint the Prince, that for the cure of this poor Shepherd it is necessary he accept of this charge. And when all ceremonies are performed, assemble with him Alcidon and Damon, then declare unto him the death of Clidemant, the treason of Polemas, the correspon∣dencies which you fear he holds with the Princes your neighbours; and I am most confident, that he being generous, will embrace your defence as willing as you
can desire him. And because you must not disoblige Alcidon and Damon, I con∣ceive it good, that before you acquaint the Prince Godomar, you talk with them, and ask their advice, and I believe they will so freely concur, as they will assist you in your desires unto that Prince. Whilst they were thus discoursing, Godomar went towards Damon, where Al∣cidon, Daphnide, and Madonthe were talking of the accidents which befel Dorinde, and because that Prince did think that the habit wherein she was (though much different from what she was wont to wear) did well become her, and that she ap∣peared very fair in it, he took a fancy to have her picture drawn in that dress; as∣suring himself, that his Brother would take great delight to see her so disguised: And therefore Galathea (Who was talking with Lycidas, and highly pleased to see some Ayr of Celadon in his face, whom she could not entirely forget) hearing her self called by Madonthe, she went presently unto them; and hearing what Godo∣mar desired, she told him, that she had a very excellent Artist, that could take a piece to the Life, and was very dextrous and quick at it. Such a man (said the Prince) do we want; for I am desirous to send very speedily unto my Brother, and let him understand our Fortune, of which I know he will be very glad, so as I would not delay this contentment any longer. The Nymph to satisfie his longing desire, sent presently for the Limner, who at her command, fell immediately to work though Dorinde was very unwilling, being ashamed to be seen in that dress. Why Fair one, said the Prince, can you be seen in better company then is here? No Sir, answered she but I am ashamed to be seen thus any where but in this Coun∣try, where the Shepherdesses are such, as beget the admiration and esteem of all that see them. Then for your satisfaction said the Prince, we will write under your Feet, This is DORINDE, one of the Fairest Shep∣herdesses of all Forrests. Upon this condition she permitted them, provided they would leave out the Epithet Fairest. In the mean time, Amasis having found an apportunity of speech with Damon and Alcidon, whilst the Prince went to see the Artist take Do∣rindes picture in the next room, she acquainted them according to the advice of Adamas; and they did so approve of the proposition, that they themselves ac∣quainted Godomr with the discourse, when he returned into Dmons chamber: and he was all curtesie, accepted of whatsoever the Nymph was pleased to impose upon him. Therefore she sending for Adams, she commanded him in the Princes pre∣sence, to prepare all things in readiness for that action. The day so passed away in variety of discourse amongst these Nymphs, Cava∣liers, Shepherds, and fair Shepherdesses, with so much delight and pleasure, that night surprized them before they were aware of it, and forced them to part till the next morning. Amasis would have stayed Dorinde in the Castle, but she and her companions made so many entreaties, and were so unwilling to separate, that the Nymph permitted her to return into the house of lidor, who bade them most freely welcome, where they were much more free then they could be amongst so many constraints and observances which they must of necessity use towards A∣masis and Galathea. Merindor and Periander waited upon Dorinde: Alcander and Clorian upon Cercinea, Lucindor and Cerintes upon Glorice, and Amilcar and Selienes upon Palanice. hamires again kept close unto his sad Clidea, who was quite dejected at the approaching departure of her dearest Shepherd, and Adra∣stes never left following Doris, whom Palemon led by the arm: There was none of all the company who was without his charge but Hylas and Bellisard, who yet passed away the time very pleasantly with all the Ladies, without being engaged unto any one: Also there was none in all the company who had not business of their own to follow, without minding Hylas; for Alcander and Clorian courted Cercinea, Lucindor and Cerintes loved Florice, and Amilcar and Seleines were ser∣vants
unto 'Palanice, and the best conceit was, every one knew of the affection of his Rival. On the other side, Periander and Merindor adored Dorinde, who ha∣ving been deceived by them, as she thought, did nothing but twit them with their infidelity, as often as they mentioned any affection to her; which she did with a more contented mind then before, when she thought that Prince Sigismond had also deceived. When they were come to the house, these Cavaliers, to regain the time which they had lost in being so long from them, resolved to stay as long as ever they could in these Ladies chambers: But Dorinde would not upon any terms permit them, excusing themselves that they must go to bed betimes, because they must rise very early, to be at the Castle before Galathea was up. Then they were con∣strained to retire: and as fortune was, Hylas was lodged in the same chamber where Alcander, Amilcar, and Belisaid did lie, and the other four Cavaliers in another chamber. And because these two brothers had been long friends unto Hylas, as soon as they were in bed, and their beds standing very near unto one another, they fell into discourse of all passages that hapned since last they saw each other. For my part, said Hylas, I shall quickly have told my tale; for since Creseide, that fair stranger, escaped the Guards of King Gondebaut, and went to∣wards Gergovia, I followed her; but all in vain. for I could never find her. 'Tis true, I met with Madonthe and Laonice, with whom I came into this countrey, and found in it so many very handsome Shepherdesses, that I could not possibly leave them▪ And to tell you truly, I have tasted of all waters, and tried all kind of lives; but I find none comparable to the sweet lives of Shepherds in this coun∣trey: for though their garments be course, and their conversation smell a little of the Village, yet they are more discreet, and more civil, then any I ever coversed withall. Amongst the rest, there is one Sylvander, whose acuteness of wit can∣not be sufficiently admired nor commended. As for the Shepherdesses, they are fair and handsome, beyond all expression or imagination: All the sorts and adl∣terations of cities are so far excelled by the natural gayness of these Shepherdes∣ses, as it is impossible to look upon them and not love. You have seen Florice, Palancie, and Cercinea, several times, and have heard how their beauties have been cried up in Lions: Let them come amongst the Shepherdesses of Licynon, and they are but as so many candles to the Sun. Fie, fie, said Alcandr until now I will pardon you, but to say that any Shepherdess under the Sun is fairer then Circinea, I cannot endure. Had you spoke only of Florice and Palanice, I should have thought it something probable; but as for Cercinea, no beauty upon earth ever equall'd hers. Brother, said Amilcar, and interrupted him, Palancie must challenge preheminence above all beauties that ever lived, and will sufficiently an∣swer for her self: As for Florice and Cercinea, let Hylas say what he pleases, so he leaves Palanice out of his comparisons, since it is not reasonable, that she whom heaven never gave an equal, should so unjustly be inferioured. What my sons? (said Hylas unto them and smiled) have you any interest in these women, that you take their parts so zealously? Any interest, answed Al∣cander; good Hylas, in what countreys have you been in, that you are so igno∣rant of it? what interest, and since when? replies Hylas, for when I was with you, I never knew of any. Have you been at Lyons, said Amilcar, since the death of Thombres? No, said he: Then, said Amilcar; the affection which we have unto those fair Ladies began since that time. Also, if you remember, it is not long since our father caused us to return home to his house, True, answered Hylas, but have you been ever since in love? I think there requires more time in con∣tracting love then fiendship. I believe, answered Alcander, there is more time requisite to the choice of a friend then a mistress. Then, replied Hylas, (since it is so, and since we are en∣tred into discourse) it is not likely any of us can sleep so soon, I beseech you let me know all the story of your affections, that I may give my self a check when I speak of the beauty of your Mistresses. I will, said Alcander, upon condition you will not any more, for my sake, dispise the beauty of Cercinea, nor of Palanices for my brothers sake. No, nor you Stellas (answered the inconstant) for Hylas
his sake. We do promise it, said Alcander, but one thing is very requisit before I begin. What's that? said Hylas, you must either come into our bed, said Alcan∣der, or else we come in yours: for it shall be a great trouble unto me to speak so loud. It is but reason, said Hylas, that the scholler should go unto the master: so leaping out of his bed, he went into theirs, where after a while Alcander began thus, whilest Bellisaid slept. The History of ALCANDER, AMILCAR, CERCINEA, PALANICE, and FLORICE. THere are some who say that love proceeds neither from simpathy nor destiny but from designe and will of the lover: and that the original of this affe∣ction has its rise from the violence of beauty, which does tiranize over the facul∣ties of the soul: but such, have not had that experience which Amilcar and I have had: for had they, they would presently be of another opinion, and con∣fess with us, that every one is at his nativity destinied unto her whom he must love and serve. This is a position (said Hylas and interrupted) which I cannot be∣lieve nor grant: for were it so, nuto which of the thirty or fourty whom I have served will you decree me by simpathy and destiny? To that, answered Amilcar, we will speak another time; for a general rule must still be observed, though it may haue some exceptions; and besides, Hylas is a monster in love, quite differ∣ent from the nature of other lovers. This, answered Hylas, and smiled, smells of Silvander, but Alcander continued. You must know, said he, that a little before the marriage of Florice, sister un∣to Amilcar and me, unto Theombres, our father sent for us to return home unto his house, having no mind until then, that we should be with him, until we had so qualified our selves sutable to the degree of our Ancestours. In our more ten∣der yeares he sent us to the most famous Universities, to be instructed in the libe∣ral Sciences and Arts: when we were grown to be more men; he caused us to be taught in all the exercises and behaviours of the body, as riding, fencing, dancing, and the like: and afterwards sent us abroad to learn the languages, and know the manners and customes of our neighbours; then when we were arived at the age of two or three and twenty years, he sent for us home unto his house, where we were such strangers in our own countrey, and knew so very few, that had we not been told Florice was our sister, we could not have known her to be so. Our return was (as you know) a little before Florices marriage, and when we began to love one another, Theombres carried her out of the Town: so as we lost her almost as soon as we found her: but heaven it seems had pity upon us, and re∣stored her back in a short time, by the death of Theombres, who lived not above three months after he was married. She took her loss as she ought to do, and we helped her in this charitable office, but our tears were quickly dried up: for the disposition of this man was not very pleasing, and she married him rather as a fortune then as a lover, without any fancy to him. Our sisters sorrows sunk not so deep into her soul, but she was quickly comfort∣ed by the affection which we expressed unto her; and she in requital to make our stay at home with our father, as little tedious unto us as possibly she could: and doubtless that droning kind of life, so different unto that which we had been ac∣customed unto, had been intollerable to us without her sweet conversation. Some dayes after Florice was returned home, and her mourning not of so deep a black, but would allow her colours, she took notice of the melancholy lives we led, and few recreations we frequented: Brothers, said she unto us, I am sorry to see you droop thus; but I must divert you some wayes or other, so as you shall find this place not so drowsie as you did at first. Our father does tire you with these visits
of kindred, who never talk of any thing but serious matters: but I will make you acquainted with some of my associates, and dare lay a wager, you will not think them so dull and tedious as his. We who had lived with our father in a kind of imprisoned constraint, and could not indure it any longer, did intreat her to be as good as her word. She deferred the effecting of her promise, no longer then the next morning, when she carried us unto the house of Cercinea, where we found Palanice, Dorinde, Cloris, Parthenopea, and some others, all very fair and handsome women. But Hylas, to prove the destiny which I spoke of, I did no sooner cast my eye upon Cercinia, but I found in her so many allurements unto love, that I could not deny her my heart, and my soul: My brother also at the same time thought Palanice so lovely, that he could not chuse but bestow himself wholly upon her. Now let those who think that it is beauty which doth tiranize over our souls, tell me the reason why Cercineas beauty should not tiranize as well over the soul of A∣milcar as mine; or why Palanice should not have as powerful an influence upon my heart, as upon my brothers? I am confident that mauger all their reasons, they will confess, that it was destiny and fate that did dispose of us as they plea∣sed. Destiny, I say, decreed that we should at one and the same time receive two great losses: for the loss of our liberty, was presently after seconded with the loss of a father, who being of a great age, was also seized upon by a violent fea∣ver, which in few dayes brought him to his grave. Perhaps if the new affection which we had conceived unto these two Ladies, had not been written in the fatal book of destiny, this last loss might have stifled it in his grave: for the truth is, we took it more sadly to heart then others use; but Hylas, what can resist fatali∣ty? For our affections by this contrariety, increased as a flame will by contrary wind. There is nothing which hinders a growing love from taking deep root, more then to be out of sight of the party loved, because the eyes are they that give beginning unto love, and the sight does nourish it and make it grow: so as when this sight is denied, commonly love dies, or at least languishes. But this, we found, might hold true unto others, who love by election, but not unto us who were de∣creed unto it by unresistable Fate: for being constrained to observe the ceremo∣nies of mourning, we were a long time deprived of the sight of these beauties, but all would not do any good: only helped to make our misery more painful, and hard to be indured. But the dayes of deepest mourning being past; it is the custome, upon such accidents for friends and nighbours to come and visit the mourners, as well to con∣dole with them and offer their assistance, as to renew that amity and friendship which they formerly had with the predecessour. All our friends and neighbours, failed not to pay those duties of civillty: so as our house was frequented as much as any famous Temple; Palanice and Cercinea, amongst the rest that were inti∣mate friends unto my mother and sister, were not failing at this visit: and we who were almost alwayes with Florice, were, heaven knows, most glad to see them. The truth is the death of our father did greatly afflict us; and there was not the least appearance of any mirth in our house, until these two fair Ladies were pleased to come unto it. But then, I must confess, the mourning of Amilcar and me, did vanish like a cloud before the Sun. When Cercinea had complemented my mo∣ther a long while, she came to render the same civilities unto Florice: and because I could never satisfie my eyes with looking upon her, I drew near unto my sister; and after I had thanked Cercinea for the pains she was pleased to take in coming to a house so full of sorrows, and that in requital of this honour, we offered unto her all our services, Florice was constrained to go and say as much unto Palanice: so as Cercinea and I remained together at a distance from the rest of the compa∣ny: this invited me, in pursuance of my former discourse, to say unto her; the truth is, fairest Cercinea, I have very little reason to thank you for this favour, since I foresee more harm then ever I can hope for good by this visit. She who did not yet perceive the affection which I had unto her, for all former demonstrations
of kindnesses were received only under the notion of civilities and courtesies, I cannot tell Alcander, said she unto me, what harm my visit may do unto you; but I am sure that I have no intentions of doing any: if you have no intention Madam (said I unto her) then it is my destiny, for certainly Cercinea will be the cause of Alcanders death: Who I? said she, the cause of your death? Doubtless you will, answered I: but I will pardon you, not being my self able to be dis∣pleased with it. Upon this we were parted, by the coming in of a great number of Ladies, and after that, I could not renew this discourse all that day. In the mean time Amil∣car, who would not, no more then I, lose this opportunity, he accosted Pala∣nice. I did not think Madam, said he unto her, that the beauties of this countrey had been so cruel as I find them; what cruelties Sir, said she, do you complain of? of yours Madam, replied he, who are not contended to see this house so full of sadness, but you will add more sorrows unto it. Your sorrows, replied she, and smiled, are doubtless to be condoled; but I do not see which way I am any addi∣tion unto them, or if I be, I am sure it is very innocently. That innocency, said he, is not enough to repair my loss which you have caused, without some other cordial. Doubtless their discourse had continued longer, had they not been interrupted by the same accident which severed Cercinea and me. And judge whether destiny did not drive us both unto this affection, since the words by which we made the first overtures of our loves unto these Ladies, were almost the very same, although we did not consult together about it. Now though these few words wrought no great effects, yet they served, at the least to open the eyes of Cercinea and Palanice, and let them know that we were in love with them: And upon the next opportunity of discourse with them, we found not the difficulty so great to make them understand us. It was not long be∣fore we had that opportunity, for when the first dayes of mourning are past, it is customary to return those visits which we received: and you may well imagine that my brother and I were not very backward in paying such debts unto those fair ones, with whom we might have what opportunity of speech we pleased. Florice who accompanied us thither, and observed that I had talked very long unto Cer∣cinea, when we were returned, she took me aside, and said unto me: I forgot brother to advertise you, when I shewed you Cercinea, that you should have a special care of being surpised by her beauty: for she is so engaged another way, as I fear you will take abundance of pains for very small contentment: O my dear sister, answered I, your councel comes too late, for I am already so deeply enga∣ged, that there is no hopes of any retreat till death. O Heavens brother, cried she, I pity you extremely, and am very sorry that I was the cause of your seeing her, for there is not a beauty in all the countrey more likely to make one in love then she. You must know that Clorian brother unto Palanice does so possess her, as I believe none whomsoever can divert her from him. Sister, said I unto her, you astonish me extremely, in telling me she is so engaged unto a man: perhaps, an∣swered she, I do not mean as you do, when I say that she is engaged unto Clori∣an, my meaning is, that he being brother unto Palanice, and Palanice the most intimate friend of Cercinea; and besides, the husband which Palanice had (for you must know she was married) being uncle unto Cercinea, and as long as he lived, she was alwayes with his wife: these considerations hath caused Cercinea to honour her, as much as if her husband was living: so as Palanice has a great command over her, and she loving her brother Clorian extremely well, she gives him such access unto Cercinea, and has such a hand over her, that she dare hardly turn her eye without her leave. Not that I will say she loves him, or that any thing has passed between them that is unhandsome, for she is esteemed to be a very virtuous and discreet Lady. But certain it is, that she being without father or mother, she suffers the sister of Clorian to have so much authority over her, as it is not credible any else can be entertain'd. If it be so, said I, that Clorian loves her, and that Palanice has all the power, why is not the marriage compleated? very many, answered she, who are ignorant of the cause, and yet see their af∣fections,
have asked the same question; but in answer to it, you must know that Cercinea has two brothers, the one of which is extremely in love with Palanice, and because he loves him not, and to colour it, pretends she will not marry again, he is resolved that Cercinea shall never marry Clorian, unless Palanice take him for her husband; and Palanice being obstinate, is the cause why Clorians con∣tentment is retarded: This sister, replied I, is the best news you could tel me, for certainly if I had no hopes of Cercinea, there was no hopes in my life: But Sister, if you love me, let me be acquainted with the Brother of Cercinea, that I may, if it be possible, gain him. Brother, answered she, and smiled, I would acquaint you with another secret if I durst, and which perhaps may be more advantagious to you. Dear Sister, said I unto her, I conjure you, as you love my life, conceal nothing that may advantage me in this business; for heavens sake out with it, since nothing ought to be hidden betwixt us. Florice smiled, since you desire it so se∣riously (said she) I will tell it unto you; but Brother, upon condition you receive this testimony of my affection to you, as the greatest that I can do you. Know then, that Cercinea has two brothers, the elder is called Selenes, and the younger Lucindor: The elder (as I told you) is desperately in love with Pala∣nice; and Lucidor; at this word she stopped and smiled, and Lucindor (said I) is in love with Palanice too: Nay, nay, replyed she, and smiled, it is not so; and then laying her hand upon her eyes, which made her more confident to speak, she said, and Lucindor says he loves me, though I do not believe him: but I dare boldly say, that at my entreaty he will do you the best service he can, for I am confident he will not deny me any thing I ask. Oh dearest Sister (said I, and took her hand) my life and my death is in your hands, and if you do not help me in this condition which you your self have caused, you are the most merciless Sister that ever was. Oh Heavens! Alcander (said she unto me) what a task do you put upon me? And what will Lucindor say of me? Do you not consider how I shall engage my self unto him? Sister, said I very seriously, I beseech you hear me, and mistake me not; but be assured that if my affection to Cercinea were not quali∣fied with all the conditions of a vertuous Love, I would rather die, then employ you in it: I do love her with intention to marry her, not abuse her. And as for Lucindor, he being the Brother of Cercinea, I will think him to be a man of me∣rit; and if he be, why may he not marry you? Your young years will not let you continue long in a widowed habit; and for my part, I will never advise you should Oh Brother, replyed she, talk no more of that I beseech you for The∣ombres is yet too fresh in my memory to entertain any such thoughts. Oh the gros∣sest piece of folly that ever was, replyed I; Do not I know that you married him only out of obedience to my Father and yours? And what great affection could you therefore have unto him? Ah Alcander, answered she and smiled, you are very pleasantly disposed; why might not I conceive affection unto The∣ombres in three moneths space, as well as you unto Cercinea in a moment? Oh Brother, did you know how the Bonds of marriage do oblige every good wife unto it, you would change your discourse: For the knots of it are tyed to fast, and are so dear, that they can never be unloosed without resentments of sorrow, so as a separation is like unto that of the soul and the body. But though this consi∣deration which is very great, had no force in me; yet there is another which is prevalent enough to keep me from any more marriages, which is Brother, The extream jealousie which he had conceived of me, so as I thought my life to be a torment unto me: As for Theombres, I should have thought my self the happiest of all my Family, had he not taken this toy in his head. Now after all these great inconveniences, would you have me so mad as to plunge my self into the like mi∣series again? Why Sister, said I unto her, will Lucindor be jealous? Or why should you think he will? Alcander, answered she and smiled, I see you desire to know all, and I will tell you, since I am resolved to hide no action of my life from you. You know Brother, that in this great City there is abundance of company, and one cannot chuse but be seen, and converse with several persons: It happens that ma∣ny persons seeing us, many come to love us, or at the least seem so: for I believe that is the custome of most men: But however, many eyes being upon us, they
will see these addresses, be they true or false; and thus this multitude of acquain∣tance produceth this enemy; or rather, this mortal disease of Love, which is cal∣led Jealousie. Lucindor having observed one of Palanices brothers did seem to love me, or perhaps loved me in earnest, he became so jealous upon it, that he will let me nor himself take any rest. How? Sister (said I and smiled) I beseech you explain this a little better unto me; Does this Brother of Palanices love you, and did not you say that he loved Cercinea? Is he in love both with you and her? No, answered she, Palanice has two Brothers, The one is called Clorian, who is in love with Cercinea, and the other is called Cerintes, who makes a shew of some good will unto me. This Sister (said I unto her, and laughed heartily) is one of the finest encounters that ere could happen: Palanice has two Brothers, the one of which is called Cerastes, who loves you; and the other is called Clorian, who is in love with Cercinea. Cercinea also hath two brothers, Selcines loves Palanice, and Lucindor courts you; And you Florice, you may say, that these two fair La∣dies cannot lend you any thing, but you are able to pay them back again in their own coyn: for as I do love the fair Cercinea, so Amilcar is desperately in love with Palanice. How? cryed out Florice) Amilcar in love with Palanice? Yes, yes, replyed I, most desperately. This (replyed she) were an excellent subject for a Comedy. I would it were, replyed I, for Comedies, they say, conclude always with a marriage: but yet since we are six, and you but three, some of us must of necessity be discontended; for I am sure I will suffer none to share with me in her that I do love. Do you think (said she) that any one of us would be divided into two? As for that, answered I, I refer it unto your self: But Sister, all that I re∣quire from you, is, to work so with Lucindor, that his Sister may love me; and with Cerintes, that he work so with Palanice, that she may take Clorion off from his Courtship of Cercinea. It was by this discourse, Hylas, that I came to the knowledge of all these se∣cret passages; and because I could not say any more, by reason that many per∣sons came in and interrupted us; The conclusion was, that she promised not on∣ly to assist me with all her power, but also to deal so with Cerintes, that Amilcar should find no ill entertainment from Palanice: for (said she) I think my self ob∣liged to assist you both, since I was the cause of your being in love. Thus then we parted; and because I was advertised of Clorians affection unto Cercinea, and of the influence which Palanice had upon her, I thought to gain some of Cercineas good will, before either the Brother or the Sister took notice of it; to the end, that when Clorian entreated his Sister to do me any ill offices, she might be armed a little before hand in my defence: and therefore the way that I took to oblige her, was principally discretion; having heard that nothing does more engage a maid to love then it; and it is but mean prudence to employ any confidents in the business: I have already told you how I made the first declarati∣on of my affection; and I said no more unto her for some days after: but being almost continually with her, all the demonstrations that I gave her of it, was a most observant respect; and to the end she might know that it was a respect whch proceeded from Love, and not from civility only, I behaved my self towards Pa∣lanice after another manner, and did not render unto her any more then that ho∣nour which every Cavalier is obliged to pay unto Ladies of her qualities. My car∣riage to the one was a common road of complement, and to the other, a particular reverence, which glanced sparks of Love: One day, when Cercinea was at Palanices house, she would wash her hands before a collation; I, as I always used to be, was close by her to hold her Gloves; she was nothing nice in giving them unto me, because it was a trivial service which any would freely undertake: And pretending to have a little business at my own house, I went thither as fast as possibly I could, and with the same haste, wrote this in one of her Gloves.
If I be not Yours, I am not mine Own, Nor Any's else. Cercinea took her Gloves again, but took no notice at that time what I had written in them: but at night when she was going to bed, her chamber-maid made the discovery. Mistris (said she unto her) who gave you these Gloves? How? (said she) who gave them? Are they not the same I wore in the morning? I can∣not tell, answered she, but I did not see what is written in one of them; and then she brought them unto her, for she was in bed. Cercinea reading it, and remem∣bring that I had them once in my hands; but because she would not trust this maid who was wholly for Clorian and Palanice, she seemed as if she could not possibly devise who it should be that writ it; and to shew how little she cared for it, she gave the Gloves unto Andronira (so was the wench called.) I wish Mistris (said she unto her, and thanked her) that he who writ this in these Gloves, may often do so; and I assure you, did I know him, I would give him hearty thanks. Thou wouldst do well (answered she, and smiled) for the gift deserves it. I believe (said she) that the gift is very precious unto him, who is the cause of your giving them unto me; and if I should present them unto him from you, he would thank me with all his heart. Take heed of such a trick, replyed Cercinea, for you may chance do me an extream displeasure. Why should I take any heed? replyed Andronira; I do not know who it is. And if thou didst (said Cercinea) wouldst thou do it? Never doubt it Madam, answered she, for I am extreamly pitiful un∣to those that are in love; and besides. I am sure Clorian would give me hearty thanks for informing him. As for Clorian (replyed Cercinea) if you would have me live in peace with Palanice and him, be sure you do not acquaint him with it. What need you care Madam, answered she, as long as you know not who it was? No matter, replyed Cercinea, I would not have him see them; and then feigning as if she had not read what was written, let me see them again Andronira said she) that I may read it; and she having given them unto her, Go, go to bed (said Cer∣cinea) thou art such a fool, that thou shalt not have them. Ah Mistris! cryed she, then restore me back the thanks which I gave unto you. If that will content thee (said Cercinea) prithee take them with all my heart, and I will give thee ano∣ther pair of Gloves besides; Then calling for a Cabinet where she kept such things, she gave her another pair of Gloves. Mistris (said Andronira and thank∣ed her) you have taught me a way never to want Gloves. How? asked Cercinea. Why Madam (said she) when these are worn out, I will get some body to write a little upon those you wear, and you will presently give me a new pair in exchange of them. Thou sayst right, said Cercinea, but in the mean time, leave me to my rest. Now Cercinea knew very well that it was I who writ upon them, and though she had no thoughts that were advantagious unto me, yet would she not upon any terms let Clorian see them; and lest this wench should shew them unto him, she chose rather to keep them: yet it was impossible to avoid that which heaven had decreed, as you shall hereafter understand. In the mean time, this trivial passage was not altogether, unprofitable; for Cercinea remembring the words that I had spoke unto her, and seeing with what observance I behaved my self, she was better assured by the reading of these words, that I did really love her; and though she was far engaged with Clorian, yet could he not reject this affection. After she had a while consulted with her self, whether she should cherish this humour in me, or give me cause to quit it and her; at last she resolved to let this have its free course, thinking she could give it a stop when she pleased. Some few days after she came to see my Sister, and by fortune I was not at home, having then accompanied Amilcar unto Palanices house; and taking my Sister a∣side, she shewed her those Gloves upon which I had written: Flories presently
knew the hand; but making a shew as if she thought it the act of Clorian, What? said she will this love last always? How? said Cercinea, last always! What love do you mean? It had been a much more pertinent question to have asked when it began? Why? answered Florice, all the world knows that Clorian loves you: I do believe it, replyed Cercinea, and am sorry for it: I believe every one sees the folly of Clorian: but such passages as this are not usual with him: Pray look upon it a little better, and see if you can know the hand? Then taking the Gloves, and looking upon the writing a little more precisely, she cryed out, Oh Cercinea, I know it very well, it is the hand of one that is very neerly allied unto me; I have often advis'd him to make no further attempts upon that designe, and told him it was better to retreat betimes; then be foyld in a business which he would never bring to pass. Ah Florice (answered Cercinea) what strange offence have I com∣mitted against you, that you should wish me so much harm? Assure your self, an∣swered Florice, that I never entertained the least thought of any harm unto you; but I was loth that Alcander should attempt a thing wherein he should be baffled. And how do you know things future? replyed Cercinea. I do not know them cetainly, answered Florice, but I can foresee by probable conjectures; and you your self, if you will, can tell it as well as I. Then I will tell you seriously, re∣plyed Cercinea, 'tis true, Clorian has such a Fancy in his head, which might well move you to speak thus; but it is more true, that if I continue in the same mind wherein I am, he shall never bring what he intends to pass; not that I would by these expressions engage Alcandr any farther in his designe which he seems to have: for besides my unwillingness to put him unto so much pains, I have no de∣sire to be loved: But take this for a most certain truth, That I am very sorry the indiscretion of Clorian is such, and so disadvantagious to me, as makes me weary of it and him. Since you are pleased to speak so freely unto me, answered my Sister, let me tell you again, that I think the courtship of Clorian is not disadvan∣tagous unto you, unless it be in this, that he does seem in publique to have so much authority over you, as makes the world believe he has more in private; and whe∣ther this be prejudicial unto you, I leave it unto your own judgement. For my part, I think you would do much better if you by degrees get this absolute authority out of his hands; for so you will let the world see, that the fault is not yours, and that those whose profession is to censure the actions of others, are grosly mistaken in the discretion of the man. Oh Florice (said Cercinea) this counsel is easie to give, but very difficult to execute; and did you know the humour of Palanice, you would confess as much; when we have more leisure, I shall more fully inform you: But in the mean time (continued she, and smiled) do not think I desire Alcander should trouble himself so far as to love me; and to tell you truly, I think my self obliged unto you for disswading him; also you will add unto the obligation, if you continue it, though I know you will find no great difficulty in so doing; for I as∣sure my self he does but jest. At these words my Sister observed that she blushed a little, which made her think, that what she said was not the desires of her heart: yet seeming to believe her according to her words, she answered her, I wish Cer∣cinea, as well for your own interest as my Brothers, you would free your self from this importunity; but I fear you will not. Upon these words they parted, because Amilcar and I entred into the room, and presently after us, entred Cerintes and Silcines: for my part, assoon as I had saluted all the company, I applyed my self unto Cercinea; Cerintes, he began to court Florice, and Silcines and Amilcar sate down by Palanice, whom we brought along with us, I must confess that I was not very attentive unto the discourse of the company, being so joyed to have found her alone whom I desired, as I thought heaven was very favourable unto me: I say alone, though all this good compan was there, because I esteemed it so, since Clorian was not present; for if he had, I could hardly have had any opportunity of discourse with her. Seeing her there∣fore to wear the same Gloves in which I had writ, I swear, fairest Cercinea, said I unto her, that all in those Gloves is full of Truth. I doubt it not (said she unto me) for my hands are in them, and they are true. Your hands (replyed I) ought to have not only the Epithet of true, but also of the fairest hands in the world:
but there is something yet in your gloves which you have not spoke of. She who seemed not to understand my meaning; there is also (added she) some rings which I wear upon my fingers, which are likewise true rings. There is yet, replied I, something else. What can there be? said she (and seemed to wonder) for my part, I neither see nor feel any thing else. O Cercinea, then answered I and sigh∣ed, there is small hopes of any happiness unto me, when my heart is in your hands and you feel it not, nor will so much as look upon that writing which touches them. She then smiling, how should I feel your heart, said she, if it be not there: then pulling her hand out of her glove, see, said she, if any heart be here. But see, replied I, if it be possible, so fair a hand should be there, and not have an infi∣nit number of hearts. Then taking the glove, and shewing the writing unto her; See here, said I, whether I say truly or no, for I see there what my heart did write. She seeming as if she never saw it before, truly Alcander, said she, you are very bold with me, in writing thus in my gloves: do you think I take any de∣light in such foolery? Then taking a pair of sissers, she seemed as if she would scrape it out, but interposing my hand, I said unto her, I most humbly begg a pardon Madam, upon the gradure of my affection, and the boldness whereof you accuse me; and believe it fair Cercinea, it is in vain to scrape out that writing, since they are so engraved in that heart which I have devoted unto you, or rather you have ravished from me, that neither time or death it self can ever deface it. Alcander; said she, I value neither your heart nor your tongue, knowing neither the one nor the other to be true, but though they were, I will not burthen my self with any such kind of merchandize. I must needs confess, answered I very faintly, that this merchandize not being worth much, and you esteeming it less, you have no reason to be burthened with it, for if ever once you take it upon you, you can never shake it off: that is not my meaning, replied she and smiled; but on the contrary, I know your merit, and esteem you as I ought to do; but this mer∣chandize whereof you speak, is of such a nature, that though I had it in my hands, it would not stay long there, it being like to those quintessences which va∣nish all into smoke. But Alcander, to be plain with you, my meaning in effect is, that I have no inclination either to love, or to be loved. 'Tis strange, replied I, you should be so ignorant in a thing wherein you have been so well taught. Al∣cander, Alcander (said she with a smiling eye, and giving me a gentle blow upon my hand) you are a very dissembler, and assu re your self I take all you say under that notion. Fairest Cercinea, answered I, if I be not most really devoted your ser∣vant, then I am not Alcander, and I wish heaven may never let me live longer, then I love and adore you with all the faculties of my soul and body. She would have answered, and had half opened her mouth to speak when she stopt upon a sudden, and changing countenance and behaviour towards me▪ she seeming to become quite another. This alteration did astonish me: but looking back towards the door, I saw Clorian with Lucindor enter. Imagine, Hylas, you saw a little child under the rod after he had committed some fault: just so looked Cercinea and Florice, when Lucindor and Clorian surprized the one with me, and the other with Cerintes: and though I had interest in them both, yet I could not chuse but laught; But to shew my discretion towards Cercinea, seeing in what trouble she was when Clorian saw me alone with her, I made a shew of going to receive him and Lucindor also, and of doing them the honour of the house: Flo∣rice did the like; and therefore every one for company rose up: but for all this, Clorian took notice that Cercinea did talk with me, and Lucindor observed Florice talking with Cerintes: so as when they first entred, their faces were full of severe and surly looks, and seemed to be much troubled, but Cercinea much more; yet they endeavoured as well as they could to put good faces upon the matter, and clear up all clouds of suspition. Clorian did not yet know of a certainty, that I loved Cercinea, but his doubts of such a thing, and his humour of suffering none to speak unto that Lady, did make him knit the brows, and look so surly as he did. I must confess this demeanure of Cercinea's did much displease me, and I was in a hundred minds to love her no longer; but then as soon as ever I looked upon her face, I yielded unto the power
of her beauty, and shrugging my shoulders complained against my unjust fate, that had made me a slave unto a slave. At the last, night drawing on, every one retired homewards, and Cercinea gave me such a cold good night, as if I had committed some grand offence against her; yet thinking it was only because of Clorian, I would not, as I used, wait up∣on her to her house, but went home. When I was at my own house Florice related unto me all her discourse with Cer∣cinea, and afterwards added, Shall I tell you brother, what I think, certainly she will be more easily taken off Clorian, then ever I thought she would: and the truth is he is so very imperious over her, as I wonder she should so long indure it as she has. Sister, answered I, and smiled, that which you wonder at in another, you do allow of in your self: believe it you are both alike, and if without offence I may speak it, you may well be ranked in a medium, betwixt creatures irrational and rational. Alcander, said she unto me, you did oblige us both in saying so: Pray tell us what we should do? Florice, said I, does not Lucindor treat you as Clorian does Cercinea? if you do disapprove of her tolleration of it, why do you allow it it in your self? And if Cercinea be weary of that tiranny, why does she still tie the knots of her bondage faster? Ah sister, believe it, both you and Cercinea, and all the women of the world are molded after one pattern, you will, and you will not: you will not, and you will. What do you mean brother, by these intricate words? (said Florice and smiled) I mean, replied I, that you would fain be mistresses, and yet you are contented to be slaves; and though you be weary of servitude, yet you take delight in remaining under it: Have you not told me that Lucindor cannot indure Cerintes should speak unto you? and yet the same jealousie was your greatest torment with Theombres: if so, why do you sub∣mit your self unto it? why do you not take upon you that authority which he u∣surps over you? you think it strange that Cercinea should be so subject unto the tiranny of Clorian, and I do think it more strange in you: for there is some rea∣son to be alledged why she should be so enslaved unto him; her education in his house, the authority which Palanice ever had over her, her small experience and many other considerations, which you cannot alledge for your self; but brother, said Florice, who told you, that I do stand in fear of Lucindor? my eyes, replied I, ad your actions: had you but seen your self in a glass when he entred with Clorian, you would have been ashamed to see how every one took notice of you; and yet you can tell me that Cercinea is weary of that authority which Clorian as∣sumes unto himself over her; and that it is an easie matter to take him off: Ah sister, how hollow is the hopes of it, since they are grounded upon the faint reso∣lution of a woman? were it a thing that is disadvantageous to you, or against all reason to make a man despair who is all yours, O how easie and ready would you be to take up such a resolution; but if it be a thing that is reasonable, or to your advantage, O how backward and difficult you find it to resolve with your selves. Thus I continued twitting Florice with these reproches, and she having given me hearing a while, she took me by the arm and interrupted me: Alcander, said she, from whence did you come that you are in such a crabbed humour? and I an∣swering that I came from walking in the garden, certainly replied she, you have tasted of some bitter fruit. I had some thoughts, said I unto her, which indeed were as bitter as any wormwood unto me: I thought so, replied she, for your words are full of wormwood. But since you think us woman so inconsiderate, I beseech you tell me, you that are so wise, would you have me break off with Lu∣cindor? think well what councel you will give me; for I am resolved to follow it, assuring my self that you will give me none, of which you will not be called the Authour: believe it sister, answered I, you are very kind; because Lucindor is brother unto Cercinea, you would at my charges, regain your liberty. You see then, replied Florice, that as women want resolution, men are all for their own interests. Ah Alcander, how easie it is to spie a mote in a neighbour eye? and how hard to see a beam in our own? if I do suffer some things in Lucindor, you have reason to be glad of it: for he being brother unto Cercinea, we may keep
him within his devoires of serving you. Sister, said I unto her, shall I speak free∣ly unto you? I am not much against Lucindor, for he is not out of all reason; but I cannot endure the impertinencies of Clorian. Brother and friend, answered she, I see that now your tongue and your heart concurre, but set your mind at rest, and be assured, that if you will be ruled by me, we will take some course or other, that shall give you contentment. What couese, replied I, would you have me take? O heavens, answered she and smiled, how the case is altered? must it be I, that must give the councel? well Brother, for this time, I will, and if you find it bad, never credit me again. However Cercinea behave her self towards you, continue you serving her, but be sure you hide your affection from all the world but her, and leave the rest to your own merit, to the impertinency of Clorian; to the humour of Cercinea, and to my assistance▪ for if you discover it, Clorian and Palanice will lead her such a life, as she will wish her self out of the world: on the contrary, if you hide it handsomly from them, you shall see that this discre∣tion will so much please her, that Clorian will be doubly intollerable to her, and assure your self that if she once begin to melt a little, I will not let any opportuni∣ty slip, which may advantage you. I must confess, said I unto her, that I find by your discourse, every one is to be believed in their own mystery: to love and to dissemble is the mystery in which most women are versed; therefore sister, I will follow your advise, and not fail in the least circumstance. Truly Alcander, said she and clapped her hand upon my shoulder, I imploy my time very well, in advi∣sing you so affectionately, whilst you in the mean time requite me with retorting injuries. This was our discourse, in which I conceived no small hopes, and thinking the advice of Florice was not to be rejected, I resolved to follow it as near as possibly I could: you know Hylas, that passion has a quality, to swell that soul with vio∣lences which is possessed with it, and so it was with me; for notwithstanding all my designs of constraint, and close deportment, my affection did hurry me ere I was aware into such actions, as did but too much make known what I desired to hide: so as Palanice perceived it, making it appear, that art can hardly hide a thing from those that are of the same mystery. And because she knew how im∣patiently Clorian would take this new affection, and she extremely loving her bro∣ther, one day she took Cercinea apart, and to begin; told her, how unadvised that woman was who would reject a firm and settled affection, to enter any new one: how most men do court rather out of humour then love, and oftentimes on∣ly to try whether women will be easily won, that they may afterwards laugh at them, never caring for the reputation of those they seem to love, so they can but satisfie their vanity: how hard a thing it is to find a man of another humour, and what danger there was in trusting any before long trial: Then afterwards she con∣tinued. Now sweetheart, I mention all this unto you, to advertise you of a thing, which perhaps you take no notice of: I know, that Alcander since his return, has a great aim upon you, and would make you believe that he loves you; he is a young man and has not yet sold his merchandize, he has been abroad, and swelled his mind full of wandring fancies: be sure Cercinea you do not believe what he sayes, and though you say never so little unto him, he will be sure to take you at your word: we know yet of what humour he is, and I should be very sorry we should learn it at your charges; what I say is meerly for your own good, and as for the affection which my brother bears unto you, I am most confident his worth will oblige you to wish him well, and did he know thus much, it would trouble him most excessively: I see that for your part you have not contributed any thing unto it, further then an affable complacency, which is ordinary amongst women of your age, because they think it a high honour to be courted by many: but sweetheart I beseech you be not you of that opinion, for there is nothing more discomendable in a young woman, then to be followed continually by all sorts of men: for things that are common are not estimable, and persons of merit will not walk in a crowd: Dear Cercinea, take this advice which I give you, in good part, and make your advantage of it, like a wise and a prudent woman, as I know you are.
Cercinea was very attentive to the discourse of Palanice; and though she knew all her sapient advice aimed only at her Brother, yet she took it handsomly, with∣out any dislike, or so much as the knitting of a Brow; so as after a complement of thanks for her good advice, she beseeched her to continue it, and her usual fa∣vours towards her; and as for her part, she knew not what I intended, but would with all discetion divert me, if she found any such designe in me; but above all, she beseeched her to hide it from Clorian, because she honoured and esteemed him, and would not upon any terms give him any cause of dis-satisfaction, This was the first discourse they had together upon that subject, and see I be∣seech you, how prudently she needed to carry her self in such accidents. 'Tis true this counsel of Palanices caused her to carry her self more coldly towards me then before: but withal, she treated with me as with her servant: I mean, she was so perswaded that I loved her, as let all the world say the contrary, she did not doubt it: so as the counsel which Palanice gave her with intention to do me harm, did more advantage my designe, then all my courtship would have done in a long time: My Sister who saw this alteration, and that Cercinea durst hardly name me without a blush; that when I came into the room where she was, she presently cast down her eyes, or turned them another way; that when I came to her, she then changed place, and went into other company: that if I presented her with any flowers o fruits as I used to do, she refused them: and briefly, considering how much displeased she seemed to be with me one day when we were both together at home, she could not chuse but speak unto me about it, and represented this scorn to be so insupportable to a man of courage that if words had been able to have al∣tered my opinion, doubtless those of Florice had been sufficient to have diverted me from that affection which I bore unto Cercinea. But the disease had taken too deep a root, or to express it a litle better, the Arrow was struck too far into my heart, to be pulled out by any thing but death: And she saw it very well by the answer which I gave her; for when she had represented unto me the wrong which that woman did me, and how every one admired to see me so obstinate, or rather insensible; that upon all other occasions I shewed courage and judgement enough, but in this I seemed as if I had forgotten what I was; and briefly, after she had set before my eyes both who I was, and who she was, and that our alliance was all honourable and advantagious to her, as that of Clorians, or any others that could be propounded unto her. Dearest Sister (said I unto her, and smiled) you make of those Chirurgions who when they have looked upon a wound, do think they have done enough; thinking that when they have declared what Nerves, and whar Atteries are offended, to shew how mortal and dangerous the disease is, and the great pain which the Patient endures, but never apply any remedies to cure them: Alas Sister, I do know too well all that you have told me; I see Circinea does not love me, I know very well my services are not pleasing unto her, and I am not ignorant that Clorian is the happy man in her eye: But Sister, what am I the better for knowing all these things, since it is still but a bare knowledge, which sets before my eyes the grandeur of my wounds? If you have any pity upon my misery, make me know what remedies are necessary to cure it; for otherwise I as∣sure you Sister, your pity in lieu of doing me good, will cause the end of my days, for to think that these consideration can divert me from the love of that Fair one, is only to deceive your self; since I am so wholly hers, that she may use what cruelties she please against me, and my heart not murmure nor complain. I oberved that when Florice heard these expressions, she changed colour, and was even ravished with wonder: After she had looked upon me a long while with∣out a word at last she said thus, I must needs confess Brother, that never any lo∣ved like unto you, if at least it be love to give ones self entirely away; but I must tell you, that your affection deserves to meet with a reciprocal return, unless hea∣ven have decreed you for the most miserable man that ever loved. Truly Sister, answered I, there is not a word which I spoke, but I will signe it with my blood: But to what purpose is all this? Will you let me try my last remedy? said she unto me. Alas Sister, replyed I, to what purpose should it be delayed, unless to make me lose my life? Then Brother (said she) assure your self that I will employ the
endeavours of Lucindor; and if he obtain no contentment unto you from his Sister, let him never look for any one good word from me again: In the mean time use your utmost endeavours, for several Batteries will sooner cause the Fort to yeild. Upon this resolution we parted, she seeking for an opportunity of speech with Lucindor, and I beating my brains how to win upon the good will of this cruel Fair one. I have already told you that I had a Garden belonging to my house, where I often used to entertain my Fancies. At this time, as it was my custome, I went thither, so taken up with my own thoughts, that I took no notice of Beli∣sard, who was walking by himself in a close Walk. This Belisard is the young man who is now asleep in the other bed, & who was appointed to have a care of us, when our Father sent us to the Roman Schools: The long time he hath been with us, and our constant familiarity has begot in him such an affection unto me, that I dare say he loved me with all his heart: The knowledge which I had of this, besides many other good qualities, which might well make him amiable, was the reason why I had a very dear esteem of him, and concealed nothing from him: This time only I did not tell him of that affection which I had unto Cercinea, not knowing any reason for it, unless because occasions did not handsomly present themselves: Now this young man was (as I told you) before me in the Garden, whilst I took no notice of him; and by fortune I went into a Walk which was parted from his, on∣ly by a Hedge of Lawrels, which was reasonable thick: He who spied me coming with my hat over my eyes, and looking down upon the ground, walking a great pace, he knew that I had some deep thought in my mind which perplexed me, and because I did not vse to hide any thing from him, he knew not what to think of it; and therefore getting as close to the hedge as he could, to hear what words he thought he heard me utter, I began to raise my voice, thinking there was none to hear me; Then did he easily hear that love was the cause of my perplexity. And as I was uttering these words, Since all I can do will not avail to conquer the courage of this cruel Fair one, who is he that can help me? and from whom can I hope for any relief? I heard him answer in a loud voice, Belisard. Judge Hy∣las, whether or no I was surprized at this voice. I stopt, and looked about me, and seeing no body, I must confess I began to think it was some Spirit which made the answer. But the young man went a little about, and came to me, saying se∣veral times, Belisard, Belisard, from Belisard you may expect all faithful service: Oh Sir (said he when he was a little nearer) is it you that is thus perplexed and does conceal your self from me? Have you forgot my affection and fidelity? Oh friend, answered I, you need not be offended with me for concealing that from you, which if I could, I would conceal from my self, thinking, that as fire which is blown will belch out biggest flames, and when it wants ayr, will smother it self away; so I by silence should become free as I was wont to be. Oh Sir, answered he I perceive this is the first time that you have been tainted with this disease, since you think that it will smother of its self: You must know Sir, that when a heart is once stricken, it can never be cured again, but either by such extream scorn as will blast all hopes, or by the enjoyment of the party who is the cause: and this is the reason, There is nothing that can naturally live without some nourishment: now favours are the food of Love; when a Lover is deprived of these favours, then Love (like a candle that will extinguish for want of wax) will also die for want of nutriment. Then again, as superabundance of wax will extinguish that flame which would be nourished by a mediocrity, so the fruition of the party loved, will stifle Love, by the superabundance of favours which on like occasions are received, Oh Belisard, said I unto him, if you know no better remedy against my disease. then you know how to discourse of it, I am afraid I should be long sick before you cured me; for I have found by experience, that one of those things which you say will extinguish Love, will make it greater, and more full of pain: Nor can I imagine how the fruition of a good can make one hate it: so as reason on one side, and experience on the other, makes me conclude you no great Doctor in the dis∣ease of Love. There is nothing Sir, said he unto me, which so much hinders the cure of a disease, then for the patient to have an ill opinion of his Doctor: Fancy
and Imagination will oftentimes work wonders, and produce effects incredible; and therefore you ought not to give so bad a judgement of my capacity, until you have considered my reasons: I say, that either extream scorn, or superabundance of favours, may either of them extinguish Love: for is not Love a desire? and one does never desire that which they possess: if then by possession there be no desire, it follows by consequence then, that by possession there is no Love. In Love (said I) there is an inexhaustible Abyss of sweets, of delights, and it is im∣possible ever to have them all, but there will still be some greater and greater to desire then we enjoy: Besides, the appetite is not extinguished nor satisfied, but on the contrary, the new thought of the happiness enjoyed, does become bellows uno desire, and makes it more violent; and so, according to your own argument, Love being a desire, and that desire being made more ardent and violent by the knowledge of the happiness enjoyed, it consequently follows, that it which you sa does extinguish Love, does on the contrary make it more vigorous and vio∣lent. Such a Love as you mention Sir, replyed he, must be a most excessive Glut∣ron, if nothing can satisfie it. But Sir, what do you say to scorn and disdain? Can Love hold out against a generous spirit? Cold will allay heat, and all contra∣ries will destroy their contraries; nor can you deny but hatred being the contrary of love, will make Love die. All things in the Universe (replyed I) are preserved by their contraries; and if there were no contrarieties, all would be but one thing, and so the world would end, at the least be no world. 'Tis true, replyed he, but then these contrarieties are so equal in power, that the one cannot surmount the other: But what love is it which will not be extinguished by extream scorn? Ac∣cording to your argument, replyed I, Love may resist scorn, when it is equally in the extream. But Belisard▪ why spend we time in this unseasonable dispute? What will it avail me, whether what you say be true or no? Since I do find by sad expe∣rience, that neither disfavours nor scorn have wrought in me that effect which you speak of. Perhaps Sir, answered he, there may be a failure in your experience: I beseech you tell me what arguments you have to think your self scorned? Oh Belisard, cryed I so many, and so great, as makes them most apparent: And that you may the better judge, for I will not conceal any thing from you, Know that I am most desperately in love with Cercinea. Who? She (said he) who Clorian so long courted? The same, replyed I, and I assure you, that ever since this affe∣ction first began, and since I did discover it unto her, her cruelties are daylie en∣creased Sir, said he then unto me, Will you not be offended if I be a little in∣quisve? Pray tell me whether she did treat you after the same manner, before you made your love known unto her? No, answered I, far otherwise; for then her language was sweet, and her favours fluent. Then (said he) when you did acquaint her with your love, did she take it in scorn, or in anger? Neither the one nor the other, answered I; but a while after she began to scorn me. And what? continued he, Did she make her ill will known unto you? Alas, answered I, she flies me like a contagious disease: when I come into the room where she is, she blushes, and turns another way: And since she took this humour, would never so much as cast an eye upon me. But my dear Belisard, to what pur∣pose is the relation of all these particulars? Know this for all, that all her actions are so many arguments that my service is not pleasing unto her. Belisard upon this smiled: Master (said he) be of good courage, and take it upon my word, this woman loves you. How, answered I, Cercinea love me! Believe it, she gives me but small reason to think so. Sir, said he, most assuredly Cercinea does love you; all her actions of which you complain, are so many assured arguments of it. These slights, these blushes, these shifting of places to avoid the sight of you, briefly, all that you have related unto me, are nothing but words of love, in which she silently speaks unto you: She might as well say, I love you Alcander: And to shew you Sir all this is true, what testimony Sir will you please to have me bring you of it? Alas my dear Belisard (said I unto him) it is the excess of thy love whih makes thee speak thus, to give me some consolation. No, no Sir (said he) I do not flatter you; I am most confident I shall bring you some testimony of her love to you the first time I shall speak with her; refer the whole care unto me, be
merry, only continue a discreet behaviour towards her, and be not offended at the harshness of her actions; for believe me, they are only constraints, and absolutely to your advantage. I should tyre you Hylas, if I should repeat all the discourse we had upon this subject, for I should never end; so pleasing were the flattering hopes of his pro∣mises unto me: In conclusion, before we parted, he resolved to find out some means of speech with her, which I told him might easily be done if he feigned to visit her from Florice, as is usual in great Cities betwixt persons of quality: But I thought it necessary that Florice should give him the Commission. To feigne that I come from her, Sir (said he) I think it good; but to take my commission really from her, I do not like; or that she should know any thing of your designe: for Sir, learn this secret from me, That there is nothing which a woman fears so much as to trust her self in such matter unto another woman, especially if she be fair and young, there is nothing that will sooner cause a divorce between them; and then what danger are they in who trusted them with any thing of importance? No no, such as are well advised, will never run such hazards: Should you acquaint Florice, and she thinking to do you a good office, speak unto her, you should find nothing from her but coldness, and shy looks. Alas (said I unto him) I have concealed nothing from her, and she has spoken unto Cercinea of it several times. Well Sir, said he, I will try if I can remedy it; but I beseech you desire Florice to speak unto her no more, and you shall find my advice to be good very shortly. Night began to rob us of the day, and supper time drew near, when I went out of the Garden much better satisfied with the hopes which Belisard had infu∣sed into me, then I was when I entred; which Florice perceiving, Whats the mat∣ter Brother (said she unto me) that your mind is better contented then it was when you went from hence? Sister (said I, and spoke very low) it seems my face is a Teltale, and will save me a labour; but I beseech you take no notice of it, nor speak unto Cercinea any more concerning my affection, nor any thing else concerning me, till I advertise you; she made a signe with her head, which intimated as much as she would observe my desire, and so we sate down to Supper; when we had half sup∣ped, Amilcar came and told us of a great meeting at the house of Dorinde, because the next morning she was to be married unto Bellimaries, a great Souldier, whom King Gondebaut made Governour of the City of Lions; and that Palanice and her Brothers would go thither as soon as they had supped: That Dorindes Father whom he met in the street returning from our house, desired him to invite Florice and me thither: That Cercinea was not there, though her two brothers were, because she found her self not well disposed. This News made us haste with supper as soon as we could, that since we were invited, we might go thither: And when I was ready to go Belisard came to me, and desired me not to be at that Assembly, since Cercinea would not be there: for (said he) I intend to go unto her; and if she be to be spoke withal, I will break the matter unto her; and believe it Sir, I am the most mistaken man in the world, if I bring not back welcome News unto you, before you go to bed: To which I answered, that I would do as he desired, and so I did. Belisard was as good as his word, and went to Cercineas house, where by for∣tune he found none with her but Andronira, all the rest being gone to this house of jollity: She was set upon her Beds side half undrest, with a Lute in her arms where∣with she was entertaining herself; for amongst the rest of Cercineas excellent qua∣lities, she plays upon that Instrument in the perfection; she was so attentive to her own harmony, that when Belisard came into the room, it was long before she perceived him; and had not Andronira spied him, and advertised her Mistris, he had longer pleased his ear with the enchantment of her musique; But she starring up, would have gone into her Closet, because she would not be seen so undrest, had not he held her back by her garment; afterwards casting himself upon his knees before; he did so beg and importune her to stay, that she returned to her place, yet commanding Andronira to take away the candle, that she might not be so well seen in that dress. Madam (said Belisard unto her) if she do take away the candle, it is no mat∣ter,
for no Sun can illustrate a night better then your beauty: Belisaid, said she unto him, these flatteries might well be spared to your friends, especially in their presence, let therefore the candle be removed that you may not see me blush at them, But tell me, I beseech you, what brought you hither? and why are not you at Dorindes house, where so many beauties will be assembled? To answer Madam unto your question, said he, you must know that either a good or a bad spirit directed me hither; and the reason why I am not at Dorindes house is dou∣ble: For, continued he and spoke aloud, Florice hearing you were not well, she commanded me to come and know how you did, and to tender her most humble service unto you I am much obliged, said she unto Florice for the favour, and her care of me: I beseech you tell her, that this sickness is not like to disable me from paying back unto her, the due debt of my most humble service. O Cercinea, said he and spoke low, you are mistaken, if you think Florice knows any thing of my coming hither: why then, said she, did you tell me a lie? because, replied he, too many people would know our business, if we should alwayes speak truth. Do you think I would have Andronica know the cause of my coming hither? No, no, I dare not trust her. Cercinea dd not wonder at the odness of Belisaids expressions, because it was usual with him, both towards her, and her companions: yet she had a suspition that I had a share in the business of Belisaid, because she knew that I had a great confidence in him; and therefore she would not ask him any more what business brought him thither, but he beginning to speak: I did never in my life, said he, see a person so little inquisitive as you are, since you know that it was not upon Flo∣rices errand that I came, why do you not ask me, upon whose the? Cercinea then smiled and said unto him: I did never in my life see a man so prodigal of his secrets as Belisaid, who will not only tell them unto those that ask him, but will force those who have no curiosity, to know them. You may see by that, replied he, how the blame which is laid upon woman, is due also unto men. What blame do you speak of; said Cercinea and smiled; that they cannot keep their tongues in their heads, answered Belisaid. 'Tis true indeed, replied Cercinea then, that men do asperse us with that fault, which methinks, they are more guilty of them∣selves, at the least, many that I know; if it be a vice natural in women, then nature failed in me: for I swear Belisaid, that when one desires me to conceal a thing, I do so absolutely forget it, that I remember it no more, then if they had never told me of it. Are you of that humour, replied Belisaid, in every thing? In every thing, re∣plied she, that is of any importance. I will try, said Belisaid, whether you speak truth; for I will trust you with a secret which I would not have known for half my life. Why then, said Cercinea, will you tell it unto me? For two reasons, said he, the one, to know whether a woman can be silent; and the other to shew you how much Belisaid is your servant, since he will trust you with such a secret, by which you may ruine him when you will. Truly, answered she, I would know what you intend to tell me, for the two considerations which you mention; but be sure you mention it not unto any other, left if they should blabb, I should be accused of their fault: No, no, answered Belisaid, I am confident, that when I have told it unto you, it will be the least of your fears I should tell any other. If so, replied Cercinea and smiled, I shall be glad to hear it, as well to shew you what I am, as to know what you are. Be pleased then, said Belisaid) to hear what it is: you know very well, that there is not any upon the face of the earth, whom I love, and honour so much as Alcander; you know that I have been long con∣verlant with him, and I think you know, that he is pleased to set some value up∣on me, and has trusted himself unto my fidelity. I will at this time acquaint you with a secret which he hath trusted unto me, and which he had rather die then it should be divulged: Be pleased to know, fair Circinea; that as he and I were dis∣coursing together upon several things of importance, he swore by his life, and protested a hundred times by all that was most sacred and dear unto him, that he did love the fir Cercinea so, and was so wholy and devotedly her servant, that ne∣ver was any affection equal unto his: and that if this affection should by his cur∣sed
fate be displeasing unto you; then, he should have recourse unto no other re∣medy but death. And because Belisaid made here a stop, Cercinea smiled, and thus replied: Is this all the secret, Belisaid, which you have to tell me? and do you think this to be a matter of such huge importance? Do you think it is not? said Belisaid, since it concerns the contentment and the life of such a Cavalier? for know Cercinea, that since first he saw you, he never thought of himself, nor ever talks unto me of any thing but you; the whole study of his thoughts is to find out wayes how to serve you: all his discourse is to extol and esteem you, and all his desires have no other ambition but the honour of your favour; But Madam, for Godsake, I beseech you, keep all this secret. I promise you I will, answered she, and secret in such a manner, that Cercinea her self shall neither know nor believe a word of it. O Madam, said he then, that's not it which I desire, but on the contrary, I would have Cercinea both know and believe it, as a most infallible truth: but my meaning is, that you should not impart it either unto Palanice or Clorian: No, no, answered she, nei∣ther Palanice or Clorian, nor Cercinea shall ever know it. Do you not remem∣ber I told you at first, that when any told me a thing with a charge of silence, I should quite forget it? trust me Belisaid, I will do the same by this secret which you have imparted unto me, for I will not so much as think of it any more. Per∣verse woman, replied Belisaid, do you think I would tell you any thing that you might forget it? Do you thus scorn what I say, and what concerns so deeply a Cavalier of such merit, and a Lady that is the fairest in the world? what you have told me, replied Cercinea, has none of those qualifications, and therefore I see you do but only mock me: for the Lady of whom you speak is good, but not fair, and the Cavalier whom you say it so much concerns, does not think so; and this secret which must be so closly kept is known already to any that will. I am very glad, answered Belisaid, that, since against your conscience you will deny what I say, you confess, that every one knows it: As for that beauty which you deny to be in Cercinea, all that have eyes and look upon you will give you the lie; as for the affection of Alcander which you put in doubt, all his actions do give you a sufficient testimony of it. And lastly, for the secret, which you say is none: time which is the discoverer of truth, will let you know, that none ever heard it but Cercinea, Alcander, and Belisaid: Ah lier, replied she presently, has not Flo∣rice spoke of it several times unto me? Florice, answered he, might perhaps speak what she thought, but not that Alcander imparted any thing unto her: then Clo∣rian and Palanice, said she, they are acquainted with it; how, said Belisaid, they acquainted with it? most certainly, answered she, for both of them have told me of it, and with many a bitter reproach: believe it Belisaid, since they have known it, I have not been without exercise. Then Belisaid smiling, fair Cercinea, said he, would you have me confess the truth? All that I have told you concern∣ing Alcander is as true as that there is a heaven, and a God: let me be ca∣sheered out of the number of the living, if he do not love you, nay rather adore you: but the reason of my coming to you, and of all the discourse which I have had with you, was only to know, what now you have told me concerning Pala∣nice and Clorian: for Alcander and I could not imagine why you should treat him so cruelly, considering his extream affection unto you, and the discretion where∣with he hath loved you; and thinking it not likely, that considering his merit and his desire to serve you, he should be coursly used: but now I plainly see, that all this proceeds from no ill will in you, but only from the importunity of Clorian and his sister, who are the only causes of it; will you be pleased to let us make this construction of it? and for the satisfaction, or rather for saving the life of my dear master, shall I let him understand it so? and because she spoke not; but in lieu of answer rose up, and walked softly up and down the chamber, he con∣tinued in this manner: I have many a time admired at the good fortune of some persons, and at the bad fortune of others; I have seen some have great estates, who were unworthy of them, and others of great worth and merit to want. The same consideration may be had upon this occasion; for with what justice,
can the honour of your favour be denied Alcander? and what shadow of reason can you have to let Clorian have such a tirannical power over your will? If the merits of both be considered, they are out of their wits that will not prefer Al∣cander before him. This very consideration is enough to win you from him: Clo∣rian is imperious and domineers over you, Alcander does humbly reverence and adore you, as if you were a goddess, and yet you make him inferiour to Clorian. This is a thing so strange as is hardly credible, yet it is true: you are all submissi∣on unto him that tramples you under his feet, and you are all cruelty and scorn towards him that humbly adores you. O no, replied Cercinea, you are mistaken Belisaid; I do not scorn him, but I do esteem Alcander as I ought, and as his me∣rit does oblige all those that know him: a large gratification indeed, said Beli∣said, to esteem him as all that know him do; but are not you obliged unto him more, since he would not live but only to do you service? What more (answer∣ed she and smiled) would you have me do? why should I tell you, said he, since you will do nothing? Upon this they went to the table, and he taking up a pen with∣out any designe, why should I tell you what you should do more, said he, since I fear you will not do it? perhaps, replied she and smiled, you have guessed right; and perhaps also you are mistaken: First, said he, answer me to one question I will ask: do you love Alcander, or do you hate him? A very fine question indeed, answered she and smiled, and why should I hate one of so much merit, and who never gave me any occasion for it? you say very true, answered he, why then do you treat him with so much rigour? I do not know, said she, what you call rigour. When you see him, replied Belisaid, you turn another away: if he come towards you, you flie him; if he speak unto you, you will not answer him; or if you be forced unto it, it is but half words: breifly, all your other actions are scorn and disdain of him. Belisaid, said she (and laid her hand upon his shoulder) shall I speak freely to you? I never thought that thou or thy master had so little wit as I see you both have: Go, go, Belisaid and learn this lesson, that women are oft constrained to seem as if they did not see what they do see; and on the contrary, to see that which they do not see. O Cercinea said he, I give you most hearty thanks for reforming my ignorance. This lesson will be the greatest contentment in the world, unto one who is now the most afflicted, but now I shall presently make him the most contented and happy person alive: whilst Cercinea was walking left Andronira should suspect any thing from their long discourse, Belisaid took the pen, and began to write, for he had an excellent wit, and as good a faculty in writing as any in the Court: As he writ, Cercinea at every turn of her walk looked upon him, and said aloud, be sure you write nothing but what is good, and do not spoil my paper: if you please to see what I have writ, said he, you shall see how I have obeyed you, and if you would approve of it, I would thank you; if it be a thing I ought to do, answered she, I will: O Cercinea, replied he, I should think this a happy night if you would: doubtless I will answered she, if I can, but what have you writ? You shall see it, answered he, and never look up∣on me as your servant, if I have inserted any thing, which in all reason you may not avow, then taking the paper, she read these words. CERCINEAS Note unto ALCANDER, THe assurance which your actions have given me of your amity, has obliged me in gratitude, to love you; and to set such a value upon your merit as to esteem you as a person whom I will honour as long as I live. When she had read it; now Madam, said Belisaid, make good your word, and perform the promise hich you made. What promise, said she, did I make unto you? you assured me, answered he, that if it were a thing which you ought to do, you would approve of what I had writ: have I writ any thing which is not true,
and which you ought not to avow? I do not know, replied she, to whom this is directed, nor from whom it must go. You may easily imagine Madam, replied he, that I will carry this testimony unto the most faithful servant you ever had: what then said she, would you have me do? I would have you, replied he, to ap∣prove of what I have writ: Well, answered she, I do approve of it; Nay that's not enough, answered he, you must subscribe your name unto it: what then, said she, why then, answered he, you have performed your promise, and I am satisfied; but that, answered she, is no satisfactory answer to my question: I would know what must be down with the Paper when I have subscribed it? Away, away, said he, what needs all this curiosity? Then taking the pen, and holding the paper unto me, come, come, said he, make good your promise, and afterwards we will talk further: so even by force he made her write Cercinea; and because he presently took away the paper as soon as she had done: No, no, said she, I do intend to keep it, for I did not promise to let you have it, but only to approve of it: 'Tis true answered he, but I made no promise to give it unto you, but to keep it; so as I will keep mine as well as you have yours. Come, come, replied she, I will have it: Well Madam, saist he, if you will, you shall; but it shall be from the hands of Alcander. After such discourse as this, because it grew very late, he bad her goodnight, and she seeing him ready to be gone and carry it away, she went unto him. I per∣ceive, said she and smiled, one must give that which one cannot sell, therefore I pray tell Alcander how you have deceived me; No, no, said he, I will make him a more happy man then ever he hoped to be: So not staying for any answer, he came as fast as he could to me, and found me composing some lines into meeter, upon this subject, That though she scorn'd me, yet would I love her. Just as I had finished them, Belisaid entred, and because I commonly communicated them unto him; before ere I asked whether he had seen Cercinea, I made him read them, that he having a good wit, and was able to judge of such things, might give his opinion of them: But at this time he laid them down upon the table; ver∣ses, said he, are now no more in season, then Schollars are in time of war: What do you mean Bellesaid, said I unto him? I mean answered he (and sets his arms a kimbow) that there is but one Belisaid in a world, that can cure a desperate dis∣ease. Tell you me of Rigours, Cruelties, and Scorns? why? Nothing but love and favours can I find from her. Then throwing the pen out of my hand I em∣braced him, saying, Surely Belisaid you only mock me, is it possible that Cerci∣nea should give you any testimonies of her good will to me? I am sure, said he, that you were prepossessed with the opinion wherein you were, that you will hard∣ly believe me: but first hear what I will say unto you, then ask what assurance, which in any reason you can, and I will give it unto you. I will tell you, that Cercinea does not only accept of your service, but more, she loves you, and I am able to make good what I say. Ah Belisaid, said I unto him, (being transported with too much content) may I believe this good news? I knew well enough, re∣plied he, that you would be incredulous, and therefore I offered you at first, such assurance, as might make you believe what I say: bethink your self what will most inspire you with belief; then swear, said I unto him, by the love thou bear∣est me, that indeed, said he, were well; but go on. Swear then, said I, by the love I bear unto Cercinea. Oaths, said he, are but words, and words are but wind; but I would give you some assurance which you may see and touch: I conjure thee, (said I unto him being all impatiency) to tell me what it is. I pray you content your self, replied he, and believe me another time, if I shew you in writing, that all I have said is true. O I fear, said I, that your promises are to bigg to be effect∣ed: I will make it evidently appear unto you, replied he, that the effects are greater then all my promises; for you shall see it in writing, nay, in writing from her to you: Then giving me the paper; see there, said he, how that contract of love, to which I was Secretary, is approved of and signed by her own fair hand: there you may see Cercinea sent unto you in writing, as an earnest that afterwards she will make you possessour of her self in substance. Oh Hylas, how can I express my joys and my ravishments? I kissed the name
of Cercinea a thousand times, and laying it to my heart, me-thought I received unimaginable comfort; and because I was astonished, and admired how it was pos∣sible he should obtain this declaration from her, he related the whole story of his negotiation, not omitting one sillable; and I heard with so much attention and delight, as I could have wished he never would have ended: But in conclusion, Master (said he unto me) this woman has not only all imaginable excellencies of body, but she is one of the rarest wits in the world; her years, though few, are yet full of prudence and wisdom; and believe me, you are obliged to love her, not only for her high Beauty, but more for the good will she bears unto you: for besides her Letter unto you, her discourse does better testifie, that all those actions which have so much tormented you, were only constraints, and because she durst do no otherwise: But Sir, what may you now expect from her, since I have this first time obtained more then ever you could hope for? Our discourse together had not so soon ended, had not Florice and Amilcar so soon returned from the Nuptial house, where neither of them had been very merry, and returned without much contentment; for Lucindor and Cerintes were there, who never left Florice, and Seleines kept Palanice company, so as Amilcar could not talk unto her without witnesses. As soon as I saw them, Belisard and I having done discourse, I took them both by their hands, and drawing them a∣side; now (said I unto them) I will participate of your contentments, that this merry night pass not away without some delight unto me. Both of them smiled at this. For my part, said Florice, I have seen Lucindor and Cerintes. And I (said Amilcar) to my happiness have seen Palanice, and to my sorrow, Seleines with her. Then (replyed Florice) I cannot tell you any news, but that I have been the most persecuted woman in the world with their importunities, or rather jea∣lousies; for I could never speak to the one, but the eye of the other was upon me, and I could not do any manner of thing which did not disoblige them both: he to whom I talked, was sorry I did not look upon her; and he upon whom I looked, was angry it was not him I talked unto: and I was afraid left they should have faln foul upon one another. For my part Sister (said I unto her) if you love either of them, I beseech you let it be Lucindor, for he is Circineas Brother; and the more to oblige him, let him know that I am his Solicitor unto you. Nay then Sister, (said Amilcar, and smiled) I conjure you to love Cerintes, because he is Palanices Brother and let him understand that I did entreat for him. Brothers (said Florice, and interrupted) first for your sake Alcander, I will not love the Brother of Pa∣lanice, and then for your sake Amilcar, I care not for the Brother of Cercinea; and for my owne sake, I will not trouble my self with either Lucindor or Ce∣rintes. We could not forbear laughing at this Declaration: Sister said I unto her, ei∣ther love them, or love them not, that's all I care, so you will but seem to do as I desired: But Amilcar (said I unto him) what adventures have befallen you? Ve∣ry well at first, answered he, but at last not so: When we were altogether at the Assembly, Seleines was not there; so as finding the place free, and because I would not let such an opportunity slip, I told her, that I should have cursed my Brother, if I had gone with him, as he desired: Perhaps (answered she) you would have found more contentment there then here: Indeed (replyed I) there's none can tell better then Palanice, since it is in her power to make me the most contented, or the saddest man in the world, and this she may do with one word: If so (said she) you have confined your good or bad fortune unto a very narrow room. No, no, answered I, for I set such a value upon you, that the very least things which come from you, seem great unto me. Take heed Amilcar (said she) that what you think so, do not prove so really. Oh fairest Palanice, replyed I, I would to God you would be pleased to make me judge of it by experience. What would you have me do (replyed she) to make you so knowing? I would have you speak but one word only (said I) that is, I love Amilcar. That word (replyed she) sounds so ill in the mouth of a woman, that I cannot speak it. Say then replyed I, The love of Amilcar is pleasing unto me. How? replyed she, and smiled, would you have me say it when I do not think so, nor believe it? Oh heaven! cryed I,
do you not believe it? What should I do to create a Belief in you? If that Belief (answered she) would do you any good, you must find our ways to infuse it; but I will advise you no further. When I have brought it to that pass, that you can∣not but believe I love you (said I) will it be pleasing unto you then? The judge∣ment upon things future (said she) is very uncertain, and one can hardly be sure of any thing. Unto what then (replyed I) shall I have recourse? Upon this Si∣leines came in, who hindred us from any further talk, but that she said unto me in a low voice, unto Tryal; And after this, we could not all that night speak a word, without that troublesome witness. Thus Hylas we discoursed together, and I thus understood their adventures, and they not mine; Not but that I should willingly have imparted it unto them, had I not feared the displeasure of Cercinea, who I saw was extreamly constrained by that authority which Palanice had usurped over her; and because it was very late, we retired to our rest. But I held Bilisard so long in talk in my chamber, by making him repeat what he had told me before, that day did appear before I would permit him to retire. The Sun then shining upon us, we resolved to gain Cercineas chambermaid, it be∣ing almost impossible to find any defence from her eyes: And since Belisard had been already so prosperous in his first design, I referred the managing of all matters wholly unto him. The discourse Hylas would be too long, if I should relate unto you all passages concerning my Brother and me, and these four Cavaliers. But so it was, that Be∣lisard did negotiate the business so well, that he did not only insinuate himself into great credit with Cercinea, but also made Andronira entirely his. Yet as ill fortune was, I was that time constrained to take a journey of necessary importance about our estate, into the Country of Veragrois, and my mother, do what I could, would by all means have me post away with all speed; God knows whether this journey was not with an ill will, and whether I would not willingly have referred this charge unto Amilcar: But I being the elder, and consequently the heir to the estate, I must resolve upon this unwilling departure. But see whether Fortune was not resolved to try my resolution and patience? When I had stayed to the last minute, and my journey could not be deferred a jot longer, Cercinea fell sick; whether it was by too excessive heat (for then it was the Dog-days) or whether by eating too much fruit, as young persons are apt at that season; but so it was, that she was forced to her bed by a violent Fever: Oh Hylas! How heartily I wished Amilcar were my elder brother; or at least that those Rents which I was to receive and give discharge for, had not been due: and the worst was, Clorian and Palanice never stirr'd from her Beds side, so as it was a thing impossible for me to speak unto her before I went, unless before those two malignant witnesses: Imagine what a leave I took, and what satisfaction I had in my adieu. It was my custome always to carry Belisard with me, because I loved him as a second self; but at this time I left him behind expresly, to try if he could convey a Letter unto this Fair one, which might testifie my sorrows by my depar∣ture, and to send me word how she did. The Letter was this; ALCANDERS Letter unto CERCINEA. OH good Gods! What will be the end of my journey, when the beginning is so sad? To Depart! To Depart, and not be able to speak, and to leave you sick in Bed, are three such fatal misfor∣tunes as are intolerable. Yet be pleased that I shall live; Pity my pain, and take some share in my inexpressible sorrows. Upon the first opportunity that presented it self, Bellisard acquitted himself of that charge which I left with him; and so, that he did not only delude the eyes of
Palanice and Clorian, but also of another maid which they had put to wait upon her, being entred into some suspition of Andronira. In the mean time, I conti∣nued on my journey with so much regret that I had not spoke unto her, as but for the hopes which I had in the assistance of Belisard, I know not what would have been the issue of it. Amilcar in my absence was so diligent in his courtship of Palanice, as he put Seleines, Cercineas elder brother, to abundance of pain. This Seleines as you know, was a very brave Cavelier, none excelled him, and few equall'd him in feats of Arms, or any thing belonging to a Cavalier: At Barriers, and Tiltings he always got the advantage: And as he had the esteem of every one, so had he no ill opinion of himself; yet curteous and full of respect to his friends, but a lit∣tle imperious in his affection, and thought that he obliged a Lady if he loved her. This Cavalier being brought up in the Court of King Gondebaut, and being very young, he cast his eyes upon Palanice: Their houses being near adjoyning, and she being oft in the Queens Court, he had frequent opportunities of seeing her. This affection grew so great by degrees, that Sileines and Palanice also, became both perfect Lovers: yet because the Prince Sigismond who was about the same age, fell in love at the same time with that Lady, respect made them dissemble their loves, and move Sileines to keep at a distance: And though this at the first was more in appearance then in effect, yet continuing in this dissimulation, Sileines turned his eyes upon Dorisa; and though he deny it, yet it was generally thought that his jesting proved to be in earnest. Palanice, as young as she was, consented un∣to this Artifice, to remove from Prince Sigismond all cause of withdrawing that affection which he professed unto her, and never resented the losses of Sileines, as long as Sigismond, continued loving her: But it hapned a while after, that this young Prince whose humour was not unalterable, did for some cause or other with∣draw his affection. I believe (said Hylas, and interrupted) that the occasion was not great; for being then at Lions, I heard as much. The relation of it, replyed Alcander, is various; but the most common report is, that Palanice being with the Queen, Prince Sigismonds mother, as she was helping to dress her, this young Prince came to her, and took her fingers to play with them: Palanice fearing left the Queen should see, pull'd back her hand two or three times; and because he continued still, Sir (said she) I beseech you let me alone: and because she pro∣nounced these words somthing sharply, he said unto her, Would you indeed have me let you alone? Then she answering in the same words and tone; I promise you (replyed she and blushed) you shall never have occasion to bid me the third time; and upon that he left her, so as ever since he looked upon her only as a person in∣different: The cause indeed of this separation was very trivial, but it served to di∣vorce this affection, so as it never since knit again. A while before Sileines making shew of love unto Dorisa, a very fair and hand∣some Lady, he became fettered in good earnest, shewing by this experience, that fictions in love are very dangerous; for Love is but a play, and by playing, one may come to love in earnest. Palanices vexing at the loss of Sigismond, and be∣ing displeased at the diversion of Seleines, made the way easie for Rosiliander, who no sooner began to wooe, then to win her; and the more easily, because she be∣ing weary of the Court, and desirous to be far from the place where she found nothing but displeasures, she entertained Rosiliander, whose habitation was the most remote parts of the Sebusians: But see whether Love be not a very child, Sileines no sooner saw Palanice gone, but he began to remember that heretofore he had loved her, and grieved more for her absence then he cared for her presence. Now began Letters and Messages to pass apace betwixt them, and Love found more heat at a distance, then near hand: But it must needs be confessed, that both of them did well deserve the pains they endured; Love shewed himself just in pu∣nishing Inconstancy, or rather the imprudency of these two Lovers, by a two-years absence, during which time there passed good correspondency betwixt them, and they heard from each other very oft. At last heaven (which does ordinarily favour those that love, and continue lo∣ving) did deliver Palanice from the obligations of marriage by the death of Ro∣siliander.
She seeing her self now free, and weary of the Sebusians, she returned into her native air, where she found Prince Sigismond married: and though he was presently after a widdower, yet no sparks of that old affection which once he extinguished were seen to revive: But Seleines who expected her with extream impatience, receaved her with abundance of contentment. I make a brief relation of these things unto you Hylas, that you may the better understand what a task Amilcar undertook when he addressed himself to serve Palanice: since she was already engaged another way long before, and that to a person of very rare and high accomplishments; yet the observances of my bro∣thers were such, and he addressed with so much prudence and discretion, that Se∣leines could not defend himself against apprehensions of jealousie, a thing very common amongst lovers, and such as have not a very full assurance of the good will of those they court. At first, Palanice seemed as if she were afraid to cast any eye of love upon him; but afterwards, whether it was that some friend had given her advice, or whether she disgusted something in Selienes, but so it was, that she received the services of Amilcar very favourably, making it appear that she gave such counsel unto Cercinea, as she would not follow her self, for she ad∣vised her to make Clorian jealous. One day when Amilcar and Silienes both were with her at her house, and neither of them, for fear of each other, durst talk a sillable of their affections, they began to hint at it after such a manner, as slaves do, for fear of beating, and fell into a discourse of slaves. I wish, said Sileines, that I might, as slaves are for fear of loving, be marked under that notion, by your fair hand: Truly, said she, if you will, I will satisfie your desire. Then ta∣king his hand, shall I, said she, with the point of a needle, set my mark upon your arm? If you should, said he, I should not keep it long, for it would wear out: No, no, said she, (after she had begun to scratch it a little) I will put a little ink upon it, and it will continue long: Sileines then consenting, she began with the point of a needle to rase the skin by little and little; but he impatient of so much pain, could not any longer indure it. Then Amilcar, holding out his arm, here Madam, said he, honour this arm with what mark you please, and you shall see, the pain shall not deprive me of that contentment. Palanice, who was not so fa∣miliar with my brother, no, no, Amilcar, said she, I dare not do you so much harm: and yet, replied he, you dare do it for Sileines; 'Tis true, answered she, but it is by way of revenge, for he did me an injury long since, and I would pu∣nish him for it. Then Madam, said Amilcar, do that unto this arm by way of re∣compence, which you would have done by way of revenge upon the arm of Si∣leines. Pray Sir, said Seleines, what recompence can you demand of her? The gods, replied my brother, do accept of the good will for the deed it self. This Lady therefore, whom I esteem and honour no less then any goddesses, does own unto me a great recompence, if it be proportionable unto the good will I have to do her service. The Ladies of this country, answered Sileines, are so far from so much liberality, that they do not pay those debts which they justly ow, and therefore it is very unlikely they should be so forward as to pay off those obligati∣ons which are yet to come. There are, replied my brother, both servants and services of several sorts and prices: besides, I believe, prayers and supplications will never offend any; and I do beg this favour, but not as a due debt. Palanice, who as I believe was desirous to nourish the jealousie of Sileines; No, no, said she, I would have Amilcar to know that you do make us far more niggardly and spairing of our favours then we are: then taking his hand, but now I do not know, said she, whether my resolution will let me finish that payment which you ask: upon this word she made in his arm the first letter of her name, whilst he did not seem so much as to feel what she did; and afterwards she took the blackest ink she could chuse, and filled up the scratch which she had made, and which en∣tred so into the skin, that the print of it would remain a long while, at which Si∣leines began to grumble, but she began to laugh, and said, had I marked all those that were mine, thus, I should have known them again when they strayed from me, or might in reason have demanded them back from those that stole them from me. If you think to have retained them that way (said Sileines, who was
extreamly stung, and knew she did it in reproach of him) I believe you are de∣ceived. However, replyed she, I will try this means, since I have found all o∣thers naught. Take heed (said he, and went away in a discontented manner) that the fault be not your own. Thus Sileines went away, and left the room free unto my Brother, who was not at all sorry to see this petty divorce, which yet lasted not long; for within two days after Sileines returned, and with a thousand repentant submissions, obtained a pardon for his cholerick departure. On the other side, Lucindor, the younger Brother of Cercinea, and Cerintes, Brother unto Clorian and Palanice, who loved our Sister, they lost no opportu∣nities of shewing their wills; and as Seleines was jealous, Lucindor and Cerintes were no less. I will not here enter into any elogies in commendations of Florices deportment, left, Hylas you should suspect me of flattery and partiality (she be∣ing my Sister) but the truth is, she carried her self so prudently, as deserved a∣bundance of esteem; you see her modest behaviour, and equality towards all, and she is the very same towards one that she is towards the other; so ballancing her favours, as one can very hardly brag of any favour above the other. The first that loved her was Lucindor, but he was presently constrained to a long journey, he found Cerintes, if not in his place, yet in one that was no less advantagious then his; and therefore he being in humour very like unto his Bro∣ther Selienes, he was out of all patience; yet Florices discretion did so temper his spirit, that at last he was brought to terms of reason, though not without much heart-burning betwixt these two Rivals; and had not Cerintes been a very rarely accomplished Cavalier, and Lucindor the same, certainly the jealousie that was betwixt them was such, as perhaps might have produced ill effects. When the affections of these two Cavaliers were at the height, Florice was for∣ced out of the Town to see an Aunt that was very sick: This departure was very sad unto both these Lovers; for nothing is more insupportable in love, then to lose the sight of the loved party. Thus these four Cavaliers pursued their designs, whilst I was at Agaune, where days seemed so long and tedious to me as years. And because I saw my business would retain me yet longer there, my desires of knowing how Cercinea did, and how Belisard did thrive in my negotiation, I dispatched a messenger unto him, with a Letter for him to present unto Cercinea. This messenger made such haste, that the third day he arrived at Lions, where Belisard began to be weary, and wonder that he heard no ofter from me, and to think that the business which I left to his negotiation, ought to have made me write oftner unto him: He began therefore to complain against my forgetfulness, when he received my letter, which convinced him that he was too blame in having any such thoughts of me: He received these Letters with extream contentment, because Clorian about three days before was forced into the Country about some business which would retain him there; but yet Palanice was always at Cercineas beds side, or else the servant which they had set to wait upon her: But Amilcar knowing what affection I bore unto Cercinea, he would go often unto Palanice, and entertain her with talk of business, whilst in the interim Belisard effected his. At this time, when my Letters came, Amilcar was very busie at Court with Prince Sigismond; and Belisard who sate upon thorns till he talked with Cercinea, he durst not go unto her alone; but as fortune was, he met Palanice as she was going from her house to the Temple; and assoon as she was out of sight, he went immediately into the house, where by fortune he met Andronira; Sweetheart (said he) how does our Mistris? As for your Mistris (said she, and smiled) I can∣not tell how she does; but as for mine, she begins to mend, thanks be to God, and I believe will not long keep her bed. If I have any Mistris, (replyed he) it must be understood Andronira, but when I say our Mistris, you must understand I mean Cercinea; for she being Mistris unto my Mistris and my Master, I may very well call her ours. Ah Dissembler (replyed she. and smiled) if she were no more the Mistris of your Master, then Andronira is yours, you would not come to see her so often. Then having some business to do in the house, she told him, that he
might venture to go unto Cercinea for all the other woman was there, for she will not tell tales. How? said Belisard, have you gained her already? Cercinea, an∣swered she, has charmed her, and won her love, so as I dare say she will not do any thing that will displease her; but for all that, it is not good to trust unto her altogether, until a little further tryal; and since she takes so much delight in see∣ing you dance, and hearing you sing, I am afraid Belisard, that if you be my servant, I must ere long go look out for another. No, no Andronira, (replyed he) but however, I will dance and sing; and she shall love me, and I will seem to love her: Upon this, because he would not lose the opportunity, he went up to Cercineas chamber, in such a singing, dancing, and jolly manner, that as soon as the Wench heard him; Oh Madam (cryed she, and clapt her hands together for joy) yonder is Belisard; At the same time he entred, and seigning not to see Cercinea in bed, he ran to the wench with open Arms, as if he would have kissed her; but when he came to the middle of the room, he stopt upon a sudden, seem∣ing as if he had not spyed her Mistris till then: Madam (said he unto her) had I thought you had been in bed, I should not have presumed to enter. Belisard, said she, I know your discretion, and therefore you are welcome: this is not the first time you have seen me in this place. 'Tis true Madam, answered he, but now you are sick, what pretence can I have for my coming hither? To comfort me in my sickness, replyed she. Madam (said he then very gravely unto her) If you would take one medicine which I can tell you, I swear by Jupiter it would presently cure you. Are you in good earnest? said the wench, and interrupted him. Yes (replyed Belisard) and I wish she would believe me. Did I think (an∣swered Cercinea) that your medicine were a good one, I would use it. Belisard who desired to give her the Letter under this pretence, Madam (said he) when did I ever tell you a lie? Or wherein did I ever deceive you? Never, said she, but I am so weary of all Physicians, who torment me with so many lothsome drugs, as if I thought your medicine were a good one, I would take it with all my heart. Madam, said Belisard, never let me live a moment longer in your favour, if it do not most perfectly cure you. Cercinea knew wel enough that this medicine was somthing which was more proper for the mind then the body; and being very willing to be deceived, she hearkned unto him: What? said she, must I take any lothsome potion? No, Madam, answered he; This medicine does consist most in the vertue of some words. Perhaps then, replyed she, it is some charm. No, replyed he, I am no Sorcerer; The words may be well understood, they are no unknown Characters, nor has any thing like Sorcery in them. Then Belisard, said she, I am willing to make use of them, tell me therefore what I must do? This remedy, replyed he, must be kept very secret; for if it be divulged, it will lose its vertue. Upon this he kneeled down by her beds side, and taking the Letter which I had written unto her, Do you think (said he aloud) that I mock you? He who give it unto me, did write in this paper the directions which are to be used, and which I will let you see: then feigning to look it out amongst many other papers that he had in his pocket, he gave her the Letter, which he first unsealed, to the end the wench should not suspect any thing: Then she read these words. ALCANDERS Letter unto CERCINEA. OF all the torments that a mortal man can endure, none are more cruel then those of Love; and amongst all the torments of Love, absence is the most intolerable: and of all absences, mine has the most bitter Qualifications. To lose the sight of her for whom on∣ly I desire to have any eyes, to leave her sick in bed, and not to hear any news of her health, are the tortures which are reserved for me. If the miserable condition of a most sadly afflicted heart can move you unto it, let me hear how you do, but let passion, and not compassion obtain this favour from you.
Well Madam, said Belisaid aloud, how like you the receipt? is it not a good one? I do not know, answered she and smiled, whether it be a good one, but it is very pleasant. But Madam, replied he, the man who gave it unto me, did give me this also, which is a more particular direction how to use it; I would have you to see it also, that you may be as skilful as my self: Then he presented unto her the Letter which I wrote unto him; Cercinea not daring to refuse it, lest the wench should enter into any suspition, she took it. Belisaid, said she, in a low voice, this is a fine invention to make me reade Letters: Madam, said he, we must delude the eyes of this troublesome wench: upon this, she began to read that Leter which I sent unto Belisaid. ALCANDERS Letter unto BELI∣SAID. O My dear friend, how infinitely do I envie the happiness which thou enjoyest? all the contentment which I enjoy here, is to think of those felicities which you enjoy there: and every thought ends with this wish, that I were as happy as Belisaid: But dear friend I must accuse you of neglect, that can let it be so long without letting me know the state of my life: Of my life, I say, since it must be the place where you are from whence that news must come; be thou a little more care∣ful of thy master who loves thee: I would say with all his heart, if I had it here, but thou knowest very well where I left it. Here is in this, said Cercinea aloud, more business then you told me of; and the worst is, I am afraid your receipt will not work those effects: for methinks it is very uncertain, believe it Madam, replied he, there is nothing but what is true, and I will die rather then tell you a lie. Well, said she, what must I do to make tryal of it? Madam (said he and spoke low) you must love my master, not only according to his merit, but according to his love of you; and for a testimony of it, you must honour him with a Letter. Ah Belisaid, replied she, that is too much; I had rather make use of other more common medecines: The wench, who was busie about some trivial work in the chamber, she came then unto her mistress: Madam, said she, you have been so long in the hands of Physicians, and cloyed with their potions, that it were not amiss to make trial of Belisaids receipt. I be∣seech you tell me, is it a thing that is difficult to be taken? sweetheart, answered Belisaid, and interrupted (because he was afraid that Cercinea could not set so good a disguise upon it as he could) I will tell you what you must do: Do you see this Paper? (said he taking the Letter which I writ unto Cercinea) all that she need to do, after she has read it over three times, is to say, I do believe it with all my heart, and kiss the Paper; then that she lap it up and hang it in a string about her neck, so as it may touch the nearest place to her heart for nine dayes together, and never trust Belisaid again whilst you live if it do not cure her: O Madam, cried out the wench, this is a fine easie medecine, and soon done: It is not such an easie matter, replied Cercinea, to keep it so long to the place next my heart, e∣specially when I am asleep; there is the greatest difficulty, said Belisaid, and that none do read it but your self: for if they do, after you have begun to apply it, they will infallibly have the same disease which you have, and will make you also worse then you were before; and therefore, when the nine dayes are expired it must be burned, and so (said the wench) all the pestilence of the disease will con∣sume away? No doubt of it, answered Belisaid, and when it is burning, you shall see several colours in the fire: O Madam, said the wench then, this remedy must needs be good, and I will help you to hang it about your neck, so as it may hang just to the place of your heart; but first let her read it thrice over, said he,
and get you out of sight, unless you will repent it: Cercinea upon this could not forbear laughing, to see how quick the wench was to be gone, and then she took the paper and read it, but the wench was more careful of not seeing it, then Be∣lisaid could desire her, and therefore he called her again, and said, there was no danger to be feared if she did not read the words, so as she came in again, they lapped the paper about with silk, and hung it about her neck in a ribband; and be∣cause Belisaid said it must be applied just to the place where her heart did beat, the wench would needs feel with her hand where it was: but Cercinea, who laughed to see how officious she was, would not permit her to feel her heart beat. Ma∣dam, said the wench, you are not so wise as you should be, pray let me place it right, for I know if every circumstance be not observed, the medecine will do no good; at last, this wench having put the paper where it should be, nine dayes, Ma∣dam, said she, will be quickly exspired, take a little pains, for nothing so sweet as health, ere long you will be able to walk in the Athenian Gardens, and enjoy all the pleasures about the Town: As Cercinea laughed at this piece of Sorcery, so did Belisaid in his thoughts. But at last, because he feared left Palanice should re∣turn from the Temple; This Madam, said he is not all, I will now tell you the last thing that you must do: then approaching near unto Cercinea, Madam (said he in a low voice) I beseech you, after all this sport, that you will be pleased to have pity upon my master, and favour him with the honour of one word in a Letter. Belisaid (answered she in a low voice) though I would, yet I cannot do it, be∣cause of these two impediments: First, I have neither pen, ink, nor paper; and secondly, I am so watched, that the eyes of this wench are upon me both night and day, for Andronira and she lie together upon that Pallet in the night. For the first difficulty, replied he, it is easie to find a remedy, for I will bring you pen, ink, and paper: As for the other, does not a candle burn all night in your cham∣ber? If it do, Andronira, when the other wench is asleep, may give you the can∣dle, and you may write what you please. Belisaid, said she, I would gladly be ex∣cused this: No, no, answered he aloud, you must observe all circumstances very exactly; so thinking he had ordered every thing very well, he went his way, lest Palanice should return. At his going out of the chamber he found Andronira, and (falling into a fit of laughing) said that her mistress would acquaint her with the most rare invention that ever was, in which she must be assistant, but he durst tell her no more for fear of meeting Palanice. This wench who was very subtile, went into the chamber, and asked Missina (for that was the other wenches name) what was the matter with Belisaid, that he went away so contentedly? We have all reason to be so also, answered she, if his receipt be good: What receipt, asked Andro∣nira? Ask my Lady, replied Missina; I swear she looks better on't already, and she said truly, for Cercinea had laughed so heartily, that a very high colour was come into her face: Madam, said Andronira, I beseech you what strange Physick have you taken? Then Cercinea told all passages aloud, and afterwards told her every thing in private, at which she could not chuse but laugh, though she seemed to believe it more then Missina. Belisaid, who desired my contentment above his life, did not fail to come in the evening, with an inkhorn and paper in his pocket; but it perplexed him extremely to find Palanice at Cercineas bedside when he came into the cham∣ber: Come (said he in a confident way (how does your Physick? Cercinea smi∣led at Palanice, Do you know (said she unto her) that Belisaid hath given me a receipt? I come to know (said he and interrupted) whether our receipt have cured you. How Belisaid, said Palanice, can you cure Ladies? Yes, fair ones, an∣swered he; and therefore when you are sick, pray come to none but me, I know you to be a man of much merit and knowledge, replied she, but I never knew that your knowledge reached so far, till now. But by the work, answered he, it may be known what the workman is: I will give you my life, if within three dayes this fair sick Lady do not lose that name: What of fair? (said Palanice) no of sick, replied he: However said Cercinea, I shall not be so cloyed with this Physick as I have been with others: Palanice would have inquired more particularly what the
Receipt was, and perhaps had made a better discovery then Missina, but as for∣tune was, she heard a voice in the street, which she knew presently to be Sileines, brother unto the fair Cercinea, and she ran to the window to look upon that Ca∣valier, who was her professed servant, and in the mean time Belisard conveyed Pen, Ink, and Paper, under the pillow of that fair Lady, beseeching her to have pity upon the most faithful Lover that ever lived. Well, said she, and smiled, I will take the advice of my Councel, Clorian and Palanice. Belisard shaked his head, and without any answer, went unto the window to avoid suspition, and to hear Sileines sing. Palanice who was skulking under the window lest those in the street should see her, caused Sileines to enquire whether she was in the house; and hearing that she was, he entred, and was doubly glad to see his Sister recovered, and to meet his dear Palanice with her: If Belisard would have talked with Cer∣cinea, he had opportunity enough; for Palanice and Sileines had so much serious business of their own, that they never minded others: But he not thinking it ne∣cessary to stay any longer there, to shew that he had no need of any opportuni∣ties, he went away, and said nothing to any one, as if he were a domestique, and insisted not upon any ceremonious complements. The next morning he went to visit his patient, and see what operation his Re∣ceipt had, taking his time for it, when Palanice, according to her custome, had bid good morrow unto Circinea, and was gone to the Temple. He entred into the house, and understood from Missina, whom he met upon the stairs, that Cercinea found her self so well after her Receipt, that she had a good mind to rise, and walk a little up and down the room. And may I go in, said he? Yes answered Messina, I am confident she will be glad to see you; and good reason she has, for your Receipt is worth a thousand of all others, which did but make her worse. The best news replyed he, that I could hear; but Sweet-heart has she not removed the Receipt this morning? No, not yet, answered she. Oh said Belisard, I was afraid she would, and therefore I came to see, and put her in mind of it. Upon this he went up the stairs, and into the chamber, where he found Cercinea up, and Andronira combing her hair. I am very glad, Madam, (said he unto her after he had bid her good morrow) to find you out of bed. I believe (answered she and smiled) that if Missina fall sick, she has such a good opinion of you, and your Receipt, that you must make the same for her. My Receipt Madam, replyed he, is only for you; but I beseech you tell me, how did you pass away the night? Andronira can tell you, said she, that I have observed your directions: Upon this, seeing none in the chamber, she took the Letter from Andronira, and gave it unto him; Here (said she) Seal it, and assure your Master that I writ it for your sake. Oh Madam, replyed he, This favour will make him compleatly happy; and I dare say, this paper must never depart from that place where you wear that Receipt which I gave unto you, for he will hold it at a far dearer rate then all his estate. You have that opinion, answered she, because you think he loves me. I do not think it, replyed he, for I know it of most cer∣tain knowledge. As Andronira was combing her hair, Belisard was very busie in taking that hair which stuck upon the Combe, and which, by reason of her sick∣ness, did come off very much. Madam (said he) if you will make him most per∣fectly happy, give me leave to send him this which your Comb hath stolen from your fair hair. Oh God! said she, I had rather die then any man living should have any of my hair; and because he had it already in his hand, Andronira, said she, let him not have it. Believe it, Madam, said she, he has it already. Oh God! said Cercinea, what a fool you were to let him take it. Then turning towards Be∣lisard, Come, come said she, give it me again, for I will have it, else be extream∣ly angry with you. Pardon me Madam, I beseech you, answered he; for treason, and breach of trust, is the most abominable vice that can be in man. True, said she, but there is neither in this which I ask: If in restoring this which you ask, answered he, I do not commit treason, and break my trust, I am contented to restore what I stole; but since I know you will count me the most infamous man upon earth if I should, I will keep it. These excuses and pretences (answered she) shall not serve your turn, for I will have it; and indeed Belisard, you will
do me a most signal displeasure, if you do not restore it unto me. First Madam, said Andronira, he pleased to hear his reasons. My reasons, answered he, are invincible; for when my Master commanded me to stay in this Town, about the business which I know of I vowed unto him, to do all I could that would conduce to his contentment; and were I not a Traytor, and a most perjur'd person, if I should restore this back? and did I not falsifie that trust which he reposeth in me? Certainly Madam (said Andronira) he is obliged in Conscience to keep his Vow. Certainly Andronira (said Cercinea) you are out of your wits, to think that any man ought to have any of my hair. Madam, replyed Belisard, as unto you, Belisard is no man, he is only your servant. She would have replyed, but Mis∣sina entred; she stopt upon a sudden: and Belisard fearing lest this sudden silence should raise any mistrust, Sweet-heart (said he unto her) I am glad you are come to assist me, for this Lady will continue the Receipt no longer, and says, that once is often enough to use it: and I assure you, she had better never to have begun, then to leave it so imperfect. Oh Madam, answered the Wench, What a strange humour is this? Will you be always sick? I pray what pain does the Receipt of Belisard put you unto? It vexes me, said Cercinea, to continue the same thing so long. But Madam, replyed Andronira, Is it not better to continue it so long then to continue sick in your bed? The truth is Madam, said Missina, if you will not observe the directions of the Receipt with a good will, you shall by force, for you must read it: Then untying the string which was about the paper, she presented it unto Cercinea to read. Prithee good Missina (said Cercinea unto her, read it for me. Nay by my Faith Madam (answered she, and turned away) I heartily thank you, would you have me to be sick? Andronira and her Mistris laughed heartily at the simplicity of the wench; and after Cercinia had read it, what (said she must I do with it now? Kiss it thrice (said Mssina) and say, I do believe all that is written in this Paper; and because Cercinea seemed unwilling, the poor wretch compelled her by force to kiss it, and repeat word for word every sillable of the directions, but not without much mirth to all the company: At last all the ceremonies of this charm being ended, and Cercinea presently after drest, news was brought that Palanice was returning from the Temple, and Seleines in her company; upon this Belisard approaching unto her, said, This Present Ma∣dam, which you have sent unto the most faithful Lover that ever was, or ever will be, will keep him alive: for otherwise, his sorrows, to be so long absent from you, would most infallibly have killed him. Belisard (answered she) I do consent unto what you will; but remember, that if he do fail either in fidelity or discretion, you shall answer for it. Belisard would have replyed, but the coming in of Palanice and Sileines, and a little after, of Amilcar, prevented him: and when he saw them entred into discourse, he retired according to his custome unto his house, where he did write every passage so punctually, as I believe he did not omit one circumstance. But in what a rapture of joy was I, when opening Cercineas Letter, I found her hair in it! I kissed it a thousand times, and it was happy that none was present when I opened them, for it had been a thing impossible for me to have concealed my ex∣tream contentment. At last after I had kissed, and over-kissed this fair hair, I read the Letter, which was in these terms. CERCINEAS Letter unto ALCANDER. Your passionate Desire and Wishes of my Health, do infinitely oblige and please me: May Heaven in requital, give you that happiness and contentment which you merit and desire. This wish comes from her who loves you above all those that profess any affection unto Cercinea.
When I call to memory those contentments which I received at that time, I cannot chuse but charge them with want of affection, who say that there are more pains then pleasures in love. For Hylas, no mortal man can be capable of greater felicity, and no less then two hearts and two souls are requisite to gust it. Had any seen my actions, certain∣ly they would have said, I had been out of my wits: but I will abridge the re∣lation of them into as narrow a room as possibly I can, and tell you that the dayes which I was to stay amongst the Veragrois, seemed longer then they were wont to be, and therefore, I made such haste, as within six dayes after, I departed and came to Lions. As soon as I saw my beloved Belisaid, I was so transported with joy at those good offices which he had done me in my absence, that I could not Carress him e∣nough. He on the other side who loved me extremely well, had so great a desire to talk with me in private, that he would hardly give me leave to see my mother and my brother. But after our first salutations, (having given a general relation of my baseness) I pretended to be very weary, that I might retire with my dear Beli∣said: and I believe my brother took notice of it; for I saw him smile two or three times at my impatience, and measuring me by himself. Belisaid on the other side, who was no less impatient then I, did follow me so close into my chamber, as I was no sooner entred, but he had shut the door. Then did I redouble my Cares∣ses, and asked particular questions of all he had done during my absence. He an∣swered unto every thing, with more satisfaction to me, then ever I durst hope for or desire: Thus Hylas, we spent above two hours which seemed to me not a quar∣ter, and I believe, had we not been interrupted by beeing called to supper, our separation had not been soon, but it was not without a million of caresses and thanks. Because Belisaid told me that Cercinea would be glad to see me the same night, as soon as we arose from the table, we seemed as if we would go to the Court, but went straight to the house of that fair Lady; and to have better opportuni∣ties of talk, also my brother being as desirous to see Palanice as we Cercinea, he went along with us, and by this means we were welcome to the house, for Pala∣nice was very glad of my brothers company. Lucindor, who was a servant unto our sister, saluted us with all possible curras∣ses, and Sileines as it fortuned was not there, not thinking that Palanice would go that night unto Cercineas house; both she and Palanice were a little surprized, to see me so unexpectedly: Cercinea blusht, and turning to Belisaid, after all com∣plements and salutes were done; Ah Belisaid, said she unto him, why did you conceal the coming of Alcander, from us? Madam, answered he, it was conceal∣ed from me almost as much as from you, for he is but newly returned; but going a little nearer her whilst I was in some complements with Palanice; yet said he, if he had come in the morning, I would not have acquainted you: Why, said he, for two reasons, replied he, the one, because I would not be the relatour of any thing before Alcander. And the other is, because I thought, you would not care for the news; and because she looked upon us and did not answer him: what Madam, said he, do you not consent unto what I say? What would you have me answer, replied she and smiled, but that you are a lyer in both? Upon this, because I came towards her, she left him: I am glad of your return Sir, said she, because now I hope to see Florice shortly, who cannot be long absent from so dear a bro∣ther. I thought Madam, answered I, you would have been glad of my return up∣on another consideration, more advantageous unto me; but I see, that as you are as fair as you were wont to be, so you are no kinder then when I departed: what reason have you Alcander, replied she, to accuse me thus? because Madam, repli∣ed I, you do not say you are glad of my return, for my own sake, who honours and adores you above all the world: I believe Alcander, said she, that Belisaid and you have conferred notes together in your chamber, that you may agree both in one tale. Truth is Madam, said I, Belisaid and I do often talk of you, and had I said that we talk of nothing else in private, I had said truly, for I have as great a confidence in him as in my self; but as for conferring of any notes together,
whereof you speak, we never so much as thought of any such thing: for there being but one truth, we never agreed together upon any thing else. Well, said she, seeming desirous to change discourse, I will believe what you and Belisaid please: But pray Alcander tell us how you have lived since we lost you? Madam, answered he, if you would know of Alcanders life, you must ask the fair Cerci∣nea, for it is only as she is pleased to ordain it: Come, come, said she, you are a dissembler; tell me what adventures you have met with in your voyage, and what contentments you have received in it: Madam, said I unto her, never was man more miserable then Alcander in his absence from you, nor ever any so happy as he, when he received the honour of hearing from you; and therefore I had reason to say that my life was just as you were pleased to have it, nor ever shall be any o∣therwise; but this is not it I would know of you, said she, and interrupted him, tell me whether you have effected your business well, and whether your voyage has been to good purpose; Belisaid sent me word Madam, said I unto her, that my business was effected better then I could hope, so did the fair Cercinea also; and that's the reason of my return so soon, not only to kiss your fair hand for so great a favour, but also to pay that Homage which I ow unto you, as unto her who may dispose of my life, and all I have, as she pleaseth. She would have answered, when Palanice not being so attentive to my bro∣thers discourse, as to forget Clorians business, she observing how affectionately I spoke unto Cercinea, she came and interrupted us, seeming as if it was only out of civility, because I was yet a stranger: In the mean Belisaid was not idle, but talk∣ed with Andronira, and inquired of all domestick news a particularly as he could: he heard that my affairs could not be in a better condition then they were, unless Clorian did marry her, or divert her from me: That Cercinea had a great good will towards me, but the imperious authority of that man, by means of Palanice, did so restrain her, as it was impossible for so young a spirit to withdraw her self from that servitude, so soon as she and I desired: That if a means could be found to make Palanice in love with Amilcar, it would be a way to divert her from the protection of her brother: for believe it Belisaid, said she, love has more preva∣lence then friendship, and if ever she should love in good earnest, Amilcar might make her do what he would: yet I believe he will have a hard task to overcome her: for Sileines who has loved her long, has gained much upon her. O fool, said Belisaid unto her, new conquests are alwayes most esteemed, and loved. But being late we were constrained to part, and therefore bidding goodnight we retired to our chambers with much satisfaction to my self, where as late as it was, Belisaid and I, had a long discourse, from whom I heard all the discourse betwixt Andronira and him. As soon as Florice heard of my return, it seems she had a mind to make good the words of Cercinea; for she presently came to see me, but because her Aunt was very sick she could not stay, only dined with us and then returned; yet not so soon, but Lucindor was first advertised of it: for Belisaid, who thought this to be advantageous unto my affairs, was of opinion that it was requisite to oblige him, and to enter into some conferrence with him, to the end that when he came to Cercineas house he might bid him welcome: It was Belisaid therefore that gave him this intelligence, yet he no sooner came but Florice departed. But Hylas, you may remember how I once did write something in the glove of Cercinea; I know not how it came to pass, but so it was, that they came to Pala∣nices hands: we had conceit that Missina finding them, did give them unto her; but however, Clorian was quickly acquainted, and leaving all his Court business at randome, he returned home with more hast then I desired. The first vexation I resented, was, that Cercinea entreated Belisaid to keep me from making so many visits; and when I did go to see her, she durst hardly come near me, or cast an eye that way, much less to speak unto me; I did resent this change very sadly, and much admired at it: for I thought those testimonies of good will which she had given me, were too great to be forgotten, and to dissemble, it was too gross; and because I could not indure this without making some demonstrations of my resent∣ments, Belisaid thought it good for me to send for Florice; for Lucindor perhaps
might gain upon her; which if he did, he might cause Cercinea to shake off the ty∣ranny of Palanice and Clorian. As fortune was, when we were busied to find out some handsome excuse for her return, the death of our Aunt did furnish us with a very good one, so as she returned of her self, sooner then we looked for her. The ceremony of mourning for this good aged woman was soon over; for the infirmities of old age were such a great burthen unto her, that her friends rejoyced, rather then mourned to see her delivered from them. As soon as Florice came, I desired her to use her utmost endeavours upon Lucindor, to favour me; she, who loved me very well, and want∣ed neither wit nor will to negotiate such a matter, did so prevail with Lucindor, that he took my part both against Clorian, and against Palanice: indeed he spoke so affectionately to his Sister, as she (to our thoughts) had some inclination to me, and began to lean towards my side; when Clorian and Palanice taking no∣tice of it, resolved to negotiate with Sileines, after the very same manner that Florice did with Lucindor; for Sileines was in love with Palanice, and was elder brother unto the fair Cercinea, so as by this means he took their part all that pos∣sibly he could. To what purpose Hylas should I use any longer discourse upon this matter; Sileines for the love he bore Palanice, took Clorians part, so as these two Brothers were one against the other, and the Family so divided, that all was like to be in a great confusion: But Hylas, it hapned also at the same time, that as Cer∣cineas family was divided betwixt Clorian and me: so ours also was divided be∣twixt Lucindor and Cerintes; for those two Cavaliers (as I told you) loved our Sister Florice; and I took part with Lucindor, because he was Cercineas brother, who did me all the good offices he could; and Amilcar favoured Cerintes, bro∣ther unto Palanice, upon the same interest: And presently after, the same dissen∣tion hapned between Clorian and Cerintes, because Clorian was all for Sileines, who loved Palanice; and Cerintes solicited Palanice for Amilcar, because he was the servant of Florice. So see, I beseech you, how Love had busied himself amongst us; for Florice never met Cercinea, but she spoke unto her in my behalf, and Cercinea solicited as much in behalf of Lucindor, Cercinea never saw Palanice, but she entreated her to favour Sileines, and Palanice at the same time recommended Clorian unto her. When Palanice met Florice, she solicited her in behalf of her Brother Cerintes, and Florice solicited her in behalf of Amilcar. Judge (I beseech you) when we met all together, what fine discourse there was amongst us: It was very happy we were all intimate friends before these cross interests fell out; for otherwise, doubtless things would have fallen out very foul amongst us: But all of us foreseeing that things could not long continue thus, without some more bitter exasperations, one day when we were all met together at Cercineas house, we all agreed, both Ladies and Cavaliers, to submit our selves unto the Will of God, and so went all toge∣ther to enquire of the Oracle, at the Temple of Venus, where we received this answer. The Oracle. LEt Six within this Place remain, Till Honour otherwise ordain: No answer to the Female three Expect, unless alone they be. An old man who expounded these words unto us, said, that the Oracle com∣manded us to stay in this Town until such time as some action of honour constrain∣ed us to depart: and that if the Ladies came alone without us, the Oracle would tell them what they should do. We understood that three days after they went and consulted with the Oracle. As for us six, we still waited until some honourable oc∣casion caused us to go out of Lions: And now it so fell out, that the Prince Godo∣mar
being to attempt the preservation of Dorinde, the Prince Sigismond command∣ed us to follow him, and we thought our selves obliged in honour to obey him; so we came hither, where we found these three Ladies; but we know not yet how Love will dispose of our affairs. Thus ended Alcander; and it being very late, Hylas (who began to be very sleepy) bade them good night, went to his own Bed, and slept till the next mor∣ning. Important affairs did so take up the mind of Adamas, and interrupted his sleep that he oft left his bed before he had closed an eye; and though his age required rest, yet his affection to the service of the Nymph, and the publique safety, did make him strain his weak and wearied body beyond belief; such power has desire of doing well upon a generous person. The greater he saw the danger, and the more difficult he found the remedies, the more did he rouse up his generous spirit and judgement to oppose the designes of Polemas. And indeed, the difficulties he saw were not a few, nor small; for he saw the Nymph destitute of men and money, and to have no place of security but Mar∣celle, where he made no question but her enemies had many friends, and good intelligence: That she was to defend her self against a great Souldier, who had all the men, the Forts, the Intelligence, and all the money of her Dominions in his power: His greatest difficulty was, to make his preparations to oppose this Trea∣son so secretly, that the enemy should not perceive it; a thing so difficult, that it seemed impossible: For Polemas had so corrupted all those which he had drawn to his faction, as Adamas hardly knew whom to trust. The truth is, the unexpected coming of Prince Godomar in a time so oppor∣tune, and of all those Cavaliers who were with him, as also of Damon and Alci∣don, did much encourage him; thinking it a most infallible signe, that the Gods intended to preserve the Nymph against the tyranny of this wicked man. When he was deep in these thoughts, those of the Guard sent to let him know, that there was a good Troop of strangers who desired entrance, who not being willing to tell their names, stayed there; yet their designe seemed not to be bad, since there was many Ladies in Coaches. This intelligence was no sooner given unto the Druide, but two Cavaliers were conducted unto him, to let him understand what men they were. These two Cavaliers were well in years, and seemed to be persons of great re∣spect, which caused Adamas to do them much honour. And because they desired to talk in private with him, he carried them into his Closet, where the elder of them began thus. Prudent and sage Sir, Argira, Queen of the Picts, hath sent us unto the great Nymph, to let her know, that she is entred into her Dominions, before she gave her any notice of it, because, not desiring to be known, for some reasons which she will shew her, she thought it would not be displeasing unto her: And because she is constrained to obey an Oracle, she has sent us, to beseech you from her, you would be pleased to permit her entrance, and to let her pass unknown, assu∣ring her self, that when the Nymph does know the reason of her desire, she will think it most just. How? said Adamas and interrupted, is the Queen of the Picts at the Gates? And being answered she was; Oh God (said he) how sorry will the Nymph be, if she should not know it, and will be extreamly displeased that so great a Princess should be no better received in her Dominions! He would have gone on in his excuse, if these two Cavaliers had not interrupted him. Sir (said they) the Queen desires not to be known upon any terms, and beseecheth the Nymph to conceal her: We are not shye in acquainting you with it, because we hear great reports of your wisdom; but we beseech you, from the Queen our Mistris, to take no notice of it, and to let her see the Nymph, as a stranger un∣known, that she may communicate the cause of her Voyage unto her. I know Sirs (said Adamas unto them) that the Nymph would not upon any terms in the world displease the Queen, but will be extreamly joyed to see her within her Do∣minions; and since you desire to have it so, we will go all together unto the Nymph,
and acquaint her whose pleasure I know is, that the Queen may command any thing here as freely as amongst the Picts. Upo this, they went all three together, and Adamas acquainted her with the news, which being so unexpected, did not a little astonish her; and causing the two Cavaliers to enter, she understood from them what Adamas had briefly hint∣ed unto her, and more, that the principal cause which moved Argira to come thus unknown, was that misfortune of Rosilion whom she brought with her, and whose mind was so distracted, as moved much compassion from all those that for∣merly knew him. For his reason, she desired that he might be lodged by himself, where none might see him but his domesticks. The Nymph would have gone her self to meet her, but the Cavaliers fell down upon their knees and besought her not to do so, because the Queen would be extremely offended at it; for Rosilion would some∣times commit such gross follies when he was in any company, that Argira was con∣strained to come almost alone, having brought with her but the Princess Rosani∣ra, the daughter of Poliander King of the Boyers and Ambaries, and a small com∣pany of Cavaliers to guard them. Since (said the Nymph unto them) the Queen is not pleas'd to let me pay that honour which I ow unto her, my daughter Galathea shall go in my room to wait upon her unto her lodging in the Castle, where she may be seen by none but whom she please: No, said the Cavaliers, she will not be pleased with that, she will ac∣cept of the lodging which you are pleased to offer, because she would be near you; but we most humbly beseech you not to let the Nymph, your daughter, meet her. Madam (said Adamas unto her) since it is her pleasure so to have it, be pleased to content her in it, and tell her that all your Dominions is in her power, and that you will obey her in all things: If you please to command me I will wait upon her to her lodging, and seem as if I went only to command the gates to be opened for her entrance. Thus was Argira brought to the Castle, and all those that came with her, which were about a hundred Cavaliers, were lodged in the Town with all fitting acco∣modation. Adamas did most heartily rejoyce at the arival of the Princess, think∣ing it a great advantage to the Nymphs affairs: for he could not imagine she came to stay only a few dayes; and that if Polemas did attempt any thing, she would be engaged in the Town with them, which would invite the Picts to come and re∣lieve her: Besides, having heard of Rosilions great exploits in arms, and of the amity betwixt him and Policander the King of the Boyers and Amburies, and moreover, knowing that Rosanira his daughter was with the Queen of the Picts, it was not likely that such great Kings her neighbours, would suffer her to be be∣sieged in a place without sending relief. And having thus communicated these things unto the Nymph and Prince Godomar, they were both of opinion, that it was necessary to oblige this Queen, by all manner of kindnesses, to interest her self in their affairs. And because Adamas had already obtained of the Queen, that Amasis and Ga∣lathea might come and see her, as soon as she had a little refreshed her self, the Nymph went unto her, carrying with her only Galathea and Adamas. And that none might take any notice of it, she went through a gallery which passed between both their lodgings. Argira, hearing of her coming, went into the gallery to meet her, having none with her, but three aged Ladies and old Cavalier. The first salutations being done, Argira taking the Nymph by the hand, and sitting down, Galathea desired leave to go and kiss the hands of the Princess Rosanira, which the Queen most willingly consented unto: when she was gone with one of those old Ladies, and the doors being shut, the Queen commands the old Cavalier to relate, as briefly as he could, the cause of her voyage, and not to conceal or disguise from the Nymph, or any thing which concerned that business; and so the Cavalier, in obedience to her commands, began thus.
The History of ROSANIRA, CELIODAN∣TE and ROSILION. PAtience and impetuosity are two means by which men may bring great things to pass; for the one works by force and violence, throwing down every thing that opposes his design: and the other by temporiz∣ing and smoothing the enemy, does get the victory, so as it seems one may arive at one and the same end, by two contrary wayes. He that is master of both these qualities together, may be thought more then man; but because hu∣mane infirmity is very rarely capeable of both, I think, that all things rightly ballanced, Patience and Moderation is most comendable and profitable, as be∣ing most grounded upon reason, And that he, who takes violent impetuosity for his guide, is sooner brought to ruine, and inevitable precipices. Wise and great Nymph, the discourse I am to make unto you, will testifie, that if the Queen had alwayes set this maxime before her eyes, she would not have fallen into so many inconveniency and displeasures as she hath; but when one goes into passion for advice, it is not to be wondred if the advice be often against reason, and draw after it a long train of misfortunes and distasters; of which I will make you as brief a Relation as possibly I can. Be pleased to know Madam, that Policander King of the Boyers and Am∣bries, being a Prince very young, and seeing that his Provinces, under the sage go∣vernment of the King his father, did enjoy a secure peace, he was desirous to travel, and by his courage to get glory and renown, so as he stole away secretly, and with one servant only, went into the next warre he heard of. This young Prince passed under the notion and title of the errant Cavalier, not only through∣out all Gaul, but also amongst the Grudiens, Menapiens, Battaves, Ubiens, Lato∣briges, Henides, Tullingeans, Marcomanes; and briefly through all high and low Germany: and afterward passing into great Brittain, he stayed long in the Court of that great King, where, and every where else, under the name of the un∣known Cavalier, he got so much glory, as hardly any in all Europe was better known then he that passed for unknown. At last, desiring to return into his own Kingdome, he imbarqued loadned with abundance of glory, and being upon the Armorick coast, his destiny carried him into the Court of the King of Picts, who hearing the fame of his valour, did receive him with so much curtesie as invited him to stay longer there, then he designed. During the time of his sojourn there, he saw the Princess Argira; and as all things that are written down in the book of Fate are inevitable, so as he loved her, she could not chuse but entertain his affection. This last designe made him forget his first, of returning into his own kingdome, but stayed some moneths in this Court where he changed the name of Cavalier errant unto that of Lover. The truth is, great Nymph, his valour, and the glory of so many combats, at∣chieved with so much courage and happy success, the discretion honour and re∣spect wherewith he courted this young Princess did oblige her to entertain that af∣fection which he expressed unto her, but yet she would not let her good will unto him appear, until she knew that he was Prince of the Boyers and Ambaries; but he having secretly made it known unto her, and she not being so young but she could see that her father could not make choise of a husband for her more great, nor more worthy to command over the Picts, upon his promise never to marry any other but her, she took him for her husband, and suffered him to come unto her secretly. I see, great Nymph, that the Queen does blush to hear me relate these things: but the belief which she might justly have, that a Prince so great and so full of honour and affection, would not betray those assurances which he had given unto her, does sufficiently justifie her action and render her blame∣less.
They continued thus together some moneths, unperceiued by any, unless her Nurse, whom she acquainted with it, as her, that was to facilitate their meetings, and her son whose name was Verances, whom Policander trusted, and most em∣ployed in this business: At last, Fortune would not let them any longer live in rest together, but gave Policander a cause of returning into his own Kingdom, by the death of the King his Father. This separation was extreamly sad unto them both, especially unto the Princess, who did not only resent his absence, but did almost foresee that he would forget her: yet considering that besides the loss of his father, there was a necessity of his return, she consented unto it, and the more willingly, because he promised to send his Ambassadours immediately, to demand her of the King, and so their desired contentment would this way be compleated. Thus he left her, after a thousand promises and oaths, which no sooner out of sight, but were all forgot; for never since did she hear any thing of him more then what common reports did bring unto her. By this common Fame she under∣stood, that all his Kingdoms were in a flame, and divided into two factions, the one of the Queen his mother, who was all for him; and the other of a puissant Prince, in some sort his Cosen, called Bourbon Archimbout, who relying upon his friends and confederates, pretended unto the Soveraigne Authority, and to restore it unto his Family, which he said the great Grandfather of Policander had taken from Bourbon his Ancestor, He made this attempt the more boldly, because a re∣port was spread abroad that Policander was dead, who was the only Successor be∣twixt him and the two Crowns. The King on the other side who was old, and whose vigour and strength began to fail, never offered to make any opposition a∣gainst this designe, although he saw it; but passed away his life smoothly and calm∣ly as he could: so as when he came to die, the faction of the Prince Archimbaut was so high, that if Policander had not speedily arrived, certainly the Queen, his Mother, would have been forced to yeild unto rebellion: For besides the strength of his Faction, he was also assisted by the power of the Limovices, the Queen of which people was his sole and only daughter, who had married their King, and was left a Widdow within a year, having only one daughter by him, named Ce∣phise. The Princess Argira came to the knowledge of all these things, only by com∣mon Fame; and because she thought her self nearly interessed in the business, she desired the King, her Father, to send him relief; and the more easily to invite him unto it, she did craftily make it known unto him, that the unknown Cavalier who had been so long in his Court, was the King Policander; but for all that, reason of State moved him to take the other side: For the partakers of Archimbaut made him believe, that Policander was already ruined, that all his hopes were gone, and that it was no prudence to make himself so potent an enemy, as him, who had already the Kingdom of the Lemovices in right of his daughter, and who ere long would be King of those two Kingdoms: Briefly, these considerations were so cunningly insinuated into the Kings Belief, as they had such an influence upon him, that in lieu of assisting Policander, as she desired, and as indeed he ought to have done (for all Kings ought to be enemies unto Rebels) he sent forces unto Archim∣baut, and such, as Policander was counselled not to put things to the hazard of Arms, but rather to stop all factions by a more safe, and a more easie way, which was, by a marriage betwixt him and the only daughter of Prince Archimbaut, whose name was Clorisena, who though a widdow of the King of Lemovices, yet was very fair and young. Policander did the more willingly hearken to the moti∣on, because he was extreamly incensed against the King of the Picts, for sending aid unto his enemy; and Archimbaut was the more willing to embrace it, because having but one daughter, and out of hopes to have any more children, he could desire no more then to see his daughter Queen of the Boyens and Ambaries, and his grand-children King of those two Kingdoms. But that which most of all mo∣ved Policander unto it was, a strong report that the Princess Argira was dead; and though the news was false, yet was it not without some colour of truth; for some moneths after Policander was gone, she perceived her self to be with childe, and being desirous to hide it from the King her father, whom she feared, and not with∣out
reason, she feigned her self to be sick, which she might easily do, by reason of her extream displeasure to see her self cast off by him in whom she most trusted, she so perswaded the King unto a belief of it, that he thought it good for her to leave the Court for change of ayr; and having made choise of a very retired place, which by the opinion of Physicians was of a very wholsome ayr, she was conduct∣ed thither with what company she best pleased; and taking very few with her but her Nurse and her son, they only knew of her being brought to bed. Now as news is like unto a ball of snow, which being tumbled from the top of a hill, does grow as big as another hill before it come to rest, so the reports of her sickness was made to be death unto Policander, without which he could not consent unto this marriage, at least not without perjury. This marriage was the first news which she, to her great grief, heard of, when she returned again to the King her father: and doubtless she had more deeply resent∣ed it, if she had not also heard, that Policander was forced unto this marriage, and that if he had not done so, certainly he had lost his Kingdoms: This gave some satisfaction to her sad soul, when she considered, that he committed this fault by constraint, and not by consent of will: and as if he had known what reports were amongst us, he used the same to clear himself; and since there was no other reme∣dy, she believed them. But her greatest grief was, to hear that the King of the Santons had sent to treat upon a marriage with her, and that it was already resol∣ved upon. This news was most abominable unto her, because she was resolved against all bands of matrimony, since she was so unworthily deluded by the first: But now she saw her self constrained to change her resolution, since she could not contrary it, unless she should make known what she had so carefully concealed; which being once known, would extreamly vex the soul of her aged Father, and become a stain both unto his reputation and her own: Upon this prudent consi∣deration, she married the King of the Santons, by whom within a year she had a son who was named Celiodantes. But because she consented unto this marriage only upon reason of State, she still retained her first affection unto the Prince Policander; and it vexed her very soul to think the King of the Santons son should inherit two great Kingdoms: whilst he, whom she had by Policander, should live unknown, and without any Do∣minion. Then again, to have the Son of him whom she loved not, always under her eye, and to be always deprived of his whom she did love, seemed intolerable unto her. See Madam what affection will make her do, and into what extream it will drive one. A little while after she was well recovered from her lying in, she feigned to be very desirous (as it is the common curiosity of mothers) to know what would be the fortune of her new born son: The King indeed did all he could to disswade her from it, as thinking it best to be ignorant of things inevitable; but seeing her so extreamly desirous of it, he permitted her. There was then in those quarters a famous Sybil, who, if they may be so termed, rendred Oracles; and surely some God did speak by her mouth, for otherwise it were impossible any hu∣mane should foretel things so certainly as she did: She was an old woman of great sanctity and solitude of life, her hair, which she wore loose about her shoulders, was of the same colour with her garment, both white as snow, and her feet were always bare. This woman did profess to be instructed by those who succeeded Vellede and Ganna, two famous Druids who rendred Oracles in Germany, and from whose institution came the Isle of Sayn, otherwise called Sena, in the Britanique Sea, opposite unto those Banks which are termed Osisiniens, a place highly renown∣ed for Oracles there rendred. The name of this woman was Melusine, and she was one of the nine which inhabited in the Isle of Sayne: But in as much as they divided themselves into nine Regions, and this Sybils lot was the Picts, the Santons, and most of the Armorique Cities, she came to inhabite upon the top of a Rock, where she caused a Tower to be built, which she named Lux ignis, from that di∣vine fire which shined in all her answers, and which since was called by the people Lusignan; thither came all the country about to consult with her: At the first it was a hard matter to speak with her, for she would never shew her face, to the end, as I believe, that more reverence might be had of her; and when any desi∣red
to know any thing of her, the best of the company must always come and bring the demands, and carry back the answers, and not daring to presume so high as to look her in the face; which to prevent, she wore a veil, that if any were so rash as to look up, he might not see her. Now this Sybil was then at the Rock of Lugnan: And though she used a fortnight before the Misleto was gathered, to come unto a stone near Poictier, and there remain nine days ready to answer all questions, yet the Princess would not stay till she came so near us: Having there∣fore the Kings leave, she went unto this Rock, with as few in her company as she could; and having accosted the Sybil, she asked her what would be her Sons for∣tune: But the Sybil answered: The Answer of the Sybil Milusine, unto the Princess ARGIRA. HArk what the Fortune of them both shall be: With Fratride the one of them you'll see, And by an Incestous marriage menac'd be. In Forrests where shall be Prince Godomar, The other shall his senses there recover: Then Fate will kindly be both t'one, and other. This Oracle, not then understood, did put her into a cruel perplexity, and she saw now that the King, her father, had good reason to disswade her from that curi∣osity; yet silently keeping the answer to her self, at her return she fancied a diffe∣rent construction, which was, that if the young Celiodantes were seen, either by his father, or mother, or any else, except his Nurse, and those that were to nourish and bring him up, for a certain time, he would infallibly die. The Kings were exceedingly loth to be deprived of the sight of the little Cleodantes, yet fearing some such malignant influence, they consented to humour the Queen in her de∣sires. Now the reason why she desired this, was only to put the son of King Po∣licander into the place of the King of the Santons, as well to enjoy the content∣ment of seeing him brought up with her, as to see him hereafter King of the San∣tons and the Picts: And her design was so handsomly carried, that at the return of the wrong Celiodantes, none had any suspition of him, though he was a little too big for his age: For the King of the Santons being of a big tall stature, did help to make every one believe that he would be like his father. Thus Madam, this Princess was both a bad and a good mother. In the mean time, she fearing lest if the right Celiodantes should remain in a place where he might be seen by any of the Court, he might come to be known, either by his resemblance of his father, or by the indiscretion of those who had the keeping of him, she pack'd him away, as far off as she could, and sent him to a Port of the Santons, to be brought up as the childe of Verances, unto whom she committed the care of him, with a good sum of money for his education, and to instruct him in all such exercises and qua∣lities which a Cavalier ought to be: and lest by any fortune he should chance to be lost, either by the death of Verances, or any other accident, she thought it good to give him some mark whereby he might be known: In order to this, she took a hot iron, with intention to burn him upon the left hand; but as she was looking about where it should be done to do him the least harm, & be least seen, she saw that Nature had saved her that labour, and had placed upon the same hand a most per∣fect Rose, so exactly, that no art could possibly do the like: She contented her self with this mark, and commanded Verances, that at the first Town he came un∣to, he should take the picture of that little hand, and send it unto her, which she
intended to keep as a memorandum; and when she was ready to part, she took a Turkish stone from about her neck, which Policander gave her, and which she e∣steemed at a very dear rate, not for the value of it, for it was of no great price, but because he gave it unto her when he told her that he was King of the Boyers, which he was wont to wear in all his Travels: This stone had engraven upon it, a Lion, with certain German letters, which in that language signified a King, the son of a King: Policander wore it for his motto; intimating, as the Lion is the King of all other animals, and was begotten by another Lion: so he, though he seemed to be only a Cavalier errant, yet was he a King, and the son of a King. The Queen Argira seeing what fortune this little Celiodantes was to run, she thought this motto suited with him very well: besides, a Turkish stone is very lucky when it is given with a good will; so she hung it about his neck, kissed him, and recomended him to Verances, beseeching the gods to be propitious unto him: Natural affection began to work upon the heart of a mother, yet the Tirant love would needs shew himself the stronger. Perhaps Madam, you may think it strange, that in a business of this importance, the Queen should imploy Verances, a young man, and one whose understanding perhaps was not so great as such a secret re∣quired. But be pleased to know that Verances was son unto her nurse, and they two only did know of Policanders love, and the birth of that child which was in the room of Celiodantes, so as she thought it not convenient to trust any more with those passages, but better to imploy these then any other: besides, she was desirous, that if it were her fortune to die, the King Policander might be inform∣ed by some, what love had made her do for his son, and she knew that he would give credit unto whatsoever this man did say. In the mean time King Policander had by the Queen his wife a son and a daughter: The son was called Ariontes, and the daughter Rosanira, and presently after Clorisone died, and left many that sadly lamented her loss. Policander mourned beyond the imaginations of every one, for it was thought that he loved her only as the mother of his children; yet most certain it was that he did love her, and as certain that Argira was quite out of his memory: O the odd hu∣mours of some men, who can forget those they once loved as soon as ever they are out of sight. Policander seeing himself a father of so fine an off-spring and a widdower, he bent all his studies to rule his dominions well, and to see his children educated in all noble and Princely exercises and qualities sutable to their sexes and degrees. And because the Princess Cephise, his wifes daughter, whom she had by the King of the Lemovices, and somthing elder then Rosanira, was in his hands, after the death of her mother, he brought her up with his own children, making no dif∣ference between her and Rosanira, who having attained to the age of seven or eight years began to appear so fair that she carried away the glory from the great∣est beauties in all Gaul, although Cephise in the eyes of many did not yield unto her. The young Prince Ariontes on the other side, was so apprehensive and ca∣pable of every excellency (that he applied himself unto) that no Prince of his age did equal him either in exercises of warre or peace, which joyed the heart of Po∣licander beyond all expressions. At that time there was some certain Merchants which used to traffick upon the Armorick seas, and by reason of the conveniency of the river Loire, did bring their wares into the Provinces of Gaul, amongst the Heduois, Burgundians, Al∣lobroges, Galloligures, and others: These being constrained to pass through the Territories of the Boyers and Ambaries, in hopes of a free and safe conduct did present unto the King Policander many rare and precious things, and amongst the rest, a young slave, so farre and so exceedingly handsome, that as soon as the King saw him, he did dedicate him unto the service of the two Princesses Cephise and Rosanira, because he seemed to be no elder then the youngest of them. These Princesses lov'd him exceedingly well, being of a very pliant and sweet disposi∣tion, and strove who should most oblige him by caresses: and because his name was Kynicson and that word hard to pronounce, they called him most commonly by reason of his beauty, the fair slave. But O the fate of inclination? Although
he was given at the first unto both those Princesses, yet he devoted himself solely unto the service of Rosanira; not but that he obeyed Cephise in all her commands, because he knew it was her desire and his duty so to do; but yet that service which proceeds from affection was wholly unto the other, at which Cephise would doubtless have been very angry, if she had been composed of any Gaul, but she was of so wise and sweet a temper, that though she had a mind to be ill pleased with him, yet she could not be angry: so as all her anger did turn it self into jea∣lousie of her sister, and sometimes to twit him, who as young as he was, know∣ing that the displeasure of that Princess might do him as much harm, did endea∣vour to please her, but it was so hard to hide his affection unto Rosanira, that she was alwayes harping upon that string. One day, Cephise chid him for that he minded no service but her sisters, and scorned all others: Rosanira, by fortune heard him answer thus: Madam (said he unto her) I think it a most high honour to do you service, and if I fail, you will oblige me, if you punish me; but the very truth is, that though you should not be willing I should serve your sister, yet you must take away my life if I do not; for if I live I cannot chuse. But why (answered Cephise very angrily) and did not see Rosanira) have you a more ready will to serve my sister, then me? are not you mine as well as hers? I did not say (replied he very modestly) but that I am as rea∣dy to serve you as I ought to do: but, but me no buts, replied she, and looked red with anger, and going nearer him: but Madam, answered he, then spying Rosa∣nira, and changing his discourse upon a sudden: but Madam, here is the Princess your sister: upon this word, going back a pace or two, he slipt out of the cham∣ber door. This Modesty did extreamly please both the Princesses; Cephise, because he would not acquaint Rosanira with any passages betwixt them; and Rosanira, at his discretion, in hiding the anger of her Sister Cephise; so as that passage caused both of them to love him better then before. And a few days after, Rosanira having an opportunity of talk with him, Prithee, said she unto him, tell me one thing truly; Have you not much ado to content my Sister? Madam (answered he) I shall be very glad to be told of my faults, if I neglect any thing in her service. I can tell you one (replyed she, and smiled) and advise with your self whether you will relapse into it, or no. Surely Madam, answered he, I shall not; at least I will endeavour all I can. It is (continued Rosanira) because you seem unto her to be so affectionate unto my service. Yours Madam? replyed he presently. Yes mine, replyed she, and consider with your self whether or no you will continue it any longer, for this is it which does so much displease her. Oh Madam, cryed he, if her displeasure proceed from thence, I shall continue it as long as I live. Why, said she, had you rather displease her, then leave my service? Madam, answered he, will you please I should tell you the truth? Yes (answered she) and tell me tru∣ly. If I do not (said he) may the Sun never shine upon me, and may I be odious unto all the earth. Upon this assurance (replyed the Princess) I will believe you. I do swear and vow Madam (answered he) that though all the Powers in the world should command me to quit your service, I should be disobedient: Nay more, I should not think my self too blame in such disobedience: For ever since that day the King, your Father, devoted me unto you, I have so ratified the donation, that I swear by all the Gods, I will never depart from your service. But (said Rosanira) were you not at the same time given unto my Sister as well as me? No Madam (an∣swered he) for the King only gave me unto her, but both the King and my own consent did give me unto you. But yet (said Rosanira, and smiled) she pretends to have as much right unto you as I; yet since I see your inclination, I will beseech the King to bestow some other upon my Sister, and let you be wholly mine. To make me become wholly yours Madam (replyed he) rests wholly in your own will, and though the favour you would do me in asking me of the King, be one of the greatest you can do me, yet I most humbly beseech you not to speak unto him a∣bout it, for it may procure me so much ill will from my Lady, your Sister, as I am afraid the King should remove me from her service, and yours also. Say he should, (replyed Rosanira) would you continue serving me? Nay Madam (answered he)
both alive and dead, that resolution shall never alter. But say I would have it for (said she) would you disobey me? If your Will Madam (replyed he) were strong∣er then Destiny, you might do what you pleased; but since it is not, most cer∣tainly you would be disobeyed in that. Then (replyed the Princess) you shall ne∣ver by my consent leave my service. Upon this, fearing lest her Sister, or some other should come in upon them she retired, giving him a gentle blow with her hand upon his cheek, as a gage of that promise which she had made unto him; with which he was so well satisfied, that he was highly contented with his fortune: And as he increased in age, he encreased also in affection; of which, the vertues of the Princess: and continual conversation with her, was both Mother and Nurse; Yet knowing himself to be a slave, he durst not presume so high, as to discover any such thing. On the other side, Rosanira though she feigned otherwise, yet was she not quite exempted from passion, yet her haughty spirit would not allow her to love one that was unknown; and this consideration was a great stop to the growth of her affection: All the leave that she gave unto her self freely, was, to grieve and lament, as oft as she considered the baseness of his fortune A little while after, the King seeing him to be every way very handsome, had a desire to have him wait upon the young Ariontes, and so have him more in his eye: but fate which had designed him for other imployments, did afford him such a glorious occasion to shew himself, as the like is not upon the Theater of the whole universe. The King Policander being one that did abominate all ease and idleness, did much delight in hunting: one day as he was chasing a Hart through a thick wood, a lion rushed out so near the King, that his horse extremely affrighted began to turn about, and so unhappily, that he fell backward with the pomel of the saddle against the Kings brest: so as the King being under his horse, he was not able to disengage himself: The horse was run through the body by the Kings sword; so as he died presently: the King also received a little wound in his thigh; all those that followed the King, were so affrighted by this fierce beast, which they knew very well (being the greatest and most furious of all those the King kept in iron cages, and was escaped out) that they were all glad that their horses were affright∣ed, and in lieu of holding them in, they spurred them away as fast as they could: The fair slave only, lighting from his horse, he ran towards the King, and in such a happy nick of time, that he got between the Lion and him, when this fiery ani∣mal was with open mouth ready to devour him: but the courageous boy, with∣out more ado, drew his sword, and wielded it so happily, that he ran the Lion to the heart; but for all that, though the sword was in the midst of his heart; yet this furious animal in dying, did give his valiant enemy such a wound upon his shoulder with one of his claws, as might very well have dispatched him. At the first, the fair slave staggered, and afterwards fell, some five or six paces distant from his dead enemy: but though his wound was great, and his fall violent; yet, half astonished, he presently got up again and ran betwixt the King and the Lion, apprehending him still alive: He stayed so a while, and seeing the furious animal now tame enough, he run to help the King, who was striving to get himself from under his horse, and with much ado, he helped him up; but when he spied the bloud to run from the Kings thigh: O Sir, said he, you are wounded and with tears in his eyes would have held him up. Policander, who had more courage then to be daunted at any dangers, did admire the valour and affection of this young boy: fair slave (said he, and embraced him) thou hast not this day imployed thy courage for an ungrateful master: and till a better occasion offer it self, ask what thou wilt, and I swear by my fathers soul it shall not be denied. The slave kneel∣ed down, Sir, said he unto him, it is your own goodness to acccept of this service which I have done you: but alas Sir, both this, and all that I am able to do, are but tributes of that seruice which I ow, and I dare not pretend unto any recom∣pence: An act so generous as this, replied the King, argues the height of merit, and cannot be equall'd by any recompence, and therefore I command thee to ask something that may argue me not ungrateful. Sir, replied he, the gods do not measure they benefits the bestow upon us, according to our merits, but their own
good will and pleasure: and knowing that in this you are pleased to imitate them, I dare presume, since you command me to ask of you, that which is most dear un∣to me, and that is, my liberty; not that I desire ever to be out of the honour of your commands; but to testifie unto you for the future, that it is my own free will and desire to serve you as long as I live. The King, who thought he would have asked some great summ of money, or other matter of profit, did still more and more admire the Generosity and Magnanimity of his courage, and embra∣cing him again, yes (said he) your request is granted, you are from this hour free, and in testimony of it, you shall receive the honour of knighthood as soon as we are returned unto Avarick: and though in any other, your age would not permit it (for he was then not above eighteen) yet in you, your courage and fortune re∣quires it. In the mean time, most of those that ran away for fear returned, and finding the Lion dead, they were ashamed that so young a boy should have more courage and resolution then themselves, and durst hardly look the King in his face: but when they saw what extraordinary favours the King did unto him, then every one swelled with envy; for noble actions does cause envy in the souls of base people, and emulation in enerous spirits. The King, who desired only to invite others unto well doing, by the example of this valiant youth, as soon as he came into Averick, he made this slave a Knight: and although their wounds would not give them leave to use much cere∣mony: yet would he needs have the Princesses Cephise and Rosanira, with all the Ladies, to be present. He himself put on his spurrs, and girt him with a sword, and kissing him, commanded the Princess Rosanira to do the like, which she did with much willingness and contentment; when all Ceremonies were performed, the King addressed himself unto him and said, Cavalier, I do pronounce you free, and would have all esteem you so: Also, since your merits do claim a bet∣ter name then that of slave, I do ordain it shall be changed, and hereafter to pre∣serve the memory of your brave Act in killing a Lion, be called Rosilion, and Ro∣sanirus Cavalier: This title will oblige both my daughter and me to remember our engagements unto you. The joyes and thanks of the new Rosilion were great, but not greater then those of the Princess: after he had humbly kissed the Kings hands, he did the same unto that Princess, with a thousand protestations of eternal service; the expressi∣ons of which had not ended so soon, if his wounds in his shoulder had not con∣strained him to bed, and to keep it for some dayes. The Princese had much ado to hide her excessive contentment to see him made free, for an act so noble: and to give him some private knowledge of it, she wrote this Letter unto him. The Princess ROSANIRAS Letter unto ROSILION. YOur courage is victorius and can conquer Fortune, since it has so ge∣nerously restored that unto you, which she most unjustly detained from you, I would not have your virtue make a stop here, but would have you lift up your eyes unto somthing that is above you: Hope well (for I would have you do so) and I will hope as well as you. When she had done, she knew not which way to convey it unto him; but at last, hearing that his wound bled still, and they could not stop it, she sent it unto him, under the notion of a medecine to stench blood, lapt up in a little tafaty; suppo∣sing he would be so inquisitive as to see what was in it, and it happened as she supposed; for Rosilion receiving it with all the honour and thanks that such a fa∣vour could deserve, at first he hung it about his neck thinking it to be a real re∣ceipt. But in the morning when he was awake, and thinking upon the favour
which the Princess had done him, he had a desire to see what was in the Taffaty, in a conceit, that the Receipt was writ by the fair hand of his adored Rosanira, which treasure he should esteem as dear as his life; he took it then from his neck, and opening it, he found the Letter, which he read; then he kissed it, with such ra∣ptures of joy and admiration, that his wounds began to bleed a fresh; and had not the man who waited upon him, heard him sigh, this accident doubtless had done him much harm, before any notice could have been taken of it. But the man be∣ing very careful of his master, ran presently to his Bed, and seeing his complexion changed, he asked him how he did? Friend (said he unto him) help me a little to put this on, which I have in my hand; for it is the Receipt which the Princess sent me to stop blood, and which I would needs see: but I no sooner took it from about My Neck, then my wound began to bleed: Alas Sir (said the man) I have oft heard say, that such things ought not to be seen; for if they be, they presently lose their vertue; and if you have read it, expect no good from it. I did read it indeed (said Rosilion) little thinking that such a thing could take away its strength: Upon this he kissed it, and put it about his neck again; which done, he perceived the blood to run still: Friend (said he) thou toldest me right; the Receipt has lost its vertue: run therefore, and call some to apply another remedy. Whilst the Physicians and Chyrurgions were applying some powder of his hair burned, and some other restringent things; Rosilion, whose mind ran more upon the wound of his heart, then that of his shoulder, did think this accident to be a very good occasion of thanking the Princess for the extraordinary favour which she had done him, thinking it to be infinitely beyond his merits: and retaining this thought in his memory, till every one was retired, he called for Ink and Paper, and writ what love did dictate unto him: afterwards lapping it up in the same form that Rosaniras Receipt was, and taking the other out of the Taffaty, he put this in the room of it. After he had lapped it up, he bade Merisin (so was the man called that waited upon him) to go unto the Princess, and thank her for the great care she was pleased to have of him in sending that Receipt: but his curiosity was such, that thinking he had been cured, he read it, and then his wound began pre∣sently to bleed again: That he knew no better remedy for his disease then that Re∣ceipt, and most humbly beseech her to send him another, in lieu of that which he returned back: Merisin was diligent and faithful in delivery of his message: and though the Princess did very well understand the meaning of Rosilion, yet the durst not to take any notice of it: But taking the Taffaty; Friend (said she unto him) tell your master he was too inquisitive; he should have been contented with the good which the Receipt would have done him, without desires of knowing what it was: tell him I will make him the same Receipt, but bid him take heed of suf∣fering it to be seen; for if he do, it may much prejudice him. Then going into her Closet, and shutting the door, she was long in debate with her self, whether she should read what she doubted he had written, thinking it somtimes a dishonour unto her self to love: Rosilion considering the condition wherein he was when first he came into her service; but presently beginning to flatter her passion; and who can blame me (said she) for loving him that saved the life of the King my father? 'tis true, that fortune conducted him hither with∣out Liberty; but being as it were in his cradle, the greatest King upon earth can∣not defend himself against such an accident. To be the first whom Fortune was pleased to spit her venome at? Surely past ages can furnish out with examples of the like: and perhaps we may meet with a great abundance of that deplorable number, and never go out of Gaul; but very few, who by their valour, could recover their lost liberty, as Rosilion hath done. Then looking upon the Taffaty, but who can tell (said she) that I do love him, but himself? If he is of so base an extract as he is esteemed, he never dare be so bold as to think of any such affection▪ and much less to publish it: and if his birth be as high as his actions and courage, who can blame me if I suffer him to love me? But whosoever he be, the very truth is, I do love him, and have already hinted as much unto him: Why then should I not read his answer? The worst is, if it do contain more then does be∣come him, I will send him a blank paper by way of Reply, in lieu of that which he hath writ unto me.
Upon this she took a pair of Scissars, and with a trembling hand began to open the Taffaty, and found a paper which contained these words. The Answer of ROSILION unto the Princcss ROSANIRA. YES, My Fairest Princess, I will hope, since you command me, But what is it you are pleased I should hope for? Oh that it were the honour of your Favour; which Favour would raise me above all the good fortunes of men, and would surpass all the merits of humanes: But it is absolutely impossible for me to give thanks equal unto such superlative benefits. She blushed extreamly when she read this Letter, and yet she could not chuse but like it; thinking that if he were too bold, it was she that taught him to commit the fault, and therefore easily excused him: and lest Merisin, or those that wait∣ed in the anti-chamber, should enter into any suspition, she writ back this answer. The Princess ROSANIRAS Reply unto ROSILION. PErsevere still, and hope for that which will afford you most content∣ment, for in doing so, you do but as you are allowed: But remem∣ber, that Fidelity, Discretion, and Silence, are the Victimes which ought to be offered upon those Altars, on which you will sacrifice. Thus lapping up these short lines with more care then did the first, she called for one of her women, and commanded her to give that Receipt unto Merisin, to carry speedily unto his master, and to tell him, that if he looked in it this time, let him never hope for any more. Rosilion understood very well what the Princess meant, when Merisin delivered his message; yet he had such a longing desire to see what answer she returned, that he was all impatience to be alone, that he might kiss that happy Paper, when he received it, there was much company with him, for he was very well beloved, and a Favourite is always followed by many of those flies which use to fly away as soon as any misfortune comes; so as to be handsomly rid of them, he seemed desirous to take his rest, and commanded Me∣risin to leave him alone, and not to come into his chamber till he called for him: When he was alone, he took the Taffaty, and after a thousand kisses, he read the Princess Letter, with such an excess of joy and contentment, as he was hardly able to contain it within the narrow compass of his soul; but when he was a little cool∣er, and had long looked upon this paper, he remembred that many people were present in the chamber when Merisin delivered his message unto him, and especi∣ally an old Cavalier, whom the King had sent unto him, and who without all doubt would make relation of it unto the King again, which might move some, or per∣haps the King himself, out of curiosity, to see this Receipt: He took out that therefore which the Princess had written, and placed in lieu of it another paper, scribled over with a few odd Characters, such as his pen did drop at random, and hung it about his neck, as he did the Letter: And happy it was he did so; for the King being desirous that every one should know how much he esteemed Rosilion,
to the end all the Court might imitate him, he himself would needs go visit him, as soon as the wound in his thigh would permit him, and carried with him the two Princesses, Cephise, and Rosanira, telling them, that the great generosity of that Cavalier, and the good service which he had done him, did very well deserve their extraordinary care of him. Though this unexpected visit of the King did surprize him, yet the sight of the Princess Rosanira was the height of contentment unto him; and such, as not knowing what thanks to return for such an unaccustomed favour, he could not find words to express his resentments of it. Policander came up to him, took his hand, asked him how he did, and whether the Receipt which his daughter had sent him, had done him any good? Very much Sir, answered he, and so much, that I think I do owe my life unto it. 'Tis very well, answered the King, for both she and I are obliged to have a care of your recovery. But Daughter (said he, and turned towards the Princess) pray tell me who gave you this Receipt? Sir (answered Ro∣sanira, and was a little surprized) it is so long since I first had it, that truly I have forgotten who gave it unto me; but I do very well remember, that whosoever it was, he told me that it would not fail: yet having no experience of it, I laid it up, and made no reckoning of it. The King then turning towards Rosilion, I be∣lieve (said he) that this which you wear about your neck is the Receipt: It is Sir, (answered he) and since I found so much benefit by it, I would not leave it off. Policander very desirous to know what it was, did take it from his neck, and would have opened it. But the Princess who trembled for fear of discovery, did present∣ly lay her hand upon it, and would not let him. Sir (said she) if you do see what it is, it will be unprofitable to Rosilion: And did not you see it? (answered he.) I did (replyed she) but it was, because otherwise I could not make it: yet if any other see it, the vertue of it is lost. These superstitions (said Policander) are to be observed by little children, and their Nurses: and to tell you truly, I have known so many of these kind of Receipts, which never wrought any effect, that I will see what this is: Then calling for a pair of scissars, he opened the Taffaty, and took out the paper. Judge Madam, in what a perplexity Rosanira was; she was indeed more dead then alive, and could not devise what excuse she could use to cover the crime which she had committed; yet when she saw it was not the same paper which she had written, she took a little heart: but she was presently sur∣prized with a second fear, not inferiour to the first; for she thought it to be some reply which Rosilion intended to send: but casting her eye upon him, she saw him smile, which gave her some courage; and more when she observed that nothing but Cyphers and Figures were in the paper: Oh how glad she was, and how she applauded the prudence of him, whom a little before she condemned, for suffer∣ing it so easily to be seen, when it so nearly concerned his life. What Daughter (said he, and was astonished, after he had a while considered it) does your Re∣ceipt consist of nothing but such odd Characters and scriblings as this? You see Sir (said she and smiled) all there is. I hope then (said the King and laughed) that it will cure me, if I be ill: Then lapping up the paper as it was, he put it himself about Rosilions neck, who kissing his hand, assured him, that he had received so much good from it, that he would keep it most carefully as long as he lived. But (said the Princess) it will not now do you any good, because it hath been seen: I believe Madam (said he) that if I do not see it my self, it will retain its vigour: for you see, that though the King have looked upon it, yet I do not bleed again, as I did before. I am glad of it (answered Rosanira) because I cannot make it any more; for the condition of the Receipt is such, that it cannot be made above twice for one person. Rosilion did very well understand she meant, that he should write no more this way: and yet he could not chuse but answer her; 'tis hard the fa∣vours which we receive from the Gods, should be always so conditioned, that we can enjoy them but a while. The favours of the Gods (replyed she) ought to be desired no further then in cases of necessity; and we ought not to grumble, be∣cause we have them not in abundance. The King did hear these words and Cephise also, but understood them not: so presently after he retired, and commanded all those that were about Rosilion, to have as great a care of him, as if he were the
Prince Ariontes his Son; and by fortune, as the King went out, the Prince came in, who meeting his Sisters going away, he carried them back for company, which pleased Policander very well; for he was desirous all manner of favours should be shewed unto this Cavalier, to invite others to follow his example in valour. Rosilion received the Prince with all due respects; and after he had kissed his hand for so great a favour, Sir (said he unto him) the honour you are pleased this day to confer upon me, is so great, as makes me ashamed of my little merit: But since he is not ungrateful, who though unable to satisfie as he ought, yet strives to do all he can, so I assure the Prince Ariontes, that for these extraordinary favours, Rosilian shall never be branded with that odious name, since I do from this very day dedicate all the days of my life, not to exonerate my self of this debt, because it is impossible, but in doing you all the services that a man can do unto his Master and Lord. Rosilion (answered the Prince) your blood employed in the preserva∣tion of the King my father, can never be fully recompenced, as well for the ge∣nerosity wherewith you spilt it, as for the great service you have done, and the whole State in it; assure your self that it shall never be forgot. And because he would have replyed, and the Prince not pleased to use more words of ceremony, he interrupted him, and embracing him, said; you may (Rosilion) overcome me in good language, but never in testimonies of affection: And going to a Chy∣rurgion who stood at the Beds feet, he expostulated with him concerning the state of his health, and whether his wound was dangerous, whilst Cephise and Rosani∣ra staying with him, did hinder one another: for (if I be not much mistaken) Cephise loved him as well as Rosanira; but because she always saw he had a great∣er inclination to her Sister, she durst not shew it; and Rosanira (who saw it) did keep the matter as secret from her, as from any other: As these two Sisters were sitting silently for fear of one another, Ariontes called Cephise, to shew unto her the terrible claws of the Lyon, which had wounded Rosilion, which indeed were as sharp as any needles; so Rosanira remaining alone with him, and Rosilion to acknowledge his extream obligations. Oh God, Madam (said he unto her) when will Fortune give me leave to employ this life which you have preserved, in your service? If you think you are obliged to me (said she) for the Receipt which I sent you, I do acquit you of it, and think my self very well paid by what you have done in lieu of it; assuring you, that I was never in my life so affrighted, as when the King was so impertinently desirous to see it. You might very well think Madam (said Rosilion) that if your Receipt had been there, I would sooner have lost my life, then suffer a sight of it. But Madam (continued he) I most humbly beseech you to ordain the way, in which it is your pleasure I should behave my self. You may find those directions (said she) in the last Receipt: she returned this answer in haste, because she saw the Prince and Cephise returning: and the better to dissemble it, as they came, she went to see the Lyon, which (though dead) was a most dreadful sight. Presently after, taking his leave, they both fol∣lowed him, and the Princess had no conveniency of talk with Rosilion. But Madam, I am afraid I shall be too tedious in relation of all the success: but I thought it necessary to acquaint you with the beginning of Rosaniras and Rosilions love; for indeed they did already love each other, though they durst not tell it, but still were in hopes, that hereafter the fortune and valour of this Cavalier, might haply be such, as they might marry. And in the mean time, the wound of Rosilion causing him to keep his Bed a long while, did give Rosanira an opportunity of longer discourse with him; For Cephise busying her self with look∣ing upon some Pictures, she left her alone with him; and Rosilion not to let such an opportunity slip: Madam (said he) if my tongue durst utter any complaint a∣gainst you, or my soul consent unto it, I think I should be a little angry with my Fairest Princess. Take heed Rosilion (answered she) your anger be not without a cause; for if you do well consider my Receipt, certainly you will confess that it was beyond your desires, at least your hopes: But I must confess, that in this I was a little too free, and perhaps had I well considered with my self, I had not sent it, since men are of such a temper, that they must not be too far acquainted with our good wills unto them: for they are all apt to be transported with too much
vanity, or contentment, and to fancy many things that were never thought upon, drawing conclusions from thence that are very disadvantageous to us. Is it your pleasure Madam, replied Rosilion, I should think that the favours you have conferred upon me, were done without your consideration? No, said Rosa∣nira, but on the contrary, I would have you know that if I had not done as I did, I should have blamed my self; but I say, that it was done without any debate with my self, for I was so transported with joy, to hear that the King was deliver∣ed from so great a danger, and that it was by the valour of Rosilion, as without any consult I suffered my hand to intimate my joyes unto you Then Madam, replied Rosilion, should those expressions which you are pleased infinitly beyond my me∣rit to make, work in me any of those effects you mention, I should think my self the most unworthy man that ever lived upon the earth: but Madam, I did not draw any such consequencies or hopes as you are pleased to say, from them; nay, on the contrary, your favour, so far from my expectation or hopes, was like the splendour of the Sun, which so dazled my eyes and my soul, that I knew not what to think, nor what to hope, nor what to say, so infinitly they were above all my thoughts, my hopes, and my deserts. As for the anger which I mention∣ed against you, it was only, because being so entirely yours, methought you did me wrong in not commanding me any thing in your service. Rosilion, replied the Princess, the value which I find to be in you, and the affection which you seem to have unto me, together with your discreet carriage of it, hath moved me to love you. Your unknown extraction does much trouble me; but I wish your valour may make you so known unto all, that it may be no reproach unto me when it is known that Rosanira loves you. Draw from hence all the most favourable conse∣quences you can to content you, for I will not forbid you one, only remember the victimes which ought to be offered in this sacrifice, as formerly I writ unto you. Madam (said Rosilion transported with joy) if I durst throw my self at your feet by way of gratitude, I would, as the most obliged man living: but I know such expressions, before so many witnesses, would displease you; only I say, that words being too weak to do it, I shall with extream desire wait for the honour of your commands, to testifie my obedience, that as there is none living more wor∣thy to be loved, or rather adored, then the fair Rosanira, nor any heart more de∣voted to adore her then Rosilions, so there is nothing so difficult which I would not think easie in your service. As for the unknown place of my birth which, and with reason does so much displease you, I beseech you be pleased, as soon as my wounds are healed, I may as a wandering Cavalier see out the place, or else die in the quest; or at least, till the unknown place of my birth at my return, be no reproach unto you or him. How? replied the Princess, do you ask if it will please me? Be assured Rosili∣on, if you do otherwise, you will extreamly disoblige me. This discourse was a cause, that as soon as Rosilion was recovered, which was not many dayes, he beseeched the King to give him leave, as a Cavalier errant, to go and seek adventures, according to the custome which the famous King Arthur established in great Brittain, that so he might better inable himself to do him ser∣vice: The King, though with much regret, consented, but upon condition he would return as soon as possible. I need not relate the discourse betwixt the Prin∣cess and Rosilion at his departure: for Madam, you may imagine it to be such, as lovers before a long separation and an uncertain return would use. But Rosinara, as soon almost as he was departed, received great consolation by the fame of ma∣ny noble exploits, which he atchieved in all countreys he came into; for his Acts and his Glory, was all the discourse at all assemblies of Ladies and Cava∣liers. Whilst Policander & the Princesses lived thus, the King of Picts groaning un∣der a great age, & after a long languishing in bed, did at last pay that tribute which is due unto nature from mortal men: and as if Fortune would have us shed our tears for several subjects at the same time, the grave was no sooner shut for him,
but it was opened for the King of the Santons, which indeed were greifs unto the Queen Argira, but with one consideration that was no small consolation unto her, thinking that surely now Policander would make good his promise: for by Fortune, a little before his mother died, so as being now both at liberty, it was likely he would give all satisfaction desireable. But O, how much mistaken are the hopes of love, especially when they are exspected from such men who look only after their present interests: heretofore, I do believe, that if it had been in the power of Policander to have disposed of himself, he would have satisfied his promise; but since the welfare of his affairs and dominions had constrained him to marry Clorisina, he did so forget all his relations to the kingdome of the Picts, that he did not so much as remember the very name of Argira. But now to leave him without excuse, and that there might be no faillure on her side, though since the assistance sent against him to the Prince Archimbant, there was no good cor∣respondency betwixt us, yet when Clorisina died, Argira sent to condole with him, and to acquaint him with the King of the Santons death, intimating a kind of Summons to satisfie his former promise: His answer was indeed full of civility and courtesie, but so empty of all love, as the least spark of such a flame did not ap∣pear in it, The Queen did believe (for she was apt to flatter her self in it) that perhaps he was unwilling to discover himself unto her Ambassadour which she had sent unto him, he being a person with whom he never had any familiarity; and so she did attribute that unto prudence which indeed was defect and want of affection, as af∣terwards she found when she sent this Letter secretly unto him. The Queen ARGIRAS Letter unto King POLICANDER. ALL promises are certainly due debts, and if so, remember what you ow unto her that now writes unto you: he is a very bad pay∣master that never payes what is due, especially when nothing but will is wanting to cancel the obligation; and there can be no∣thing to hinder me from that satisfaction which is my due, but only want of will in you. The gods are witnesses unto your promises, to them I appeal, and defore them I summon you to give me satisfaction. To which Letter, he returned this answer. King POLICANDERS Answer unto the Queen ARGIRA. PRomises that are made, and afterwards revoked by consent of parties, become null: And we ought not to esteem the rest of those who loved us, so little, as to disturb them in their graves, by the displeasure of seeing us in the possession of another. This consideration, together with the good and welfare of my Estates, makes me resolve to pass away the rest of my dayes in solitude, as most pleasing unto the gods to which you appeal. Then giving this Letter unto him who brought the other; Friend (said he unto him) assure the Queen, thy mistress, that I shall alwayes live her servant, but I cannot possibly think upon any second marriage. Grief for the losses which she and I have had should take our thoughts off any such things: The affection which
we do ow unto those children which the gods have given us, should wain our wills: and it were a kind of cruelty to add more brothers unto them, who would share with them in estate; beside, the age which she and I are of, is a sufficient priviledge unto us from any such treaties: Aged matrimony is out of season, and fit only for such as are green. and in the vigour of their age, not gray, and rea∣dy to drag into their graves. This answer and message, which was no better then a reproach, did make a deep wound in the soul of the Queen, who ever had en∣tertained a most zealous affection unto Policander: but this did blast all her hopes, and made good the old Proverb, that from great love proceeds great hatred. For she conceived so great a hatred of him, that she did abhorre the very name of Policander and all his: and as she did for his sake love the son which she had by him, better then the son of the King her husband, so now she changed her mind, and wished he had never been born, for she never looked upon him, but she thought she saw the ingratitude of his father imprinted in his face. Now did she heartily repent she ever put him in the place of him of whom he bore the name, thinking it a most just judgement of the gods upon her for that imposture. This regret went so near her heart, that she sent unto the Port of the Santons to en∣quire of the right Celiodantes: but she heard that he was long since carried away by certain Pirates, and his father also (for so was Verances esteemed) and that his mother was lost, at least never seen since in those parts. This news which took from her the foundation of her intended revenge, did more aggravate her dis∣pleasure, and blew it up to such a height, that she resolved to make Policander and her self a most notable example unto future ages, for all such as should run the same fortune. The supposed Celiodantes was then about the twentieth year of his age, and by the indulgent care of the King of Santons and Argira, accomplished with all the excellent qualities of a great Prince. He was every way so compleated both in parts of body and mind, that though he had not been the son of a King; yet was he worthy of a Monarchy. But as formerly she looked upon him with the eyes of love, as Policanders son, so now she lookt upon him with those of hatred and revenge: she was long in debate with her self, before she could resolve what way of revenge she should take; at last she made choise of the greatest that then presented it self before her eyes. The King of the Cenomanes had some variance with the King of the Turoni∣ans: and commonly arms being alwayes judges between such persons, and the sword the best Justice, both of them begun to Levy men, and list Souldiers and Commanders. The King of the Rhedonians and Condates, as allies unto the Ce∣nomances came presently to their aide. The King of Venetes and Darioriques, having married the sister of the Turonian King, came almost uncalled with all his forces to the assistance of his brother in law: so as these two Kingdomes were like to be the Theaters of many cruel and bloody Tragedies, when by the advice of these four Kings, Celiodantes was chosen to be the Arbitratour of their differ∣ences. Though his young experience in such weighty matters, might make him seem unfit for such an undertaking; yet the wisdome, Prudence and Justice had already wrought such incredible effects, in all his other actions, as got him so great a repute that by the a common consent, they referred themselves unto his arbitriment and doom, and suspending arms and actions of hostility for a time, they waited for his Judgement. This happened to be at the same time when the Queen Ar∣giras anger was hottest against Policander. As fortune was, the two Kings of the Armorique Cities were deadly enemies unto Policander, because when they were young, he assisted Suenon the good Duke against them, under the notion of a Knight errant, and had caused them to lose some certain terrritories, of which they had been long Possessours. On the other side, the King of the Cenomanes and the King of the Turonians, loved Policander no better then they, because his ministers had confiscated some boats upon the river Loyre, loadned with arms, be∣cause they had not a safe conduct. This offence though but small, yet was so fresh, that it sought for revenge. Argi∣ra thought then, that if Celiodantes did compose all matters between these Kings, he
might easily move them both against Policander, as well to satisfie his request us to be revenged for their particular injuries. All the difficulty was to find a good colour of warre for Celiodantes, which she could hardly do, for Policander, though a neighbour, had carried himself so free from any offence, as he took away all occasions of complaint: yet hoping that time might perhaps afford one, that which she recommended most unto the Prince her son, and to those whom she had imployed to councel him, was to make a peace betwixt these Kings, and to consider, that the best warre, was not so good as the worst peace: and that the fire of dissention being so near them, some sparks might fly into their own houses: briefly, she so instructed them, that a Peace was made, and so as gave full satisfaction to all parties, each in particular thinking the advantage to be on their side. This did oblige them so deeply unto Celiodantes, and got him so high a repute, that all of them desiring before they parted to make a firm alliance, they chose him to be their general in case they as∣sembled any forces together: An honour indeed so high, and unhop'd for, he being so young, as in all likelyhood he would have been the lust that should have been chosen for such a dignity. But see Madam, how fatally-unavoidable some things are, the Queen was seeking out for a colour of complaint against Policander, and could not find it, when by Fortune some of the officers of Celiodantes pursuing some pilfering robbers that fled into Policanders dominions, the people of the town and some soul∣diers to maintain their Priviledges, did not only receive these thieves, but killed a great number of his men, and took all prisoners, but such as saved themselves by flight. This news being brought unto the Queen, she thought it a very good pre∣tence, and such an offence as she sought after. And because she was sure, that if she made complaint unto Policander, he would give her satisfaction, therefore she said nothing, but sent some souldiers immediatly to sack the place, and use all manner of hostility: but in lieu of revenging the first injury, it did but beget a second; for those that went found such hot entertainment, that the Commanders hardly escaped with their lives after the loss of most of their men: Argira was sorry for their loss, but she was well contented to have such a colour to move those Kings to revenge the injury which she said Celiodantes had received whilst he was out of his Dominions. And in order to this, she presently dispatched such a messenger, as she thought most fit to aggravate this offence, and move those Kings unto anger: and certainly he did negotiate according to her desires, for he used all manner of arts and arguments to exasperate those Kings, and prompt them to revenge: all who remembring their particular injuries which they had receiv∣ed, and finding arms ready in their hands, they all agreed without more delay, to fall into the Dominions of King Policander, whom they found sleeping in a dull security all unarmed, and never dreaming of such an unexpected invasion. A long and drowsie peace had so lulled him asleep, that he had lost all his old souldiers, and he knew not where to get new ones: besides, the people were all so drowned in an universal tranquility, that they hardly knew what a sword was. It was an easie matter for Celiodantes, finding him in this condition, to foil him at every encounter. Now the Queens designe was (observe what a strange animosity she had a∣gainst Policander) either to make the son kill the father in this warre, or else the father to kill the son: and though they knew not themselves to be father and son, yet it was a great satisfaction unto her, to know that she was so revenged. Poli∣cander did what he could in this urgent extremity, and making a virtue of necessi∣ty, did muster together some Cavaliers, as well of his own Vassals as of his Al∣lies, and took the field with the Prince Arionthes his son. And though he knew it was full of danger to hazard a battel; yet not being able to endure to see what plunder and ravage our Army made in his Dominions, although he was the weak∣er, yet he resolved to venture it. I will passe over all the circumstances of the battle, and only tell you that Celiodantes got the day, and Arionthes the only son of Policander was killed, and that the father had much ado to save himself by
getting into Avarick with some reliques of his broken Army: but the inhabitants of that town and those that fled thither, were so affrighted that I believe, if our Army had pursued close, the gates had been opened unto them: But it was thought better to forrage the countrey for victuals, and so besiege that great City, which they foresaw would continue long, because it was fortified with great ditches, Towers, and Ramparts; and because of the great abundance of men, as well bur∣gers as strangers, which fled thither; but the main aim was the person of Poli∣cander, who against the opinion of his councel, would needs shut up himself in the Town, with a resolution to be buried in the ruines of his Kingdome. The Corps of Arionthes was found amongst the dead, and with all honour and civility sent unto his father, to shew that hatred did not go beyond life, nor that any revenge should be taken of the dead. Policander received the body of his son with a dry eye, and shewed so much constancy and magnanimity in the sad conjuncture of woes, that the virtue of this King began to melt the enraged heart of the Queen, and in some sort to pity his misfortune. Come, come, Argira (said she unto her self) canst thou find a heart to see him who once loved thee, to be so miserable? is the sight of thee so fatal as to bring ruine upon all those that look upon thee: Consider that he whose Kingdome thou wouldst now demolish, and whose life thou wouldst have, is the same person whom once thou didst love above all the world, and one who is the father of thy son: Is his fault without a∣ny excuse? and though it be, wilt thou remember one single displeasure, more then all the services which thou hast received from him. These considerations and many more such like, did so mollifie her heart, that she began to seek for a good pretence of letting him alone in Peace, and to with∣draw our Army out of his Dominions; but not daring to declare her mind unto any, lest she should offend the united Kings, she laid siege before Avarick: her design was when she consented to the siege, to make Policander her prisoner, and then after she had made him acknowledge his offence, to restore him unto his Crown of Kingdomes. But things fell out farre otherwise; for a while after, Ro∣silion, who was following his adventures in Germany and the Macromands, he was advertised by common fame how these Kings had invaded the King of the Boyers, and how he was blockt up in the City of Avarick, which could not long hold out. When he first heard this news he could not believe it, because he knew Polican∣der to be a King of great equity and Justice, and would not give any of his neigh∣bours the least occasion of warre. Yet not to slight it, he wended his course to∣wards the Boyers and Ambaries: And by fortune, as he was going out of the Countrey of the Lepontes, he met a messenger which the Princess Rosanira had sent unto him, who had wandered several dayes all over the Alps, after the fame of his exploits: he met with him then in this place; and because Rosilion han not changed his arms, he knew him by the Lion that he wore upon his shield, with some strange words which he had taken for his devise, which was a cause, that ma∣ny called him the Knight of the Lion. Sir (said he unto him, and presented the Letters from Rosanira) I have been in quest of you above this moneth, to tell you that you are extremely desired by her that writ this Letter, and wish'd for by all the Boyers, as the only remedy and hopes they have in all their misfortunes, Rosilion, gave no answer, but opened the Letter, and found these words. The Princess ROSANIRAS Letter unto ROSILION. YOur victories are great, but not so great as our misfortunes: our Ar∣my is defeated, all the countrey undone, Arionthes dead, and Poli∣cander and Rosanira lockt up in their lost town: Iudge you whether this be not a large field in which Rosilion may imploy his Arms and his Courage.
I shall not need (Madam) to relate the astonishment and sorrows of Rosilion, when he had read the Letter, and heard all the particulars from the mouth of the Messenger. But so it was, that taking the way towards the Boyens, and making all the haste his Horse would give him leave, he came into the Territories of King Policander, where he found many Cavaliers and Officers already assembled, and wanted nothing but a General whom they would obey; for the principal of the Boyens and Ambares, some were slain with the Prince Arionhes, and others were shut up with Policander in Avaricke; so as these who wanted no good will but on∣ly a General to conduct them, received Rosilion with a common consent, as well for the love they knew the King bore unto him, as for the brave exploits which Fame had reported of him. And though the number of these Cavaliers and Soul∣diers were not above five hundred Horse, and three thousand Foot, and though our Army consisted of above eight thousand Horse, and forty thousand Foot, yet Rosilion trusting in the justice of Policanders cause, and in the good Fortune which alwaies accompanied him, he was not at all dismayed, but came up unto us with flying colours; which did so encourage his own men, and so affright ours, as if the very name of Rosilion were enough to defeat us: His smal piece of an Army at every Quarter where he lodged, like a tumbling Snow-ball, grew bigger; for the whole Country flocked unto him; and as if they were already dividing our spoils, they made themselves assured of Victory: And so it hapned, that by the just judge∣ment of the Gods, we were defeated: I may well say, by the just judgement of God; for otherwise, it was not likely so small a handful of men could ever have got the victory of such an Army as ours, which had so many Kings, and so many Grandees to command it, and so many old experienced Souldiers accustomed to Combats and Battles: But the truth was, our Army was routed, yet not totally, but so, as we were constrained to raise the Siege, and let Rosilion enter into the Town with all his men. The caresses of the King, the kind aspect of Rosanira, and the joys of all the people when he came into Avaricke, cannot be expressed. But Policander knowing that it was requisite to pursue an Army that fled, he went out of Avaricke in all haste, with all those whom he thought fit to be added unto the Troops of Rosilion, whom he kissed, and made him Lieutenant General of all his Armies, and commanding all his Subjects by Edict, to obey him. This ho∣nour setting an edge upon the courage of the generous Rosilion, and whetting his desires of doing somthing worthy of the Reputation he had got, he pursued our shattered Army, and four days after overtook us at a little River, which is called Clein, where he forced our Army to face about, and give him Battel; in which we were almost totally defeated, with the death of the two Kings of the Turonians and Cenomanes, and to our greatest grief, with the taking of young Celiodantes prisoner. But because Rosilion was resolved to drive the Nail to the head, he pur∣sued on after our squandred Army, and sent Celiodantes with a good guard unto Policander and the Princess Rosanira. You may easily imagine (Madam) that the Kings joy was not a little, when he saw not only his Kingdoms recovered, but also so many Kings defeated, and the chief of all, his Prisoner: It was such, as not knowing which way to gratifie Ro∣silion enough, he resolved to make him after his decease, possessor of those King∣doms which he had regained, by the marriage of Rosanira; and therefore he spe∣cified as much unto him by Letter to this effect.
King POLICANDERS Letter unto ROSILION. WHat Gift can equal the merits of him that has set the Crown upon my Head, but the Crown it self? Yes, I will give him more then that; For besides all my Dominions, I will give him that which is more dear unto me, my daughter Rosanira: and therefore Rosilion, she is at this hour yours, and after my decease, so is the Kingdoms of the Boyens, of the Ambarres, and of the Bitturiges. Haste therefore to vanquish, for these are the Try∣umphs which I prepare for you, to congratulate your Victories. Now see Rosilion and Rosanira almost at the very top of their good Fortune: for this Cavalier did love this Princess with such excess of passion, that he would not have lived but in hopes that Policander would bestow her upon him: And she whose affection was not inferiour unto his, though she did more dissemble it, ho∣ping that Rosilion would become such a one, as she might take for her husband without dishonour, she seeing him now so high in the Kings esteem, it could not chuse but be a most singular contentment unto her. But now (Madam) you shall hear a very pleasant encounter: Whilst Rosilion after the Receipt of this Letter, was continuing his Victories, chasing his enemies as far as the Armorique Cities, and crowning himself with Palms and Lawrels, Celiodantes a Prisoner in Avaricke, is treated by King Policander with so much civility, that going abroad where he plea∣sed upon his Parole, he was permitted to see the Princess Rosanira, whose Beauty and Vertue did presently convert a Prisoner of War into a Prisoner of Love: For this Princess had so many inevitable attracts, as it was almost impossible for any eye to see, and not adore her. When Celiodantes was taken Prisoner, many others were taken with him; and amongst the rest, an old Cavalier called Orontes, who had been his Gover∣nour ever since he left his Nurse. This man was very prudent and wise, and so affectionate unto the service of Celiodantes, that his interest took the deepest im∣pressions in his heart: On the other side, this young Prince knowing how affecti∣onate he ever was unto him, did love and esteem him very much, as he was obliged. Some days passed before Celiodantes would acquaint Orontes with his passion, thinking this Love to be in such an unseasonable time, as it could not chuse but have a bad destiny: This silence caused the Prince to fret at heart, and his soul to swell so with vexatious thoughts, that his body began to fall away every day more and more; which Orontes observing, and thinking that this sadness proceeded from his detension, he feared it would become prejudicial to his health: so as one day when he was alone in his chamber, he used this discourse unto him. If those Sir who govern Kingdoms and Empires had any priviledge to be ex∣empted from the blows of Fortune more then other men, I should say you had reason to be troubled and grieved at the condition wherein you are: But we see the highest hills most subject to the storms and winds, and not so serene as the val∣leys and plains; so as the highest Soveraignties are exposed to the tempests of For∣tune, more then the humble condition of subjects, what reason then have you to think you should be exempted? And why should you complain of a general Law, that is commong to all great ones? Your high Birth and Quality which elevates you above the rank of other men, may well excuse you from petty misfortunes, and trivial calamities, which they are subject unto, as too inferiour and unworthy
for Grandees; but great afflictions, and such as are insupportable to the com∣mon sort of men, are proper only for Princes, and such great Kings as you are; and as you would blame those who faint in courage, and shrink under the burthen of little misfortunes, esteeming them as effeminate and pusillaminous, so believe it Sir, Those that see you with such a sad dejected countenance, and bending at the first blow that Fortune gives you, what will they think of you? The fidelity which I owe unto my King, and the affection which I have unto the person of Ce∣liodantes, does oblige me Sir, in duty and love, most humbly to beseech you, and conjure you, even by the memory of the King your Father, to rouse up your magnanimity and courage, and to look all dangers and misfortunes bravely in the face: If you tell me the blow is great, I will answer, that you ought to arm your self the better against it: For the courage of a man cannot be vanquished but by its own fault, nor can any accident of Fortune stagger him, if his own will do not betray him, and consent unto his defeat: Courage Sir, and rouse up your Prince∣ly soul; you have before your eyes an example of unconquered vertue, as oft as you turn them upon King Policander; Did any of his defeats ever make him shrink? Did he droop and drown himself in sorrows, when he lost his only Son? And did his courage fail when his Kingdoms were taken from him? No, no Sir, but on the contrary, he armed himself against all the malice of Fortune, by such a generous vertue, that at last he overcame her, and (if it may be so said) did force her to take his part. Orontes would have proceeded on, if the young Prince had not interrupted him: Father (said he, for so he called him) your pains was very ill bestowed, and both my courage and memory were very bad, if the loss of one Battel, part of my Dominions, friends, and my liberty, should make me forget those sapient docu∣ments, and wise instructions which I received from you; I would never have ta∣ken any Arms into my hands, if I had not known that all these accidents might fall upon me: And since miseries foreseen do less hurt, assure your self that all those you speak of, do make no such great impressions in me: I did, I must confess, resent the change of my Fortune, as being sensible, not faint-hearted, or pusilla∣nimous. The sorrows you see in my face and actions, more then ordinary, O my dear Orontes, are caused by no wounds that any do know of, but by others, which none sees but my self: Upon this he groaned out a deep sigh, and after a silent pause, he began again. Yes, yes Father, no eyes but my own sees the wounds whereof I complain; and though I see them incurable, yet such is my confidence in Orontes, that I will discover them unto him, yet without any other hopes, but only, that he will help me to condole my misfortune. Upon this he made a long relation of the extream affection which he bore un∣to the Princess Rosanira, the little hopes he had in the good will of that Princess, or in the King her Father, since he had been the cause of so much sorrow unto them, especially by the death of Ariontes: Now judge (continued he) whether I have not reason to droop, and whether it were not better for me to end my mi∣serable days presently, then to groan away a life which will be so wretched and di∣sastrous? I know you will tell me, that Love is but folly and madness and that a generous spirit may be ashamed to be surmounted by it; but Father, whether it be wisdom or folly, commendable or shameful, if it be folly, I must confess my self a fool; and if a generous spirit may be ashamed of it, I would not be thought ge∣nerous; for the fatal truth is, that I do love Rosanira, and so, that I must not love my self, unless I love her: Doubtless you wili advise me to resist this passion, but alas, all such advice is given unto a deaf man, and to one that has not a will to be cured. The sage Orontes gave Celiodantes a long and patient hearing without any in∣terruption, knowing very well that a sick soul finds ease in emptying it self unto some faithful friend; But when the Prince had done, he began thus. I am very glad Sir, you have told me your sorrows proceed from Love, es∣pecially since your passion is grounded upon such a worthy subject as the Princess Rosanira; for till now, I thought you had drooped under the burthen of your
misfortunes, and that your injured patience had fainted at your disasters: But now I find your disease to be so easily cured, as I wish you may continue a little longer in it: for I hope this Love will be a means to re-invest you in your former estate and splendour. Do you think Sir, that the King Policander has forgot those extremities unto which your Arms reduc'd him? and out of which, heaven has most miraculously rescued him? Believe it Sir, though he do see himself a Con∣querour, yet he knows that all his Victories and Tryumphs may turn into the same condition wherein he was, and that this is but an interval, and a gleam of Fortune: Do you think he knows not how momentary and uncertain they are? Yes, yes, and questionless so prudent a Prince will be glad to make his peace with you now he may, and not defer it till perhaps he may be forced to take up such terms as shall please you. Assure your self Sir, he is more wise then to let such an opportunity slip. I dare be hold to say, this peace will be concluded, and nothing can hinder it but your own courage: This Love of yours to the Princess Rosanira will remove all difficulties which can be proposed: Courage therefore Sir, and command me to negotiate the business, for I dare assure you upon my life, to give you all desired contentment. This was the answer of Orontes, who infused such courage into this young Prince, that though his spirits were a little dulled with his hopeless passion, yet upon better consideration, he saw some probability in the designe, the conduct whereof he referred wholly unto the prudent Orontes, giving him commission to treat and conclude what peace he pleased, so Rosanira might be his. Orontes, who knew he could not do more acceptable service to his Master, nor greater advantage to the State, then to negotiate the matter, he employed the whole strength of his Wit and Prudence in it: And having observed the several Interests of all those about Policander, he perceived that two of the prime offi∣cers about the King, who had most particular access to his person, and bore a great sway in affairs, were very ill satisfied with the Kings design, in giving his daugh∣ter unto Rosilion, a man unknown, or at best, but of an ignominious extraction; and, as they said, they blushed to think a man bought and sold for money, should ever be their Lord and King: That it was a vile blemish to the names of Boyens, Ambarres, and Bituriges, to make choise of a Slave for their Soveraign, and that he should command over so many Provinces, and such Provinces as abound∣ed in great and noble Cavaliers, whose valours and courages were not inferiour to this enfranchised slave; for he was no better, though his acts were very notable. But that which moved these two Grandees most to dislike this match, was a parti∣cular Interest which touched them more nearly; for each of them had a Son, and they had a squint eye at the same happiness after the death of Policander, which they saw Rosilion was like to enjoy. And though both of them had the same de∣signe, and were in the same hopes, and certainly had been deadly enemies unto each other, if Rosilion had not been, yet they united both against him, and con∣tracted friendship so far, as to ruine their common enemy, and doubtless to ruine one another after if they could. The wise Orontes heard of all these passages, he thought either one or both of these men might be made fit instruments for his designe; He addressed himself therefore unto them, he made the overture of Peace; and so advantagious were his propositions to Policander, that they embraced them, conceiving there was no better way to put Rosilion by his pretensions then this: And though the marriage of Celiodantes did blast all the hopes of their own children, yet they liked better to fall into the hands of the King of Picts, who would be obliged unto them, then into the hands of Rosilion, whose fortune hung all at the point of his Sword. Both of them therefore receiving this overture of peace very willingly, and desi∣ring to promote it, they consulted together to speak unto the King, but severally, to the end he might not think it a compact against Rosilion: And they carried it so prudently, and used so much artifice, that Policander after some kind of difficulty, by reason of his promise unto Rosilion, and after their proposition of giving Ce∣phise in lieu of Rosanira, he consented unto it, knowing very well, that the mar∣riage betwixt Celiodantes and Rosanira, was the only Cement of this peace, which
he apprehended to be so advantageous to him. Sir, said they unto him, We be∣seech you consider, in what condition you were not long since, and in what by the great mercy of God, you are in now: your prudence bids you not to lose that good fortune which presents it self, for a few slight considerations. Never was any King of the Boyers so great and redoubtable as you may be, if you will consent unto this match, adding thereby unto your own crown, besides so many Alliances which the King Celiodantes will bring you, two great kingdomes which he enjoyes: All which advantages you can never pretend unto, if you give the Princess unto Rosilion, who though a man indeed of great merit, yet has he no e∣state but his sword; besides Sir, the Princes and Lords who are Subjects unto your Crown, will stomach more then they make appear, to be by your will subjected unto one who they saw within these few years a slave, & sold by a Merchant. Assure your self Sir, if you will please to honour them so far as to ask their opinions, they will with bonefires, and all expressions of joy, approve of this last proposition. And as for the services which Rosilion hath done unto your Crown, will he not be recompenced to the full if he be made King of the Lemovices? a state so full of Cavaliers and great men, that there is not a Prince in all Gaul, but might  be contented with it. But say Sir this recompence should not be made; ye  he be so faithful and affectionate to your service as you believe him, he will not look upon his own interests, but will be the first to advise you unto this peace upon these propositions: but if his ambition have so blinded his eyes as he will not see the good of your state, Prudence Sir, will bid you look to your self: for his ob∣ligations unto you are such, as though he gave you his life, yet were he still your debtour. They added many other advantageous arguments to further their designes, and used such Rhetorique as moved the King to follow their counsels, and he gave them commission to conclude this Peace and Alliance: And at the same time, left Rosilion seeing himself disappointed of his hopes, and having the command of the Army, should do him any ill service, he dispatched a messenger to give him many thanks and commendations▪ & to command him at the same time to come presently unto him, and to refer the charge of the Army unto the Marshal of the Boyers, a man whose fidelity Policander could not suspect. These things could not be carried so close, but Rosanira was some way or other advertised of them, and she received the news very sadly: For she loved Rosilion, and harboured at her heart a secret hatred against Celiodantes, because of her bro∣thers death, whereof she said him to be the Authour; so as not knowing any bet∣ter remedy, she resolved to acquaint Rosilion with all possible speed, to the end he might break off this pernicious designe, before it was fully concluded. The messenger whom she sent unto him made such extraordinary haste, that he delivered Rosaniras Letter unto Rosilion two dayes before Policanders came unto him: So as if he had been so minded as to do the King any ill service, he might easily have done it; but any such designs were so farre from his thoughts, that on the contrary he imployed his time in making more haste to take a Town that was besieged, and to find out some handsome excuse for quitting the Army, and ta∣king that journey which the Princess commanded: And indeed he took such pains, that the very same day the Kings messenger came to the Army, he forced the Town by a general assault; where he shewed so much valour and Prudence, that if he had continued but a moneth longer in the Army, there had been no need of making any other peace, but that of conquest, for there was only a few small Towns, and some petty Islands which remained in the power of the ene∣my. As soon as ever he received the Kings command, he obeyed it, and leaving be∣hind him very good orders for the Army, he came in all possible post haste unto him, and gave him an accompt of his charge and state of the Army, and how near he was to the obtaining of a perfect and entire victory: Policander thanked him, made him as welcome as possibly he could, and told him that when he had a little refreshed himself after his journey, he would communicate unto him the cause of his sending for him. So without saying any more, he let him go to his
lodging: Rosilion who was not ignorant of the Kings intention, had much ado to conceal his knowledge, yet fearing to offend the Princess, he constrained himself, and so disguised his looks that the King was ignorant of his knowing any thing; but impatiently longing to see Rosanira, as well because he had been long deprived of that happiness, as to understand more at large what she had writ unto him in a few words; therefore he went unto her, whom he found in the same mind he left her; but extremely afflicted at the resolution of the King her father, to bestow her upon King Celiodantes, upon a Treaty of peace: but because many eyes were upon her, and lest passion should make appear the good correspondeney betwixt them, she told him in a low voice, that if he would meet her after supper in the place where they were wont to walk, they would talk together without so many witnesses of their actions: upon this she retired, leaving Rosilion extremely plea∣sed to see that she had no hand in her fathers alteration. This appointed hour, was long a coming, according to the impatiency of Rosi∣lion, which made him be upon the place before the Princess, who at last came as privately as she could: As soon as they met, Rosilion (said she unto him) this testimony of my good will, which I give unto you, and whatsoever I shall now most truly say, must not make you judge any thing in my disadvantage; but only let it thus farre possess you, that I will do for you all that my duty will permit me: I know that the affection which you bear unto me will never let you desire any more, and therefore I make no difficulty to tell you, that I am extremely grieved to see the King so forgetful of his promise to you, and that he should hope for good of an uncertain peace, before the certain services that he hath and daily doth receive from you: For the truth is, he has changed his minde: I must be the vi∣ctime, and be given unto Celiodantes, although he be all smeared with my bro∣thers blood: Judge Rosilion what joyes I am like to have in living, lying, and eat∣ing my meat with him, that hath already wallowed in the blood of my brother, and but for you, had done the like to my father and us all: and yet this is he with whom this tyrannical reason of state does ordain me to spend my miserable dayes, and so I must, unless your fortune, which hitherto never found any thing impos∣sible, do not shew it self more strong then the Kings resolution. O gods! O heavens! O earth! replied Rosilion (and interrupted her) will then the King fal∣sifie his word? You may, answered Rosanira, be most certainly assured of it. Has the King, replied he, so soon forgot my services? since he can forget wrongs, so soon, answered she, do you wonder he should forget benefits? Will the King be revenged this way, said he, for all the violencies, rapines, and plunders, that have been committed in his kingdome? is this Policander, that great Prince, whose Fame and Glory reaches all over the earth, whose goodness is so much admired, whose valour so much feared, and whose justice was never tainted with any re∣proach? The very same, answered the Princess, but it becomes not me to cen∣sure his actions; only to be silent, to suffer, and say he is my father: Rosilion, then pawsed a while, and then replied thus. The respect Madam, which hinders you from speaking upon this subject, does indeed argue your wisdome, but the faintness wherewith you speak does argue but flender affection: O my Cavalier, said the Princess, no more of this discourse, unless you would have me think your affection unto me not such as I would have it: for (and let this rule be an answer unto all you can desire of me) I shall never believe you love me, if you request any thing from me that contradicts my duty. You see Rosilion that I do love you: I have told you as much, and do tell you so again; nay, I will ever render you all possible demonstrations of it, yet it cannot enter into my thoughts, but that you had rather die a hundred deaths, then wish me unto any thing that is against my duty, or to entertain the least thought of such a thing, for I ought to obey my father, and so I will as long as life remains in me. Will you then marry Celio∣dantes? (said Rosilion with a deep sigh) yes, answered she, not only Celiodantes, but also the veryest barbarian nay the worst of men, if my father command me. What good then, replied he, will all that affection do me which you are pleased to express? my affection unto you (replied she) proceeds from my own good will and inclination, but unto any other, from command only, and lest I should trans∣gress
my duty. O gods! (cryed he out) must I lose you upon this consideration? I hope, replied Rosanira, my good intentions will not be recompensed with so great a punishment: but if by the unsearchable judgment of the gods, it happen that our Destiny be such, you ought to shew as much courage upon this occasion, as you have in all dangers which hitherto presented themselves unto you. What? (said Rosilion) see you anothers, and live? Ah Rosanira, you measure my affe∣ction by a wrong rule, if you think my courage able to permit this: Rosilion can do any thing but that, when this comes in question, all respects are lost: courage and constancy faint, and all manner of considerations are cast away, I cannot live without this hope; it pleased the King your father to plant it in me, you your self approved of it; and when my angry fate will displant it, the same blow displants my life. But Madam, when you alledge it your duty to indute this dignity with patience, do you not give it a wrong name? May it not more justly be called. Ty∣rannical then reasonable? How can you quit one you love, for one whom reason and nature commands you to hate? Must the Princess Rosanira be the ransome of Celiodantes, who has done her so many mortal displeasures? Does duty com∣mand this so extremely unreasonable? Is it not rather unnatural tyranny that tri∣umphs over your spirit? Cast of this bondage Madam, break the cords which thus enslaves your reason, and would so unjustly captivate it: All the world will disapprove of the Kings designe, and commend your generosity: these Arms which have upheld this tottering kingdome, and this sword which hath conquered so many Kings, I do offer at your feet, to maintain the justice of your cause, against all men living; and to prove that the King, in thus submitting you to his enemy is most unjust, and that it is a most ignominious act, unworthy of the King of Boyers. Rosilion added unto their expressions many others, and would have continued longer, if the Princess had not interrupted him. Cease, cease, Rosilion (said she) and assure your self that I am so resolved upon it, as I will be observant unto my fathers commands as long as I live upon earth; the injustice of another, is no al∣lowance unto me, to fail on my part: and I had rather have future ages say that Rosanirus fault was in too much obedience then in neglect of duty: And Rosilion let me tell you, that you are obliged as a free Cavalier, to maintain me in this re∣sollution, and wave your own interest in me; and therefore I advise you to address your self unto the King my father, put him in mind of all your services, of his promises, and of the injustice in his designe: All that I can do for you is, that if he will refer me to my own will, I will give you all the satisfaction you can de∣sire, if he will not, I will make as much resistance, as in duty I can; but if all will not do, then all I can promise you is, to condole your misfortune and my own, and to take my leave of you & all contentment in this life: After this, because it was late, and she fearing to stay any longer with him, she retired, leaving him so in∣tangled with a multitude of confused and unsatisfied thoughts, that the sun did both set and rise before he had suffered any sleep to seiz upon his eyes. As soon as he had heard the King was up, and to be spoken withall, he went unto him; but as formerly such visits were wont to be with abundance of content∣ment, so now quite contrary; not knowing with that countenance to come be∣fore him, since his present fortune had put his eyes and all his actions into mourn∣ing. At last he thought it prudence, and for several considerations resolved, to treat with the King as formerly he was wont to do, because if happily he could dis∣swade him from his pernitious designe, he should not then give him any suspition of that intelligence between the Princess and him: he presented himself therefore before the King, in a face quite different from his heart; and began to relate at large the state of the Army; particularizing the places which he had forced those which rendred themselves; the battels he had won, the combats he had sought, and the encounters he had met withall: and briefly how little remained to do, before he made an absolute conquest of all his enemies; he also set before him, yet without either reproach or vanity, all the good services which he had done him, and in such a manner, as the King began to stagger in his resolution. But
Policander knowing his own good nature, and foreseeing that it would trouble him to displease a person, from whom he had received so much good service, he commanded them two, who advised him unto this peace, to be present when Rosi∣lion spoke unto him, and to fortifie his resolution by their reasons: As soon there∣fore as this Cavalier came unto him he sent for them two, and dismissed all the rest that were in the room. As long as Rosilions discourse lasted, the King did not interrupt him; but as soon as he had done, he began in the first place to thank and applaud him for all his brave exploits, assuring him that they should never be forgotten, and in the end, concluded thus: But Rosilion (said he) because every just war ought to have peace for its main end, we conceive it best to make it now when we may do it upon our own terms, and not to stay till some revolution force us to make it upon harder conditions. Truth is Sir, answered Rosilion, a great and a wise Prince as you are, ought to limit his ambition and his victories unto that end: but give me leave to tell you, that to conclude it now is something dishonourable unto you, since victo∣ry within these few dayes will give you the same peace upon farre more glorious terms; for there will not be any ere long that dare own the name of an enemy or abide the fury of your Arms. Then the elder of the two Councellours seeing the King to look upon him, as if he required his assistance; Sir (said he) your cou∣rage and zeal to the Grandure of the King moves you to speak thus: but whilst you were in the Army, gaining Battels, forcing Towns, conquering Provinces, and adding victory unto victory, you are not sensible of those sufferings which this poor estate indures, and which the King foresees, will increase the unsupportable necessities of the people by subsidies and exactions, which they are forced to pay towards the continuation and maintainance of the warre, which will not only fleece but flea them, and drive them into despair. Pray tell me, what content∣ment and advantage will it be unto the King, to gain the kingdomes of others by the loss and ruine of his own? Can he take any delight to see the miseries, hunger and extream necessities of his people, whilst he is killing and massacring those of his Neighbour Kings? The shortest fits of fury, they say are alwayes best: and believe it Rosilion, the same may be said of warre, the longest whereof are alwayes the worst and most destructive. These wise and pious considerations have moved the King by the advice of his Councel to give peace not only to his enemies, but also to his people, who beg it upon their bare knees, and with tears in their eyes. And because he thinks you, as well he may, to be one of his best servants, he therefore sent for you to give your advice also, assuring himself that you would approve of it, and rejoyce, as all those ought to do who love him, and have any care of his and his kingdomes welfare. The King hath considered the state where∣in he was when the Kings, his neighbours, invaded him, and that he shall not per∣haps have the sword and fortune of Rosilion alwayes by his side to help him in the like accidents: so as now in the height of his good fortune, he is pleased to heark∣en unto that counsel with the best of his friends do give him, which is, to conclude a peace in time, when he may do it to his best advantage. In order thereunto he hath thought upon such expedients as may make this peace most honourable, most profitable, and most lasting; and the only way is, by a marriage between the King Celiodantes and the Princess Rosanira. For by this means, so many great king∣domes will become but one Monarchy, and will for ever perpetuate the Kings Name and Glory. Hitherto Rosilion was patient, but when he heard of giving Rosanira unto Celio∣dantes, he roused up his courage and voice▪ What Sir? (said he) will you suffer these Traytours to give you such pernitious counsel, and fortifie themselves with your name and authority? Traytours Sir, I dare say they are, since seeing your enemies at the last gasp, having no strength nor ability to oppose your Arms, would not only ravish out of your hands this honourable victory, but would make you a slave unto those you have in your prisons: Good Sir, will you suffer them to sell you, and your Crown also? and will you approve and confirm the sale? Do you not plainly see that those who give you this counsel, do sell your honour, your liberty, and your kingdome? For what is it else if you give the Princess Ro∣sanira
unto Celiodantes, but to make him King of the Boyers, Ambaries, and Le∣movices? you pay very dear for the ransome of that captive Prince, if you buy it at the rate of Crown and Liberty. Was ever such a fine device to get king∣domes as this? will losing of battels, and being taken prisoner win Crowns? Tell me, Grand Sirs of the Councel; If the Kings fortune had been to have fallen in∣to the hands of his enemies, and lost all his Towns and Dominions, what harder conditions would they have imposed upon him, then these which your cantulous wisdomes do think so good and profitable for him? Doubtless he could have gi∣ven no more unto his Conquerour, then his Dominions, Life, and Person: yet you are so brasen fac'd (my passionate zeal Sir to your Majesties honour forces me to this language) as to advise the King when he got the advantage over his enemies, and has them prisoners, to pay their ransomes, and become a slave him∣self? will you Sir suffer future ages to record it in perpetual memory, that Poli∣cander King of the Boyers did buy his peace with his Neighbor, by giving away his Daughter, his Scepter, and his Liberty? Nay rather then so, why did not these wicked Counsellours advise you at the beginning of the war, to go with a chain a∣bout your neck, and give it and your kingdome unto your enemies? you then would have done as much as all your victories have, and have spared the lives of many a Cavalier, and the ruine of many a Town. He would have proceed further, when the King knowing him to be partly in the right, yet willing to deceive himself, and not being able to endure these re∣monstrances; Rosilion (said he unto him) there is none about me who have such intentions as you mention, and as for the Counsel which they gave me concerning peace, if you call them Traytours for it, you must put me into the same number with them, and all the rest of my people. When I did communicate this affair unto you, it was not to require your advice, because it is a thing already resolved upon; but only because I took you for one of my best friends and servants, I thought you would share with me in my contentment, and in the welfare of the people. And in this general joy, I have not forgotten the services which I have received from you, but have disposed my daughter unto you: so of four king∣domes, which it hath pleased supream Fate to submit unto my Crown, you shall have two of them, and the other two are designed for the King of the Picts and Santons: Thus will I unite six kingdomes together, which by the good corres∣pondency betwixt Celiodantes and you will become but one. Rosilion hearing the King speak of giving his daughter unto him, though he heard before that he would give Rosanira unto Celiodantes, yet he perswaded himself that he had mis∣understood him (Sir answered he) the fovours which I have received from you are such as transcend all capacities of requital; and yet Sir it seems you will add unto my infinite obligations, unless I do misapprehend you: for you say you will honour me so far as to give your daughter unto me; and yet methought you said before, that for a conclusion of the peace you would give her unto Celiodantes. Most true (replied Policander) for I will give the one unto you, and the other un∣to him: to you my daughter Cephise as I promised, and to him, my daughter Ro∣sanira: Sir (said Rosilion and interrupted) you did promise your daughter unto me, but Cephise is not so: she is not indeed, replied the King, but only in name, and yet I loue her no less then if she were: Sir replied Rosilion, you named Rosa∣nira in your Letter unto me, I cannot tell (answered the King, whether the Secre∣tary mistook, but I am sure my intention was her I now mention unto you: Ah Sir, (said Rosilion, and looked the King in the face) will you do me so much wrong as to prefer Celiodantes before me? Celiodantes, who hath ruin'd your kingdomes, and reeks still with the blood of your son, and who will certainly make you King without a kingdome? before me I say, who has set the Crown upon your head, revenged the death of your son by the death of so many Kings and have brought into your prison the plunderer of your kingdomes and murderer of Ariontes? O Sir, can your heart ever let your eye see this Celiodantes sit upon that throne where that Prince should have raigned, had not the bloody Prince prevented him? Certainly the blood of that Prince will perpetually ring in your eares, and tell you that this marriage is unjust, and a horrour both to gods and men.
The King not being able to endure these reproaches: Peace Rosilion (said he unto him) no more of this discourse; for Celiodantes shall marry Rosanira, and be you contented with this marriage which I have proposed unto you. Upon this Policander in a discontented manner would have retired into another chamber. But Rosilion extreamly offended at these last words, did run before him, as if he were almost out of himself. Sir, (said he) I have no designs but what aims at your glo∣ry, and I would not have so great and so just a King be blamed for favouring me above my merits; and therefore I do declare unto you, that I will not receive this honour which you offer unto me, as being conscious of my own unworthiness, but will think my self sufficiently recompenced for all the services I have done you, by the gift of this sword which I wear by my side, at the point of which hangs your Kingdoms and Empires: But Celiodantes may assure himself of this, that none shall ever marry the Princess Rosanira, but he that gives her the head of Rosilion. These words of rapture, uttered with so little discretion, did so exasperate the al∣ready incensed spirit of the King, that he looked upon him with an enraged eye; Ungrateful and impudent fellow (said he unto him) Darest thou speak thus unto me? Hast thou already forgot the price I paid for thee, when I bought thee as a slave? Hence, out of my sight, and see me no more, unless thou wilt feel the fury of my justly incensed dsspleasure. These words were pronounced in so loud a tone, that all those in the anti∣chamber heard them, and ran in so fast, that Rosilion had not time to answer, but gnashing kis teeth, and stamping upon the ground, he was constrained to retire unto his lodging, where by the Kings command he was presently arrested by a number of Souldiers, who seized upon all the doors and advenues. As you may see Flies upon the first frosty day, vanish away from that place which swarmed with them while it was hot; so upon the first noise of Rosilions disgrace, all those importunate guests which swarmed about him with so many of∣fers of service, were all fled, and not one of them to be seen in the place, where one would have thought they came for the love of him. Oh the miserable con∣dition of those who go upon the legs of tottering Fortune: for in prosperity they are even smothered with the importunities of such horse-flies, as in time of chill adversity, are all vanished, and scorn those that before obliged them. Rosilion begun presently to resent this change: but the falling off of these hollow hearted friends, was not it which troubled him; it was the Kings reproach only which stung him at the heart; When he saw himself alone in his chamber, and had shut the door, he began to walk up and down a great pace, not uttering a word, nor so much as knowing what he did, or where he was: At last making a stop in the midst of the room; Ungrateful and impudent fellow! said he) hast thou already forgot the price I paid for thee, when I bought thee as a slave? Oh good Gods! continued he, Is it possible these words should come from the mouth of Policander, whose life I have saved, and whose Crown I have kept upon his head? Yet utter them he did, and most certainly these ears did hear them; it was to me, me my self he spoke them: Then being silent for a while, he began again, Oh most cruel Law, which will not let me pull out that Vipers tongue which spits those venomous words; words not worthy of a man that bears the Title of a King? Remember how I bought thee as a Slave! Remember (said he unto me) the price I paid for thee, when I bought thee as a Slave. Well, when all reckon∣ings are cast up, I have more reason to upbraid thee: for though I were a slave, it was Fortunes fault, not mine, nor ought I to be accused for it: but who must be blamed for that servitude out of which I released thee, and into which thy drow∣sie spirit and faint heart did bring thee? As thou dost bid me remember the price which thou didst pay for me, which was only a little money; so I bid thee also re∣member the price which I paid for thee: Thou knowest it was my blood, of which I was too prodigal for the recovery of thy safety. Upon this calling to memory all the signal actions which he had done for Policander: And for all these (said he) I must be retorted with a remember what I paid for thee. Oh ye most just Gods, who do abominate all ungrateful men, how comes it to pass you do not punish this cursed ingratitude? And thou Arm, who has so couragiously defended the
honour of this unthankful man, why dost thou not revenge this intollerable af∣front? Why dost thou not as much for me, as thou hast for all those that ask'd justice from thee in their oppressions? Oh thou unlucky Sword that has been so victoriously keen in the cause of thy enemies, and so dull and blunt in his that wears thee? Did I win so many Battels, and conquer so many enemies, only to lose all my contentment and happiness? Oh most fatal Destiny! which would have made me Conquerour, if I had not conquered! Oh the injustice of heaven, why did I not die in the midst of my victories, that it might have saved me a dying by the hand of those I have conquered. These thoughts, together with the advice which the Guards about his Lodg∣ing gave him, did put him into such a fury, that he was almost quite out of his wits; and all that Merisin could do, was, to get him to Bed, without contra∣dicting any thing he said, lest it should augment his rage: There he remained two nights and two days without either sleep or meat; at last, a Fever seized upon him, and so high, that none did wonder he should talk so rovingly, and far from any purpose, because they thought his disease to be the cause of it: But a few days after, when his Fever had left him, and yet he continued to talk in the same fran∣tique manner, it was plainly perceived that he had lost his understanding, and was turned stark mad: which extreamly grieved all those that were admirers of his Vertue, especially the King Policander, who when his anger was a little over, did know that his own loss was the greatest: yet his earnest desire of peace, made him resent his loss with less regret. In the mean time, the Peace was concluded, as Policander wished, and as Ce∣liodantes desired; who thought all things advantagious, so Rasanira might be his wise: And the Treaty of it was so closely carried, that the first news which the Queen Argira heard of it, was, when Orontes told us who Celiodantes had sent to that purpose. Every one at first did think by her countenance that she appro∣ved of it; for she seemed to be so joyful and contented, that one might read her approbation of what Orontes said unto her, in her eyes. Madam (said he unto her) As heretofore the loss of the King did draw many a sad tear from your eyes, so now you may turn all your sorrows into joys, at the great happiness which he and your Dominions are like to receive: For that little rub of misfortune (little may it well be called in comparison of that great happiness unto which it is con∣verted) has made him a great King, and gotten Policander to be his friend: Nay more, it has gotten him two Crowns, that of the Ambarres, and that of the Boyens, by the marriage of the Princess Rosanira, the Inheretrix of those two great Kingdoms: And this News (Madam) I am come to bring you from the King your Sno, whom now you may call the greatest Monarch of all Gaul. The Queen was so surprized at this News, that she stayed a long time before she an∣swered; whereat Orontes much wondred: and thinking perhaps that she did not rightly understand him, he repeated it over again, relating the contentment of both the Kings, and the great joys of the people upon the publication of this Peace and Alliance: Unto which the Queen returned no answer; but after a deep sigh, this; Oh Sybil Melusine! How true are all thy Prophesies? After this, she presently dismissed Orontes, and a while after, went to Bed. None heard what Orontes had said unto her, but every one judged the News to be far different from what they thought at first: yet none was so much astonish∣ed as Orontes; for he thinking he had brought the most welcome news the Queen could receive, he knew not what to think at her cold entertainment of it. But somtimes he feared that in the excess of his joys he had mistaken himself, and told her one thing for another. On the other side, the Queen did nothing but cry, and sigh in her Bed, not uttering a word that any could understand, but only from time to time saying, Oh Sybil Melusine! and so lamented away all the night, until break of day, and then she fell asleep. The reason why this Treaty was carried on so closely, was, because Policander knew what hatred Argira bore unto him: And though Celiodantes was igno∣rant of the cause, yet he knew it was so by her own animosity, in raising wars a∣gainst
Policander, almost without any colour of reason. So as when it was pro∣posed not to acquaint the Queen his mother with it, till all was concluded, he was willing thereunto, left she should give any stop unto that marriage which he so passionately desired; thinking that when the peace and alliance was concluded betwixt them, then she knew not how to break it of; nor could she much as op∣pose it, without shewing her malice too palpably: Yet they foresaw that she would extreamly wonder at the News, and would be very backward to this peace, and therefore it was, that Celiodantes gave commission unto Orontes, not only to cause this to be published and observed in all his Provinces, and amongst his Al∣lies, but also to receive those places which Policanders Forces held, and to restore them unto those Kings to whom they of right belonged: Also to release all pri∣soners on both sides, according to the Letters which Policander writ unto the Ge∣neral and Officers of his Army. So as the next morning Orontes went again un∣to the Queen to communicate unto her all those Commissions which he had, and to beseech her he might put them in execution: But she slept on, so as it was ve∣ry late before he could be admitted unto any speech with her: And when her Lady of Honour told her that he desired to speak with her, Sweetheart (said she unto her) I am but in a very ill condition to hear of any business; but since his affairs are so pressing, bid him do as the King his master has commanded him, and so turned to the other side. As soon as Orontes had gotten this permission, he assembled together all the Magistrates, and Principal Cavaliers, to whom he imparted the news of this peace, and commanded them to publish and observe it in all the Provinces of the King∣dom: And after he had taken in all those places which Policanders men detained, he went unto the General of the Boyens and Ambarres Army, which was upon the Armorique Coast, where he was still continuing his last victories; whom he ac∣quainted with Policanders will, and who had already received the same intelligence by one of his principal Officers. Peace was presently proclaimed, and places and prisoners generally rendred and released; and so welcome was the news to all sides, that even those who had the advantage, were glad of it, so weary were all of war, and desirous of peace. In the mean time Orontes advertised the King his master, how Argira received the news of Peace, and of his marriage, at which he did not wonder, no more then Policander; both being of opinion, that it was an effect of the ill will which she bore unto the King of the Boyens; but they made no great reckoning of it, assuring themselves, that time would salve the sore, and she be as well contented as either of them. The consummation of the marriage was deferred only till the return of Oron∣tes, and those whom Policander had sent to see the Treaty performed on both sides. And one morning as Policander was going to the Temple, according to his custom, a poor fellow seeing him pass by, and not suffered by the Guards to come near him, King Policander (cryed he out in a loud voice) Command that I may tell you my name, and so, as none may hear me. The King casting his eyes up∣on him, and seeing him to be an old ragged fellow, did think him to be one that would beg: and being ever of a charitable inclination, he commanded his Almo∣ner to give him somthing: Upon this the poor man cryed louder, No, no King, I come not to beg, though perhaps I have need enough, but only to tell you my name. Those who heard him, thought him to be some mad man, and therefore would have repulsed him; but the King looking better upon him, did remember that he had formerly seen him, and commanded to let him come nearer. The poor man kneeling down upon the ground, and in a better posture then his habit promised; Sir (said he in so low a voice that none could hear but the King) I am Veronces. Policander hearing that name, presently remembred both by his voice and gesture, that it was the same Veronces who served him when he courted Ar∣gira, and whom he left with her: so as being astonished to see him so unexpect∣edly, after a long opinion of his death, he could not chuse but cast his arms a∣bout his neck, and embrace him, as affectionately as if he had been his son: Eve∣ry one wondered at these extraordinary caresses; but the King called for one of
the Officers in his chamber, and commanded him to treat that man very kindly, to put good clothes upon his back, and money in his purse, and at night to con∣duct him to his chamber. Veronces was so over-joyed to see the King acknowledge him, that he could not speak a word more, but cryed for joy. At night the Officer conducted him into the Kings chamber; who after some fresh caresses, asked him where he had been lost so long? Sir, answered he, the question which you are pleased to ask, is of too great importance to be answered before so much company, and therefore I beseech you let it be in private. Policander then taking him by the hand, and thinking it to be some business which concerned the Queen Argira, he carried him into his Closet; where Ve∣ronces seeing himself alone with the King, he began thus. I have wondred (Sir, a thousand times, when I was in the Abyss of my mise∣ry, why the Gods should keep me so long alive; thinking that if the afflictions of men were equally divided, I have suffered above my share, and more then any o∣ther: upon this consideration, I must needs confess, I did somtimes begin to mur∣mure against the wise Government of the Gods, and accuse them of injustice, for having so little care of humanes. But now when I see their all-wise providence in preserving me, to do you a service of such importance, I must needs say they are all-wisdom and goodness, in keeping me alive, and conducting me opportunely unto this place, where I do not think any but my self can shew you the greatest errour that ever could happen in your Family. Be pleased therefore to know Sir, that since you commanded me to stay with the Princess Argira, who was presently after Queen of the Santons, and since by the death of the King her Father, was Queen also of the Picts, I may say my life hath been nothing but a continual chain of miseries and disasters; one no soon∣er ended but another immediately began; and I think Fortune would never have been tyred with tormenting me, had it not been to do you service: But I think this favour so great, that I think all my past torments and miserable time well em∣ployed, since I have so much life left as to serve my master. Imagine Sir, that in seeing Veronces, you see a messenger of God sent unto you, or rather, a soul that has been retained at least these twenty years in hell, has at last got leave to pass over the River Styx, purposely to advise you of a fault which would have eclipsed all your glory, made all your contentments bitter, and have sunk you in sorrows: For the truth is Sir, I have been prisoner these twenty years, without any hopes of liberty, until this general Peace, by which I receive the favour of heaven, and the light of the Sun, which has been so long a stranger to my eyes. Enjoying therefore this benefit, I came to understand that you are giving the Princess Rosanira unto the King Celiodantes in marriage: As soon as I heard this news, I made all the haste I could unto you, to speak with you before the marri∣age be consummated: and if I be come time enough I do thank the infinite good∣ness of the Gods; and if too late, I protest that what I intended to tell you, shall die with me, and I shall think it the greatest misfortune that ever did befall me: I beseech the Gods after such a disaster, not to let me live a minute longer, since life will be a most intolerable torment unto me. Upon this Veronces was silent, and Policander laid his hand upon his shoulder, Friend (said he unto him) thy affection is so well known unto me, that thy ex∣pressions of it may be spared: Come tell me freely what this secret is which you think so necessary to my contentment? For the truth is, I do intend to give my daughter unto Celiodantes, but it is yet proceeded no further then promises, and I stay only till the peace be published, and received by all those that have any In∣terest therein. Oh ye great and good Gods! be ye for ever blessed (cryed out Veronces) as well for your goodness, as for your profound judgements. Then turning towards the King, Sir (said he unto him) I shall acquaint you with a thing that will even ravish you with wonder, and will divert you from this marriage. What can divert me (replyed Policander) from a designe so much conducing to the grandeur of my Crown, and the welfare of my people? Sir (replyed Veron∣ces) This marriage is against all Laws, both Divine and Humane: For, is not the Princess Rosanira your Daughter? Yes certainly (answered Policander.) And
the King Celiodantes (replied Verances) is your Son. My Son? (said the King in a great amazemement, and started back) yes Sir, answered Verances, Celiodan∣tes is your Son; and be pleased to hear the whole truth of the mattter, which none can tell you but the Queen Argira and my self: Then being silent a while he went on. The Princess with whom you commanded me to stay, was presently after your delivered of a son, and so secretly, that none but her nurse and my self, who she was pleased to trust, did know of it: A few moneths after, she was married to the King of the Santons, by whom the same year she had another son called Ce∣liodantes; but because she married only by reason of state, and still preserved her affection entirely for you, she could not endure to see Celiodantes continually un∣der her eye, and be deprived of that better beloved son which she had by you; and much less that he whom she loved not should be King of two great kingdomes, whilst the other had no estate: and a hundred times has she made her complaints of it unto me, and as oft did I indeavour to comfort her: at the last she pitched upon a most strange resolution: she pretended that a certain Sybil had foretold her, that if the little Celiodantes were seen by any other but his Nurse, and those that were to wait upon him, until a certain time, he would most infal∣libly die immediately after. By this device she sent him away, and commanded me at the same time to change him for the other which she had by you, so as ever since he has been received by all for Celiodantes. Now she made choise of me for a witness of this change, to the end, as she said, that if she chanced to die, I might let you understand how great her affection was unto you; and blessed be the gods, I have now, after so many years of misery made good my promise un∣to her. King Policander hearing this discourse, O Verances, said he unto him, dost thou assure me that Celiodantes is my son? and that the Queen Argiras love unto me, moved her to put him in place of the true Inheritour? Assure your self Sir, an∣swered Verances, upon that fidelity which I own unto you that I do not lie in one word. Policander then made a silent pause, and afterwards clapped his hands together, certainly (said he) this is the cause of Argiras sad resentment of the news, when Orontes told her of the marriage between Celiodantes and Rosanira, for ever since she has kept her bed. Doubtless Sir, said Verances, that if she know of such a marriage betwixt them two, it will grieve her to the very soul; and I do judge of her by my self, for I protest, I think that had I come too late to prevent it, it would have cost me my life. But Sir, there is no reason you should suffer one that has loved you so well, to continue in such intollerable sorrow; I beseech you therefore out of your own goodness, and conjure you by the love you once bore unto her, to remedy it, and to quit your self of those obligations wherein you stand bound unto her. Friend (said the King then) now do I begin to be∣lieve that heaven does love me, and will let me live the rest of my dayes in con∣tentment, since It hath so unexpectedly given me a son in lieu of him I lost. I am resolved therefore not only presently to put the Queen Argira out of her pain, but also give her such testimonies of my esteem, as she shall never again repent of her affection unto me. After some other discourse upon this subject, the King commanded him to re∣tire, and above all to be secret: then he went unto Celiodantes, whom he accosted with such new and extraordinary Carresses as did amaze him, and afterwards told him, that he had a most earnest desire that the Queen Argira his mother, should be at the marriage, and therefore wished him to continue the means of getting her to come, or if she would not, he was resolved to go unto her, although she was displeased with him, for he was fully resolved upon a reconciliation with her, and never to suffer the consummation of the marriage but in her presence. Celi∣odantes, who next his marriage, desired nothing more then to satisfie Policander, he told him after much other discourse, that he would go himself and invite her to come, assuring himself she would not deny him that favour: and Policander, approving his design, he began to take order for his departure, and made such
haste, as within three dayes after. he was ready to set forward, when Orontes re∣turned and assured him, that the Queen Argira would be with them within two dayes, and that he came before her purposely to acquaint them. Both the Kings were extreamly joyed at this news, and Celiodantes the same hour set forward to meet her. Policander the mean time enquiring of Orontes, how it came to pass, her hu∣mour was so much changed from what it whas when he writ, did understand, that after she had kept her bed a long while, she sent one evening for him, and faintly asked him upon what business the King her Son had sent him thither. Madam, answered he, when I came first I began to tell you my business, but you were so indisposed then, that you could not hear me out; I understand, replied she, that you come about the Publication of the peace, and to cause Publique joyes to be made for his marriage. But in that there was no need of any addresses unto me, for you had commission ample enough for it without my approbation. Ma∣dam, answered Orontes, 'tis most true, I had such commission, but it was with a limitation, to act in it according unto your pleasure, and I am to beseech you from Policander and your Son, you would be pleased to take so much pains as to be at the Celebration of the marriage. Did not you tell me (said she and inter∣rupted) that the marriage was already past? Pardon me, Madam, I most hum∣bly beseech you, said he, I might perhaps tell you that the marriage and the Ar∣ticles of peace were concluded upon; but the consummation of the marriage was not to be, before your health would permit you to be there, or till you excu∣sed your self. O Orontes, (cryed she out with a joyful countenance) how I have been tor∣mented, since your first coming, by not understanding the businesse of your voy∣age: for you must know that when I understood the King my Son made so small accompt of me, it did so grieve me to the soul, that my life has been odious unto me. O Madam, replied Orontes, entertain no such opinion, I beseech you, but believe, though he used all the expedition he could in concluding the peace with∣out imparting it unto you, because he thought it so necessary and and advantage∣ous to make himself King of two great kingdomes, that he thought you would blame him if he used any delay: yet for the marriage, assure your self Madam, he was not so hasty, since the retardment of it could not be of such importance; and the King Policander himself desires you should be present at it. The Queen upon this, so changed her countenance, as if she had not been the same; and took order for her departure the next morning. Policander supposed that the Queen had prudently concealed the cause of her displeasure from Orontes, and he longed extremely to hear the relation of Veran∣ces confirmed from her own mouth. The Queen being arived, and received with all the honours that Policander could do unto her, and to the general joyes of all, except Rosanira, who by rea∣son of her affection unto Rosilion, could not in heart approve of this marriage with Celiodantes, The next morning, King Policander went to visit her, and af∣ter all Ceremonies of civility and complement, she desited to speak with him on∣ly in the presence of the Princess Rosanira and the King her Son; so as every one quitting the room but they, the Queen began in this manner. I am sure, Policander, when first you resented the fury of my Sons Arms, and of those united with him, by my contrivance, to your ruine, you were then not a little astonished. Do you remember what affection I shewed unto you, when (as a Knight errant) you came into the Court of the King my Father? if you do, you could not expect a lesse revenge upon your ingratitude, from my wrong'd affecti∣on; and when you have heard me out, you will confesse that love and hatred had never so strong an influence upon any, as it had upon the Soul of Argira. But you Madam (said she unto the Princess) I beseech you wave your ill opinion of me, until you know by experience, what power these two passions of love and hatred have over a Soul that loves well. And you Son (said she unto Celiodan∣tes) stay until the end of my discourse, and then I assure my self you will com∣mend my fault, and think your self beholding unto me.
Then beginning her discourse at the arival of Policander in the Court of the King of Picts, she related all his Courtship of her, and the promises which she received from him, not concealing any particulars of their affection: how closly she carried her being with child, and her delivery: The sorrows she resented when she heard he had married Clorisena contrary to his promise; how she was forced by her fathers command to marry the King of the Santons, by whom she had a Son. She represented her grief to see this Son alwayes with her, and to be de∣prived of the other: her resolution was to change them, her contrivances about it, her curiosity to know the Fortunes of these children from the Sibil Mesuline, whose answer she still kept in writing: how she put the true Celiodantes into the hands of Verances, and how extremely grieved she was, when she thought them both lost. The King Policander, who knew all these things from Verances, he was not so much astonished as the rest: But Celiodantes, who saw himself deprived of Rosa∣nira, and of two kingdomes, of which he thought to be Legitimate Lord, he was strangely confounded; yet it was no small contentment unto him, to see he had found such a father as Policander, whose virtue and valour was held in high esteem amongst all the Princes of his time. And to hide his discontents, when the King his father opened his arms to embrace him, he kneeled down and said, Sir, although I have this day lost that which I loved most dear, yet the Princess Rosanira will give me leave to rejoyce that I have found such a Father as the great King Poli∣cander. Son, said he, wives, if one be lost another may be found, so cannot fathers, e∣specially such as I shall be unto you: And for my part, I think this day the happy∣est I ever lived, since in it I have found a Treasure which I esteem more then my Life; and since now I find, that never was any Cavalier more obliged to a Lady, then Policander is unto the Queen Argira your mother: Then raising him up, and kissing him, he suffered him to kisse Rosanira as his sister, who made it appear by her eyes, that she loved him much better as a Brother, then as a Hus∣band. In the mean while, King Policander addressing himself unto the Queen Argi∣ra; I beseech you Madam (said he unto her) Did you never since hear of the true Celiodantes nor of Verances? Never, answered she, though I have made all the enquiry that possibly I could; and yet I am in some assured hopes he is not lost, by reason of the Prediction which I received from the Sybil Melusine: For it is not probable she should be a lyer only in this; before you say any more Ma∣dam, said the King, I would have you see one, who perhaps may tell you some news of him: then going himself to the door, he brought in Verances, and ta∣king him by the hand, presented him to the Queen: Madam, said he unto her, do you know this man? As soon as she cast her eye upon him, although he was grown very old and lean, yet she cried out, Ah Ʋerances, where is the charge I committed into your hands? Ʋerances kneeling down upon the ground, with tears in his eyes, Madam, said he unto her, force and violence hath disabled me from giving you a good accompt: O ye gods, cryed she, and joyned her hands toge∣ther, is my Son lost? and is the Sybil a lyar? Tell me Ʋerances, said she, and tell me truly, is he dead? didst thou see him murdered before thy face? No Madam, answered he; but if you please to hear the Fortune of the most miserable man alive, I will briefly tell you mine, by which you may be better satisfied in your Questions: Then Policander beseeching her to hear him, he began thus. I was no sooner come to the place, where by your command I had changed this young Prince for his brother, but I changed also his name, and charged his Nurse to call him by no other then Kinicson, chusing that name rather then any other, because of the stone which you hung about his neck, whereon was ingraved the figure of a Lion, with these words, Kinick, Knicson; conceiving that if ever he were lost, or came within compass of your hearing this name, you would know him by it. We went then, according to your command, unto the Port of the Santons, where taking a little retired house, we passed away five years, every one thinking Kinicson to be my son, and his Nurse my wife. When he was about that
age, one unlucky day, as he was playing amongst other children by the Sea side, he was carried away by some Pirats who roved about that coast: I was there also, but asleep upon the ground, but did not awaken, till after these Ravishers had got my master into their hands, and me also: yet amidst this great disaster, it was some comfort unto me to be with him, that I might in some sort serve him; but alas, Fortune did presently after rob me of this consolation also: for we were no sooner upon the open Sea, but another company of Pirats fell upon those that took us, and after a long dispute became masters of us; and it was my chance to be wound∣ed. These last Pirats, thinking that I had been one of the conquered Pirats, they put me into chains, and treated me with all the cruelties that such persons ordina∣rily use to be: These men carried us into one of the Armorique Isles, where they were wont to make their retreat, and where Merchant of the Continent used to come and buy such prizes of them, as they used to take upon that coast. A few dayes after, these Merchants came thither, and the child was bought, as well for his handsomness, as upon the promises that I made unto them, to pay double what he cost, as soon as I could convey a Letter unto his friends; for I was extremely desirous to get him out of the clutches of these wretched sort of men. When a thing, Madam, is decreed by heaven, it is impossible to be avoided. An honest Merchant bought him, and presently paid, what they asked, both for him and me. I told you that I received a wound in the Combate, and this wound for want of right dressing, did so gangrene, that the Merchant durst not take me with him, left I should dy by the way; but gave me some money to maintain me, with a promise to return unto me within fifteen dayes. And because the Pirats had taken the stone which you had put about the neck of little Kinicson, I beseech∣ed the Merchant to buy it also, and give it him: The honest Merchant did so, and before my face put it about the neck of the child; at which I was exceedingly contented, thinking that though I died, yet this mark might one day bring him to your knowledge. Now Madam, the fifteen dayes were past. and fifteen more, yet no Merchant came; and a while after, I heard he was dead: when I was recovered of my wound, I required a release, because my ransome had been paid; but they who made pro∣fit their god, did but laugh at me, and the chief of them answered, that the gods had made them Lords of all they could get, and owners of all that fell into their hands: so as clogging me with abundance of chains, I remained there in abun∣dance of misery, until this last war, when the Boyers and Ambaries, after they had forced many Towns towards the Armorique coast, did by fortune come into this Islle, which they plundered, and with many others, brought me into their camp; where though I was a prisoner, yet it was some satisfaction to be prisoner unto reasonable men, and to see those who used me so cruelly, to be prisoners as well as my self. Heaven at last, shewed some pity upon me, and after a twenty years imprisonment, did set me at liberty, by the benefit of the general peace, when all prisoners were released. The first thing I did was to go unto the Temple, and render thanks unto the great Tautates, and next to beseech him, that if Kinicson were alive, to make him known unto you, that I might pass away the remainder of my old age in some rest. Having recorded in my memory, the name and place of the Merchant, I went thither as fast as I could; and all I could learn was, that the estate of the Mer∣chant, after his death, was divided amongst his children, and those that had Ki∣nicson, did send him up the river Loyre amongst other Merchandize, and sold him either in Gaul about Lyons, or beyond: And being desirous to make a more ex∣act search, I understood that all this Merchants children were slain in this last war: So I went as fast as I could unto the Port of the Santons to enquire of the Nurse whether she heard any news; but they told me, that as soon as she heard of the loss of her son, and her husband, she died for grief: And indeed, Madam, I re∣solved upon the same, not knowing what I had else to do; but the news that I heard there presently after, prolonged my life: For I understood that Policander,
having taken the King your son prisoner, he resolved to conclude a peace, and for a confirmation of it, to marry the Princess Rosanira unto him. Then did I think the Gods had preserved me alive purposely to prevent that incestuous marriage; and though I knew, Madam, that you were alive, and that you knew the truth of things better then I, yet I thought some consideration or other might keep you from declaring it. I made therefore all the haste that possibly I could, to acquaint Policander with it, lest so great a disaster should happen in the Family of so good and so just a King; and lest that curse which would infallibly ensue upon such in∣cestuous alliance, should fall upon his head. Upon this, he fell down upon his knees with tears in his eyes; It grieves me Madam to the very soul (said he) that I am not able to restore unto you that charge which you committed unto me: But cursed Fate! without any fault in me, did deprive me of that contentment. The queen after she had looked a while upon him, and saw his eyes swim in tears; Ʋerances (said she unto him) all that I can gather from your discourse, is, that my son is lost, and that there is no hopes ever to see him again. And Ʋe∣rances making no reply, but sadly shaking his shoulders, Oh Gods! said she, must the Sybil be a Liar only unto me? Here is thy prediction, oh Melusine (said she, and pulled a paper out of her pocket) written with thy own hand; I must to my grief upbraid thee with it, and tell the world thou art an Impostor, a Deceiver, and not to be believed. The King then taking the paper, and reading it he did admire it, that the Sybil should so foresee all that hapned unto her son, and the incestuous marriage which was intended: But when he read these words, In Forrests, where shall be Prince Godomar, The other shall his senses there recover: Then Fate shall kind be both to one and other. Oh Madam (cryed he out) Do not condemn this great Sybil. Then taking Verances by the hand; Verances (said he) in what place do they say the childe was sold? Alas Sir (answered he) they know nothing, but that he was sent up the Ri∣ver Loyre with other Merchandise. Well (replyed the King) what age might the childe be then? About six years old, answered Verances. Was he black or fair, said the King? Sir (said Verances) he was the fairest childe that ever eye beheld: fair hair, and curled; full eyes, and lively; visage somthing oval, complexion fresh and delicate, big for his age, and full made; in all proportions so handsom, and in every action so becoming, as it was impossible to see, and not to love him. What was his name? said the King. His right name (answered Verances) was Celiodantes, but lest he should be known. I gave him the name of Kinicson, by reason of a stone which had that name writ about it, and which the Queen did put about his neck. Oh ye infinite Gods! cryed out Policander, lifting up his hands and eyes to heaven, open our eyes, that we may find out the truth which hath been so obscurely hid from our eyes. Then turning towards the Queen, Madam (said he unto her) as you have gi∣ven me one son, so I will give you another, unless I be the most mistaken man a∣live: For tell me Daughter (said he unto the Princess Rosanira) do you remember the name which Rosilion had when the Merchants presented him unto me! Sir, (answered she, almost out of her self) his name was as you may see writ upon this stone, which formerly he gave me, when he waited upon the Princess my Sister, and me; for (said she) having nothing else to give me for a New-years gift, when they gathered the Misleto of the New year, he gave me this; then pulling it out of her breast, I have ever since kept it (said she) because he told me it was very fortunate. The King no sooner saw it, but he knew it to be the very same which he himself had long worn, and afterwards gave it unto the Queen Argira; who also as soon as she cast her eye upon it, she cryed out, and said, Oh happy mark
of my past contentments, I do demand of thee him unto whom I gave thee, whom if thou dost restore unto me, I will call the most fortunate stone that ever was: then she kissed it, and laid it unto her breast. But all this was nothing to the joys of Verances when he saw it, for truly he seemed to be absolutely out of his wits. The Princess who durst not shew her joys, for fear of giving too much knowledge of her affection unto Rosilion, she waited with extream impatience, until he was fully known, that she might be a sharer in their demonstrations of joy. In the mean time, the King taking the stone, and reading the inscription about the Lyon, he found it to be Kinic, Ki∣nicson, which signifies, a King, the son of a King. Here is the name (said he) which he had when the Merchants sold him unto me as a slave, for I do very well remember it, and that afterwards when he killed the Lion which was ready to de∣vour me, I changed it into Rosilion; as well in memory of that generous act, as because he was my daughters Cavalier, and from Rosanira and the Lion, I formed the name Rosilion. When he was first brought unto me, he was about the same age which Verances mentions; his face was according to his description; and all circum∣stances makes me believe Rosilion to be the same whom the Queen lost. And yet I conceive that a business of this importance ought not to be divulged, until some more certain testimonies appear; for this stone might be taken from him, and put upon another▪ and that name might be given unto him by chance, especially see∣ing him so handsome, as he might well be thought worthy of that name, which indeed does signifie the Son of a King; and therefore before any notice be taken, I would have it made out by more infallible circumstances and proofs. Sir (said Verances presently,) he loved me so well, as I am confident that as soon as he hears my name, he will know me. If I do see him (said the Queen) I can know him by a most undoubted mark; for I remember that when I put him into the hands of Verances, I was in some fears of losing him, and therefore to know him, would have given him a mark with a hot Iron; and looking which was the most convenient place, I found upon his hand a Rose so perfect, that I thought it mark sufficient. Oh Madam (said the Princess presently) assure your self then that Rosilion is your son, for I have seen a Rose upon his left hand so perfectly drawn by Nature, as is beyond all imitation of Art. Oh Sir, said the Queen, and clapped her hands together, what can you desire more? Is it possible to give more certain assurances? The name, the age, the stone, the merchants, and the mark upon his hand, makes it most apparent that he is the very same; and above all, the prediction of the Sybil Melusine, puts in out of all doubt, considering the condi∣tion wherein he is. Madam (said Verances) I most humbly beseech you, give me leave to go unto him, and speak with him, before he hear any thing of this news, and I shall give you a most perfect account. Upon this he went presently to the Lodging of Rosi∣lion, whose malady was not at that time in its height of Fury, but only a distracti∣on of the understanding, which made him conceit himself somtimes to be in the Army, and commanding, as if he were the General; otherwhiles he fancied that he saw Rosanira, and spoke unto her; somtimes he would upbraid the King with breach of promise, and such conceptions: And when he fell into these humours, he would talk so temperately, and urge such solid reasons and arguments, that if he did not somtimes rove presently from one thing unto another, one would not have judged him to be out of his senses. When Verances came unto him, he was walking up and down the chamber, and said not a word; but as soon as he was told that Rosanira had sent to visit him, he left walking, and received him whom they presented unto him, so very kindly, and gave such sweet language, that none would have believed him distempered: and this was no novelty; for when at any time they would have him to do any thing, if they told him that Rosanira would have it so, he presently obeyed, with so much willingness and alacrity, as if his mind had not been disordered. Verances seeing him in this condition, could not refrain from tears: but before he made himself known unto him, Sir (said he) the Princess Rosanira has sent me to know how you do, and to see whether the Rose which you have upon your left
hand be worn out. Worn out (said he presently) No, no, neither the Rose in my hand, nor the Rosanira in my heart will ever wear out. She hopes the same (re∣plyed Verances) but because some had told her the contrary, she sent me to see, and report the truth unto her. Then he held out his hand unto him; see Cavalier (said he) how Nature knowing I was decreed by destiny unto Rosanira, has given me a Rose, which I will keep as long as life. Poor Verances knowing him very well by that mark, Ah Kinicson (said he unto him) is it possible you should see Verances and not know him? Upon this he started back two or three paces, and after he had looked a while upon him, Are you Verances (said he all amazed) the husband of Lerina? (that was the name of his Nurse, whom he thought to be his mother.) I am the very same (answered he) that was taken with you upon the Sea side by Pyrats, and who never since enjoyed one minute of contentment till I came hither. To see the good nature of Rosilion, he ran unto him with open arms, embraced and kissed him, and for very joy, tears came into his eyes: after∣wards, as if he were in his perfect senses, he enquired of his and Lerinas fortune, and why he had been so long absent from him. Verances then acquainted him with his long imprisonment, and how he was set at liberty by the general Peace: At the word Peace he began to sigh, and to be very extravagant in discourse of the War which he had enterprized against Celiodantes, with whom he would joyn Battel, and would have Verances there; and roved so far from any purpose, that Verances not being able to conceal his sorrow and tears; Sir, said he unto him, what message will you please to send unto the Princess Rosanira? Tell her (said he) that I will ere long send her Celiodantes a Prisoner; but I do not intend the second victory shall be so disadvantagious unto me as the first. Then Verances would have gone away: But dear Verances (said he unto him) take heed you be not again taken by Pyrats; if you go by Land, I will be your convoy with half my Army; but be sure you return presently unto me again, if you love me. Verances with abundance of tears returned to the King and Queen, and report∣ed what he had heard, and how Rosilion remembred the name of Lerinda and Ke∣nicson; of which the Queen was so glad, that she held up her hands, thanked heaven, and wept for joy: At last (after much rejoycing) they all resolved not to publish their toys, until they saw the rest of the Sybils prediction verified; and in order thereunto, to carry Rosilion into Forrests: And also it was then concluded upon, that if he were cured, Rosanira should be his wife, and Cephise be given unto Celiodantes. Verances then addressing himself unto King Policander, Sir, said he unto him, will you be pleased to give you most faithful servant leave to put you in memory of that which my duty obligeth me unto? Most freely (answered the King.) Be pleased to know then, O most great King, that you can never hope for any blessing from heaven nor earth, as long as you continue in that injustice, wherein out of some reason of State you have lived several years. Have I done any inju∣stice? said the King, and was a little moved. Yes Sir (replyed Verances) and the greatest that ever was done: for is it not the height of injustice to break all your promises made unto so good and so wise a Queen as this great Princess in? Do you not remember how I am a witness of all those solemn Oaths, and Gods which you mocked, at the making of those promises? Assure your self Sir, that all the misfortunes which hitherto you have received, are but fore-runners of greater, unless you do satisfie all those solemn promises which you made in the presence of the Gods. The King upon this was in a strange confusion. I do confess Verances, said he unto him, thou sayest most truly; and to make all due satisfaction, if the Queen will please to forgive, and forget the offence which I have committed a∣gainst her, which as thou sayest, was committed only out of reason of State, I will this very hour take her for my legitimate Wife, and Queen of the Boyens and Ambarres; which she accepted of with much joy. Thus the grave old man made an end of relating the cause of the Queen Ar∣giras coming into that Country, and beseeched the Nymph to keep it, secret, until it pleased the Gods to restore Rosilion unto his health. Unto which she answered, that she thought it very expedient so to do, although she had very confident hopes
of his cure: for (said she) besides the predictions of the Sybil, which hitherto have proved all true, the coming hither of him who must cure him, which was but the day before Rosilion came, seems as if the Gods had sent him purposely for it: For the Prince Godomar, the second son of the Burgundian King, came unto this Town but yesterday, and was conducted hither by a most unexpected piece of Fortune, Madam (said Argira) you do put me into great hopes and joys; but I beseech you, how do you conceive it should be him whom the Sybil means? I do conceive (said she) upon good reason; for before your coming, we were re∣solved that he should drive a sacred Nail for the cure of a Shepherd that is trou∣bled with the same disease; and this will be a means to keep it the more secret: for under pretense of the Shepherd, both may be done as you desire. And I do think the Gods did send Prince Godomar hither, purposely for it; because it being necessary that he who drives the Nail, should be Soveraign Magistrate; I cannot think of any more fit for it then he, whose quality is above the common rank. How Madam? said the Queen Argira, Is then the young Prince of the Burgun∣dians here? He is Madam (answered the Nymph) and I cannot conceive any danger in acquainting him who you are; to the end, that if he should come to know it afterwards, he should not be offended at our diffendence in him. With all my heart (said the queen) I will therefore send unto him, with a tender of my service, and acquaint him with it. Madam (said Adamas unto the queen) I con∣ceive it very necessary for many reasons, that all haste be made in the cure of the Prince Rosilion, especially because it is impossible but the business will be divulged if it be retarded, since there are many in your Train who know of it: And since the sacrifice is already resolved upon, and prepared for the Shepherd Adrastes, the deferring of it would give occasion unto many to seek out for the cause of it, and perhaps find it out. But besides all these considerations, the important affairs now in agitation, and which the Nymph will impart unto you, do require a speedy course to be taken in it; so as Madam without more delay, let it be effected to morrow. Father (said the queen) you motion a thing which suits much with my approbation, though I durst not trouble the Nymph so far as to move it; but since her service requires it so, I beseech you let us joyn our petitions together, for a speedy conclusion of it. Adamas then turning towards the Nymph, Madam (said he unto her) if you please, I shall see the sacrifice in readiness, and shall acquaint the high Priest, and Prince Godomar, and therefore I beseech you give this satisfaction unto the queen. The Nymph consented; and sending for Galathea, she retired, and left the queen Argira to as much rest as her troubled soul would give her leave to take. The next morning the high Priest, accompanied with many Flamins, and the most part of the Colledge of Augustalians, presented himself before the Nymph, to let her understand what was necessary to be done in the publique action which she intended; and amongst other things, that she should chuse a Soveraign Ma∣gistrate, unto whom she should refer the Soveraign Power, as long as the business was in hand: For (said he) this Ceremony did come from Numa Pompilius; and at that time Rome was under the command of Kings, and it was they who were wont to drive the Nail: But after Kings, were abolished, they used always to elect a Dictator: For this solemn action must not be performed by any, but such a one as hath no superiour unless the Gods. Now Madam, I present these things unto you, that you may put in effect those good and pious intentions which you have towards Adrastes, and the other stranger; and in order thereunto, to make choise of him, who being made Soveraign Magistrate, may execute all conditions neces∣sary: For though (Madam) you be the Soveraign Lady of the Country, yet ac∣cording unto our Customs, you are not capable of medling herein, because in all sa∣crifices unto Jupiter, men only must be ministers. The Nymph who was already advertized of the necessity in making this electi∣on, and who also thought it advantagious to her affairs, yet seeming to have no
other design, but the care of these two Persons. Father, answered she, I am so much desirous to obtain this favour from the gods, that I intend not only to make choise of such a man so quallified as you mention, but also to do any thing else that you shall think either expedient or necessary; and since we are not well experienced in such solemn Actions, I pray give me a full relation of all that is to be be done. Madam, said the high Priest, two things are necessary to be, done: The one a sacrifice, the other an election of a soveraign Magistrate; for after the sacrifice offered unto Jupiter and Minerva, he whom you chuse, must drive a nail of brass, which we must consecrate and make pure and clean with Lustralian wa∣ter, into the wall of Jupiters Temple, which is towards the Sanctuary of Minerva, and this to be done after the nail hath three times touched the temples of the dis∣eased person: Then for the sacrifice we will take such order as it shall be in readi∣ness, at what hour, to morrow, you shall please to appoint: But, Madam, as for the election of this Soveraign, it is requisite you make choise of him to day pub∣lickly, and that you give unto him a Scepter, & a Globe, as formerly they were wont at Rome: and because that was a Republique, and every one had a share in it, that Dictatour was chosen by the votes and suffrages of all the people; but in this place, where you have the sole interest, you alone must make this election, so it be in pub∣lick, that every one may know your intention. Adamas understanding that the Ceremony was to be performed in this manner. Madam, said he unto her, knowing it your pleasure to observe all these things, I have-taken order for all things requisite in this election, so as they have already begun to erect scaffolds, and I assure my self, that presently after dinner, all things will be in readiness. After this, the Nymph appointing the high Priest to take or∣der for the sacrifice next morning, she referred the ordering of all the rest unto the Druide, intending presently after dinner to make this Election, unto which, the Prince Godomar, Alcedon, Damon, and Adamas, were of opinion, that it was requisite to summon Polemas, to the end he might have no colour or excuse for the Arms (which was in a low voice commonly spoken) that he was preparing And though the Nymph knew very well he would not come, yet she approved of their opinions, and dispatched Clindor presently unto him. On the other side, Prince Godomar thinking it necessary to advertise the Prince Sigismond of all passages, and being unwilling to imploy any of his own men, left he should receive some course treatment from King Gondebaut, he beseeched the Nymph to permit that Leontidas the son of Clindor might be the man; conceiving him to be man of courage and wit, and a person whom he might trust in the busi∣ness, since Dorinde lay at his house, and since he believed that she had acquainted him with the cause of her coming. The Nymph liked very well of it, and sent Letters by him unto the King, unto Prince Sigismond, and unto the Princess Clotilda. Unto the King, by way of joy, for the honour she received from the presence of Prince Godomar his son; not ta∣king notice that she knew any thing of the cause which moved him thither: Unto Prince Sigismond, by way of assurance, to give Dorinde for his sake all possible assistance; and unto Clotilda, to desire the continuation of her favours. And because Godomar thought that perhaps the King would not suffer Leontidas to see his brother, he advised him to go unto him secretly, if he could the night before, and to speak unto Gondebaut, according to the advice of Sigismond: having then given him full instructions, and Dorindes picture, he recommended him unto the Protection of Tharamis. Dorinde on the other side, who as she thought had so much cause to complain against all men in general, and in particular against Sigismond, she knew not what message to send unto him: for when she remembred how she was left all night in the wood, in expectation of him, she could not afford him a good thought; when she considered what Godomar told her, sometimes she thought him partial and spoke in behalf of Sigismond, and sometimes again she excused him: At last, at the instance of the young Prince, she sent him a Letter by Leontidas, and en∣treated him to assure Sigismond that she would be alwayes his servant, in spite of Fortune.
Thus the Father and the Son, Clindor and Leontidas departed both in one day: 'Tis true the Fathers journey was not far, and therefore sooner dispatched when he came to Surida, which was about some five hours after he went from Marcel∣les, he was amazed to see such a confluence of Souldiers, Officers, and Cavaliers: Clindor, who knew Polemas before he was raised to this Grandure, and whose Predecessours were nothing inferiour unto the family of this man, he could not look upon this excessive arrogance without dispising him: so as when he went un∣to him to deliver the Nymphs letter, and was first carried through a long Guard of Souldiers in File, afterwards into his antichamber and withdrawing room, where he found a great number of Cavaliers ranked into two Files to make him passage; he could not chuse but say unto the man who conducted him, I wish some stranger saw the Train of Polemas, that they might admire at the Grandure of the Nymph Amasis, and publish to the world, that her servants keeps as great a Court as the greatest Kings. Polemas was all this while at the higher end of his Chamber, and no sooner saw him, but with cap in hand he came and embraced him so kindly, that as Clindor was ill satisfied at his first entrance, yet this rece∣ption obliged him so, that he thought Polemas worthy of all his Grandure, such a strange influence has sweetness courtesie upon the most noble and generous hearts. And indeed it was true that Polemas, amongst the rest of his perfections, was his Arts Master in Civility, Courtesy, and Complement, a quality very requi∣site in such as aim at Grandure above their native qualities: After the first Com∣plemental Caresses, Clindor presented unto him a Letter from the Nymph, and withal acquainted him with her desire of his being present at this Ceremony. Un∣to which returning no answer, as if it were a thing he leaft intended, he fell into some complaints, speaking as if he had great confidence in Clindor. Dear friend, said he unto him, I beseech you consider how ill the Nymph has us'd me of late, and what reason she has to think me worthy of coming into her presence: You know how dearly I loved Argenteus, as well for his merit as kindred; and yet she could look on and see him treacherously murdered befoee her face: Nay more, she forced me to cashier all those who opposed that unworthy act, as if they had done something that was ignominious, and against her service. Then again, in lieu of chastising one Damon, that wanderer, or rather high∣way man, she has gotten him into Marcelles, and makes a great accompt of him, as if he were not guilty of the basest action that ever any Cavalier attempted. I set these things before your eyes, to the end that you being a Cavalier, may pity my disgrace, which forces me to keep a distance from the Nymph, chusing rather the solitude of my house, then to trouble her with the sight of him who is so displeasing unto her. Should I relate some other causes which I have, you would admire my patience, for to pass by the infinite number of affronts which I re∣ceive every day; you know, dear friend, that you and I are Cavaliers, whose pro∣fession is conversant in Arms and affairs of State. How is it possible we should en∣dure to see a Druide, whose office is only about Altars, sit at the helm of the State, and stear it as he pleaseth: To see him set and appoint Guards in Towns, to lift Souldiers, appoint commissioned Officers, and such like, as are quite contrary to contrary to men of his coat, whilst we sit still in our own houses dispised, and not so much as looked upon; and yet we see all these things in the person of Adamas, whom now has lost the name of Druide, and is become a great Governour of Provinces, nay of Amasis her self. Surely we cannot look upon these things but with sad eyes, and I think none doubts but that it is a most manifest injury unto me: for the Nymph has committed that charge unto me, and she cannot put me out, without most apparent wrong: Have I any way misbehaved my self? has not the state enjoyed a serene tranquility under my regiment? Can the people complain of any subsidies or exactions? has any Souldier served without his full pay? have I lessened the revenues of the Exchequer  have any leagues or confe∣derations been broken? Are any of our neighbour Princes discontented? If any one in all the state, great or little can complain of any wrong that I have done, then, I am guilty, and the Nymph has reason to put another in my place that will serve her better. But when none of these things can be charged upon me, tell me
dear Clindor, have I not just reason to complain? Yes certainly, if not against the Nymph, yet at least against my bad Fortune. This grievance makes me to love my friends and my kindred, and to spend my time amongst them, since my life has hitherto been spent in the service of one who does not so much as look up∣on my affection; or if she do see it, does scorn and reject it. Clindor heard him out without any interruption, and let him say what he would, but though his words were smooth, and language full of candour, yet he saw they were steept in viniger, and had a hidden bitterness in them▪ and not being so ignorant in the affairs of the world, but that he had heard of his bad designs, especially when the Nymph at parting gave him a hint thereof, that he might more particularly observe all his actions, he found that all his complaints had been long premeditated, and that to contradict him, would not convert him, nor do the Nymph any service; and therefore without entring into any excuse he only told him, that perhaps his complaints had not so just a ground as he imagined, nor as was reported unto him: That in love and court, absence was a mortal ene∣my unto any man: That the Nymph was so sweet and every way so good, that he might expect all desired satisfaction from her: That she esteemed of him above all the rest of her Subjects, and therefore had elevated him above all the rest: That the demonstration of her good will unto him was so great, that he could not any way suspect the contrary: That her desires of seeing him was an argument that she set a higher esteem upon him, than he was made believe by some sowers of sedition; and that to blast all the designs of such ill officers, he ought to come unto Marcelles, where he might receive from the Nymph all manner of satisfacti∣on and contentment, and that he ought the rather to come, left the Prince Goda∣mar being there, should assist the Nymph in this publick Action which she in∣tended. Polemas had been already advertised of Prince Godomars' coming by his correspon∣dent; but because the cause of his coming was kept close, he could not know it: yet imagining that so great a Prince would not come with so small a train, unless upon some great importance, he passionately desired to understand what it was; but not daring to discover his curiosity too much unto Clindor, he conceived that their discourse did give him a good occasion to talk a little more of it. But dear friend, (said he and interrupted him upon that point) what great action is that which is intended? For though I know Prince Godomar did not come thither for nothing; yet I cannot imagine what it should be. The Action (replied Clindor) will be very great, for the Queen desires that whatsoever the high Priest and Col∣ledge of the Augustalians, shall command, may be exactly observed. About three or four dayes since, a Lady whose name is Dorinde came unto Marcelles upon some occasion, which truly I do not know; but so it was, that there came in her company some shepherds and shepherdesses, who brought one with them who ran mad for love. The Nymph was desired that a nail of brass might be driven into the wall of the Temple for him, a Ceremony which they say is a common cure for madness. Now the high Priest does tell her that for the dri∣ving of this nail she is to make choise of a Soveraigne Magistrate, for it can be done by no other hand but his. Who do you think (said Polemas) she intends to chuse for that Ceremony? I think, answered Clindor, she is not yet resolved: but when you come unto her she will tell you, and I am confident she will do nothing without your advise. Clindor, replied Polemas, unless she intend utterly to dis∣grace me, she will not think upon any but me: For it belonging to my office she cannot without extream offence prefer any other; but I perceive she thinks her contempt of me not enough, unless it be done to my face, and therefore she would have me present at this publick Ceremony, that all the world may laugh at me. It is enough that I have spent my age and my estate in her service, and not lose that little reputation and credit that I have amongst men. Tell her therefore, that as long as I can, I will conceal from every one that small value which she sets upon my services, and that I had rather hear say she slights me, then be witness of it. Clindor perswaded him all he could to divert him from this resolution, but he stood obstinately upon this and beckning unto Ligonias, Pelidontes, Argoni∣des,
and Lysander to come unto him; he acquainted them with the cause of Clin∣dors coming, and with the answer he had sent unto the Nymph: And all four did so approve of what he had done, with so many complaints and imaginary injuries, that at last he was constrained to come away with this answer, to wit, that if the Nymph would chuse him for this solemn Ceremony, and gave him the title of So∣veraign Magistrate, he would come and serve her with a good troop of his friends: otherwise, he would keep at a distance, and rather hear what was done, then see it with so much dishonour to himself. But in the interim, the Nymph as soon as she had dined, carried Prince Godo∣mar unto a great plain, where scaffolds were erected, and there in the presence of all the Druids, Priests, Flamins, Augustalians and others, as also of all Cava∣liers, Sherifs, and Majors of the Town, she declared him Soveraign Dictator in all her provinces, and in order thereunto gave him a Scepter. He afterwards ta∣king an oath to govern the State with Justice and equity as long as his commission lasted, and not to spare any pains, life, or limb, in defence thereof! Then the Trumpets sounded, and the people with shouts of joy accompanied him back to the castle, and as they passed through the streets, though it was night, yet it was as light as day, and not a door but had two Torches burning before it. Clindor returned when all these lights were set out, and supposing it to be for joy of this election, he hoped that the Nymph did it upon good consideration, though he knew it would extremely incense the spirit of yonder ambitious man, When he came before Amasis he would have given her an account of his journey but she would not hear him until the Prince Godomar, Damon, Alcedon, and Adamas were present, who hearing the resolution of Polemas did not wonder at it, know∣ing very well that he would find some excuse or other for his not coming hither; but charged Clindor to be secret in it, for some reasons which afterwards he should know. But all these Ceremonies were no sooner solemniz'd, then Meronthes the confi∣dent of Polemas, sent his son to acquaint him with it, and the arival of the Queen Argira, though he knew not her name; only let him know with what a Train she came, and how she was lodged in the Castle: All these things did extremely trouble him; for being ignorant of the cause which brought Prince Godomar thither, with the Cavaliers, which, troop after troop, followed him, and then the great number which belonged unto the Queen Argira (for the hundred souldiers which she brought were reported to be three) he was the most confounded man in the world; and but for the hopes he had in the nimble wit of Climanthes, cer∣tainly he had hastned his design, and attempted upon the Town: but the assu∣rances he had from him, and the execution at hand, was the reason of retarding the business, and slacking his design wherein he had such great hopes. And the rather, because tomorrow was the day appointed by Leonide for Galatheas reso∣lution: which the Nymph remembring very well, she appointed her and Silvia over night to go the next morning and know his resolution; which they failed not to do: and because they were very desirous to be at this solemn sacrifice of dri∣ving the nail (a Ceremony never seen before, and therefore invited with the more curiosity) they got up so early in the morning, that they were almost the first at the opening of the gates: and yet they found Climanthes already expecting them, at the door of his Temple, where seeming as if he saw them not; he began to adore the rising sun, and the heavens, and endeavoured by such counterfeit devo∣tion to get an opinion of his sanctity. But when he perceived that they saw his dissimulation, he arose up and came towards them. Nymphs (said he unto them) the Divinity, who I adore, is pleased with the prayers of Galathea and the sacri∣fices which I offered for her; and therefore have permitted me to go unto her, and render the Oracle which she desires, and which is one of the greatest favours that ere was done unto any mortal. I assure you therefore that three dayes hence I will come about this time of the day unto the garden door which is under the Castle, not desiring to be seen in the Town, or any places frequented, because they are not conformable unto my solitary course of life; and I do give her three dayes warning to the end she may prepare her self with a resolution to observe the
commands of the Oracle: For otherwise, that great Deity whose Messenger and Interpreter I am, will be more incensed against her, then I am able to express; and therefore let her be sure she arm her self with strong resolution to obey his commandments. Sage Nymphs, I know you love her, and therefore I conjure you to advertise her of it from me; and if by fortune you find her not inclineable thereunto, to give me notice of it, that I may not more aggravate her crime by my coming unto her. Nay, nay, answered Leonide, never retard that favour which the Gods intend her for that; for I assure you she is fully resolved not to fail in any thing; and if any thing divert her from this her resolution, it will be only the delay of these three days which you prefix, and which will seem very long unto her. That delay (answered she) proceeds not from me, but from the Deity which I adore; and I take it for a very good Angury; for the number of three is pleasing unto the Gods: and to tell you truly, these are the three days in which that God is mute; so as though I would my self speak as I was accustomed unto her, yet I cannot. And for this cause I do not carry you at this time into his holy Temple; knowing that during these three days, neither Sacrifices nor Pray∣ers are pleasing unto him: and you shall see that if I offer to enter, as I am accu∣stomed, he will shut the door against me: But fail not you to be both at the Gar∣den door upon the day I have appointed, and you shall see that contentment which heaven is preparing for her, as a reward of her obedience. Upon this he hasted up the stairs towards his Temple, for he thought that if he stayed any longer, the door would shut of it self: and it hapned as he thought; for he was no sooner ready to set his foot in the door, but it shut violently upon him. Leonide and Silvia did know very well that this man was an Impostor, yet for all that, they were afraid; having an opinion, that under a colour of sanctity, he dealt with the Divel: And, as if heaven took delight in augmenting their fears, it hapned that when they were near the gardens of Marcelles, through which they could pass into the Base Court of the Castle, without coming into the Town, pre∣sently they spied a man, who knowing them a far off, came running to them; and as soon as he overtook them, fell down upon his knees before Silvia, and endea∣voured to kiss her hand. The Nymph no sooner cast her eye upon him, but she cryed out, Oh good Gods, See where the soul of Ligdamon is! Ligdamon! re∣plyed Leonide (and was worse affrighted then her Companion) oh Heavens! it is so, and began to run away as fast as ever her legs could carry her to the Garden door, which by chance she found open; and she had run her self so out of breath, that as soon as she was two paces within the door, she fell down, as if she had been half dead: Silvia in the mean time seeing her self alone, and held by this man, whom she thought to be a Ghost, was so extreamly affrighted, that she fell into a swoond. The man seeing her in this pitiful condition, he was struck al∣most as dead as she seemed to be; he fell down upon his knees, called unto her, and pinched her to bring her again unto her self. She upon this opening her eyes, and still feeling him, cryed out, and fell into her fit again; he still called upon her, and still pinched her, but all would not do any good; for her fears this second time were such, as indeed did put her in danger of death. At which the man was so affrighted, that he rose up, and ran to call for help, or at least, to fetch some water to throw upon her; and seeing a house not far from thence, he ran thi∣ther: But as good luck was, he was no sooner out of sight, but Silvia came to her self; and not seeing this Ghost which put her into this fright, she rose up and ran as fast as ever she could unto the Garden door, which she saw open, and as she was shutting the door, she spied the man running after her as fast as he could, yet so far off, that she had time enough to make fast the door, and get into the Castle, where she found Leonide in such apprehensions of fear, as she was not able to utter a word. But when she saw Silvia, Oh Sister, said she, I am very glad you are escaped out of the enchantments of this wicked man. Silvia half besides her wits, Ah Sister (said she) would you run away, and leave me in so great a danger? All their companions seeing them thus affrighted, ask'd to know what the matter was?
But for all their disorder they would not tell, having this consideration with them, that perhaps it might he prejudicial to the service of the Nymph. Galathea was presently acquainted with it, and thinking that Climanthes was wicked enough to do them some harm, she went unto them in their chamber where they were: when they saw her, they cheered up themselves as well as they could, yet looked as if they were newly come out of their graves. Galathea not willing to ask them any questions before so much company as was present, she took them by their hands, and commanded the rest all to withdraw: And then, Come (said she unto them) I see you both extreamly affrighted, what is the cause of it? Ma∣dam (answered Leonide) the strangest encounter that ever was: for the man unto whom you sent us, I think has a thousand Divels at his command: After we had spoke with him, and he promised to be here the third day, and when we thought we had been quite out of his hands, he sent the Ghost of Ligdamon after us, who took my companion by the hand, and put us into such a fright, that if we had not luckily found the garden door open, we had died. For my part, I ran away, and cannot tell how my companion escaped out of his hands. Truly (said Silvia) I followed your example, taking my self to my legs; and 'twas well I did so; for I saw him running after us, and would certainly have followed us hither, if I had not been so couragious as to shut the door after me. All which the Nymph hear∣ing, and knowing it to be nothing but fancy she began to laugh at the fears where∣in they were; and leaving them to rest themselves, she went unto Amasis, unto whom she related all she heard; whereat she was not a little astonished: And whilst they were in talk of these things, one came to tell the Nymph that the Sa∣crifice was ready, and that the Nails of Brass were washed clean and pure with the Lustralian water: so as the Prince Godomar expected only the Queen Argira, who at last came, holding the Princess Rosanira by the hand; who was so fair that day, as she ravished the eyes of all those that looked upon her; her Dress was modest, and by reason of her affliction, rather too much, then too little; but so neat and handsome, that envie it self could not find the least fault: she leaned upon the arm of Rosilion, whose countenance was very sad, and his looks som∣thing wilde, but by his walk and garb, and all the rest of his actions, appeared to be of no mean extraction. There was very few that knew him, for the Queen desired it so; so as for a long time together, nothing could be heard amongst all the assembly, but enquiry who they were; but none being able to satisfie their cu∣riosity, they all set themselves to behold the ceremony. First came ten Trumpetters, who from time to time sounded all together. Next them, followed men who were crowned with flowers, and in habits trimm'd all over with Violets, dancing before the Victims, carrying in their hands little Dag∣gers, which they knocked against one another to a kind of Tune: After them came the carriers of Basins and Dishes to receive the blood of the Victims: after them followed many Victimaries with axes, hatches, and several other Instruments to slay the Victims, all having caps of flowers upon their heads: Next followed the Victims, which were seven Oxen to be offered unto Jupiter, and as many unto Minerva, with guilded horns, and dressed over with Garlands of Flowers: These Victims were followed by some Sacrifices, one of them carrying the Vessel that held the Lustralian water, who followed a Flamin, who with a branch of Misleto sprinkled this holy water upon all the Assistants; Another carried a box of Aro∣matique Drugs, as Incense, Myrrh, and Aloes; Another carried upon his head a ves∣sel of Wine, which was to be used in the Sacrifice: another carryed salt, and another honey, and another water: After all these, followed twelve Players upon Flutes, and some Choristers, who sung Hymns in praise of Jupiter and Minerva. Next fol∣lowed the Epulian Triomvires, who are those that were wont to tell the people when they ought to make any Banquets unto the Gods: After these followed the Flamins; the last of which was Diale the Flamin of Jupiter, with his cap made of white wool, and in a Surplice of finest Linnen, so pure and white, that not the least spot appeared in it. Afterwards came the Colledge of Augures, each having in their hands an Augurian staf. Last of all came the high Priest, with most com∣ly gravity, clad in a garment of white linnen, this Surplice of purest white hung
down to the ground; he had upon his head a kind of cap, which might rather be called a Vail, hanging down on both sides; He held in one hand his Crosier, and in the other his Pastoral staff; on each side of him was two Flamins, who carried in their hands a great Nail of Brass, which had been purified and consecrated. After all this pomp, the Prince Godomar came all alone, with a Crown upon his head, and a Scepter in his hand, and following him a great croud of Cavaliers and Souldiers. In this order they came unto the Temple, where the Queen Argira, the Nymph, Rosanira, and the rest of the Ladies were with Rosilion and Adrastes: and every one having taken their places, Proclamation was made that all should keep silence upon pain of punishment: Then the Flamin Diale, who was Sacrificer that day, called for the Lustralian water, and after he had washed his hands, did sprinkle it upon all that were to be assistants at the Sacrifice; then falling down upon his knees, he confessed himself to be a man poluted with many sins, and begged a pardon of the Gods, not only for his own, but for the sins of all the Assistants; then taking a Torch which was made of Virgins wax, which was lighted at a clear burning fire, he kindled the wood that was upon the Altar; and commanding the Victims to be brought near, he turned towards the east side of the Altar: He first invoked Janus and Vesta, and afterwards Jupiter, calling him Father, Omnipotent, and Good; and after him he invoked all the rest of the Gods. Afterwards addressing his prayer particularly unto Jupiter and Minerva, he declared that it was unto them only this Sacrifice was offered: And these were the words of his prayer, which a Flamin pronounced after him word for word. OH most great and good Father, Son of Saturn, Jupiter omni∣potent, the beginning and ending of all; who art fulness in the self, who art every where, in all, and above all: The Creator, Preserver, and Director of the world; the Destiny upon whom the order of things depend; the Nature which produceth all things; thy Providence which foresees all things; the Eternity, that was before, and will be after all things. Oh thou Jove, who for the benefit of Mortals, conceived Minerva in thy Brain: Oh most mighty Minerva! who teaches mortals to be wise, to judge justly, and to do rightly. Goddess of eternal Virginity, Physician unto those who are deprived of their understandings. Receive, oh Great and Omnipotent Deities! the Prayers and Sacrifice which Amasis our great Nymph does offer unto you, for the safety and wel∣fare of her self and people: and because there is nothing in the whole Uni∣verse more pleasing unto you then man, and nothing in man more then the Understanding: Grant, Oh Great and Good Jupiter, and oh Goddess of Prudence and Understanding, Minerva the request which this great Nymph makes unto you; That those sacred Nails which the Prince Godomar, our Protector, and as Soveraign Magistrate is to drive, according unto your Ordinances, may obtain for Rosilion and Adrastes, the same favour which Orestes formerly obtained near the City of Githea, when sitting upon thy Stone, Oh Jupiter! he was cured of his distraction. After these words were uttered in a loud and so distinct a voice, that all, or most of the people might hear as they were upon their knees; he caused the Victims to be brought near, he cut off the hair which grow between their horns, and cast it into the fire, which was the first beginning of the Sacrifice: Afterwards he turn∣ed towards the East, and commanded the Victimaries to do their offices, which they did accordingly: Then he viewed the Intrals, and found the Hearts, the Li∣vers,
and the Brains very sound, yet of a more dusky colour then usual, but not to affright the Assembly, they took no notice of them, because it portended dis∣sentions, wars, and tumults. After the Victims were viewed, the fat of them was burned and consumed upon the Altars; and they poured out wine and oyl, and sprinkled Incense thereupon: The fire burned till all was consumed, but they ob∣served the flame to be blew like brimstone, and not burning upwards like a waving Piramide, but as if it were depressed with wind, which yet would some times flash out into extraordinary flames: The smoak was thick, dusky, and obscure, smo∣thering downwards, and not ascending as usual. At which being astonished, they looked amongst the Wood, to see whether there was any that was forbidden; as the Olive, the Lawrel, the Oak, and such fat kinds of wood; but they found all to be dry, and very right; which put them into greater fears: but those fears va∣nished, when at last they saw the fire burn clear, the smoak thin, and ascending, and the Victims all consumed, with as good an odour as they could desire. The sacrifice was no sooner ended, and the Flamin had no sooner pronounced the last word, but the high Priest taking the sacred Nails, did wash them anew with the Lustralian water, and offered them unto Jupiter and Minerva: Then he presented them unto Prince Godomar, who taking them with all reverence and de∣votion, made some private prayers; and afterwards touched the temples of Ro∣silion and Adrastes; which was a thing not easie to be done without the Princess Rosanira, and the Shepherdess Doris: But Rosilion did so much respect the one, and Adrostes the other, that they durst not disobey whatsoever they commanded. When the Prince Godomar was going to drive the Nails, Palemon went to the cor∣ner of the Altar: For my part (said he in a loud voice) I do make a most solemn vow, that if it will please the great Gods to grant our request which now we ask, I will not deny the first thing which shall be asked of me, be it what it will, if it be within the compass of my power. The Officer who recorded all solemn vows, did write down this of Palemon, and many observed that Rosanira looked upon the Queen Argira, as if she expected the like from her; which the Queen per∣ceiving, she also rose up, and went unto the Altar: And I (said she, as loud as she could speak) who am a Queen, and the Wife and Mother of Kings, I do pro∣mise and vow, oh great Jupiter and Minerva, that if you grant the petition which I now make unto you, I will employ all the power and forces of those King∣doms which are in subjection to me, my husband, and my son, in maintenance of the Nymph Amasis, and her Dominions, against all those that shall offer any injury unto them or her. The people hearing this Vow, and wondering at it, would have broke out into acclamations of joy, but their respect unto the sacri∣fice hindred them. In the mean while, the Prince Godomar holding the Nail in his left hand, and a hammer in his right, being directed by the high Priest, and the Flamin Diale, he went towards the wall which was towards the Sanctuary of Mi∣nerva; and there calling thrice upon the names of Jupiter and Minerva, he drove the Nails to the very head: But to see the wonderous effects! upon the very first blows that were struck, Rosilion and Adrastes fell to the ground as if they were dead, and so continued until the Prince Godomar came unto them, and till the Fla∣min sprinkled some Lustralian water upon them; then they came to themselves, as if they had waked out of a dead sleep. Rosilion opening his eyes, and seeing so many Flamins, and other people about him, did think himself at first in a dream, for he had quite lost the memory of all he had done, during the time of his distra∣ction. But Verances standing by him, and taking him by the hand, Sir (said he unto him) do you not see the Princess Rosanira coming towards you? If you do not make good haste, she will find you lying upon the Ground. How? said he, will Rosanira take so much pains as to come unto me? Upon this rising up, he saw her close by him, with the Queen Argira; and he not knowing the Queen, he went to salute Rosanira, as if he had not seen her seven years before: But Ro∣sanira taking him by the hand, Rosilion (said she unto him) first salute this great Queen, unto whom you are obliged as much as ever any Cavalier can be: Upon this he kneeled down, and would have kissed her hand; but the Queen would not suffer him, but embracing him with tears in her eyes, Rosilion (said she unto him)
let us all render thanks unto the gods for freeing you from your enchantment: Enchantment! (replied he all amazed) what enchantment do you mean? you shall know hereafter answered she; but in the mean time, let us express our gra∣titude, as both you and I are obliged, and taking him by the hand she carried him to the altar: then presently after she took Rosanira and him into a coach, and went unto the Castle, it being so resolved upon by the Nymph and the Prince Godo∣mar, left if Rosilion had stayed any longer amongst all the company, he might fall into some fancy of his being distracted, which perhaps might be prejudiciall unto him, having been so lately recovered. It was very discreetly said of the Queen Argira, when she phrased his disease, inchantment: for had she said he had been mad, it might perhaps have distracted him again. In the mean time Adrastes was so astonished, to see such abundance of people about him, and especially so many Nymphs and Cavaliers looking upon him and saying nere a word, as he knew not how to behave himself: Afterwards looking upon his clothes and seeing himself so ragged, not remembring any thing that was past; Friend (said he unto Palemon, who held him by the hand) what is the matter, and where am I? Adrastes (answered he and still held him by the arm) give thanks unto the gods for making you a man again this second time. The poor shepherd holding up his hands, and turning towards the altar, he fell down upon his knees and did as Palemon advised him: so all the assembly seeing the gods accepted of their sacrifice and prayers, they shouted for joy, and sang hymns in praise of Jupiter and Minerva: In the mean time Palemon taking him aside into a by room in the Temple, he desired him to put on those clothes which he had prepared for him. On the other side, the high Priest accompanied with those who had viewed the victimes, and considered the burning of the fire, told the Nymph that as they found by the intrels and burning of the fire, the state was menaced with many troubles and great rebellions, the issue whereof was indeed like to be happy, if by her prudence she gave a timely prevention. Upon which information she held up her hands, and beseeched the gods to impose no greater a burthen on her then she was able to sustain, that they would pardon all the sins of the Nation, and not punish according to merit: After this she went towards the Castle with the Prince Godomar, and all the strangers, who could not enough admire the prudence of the Nymph, and the wisdome that appeared in all her actions. In the mean time Polemas, who had his spies in every corner, was advertised of all the passages concerning this Ceremony, as well of the election of Prince Go∣domar, as the recovery of the two distracted persons; and also of Queen Ar∣giras expressions of interesting her self in the Protection of the Nymph, when she declared her self to be a Queen: He was advertised also of one Dorinde, a Lady that fled into Marcelles; but though he heard of the combate about her, upon the banks of Lignon, yet he knew not the cause: and when he was thinking seriously upon these things, he was advertised of some Cavaliers, strangers, who desired to speak with him, and who came as they said, from King Gondebaut. Po∣lemas commanded they should enter, and after a very honourable reception of them, the chief of them spoke thus. The King my master Sir, who loves you as well as any neighbour he hath, has sent me to acquaint you that he hath great occasion to complain against the Nymph Amasis, who values his friendship at so low a rate, as that she harbours within her Dominions, those who have most traiterously assassinated Clorantes, the Captain of his Guard, who would have took out of their hands a woman which run away from the Princess Clotilda, after she had committed most foul crimes, which are unfit to be published in respect of the Princess honour: And though the Prince Godomar, whom he disclaims for his son, be the chief of those against whom he complains, yet he conceives the Nymph ought not to receive such runagate subjects of his without his consent: he hath sent me to make these complaints unto you, and commanded me to tell you that he would gladly live in peace with his friends, and that offences committed against their wills, shall not make any separation betwixt him and them; and therefore if you think it expe∣dient,
I will go unto Marcelles; and declare unto the Nymph how much the King my master is offended; I will demand from her a restitution of Prince Godo∣mar and Dorinde, or else declare open war: And in testimony that all I say is true, here Sir, is a Letter from the King my Master unto you. Upon this Polemas took the Letter: Cavalier, answered he, I am very sorry the Nymph has given any cause of discontent unto that great King: If she would be ruled by my advice, no such complaints should ever be; but truly these new Councellours go upon Ma∣ximes which are much contrary unto mine, and such truly as I do not understand; I pray god she do not repent of them when it is too late. Then opening the Let∣ter which he found to be a Letter of Credence. The King (said he unto the Ca∣valier) tells me I may believe whatsoever you shall say unto me from him, and therefore speak freely your mind, for there is no Prince upon the earth whom I take to be my master but yours. The stranger, upon this, thanked for his favour∣able declaration, and beseeched that he might speak unto him in a place where there was fewer witnesses. Polemas then taking him by the hand he carried him into a private closset, and shut the door. The stranger then began to speak, and told him of the Kings affection unto Dorinde (yet in as favourable a sense for his Master as possibly he could) of the love of the Prince Sigismond unto the same woman: of the Kings just anger, when he heard that the Prince intended to marry her; of the Kings design in marrying her unto Periander or Merindor, to divert that Prince: of the deten∣tion of that Prince: of the Kings command unto Clorantes to follow her: of Prince Godomars going out of Lyons with many Cavaliers: of Ardilans death, whom the Prince Godomar killed at the gate of the Town; and briefly, how Clo∣rantes was killed with almost all his company, as he was in quest of Dorinde, whom he found in the habit of a Shepherdess upon the banks of Lignon. Now Sir (continued he) the King is informed that this Dorinde, and the Prince Godo∣mar, are fled into Marcelles, and that the Nymph hath promised to protect them: How? to protect them, said Polemas, hath she invested the Prince Godo∣mar with absolute Authority in all her Dominions? Yes Sir, replied the stranger, and hath thereby so disobliged the King; that he is fully determined to come him∣self and fetch him out of Marcelles. But that you may know how much you are obliged unto the King, he lets you know that this is the nick of time to put your generous design into execution: for Clidamant is dead: How (said Polemas) is Clidamant dead? why Sir (said the stranger) did you not know that before? It is long since the King sent you word of it, but I verily believe the Letter which imported it, was intercepted by the death of Clorantes: but be pleased to know that dead he is, and Lindamor so wounded, that there is no hopes of his life, also all those that were under his conduct are squandered and gone. O heavens! (said Polemas) this is news beyond my hopes: now Sir, (said the stranger) the King to testifie his affection unto you, will under colour of Prince Godomar and Dorinde, raise a great Army against the Nymph, and will himself in person come and besiege Marcelles: he will invest you with the Soveraign Au∣thority, make you Count of the Segusians, and content himself that you should only hold it of him, as Duke and Earl of the Burgundians, thinking your merits and affection unto him alwayes expressed, does deserve no less then his assistance upon this occasion. The joyes and thanks of Polemas were great, and his promises and protestati∣ons were greater: but indeed his joyes were extream, for Clidemant and Linda∣mor were two great rubs unto him, the one to his ambition, and the other to his affection: and they being thus removed, gave him assured hopes in his designe. He desired the stranger therefore, that he might impart this news unto four of his friends, whose advice he used in all affairs: and calling for Ligonias, Peledontes, Argonides, and Listander, he related the whole matter unto them, whereat they seemed so extremely transported with joy, that they were hardly themselves. At last, it was resolved upon that this Cavalier should go unto the Nymph, and de∣mand the Prince Godomar and Dorinde; and in case she would not restore them, as
they verily believed she would not, then to declare war from the King of the Bur∣gundians; and lest he should receive any harm either in going or coming Polemas should appoint him a Convoy of six Troops of Horse; So in this resolution they parted. The same night Climanthes came to Polemas, to relate unto him all that he had said unto Leonide and Silvia: But Polemas having not so much patience as to hear out all his discourse, he embraced him: Oh my dear friend (said he unto him) I have other kind of news to impart unto you: Clidemant and Lindamore are dead with all their men, and the King of the Burgundians will come himself and make me Count of the Segusians, contenting himself that I should only acknowledge him to be Lord Paramont, as Duke and Earl of the Burgundians. The death of Clidemant and Lindamore (answered Climanthes very faintly) falls out very happi∣ly for our design; but let me tell me, that in my opinion, so is not the coming of the Burgundian King; for Ambition is a monstrous glutton, and is never satisfi∣ed: Now objects will move new appetites: There is not in all Gaul a more plea∣sant Province then this; Galathea is very fair, Gondebaut is of an amorous com∣plexion; moreover, he has two sons who are not married; These Interviews are dangerous: for my part, I like of his sending aid, but not of his coming: Do you think that when he is once in Marcelles, and tryumphant, that he will then care for you? The Prize is yours already, Sir, since Clidemant and Lindamore are dead, why then should you let another share with you? The enterprize may be done without him, who can resist you? Therefore Sir, if you will be ruled by me, let him not come, unless you have a mind to make your self greater enemies then those you have lost. This was the opinion of the crafty Climanthes, with whom the four Confidents concurred, when they were call to Councely and thought it ex∣pedient by all means to hide their mistrust, and to find out some handsome excuse for it: As that it was not honourable for so great a King to venture his person for such a trifle, no nor safe for his crown, it being to be feared, that in his absense his sons might raise commotions in the State. After this course was resolved upon, and the Cavalier had declared war in the name of the King his master, it was then time to scour up their Arms, and make all preparations without delay: Climanthes advised, that they should give him leave to go and speak with the Nymph Galathea; for (said he) if fair means will bring your desires to pass, why should you ruine a Country by war, which is to be your own? I conceive it expedient indeed to have all things in readiness, and if any way take not effect, then within two days after to force those feeble walls, which I think will be easily done upon the first assault; for I cannot believe they are able to man them: besides, the party in the Town that is for us, does promise to open us a Port when we will: Polemas was very much against the going of Climanthes unto Galathea, thinking it to be too dangerous for him; for (said he) assure your self that Adamas hath seen the Letter which King Gondebaut sent unto me, and which was lost when Clorantes was killed; and you see that they are more strict in their guard of their Town then they are wont to be; therefore I am in fear they know somthing of our designe; and if they do, you run extream danger of ill treatment, which would be a most extream grief to my soul. But Climanthes who thought himself so subtle that none could over-reach him; No, no Sir (an∣swered he) never trouble your self for me, but assure your self I shall be cunning enough for them all. These Nymphs cannot catch me, I warrant you, and had you seen and heard them, as I did, you would let that be the least of your fears: As for the Letters, I believe they may be intercepted; but though they be, they will not hurt us: If they do not know of the death of Clidemant and Lindamore, I will acquaint them; for it will sooner bring them to our designe, seeing them∣selves deprived of such support: And if they did know of it, why did they not do me some mischief all this while since Clorantes was slain? Upon these reasons, and some others, they resolved to let him go; and if he failed, to fall upon the Town two days after. In order thereunto, Polemas com∣manded his four confidents to have all things in readiness, as well Foot Forces, as Horse, especially the Artillery, which was most necessary for an assault of a Town,
and with which they would begin: Also intelligence was given unto Meronthes, who was within the Town, that when they began to compass the Town about with their Army, he should open unto them the Port that was towards Mount Brison, which, with his friends he might easily do, because all the Townsmen would be so taken up in resisting the Assault, as they would be all upon the walls. They were all ready to separate, and take several orders for all things necessa∣ry, when Climanthes stayed them; What will you say (said he unto them) if I make you all masters of what you desire, without a blow? I will say (answered Polemas) that you are Climanthes, that is, the wisest and best contriver of things of any man alive. Then (said the Impostor) assure your selves that within these three days I will make you possessors of what you wish. To day (said he, and counted the days upon his fingers) King Gondebauts Cavalier it talking unto Ama∣sis; to morrow I will go and act my part, and the day after Galathea is infallibly yours: And thus it will be brought to pass. I have already told you how extream∣ly she desires to speak with me, to the end (as she says) she may the better con∣form her self unto the Will of that God which shall speak by my mouth: I know that whatsoever I shall say, will be most exactly observed; for I will threaten her with so many horrible punishments in case of disobedience, that I dare lay my life she dares do no other; and my intention is to tell her, that at such a time she shall not fail to be at Termes, where the four ways meet, which is not above a mile from the Garden door, and that he whom the Gods have ordained she should marry, shall be the first that shall pass by her in the habit of a Hunter; doubtless she will come without any company but Leonide and Silvia; and then, if you seem as if you rode that way to hunt, what will hinder you from taking that Fair Prize? When Galathea is in your hands, may you not marry her the next day? Is not your designe then accomplished, and the war ended in three days? I must confess (said Polemas) that if you can do as you say, the work is done; for she being my wife, as I am fully resolved to marry her that very hour, then who can dispute with me for the Seignory of this State? And I promise you, if ever that happiness come to pass, I will quickly abolish that foolish Law, which excludes males from the So∣veraign Power. But on the other side, Leonide and Silvia were so pitifully affrighted, that they thought the Ghost of Ligdamon hunted them continually: Adamas hearing of it, went unto them, to put them out of those simple fears; but for all that they were still so affrighted, that as oft as Ligdamon was named, they trembled. This were a strange encounter (said the Druide) if Leonide and Silvia should turn mad, the same day that Rosilion and Adrastes are cured. In the mean time, as they were talking of nothing but this Vision in the Castle, and many laughing at the Nymphs being so affrighted, a great noise was heard below in the Court, and looking out, they saw some run one way, and some another, and saying nothing but Ligdamon, Ligdamon. The Nymphs that were with Leonide and Silvia, and laughing at them, hearing that Ligdamon was there, they all fled away as fast as they could, some ran to save themselves in Galatheas chamber, and some into the chamber of Amasis: As the women were affrighted, so were some of the men: and the Guard at the Castle Gates knowing Ligdamon, and seeing him to come towards them, whom they thought to be dead; they all ran away, and left the Gates open. Adamas seeing every one to run in this manner, was afraid left this panique fear should be the umbrage of some Treason; and therefore going as fast as he could to the Gates, he found them open, and all the Guard fled, which did much astonish him: But seeing some of his own men coming from the Town, he beckned unto them to make haste, to shut the Gates, and to guard them till the Souldiers re∣turned. And because he still heard the cry in the Castle, he went to see what was the true cause of it. In the mean time Ligdamon who had caused all this terror and confusion, finding the Gates open, he entred, much wondering to see every one fly from him, and cry out so pitifully. He knowing all the rooms in the Castle, being brought up in it from his Infancy, he went straight unto the chamber of the Nymph Amasis; and because the Ushers of the Chamber had command to keep
the door shut, they did not only lock it, but also blocked it up with chairs and tables, so as when Ligdamon came he found all fast, and not daring to be so bold as to knock, he waited until some came out. The Nymph Amasis, Gala∣thea and others, being advertised that he was at the door of the Antichamber, they trembled for fear, and one who was the stoutest amongst them, peeping through the key hole, and seeing it was he, they all fled away, crying it was he, it was he. The noise continued so long, before any had the courage to go out, that Egi∣des who had served him a long while, and whom Silvia ever since did keep with her, passing from the chamber of his Mistress unto that of the Nymph, and look∣ing as the rest did, through the keyhole, he looked upon him: O good god (said he) it is my dear Master; and running presently out at another door, for they would not let him go out at that, he went unto him: some of the affrighted wo∣women would have hindred him, telling him his master was dead: I know he is, answered he, but no matter, I love his soul as well as his body, and am sure that nothing which is his will hurt me. In this resolution this faithful servant ran to him, and kissed his hand, with such a flood of tears in his eyes, that he could not utter a word, but ah my dear master: Ligdamon on the other side embraced him with extream contentment, and when he could speak, Egides (said he unto him) what is the reason that every one thus flies from me? O Sir, answered he, who can chuse but be affrighted to see you so unexpectedly, your death being publish∣ed by me who saw you dead. Why then, said Ligdamon, didst not thou shun me as well as the rest? I Sir, answered he, why should I shun you, that would most willingly follow you in death, and doubtless had done so, but for disobeying that command which you imposed upon me with your dying breath: well (said he) didst thou then deliver my Letter unto the fair Silvia? I did, answered he, and more then that, I told her all that you commanded me, and related unto her the whole story of your death. The Nymphs all this while, who looked upon them through the key hole and heard them talk, they began to take heart. Adamas at the same time came also to the door of the antichamber, where finding Ligdamon, he was a little suprized, yet still a person of judgement and resolution: Ligdamon (said he unto him) I charge thee in the name of Tautates, that if thou beest a Ghost, to return unto thy eternal rest, and leave this place in quietness: Sir (answered Ligdamon and smiled) I should be glad to be a Ghost, to meet with that rest which yet I could never find: But know, that I am the very same Ligdamon whom formerly you have seen, and whom the great God hath raised from death to life, to shew, that as men come into the world by his appointment, so they cannot go out of it, un∣til it be his pleasure: upon this Adamas embraced him with open arms, and was extremely joyed, for Ligdamons virtue got himself the love of all. At this great noise, the Prince Godomar, Alcedon, and many other Cavaliers, came to the Nymphs chamber door to see what the matter was: The Nymph hearing that the Prince Godomar, Adamas, and Alcedon, and many others had spo∣ken with him, she took courage, and commanded the doors to be set open, but neither she nor Galathea would have suffered him to come near, if the Prince Go∣domar by one hand, and Adamas by the other, had not presented him unto them Is it possible Madam (said Ligdamon, and humbly kneeled down) that I should be here in this place taken for another, and not be known to be my self? We in this countrey (said Amasis and commanded him to rise up) are so seldome used to see any raised from the dead, that we could not but wonder to see Ligdamon have that priviledge; but thanks be to god, the man who brought us the news of your death proves a lyer, and if ever any lye was welcome unto us, it is this▪ I would to God Madam (answered he) that this life of mine, which is preferred, might be lost in doing you any service: yet be pleased to know that Egides was no lyer when he told the fair Silvia I was dead for I commanded him so to do▪ and knew him so faithful that he would not fail me; and yet (said the Nymyh) thanks be to god, you are alive, how then could you assure her that you were dead, unless he were a lyer? Madam (replied Ligdamon) did I not fear I should
be over tedious, I could tell you how. Well; replied she, I will leave you with Galathea, Silvia, and the rest of the Ladies; they have not so much business up∣on them as I; pray tell them, and let them relate unto me at night. Upon this, the Nymph, Prince Godomar, Alcedon, and Adamas, went unto the Queen Argi∣ra: and in the mean time Ligdamon, after a thousand Caresses from the Nymphs, he was conducted by Galathea unto Damon, who was almost well recovered, and began to walk up and down his chamber, and also did passionately desire to see him. After all civil complements and salutations, Galathea desired him to tell the reason why Egides did falsly report his death unto Silvia. Madam, answered he, I desire nothing more then to obey you, but I cannot possibly tell you the story, before I see her that is the cause of it. Why? replied Galathea, have you not yet seen Silvia? upon this she commanded Leonide to bring her thither: I believe, answered Leonide, it will be as great a difficulty, as it was this morning to drive the sacred nails: Alas (said Ligdamon) is it impossible to mollifie her obdurate heart, both living and dead? Do not complain (said Galathea and smiled) until you have seen her: I am afraid Madam, replied he, that sight will make it worse, and not only hinder me from complaining, but from living. Love, replied the Nymph, does allow that person to love, who is loved: O Madam, cryed out Ligdamon, that general does hold in any but in Silvia, for never was any more loved then she. Then, said the Nymph, let it so continue: My affection, replied he, is no less then an eternity, and I have loved her in the cradle, and in the grave: all this is not enough, replied the Nymph, unless she knew as much: Is it possible Madam, replied Ligdamon, she can be ignorant of it? both my life and my death hath told her of it. Assure your self, replied Galathea, that if you do love her well, and that she does perfectly know it, she will pay unto you that tribute which love does exact from all true lovers, provided still you persevere, and be not wea∣ry. As Ligdamon was ready to reply, Silvia came into the chamber with Leoni∣de, and with such a lively aspect, as made it apparent that the return of this Cava∣lier was not displeasing unto her, yet with so much modesty, that she was as much admired for it as for her beauty: for every one had heard that she did extremely grieve and lament his loss, and at that very time did seem silently to sigh: but now, when against all her hopes she saw him returned, he seemed unto her as a person only indifferent. When she came first into the room, Ligdamon looked upon Galathea, as if he had begged leave to salute her in her presence. The Nymph who understood his looks, did signifie unto him by her looks a∣gain, that she would have it so; so as he went immediately unto her, and falling down upon his knees, kissed her hand: but she pulled back, as thinking it an in∣civility before the Nymph. No, no Silvia (said Galathea) his return is extraordi∣nary, and so ought your reception of him to be. Sylvia then seeing it was the Nymphs pleasure to have it so, she permitted Ligdamon to kiss her hand, but not without a blush, and retiring presently amongst her companions, did hardly give him time to express the continuation of his service, and because he followed her, seeming very desirous of some conference, she said unto him in a low voice; if you be the same Ligdamon you were wont to be, take another opportunity of speech with me, and before all this company use the same discretion you were wont to do. Upon this hint, Ligdamon making an obedient legg, turned towards Galathea, but so transported with joy, at the sight of that beauty which was so dear unto him, that he could hardly retire from him: which Damon considering, I believe Madam (said he unto Galathea) that Ligdamon thinks it a hard penance to satisfie your commands, before he has a little longer entertained this fair Nymph, and I perceive by his eyes that he would be dispenced with all: if so (an∣swered the Nymph) my curiosity is too great; Madam, replied Ligdamon) I have no greater desire then to obey you in all things, only I beseech you be pleased that I make as short a relation as possibly I can, of such things as you seem desirous to know: Then after a short pause, he began thus.
The Sequell of the History of LIGDAMON. HE, Madam, who speaks that which is not true, is not alwaies a Lyar, if he thinks it truth which he speaks; for it is not a perfect lye, unless the Lyar knows he lies: If this qualification be necessary to make a Lyar, Egides was none when he reported my death, because he thought me so as well as my self: I say my self; for indeed it was my full intention to die, but heaven would not permit it, to shew, that the Gods will have our lives abso∣lutely in their own dispose. Silvia who all this while took particular notice of every word which Ligdamon spoke, and every one casting their eyes upon her, not being able to endure it, she slipt amongst her companions, and as well as she could, got to the door, unseen by Galathea or Ligdamon, till she was just entring into her chamber, where shut∣ting the door after her, she resolved to stay unseen, until this discourse was ended. In the mean while Ligdamon continued thus. Since Egides has been so observant of all my commands, I assure my self Madam, he has related unto you, how I being a Prisoner amongst the Neustrians, I was taken for a Cavalier named Lidias, whom certainly I did much resemble, since his own Mother, and all the rest of his Kinred would not be perswaded but that I was he. This Lidias had killed in a Duel his enemy called Orontes, and was condemned for it to lose his life; and I being taken for him, must suffer for his Crime; but the Gods so guided my Sword, that being put into a Den of Lions, I killed two of them, rather by chance then strength. At the same time, she for whom Lidias had fought with Orontes, taking me (as all the rest did) for him whom I so much resembled, she came and demanded me for her husband: for it was a customary Law amongst all the Gauls, that any woman might take any con∣demned person for her husband, and so save him. By vertue of this Law I was reprieved, and a few days after carried into the Temple to marry her. I must confess Madam, that my prison, my sentence of death, my combate with Lions, and all my misfortunes, were nothing so intolle∣rable as this; and therefore when I came into the Temple, and seeing no way to avoid this unfortunate marriage, I resolved to live no longer. Not but that A∣merina (that was her name whom I was to marry) was very fair, very wise, and no way deficient, but I could not violate that fidelity which I had vowed unto the fair Silvia, without thinking my self worthy of death. Some few days before, I had provided a certain kind of wine, so mixed, as might be a draught of immedi∣ate death; I drunk a full glass of this mortal potion, and before I was aware, so did Amerina also: by force of which, with a firm opinion that it was poyson, I fell down as dead, and presently after Amerina also. I believe Madam, that Egides might relate my fortune thus far, but certain∣ly all afterwards was unknown unto him; for he went away immediately, as well to perform all my commands, as to be out of that place where he had received so sad a loss. Now you must know that this Amerina, and this Lideas, were of them of the best Families amongst all the Neustrians, and exceedingly beloved and alli∣ed; so as the noise of this accident was presently spread through all Rothomagues, and the Temple was so full of people, that one could hardly stir in it: for it was an accident of such admiration, as moved every one to come and see us. They had laid us upon the ground one by another, and cast a cloth over our faces, whilst all about us wept, some for love, some for pity, and many for company. They were ready to carry us into a Vault, where the Ancestors of Amerina and Lideas were entombed, when a Physitian came thrusting through the croud, and addressed himself unto one that stood by us: Friend (said he in a loud voice) is this Lidies who lies under that cloth? The same, answered the man. By what accident did
he die? asked the Physitian: Alas (answered he) both he, and this woman who lies by him, did voluntarily poyson themselves. No, no (said the Physitian) they are not dead; let some water and vinegar be fetched, and by the help of Tauta∣tes I shall recover them. Many were ready to run for these remedies; and when they were brought, the Physitian rubbed our Temples with Vinegar, and put some into our Noses, and afterwards threw water into our faces: This did awake us presently, as out of a deep sleep, but so astonished, that we knew not where we were: the candles a∣bout us (for it was grown night) and the admiration of all the people who came to see us, that for half an hour together we still seemed to be out of our wits: At last we were carried to our Lodgings, where we understood from the Physitian, that it was he from whom I had the potion; and because he feared I intended some hurt, in lieu of poyson, he gave this Dormative, for which he was much commended by all that heard him: But though this composition was not mortal, yet it made us very ill many days, and Anderina worse then I, being of a weaker constitution. This sickness was a great contentment unto me; for it gave me time to think what I should do. Amerinas kinred were all extreamly offended that I should rather chuse death, then living with their Cosin; conceiving that this disdain could proceed from no other cause but from an ill opinion which I had of Amerina; so as addressing themselves unto her, they asked her what occasion she had given me to hate her so extreamly? And told her, that our Qualities were equal, that she had given me my life, and that formerly I loved her so very passionately, as they could not imagine that this alteration in me, proceeded from some fault which I had discovered in her, and that it could be no less then the loss of her honour, if it were so; and that if they came to know of it, let her expect no less then severe punishment for being a stain unto a Family so noble: They added many other me∣naces, unto which Amerina answered rather with tears then words, yet excused her self from all those imputations as well as she could, and assured her self that her innocence would defend her against all calumny; so as the next morning she came unto me, and acquainted me with all these reproaches of her kinred: By fortune, my thoughts were at that time upon Silvia, and grieving at her absense, I spoke so loud, that when she came to the door, she heard me complain of my absense from her, and name Silvia several times. Amerina had so much patience as to hearken, and durst hardly breath, for fear of being perceived, so desirous was she to know the cause of that alteration which she thought to be in me: And when she heard me lament the absense of a Lady, and name Silvia, she presently conceived that some new affection had blast∣ed mine unto her; and being more offended at this, then at all the reproaches of her kinred, she violently pushed open the door, and entred into the chamber so troubled, that she could hardly bid me good morrow; and yet civility, rather then any good will, invited her unto it, and to reply thus, never staying for the return of her salute: Why (said she) should I salute a person, who is the cause of so much sadness to my soul? Cruel Lidias, if there be any spark of that name re∣maining in me, as when thou didst once love me; Is it possible thy inconstant hu∣mour should thus separate thee from me, as to deprive thee both of judgement and reason? Hast thou thus forgot all thy oaths and vows of fidelity: Dost thou not consider how thou art obliged unto me for thy life? Can thy new taken-up affection unto Silvia thus blind thy eyes? But tell me, most insensible mad man, (for that's the name best suits with thy nature) why shouldst thou not marry me, since thou canst not live without me? Must I refer thee again to the claws of Ly∣ons, from whence I have once rescued thee? Dost think thy valour can keep thee always alive? Oh Lidias, didst thou know how many there are, and how fierce and cruel, the very thought would make thee tremble, they will pull thee in a thousand pieces, thy heart and thy intrals will be viewed by all the spectators: oh Lidias! What a most horrid and gastly sight will this be? and how impossible is it to avoid it? Canst thou think fortune will alwaies fight for thee? Oh Lidias Do not deceive thy self: Consider that she is a woman, and that thou wert always
wont to say that inconstancy is a quality inseparably incident unto our sex, and though she be a goddess, yet is she subject unto that imperfection: Alas Lidias, dost thou not know that as a goddess, she is just; and since so, she will most in∣fallibly punish thy injustice: O heaven defend my dearest Lidias from such misfor∣tunes, at least to favour me so far as to take me first out of the world, that I may never see it: upon these words, she broke into a flood of tears, and with much a∣do uttered these words: However, cruel man, though thou wilt not take me to be thy wife, yet seem as if thou didst to save thy life, afterwards do with me what thou wilt: have some pity upon thy own self, and assure thy self thy approaching torment does more trouble me then does thy scorn, and I shall endure that better then thy death. She uttered these words with so many sighs and tears, that I un∣derstood her better by her meaning then by them. At last, when she was silent, I answered her; Fair, and mistaken Amerina, said I, all those horrid torments, of which you have spoken, can never make me break that faith which I have promi∣sed: I will not now mention that gross errour wherein you are, for I see it is to no purpose; I have said so much already, that if you will not give credit unto it, I cannot hope that any thing I shall say will undeceive you; but that you may not entertain any opinion, that it is either any scorn of you, or any change of will in me: Let me tell you, that all these horrid torments you speak of are welcome unto me, so I may by them be rid out of that misery wherein I am, and so I may render unto Silvia my faith, pure and without a stain; it is not any fears that makes me speak thus, but only my desire to see you unmistaken: I have already told you, that I am not Lidias: to my knowledge I never saw him; I assure you my name is Ligdamon, and am a Segusian: Therefore fair Amerina, if you do love me, go with me into that countrey, the journey will not be long, in fifteen dayes we shall easily go it; and I protest unto you by all the gods of heaven and earth, that if when you are there you do not plainly find that I am not Lidias, as you think me, I will not only become your husband but your slave: for such is the virtue and beauty of Amerina, that if I were not already engaged in affecti∣on unto Silvia, whom I will shew you, and whom I have loved from my very infancy, why should not I esteem and embrace her alliance and good will? Amerina hearing me say so, cruel man, (said she unto me, and fixed her eyes upon me) wilt thou inviolably observe this protestation? or dost thou only make it to deceive me by fair promises? Fair Amerina, answered I, had I any intention to deceive you by words, I should never have been so free of them as I have been; but should have let you go on in your errour, and afterwards have left you; but rather then I would be guilty of any such unworthy base action, you see I will first chuse poison; and therefore you cannot think me any deceiver or abuser. I know, wise Amerina, that there is a great God in heaven, who sees all our most secret thoughts, before we can conceive them: I know also, that this God is most om∣nipotent and just, and will punish every one according to their merits: I am sure of all these as that I live; now Amerina, it is this great and just God, whom I pray unto to cover me with eternal torments, if I do not marry you when we are in Forrests, in case you do not most plainly and apparently see that I am not Li∣dias. Upon this solemn protestation, said Amerina, I will follow you, not on∣ly into Forrest, but wheresoever you will, being most confident to find you no other but my dearest Lidias, and that you will take me for your wife according to your promise. Several other promises and vows did second the first, after which we consulted of the means how to take our journey secretly. She thought it most expedient, that I should colourably take her for my wife, and to live a while with her as if I were really her husband, to the end her kindred might be satisfied, and not tor∣ment us so extremely. I consented thereunto, yet with this reservation, that I should not be any way obliged unto marriage, but upon the former protested conditions: for I knew there was no other way to be free from all trou∣bles. Thus we parted upon this resolution, and presently after, her kindred and
those of Lidias, being told by Amerina, that I was resolved to live with her ac∣cording to her desires, they all came to visit me, and rejoice at the good resoluti∣on I had taken. I received their visits with as good a countenance as I could, and excused all former passages, upon pretence of a vow which I had made, which now being absolved from, I was ready to embrace that favour which Amarina and they shewed unto me: These excuses were taken in a better sense then ere they were meant, and gave us those opportunities which we desired: So as a few dayes after, seeming as if we would walk unto a house of Amerinas, not far from Rothomaques, we made all the hast we could into the countreys conquered by the Franks: and though I passionately desired to see Prince Clidemant and Lindamor, yet I could not because Amerina would not give me leave, earnestly desiring to finish that voyage which we undertook, and resolving, as she said, that if she found me any other then Lidias, to enter her self amongst the Virgin Dru∣ides, not daring to return back unto her kindred. We passed so near Paris as to hear of the Franks victory, especially of the ta∣king Callis, whereat she much grieved, as she was a Neustrian, such a natural affe∣ction has every one unto their native countrey. But Madam, be pleased to hear of a new disaster, which to my sorrow befell us. About the hight of the day, when the sun was extremely hot, Amerina not used to travel grew very weary: so finding a handsome shade by the way side, she desired me to let her rest: I, who did very much honour and esteem this Lady, did lay some of my clothes under her, left sitting upon the ground might cause her to catch a cold, and shaded her as well as I could with boughs, from the scortching heat of the sun; and went a little distance from her, to get some more fresh branches. I was no sooner gone some twenty paces from her, but a young Cavalier lighted from his horse, near the place where Amarina was, with inten∣tion to rest there until the day was a little cooler: he tyed his horse unto a tree, and so as he might grase, but not without great need, for he looked to be so lank and faint, that one might easily judge his master had rid him a long journey. In the mean time I returned unto Amerina, and never minding this young man, brought those branches which I had gotten, and went to get some more: he in the mean time, after he had tied his horse and looked about him, he spied Ameri∣na, towards whom he went, and with a handsome becoming civility, asked her if it would not be too great a trouble unto her, if he enjoyed part of that shade where she was. Amerina knew by his tone that he was a stranger, and finding much modesty in his looks and garb, she offered him the conveniency of the place. He was no sooner set upon the stump of an old tree, but I returned, and I per∣ceived, that as soon as he cast his eye upon me, he changed colour, and was so a∣mazed, that he knew not what to do, but slunk away: but hearing him speak unto Amerina, I knew by his tongue he was neither Frank nor Gaul, and thought that he had an opinion, I would dislike his intrusion so near Amerina; so as minding him no more, I talked unto Amerina, and asked her how she did, and whither she desired to sleep. Yes (said she) I would willingly sleep, did I not fear some Serpents and Gnats would sting me: Never fear, said I, for I will not stir from you, but keep a vigilant eye that no such things shall hurt you. Then said she, you shall be my Guardian so I made her a pillow of some of my clothes, and co∣vered her face with my handkerchief, then set my self down by her. Mean time, the young man was got a good distance off: I took notice that he pulled his hat over his eyes, stamped upon the ground with his foot, crossed his arms, looked up towards heaven, and often cast his eye upon me; then would he bite his fin∣gers, lay his hand upon his sword, walk two or three paces towards us, and turn back upon a sudden, using such raptive gestures, as I thought him either mad, or else had some questions of quarrelling importance to ask me: yet I seemed to take no notice, but kept my self close and observed what he did. At last, when he saw Amarina asleep, he came towards me, and when he per∣ceived me to look upon him, he beckned unto me: I rose up as gently as I could,
and coming to him, asked him what he would have with me; but he without re∣turning any answer, looked earnestly upon me, and going back again, made a signe with his hand that I should follow him; which I told him I would, but would not go far from that Lady: he looking upon me with eyes of fire, Does that La∣dy (said he) hinder thee from restoring that which thou owest unto me, thou wicked and perfideous man? Am I (said I in amazement) so wicked and perfide∣ous unto you? Stranger, thou art either out of thy wits, or else art weary of thy life. Life indeed (answered he) is nothing pleasing unto me, but much more then thy ingratitude and unworthiness: Upon this he recoyled two or three paces, and drew his sword: Then coming towards me, This life (said he) which Melander could not lose in twice saving thine, thy sword, and thy ingratitude shall ravish from me. Upon that, without staying for any answer, he fell inconsiderately up∣on me, and I only standing upon my Guard, he hit his right arm upon the point of my sword, and received a wound so deep, that his sword fell out of his hand; and presently after his heart failing him, he fell down, saying, Well Lidias, now I thank thee, since not being abe to live without thee, thou art pleased to give me my death. Upon these words Amerina waked, and seeing our swords drawn, she ran un∣to us; but seeing him upon the ground, and in a swoon, thinking him dead, friend (said she unto me) let us make all the haste we can from hence, lest if any should come in, we should fall into the hands of Justice. Indeed (said I unto her) I am unwilling to leave this young man thus; for I cannot think it possible he should die upon so slight a wound. If he be not dead (replyed she) so much the better, some will come and do him that charitable office which he should receive from us, but however, it is wisdom to secure our selves: Upon this taking me by the hand, she carried me away, and passing by the place where she rested, she took my clothes, and gave them unto me with all possible haste. Observe Madam, how affection will somtimes foresee a danger unto the per∣son loved, as if we had a knowledge of future things. I observed that Amerina from time to time looked back unto the place from whence we came; and after a two hours walk, when we were almost close to the Town of Neomagues, one of the prime Cities of the Ambarres, six Souldiers upon full gallop overtook us, and carried us away prisoners: where Amerinas wit appeared to be most admirable; for undressing her self with all possible haste, she constrained me to change clothes with her: for (said she) if the man be not dead, when he sees me, doubtless he will say that it was not I who wounded him, and so we shall be released. Now so it chanced, that a while after we had left this stranger, the Governour of that Province passed by the Place where this Duel was fought, and asking some Shepherds which saw the passage, who it was that committed this murder, he understood that it was two persons who went towards Neomagues, and on foot: The Governour being desirous to do Justice, dispatch∣ed six of his Guard to seize upon us, as they did; and in the mean time, caused the Corps to be carried away, with intention to bury it: but being only in a swoon, as soon as they began to undress him, he revived; so as they bound up his wound, and set him upon his own horse, with one to hold him, left he should faint again, and fall. He was no sooner upon Horseback, but seeing a young man riding fast upon the way, oh (said the young stranger) yonder's the man who did me the wrong. Some that heard these words, acquainted the Governour, yet not so soon, but the young man, who had a very good horse, and rid very fast, was got a good di∣stance off; so as do what they could, they could not seize upon him, till he was entred the Town: but enquiring at the Gates where he lodged, he was no sooner alighted, but they took him, and brought him to the prison where we were, yet into another chamber; and we were advertised of it by the Goaler, at night when he brought us our meat: But I must needs confess, I was never in all my life more grieved, then when I saw them fetter with Irons the feet and hands of the fair A∣merina, especially when I considered that it was for my sake she suffered: yet she took them with incomparable courage, and cast such an eye upon me, as intimated
that all chains and fetters for my sake were welcome unto her: But indeed, when she saw that they intended to separate us, she began to be somthing troubled, as well because it grieved her to be absent from me, as because she was to stay alone in that place; which made me use all possible endeavours to prevent it: I used all my Rhethorique and Prayers that we might keep together, for we said that we were man and wife: but the man was no more moved with any prayers, or tears, then if he had been a Rock: I offered him to put as many fetters upon my hands and feet as he pleased, I kneeled unto him, held up my hands, would have kissed his feet, but all would not do any good: At last, remembring that gifts will som∣times strike a thunderbolt out of the hand of Jupiter, I took a very fair Diamond from off my finger, and presented it unto him, beseeching him to take that in part of what we intended to do for him: He took this testimony of our good will ve∣ry willingly; and I presently perceived, that the luster of the stone did begin to mollifie his obdurate temper: And after he had looked well upon it, I perceive (said he) that you deserve to have some favour shewed unto you; I pity your condition, and am sorry your affections to each other should be separated; but though I have command to sever you, yet I will not this night: yet do not think it is because of this ring which you have given me, but because I know by your faces that you are not guilty of this crime whereof you are accused; for we can tell at the very first fight who are criminal, and can read their faults in their very eyes. After this he went away, and presently sent us a good Feather-bed, and good Bed-clothes, with so many kind expressions, as we could not chuse but ad∣mire, that a heart which was as hard as any stone, should be softned so suddenly by gifts. After the door was shut, and I think a hundred locks upon it, Amerina after a deep sigh, Friend (said she unto me, for I lay upon a Matteras a little di∣s;tant from her,) are you yet asleep? No (answered I) will you command me any service? The service I would command (said he) is, that to morrow you petend to go and solicite for my enlargement, and when you are out, then to make an escape, and tell me the place where I shall find you. But (replyed I) would you have me leave you alone in this condition? Friend (said she) the condition wherein I am, would be pleasing unto me, were it not for my fears of you; and these chains and fetters, since for your sake, would be more sweet and welcome to me, were I certain of your safety: in lieu of hating them, I would kiss them a thou∣sand them, since by them I can testifie the extream affection which I bear unto you. But tell me, dear friend, when you are gone from hence, will you ever think upon Amerina? Will it not come into your thoughts that Silvia cannot love you so well as I? Oh how great would be my felicity if it should? But Friend, I will not oblige you unto so much; only promise me, that in the midst of all your contentments, you will give me leave to love you, and that you will not call my affection troublesome, nor be weary of it: Upon this condition go, and enjoy the felicities of that happy Silvia; and tell her amidst all the kind embraces which you receive from her, that it was poor Amerina which preserved Lidias for her. She would have talked more, if tears and sighs would have suffered her; which moved me to so much compassion, that to comfort her, I went nearer unto her; as well to oblige her by it, as to avoid being heard by any, having heard, that somtimes walls have ears. First I fell upon my knees by her Bed-side, and taking her hand, which I found fettered, I offered to kiss it; but she pulling it back, caused me to sit down by her, and then I said unto her. These testimonies of that affection which you have unto Lidias, and for whose sake I receive so many favours, do oblige me so far, fair Amerina, that I will swear I shall never enjoy any perfect contentment, until I see you undeceived, and con∣vinced of that errour wherein you are. Oh most cruel man! said she, yet harp∣ing upon that false string, which jars so extreamly in my ears? I most then at one blow cut off all your impertinent excuses: Upon this, raising up her self in her Bed; I conjure you (said she) in the name of truth to tell me, who was it that rescued you out of the claws of Lyons? Who sav'd your life upon condition of Marriage? To whom did I give my person and all my estate? For whom have I
left all my kindred and friends? Tell me who it is I have followed through all these strange Countreys, not valuing my reputation nor any thing else. Tell me (I say) for whom do you think I suffer these Irons upon my hands and feet, and am ready to endure all the torments that mortals can devise? I must needs confess (said I unto her) that it is I who am obliged unto you for all these. Then (replied she presently) if it be you who is obliged unto me for your life, and all these testimo∣nies of my affection, whoever you are, you are the most ungrateful man that e∣ver breathed, if you do not render me amity for amity, and love for love. I do not exact this from you as Lidias, nor bid Lidias love Amerina: But I say, friend whomsoever you are, love her who loves you, and her to whom you are more ob∣liged, then ever any man was unto any woman. These words did a little surprize me, and was the cause why I paused a while without returning any answer, and gave her occasion to continue on: O most ungrateful heart (said she) O the most insensible soul that ever was? what canst thou do more to make me die? why dost thou not open my brest, and pull out that heart which loves thee too well? perhaps you think it has not suffered e∣nough yet, for the fault which it hath committed: I beleive she had not so soon ceased her reproaches, though sighs and tears made her cut her words in the midst, if I had not beseeched her to hear me, and give a little truce to her passion. What canst thou say unto me insensible man? replied she, dost think I know not what answers thou wilt make? Amerina (wilt thou say) were I not already Silvias, and given my self and my faith unto her, I should endeavour to satisfie all my obligations unto you; but I am already tied up by the Laws of fidelity, and I were a most unworthy man, if I should offer to break them: This is the answer I expect from you, but O thou unthankful person, dost think to pay thy debts thu? Canst thou believe such coyn as this will content Amerina? No, no, un∣grateful wretch: I summon thee before the throne of Justice, and ask whether such obligations as these ought to be cancelled, upon such shallow and unreason∣able pretences. For pray thee tell me, has this Silvia, whom thou thus preferrest before me, obliged thee with stronger chains then I have? Did she ever save thy life? has she wholly given her self unto thee? Did she ever follow thee through strange Countreys? Was she ever in prison for thy sake? Did she ever setter her hands and feet with Irons to set thee at liberty: if ever she shewed such testimo∣nies of her affection, then I am silent, and must only complain against my ill Fortune, which would not let me be the first of thy obligers; but if she never did, then I must say, and say again, with abundance of reason and truth, that thou art the most ungrateful, most unjust, and most insensible person that ever lived. At last, I interrupted her in this manner: It is most true, fair Amerina, that I could alledge all those arguments you have instanced, and were we before any uninterested, impartial Judge, perhaps those reasons would not be contemptible. But now I will not urge it so far, knowing as well as you can tell me, that never any was more obliged then I unto you: This I only must say, that if hitherto you do not know, how I resent the favours you have done me, it is because you never asked me, but only asked one Lidias, whom I protest before heaven and all the gods, I never saw to my knowledge: But now, since you address your self unto me, and require of me personally, a satisfaction, and acknowledgment, of all those obligations, wherein I stand bound unto you, I must needs confess my self infinitly to blame, if I did not give you all the satisfaction I am able. 'Tis cer∣tainly true, that he who is forward to borrow, unless he intend to convert his friend into an enemy, must be as forward to pay: And it is as certainly true, fair Amerina, that I am as much obliged unto you, as any man can possibly be: and I do not now deny the debt, but only require a little time, to give ample satisfa∣ction: in the mean time, as part of payment, I beseech you accept of my good will, with this assurance, that I can never pay all I ow you, but am as wil∣ling as you can desire: Ah Ligdamon (said she) and now no more Lidias, since you will have it so, what unspeakable contentment would these words be unto me. if I could think them real? O fair Amerina, replied I presently, if you love me,
lose that of opinion of me, had I a mind to be a lyar, I could easily have pre∣vented all those reproaches, which you were pleased to put upon me, for I could easily haue promised all you demand, without any solicitation from you. But commonly those that are forward to promise are backward to perform: since for the present, I must be contented with your good will (replied she with a more sa∣tisfied tone) and since you promise to give full satisfaction, as soon as you can, tell me friend, what do you mean by these words good will? To which I answer∣ed, fair Amerina, that good will which I mean, and which I beseech you to ac∣cept, is a most real desire to do you all manner of service, with an assurance that I do honour and esteem you. And why (said she and interrupted) do you not say, and love me; and love you also (added I) since you are pleas'd I should use the word; and love you with as sincere and perfect affection, as your honour and my faith will at present permit. To be brief, I am fully resolved to imploy that life which you have given me, in giving you all the contentment you desire, and never to think my self satisfied and contended, until you be. Will you pro∣mise me (said she) to observe all these conditions most religiously? I swear it (said I unto her) by all that's sacred: and may all the curses of heaven and earth fall upon me, if I be forsworn. Then (said she) give me your hand: I swear also to receive your promises, and declare, that until such time as you can give full sa∣tisfaction, I will be contented, and think my self well paid for what I have done: Nay more, I will for ever love you, and upon all occasions whatsoever, oblige you more for the future then I have for the time past. Thus was the mind of Amerina calmed, which was no small advantage to me, for I believe if I had left her in that rage, she might perhaps, out of spite, have discovered all that had passed, and so have ruin'd me and her self too. But on the contrary, after all these conditions, she was urgent with me to be gone the next morning, and that I should stay for her in the first Town of the Segusian Countrey. I urged my sorrows to leave her in that condition, but she told me that as for her, she could not be in any great danger, for come the worst that could, she could say that I was her husband, and to help me away, she lent me her clothes: That besides, there was another stranger already accused, and that when the first stranger saw her, he would know she was not the same that wounded him: That she was not the first wife who helped her husband to escape in her clothes. To be brief, she perswaded so, that I resolved to be gone in the morning: So as in order thereunto, when the Goaler came to visit us, I told him that I had a great desire to provide some good meat for my husband, also desired him to dine with us, and therefore prayed him to let me go into the market to buy it. He who was already well prepared with the diamond that I gave him, and hoped for more, you may go, said he, whether you please; for it is not you that is accused for wounding the man, but it is your husband, and I have no warrant to keep you prisoner, but him only, so as the door shall be open unto you when you please: I thanked him for his courtesy, and promised acknowledgment. I went then un∣to Amerina, and under a pretence of asking her what she would have to dinner, I told her that I would stay at a private place upon the high way, called Pacodiere, near a Segusian Town called Crosset: that in the midst of that Town there is ere∣cted a pillar which divides four wayes: that upon this pillar she should find the first letter of my name, and the place where I lodged: And presently, without any ceremonious taking of leave, I went away; but I must confess, not with∣out tears in my eyes. The Goaler opened the doores, and told me where I might buy any thing I desired, so as I left him in expectation of a good dinner. I was no sooner at liberty, but leaving the way of Gergovia, I went towards Desires, up the river Loyre; and though I was in womans habit, yet I was so de∣sirous to see my native Countrey, and so fearful to be taken in the Dominions of of the King of Ambaries and Boyers, that the fourth day I came to Pacodiere. There I stayed ten dayes, in which time I changed my habit, and hearing no news of Amerina all that while, I desired the good woman of the house where I lodged,
who entertained me very kindly, to watch when Amerina passed by, and to give her those clothes which I wore; and also to tell her, that such urgent business befel me, as I was forced to go unto the great City of Marcelles. And indeed Madam, the reason why I stayed there no longer, was, a Re∣port spread up and down all the Country of an ensuing War, and I did see that some listed Souldiers secretly about Surcea, so as I thought it my duty to present my self unto you Madam, upon this occasion, and employ my life in your service, as I was obliged. Thus did Ligdamon relate his fortune, whilst the Nymph Amasis▪ Prince Godo∣mar, Adamas, and Alcidon, went unto the Queen Argira, who desired to speak with the Nymph and the Prince, before she resolved upon her journey. She told them, that for the favour which she had received from the Gods in the restitution of her Son to his senses, she could never be thankful enough unto them, and all those that were instrumental in it: But she was afraid left Rosilions malady being only a wounded imagination, he should return into it again: And therefore (said she) I thought good to tell him, that it was caused by Inchantment, and that Prince Godomar dis-enchanted him; for he did no more remember any thing that was past since his distraction, then a childe in the cradle: I thought it therefore expedient, as well upon this consideration, as for the preservation of his Reputation, not to let him be known here, but to carry him away secretly, as he came. Adamas then upon the Nymphs command, represented unto her the content∣ment which Prince Godomar and she received at that satisfaction which she found in her journey: That it was very prudently considered of her, to carry away the Prince Rosilion: But before her departure, it was necessary for the observation of that solemn Vow which she had publiquely made, that she knew the danger where∣in that State was, which she had sworn to preserve and defend. Upon this he ac∣quainted her with the enterprise of Polemas, with his correspondencies with his Neighbour Princes, especially with the Burgundian King; with the assistance that King had promised unto him; with his pretended offence against Prince Godomar and Dorinde; with the death of Prince Clidemant, with the absence of Lindamore and his Forces: Briefly, the Druide omitted nothing that was necessary to be im∣parted unto her: so as Madam (concluded he) if you do not assist the Nymph, as you have voluntarily obliged your self by solemn vow, I know not what will be∣come of her. The Queen then who gave a very attentive ear unto all this, turning towards the Nymph, I am very glad Madam (said she unto her) to know all that this great Druide hath related unto me, that I may testifie unto the Gods and you, how I can keep my promise: It seems to be the will of heaven my son should receive this favour from this place purposely to interest him and me also in your affairs. I assure you, that if you will give me but a moneths time, I will bring so many fighting armed men into the field, as though the King of the Burgundians be a great Prince, yet he shall not be able to hurt you. Whilst the Nymph was returning thanks, and the Queen confirming her pro∣mise of present aid, one came and acquainted the Queen Argira, that a Boyen Cavalier was come unto her from King Policander. As soon as the Queen saw him; what News (said she unto him) do you bring me from the King? Not good (answered he) but Madam, he does passionately desire to see you. Upon this he presented King Policanders Letter unto her. The Queen took it with a troubled hand, and with extream inquietude broke open the Seal; she read it, and then with tears in her eyes shewed it unto the Nymph, who read these words.
King POLICANDERS Letter unto the Queen ARGIRA. DEath is a thing so natural and common, that it never troubles me; but to die before I see you, does extreamly perplex my soul: because I would gladly discharge my self of that Debt and Du∣ty which I owe unto you. Come therefore, Madam, with as much haste as possibly you can, if you desire my Soul should depart content∣edly in giving you satisfaction. This Bearer will acquaint you with the condition wherein he left me. Oh Heavens! cryed out the Queen, great joys are commonly followed with great sorrows. Then addressing her self to the Cavalier, she enquired of the Kings sickness, & what the Physitians thought of him: She understood that they thought him in great danger of his life, and that she must make haste, if she came time e∣nough to see him alive. The Princess (whose courage was equal to her quality) mustering together all her vertues and generosity, after the effusion of some tears, she resolved upon a course worthy of her self; and addressing her self unto the Nymph, Madam (said she unto her) you see I am constrained to depart for the good of my children, and happiness of all the remainder of my life: But I promise to arm in your defence, not only the Boyens, Ambarres, and Lemovices, but all the Picts, the Santons, and the Bituriges: Nay more, either my Allies and Confederates shall fail me, or the Armorique Cities, and other Kings, my Confederates, shall do the same. If King Policander be not able to come in person, my two children shall, who dare not refuse, when they see me come my self. In assurance of what I say, I will leave Rosanira with you, who I beseech you may keep Galathea company till I re∣turn: This pawn shall remain with you, not only to put me in mind of my pro∣mise, but to invite Celiodantes as her Brother, and Rosilion as her Lover, to come and relieve her. Upon this, retiring her self, she took order for her departure, acquainted Rosilion with Policanders sickness, and how necessary it was to make all possible haste; that therefore she was constrained to leave Rosanira in the hands of the Nymph, with almost all her women, and that they would very shortly return un∣to her again, but for the present, there was a necessity of leaving her for a time, upon some reasons which she would impart unto him by the way. Rosanira would gladly have followed the Queen Argira; but she was the bet∣ter contented to stay with the Nymph, by reason of the great League of Amity already contracted betwixt her and Galathea. All things being ready, the Queen Argira departed with Rosilion, and carri∣ed with her only five and twenty Souldiers, leaving the rest with the Princess Rosa∣nira, with a charge to obey the Nymph, and the Prince Godomar, in whatsoever they should command. She was no sooner out of sight of Marcelles, but the Guards upon the top of the Tower, espied some Horsemen, whom they thought to be armed, because the Sun shining upon their Armes, did make a great glistering. The Prince Godo∣mar was presently acquainted, and Adamas also; who gave orders unto the Guards at the Port, to have their Horse in readiness. A while after they discovered them to be six Troops of Horse, who accompanied some persons that were unarmed. When they came near the Town, they stayed, and those who were unarmed, who were to the number of twenty, advanced, and told the Guard at the Gate, that there was Alerantes, an Envoy whom the Burgundian King had sent unto the
Nymph Amasis. As soon as she was acquainted with it, by the counsel of the Prince, Adamas, Alcidon, and Damon, she sent those Horse which the Queen Argira left, to receive him: and being brought into her presence, she would not hear him until Prince Godomar was present also: and because Alerantes was unwilling to speak before him: Then (said she unto him) I dare not hear you without his per∣mission, because I have transferred all the Soveraign power into his hands. Since Madam you will have it so (said he) I must according to the commands of my So∣veraign Lord tell you, that considering the good correspondency which hath al∣ways been betwixt you, he complains exceedingly against you; that you should not only receive into your protection a woman called Dorinde, who most ignomi∣niously ran away out of the house of the Princess Clotilda, his Neece, but also have protected all those that murdered Clorintes the Captain of his Guard, parti∣cularly the Prince Godomar, who he now disclaims for his son, and takes for his most cruel enemy. And because Madam, perhaps you do not know how much he is displeased at your harbouring of such as are his enemies, he lets you know by me, and summons you to deliver into his hands Dorinde, as the shame of his house, and Prince Godomar, as the Ring-leader of Rebels: In so doing, he offers you all amity and assistance; if otherwise, you must expect the fury of his Arms. The Nymph not at all daunted, she addressed her self unto the Prince, Sir (said she) It belongs unto you to give an answer. Though Madam (answered he) it was your pleasure to confer all authority upon me, and so consequently it be∣longs unto me to answer, yet I beseech you to return such a one, as you shall please; and believe, this sword shall maintain whatever you shall say. Amasis upon this turned towards Alerantes; Cavalier (said she) I cannot believe that a King so wise as Gondebaut, would ever give you any commission to speak so unworthily of so great a Prince as his own Son, nor of so wise and well born a woman as Dorinde; and therefore without expectance of any answer from me, get out of my Dominions as soon as you can, or otherwise you shall find such entertainment as your arrogance deserves. Madam (answered he) I came not without my Commission, and here are Let∣ters of Credence written unto you by the Kings own hand. The Nymph took them, and presented them unto the Prince: who reading them, assured her they were written by the Burgundian King. Then (said the Nymph) I shall talk with you after another fashion: Tell therefore unto King Gondebaut, that as for Do∣rinde, my Dominions shall be always free unto any that are oppressed: And as for Prince Godomar, it is not he that is in my Dominions, but I that am in his, he being the absolute Lord of all the Segusians, and of all Forrests. As for the war which he threatens upon me, tell him, that it is men indeed who begins wars, but it is the Gods only who gives victories, and in that confidence I fear not the injustice of his Arms. Thus spoke the Nymph, and all that heard her applauded her courage: when Godomar saw she had no more to say; for my part (said he) tell the King, that though he dis-own me for his Son, yet I will never do any act that shall be un∣worthy of the Name; and to testifie the truth of what I say, tell him, that as long as this sword will last, I will defend the honour of such Ladies as are unjustly op∣pressed, and maliciously aspersed. As for Dorinde, whom I take into my protection, I will defend her with my sword in my hand, against any that will offer to wrong her: And if there be any that carries the Title of Cavalier, who will speak any ill of her, or maintain the words which you have spoke against her, or against us, who have delivered her out of the hands of those who would injuriously have carried her away, here is a pawn (said he, and gave him his Glove) which imports a challenge; I except against none but the King my Father; knowing very well, that Prince Sigismond my bro∣ther, will arm himself with me in the same quarrel, if Paternal authority do not oppress him. As for war, which he threatens upon this great Nymph; tell him, I beseech one thing from him, which is, that he will not come himself, unless he have a mind to see his Army back'd in pieces before his face: but if he have a mind to
be rid of any bad servants, he may send them hither, and we shall quickly discharge him of them. Alerantes turning towards the Nymph, Madam (said he) Is this all the satis∣faction I must carry unto the King my Master? If King Gondebaut (answered she) be not contented with these answers, tell him, he could expect no other from such as he would oppress, and who yet fears not the violence of his unjust Arms where∣with he threatens a woman. I would not willingly (answered Alerantes) make this declaration; but since you do so little esteem the grandeur of the King, my Lord, and so much slight the clemency which he offers, I must let you know from him, that he is your mortal enemy; that he does defie you, and all that adhere unto you; that he declares the Segusians, and all Forrests, to be an enemies Country, and therefore liable to the plunder and inevitable fury of his Army. As he spoke these words, he broke a staff which he held in his hand in the midst, and threw the pieces at the feet of the Nymph: Thus (said he) in the presence of Gods and men, be all amity broke of betwixt you for ever. The Nymph enraged with anger, and setting her foot upon the broken staff; and thus (said she) do I trample upon this emblem of our broken alliance; I do not value any of his thundring threats, but hope that Tautates will blast them all. Then Alerantes without doing any reverence, or any action of respect or honour, retired; when Godomar said unto him, what answer do you give unto the challenge which I offered? We shall come ere long (answered he) with an Ar∣my of threescore thousand men. That (said the Prince) is either too many, or too few: Too many for a particular combate; and too few to fight against the Justice of the Gods. Alerantes returned him no answer, but shaking his head in a menacing man∣ner, he went out of the Castle, and taking horse, when he was some twenty pa∣ces out of the Town, he made a stop, and turned about▪ Oh ye titular Gods of the City of Marcelles (cryed he out in a loud voice) and all ye other Gods and Goddesses who are here adored, I beseech you be auspicious unto the Arms of the King my Lord, and be pleased to come into the Royal City of Lions where he vows to build you a Temple, to erect Altars, and adore you with all manner of Reve∣rence and Honour. When he had repeated these words thrice over, he took a Javelin, and ran with all his force against the walls of the Town, then setting spurs to his Horse, he rid as fast as he could unto the six Troops which waited for him. This action incensed the people extreamly; and had not Adamas restrained them, doubtless they would have done him some displeasure; but he told them, that Ambassadors were no ways culpable of the message they brought, nor deser∣ved any punishment; and that by the Law of Nations, they were to pass freely. And seeing all the City much startled at the noise of this war, he advised the chief Magistrates to appease this Tumult wisely; and because it was now too late to as∣semble the whole Corporation of the Town together, the Nymph would to mor∣row acquaint them with the causes of all these rumors. These prudent promises of the Druide, did a little calm their spirits; and doubling the Guards, he went unto the Castle, to advise with the Nymph and Prince Godomar. He came thither just as Adrastes was upon his knees before that Prince to kiss his hand, in gratitude for the favour he received from him. Godomar took him up, and carried him unto Damon and Alcidon. Cavalier (said he unto Damon) Here is the Shepherd unto whom the Gods have been so favourable. It was a blessed act, answered Damon, and a thousand pities so honest a Shepherd should be reduced unto such a condition upon so noble a cause; If all those that commit the same fault he did, should be as harshly treated as he was, I believe Sir, you would have work enough in driving of Nails. Every one did laugh at this: Af∣terwards he went on, and spoke unto Celidea; Shepherdess (said he) I wonder you should not tax me with my promise, that the Gods may restore that which they once gave unto you. Sir, answered she, I am so far from putting you in me∣mory, that I most earnestly beseech you to forget it. It does amaze me (said Godomar) to hear you say so; I cannot believe any woman in the world is of your
mind: for as strength and prudence have given men the priviledge to be Lords of the Universe, so the gods have given beauty unto women to be the Ladies and Mistresses of men. Sir, answered she, I should prize this beauty whereof you speak, as much as any other, if I did not consider the recovery of it may cost me that which is dearer then my life; for it is a very death unto me to be absent from Thamires: No, no, (answered Thamires) I beseech you set your heart at rest: for since you depri∣ved your self of that which is most dear unto your sex, only to become mine, I am resolved, rather then it should not be restored unto you, to lose my life: and therefore Sir (said he unto Damon) I beseech you perform your promise, and be not hindred by the tears of this Shepherdess, whose passion does blind her reason: appoint some to be my guide, and tell me what I shall do before I go. I should be very sorry to displeasure this wife shepherdess (answered Damon) but the obligation of my promise may excuse me, and therefore Halladine my servant shall be your guide; I will write a Letter unto the learned Operatour: and all that you have to do here, is to make the skars in her face bleed, and wet in the bloud as many little staves as there is wounds, in the blood; then when they are dry, lap them up in linnen clothes, and carry them away as soon as may be: in the mean time, care must be had of keeping the wounds very clean, washing them every day with warm wine, and covering them close, lest any dust get in; then doubtless you will find her recovered at your return. O heavens (cryed out Ce∣leda) must this trfle of Nature, which they call beauty, cause a separation so long betwixt Thamires and me? Ah my dearest Thamires (said she) are you not contented with me as I am? For my part I am, and if you be also, why should you seek it with so much danger to your self, and sorrow to me? Can you be bet∣ter then contented? Take heed, lest the gods, seeing you so insatiable, should de∣prive you of those contentments which you now enjoy: upon this she hung about his neck, with such a stream of tears, as moved every one to pity her, and ad∣mire her, except Thamires, who being peremptorily resolved upon the journey, was very earnest with Damon to perform his promise: Whereupon Damon, calling for Halladine, he commanded him to make himself ready, and wait upon Tha∣mires, unto the great master of natures secrets in Carthage, called Olicarsis; and because Thamires intended to go home that night, and make all ready for his jour∣ney in the morning, Halladine went to prepare himself according to his masters commands, though something against his mind to leave him before he was perfect∣ly recovered. In the interim, Damon writ a Letter, and gave it unto Halla∣dine. Celidea (seeing there was no way to divert Thamires from this voyage, since neither prayers nor tears would prevail) she called to mind Palemons vow of granting the first request that was made unto him. O Palemon (said she unto him) I conjure you by your solemn vow which you made, to grant the first thing which was asked you, after the obtaining your desires, to undertake this journey in lieu of Thamires. Palemon was a little surpized, but presently recollecting himself: O Celidea (said he) I will never break my vow, though the journey should cost me my life, and therefore am ready to perform it: Ah me! cried out the Shepherdess Doris, what a fool I was, not to make the first request, that Pa∣lemon should never leave me? Must I now lose him to content another? O most cruel Shepherdess, worse against me then thy own face? What offence have I done thee that thou shouldest thus grieve me to death? Companion (replied Celidea, with a more satisfied countenance). I must confess I am very sorry to do you this displeasure; but you see I used all means possible to prevent it: and since all will not prevail, I beseech you sweet Shepherdesse to pardon me, since what I did was by force and constraint. Doris having no hopes of altering Celidea, nor in making Palemon to break his vow, she broke out into a Torrent of tears, and went out of the chamber, complaining against Celidea, and against heaven for consenting unto her sad For∣tune. Halladine by this time being ready, Thamires, with a thousand thanks, took
his leave of Damon, and afterwards of the Nymph and the Prince: So likewise did Celidea, Licidas, Palemon, Adrastes, and also Hylas, who notwithstanding all the prayers of Dorinde, Cercinea, Palanice, and Florice, would stay no longer from Stella. What Hylas (said Leonide unto him) has Stella more power to draw you from us, then all we together have to stay you? Madam, answered he, every one must follow their Destiny: Why, replied she, is not your Destiny the same it was wont to be? for I have heard you say, it was by Destiny you loved beauty wheresoever you met with it; if so, you must needs confesse that all these fair La∣dies have more beauty then Stella alone. Madam (answered Hylas) I call nothing beauty but what pleaseth me, and if Stella alone do please me more then all these you speak of, is not she her self, more beauty unto me then all they? Upon this, say what they could, he went away in the company of those Shepherds and Shepherdesses, amongst which was Halla∣dine, who never in his life undertook a journey more against his mind then this, be∣cause he left Damon at a time when he might be most serviceable about his person. Almost at the end of the Town, they all parted, after abundance of thanks unto Clindor, who accompanied Licidas as far as possibly he could. As for Adrastes, he acknowledged himself so obliged unto Palemon for the care he had of his cure, that he offered himself several times to go with Halladine in his room, but he would not permit him, because he thought it no satisfaction of his vow, if he should go only by proxy: But at last, after many difficulties, his importunity so far prevailed as to accompany him: This action of Adrastes gained more upon the good will of Doris, then all his former Courtship had done. That night Halladne stayed at the house of Thamires, where he entertained all the company with all imaginable welcome; but when they were to draw blood from the face of Celidea, her pain was not a little: for blood was to be drawn from every Scar, and the Chirurgion hardly left any part of her face unscarified, because otherwise the Sympathetical salve would not work perfect effect. The little sticks then being all dipped in blood, and dry, they were all lapped up very carefully in linnen clothes, and put into a box: 'So betimes in the morning, Pale∣mon, Adrastes, and Halladine, all three set forwards towards Lions. All this while neither Amasis, nor Adamas forgot Climanthes, and it was the next morning he was to come unto Galathea: So as order was taken with Leonide and Silvia over night, to be up betimes the next morning, and to be at the place appointed to receive him, and bring him in: those also who were to seiz upon him were provided. And the sun no sooner begun to appear, but this imposture came to the garden door, where the two Nymphs received him: as he did very handsomly counterfeit that sanctity whereof he made profession, so Leonide and Slvia, did as well personate a great veneration and respect of his person, which puffed up his soul into such a swelling pride, that he went as if he admired him∣self. The Nymph Galathea took him into her closet, as it was concluded upon, to the end the Nymph Amasis, Prince Godomar, Alcidon, and Adamas, might hear what he said, being placed in such convenient corners, that they might hear and see and not be seen: The gravity of his pace, when he came into the presence of Galathea, was admirable; but much more the impudence, with which he began to speak unto her: Madam (said he unto her, with a severe and Majestick look) you have before you an Ambassadour, not from a Prince, King or any Monarch upon earth, but from the great and omnipotent Prince of heaven: Consider well how great a favour this is, and how you ought to receive him: visits and em∣bassies from mortal Princes, what faces soever they put on them, are all aimed at the profit of the sender; but mine cannot be suspected to have any such inter∣rested aim, since all things are the gifts of God, who needs not any thing the world can give: Hark therefore, O Nymph, unto what I shall say; yet do not heari on your of curiosity, but with a full resolution to obey, and correspond unto the good will of this great God unto you: Then he paused a while, and Ga∣lathea was so surprized at the admirable impudence of this Imposture, that she could not answer a word: afterwards he begun thus:
This great God said that unto me; arise Climanthis my servant, go and talk with Galathea, chide her for a fault which she hath committed; and tell her that punishment is ready to fall upon her head: God hath already the whip in his hand, his arm is lifted up; and there wants nothing, but to let it fall again; He who must be your husband, and you his wife will this very day be hunting, and pass by the four several wayes at Termes: there you may see him, that is the very nick of time; let it slip, and be eternally miserable: see him, and be eternally happy. He uttered these words, in such an imperious tone, as if a god himself had pronounced them: Then changing his behaviour and assuming his accustomed countenance and speech, he continued: Now, O great Nymph, you know the will of heaven, be more careful to observe it then formerly you have been, for otherwise, the anger of this great God will overwhelme you. And because com∣munication with this great God, forbids any converse with men, unless by his par∣ticular command: give me leave to prophane my self no longer, since I have done all that I had in commission. The Nymph, who admired the goodness of God, in such an Imposture to live, she much desired to be out of his company, and therefore left him without any answer, but that she would be alwayes obedient unto whatsoever the gods commanded her. But (said she before she went) must I go alone, or in company unto Termes; only with one Nymph, answered he; but replied she. what will those that see me say: have a thin Scarf over your face, answered he, and you may so disguise your self that none can know you: at what hour, asked she, shall I see this Hunts∣man? To morrow, said he, betwixt six and seven of the clock in the morning, for so the god did tell me. Then, said the Nymph, go and thank your God for me, and assure him that I will go and satisfie his commands. Upon this the Nymph left him, and referred him into the hands of Leonide and Silvia, who accompa∣nied him as far as the Garden door, which they had no sooner shut, but those, who by the command of Adamas watched for his coming, seized upon him, and carried him away immediatly to a prison which was prepared for him: when they took him and put him into prison, he called them prophane and impious persons, and Atheists, for daring to lay any violent hands upon one that was a friend to the great God: But when they laid Irons upon his feet and hands, he changed colour, and began to tremble; and more, when he saw them begin to clog him with more chains. The gravity wherewith he menaced them hitherto, began to be more mild and calm, and now he fell to prayers and supplications: Sirs (said he unto them) what offences have I given unto you? why should you be so severe against me? what advantage will my ruine be unto you? If by any cunning I have endeavoured to get something, and to arive at some Grandure, unto whom have I done any wrong? where is he that can complain against me? Is it not permitted the birds, who never sow nor reap, to fly into the fields and feed upon what they can find? If I by any harmless art would get a livelyhood, why will they unjustly punish me for it? Sir, be not you any instrument of such injuries, unless you do not fear the punishment of the gods: I am not yet so miserable and destitute of friends, but if you will shew any pity upon my age, and set me at liberty, I can find out a way to recompence you very bountifully: Do not refuse a Fortune when it is of∣fered, he that will refuse it when he may, may go without it when he would have it: No, no, said they, we never make any profit unto our selves, but with ho∣nour, never with Treason; all thy offers do but render thee more culpable, and never hope to corrupt us. Think upon thy faults, and assure thy self thou most very shortly render an accompt, and receive sallary, according to thy de∣serts. One of the company took notice, that when he thought he was not seen, he strived several times to put his hand into his bosome, but his Irons would not per∣mit
him: so as he supposed, he had there, something of importance. And as they were searching him, Adamas and Alcedon, who heard of his being taken, entred; but because they desired to talk with him alone, they commanded all the Guard to withdraw, then Adamas going unto him, and after he had well looked upon him; Fie, fie, thou wicked Imposture (said he unto him) art thou not asha∣med to prophane the habit which I see thou wearest? Sir, answered he with an im∣pudent brow, I acknowledge you to be my Grand Druide, and I know you ought not to despise me as you do: for though unworthy, yet am I of the same Order whereof you are chief: Heaven defend me (said the Druide) from such impiety, and rather take away my life, then suffer me to be the Patron of such Impostures. Tell me? how are you qualified? where did you receive your Orders? Sir, an∣swered he, it is now almost an age, since I received them at Dreux. Surely said Adamas, he is mad, he thinks the distance of the place will keep us from disco∣vering his knavery: why did you come into our jurisdiction without a Licence? I thought, replied he, that it was lawful to serve god every where: But do you not know (said Adamas) that none are to officiate in the charge of a Druide in these provinces, unless I licence them? It is so short a time since I came (answer∣ed he) and I have conversed with so few, that I never heard of this Ordinance. Did not that God (said Adamas) whom you converse withall so familiarly, ad∣vertise you of it? The god of whom you speak (replied he) did never talk with me of any such affairs, what then do you talk of (said Adamas) when he com∣mands me (answered Climanches) then I shall tell you. Alcedon and Adamas, who knew this man to be a most notorious imposture, they could not chuse but wonder at his impudence: when one of those who took him came and acquainted them, how he offered to corrupt them, to which he answered with extream impudence, that these were only meer imaginations, upon which he never entertained the least thought: thus, said he, are innocent men scandalized by wicked men; which the souldier hearing, and being extremely angry (Sir said he unto Adamas) this is the most brazen fac'd lier that ever lived: three of my companions stood by, when he gave us that language, and I am most confident there is something in his brest that would convince him: for we have seen him several times strive to take somthing out, when he thought we did not see him. Call then your companions (said Adamas) and search him very carefully. At this command, Climanthis was quite out of countenance, for though he was a ve∣ry subtil fellow, yet as Fortune was, when he was almost at the Garden door, very early, Polemas sent him a letter, which he put in his brest, because he knew not a more secret place at that time to lay it up in: and therefore when they be∣gan to search him, he made as much resistance as possibly he could, pushing all a∣bout him with his arms and head, and throwing them to the ground, as if he were possessed with some devil. This great resistance made Adamas and Alcidon, more desirous to know what it was: so as calling for more help, they searched him, and found the Letter, and because it was very dark in the prison, they went out to read it, and found written these words. POLEMAS his Letter unto CLI∣MANTHES. DEar friend of my heart, impatience is alwayes a companion of love; do not therefore wonder I should waken you thus early: at seven of the clock I will be at Termes, and a most happy hunter shall I be if by your contrivance I meet there with what you have promised unto me: Once more dear Climanthes, I swear that Gala∣thea shall be no sooner mine, but I will make you a posessour of your dear Le∣onide,
with what share thou wilt have in the State; of which, if ever I be Lord, I am beholding unto you for it. Force at the worst will not fail us▪ but I had rather your Prudence should bring it to pass by fair means: The first is more safe and certain, but the other more honourable: yet if one do fail, the other shall serve the turn. See (said Adamas) what would we know more of this wicked man, here is the whole enterprize discovered; Let us see (said Alcidon) if we can catch this Hun∣ter at Termes. As for that (replyed Adamas) order is already taken; for Leonide and Silvia are gone thither already, the first of them in Galatheas habit, yet with a Scarf about her head; also we have placed Lerintes with thirty horse in a Grange close by; to the end if Polemas pass by, he may be caught in his own Net. Whilst they were talking thus, Climanthes seeing all his plot quite discovered, and expecting nothing but an ignominious death, he fell into such despair, that seeing himself alone in the prison, he ran his head so violently against the wall, that blood gush∣ed out at his eyes and mouth; so as when Adamas came again into the prison, to ask him some questions, he found him gasping and grovelling upon the ground, as if he were choaked with a Catarh: they endeavoured to revive him; but all in vain: for he had made such a hole in his head, that his brains came out. Thus died this miserable man; and thus (said the grand Druide) is the great Tautates just, who has brought upon the head of this wicked wretch, that vengeance and misery which he had prepared for others. Upon these considerations Alcidon and Adamas went to render an account un∣to the Nymph and the Prince Godomar, and they had no sooner related all passages, and shewed the Letter, but they heard a great Tumult and noise which came from the Gate toward Termes. For Leonide and Silvia being gone thither, and Pole∣mas passing by in the habit of a hunter, thinking Galathia was there, he carried them away on pillions, before those who were at the Grange could come time enough to relieve them: for the door being too little, and an iron bar which used to shut the door falling unluckily a cross, they could not get out till Polemas had got a good disstance off; and presently after appeared four great Bodies of Horse which came to meet him; so as those whom Amasis sent, were forced to retreat a little hastily, which caused no small noise in the Town. Adamas then seeing that all was discovered and that no longer delay was to be used, Madam, (said he unto the Nymph) these tears which you shed for Leonide and Silvia, does indeed argue your natural sweetness, but at this time the necessity of your affairs requires you should shew the courage of a man, and have recourse unto remedies of prudence, and not offices of pity: I conceive it expedient to assemble the Magistrates of the Town, and that you acquaint them not only with the loss of Prince Clidemant, but also with the Treason of Polemas and Climanthes, also at the same time to shew them by what mean you intend to subdue this Rebel. For the best way to content the people, is to put them into great hopes, and to hide all dangers from them. Godomar concurring with his opinion, the most notable of them were called▪ and curiosity brought thither abundance of the common sort: Then the Nymph commanded the grand Druide to let them understand the occasi∣on for which she convened them together; which he did in such eloquent terms, that when he mentioned the death of Prince Clidemant, there was not one in all this great company that did not testifie his sorrows by his tears and sighs: But when he proceeded and mentioned the enterprise of Polemas and Climanthes, not only upon the state, but upon the person of Galathea, as he made it apparent by his Letter, and the taking of Leonide and Silvia, thinking the one of them to be Galathea: Then all the people began to cry out with one voice, Murder the Tray∣tor, and long live our great Nymph Amasis: But when to verifie the truth of all this, he caused the body of this Impostor to be brought out, and related his tricks, his designs, and his death: First the children, next them, the common sort of people, and at last almost all fell upon this Corps, and drawing it by the
legs almost quite out of the Castle, and threw it in a ditch: But as if this were not revenge enough, the people went again unto him, and hurried him by the heels out of the Town, doing all the ignominy imaginable unto it. The chief of them in the mean time, and the most notable, did not remove until they heard all that Adamas had to say unto them from the Nymph: And when Adamas had done, Clindor who for his Age, Quality, and Prudence, all the Assembly made choice of to give the answer, he spoke in this manner. THe loss Madam, which you have had, does not concern only one Person, or one Family, but it is general, and not only all this Country has a share in it, but also all the Gauls, nay all Eu∣rope may bewail the loss of so great a Prince. You see how our Tears and our Groans do accompany your grief, and how we give you this outward testimony of the inward resentment of our Souls: I must con∣fess all this is but a feeble remedy against so great a disaster; yet it may be some comfort unto you to see how sadly all your faithful Subjects do take unto themselves a share in all your griefs and misfortunes. But Madam, we must all needs confess, that this second News which you have told us, does pierce us to the very heart, with more stinging re∣sentments then the first: For the death of a Prince whom none of us did ever think mortal, unless in his Reputation and Honour, is not so hard to be endured, as is the stain of Perfidie and Treason upon this Country, which before was never seen, nor so much as imagined. Oh Heavens! Madam, that such Monsters should be found in Forrests a∣mongst us, and in our days: I wonder our Earth (unaccustomed to such an ignominious burthen) does not swallow them up alive. We know not what to say, nor think, unless that Heaven being offended at us for our sins, will punish us more grievously then all ages past. This stain up∣on us does swell us with so much grief, as we cannot lift up our eyes to weep, nor open our mouths to lament and sigh for so great a shame. Yet since the good ought not to be charged with the crimes of the wicked, we will lift up our eyes unto you, Madam, and speak in behalf of this Town, and we dare say of all the Country, if we had time to confer with them. Madam, as becomes your faithful Subjects, we do offer unto you all that is within these Walls, our Estates, our Children, our Blood, our Lives: Protesting before Hesus, Belinus, Tharamis, our great Tautates, that as long as we live, and as long as you live, we will not have any Soveraign over us but Amasis: And we will as soon fail in our Duties to the Gods, as in our Fealty to you, not sparing either Estates, Children, or Lives: And in testification of this, let every one lift up his hand and his heart, and cry, Long live the Nymph Amasis. Upon this, the hands of all the Assembly were seen above their heads, and such a shout that it was heard further then all over the Town. As the Nymph was returning them hearty thanks for the demonstrations of their good wills, Adamas was advertised that the souldiers which had been levied in the province were very near the gates, which caused the Nymph to abreviate her speech, that she might view this welcome and necessary succour. Be pleased to know (said the man that brought the news) That they are at least fifteen hun∣dred, the best armed, and in the best order that was seen a long time; for they
imagined that they came upon the Ceremony of the Misleto, so as they had trim∣med up themselves to the best advantage. Thus all the Assembly parted with such extream forwardness to serve the Nymph, that she was exceedingly encou∣raged. In the mean time, Adamas causing the gates to be opened, these souldiers en∣tred in such an excellent posture, that all those who saw them, thought them to be men of very good service, all their caps were crowned with oak leaves, for so was the custome of all those that were called to the Ceremony, as they were. They were no sooner drawn up into a body, but they were appointed Captains, Lieutenants, and other military officers, unto whom they were to be obedient, presently after, they were distributed into quarters, as well for the defence of the walls, as to guard the streets and passes in the Town. Then taking a view of all the horse, counting those which the Queen Argira left, and those which Prince Godomar brought, the number was two hundred and fifty, which also were di∣vided into five troops, fifty in each; all the foot were put under charge of Da∣mon, who not being perfectly recovered of his wounds, could hardly wear arms or get on horseback, yet he went into the Town, and visited the walls and works. On the other side, Alcedon had the charge of all the horse, and put them into as good a posture as possibly could be. In the mean time Prince Godomar, who was general, did visit the Magazines both in the Castle and Town, and by the pru∣dent advice of Adamas, provided all things which he could foresee necessary up∣on all occasions. In the mean time Polemas was so proud of his price, that he thought upon no∣thing less already, then the sumpuosity of his marriage, and the magnificence of his train: for verily thinking that Galathea was in his power, he had no thoughts but upon his marriage, and that nothing could retard his happiness, for he valued not the content of the Nymph, though he knew she would be extream∣ly against it; but being fully resolved, according to the councel of Climanthes, to add force unto his prayers, he believed that after he was once his wife she would then be more tractable. But when he came to Surien, and with abundne of honour and respect accosted Leonide, whom he took for Galathea, and at the very first word she spoke, he found his mistake. O how dead was he then struck? which Leonide perceiving, and desiring if it were possible to deceive the deceiver, she took him by one hand and Silvia by another, O Polemas (said she) you had committed the greatest errour that ever you did in all your life, and if he who carried me away behind him, would have suffered me to have spoke unto you, as I desired him a hundred times, I had prevented it. For this morning a Druide (if it be lawful to call so sacred a person by that name) came unto Galathea from his God, to command her to marry him, whom at seven of the clock in the morn∣ing, she should see pass by the four wayes at Termes: and if she did not, to assure her self that all the rest of her dayes should be most miserable, and she the most unfortunate woman in the world: The Nymph she made a full account to go, and be obedient unto this command, rather then be miserable all her life; but when she was just ready to go out, she fell sick and was forced to go to bed: But yet being extreamly desirous to know him that was destinied to be her husband, she commanded us to go thither, and tell her the name and quality of him that pas∣sed by the first, thinking that him whom the gods did chuse for her to be her hus∣band, was a better choise then she her self could make. I say therefore, that if you had not been so rash in carrying, us away certainly upon our report, the Nymph would have sent unto you before night, and acquainted you with her mind. Polemas hearing this, and knowing what Climanthes had told her, he repented himself of his carrying them away so hastily; yet seeing Leonide in Galatheas clothes: but how comes it to pass, said he, that you are in her clothes? As for that, answered Leonide, when the Ceremony of driving the sacred nails was, she gave unto me and several others of my companions, this sute like unto her own: but, said Polemas, why were you so hudded that none could know you? because (answered Leonide) many used to pass by that way, and were desirous to be un∣known.
But, replied he, what was the meaning of those horsemen that pursued us? I believe, answered she, that they were some of the Queen Argiras men, who going to wait upon her part of the way, returned again to the Princess Re∣sanira, who stayes at Marcelles, and they seeing us carryed away, and hearing us cry out, thought themselves obliged to relieve us without our knowledge, or de∣signe. What business, said Polemas, had the Queen Argira there? We do not know, answered Leonide, she has been indeed some dayes in the Castle, but so close and retired, that we did not so much as know her name till the day she de∣parted. Polemas calling for Peliodontes, Argonides, Listander, and Ligonias, acquaint∣ed them with what Leonide told him, and they were all of opinion that it was best to send them back again unto Galathea, with an excuse that some hunters took them away unknown unto Polemas, and in the mean time to oblige Leonide and Silvia by all manner of courtesies to say so. Polemas then caused a coach to be made ready for them, and using them with all possible reverence and kindnesse, he professed a thousand services; and waiting upon them to the coach, beseeched them both to be his friends upon this occasion, with all possible promises of re∣muneration. You may be sure, that they for their parts, did promise to do won∣ders for him, and taking his leave of them, he returned to his chamber, the ful∣lest of hopes that ever was man: but he and his four privy councellers had no sooner shut the door; but the son of Merouthes, his correspondent in Marcel∣les, came to speak with him▪ as soon as he came into the chamber, Sir, said he, I am very sorry to be the messenger of ill news, but since I am commanded by a Father, and knowing how necessary it is you should be acquainted with it, I thought it may as well come to your ear by me as by another; know then Sir, that all your enterprize is discovered, and the Nymph hath published it unto the assembly: How came the Nymph to know it (said Polemas) she shewed unto them a letter (answered the young man) which you writ unto a certain Druide called Climanthes, who is dead. O (cryed out Polemas) is Climanths dead? Yes certainly (answered he) for I saw him hang by the heels at the gate as I came hi∣ther. O gods, replied Climanthes, that so great a person as the universe had not his fellow, should come to such a disasterous end? upon this he and his four confidents enquiring more particularly of all circumstances, they understood that Adamas was accessory to his death, and that it was he who had contrived it, which made them believe, that Leonide knew all that this young man had related unto them. Doubtless she does (answered he) for she and Silvia caused him to be ta∣ken, at least, the common report is so. Oh God (said Polemas in a mighty fury) let some ride after, and bring them back, and if I can but get them again, they shall pay for this wicked act. Upon this Ligonias in all possible haste disparched a∣way fifty Horse, with express command to bring them back: In obedience to which, they mounted, and setting spurs to horse, did gallop away with full speed: but the Nymphs being gone a full quarter of an hour before these men took horse, and Leonide fearing left any should follow them, she desired the coachman to drive as fast as he could, which he did, until one of the wheels broke quite in two: Judge you in what a condition these two Ladies were in, who looked eve∣ry minute for some to fetch them back. The Coachman seeing no other remedy, told them that he would go into the next Town to try if he could borrow ano∣ther Coach: They also seeing no other remedy, desired him to make haste, and when he was gone, they began to consult with themselves what they should do. For, said Leonide, if Polemas do hear what has hapned unto Climanthes, most cer∣tainly he will pursue us, and it is not impossible but some may give him intelligence of it. And if he should have us again in his power, God knows how he would use us: certainly Sister, said Silvia, he would pursue us; but what shall we do to prevent being taken; I am resolved, said Leonide, to go away on foot; but Sister, said Silvia, what shall we do when night comes upon us: I had rather, said Leo∣nide, be torn in pieces by wolves, then fall again into the hands of these men: whilst they were thus talking and unresolved what to do, they espied the horse within a mile of them: Sister, said Leonide, yonder they come, and for my part I
will leave you if you will not follow me: Silvia in a terrible fear began to follow, but being busied in tucking up her coats, and coming into a thick wood by the high way, she could not overtake her companion, by reason of the Bushes and Bryers; so as presently after, the Horsemen coming to the Coach, and finding it empty, they dispersed themselves all about the Wood; and spying Silvia, they all ran unto her, thinking they were both there: but finding only one, they fell all in quest again after the other yet all in vain; for she was wandered into the wood upon the left hand, where there was so many Boggs and Bushes, that Horses could not pass: She being very crafty, in lieu of going towards Mount Brison or Mar∣celles, s;he took the quite contrary way, so as they never made that way; but af∣ter abundance of pains in seeking for her, night coming upon them they were con∣strained to return. The Coach was by this time mended, and those who took Silvia, carried her unto it, staying there till the rest found Leonide; but those that were in quest of her, returning without any news of her, and Silvia saying that when she parted from her, she went another way, they resolved to look no more for her at that time, but to go unto Polemas, because it began to be night. Leonide on the other side, had so hid her self, somtimes in the thick of the Wood, and somtimes amongst Bogges and Rocks, that it was almost impossible to find her; but the face of heaven beginning to mask it self with darkness, she knew not what to do: She was a woman of a good spirit, and none of those that use to be affrighted at trifles; but being in such a salvage place, where she heard nothing but the murmuring of a Torrent, and the scrieks of Owls, and seeing no∣thing but a hollow darkness, not knowing which way to go, nor having any thing to eat, a person of a greater courage then hers, might very well apprehend some melancholy fears; she sate long upon a great stone, as well because she was very weary, as to hearken whether any followed her; but hearing none, and the moon beginning to shine, she rose up, and looked every way about her; and neither seeing nor hearing any, she went up to the top of a little hill, from whence she thought she saw a light, and towards which she made her course: But when she was come near it, she was afraid to find those from whom she fled; so as turning a little upon the left hand, she walked on, until it was break of day, where she found another wood. In this place she intended to stay until it was night: the length of the way had wearied her, her fears perplexed her, and hunger did much press her; yet sleep being above all, it seized upon her eyes, and she slept until the evening; when a very young Shepherdess seeking for an Ewe that was stray∣ed. came by chance unto the place where Leonide was; and admiring to see her in such glistering clothes, she began to run away, thinking her some Goddess; but the Nymph beckning unto her with her hand, she came unto her; Sweetheart (said she) have you either a Mother or an Aunt? My mother (answered the wench and trembled) is in our house, but my Aunt and my Father are dead long since. And what (said the Nymph) are you looking for here? For an Ewe (answered the wench) which is strayed, Well (said Leonide) go unto thy mother, bid her come hither to me; but bid her be sure she bring none with her but thee nor tell any body; as for the Ewe which thou art looking for, I will give thee a score. The wench very glad of such news to carry unto her mother, for they were very poor, she ran unto her, and told her, that yonder was a Goddess in the finest clothes that ever was seen, who desired to speak with her, and had promised her a score of Ewes. The mother who had more wit then the daughter, enquired the place where she was, and leaving her at home, with express charge to tell no body, she went unto Leonide, whom as soon as ever she saw in that place, so clad, she knew her to be a person of some great quality; therefore making her a low curtesie, Madam (said she) what service is it your pleasure to command me? Good woman (answered Leonide) come hither into this thicket, that none may see us, and tell me whether you saw any horsemen seeking for one? Oh Madam, it is not above an hour since there was above a dozen such who said they had been riding up and down all the night long. And what (said the Nymph) is become of them? I know not Madam (answered she) whether they be asleep in some Country house,
for they seemed to be very weary. Good woman (said the Nymph) pray see if there be any of them yet, for they are enemies to the Nymph Amasis, and seek for me, desiring to do me some mischief, because I belong to her. Madam (said the Country woman) if Agis our Lord were here, I dare say he would guard you from any harm, but he has been long out of the Country in the service of Clide∣mant. Well good woman (said the Nymph) Agis is my Kinsman, and one of the best friends I have, and therefore for his sake help me upon this occasion, and see whether any of these wicked men remain yet hereabouts. The good Country woman after a promise to serve her with all fidelity, went and spied about all the Town, whether any of them were there; and found not only them, but many others enquiring for the Nymph, and promising large rewards to any that could inform them, with a menace of cruel punishment to any that should conceal her: The woman who was subtle enough for one of her condition, and knew the de∣signe of these men to be naught, seemed as if she knew nothing of her, but went to her house, got an old tatter'd Petticoat and Wastcoat, and when she saw none within compass of seeing her, she went again to the Wood, related all that she had learned, and advised her to put off her own clothes, which would discover her, and put on those. The Nymph was not all day undressing her self, and put∣ting on the clothes of this Country woman; but because it was late, and the Nymph had an opinion they would look for her all the night, she had no mind to go unto Marcelles, till it was time to carry somthing to the Market; and though she was much disguised, yet her Beauty was but too visible; so as getting some mud, she did so fully her face and her hands, as would indeed have sooner moved laughter then love: As for her own clothes, she hid them in a Bush, and would not let the woman carry them, left they should be found in her house, and so cause a discovery: The woman obeyed her, though with much regret, for she thought they would have enriched her for ever: which Leonide perceiving, good woman (said she) never trouble your self for things of so small a value; if you can but get me into Marcelles, I will give you a hundred times more then they are worth. The Sun was already set, and the night began to be very dark, which might well invite the Nymph to go out of the Wood with confidence enough, which yet she did not without trembling; knowing that those from whom she fled, were in the Town: But the good woman, who undertook to be her guide, did hearten her as well as she could, and by the way, did bid her say unto any that should ask her who she was, that she was her daughter, and that she had lived three years a∣mongst the mountains, in a place called Viverois. This advice proved to be very good, for they were no sooner entred into her little house, but four or five Souldiers entred also, who searched every corner in the Cottage; so as if her clothes had been there, all had been discovered: whilst some of them were very busie in searchings, others were as busie in questioning and enquiring after Leonide: The little Wench who had seen her in the Wood, not thinking any harm, you seek (said she) for a fair Goddess, all gold and silver, and perhaps I can tell you where she is, for I saw her to day not far from hence. Oh heavens, how Leonide started when she heard this, and the good woman also! yet to avoid suspition, where (said she unto the childe) did you see her? Upon this all the Souldiers flocked about her, and pressed her to tell. Sirs (said the mother very craftily) if my daughter do tell you, I pray let her have the reward that is promised, it will be a good portion for her, and will advance her marriage; then taking her by the hand, she went out of the house, seeming as if she would make her daughter conduct them unto the place where she saw her, though indeed it was only to get the Souldiers out of the house: But she carried them to the very place, where they found Leonides clothes, and thought that the little wench said true, but that they came too late: and as there are always some more subtle then others, so one of the Souldiers, whilst the rest were searching about, did take the wench aside, and with fair words got out of her, that her mother did know of her, for she ac∣quainted her with it as soon as she saw her; so as it was presently concluded a∣mongst them, that this old woman had hid her in some place or other; therefore threatning to kill her, and to burn her house if she did not tell them where she was,
the poor woman was forced to tell them, that it was she whom they saw in her house, but beseeched them to do her no harm, for she was cozen unto Agis who was Lord of the place, and should he come to know of it he would ruine her. The Souldiers, as glad of this as if they had won a battel, ran all to the house: but Leo∣nide doubting that this little wench might perhaps blab it out, that she had told her mother, no sooner saw them out of the house, but taking a piece of bread which she found upon the table, she went out at the back door, and recomend∣ing her self unto Tautates, she ran into the open fields, not knowing which way she went, yet stopping sometimes to take breath, and to hearken whether any fol∣lowed her. The souldiers in the mean time coming to the door, and finding it shut, did knock a while, thinking that Leonide had shut it for fear; but seeing she would not answer, they offered to break it open. The countrey woman, being very sorry to see her house thus broken, O Ma∣dam (cryed she out) they have promised to do you no harm, therefore I beseech open the door, and do not cause my house to be thus hurt. But she might have cryed loud and long enough before Leonide heard her. In the mean time all the Town flocked together at this noise, and after the souldiers had broken open the doore, they entred, and searched it as if they had been looking for a needle: At last, the Souldiers being out of hope, and vexed to the heart they could not find her, they set fire upon the house, and burnt it to ashes, with all the houshold∣stuff and estate this poor woman had, who in her little Fortune may be example unto greater, since there was but a moment betwixt her hopes of happiness, and her certainty of utter ruine. Leonide, who had taken upon the right hand towards the gardens of Mountbri∣son, though she was got a good distance off, yet could she see the fire of the little house, and guessing at the cause, she pitied the poor woman in her soul, with in∣tention to relieve her, if ever she found a fit opportunity, But this thought did not hinder her from making all the hast she could, for she was sure she should be pursued; and therefore the moon shining, she made such hast, as at the break of day, she spied the Castle of Marcelles, which did so encourage her, and mend her pace, that at Sun rising she came to the garden door, out of which she came when she went unto Termes: her joy was great when she came there, but not com∣pleat till she came as Galathea. She knocked at the door three or four times, and had hardly patience to stay till the Gardiner came to open it; but when Fleuri∣all saw her in such an equipage, and knew her not, he would not let her enter: what Fluriall (said she unto him) not know me? or art thou out of thy witts? I know your tongue (answered he) but not your habit nor your face: Well, well, Fluriall (said she) shut the door, and bring me some water, and then thou wilt know my face as well as my tongue. Then she went to the Gardiners lodge, where washing her face and hands, well Fluriall (said she) dost know me now? I think (said he) that you are a Fairy, that can change themselves as they please: But Madam, I wonder you should never speak unto me any more concerning Lindamor, but seem as if he were now quite out of memory. O friend (said Leonide and sighed) didst thou know the condition wherein we are, and what hazards I run for him, thou wouldst say I am the best friend he has. But prethee tell me, darst thou venter a journey to him, if I should have occasion to send thee? Courage Madam? answered he, yes, I dare go to him, though it were to the furthest part of all the earth. Since so (said she) prepare thy self, for perhaps thou shalt go sooner then thou art aware. Not so soon (said he) as I desire: for Madam, I love Lindamor above my own soul; above me? said Leonide, and smiled, yes, said he: and above Galathea! said Le∣onide, and because he made no answer, art thou mute (said she) why dost thou not answer? I do not answer, replied he, because I am measuring the affection which I bear unto them, and I find the scale so even, that I know not on which side it will lean. She would have continued longer, if she had not heard the Castle door open, which let into the Garden, and seeing the draw-bridge let down, she went unto
Galatheas antichamber, meeting none that knew her; but the Groom of the Chamber seeing her so clad, he would not suffer her to enter, thinking her to be some countrey impudent woman that knew not what she did: But Leonide saying unto him, what friend, know you none but by their habits? are you of the na∣ture of Lions? then he knew her, and not being able to forbear laughing at her dress, he beseeched her to pardon his mistake, assuring her it might well have been anothers fault as well as his: Then she went on into Galatheas Chamber, who was newly wakened: all those that saw her enter did not know her, and seeing her go to the Nymphs bed side, ran unto her to hinder her, but she pushed them off, and took hold of Galatheas hand which she put forth to draw the curtain, and to see what was the cause of the noise which she made: The Nymph seeing one kiss her hand that was in such ragged clothes, she knew not what to think, but asked what woman it was, and why they would suffer her to enter before they acquainted her, I beseech you Madam (said Leonide) do not drive me out of your chamber, for I assure you, the pains I have taken in coming hither deserves better treat∣ment. O good gods (cryed out the Nymph) it is Leonide, then raising up her self in her bed, and looking her in the face, she embraced and kissed her with abundance of affection: O sweetheart (said she) how I am over joyed to see you, and how many tears for you have these two dayes cost me? then looking her again in the face, she kissed her, and hugg' her in her arms. The rest of the Nymphs, her companions, hearing of her return, ran half undrest to see her, and bid her wel∣come home: And as Galathea was asking her how she escaped, and where she left Silvia, the Nymph Amasis hearing she was there, sent for her, with abundance of impatiency, to see her: for Adamas being then with her, and longing extream∣ly to see his Neice, Amasis was very desirous he should enjoy that contentment in her presence; so as she was constrained to leave Galathea and go unto her in that ragged dress. Though the Nymph and the Druide had business enough in their heads to keep them from laughing, yet now they could not chuse when they saw her in that pickle. When she kissed the Nymphs hand, and did reverence to her uncle, Madam (said Leonide) not long since I was infinitly desirous to see you, but now truly I am extreamly ashamed to see you being as I am. No, no, said Amasis, I am very glad to see you in any habit; but pray tell us how you e∣scaped the hands of those wicked men, and where you left Silvia? Then she be∣gan to make relation, when Galathea entred into her mothers chamber half un∣drest, but impatient to understand the Fortunes of Leonide and Silvia: so then she related all her adventures, in such emphatical terms and expressions, that the Nymphs did sometimes even tremble at the dangers wherein she was, and other∣whiles admiring her prudence and courage, but blaming the faint-heartednesse of Silvia, which Adamas excused upon consideration of her youth. But certainly (said he) she is not in so much danger as Leonide was, for she being my Neice, might for my sake expect the worst of that Rebels revenge; but as for Silvia, what cause can they have to treat her ill: No, no, Madam, I assure my self they will send her back unto you, and had it not been for Leonide, they would never have sent after Silvia, for you see when Silvia was in their hands, yet they pursued the other almost to the very walls of the Town. Upon this, Leonide making an humble reverence to the Nymph, she beseeched her to let her go and change her fine vestments, so as Galathea went out also with her. The news was presently all over the Castle that Leonide had escaped out of the hands of Polemas, and that Silvia still remained: as news does commonly get in the telling, so did this, and so much, that before it got into the Town, a thousand indignities were said to be offered unto that wise Lady: which reaching the eares of Ligdamon, did so surprize him, that half out of himself he ran to Leonide, beseeching and conjuring her, by all the most pressing expressions he could invent, to tell him the truth of things. She who knew what affection that Cavalier bore unto Silvia, she lessened the danger as much as possibly she could, and told him that she chose rather to remain in the hands of Polemas, then run the danger of flying; but doubtless she was wise in it, for certainly Polemas would
ere long send her back, and the reason of her stay so long, was only the breaking of a Coach wheel; and that when they spoke unto Polemas, they received all man∣ner of curtesie and civility from him. This did a little calm the mind of Ligdamon, who had already a thousand de∣signes upon the life of Polemas, and spoke them aloud, which caused the corre∣spondent of Polemas to send him word presently, that he should take good heed of Ligdamon. Mean while the Souldiers who had taken Silvia, did put her into the Coach, and carried her to Polemas, who missing of Leonide, was vexed to the soul, for he was more animated against her, by reason of Adamas her Uncle: but passing such ways where horses could not come, the Souldiers that were in quest of her, did miss her, and returned home at night so weary, that their horses could hardly set one foot before another: But when Polemas saw she had escaped, his anger was extream; and shutting up Silvia close Prisoner, did menace her, and terrifie her exceedingly: Poor Silvia not used to such treatments, was much astonished; yet knowing her self innocent from all harm, she committed her self to the protection of God, from whom she hoped for undoubted aid: And yet the grief which Polemas resented at the death of Climanthes was so great, that he was apt enough for any barbarous designe against her; but Argonides one of his four great confidents restrained the execution of his fury, telling him, that it was poor revenge to take it upon a silly woman, and would render him odious unto all that should hear of it. What then (replyed Polemas) must we sit still, and leave the death of our friends unrevenged? Stay but a while (answered Argonides) and you may carve what revenge you please; for I hope you have men enow to take Marcelles this night, and then if you will, you may make yond wicked Adamas pay according to his merits. Oh (said Polemas) I should be fully contented if that Traytor were but in my hands, or any that belongs unto him. Oh Sir (said Pele∣dontes) if that will content you, I shall do it for you; you know that he has one son, and one daughter; the son has not been of late in the Country, but as I am told, will very shortly return from the Coast of the Allobroges; but till he do return, I will send to the Banks of Lignon, where his daughter, who is a Druide, has lived amongst a company of Shepherdesses ever since she came from Carnu∣thes: I have a Souldier who knows the place very well, and who no longer then yesterday had discourse with me about it, when we talked of Leonides escape▪ The loss of this daughter would more sting the heart of that old knave, then would the loss of Leonide, who is only his Niece. Oh my dear friend (said Polemas, and was even ready to kiss him) I should think my self infinitely obliged unto you, if you could deliver that daughter of his into my hands, and till I could meet with a more solid revenge, she should content me. Sir (said Peliodontes) speak not a word more of it, rely upon me, and to morrow by this time she shall be in your power. He went presently to his house, and sending for his Souldier, he gave him the command of fifty other Souldiers, and commanded him to seize upon Alexis, yet without doing her as little hurt as possibly he could, and to bring her unto him. The Souldier set out an hour before day, and went towards Astreas Town. In the mean time Alerantes having told Polemas what answer he had received from the Nymph, he had a desire to be gone, but Polemas desired him to stay two days longer, that he might carry unto the King the certain news of the ta∣king Marcelles, for he made himself sure of taking it upon the very first Assault. Alerantes who saw such a confluence of Souldiers from all sides, and all things ne∣cessary for such an enterprize in readiness, did think that two days would be quickly over, and in the mean time dispatched a Letter, importing the cause of his stay. Over night, Polemas commanded his Army to draw all up into a Body, and in the morning, as soon as it was day, to march towards Marcelles, and would not lose so much time as to take a muster of them, but relyed upon the report of Argonides, that they were eighteen thousand Foot, and of Peliodontes, that they were eight thousand Horse; so as about two hours before day, the Moon shining very bright, they began to apply themselves unto those orders which he had given
them. Listander who had been long before preparing Engines of War, sent such in carriages as were necessary for a sudden storm, leaving such behind him as were requisite for a long siege: In the first place he sent Ladders, of which there were several sorts; one was Ladders of Ropes with hooks, which being flung up by strength of Arm, catched hold of the Battlements, and hung down with steps of cord, like Ladders. Another sort which they called Cranes, formerly called Tol∣lones, which being planted to a wall, was resemblant unto a pair of weighing scales, with a beam, which as one end goes up, another goes down, and would convey up five or six men at a time, in Baskets like Panniers, and Cords fixed at them, to pull them up and down at either end; so as when five men at one end, were at the top, other five were getting into the Panniers at the bottome, and so like two baskets, whlst one was going up, the other was coming down for more. This Engine was set upon wheels, with a kind of Rampart to defend those that were to plant it. Besides these kind of Scaling Ladders, there were abundance of the common sort, and abundance of Hurdles and Faggots to fill up Ditches, and make Gal∣leries for Souldiers to pass under, and abundance of fresh Hides to cover them, as a defence against fire or arrow shot. They had also certain Engines which they called Plutoes, and which indeed were little penthouses upon wheels, under which they approached the walls, and under them worked to undermine them. They had also Cats, and Cat Castles, Rams, Rats and Foxes; all Engines with which they approached walls, and took their names from a resemblance unto those A∣nimals. But above the rest, the Tortoise was the most admirable; for it was for∣te foot in length, twenty in wideness, and twelve foot high; it was moved forward upon Rowlers, and under it were sheltered many Pioneers, or others to work in Trenches, or to approach the walls. Of all these there was abundance of each sort; for being subject to be burnt, it was requisite to have many of them; and indeed the carriages were so many, as they almost filled all the way betwixt Surien and the gardens of Mount Brison. In the mean time Polemas ordered every thing for this assault, writing Tickets unto every Officer what they should do; And as soon as day appeared, taking Horse with all his Officers and Souldiers, he rode into the head of the Army, to disperse several orders unto them. And because it was impossible so many men should rendezvouz from all Quarters, unknown unto Adamas, he presently ac∣quainted the Nymph and Prince Godomar, who sent some Troops of Horse to scour the ways all the night long, and appointed Damon to have a vigilant eye unto the Walls and Gates, and places most necessary to be guarded. But by fortune, just before the Gates were shut, Leontidas returned from Lions, to the great joy of Prince Godomar, for he did passionately desire to hear from Prince Sigismond his Brother; he went therefore presently to the Nymph, not doubting but Leontidas would be there, where he found Rosanira and Dorinde in her Closet, and the Nymph thought it fitter to hear his report in private, rather then in publique. The Sequel of the History of DORINDE and Prince SIGISMOND. AS soon as Leontidas was entered, and done all due reverence unto the Nymph, to Godomar, and to the Princess; Madam (said he,) I come from a place where I have received all manner of honour, and all man∣ner of discurtesie; honour from Prince Sigismond, and discurtesie from King Gondebaut: And that you may understand all things in order, be pleased to know Madam, that according to the command which I received from Prince Go∣domar, I came into Lions, not acquainting any from whom I came; As soon as it was night, I made the cause of my Voyage known unto Prince Sigismond, and beseeched him to admit  nto the speech of him. That Prince was indeed kept
a prisoner in his house by command from Gondebaut, but not so close as some re∣port, nor so but any may speak with him when he please, and almost every night he goes out and visits the Princess Clotilda. As soon as ever, he heard of my ari∣val, he sent one of his men unto me to bring me up a back pair of stairs into his closet, where presently after he came and received me with so kind a countenance, as made it evident I was welcome unto him. The first question he asked me was, how the Prince his brother did; but the second was, not staying for an answer to the first, how the fair Dorinde did, and so empathically, as I saw his heart was in his tongue; and after he had asked me many particular questions concerning her, Cavalier (said he) I beseech you excuse my passionate curiosity, for the very truth is, I do love that fair one above my life. Dorinde at this blushed, and held her hands before her face: Nay, nay, fair one, replied Leontidas, never blush at what I say, for most assuredly he loves you beyond my capacity of language to express, and then he continued: The Prince then thus excusing himself, he asked me, Madam, how you did, and offered him∣self to assist me in all things that conduced to your service: for, said he, I am much obliged unto her for her merit, but much more for the kindness she shews unto Dorinde, as I am informed by a Souldier belonging to Clorantes, who fol∣lowed my brother under pretence of being one of his men, and so got into Mar∣celles, where he saw Dorinde, and the honour which the Nymph did unto her: then returned at fast as he could, and made report of it to the King, who upon this information dispatched away Alerantes to the Nymph, upon the most imper∣tinent Embassie that ever was sent unto such a Princess. After this discourse I presented your Letters unto him Madam, and that from the Prince; and because he saw none from Dorinde, I perceived him to be a little astonished and sad, which made me say unto him, I keep this to present unto you at more leasure, assuring my self that it does not import any business of state: but he taking it, and giving it many a kiss, This, this, said he, is it which most im∣ports my business, and opening it he found these words. DORINDES Letter unto Prince SI∣GISMOND. MAy I believe that this testimony which Dorinde gives of her remembering Prince Sigismond, will be welcome unto him▪ when I set before mine eyes my being abandoned to the mercy of the Wolves, and all manner of injurious Fortune, I believe not: If I give credit unto the Prince your brother, I believe yes; but when I consider how all men have hitherto failed me, O how soon am I of a∣nother faith? What then wilt thou do Dorinde? lest she should bely the o∣pinion she has of this Prince, I will believe that he is no deceiver, and that he does love me; and therefore I will love, honour, and serve him, that if he do deceive me, he may have left no excuse either before the gods or before men. As a consequent therefore of this resolution, I do assure you Sir, that I will be no more Dorinde when I am not yours. O Dorinde (said he as soon as he had read this Letter) O my dearest Dorinde, how much cause hast thou to complain against me? and how much cause have I to complain against my Fortune? Cavalier (said he unto me) were you ever in love? And seeing me smile without giving him any answer, if ever you were in love, continued he, I would not excuse the raptures of my affection; but if hi∣therto you have been exempted from that passion, I beseech you to wave your judgement of me, until you become a lover, and then I will give you leave to say
what you will of me. I knew by this that no other business was to be talked of, till all was discoursed of concerning Dorinde; and therefore I answered him, I am not so ignorant of that passion Sir, but that I know it to be one of the greatest, and one of the most just: most just, because nothing can be more reasonable then to love that which is lovely; and most great, because Nature and Will does most violently prompt us unto it. And therefore, I was not only charged with a Let∣ter from the fair Dorinde, but I have also a present which the Prince your brother hath sent unto you, and which I assure my self will not be altogether unwelcome to you. Then going to the door, I fetched Dorindes picture, which I commanded one of my men to bring. When I opened it, he fixed his eyes so upon it, and was so ravished, that he seemed himself a statue. At last, returning to himself, and considering the pains I took in holding it so long, he made some excuses unto me for it, yet still could not chuse but look up∣on it and admire: after a long contemplation he cast his eyes upon the Shep∣herdess habit wherein she was drawn, O (said he) how this Shepherdess does swell all those upon the banks of Lignon with envy? Most true, answered I, and therefore, Sir, she stayed so little amongst them, but came amongst the Nymphs of Amasis, where though in the plain habit of a Shepherdess, yet she appears like unto a Diana amongst her Nymphs. Upon this he commanded me to relate unto him the whole Fortune of Dorinde, and by what good Genius she was advised to retire her self unto Amasis: which to satisfie, I told him all that I had learned from her own mouth, from Merindor and Periander: I observed, that when I related unto him the frights wherein she was when Duriana left her, he sighed se∣veral times, as grieving that he was not with her; but when he heard what cruel∣ty Clorantes would have shewed unto her, and in what a pitiful condition she was, when Merindor, Periander, and Bellimartes rescued her. O most cruel Father, said he, couldst thou have eyes, and see Dorinde thus wronged by the appointment? And when he heard of Bellimartes his death in that quarrel: Dear friend, said he, thou art a greater gainer in thy death then in thy life, and assure thy self we do all envy thee in the honour thou hast got in bestowing thy life so nobly: To be brief Madam, this Prince did so resent every thing that concerned this fair Lady, that I verily believe never any was inspired with a more noble love then he. Having eve∣ry way satisfied his curiosity as well as I was able: he opened the rest of the Let∣ters, and they being only Letters of credence, I acquainted him with every thing according to your commands, and particularly with your joyes to see Dorinde in such a place where you might serve her for his sake, which you assured him you would do, and hold her as dear in your esteem as Galathea her self: afterwards I related unto him all that I had in commission from the Prince his brother, and how deeply he resented every thing that concerned him: to be brief, I omitted no∣thing which I had in command; unto which he answered with such abundance of thanks, as I plainly saw how much he thought himself obliged unto you in the be∣half of Dorinde. But when I acquainted him with the design of Polemas, and of King Gondebaut to make him Lord of that state, and with the Letters which he had written and sent by Clorantes, which imported the death of Clidemant, and invited Polemas to take up arms, offering unto him all favour and assistance: I do solemnly protest and swear (said he) that laying aside all respects of a son to a Fa∣ther, I will never as long as I live, suffer such an injury to be done unto the Princess: I have hitherto carried my self with all humility and sweetness; but if he do arm, I will unvail my self, and declare in behalf of the Nymph, with all my friends and confederates: for besides the particular interest which I have, the general title of a Cavaleir, does oblige me to this just defence. Upon this he acquainted me with the correspondencies, which he held with the Dukes and Earls of high & low Burgundy, for so he called all those Provinces which are on both sides the Ararri he told me what great forces he could have from the Hudeois and Allobrogians, and assured me that he should draw after him the better half of the Souldiery that were in his Fathers Kingdome, and that those who did not follow him, would not take arms against him: Afterwards I acquainted him with the Letters which for
an umbrage of my voyage were sent from you unto the King; also I acquainted him, how I had it in charge from you to express your joys at the coming of Prince Godomar into your Court where you would endeavour to do him all man∣ner of service, both for his own merit, and in respect of the King, seeming not to know of any mis-understandings that were betwixt them; which at the first he laughed at, and told me the excuse was good, but that Gondebaut would not take it so; and therefore I advise you to conceal the Letter (said he) and only de∣mand audience, which I am sure he will not permit; but on the contrary, will commit you to custody, to the end you may not have a sight of me, and there∣fore have a little patience, and I will presently give you an answer; which he pre∣sently did, and charged me to tell you, that his obligations unto you were so great, that he would never rest until he had acquitted himself, and in the mean time commanded me to assure you, that as soon as Polemas took the field, he would do the same with his friends, under a pretence of Assisting the Prince his brother: That if the King came himself in person to aid Polemas, he would then openly take Arms also, and come in person, being resolved either to die, or to de∣fend you against all the puissance of the earth. As for Dorinde (said he) pray tell her, that I am much more hers then my own, and that ere long she shall receive all desireable assurances of it. Then Ma∣dam, being parted from the Prince, I retired to my Lodging the next morning so fortunately, that none saw me either in going or returning from him. But the next morning, as soon as I let Gondebaut know that I was come unto him from you, he fell into such a passion, that he commanded me upon pain of death to get out of Lions within an hour, and presently set a Guard of Souldiers upon me, as Prince Sigismond foresaw; I answered him, who brought this mes∣sage from him, that I claimed the priviledge of the Law of Nations, to be safe from all harm; and having done my chief business with Prince Sigismond, I took horse, and made all the speed I could to this Town, the news being all over the Province, that Polemas was coming to besiege it with thirty thousand men. Upon this Leontidas held his peace, and presented the Letters from Prince Sigismond unto the Nymph, unto Prince Godomar, and unto Dorinde: And because the last of these did not desire to have any witnesses at the reading of her Letter, she retired into Daphnides chamber. In the mean time, upon the intelligence of Leontidas, it was thought necessa∣ry to send unto Lindamore, to let him know, that he was to take heed of King Gon∣debau and assure himself in Prince Sigismond; that in his return he should come by the Picts and the Boyens, and bring with him all those Forces which the Queen Argira and the Prince Rosilion would give him: Then considering who was the fittest messenger for this voyage, Galathea remembring the discourse which Leo∣nide told her she had with Fleurial, she proposed him as the fittest to be trusted, who could pass away without suspition, and who knew the way. Every one ap∣proving of him, he was presently dispatched; and having received his Instructi∣ons, departed the same night, being charged to have a most special care to hide his Letters, so that if he were taken by Polemas, yet that they should not be found. In the mean time, Dorinde got into a corner of Daphnides chamber, with a Wax candle in her hand, and abundance of joy in heart at the News which Leon∣tidas told her; there she broke open the Letter which Prince Sigismond had sent unto her, and found these expressions.
Prince SIGISMONDS Letter unto DORINDE. I Must needs confess, my Fairest, that Dorinde has suffered abundance of sorrows, but I do deny that they have been greater or more sensible then mine own: I need no excuse either towards Gods or men for failing in that affection, which I have promised unto you: For the Gods do know how pure it is, and without the least stain: And men do see that it is the tyrannie of a Father, which to my sorrow hindered me from keeping you company. Perhaps your doubts of me might make you accuse my Love as imperfect: But Heaven will not let me harbour any such thought: For I am confident the grandeur of my affection will oblige you to love me for ever. Dorinde read over this Letter several times, and every time she observed some new expression of Prince Sigismonds affection, which swelled her with so much joy, that she thought she could never read it oft enough; and doubtless she would have been longer, if she had not been diverted by Galathea, who came to visit Daphnide, and tell her what news Leontidas had brought concerning the Rebellion of Polemas, which now was openly spoken of. But in the mean time, Adamas who had intelligence from all sides of the great Forces of Polemas, and what haste he made to fall upon the Nymph, he now un∣derstood by his Spies, that the Artillery, and all Engines of War were gone out of the Arsenal of Sarion, and that his Army began to march; whereof adverti∣zing the Prince, Alcidon, and Damon, they all thought it expedient to send out a party of Horse to discover, and to scour the ways, and in the mean time to appoint every one his station where he was to fight: and because they imagined the ene∣my intended a storm, they prepared themselves with every thing necessary to su∣stain it. But Adamas who could not imagine that Polemas would ever think of carrying the place before he had made a breach, unless it was upon hopes of some intelligence, he therefore moved unto them to change the several quarter f the Souldiery in the Town▪ so as being often shifted, those that send Polemas any In∣telligence, cannot tell what Quarter will fall unto their lot; and perhaps, if we keep observant eyes, we may discover who they are and what Intelligence is given, as soon as he to whom it is sent. This counsel was approved of as good, and to prevent such things not only at this time, but also during all the Siege, it was appointed that every night the Quarters should be changed: And because no question was made of any but the Townsmen, they resolved that the walls and the Ports should be guarded only by strangers, and that the Townsmen should be kept together in a gross Body, to relieve any place in cases of necessity: An Order which at this time saved the Town: For Merontes who had the Guard of one the Ports committed unto him, had promised to set it open when Polemas should begin his general storm. All the night then was spent in shifting the guards from one place to another; and about an hour before day, the party of Horse which Alcidon sent out to discover the enemy, began to hear the noise of the Army, and to see the lights which conducted the Artillery; for the night being extreamly dark, they were forced to light some Links, that the carriages might be directed which way to chuse. Alcander who commanded the Horse, though he was sure of the Armies coming, yet would he not return, till he could carry the news upon more certain∣ty; yet thinking it necessary to make it known unto Prince Godomar, he ordered his brother to return with seven or eight horse, and give an account of what they
had seen and heard: and continuing on his way with about fifty Archers, he hid himself and them amongst some bushes which grew close by the high way, where he had no sooner placed himself and his Sentinels, but day began to break, and he ap∣pointed seven or eight of his men to stand in the high way, and when they disco∣vered the Army coming then to run away towards the Town, as if they were af∣frighted, purposely to make them follow them in disorder: so it fortuned, that when it was light enough to see, the Army appeared discovering those whom Alcander had set in the high way▪ did begin to follow them; and seeing none but these seven or eight men, they see spurs to horse, and rid after them in great disor∣der, out of an earnest desire which every one had to be the first which should do any signal act. Above two hundred horse passed by the place where Alcander was, in this confusion; who coming out of his ambuscado, did charge them so furiously, that their horses being almost all out of breath, and the riders surprized, so that except three or four, who were very well mounted, and fled away, all of them were either killed or taken: But it concerned Alcander to make a speedy retreat, for immediately three great bodies of horse pursued him to the very gates, where Damon received him with abundance of welcome; but they had not leisure to stand upon very many Complements: For the main Body of the Army appearing, every one betook himself to his defence. Alcidon would have gone out with his horse, but the Prince at the supplication of Adamas, would not permit him; because not being well assured within, by reason of much corre∣spondency which they feared▪ it was not safe to part from their horse, which was their greatest safety. Alcidon in obedience to orders, contented himself to stay in the Town, and disposed of his men unto those places that were assigned unto them to repulse the Assault, which they foresaw would be very great. Peliodontes was already come up to the Town with his horse, and facing it till the Foot were also come up, he set on foot certain Archers to begin the Approches: but those of the Town sallying out by command from Damon, and under the conduct of Lucindor, did so repulse them, that had it not been for their Horse, they had fated as ill as their Forlorn Hope: At last the three Bodies of the Army being arrived, they of the Town prepared themselves for defence. Marcelles is so seituated, that towards Mount Verdune and Isaures, there is both Plains and Mountains. The Castle (which stands at one end of the Town, is a most safe Ram part unto it from the Mountains, standing so high, that it is al∣most inaccessible: for besides the Rock upon which it is seated, there is a torrent which passeth between the Mountain and the Castle, and serves for such a Ditch as is impassible. The Avenues in all other places are very difficult; the Ditches deep, and the Wall well anked with Towers very corresdondent. When Polemas came first, not needing any view of the place, he knowing it very well, all his Infantry were drawn round the Town in form of a Half Moon, and being within Bowe shot of the Walls; the Cross bow men and Engineers be∣gan to play, and covered the Battlements of the Town with clouds of stones and arrows. In the mean time making passage for their Engines over the Ditch where∣in was no water, they filled it up with abundance of Faggots and Hurdles in many places; then passing over these Hurdles, and bringing abundance of Ladders, they ran to the Walls on all sides at one time: and which was most admirable, all things were done upon such a sudden, that they who were upon the defensive part, were no sooner upon the Battlements, but they found them full of hooks, which had Ladders fixed to them, and men of all sides mounting them: the Cranes also were lifting up men in Baskets, who were ready to step upon the walls; which did so astonish those within, seeing themselves assaulted on all sides at once, that one could not run to help another, every one having enough to do in his own defence. In the mean while Polemas went round about encouraging his men, and look∣ing whether Merontes would open the Gate unto him, according to his promise. But they within taking heart, did most couragiously oppose this furious assault, some with halbards, and others with clubs, knocking down the enemy from the Walls. But such was the resolution of the Assailants, that some were no sooner knocked down, but others were in their places. At last, those within be-thought
themselves of great Sythes sixed unto long Poles, with which they cut in pieces the cordage of their Ladders, Cranes, and other Engines: and these En∣gines being that which most troubled them, this invention was well thought upon. But Polemas, who would needs shew unto Alerantes the valour of his Army, he caused his other great Engines to be brought called Tortoyses, and with them they mounted a great bridge of hurdles, as high as the walls, on which fourty men might go abrest: Then he caused three thousand men with targets and swords, the stoutest in all the Army, to mount this bridge, which they did, and came to handy blows with them on the walls. Now was the Town in great danger to be forced, and had not Damon come to that place, it had been impossible they should have made any long resistance; but his coming was such an encouragement to his men, and so great a terrour to his enemies, that it became a fierce dispute: besides, he caused a great quantity of boyling oyl and brimstone to be brought, and threw it upon the enemy with so many artificial fireworks, that they were not able to endure them: Many were wounded, and many faining to be so, began to retreat; which Prince Godomar perceiving, he opened a Sally Port, and sent out two hundred men under the con∣duct of Ligdamon, who setting artificial fires to their bridge of Hurdles which bore up the Tortoyses, and which kindled upon such a sudden, that most of those that were upon them were destroyed: In this disorder the two hundred which sal∣lied out made a most miserable slaughter, for fear entring into the hearts of Po∣mas his men; they made no defence, but leaving all their Engines and their Arms, they fled away: In so much as those of the Town had time enough to burn all their Engines, Ladders, Hurdles and Faggots. Polemas who saw his men thus killed and burned, and then not able to relieve them, for the bridge was all on fire, he began to curse both against heaven and Fortune, for failing him in his first attempt: and he was so extreamly vexed at this repulse in the presence of Alerantes, that had it not been very late, doubt∣less he would have made a second attempt; but his councel advised him to defer it until next morning, when the fire would be extinguished; telling him that his Souldiers were weary, that it was late, and necessary to lodge them in such a place of security, that those within the Town could not hurt them in the night. The Army therefore making a retreat some two or three miles distant, they encamped themselves that night under a hill, whose scituation was so advantageous, as they thought themselves in safety, and so contented themselves with that natural forti∣fication for that night. In the mean time those that were sent to the banks of Lignon to seiz upon A∣lexis were conducted by their guide into a little grove close by the house of A∣strea; where hiding themselves, they stayed till it was day. O what what a strange alteration did those trees now find? Formerly they were wont to be the harbour and shade of harmless of lovers, but now become a receptacle of ravenous Re∣bels and inhumane ravishers. As Fortune was, Celadon waked that morning betimes, and as it was his cu∣stome very often, he put on Astreas clothes: Then, after he had looked a while upon her as she lay in bed, with Diana and Phillis, and seeing her to sleep very soundly, he had no mind to wake her, but went to walk in the hasel wood, which was close by the house, and there entertain himself with his own thoughts. Those who lay hid in the next Grove, saw him come forth; but thinking him to be Astrea, by reason of her garments, they stirred not, but kept as close as they could, assuring themselves that Alexis would not be long after, in which they were not mistaken: for Astrea waking presently after, and finding the windows open, and Alexis neither in bed nor in the chamber; my companions (said she and waked them) we are very sluggards, Alexis is up and gone to walk without us; upon this, putting her arms out of bed, she took the Druides clothes, and her extream desire to be with her, made her use all the hast that possibly she could and went out of the chamber sooner then her companions, and before they were half drest, assuring her self to find Alexis in the grove of Hazels; for there it
was she most delighted to walk: She had no sooner set her foot out of the house, but those that waited for her, discovered her; and lest they should fright her back again to the house; they lay still untill she was a good distance thence, then com∣passed her about, seized upon her, and do what she could, set her before a hors∣man, who held her before him in his arms whilst she wept, and cryed out for help. Great was the wonder of this woman to see her self hurried away in this man∣ner, but much greater grief and wonder was it to Celadon, who running to the place where the Shepherds used to meet, in hopes of help to rescue, could do no∣thing but cry out for help; but knew not what to do: he enquired which way these Ravishers went, and ran after them, still not knowing what to do but to die near Astrea. He followed the track of their horses, more like a mad woman then a Shepherdess of Lignon; crying, or rather howling, after these Ravishers: cal∣ling out for help from the gods, from men, from animals, from trees, from rocks, from the river Lignon, from all things he either saw or could think upon, but all in vain; for these Souldiers having got what they came for, they rid away as fast as they could; and thinking to find Polemas at Surieu, they took that way, but when they came near, and heard he was gone to Marcelles, but they went thither, and by Fortune, came when Polemas having lodged his Army, was hark∣ing unto Ligonias and Peledontes, who were telling him what loss they had received at this assault: the number of the dead amounting to above two thousand, and the wounded as many more at the least: And when he was in the height of his anger, these Souldiers presented Astrea unto him, under the notion and habit of Alexis: when he first heard of it, he rejoyced exceedingly, and commanding her to be brought into his presence, his anger had so transported him, that it was a hundred to one, but he would have done some violence unto her; yet she keep∣ing her self at an humble distance, and sad behaviour, he was ashamed to offer any violence to a woman, especially in the presence of Alerantes, and some other Cavaliers that were in his Tent. But having looked a while upon her: Come hi∣ther (said he unto her) thou child of the most wicked father that ever liv∣ed; what do you think I caused you to be brought hither for? I cannot tell Sir, (answered she, and looked sweetly upon him) But O the unresistable power of beauty? This Polemas, who flamed with fury, and breathed nothing but death and blood against this woman: he was no sooner touched with the Luster of her eye, but as snow melts before the Sun, so his fury and his rage did vanish at her beauty; yet making some resistance against the first glance: O most miserable daughter of a Father, far unworthy of such a child. To morrow (said he) thy body shall be a covering to my whole Army; for I will have thee fastned to the points of several Pikes, and opposed against the blows of those wicked Rebels in the Town: and in this condition shalt thou go with a torch in thy hand, and set fire to the gates of that Town. Sir (answered Astrea) if ever I did you any wrong let the gods forsake me: and if I be innocent, let them defend me: as she utter∣ed these words, tears flowed from her eyes, which moved compassion not only in Polemas, but all that saw her. Yet seigning the contrary, if these tears (said he) could mollifie the heart of Adamas, and make him open the gates of the Town, they might do you some good; but otherwise assure your self, they will do no good at all. Astrea now saw, that they took her for Alexis; and though she looked for a most certain death, yet would she die rather then discover her self; hoping by this means to save the life of Alexis, who otherwise would doubtless be taken, and brought into her room. Her desire therefore to die for her, moved her to say thus: I with Sir, my father had no occasion to wish you ill, but to think that the consideration of my life or death will move him to do any thing against his duty, is infinitly to deceive your self. for what will it advantage him whether I live or die; you know Sir, that we who are as it were cast out into the world, are commonly but hindrances to our parents. We shall see (said Polemas) how he will take it; for let him assure himself henceforward, that he has nere a daugh∣ter: The loss wherewith you menace him, replied Astrea, will not much trouble
him nor me. Upon this Polemas commanded he she should be safely guarded un∣til Silvia came, and afterwards to be bound together, because the next morning they should run both the same fortune. This command was no sooner given, but they brought a Shepherdess who desired to speak with her. As soon as Astrea saw her, she knew her to be Alexis in her clothes; Oh how it grieved her to the soul for knowing that all the ill they intended unto her, was only because they thought her to be the daughter of Adamas, she feared that if Alexis was known, all the harm would fall upon her; and to give her a hint of it, Oh fair Shepherdess (said she unto her) what fate brought you hither, where they seek only for me, as being the daughter of Adamas? It is fate indeed (answered Alexis) that brought me hither, and the best that ever was, Astrea, since it brought me hither to un∣deceive those that took you for me. Ah Astrea (cryed out Astrea) Why should you offer to Sacrifice your self innocently for another. Alexis giving her no answer, but turning towards Polemas, who heard them, yet knew not their meanings, Sir (said she unto him,) you see how I am all wet and dirty, but it is by reason of the haste I made, to prevent your errour? What errour (said Polemas) do you mean? Your errour (replyed she) in taking this Shepherdess for me, who am the Daughter of Adamas. How? (said Polemas) are you the daughter of that wicked man? Sir (answered she) if you call Adamas wicked, I am the daughter of him you call so. Sir (answered Astrea) believe her not, some distemper in her Brain makes her speaks thus, she is Astrea the daugh∣ter of Alces and Hyppolita, and I am the daughter of the great Druide Adamas, as indeed you may see by my habit: And because those who were tying the hands of Astrea did stay upon this dispute, she held her hands unto them; Nay, nay, said she, tye only mine, for I assure you I am the Druide Alexis. But Alexis on the contrary opposed her, Sir (said she, thrusting away the hands of Astrea, and holding her own) let not her clothes deceive you, for we changed them this morning, as we many times were accustomed to do: Consider that she is too young to have been so long at Carnates, as I have been: If you please to ask her any particular questions concerning the Druides daughters, and of their Statutes, I dare say her answers will let you see she attributes to her self more then is her due. Polemas and all the company were even ravished with admiration at this con∣test, which of them should be the party exposed to death. After he had a while looked upon them both, and considered how vehemently they maintained their cause; Alas poor silly wenches (said he unto them) Why should you thus dispute about the matter? Do you think any great recompence will be given unto her that is the daughter of Adamas? No, no, you are much mistaken, for all she must expect, is a most certain death: and to morrow she shall be tyed to the points of our Pikes, with a Link in her hand, and shall set fire upon the Gate of the Town, where she can look for no less then death, either from their hands, or from ours, unless paternal affection move the heart of her wicked father to open the Gates, and let us enter. Sir (said Alexis) I knew as much before, and my com∣passion upon this innocent Shepherdess, moved me to make all the haste I could, left she should suffer those pains that are due unto me. And why (said Polemas) do you think them due unto you? Because they say (answered she) that the child is to bear the iniquity of the Father; and since so, It is not reasonable that I who am Alexis should not suffer for Adamas who is my Father, but Astrea who is only an innocent Shepherdess? Sir (said Astrea and interrupted) these arguments which Astrea urges, moves me to tell you again, that she is out of her wits, and that I am the same whom my habit speaks me; and I would not have that harmless Shep∣herdess expose her self to death for me; It is I that ought to pay for my Father, and not you Astrea, whom it nothing concerns. Alexis then interrupting; Ah fairest Shepherdess (said she unto her) What a most strange errour are you possessed withal? Why should you without any rea∣son soon desire to end your days! Preserve your self for the happiness of him that must enjoy you, he still the glory of Forrests, and an honour unto the Banks of Lignon. Let me pay what I owe unto Nature, as the daughter of Adamas, and do not deprive me of that honour I shall have by such a death. Sir (continued she
and turned to Polemas, you may be sure that only one of us can be the daughter of Adamas; and I swear unto you, by all that is sacred, that this Shepherdesse whom you see before you, is not Alexis the daughter of Adamas, but is Astrea: Send her back therefore without any harm, and expose me to as many deaths as you shall please. Can you imagine that I who expect nothing but a death to mor∣row, should perjure my self to day? Astrea, who saw that Polemas was inclina∣ble to the perswasions of Alexis; O Sir, said she, I wonder you should be led into such an errour by the perswasions of this woman. You must know, that e∣ver since she lost her father and her mother, and since she her self fell into the river Lignon, her judgement and intellectuals have been much distempered: so, as sometimes she will fancy her self to be a Druide, as now she does, sometimes a Shepherd, nay sometimes a Cavalier, and rage against all such as will not believe her: Pity her good Sir, I beseech you, and send her home to her uncle Phocion, who doubtlesse is looking for her, and in fears, lest she should throw her self into some Pool, or the river Lignon, as before she did. This dispute had lasted longer, if Polemas, fearing lest this difference should turn to confusion, had not interrupted them. Well, well (said he unto them) it is enough: I will agree you; then addres∣sing himself unto Alexis. Are you Alexis (said he unto her) the daughter of Adamas, the most pernicious villain upon earth? Every one, answered she, takes me to be the daughter of Adamas the Grand Druide; and under the notion of that Adamas, I do acknowledge my self to be his daughter. Then turning to Astrea, and you, said she, are you the daughter of this Adamas? Certainly I am, answered she, look upon the clothes which I were. Since, said he, you are both the daughters of that villain, you shall both be treated accordingly. Upon this he commanded them to be both tied together, and guarded safely till the morning, still keeping an eye upon Astrea as he went out of the room, and say∣ing, It was a thousand pities so fair a woman should have such a devil to her fa∣ther: but ambition, which is a monster that will admit of no companion, as soon as she was out of his sight, made him quite forget all her merits. Polemas his intention was to expose Silvia to the blows of the Town, and A∣lexis also, as well to try whether the Nymph and Adamas would yield it to save them alive, as to shew the world how deeply he resented the death of his friends, in the person of Climanthes; of which Silvia and Leonide were principally accu∣sed. This was the reason, that when he departed from Surieu to storm Marcelles, he left her under safe custody in the Castle: Silvia being of a timorous nature, did nothing but dream all night of mortal accidents, and thought her self to be in the midst of Pikes and Arrows. Which so affrighted her, that she started out of bed all tears and fears. As soon as it was day, and finding no rest in her bed, she got up sooner then her custome: and sometimes walking up and down the chamber, and sometimes looking out of the window, she passed away some hours with as much inquietude as she did in the night time. The sequel of the History of LIDIAS. BEing thus leaning and looking out of the window towards the high way, she thought that she saw Ligdamon very carelesly coming that way: When he was something near, she coughed purposely to make him look up; but he looking upon her, he turned another way very indif∣ferently. She thought that he did so fear of being known, but seeing him come and go several times, and at every time she making the same signs unto him, she wondred extreamly he should never take any notice of her; especially, being in place where, if he would, he might have spoke unto her, or at the least have made some signs. But that which almost made her mad, was, when she saw an∣other stranger coming; and running unto him, embraced him with many expres∣sions of joy: she thought that then Ligdamon looked up to the window to see whether she was there: which she perceiving, she retired a little, and looked one
of a corner, to see what they did: Then she saw the first carrasses were nothing to the second; and this woman used all possible gestures to expresse her joyes in meeting with him whom she took for Ligdamon. This sight stung Silvia to the soul, and made her fling away from the window in spite, and go into the furthest part of the room: where standing long still and speaking not a word, at last she cryed out: O who would ever be so mad as to build upon the fidelity of men, or trust their dissembling oathes? Is any man a∣live honest, since Ligdamon is not? Ligdamon, who as Egides told me, would have poisoned himself rather then be any others but mine? Ligdamon, who slight∣ed all the favours of Amerina? Ligdamon, who within these three dayes was rea∣dy to die for the love of me, and who vowed himself mine for ever! O what a most sad fate it is to be a woman! If she love, she is sure to be deceived: if she love not, she is even tired with the importunities of men: she cannot exempt her self, unlesse she give her self to be devoured by those fierce and false Ani∣mals. The very truth was, the affection of Ligdamon, had made a deep impression upon the haughty soul of Silvia; and now seeing her self mistaken in her opini∣on, her proud spirit could not endure it, without a bitter resentment: But yet she was much mistaken; for he whom she took to be Ligdamon was Lidias: who following Melander, and Melander the false Lidius, were come into Forrests: and she who expressed so many joyes and carresses, was Amerina; who thinking him to be the same she came withal from Rothomagues, was surprized with abun∣dance of joy to meet him in that place. Had Silvia looked out at the window, perhaps she might have heard some words which would have undeceived her: for presently after the first salutations and expressions of joy, she began to upbraid him, Well, well (said she unto him) is this your say for me as you promised? Ah Lidias, who will needs be Ligdamon, if my happy fortune had not brought me hither, where could I have hoped ever to have met with you? In saying so she renewed her carresses, which Lidias received as from a person that he did but half love; being now so obliged unto Melander, that his affection was more un∣to her then the other: and if he did now return carresses, it was only out of me∣mory of former passages, then any present affection: But when he heard her call him Lidias, that would needs be Ligdamon, and tax him with promises of staying for her, he was the most astonished man in the world? and because he knew not what to answer, I see, friend (said she unto him) that you thought to be thus rid of me, and that I should never find you out in a strange Countrey: but love is a good guide, and will alwayes direct the heart of a lover towards the party loved. I must confesse (answered Lidias) that I am not only mute, but amazed, and know not a word of any thing you say: for fair Amerina (said he) what's this you tell me of Lidias, that would Ligdamon, and of a place where I promised to stay for you? How? (replied she and look'd him in the face) have you so soon forgot our coming out of Rothomagues, our journey to Neomagues, the cause of your de∣partur without me, your leaving me in prison, my clothes which you wore, and the place where you promised to stay for me? O heavens (cryed out Lidias) do I sleep, or do I wake? What's all this that Amerina tells me? It is above thirty months since I went from Rothomagues, by reason of a duel which I fought for your sake against Oronthes, and I assure you, that since I never stirred out o great Brittain, but when I came to assist Neustrians against the Franks; and landing at Callice, Lipandas the kinsman of Oronthes took me prisoner, from whence I had never been released, but for the assistance of one whom I followed into this countrey: but as for you Amerina, believe, I never so much as heard of you, until I now unexpectedly met you. How? said Amerina, were not you taken prisoner by the Neustrians in a bat∣tel against the Franks? were not you condemned to be devoured of Lyons? Did not you kill two of them very courageously? were not you him whom I rescued from that danger, by asking you for my husband▪ was it not you, who thinking
to drink poyson upon the marriage day, did only drink a dormitive? To be brief, was it not you whom I followed hither, and for whose sake I have run so many hazards and dangers? Assure your self, answered Lidias, that I am not, nor do I know any more of any thing which you have named, then a child newly born. Amerina, folding arms, and going back a pace or two, did seriously look upon him, are not you that Lidias, said she, who would not own that name, but would needs be Ligdamon? I do not know who that Ligdamon is (answered he) but I am sure that I am Lidias: O heavens! answered she, am I Amerina? or am I out of my wits? Then being silent a while, and thinking that Lidias spake very freely, she began to doubt of him whom she took for Lidias, and who had so much tor∣mented her by his resemblance; then she asked him several times, whether he was that Lidias who fought with Arontes, and he answering that he was. O good gods (cryed she) is it possible that two men should so extreamly resemble, as one could not know the one from the other; and that it is not two or three per∣sons that are deceived, but all: I know not (said Lidias) of whom you speak, but I am sure that I am Lidias, who has not seen you this thirty months before: and to testifie, that it was I who fought with Arontes (see, said he, and took off his hat) the mark of the wound which I received when I killed him. For you may remember, that flying unto your house, you stopped the blood with your handkerchief, I having not time to stay the dressing, for fear I should be taken: O heavens (said she) I do remember very well: where was my eyes and my me∣mory, that I should not take notice of this mark before? Now am I to my great contentment convinced of my errour; and then embracing Lidias again, she re∣lated unto him all that had passed betwixt her and Ligdamon: at which Lidias ad∣mired, and could not conceive it possible that two persons should be so alike, as not to find some difference either in face, voice, or gesture. No, No, Lidias (replied she) assure your self your mother, your kindred, and all your friends were deceived in him, although he still affirmed that he was not Lidias, but one Ligdamon of that countrey; and when I chid him for his change towards me (for I thought that all he said proceeded only from the alteration in his affection) he answered that he was not Lidias, but one Ligdamon, who never loved any but one Silvia, nor should he ever love any other: I was so deceived by his resemblance, that to be satisfied I resolved to come into this countrey, where he promised to verifie all he had said: but when were near Neomages, a certain passenger and he fell out, and he whom I took for you, left him dead up∣on the place, for which we were both then prisoners, and had not I helped him to escape by lending him my clothes, I know not what might have happened un∣to him: for I taking his, I said that I was his husband and he my wife: The next day I was carried before the Governour and other officers of justice: I did not deny the fact whereof I was accused. They carried me to the Chamber where this wounded man lay in bed; when he saw me, these clothes (said he) are his who wounded me, but to him who wears them I have nothing to say. The Governer upon this looking better upon me, he knew by my hair & by my brests that I was a woman: whereat, wondring, what is the reason (said he) you are disguised in a habit not pooper to your sex? Sir (said I) though I know my husband to be innocent, yet fearing the severity of justice, I constrained him to change habits with me, and so he escaped: I say I constrained him, because he would rather have died then left me in that condition; but at last my prayers, my sighs, and my tears, forced him away. As fortune was, this Governour had a wife who was both fair and young, and passionately loved her husband, as soon as she heard of my trick to save my husband, she came where we were to see me; and came time enough to plead and defend my cause: for the Governour sent for the Gaoler; asked him what was become of the man who was committed to his charge, and when he answered that it was I, no, said the Governour, this is his wife. Sir, said he, if it be, then they were both women, for I assure you the other was as fair and as young as this; and this whom I here present unto you, was delivered unto me in the same habits you see: Sir, answered I, the man speaks truth; for before we were committed unto his custody we had changed habits,
and therefore the fault is not in him. Well (said the Governour) do you think you shall not be punished in the habit which you wear? If my husband have done any injury, answered I, I will willingly receive the punishment for him; but, replied he, do you not know what punishment they incur, who thus delude ju∣stice. Be the punishment what it will, replied I, I am still the same, and ready to receive it, so my husband may go free. The Governours wife coming in upon this, and hearing me speak thus: Sir, (said she to her husband) the action of this woman is worthy of all honour and recompence; and all those that have hus∣bands ought to take example by her, to honour her and assist her, and I our of my affection unto you, become a Petitioner in her behalf. The Governour upon this smiled; my dearest (said he unto her) you need not petition where you may command, and you may command not only this, but my life: hereupon he commanded I should be released into her hands, and she carried me to her house, where she gave me this habit which now I wear, she car∣ressed me beyond all expressions, and do what I could, would not suffer me to de∣part of four or five dayes; and I believe if I had not told her that my husband stayed for me at an appointed place, and perhaps would return to seek me, she would not have suffered me to departed so soon, so pleasing was my action unto her. But the best was, that when I was out of the Town, and would go unto the place where this man said he would stay for me, I had forgotten the name of the Town; yet knowing that it was in Forrests, I took towards that countrey, where ever since I have wandred from one Town to another, not knowing whether to go, nor what place to enquire after. Lidias hearkened very attentively unto A∣merina, and when she had done, fair, and dear Amerina (said he unto her) I must needs acknowledge my self infinitely obliged unto you, for I see that all you did unto Ligdamon was intended unto me, and it is my part to do you such servi∣vices as such favours merit; but as you have acquainted me with your adventures, so it is but reasonable I acquaint you with mine: wherein, if any thing displease you, or seem in some sort to crosse that affection which I promised unto you, yet I believe when you have seriously considered upon it, you will find, that to satis∣fie obligations received, I was constrained unto it. Upon this, he related all that he had done in great Brittain: the courtesies of Melanders kindred, the shew that he made of loving her, the manner of his leaving her without telling her, his imprisonment at Callice, the resolution of Melander to fight for him against Lipandas, how she was taken prisoner by the troops of Prince Clidemont, the favour that Prince shewed in setting her at li∣berty: briefly, he acquainted her with his enterprize upon Callice, and the taking of that place. But (continued he) we were no sooner masters of the place, but I ran to the Castle, and as he that was wonderous well acquainted with the prisons, I went thither with an earnest desire of seeing Melander, and restoring her that liberty which she lost for my sake: but fortune which seemed to cross me in all my con∣tentments, denied me this amongst the rest: for I found the prison doors broken open, and nothing within but fetters and shakkles: I sought every corner of the Castle in hopes of finding her, afterwards went into the Town, and enquired of her in every house: at last in the evening (for I spent all the night and all the next day till sunset in seeking her) I understood by some who came from Rotho∣magues, that she was gone thitherward; and though I thought the friends of Arontes might procure me some mischief, if they knew me, yet so much did I think my self obliged unto that woman, as I resolved to go thither; but when I was near Rothomagues, by chance, I met with a horsman who diverted my de∣signe. This man came from the Town, and rid upon a tired horse: it being my cu∣stome to ask what news of all I met, so I did of him: Sir, said I, can you tell me any tidings of a young man, stranger, habited after the mode of great Brittain, who went towards Rothomagues, and happily you might meet him? Sir, answer∣ed he, if I be not mistaken, he whom you are in quest of, is called the sad Cava∣lier; the very same (replied I very joyful): None Sir, answered he, can give
you a better accompt of him then my self, for I have accompanied him from the prison of Callice, as far as the next Town: we were both fellow prisoners toge∣ther, and when the Franks took the Town, and the prisons all set open, this Ca∣valier, with whom I had intimate friendship, desired me to show him the way unto Rothomagues; for, said he, I have very earnest businesse there, and such as does much import my contentment. I answered, that I would not only shew him the way, but accompany him to the very gates, yet would not enter in, by reason of some great enemies I had there: so we mounted upon the first horses we met, for all was lawful prize, and in the confusion, slipt out of the Town unseen. Then by the way I undertstood, that the reason why he made such haste, was, to forbid the banes of a marriage betwixt one Lidias and a Lady, which was of great importance unto him; but he no sooner left me, then I saw him re∣turn out of the Town again in all haste, and asking the reason of it; do not stay me (said he) for I understand that this Lidias whom I look for, is gone with her whom he intends to marry, and its thought unto a house not far from hence, be∣longing to that woman: upon this, he set spurs to his horse, not saying a word more unto me. Which way (said I unto him) did he take? I cannot tell, an∣swered he, but I believe, towards Paris. Thus we parted, and ever since I have been following, hearing news of him almost every day, until I came to the Town which you named unto me, where a strange accident happened unto me: I came thither about the time that you were there, and as I alighted to rest my self (for indeed I had rid a long journey that day) a company of souldiers seized upon me, and carried me to prison, accusing me for wounding a certain passenger; and by what you have told me, I believe it was him whom that Ligdamon with whom you were, had wounded: heavens do know that I was altogether innocent of the fact, yet was I very sharply used; I lay that night with my hands and my feet fettered with iron, and the next day towards night, they carried me to the Governour of the place, who after examination, thinking me to be innocent, would have released me, when an officer of Justice desired that before my enlargement, I might be brought before the wounded par∣ty who had accused me: thither was I immediately carried, and I took notice, that as soon as ever he saw me, he fetched a deep sigh, and turned himself the o∣ther way in his bed: Every one thought, (and I amongst the rest) that this sigh proceeded from the pain of his wound; yet now I think that he took me for Lig∣damon who wounded him, and that he would not accuse me, but that perhaps be∣ing generous, he would, like a brave Cavalier, call me to answer him in the way of arms and not of Law: but so it was, that when they asked him whether it was I who wounded him, he answered no; and when they told him that yet it was I whom he had accused, he replied, I cry both you and him mercy, for it is not he. Upon this justification the Governour released me; but my horse, and the best things I had then about me, were then in the hands of the Gaoler and those that took me: I do believe, that if I had made complaint, perhaps I should have got them again; but I thought it better to go away quietly, having heard that such kind of suits do often cost more then they are worth: besides, desiring most passionately to overtake her whom I followed, I directed my course towards Forrests, because I understood that she enquired the way into that Coun∣trey. Whilst Lidias and Amerina were talking thus together, Silvia was at every turn peeping out at the window, and as closely as ever she could, spying and ob∣serving their action: for not being able to hear what they said, only some words when they spoke loud, she took notice only of their gestures, and the carresses which they used the one to the other, which stung her so to the heart, that she was divers times ready to cry out and exclaim against those injuries. But as she was in these thoughts, those whom Polemas sent, came unto her with intentions to carry her away as privately as they could, telling her that it was to carry her back unto Galathea, she was put then into a coach, and when she came to the place were Lidias was talking with Amerina, he did not so much as move when he looked upon her passing by; which troubled her so much, that she thought
upon nothing else all the way, fretting against the inconstancy of all men for Ligdamons sake. She had not gone a mile further, but she saw a great number of Soulders galloping by her, and carrying Lidias bound, taking him, as she did, for Ligdamon: for Polemas was informed that Ligdamon made it his boast, that he would come and kill him in the midst of his Army, if he did not release Silvia. Polemas, who knew what affection Ligdamon did bear unto that Nymph, he did easily believe it, and gave a charge unto all those who knew Ligdamon, to seiz upon him as soon as they saw him▪ and these Souldiers being deceived by the re∣semblance which Lidias had vnto Ligdamon, finding him by chance coming to∣wards Polemas, they seized upon him, thinking it a piece of good service to their master. Amerina cryed out, that it was not Ligdamon, for she believed that they mistook him; but her cryes did no good: for those who took him, knew him to be Ligdamon, and went away very joyfully to present him unto Po∣lemas. Silvia, seeing him passe by, was nettled with two different passions at once: for she was glad to see her self revenged, and sorry to see him in any dan∣ger: so as when she cryed out aloud, Go dissembler, and give an accompt of all thy falshoods, her heart within silently said, it was pity such a Cavalier should be so lost: as her anger made her look upon him with an eye of disdain and re∣venge, yet, so as her affection stole from her heart some sighs of compas∣sion. But on the other side, those that were within the Town, though some of them were wounded, yet did they extreamly rejoyce of the victory which they had gotten over their enemies: and all the Druides, Vaces, Eubages, and Sarronides in the Town, were commanded to render thanks unto the great Tautates: The hight Priest, the Flamins, and others, were enjoyned to go into their Temples, and thank their gods for this signal victory. In the mean time, the Prince, Alcidon, and Damon, went to visit the walls and the Ports, and to repair such places as stood in any need: Adamas above all the rest took infinite pains; making it appear, that affection adds supernatural strength: for he never rested, until all the dead were interred, all the wounded put into the hands of Chirurgeons, and till he had visited every Quarter of the Town, and taken all necessary order for every thing. Ligdamon in the mean time, who had not forgotten an unexpected relief which he had received from an unknown person, had no sooner given the Prince an ac∣compt of his Commission, but retiring to his lodging, he made inquiry for him, unto whom he was so much obliged; and hearing that he was well, and that the wound he had received in his shoulder was so slight, that the skin was no more then scratch'd, he was extreamly glad to hear it; and the first thing he did, would go and see him: he found him in a chair with his arm in a scarf, according to the directions of the Chirurgeons. As soon as this young man saw Ligdamon enter, he rose up to salute him, which he did with a countenance that expressed a long acquaintance: Ligdamon received his embraces with all the civility he could, as well because he thought himself obliged thereunto by the rules of civility, as be∣cause of his particular obligation which he had received from him: Yet the stran∣ger, who perceived he carried himself as to a person unknown, he had an opini∣on, that because it was something dark he did not know him, or perhaps for some consideration or other, would not seem to know him. After the first salutes, and Ligdamon had enquired of his health, also thanked him for the favour which he had done him, and the hazard wherein he put himself: I beseech you Sir, (said the stranger) dismisse those who accompany you, and then I shall give an answer unto all you say: Ligdamon then turned to the company, desiring them to with∣draw, and then the stranger began thus.
The sequel of the History of MELANDER. YOu do ak me, unthankful and persidious Lidias, how I do; and does give me thanks for that which I have this day done for you; as if you did not know, that I cannot be well unlesse you be so; and that the hazard which I have this day run for you, is one of the least where∣unto I have exposed my life to preserve yours. Forgetful and thankless man; Canst thou not remember the carresses and kind∣nesses, which when you were in great Brittain you received in my house, from all that had any relation unto Melander? Hast thou forgot all those oathes which thou so oft has sworn, never to love any but this Melander? Dost think by saign∣ing to forget thy flight from London, that all those who knew of thy persidy do not remember it? Is it possible thy infidelity should so choke thy memory, as not to know that Melander, who putting on the habit of a man as thou seest her, did fight with Lipandas for thy liberty, or indeed thy life? Can it be imagined that ingratitude should so dull thy soul, as to forget that this Melandr, who hath now saved thy life, is the very same, who in Callice came into the prisons of Lipandas to deliver thee, and exposed her hands and feet unto setters, to release thine? She would have continued, but that Ligdamon interrupted her thus: Certain∣ly I were the most worthy not only of blame, but of extream punishment, if be∣ing so obliged as you esteem me. I should ever lose the memory of them; but I protest before heaven, that this Lidias, whose name you put upon me, is to me altogether unknown. How? replied Melander (and was extreamly angry) canst thou without a blush say, thou art not the same, against whom for thy in∣gratitude I drew my sword, near Neomagues, and from whom I received a wound in my arm; I cannot say (answered he and was amazed) that I am the same you mention; For I do remember, that being near the Town you named. I was as∣saulted by a stranger, without any cause; who was wounded; for which I was ta∣ken prisoner, and got out by the help of a woman who being deceived as you are, and taking me for one Lidias, did give me her clothes, and she took shine. O my dear Lidias (said she) if for any important reason you desire to conceal your name, do not think me one that will reveal it; consider that so many testi∣monies of my pure affection, as I have given, may well assure you that I will con∣ceal whatsoever you shall desire to hide. If you will, no other name but Ligda∣mon shall ever come in my mouth: Assure your self my dearest friend, that my af∣fection unto you is far above my own life, and no interest or advantage whatsoe∣ver shall make we betray you: She who hath left her countrey, her kindred, her friends; She who hath hazarded her life a hundred times to save you, can she have any interest further then to please you? Say unto me freely, Melander, my designe is to be no longer Lidias, I desire the world should think me to be Ligda∣mon, I would have it thought I never saw Melander, I would lose the memory of her, and thou shalt so: O my dearest friend, that before I will discover thee, I will lose the memory of thy name and my own, as long as you shall please: If I do betray thee, never esteem me for Melander, and drive me out of thy pre∣sence, as not worthy to bear the name of a woman who would only live to serve thee. Wise and fair Melander, replied Ligdamon, I do not only admire at the gran∣dure, and purity of your affection, but much more at the happiness of that Li∣dias for whom you take me: Most happy may he well esteem himself, that is so perfectly loved, by so many discreet and fair women: and certainly he is a man of most high merit, that is thus sincerely esteemed and loved: nor should I yield unto him in happinesse, by reason of that resemblance which is betwixt us, were I in a condition to receive the good will of those who take me for him: But know, fair and discreet Melander, that you are not the first who have been deceived by my face and voice: Many have been also mistaken, and should I tell you that
thousands have been also deceived as well you, I should tell you nothing but truth: when I was brought a prisoner of war unto Rhothomagues, the mother of Lidias took me for her son, and to my sorrows, the whole corporation of ju∣stice condemned me to be devoured by Lions for some homicide which that Li∣dias had committed; and there I had certainly perished, if one Amerina, deceiv∣ed by this resemblance, had not begged me for her husband. I relate unto you all these things, that you may see how much the world is mistaken in me, and that if I were the same Lidias which you think I am, I should think my self obliged to you in all the services which you can desire; but mistake me not I beseech you, I know that I am Ligdamon, this countrey man born, where if you please, I am able to give you a thousand testimonies of it: The Nymph Amasis, her daughter Galathea, will tell you that I had my education under them; Adamas the grand Druide, the high Priest, the Flamines: to be breif, all the Town can testifie that I am Ligdamon and not Lidias. Melander was amazed at all this that Ligdamon had told her; and seeing how confidently he offered to prove all he said, she began to doubt her mistake, though his face and speech were extreamly like to Lidias, and looking seriously upon him, if it be so (said she) it is a thing most strange, that two should be so extreamly alike, that no difference can be found, neither in face, speech, stature, behaviour, nor age: and let us see (said she) if there be the same resemblance in such things as come by accident: then going nearer him, and taking off his hat, she lifting up his hair, but not finding any mark of that wound which Lidias received in the combat with Aronthes, she was quite confounded; and going back a pace or two, I must needs confess (said she) that I think my self mistaken, and that you are not the same Lidias I look for: for he has a scar in his head which you have not: and sure I am that his is such a mark, as never will wear out. Ligdamon, beyond expression, glad to see himself delivered of this pain, but more, to know this difference, to the end he might undeceive Amerina by it, for he knew she would follow him. Would it had pleased the gods (said he) that I had known this difference when I was condemned for Lidias; for then it would have saved me many a dangerous adventure: The gods, answered Melander, do every thing with such wise providence, that none ought to complain: for as your re∣semblance unto Lidias had like to have cost you your life, so the same resem∣blance hath saved it; for assure your self, if I had not been deceived by your face, I had never ventured my self so in the ditch to save you. Also had not I taken you for Lidias, I had never been convinced of my errour in thinking him perfideous, who perhaps is seeking me amongst the Gauls, as I did you as far as Callice: for Cavalier you must know, that I being in prison under Lipandas, to get Lidias out, I understood by the Gaoler, that he for whom I was a prisoner, was taken by the Neustrians, condemned unto the Lions, and delivered upon con∣dition of marrying Amerina; whether or no this was sadness unto me, let him judge that ever loved; but so it was, that after many a sad complaint, yet such as never durst come out of my lips, for fear of being known, I languished thus in this pain: for the life I led, could be phrased nothing but a languishment, never grieving for the condition wherein I was, but only because I could not ponyard my self in the presence of ungrateful and perfidious Lidias; but when I was in greatest despair of ever getting out of that miserable place: The Franks one night, I know not how, became masters of the Town, the Gaoler hmself set o∣pen the prison doors, and unsetterd our feet, in hopes that some Franks who were prisoners amongst us would save his life for it. But I, who extreamly desired to see Lidias, that I might in his and Amerinas presence sacrifice my life, I was no sooner at liberty, but finding some horses which had no owners, I took one and got out of Callice, having in my company only one young man who conducted me, and being prisoners together were become friends: with him I went unto Rothomagues, where I no sooner entred, but I was informed by a reverent Ma∣tron, of whom I enquired for Lidias, that he was at a house of Amerinas his wife not far from thence, and beseeching her to tell me the way, she told me that it was in the way towards the great city of Paris. Judge you whether this news did
not sting me to the soul; but hasting out of the Town, and overtaking the young man who conducted me, for he durst not enter in, by reason of some enemies; And I talked with him, but truly I know not what, nor which way I parted from him: But so it was, that presently after I came to this house, where they told me that Lidias was gone three days before, with Amerina his wife, towards For∣rests, upon some business: I presently followed after, and by the way heard oft∣ten of them: At last, one day, after a large journey, and when the heat of the day had almost sweltred my horse, I saw a shade by the high way side, which I thought would shelter me from the extream heat of the day: The weariness of my self and my horse made me alight, and I had no sooner tyed him to a Tree, but I spied a woman, who by what I have heard from you, I now think was Ameri∣na: I went unto her, and asked her if it would be no offence to participate of her shade: To which she gave me a very civil answer. At the same time you came with some boughs to make the place more shady: As soon as ever I cast my eye upon you, I took you, as I did now, for Lidias whom I looked for, and thought that woman to be Amerina: I must needs confess that I was moved with several passions; for once I was in a mind to fall upon Amerina whilst she slept, and first to run a ponyard into her breast, and then into my own, before your face: An∣other time I design'd to let the innocent woman alone and to open my own breast, and as I was dying, to take some of my blood, and throw it in your face, upbraid∣ing you with your infidelity: But some good genius diverted me from those cruel resolutions, and constraining me to go a little further off, after a hundred differ∣ent conceptions, I thought it best to die by your own hand, and not by my own; to the end you might the more lament my death. This being my design, you know what signs I made unto you to separate you from Amerina, and how violently I cast my self upon your sword, with which indeed I was wounded in my arm, but I know not how it missed my heart, for there was my intention to receive it; and I had such an opinion of receiving it there, that when I felt the point of the sword, I fancied that it had reached my heart; so as having heard that all wounds of the heart were mortal, I fancied my self to be dead; and when I returned to my self again, I found that I was in the hands of the Governour of Neomague. I understood since, that he finding me in a swoon, he caused me to be taken up as dead, but the motion of those who carried me, did revive me; so setting me upon a horse, they carried me away; when, to my thinking, I saw you pass by my horse, very well mounted. Certainly (said Ligdamon and interrupted) it was some other, for I was on foot, and never left Amerina till we were both taken together. If so, replyed Melander, either it was Lidias, or some other who resembles him, as you do: But so it was, that I told the Governour with a deep sigh, it was he who had put me into that conditi∣on; and as soon as the Governour heard it, he caused him to be pursued and brought to prison. When night came, I began to think how I should be a cause of punishing Li∣dias, and therefore was very sorry for what I had said: And as I was in bed the next morning, they brought me a woman in your clothes, to see if it was she who hurt me, and I said she was not: But I was extreamly astonished when they brought him whom I accused, for truly, I took him for you, I mean Lidias. And left he should know me, I turned my face the other way, as I lay in my bed: and though I knew I had reason enough to wish him ill, yet I could not find in my heart to do him any harm: so as altering my voice, I declared that it was not he, but some other, who had taken the habit of that woman. Upon this discharge he was released. I beseech you (said Ligdamon) what became of the woman, for it was she who saved me? The Governours wife (said she) took her off from all pu∣nishment, and is so far from all harm, that to morrow I believe she will return home. But to continue that discourse of my miserable fortune; In the night time when I could not sleep, by reason of the wound, not in my arm, but in my heart, I made a hundred propositions to my self: one while I would write unto Lidias, and let him know what wrong he had done me; but I was presently off that, thinking he would but mock at my Letter, and with his Amerina, laugh at it:
Another while I would send for him, not telling who I was, and in the presence of the Governours wife, who was of a sweet and pitiful disposition, upbraid him with his persidie and ingratitude, as thinking, that shame perhap might work more upon him then my love could. Upon this design I slept, with a resolution to put it in execution the next morning; but I was disappointed, for that very night, as soon as ever he was set at liberty, he went privately out of the Town, none knowing which way he went, When I heard of his departure, I was almost even mad against my self for let∣ting such an opportunity so imprudently slip; for (said I) had I accused him, doubt∣less he had been stayed, and I might have executed my design in speaking unto him before the Governours wife: And as for my fond fears of doing him any harm by way of Justice, what greater punishment could he in Justice receive, then a while of Imprisonment, since my wound was not neer mortal? But all this rea∣soning with my self was in vain; and after a long debate, and vexing at my self, Patience was my only remedy; and as soon as I could (which was within seven or eight days) to set forward towards Forrests, where I heard you were; and as Fortune was, I came into this place where all these Forces did rendezvouz to storm this Town: I searched every rank and file to see if I could find you; and by chance being next him that leaped into the ditch with intention to kill you, as soon as ever I cast my eye upon you, and taking you for Lidias, I ran in to defend you, making it to appear, that nothing is stronger then Love, since neither any scorns, or offences, nor injuries, nor any thing, could keep me from exposing my life for Lidias, whom I thought that I had reason to hate even to death. Thus did Melander conclude the discourse of her travels and pains; and Lig∣damon presenting his hand unto her, Fair and Generous woman (said he unto her) the life which you have this day preserved, shall be spent in your service; I hope you will not depart out of this Country, before you have found a full content∣ment. Your unparallell'd Fortunes, and dangers which beyond all hopes you have escaped, is an argument that some good Genius conducted you hither to preserve you. Hope therefore, and be confident that your hopes will not be frustrated: In the mean time, dispose of me, and command me, as one that cannot be more devoted to serve you then I am. These offers (answered she) are such, as a poor woman, destitute of all help, but from the Gods, might hope for from such a ge∣nerous Cavalier as you are: I do not refuse these kind of offers, and at this time will only desire two things from you: The one, not to discover that I am a wo∣man; unto any: and the other, to let me live with you, to love and serve you, until such time as it shall please the Gods I can hear some news of him whom I look for: If you will please to grant me these two requests, I shall live with some contentment, having always in my eye the face of my so much loved Lidias. Lig∣damon who did much esteem and admire the vertue of this woman, did grant her two requests, and with many assurances of his good will, did bid her good night, and went to set all things in good order within the Quarter that was assigned un∣to him: for though he had toyled all the day, yet would he not rest till he saw all right that was under his charge: and when he returned to his Lodging, he heard some in the next house that complained excessively. Ligdamon being very pitiful, and sharing in the sorrows of another, hearing this lamntable voice, and belie∣ving it to be some that was wounded, he commanded one that followed him to go in, and bring him word whether the wounded man wanted any thing, in the mean time he stayed at the door: He who went in upon this errand, did see a man tyed by the arms and legs unto a Bed post, without any to look unto him: the light which the fire cast which was in the chimney, did make the messenger judge him to be some stranger, and that perhaps some had taken him prisoner at the last Sally, yet seeing no harm done unto him, and observing that he strove all he could to draw the bed unto which he was tyed, towards the fire: What reason (said the man unto him) have you to complain? And why do you strive so to get near the fire? Perhaps it is to try if you can break your chains; but alas poor man, though they were loose, yet little hopes could you have to escape a hundred Court of Guards, besides as many ports to hinder you. The stranger looking wildly upon
him, if I had no cause of complaint (answered he) I should be ashamed to open my mouth; but I must die, and therefore when you thought my getting to the fire was to escape, alas it was only that I might end this miserable life by fire; and I was so far from desiring any escape, that the first minute my hands were at liber∣ty, I resolved should be the last of my life. Ligdamon who was impatient, and thought it long before the man returned, he went himself into the chamber, and seeing this man in that condition, who are those (said he) who treats this prisoner so cruelly? The Souldiers into whose hands he fell, being in the next room, they came to give an accompt: Sir (said a corporal) we did not put this man into this condition wherein you see him, with any intentions of using him ill; but on the contrary, we did it out of compassi∣on; for he is so desperate, that if we had not taken a knife from him, it had been before now at his heart: so as we were constrained to tie him in this manner, lest he should kill himself. Certainly (said Ligdamon) he hath received some strange misfortue, did he never tell the reason of his despair? No, said the cor∣poral, nor could we ever get any thing from him, but sighs and tears. Ligdamon looking upon him, and thinking him to be a man of valour, it is pity (said he) he should be thus lost, perhaps he has lost some whom he loved, for such despairs seldome proceed from any thing but love. Then going nearer unto him, friend, said he unto him, consider that you are a man, and by consequence, a subject both of good and bad Fortune: after a gloomy cloud, will come a gleam of Sun-shine; after a storm of bad fortune, will come a calme of good: Ca∣valier (answered the stranger) the compassion which you seem to have of my misery, makes me think you to be a man of merit: for I never knew a base heart pity the afflicted. This opinion which I have of you, makes me now repent my attempt of ta∣king away your life in the last scuffle, though I have cause enough to accuse of all my wiseries. Was it you (said Ligdamon) who fell upon me in the ditch, when I caused all the enemies engines to be burned? It was I▪ answered he, that should have been very sorry if I have accomplished my intent, but should have been very glad if pour sword had then taken away my life, since it had ravished that person from me, for whose sake I only desired life. I am sorry, replied Ligdamon, that I was any cause of your discontent; but you ought to think me very innocent, for in the heat of combate one can hardly tell whom they strike: yet, if my memory do not fail me, he whom I held under me, when you assaulted me, is not dead; for when he asked life of me I gave it unto him. O good gods, cryed out the stranger, is his life saved? Certainly (said Ligdamon) I did him no hurt after he had rendred himself, for it is not my custome to hurt those who quit their arms; and besides, I could hardly do it, since you assaulted me upon a sudden: upon this, some of those who were near Ligdamon at that time, did testifie that the man escaped, and though they saw him when he went away, yet they had so many other prisoners in their hands, that they could not follow him. O most omnipotent Tautates (cried out the stranger, lifting up his eyes to hea∣ven, and would have done so his hands, had they not been tyed) is it possible I should be so happy? and that my despair should help that person to escape? Cer∣tainly (said all the company) we saw him out of the ditch: I am very glad on't, said Ligdamon: But to see the strange effects of inward joy; one might perceive the eyes and the countenance of this man, so to change, that he seemed not the same he was a minute before; and addressing his speech unto Ligdamon, Cava∣lier (said he unto him with a mild and temperate voice) in giving life unto one, you have given it unto two: for if she of whom I complained had died, nothing could have kept me alive; I say she, for you must know that though you saw her in the habit of a man, yet she is the most generous and brave woman that ever was upon the earth: and that you may see what cause I had to love and admire her, give me leave to relate the history of all my troubles. Ligdamon, who saw him much changed, and his speech more moderate and discreet: he had an opi∣nion, that this news had settled his mind; and pittying to hear him talk so tyed; Stranger (said he unto him) I should be very glad to hear you, but am sorry to
see you in that condition; and yet I dare not suffer you to be untyed, lest you should do some act of inhumanity against your self. No, no, Sir, answered he, your courtesie has more obliged me then so; and the assurance of so many per∣sons, that she is alive whom I so much lamented, does command me to live, that I may serve both you and her. Upon this assurance (said Ligdamon) I will com∣mand you shall be untyed: you shall go with me to my lodging, where you shall find better accomodation then in this place. This unask'd for favour (said the stranger) obliges me to pass my word, never to forsake you until you dismiss me; and to tell you, that being neither any Officer nor Souldier unto your enemies, nor having passed any promise to serve them, I would never whilst I live bear arms against you, nor ever go into your enemies army; but with a sword in my hand to fight your quarrel, were it not that she, for whose sake I am your pri∣soner, is in their Camp, and I cannot dispose of my self until I have found her. Upon this, the corporal untyed him, and he went with Ligdamon unto his lodg∣ing, where he was put into good clothes, for his own were plundered from him by those who took him, and those which remained upon him, he had torn to pieces in his rage: afterwards Ligdamon, causing him to sit down, and they two being alone in the chamber, he began thus. The sequel of the History of LIPANDAS. THose who never knew the Grandure and Puissance of that god which is cal∣led Love, ought to learn by my example, how to honour and reverence him, unless they will incur the same punishments which I have, for abu∣sing those who did adore him, and for not doing so great reverence unto that great Deity as is due: for know Sir, that as soon as I left my Nurse, I began so much to despise love, and all that followed him, that to tell me one was a lover, was enough to make me scorn him, when at any time I chanced to hear of any ex∣traordinary effect of that passion, I used by way of mockery to say, that they changed the name of things, and that this which they called love, was indeed madness, and so ought to be called. When I was at any meetings, where I saw many idolizing a fair face, and were so tyed by the eyes that they could not move out of the presence of those fair ones, I was wont to say, that the men did but mock the women, and the women the men; when some would needs prove, that he was forced to a beauty, and that her charms were inevitable, I presently concluded him to be only a Sophister, that to shew his wit would argue for, or against any ar∣gument that was propounded. Nay more then al this, from my very infancy, to the Autumn of my age, I could never find in any of those who were cryed up for such high beauties, any thing more amiable then in other women: So as I may say, that as there are some who are born blind, others deaf, others without a taste, or at least a taste different from others: so was I born without any senti∣ment of love or beauty, and all my delectation at that time was in hunting, or in wars, which I followed wheresoever I could see the seat was. Now Sir, I lived in this contempt of love and beauty until of very late, when that God, who would not suffer any mortal to trample his honour and his laws so under foot, did make me know his power, by a way as extraordinary as my crime. Those who knew me, called me by the name of Lipandas, born in a city of the Neustrians called Rothomagues, and of Parents, who there held the prime rank. And whereas, my countrey maintained great wars against the Romans, and they against the Franks, I had occasions enough of shewing my valour without stirring out of the Neustrian limits, or at least out of our Army: and therefore▪ a place of great concernment being in the power of our Lords, which was called Callice, the government of it was committed unto me, and I kept it several years. About a month since, one whose name was Lidias, coming from great Brittain, unto which he was fled for Sanctuary, landed in this place.
Ligdamon upon this laying his hand upon the strangers, stay a while Cavalier I beseech you (said he unto him) are you the same Lipandas, who being Gover∣nour of Calais, did imprison Lidias for the death of Arontes? I am the very same (answered he) but what knowledge could you have of me in a place so distant from the Neustrians? Content your self (replyed Ligdamon, that I know what you tell me, and more, that a young woman of great Britain, called Melander, armed like a Cavalier, did fight with you about the liberty of that Lidias; afterwards to deliver him, did put her self into prison, and when the Franks surprized Ca∣lais, was delivered out of your hands. I perceive (replyed the stranger) that you do know almost all I have to tell you, and therefore my discourse will be shorter then I intended: Then looking upon him a little better, Oh heavens! cryed he out; why do I make any relations of it unto you? for if I be not much mistaken, it is Lidias unto whom I speak: To Lidias! answered Ligdamon, No; but to one that has paid very dear for his resemblance unto that Lidias, as you shall understand when you have done your discourse. The credit which I give to your words (replyed the stranger) makes me give my eyes the lye, for I durst have sworn you had been Lidias; but since you do deny it, I will return from whence I digressed; and then he replyed thus. Oh Sir, since you are acquainted with these accidents, perhaps you know also, that this Melander was no sooner out of my prison, but she went after that un∣grateful Lidias, who having forgotten all those extraordinary favours which he had received from that generous woman, went unto Rothomagues to marry Ame∣rina, her for whom he had killed Arontes, my neer Kinsman: As for me, I re∣mained a Prisoner in the hands of one Lindamore, a Cavalier of Gaul the most accomplished that ever came into Neustria; and the cause of it, as afterwards I understood, was this fair Melander, whom I retained Prisoner: for Lindamore hearing, I know not how, what testimonies of generosity and affection this wo∣man had expressed unto Lidias, and being informed that she was a prisoner in the Castle, as soon as the Castle was taken, he ran to deliver her: But not finding her (for the doors were set open, and she, with many others, escaped) I think there was not any corner or hole which he did not seek, continually asking me where she was: I who could not tell him, nor knew Melander but under the no∣tion of the sad Cavalier, I knew not what to answer him: At last, making me understand that he sought for a woman in the habit of a Cavalier, who fought with me for Lidias, and was afterwards imprisoned: As for the sad Cavalier, an∣swered I, he indeed was my prisoner, but as for any woman, there was none in my hands. Well, replyed Lindamore, that sad Cavalier is the woman I mean: How? replyed I, the sad Cavalier a woman! Why? said Lindamore, was she so long in your hands, and you not know it? Why it was she who loved Lidias, and in defence of him, armed her self, and vanquished you, and afterwards with a most heroique courage, bought the liberty of Lidias by the loss of her own. Now Sir, you shall hear how that puissant God of Love was revenged upon me; I who always mocked at his power, and despised his Laws, no sooner heard that this sad Cavalier was a woman, but I fell into most extream admiration: this admiration bringing into my memory the generosity of that woman, I began to esteem her; and at last, contemplating upon the sweetness of her face and aspect, her modest behaviour, her admirable patience, and her unparallell'd affection, I fell from esteem, to love her; a thing which I ever thought impossible: But learn O all ye mortals! to reverence the supreme Deities: for I not resting in an ordi∣nary affection, Love had stuck his arrows so deep in my heart, that I became all passionate flame, so as I may serve for an example unto all such Atheists as do not acknowled the puissance of this great God, who above all the rest, ought to be called Hesus, that is, strong and puissant. In the mean time, Lindamore under∣stood that Melander was no sooner at liberty, but she hasted after Lidias, who was gone to Rothomagues: and the very truth is, had I been free, as Melander went after Lidias, I had gone after Melander; but having passed my word unto that Cavalier, not to stir out of his house, I was able to do nothing but languish, and think my self worthy of that punishment which I endured, for having so fair,
and so sweet a woman so long in my hands, and never knowing it. I found then that this passion made me have a different opinion of things, and was forced to say, that none was able to resist the god of Love: I that was wont to laugh at those that begged any trivial favour from her they loved, could now be contented to kiss and adore the very chains which touched the fair hand of my Saint Me∣lander. And therefore I desired one of Lindamors men to go with me into the prison where she was wont to be: The man like the master, being all Courtesie, went with me, and not being well able to discern which chains had fettered her, I desired him to put them all upon me: as soon as I had them upon me; O chains, said I, which once fettered the hands of her who now has fettered my heart, yet less cruel then I, since you were broken to let her go at liberty, whom I so un∣worthily kept in my prison; you may with abundance of reason upbraid me with the crime which I have committed; for I was the cause and the Authour, but you more insensible then I was, had some pity upon her, and knew that she to whom the liberty of all hearts is due, did not deserve to be so imprisoned. O you most happy bonds (said I and kissed them) happy in the touch of her fair hands, shew me in what place you received that honour, that by kissiing it, I may express the devotion which I bear unto them: upon this I kissed them again, and beseeched those that were about me to fetter my arms and my hands with all the shakkles in the prison, and because out of pity, they refused to do me that office, O good gods (cryed I out) is it possible that he who had no compassion upon the fairest, and most generous woman upon earth, should find any so compassionate unto me? Upon this their denial, I spoke and did many things that were ridiculous, some could not chuse but laugh, and others seeing a man so lost in love, did resent my condition. All these passages were reported unto Lindamor, and Lindamor related them unto Clidemant, and both out of curiosity would needs come and see me. The condition wherein they found me, was such, that any that saw me would say I was out of my wits: I had fettered both my feet with as many chains as covered them, and one hand was tying the other as well as it could: as many chains were about my neck as could hang; and thus hardly able to stir, I kissed those that my mouth could reach, reverencing the rest, because they had touched that fair one. Although I saw them enter, yet I continued my devotion of kisses, as if I saw them not, which held them a while admiration: at last Clidemant came nearer unto me: Cavalier (said he) what are you doing with all these chains? and why are you thus fettered with them? Sir, answered I, I do not only desire them to be continually upon me, but I wish I could hang them about my heart. About your heart? (said Clidemant) you know that then they would kill you: for any thing that touches the heart is mortal. O Sir, replied he, that rule is false. For Melander doth not only touch my heart, but has pierced it with a hundred ar∣rows; yes, has pull'd it out of my brest, and yet I do hot die. That touch of your heart, replied Clidemant, is only in imagination; but if these chains should touch it doubtless you would die: No Sir, (said I unto him) for do you not know that Iron touched with a Loadstone, does participate of the quality of the same Loadstone, and will draw Iron also? I know it, answered Clidemant, and have seen it; but what's that to the purpose? Why this (answered I) these chains though of Iron, yet having touched the fair hands of Melander, have re∣ceived a certain virtue and quality, as they can touch hearts and not make them die, as the fair Melander can do her self. Upon this Clidemant shrugg'd his shoulders, and went away; but Lindamor very sorry to see me so distracted, he came unto me, and did all he could to divert me from such thoughts; and by little and little, his kind words, and the pains I saw him take to reduce me to my un∣derstanding, did so operate with me, that I was perswaded by him: for though these actions did make me seem as if I were mad, yet I was not so; but the Gran∣dure of this new passion, as the splendour of the Sun does dim the Stars, so this at the first did dim me from the sight of all other things, or at least made me de∣spise them. Eight dayes did I continue in this sort; at last the kindess of Lindamor was
such, that seeing me so unmeasurably sad and melancholy, and that I grew worse and worse every day, he took pity upon my affliction, and drawing me aside, did use all possible arguments and considerations that could comfort an afflicted per∣son, and afterwards offered me so many favours as have created me his servant as long as I live. Unto all which, I returned no other answer at the first but sighs; yet at last, being pressed unto it, I let him understand in the best language I had, how deeply I resented his extraordinary kindnesses, and told him, that my griefs did not proceed from my imprisonment, or my losses, but only because I under∣stood that Melander was gone after Lidias, and I not able to follow her; and that love had so wholly devoted me unto her, that if in this quest she received a∣ny harm, it would most infallibly cost me my life; because I thought my self the cause of all the harm she received. Lindamor, who I believe was not ignorant of loves power, went the same hour to procure my enlargement, and did so solicite Clidemant, that he obtained it of the Childerick, who was newly arived at that place. Upon this Lindamor returned unto me with a smiling aspect, Cavalier (said he) leave off all your sorrows and any afflicting your self, for the Prince Clidemant, at my request, hath obtained your liberty, and I come to bring you the news, to the end that before you go away you may promise me one thing, which is not at all prejudicial unto your affection, but on the contrary it will oblige you to observe it. Upon that condition (said I unto him) I shall thankfully receive the favour you have done me. Then promise me (said he) that you will never bear Arms against the King of the Franks nor against Clidemant: and you are obliged unto it by the courte∣sie which you now receive, but much more by the affection which you bear unto Melander, who is so affectionately devoted unto Clidemant, for the favours which in good time you may know she hath received from him, that certainly if she have any power over you, it will be one of the first commands she will enjoyn you. Sir, answered I, I am extreamly glad the observance of your desires will sute so well with Melanders, for I shall with more courage make a promise of it unto you. But assure your self, Sir, that though she should stand but as indifferent, and not positively enjoy the contrary, I should think my self the most ungrate∣ful man that ever wore a sword, did I not most religiously observe it. Upon this promise (replied Lindamor) I give you your enlargement. I did admire at this kindness and magnanimity, for avarice does often choke those virtues in many men. I took his hand, and by force would have kissed it by way of thanks; and because he would not suffer it, you know Sir, said I, that this is the least testimo∣ny of my gratitude I can pay, and it should be greater if I were able, but at this time I beseech you receive it with assurance, that as long as I live I shall never for∣get my great obligations unto you: and going along with him, I made the same protestations unto Clidemant and Childerick; and after I had taken my humble leave of them all, I went in quest of that fair one. First I went towards Rhothomagues, but not being willing to enter in, because I knew not how the Lords would take the loss of Callice; and therefore went un∣to a kinsmans house, not far from the Town, where enquiring how all squares went, I understood that every one was well satisfied concerning me, though the loss of that place was of great consequence: for they all knew I was betrayed, and that there is no guarding of ones self against a Traytour. But that not be∣ing the business which brought me thither, I fell into discourse concerning Lidias; and then he told me, how he would have poysoned himself to prevent his marri∣age with Amerina; then did I conclude with my self, that his love unto Melander was the cause: in this opinion, I asked him what was become of Lidias, and he answered that both he and Amerina were lost, and that it was reported they were gone into Forrests, none knowing the cause. I thought that I knew enough for that time: so as the next morning pretending that I desired to know more particularly what the Lords did think of me, I would go as secretly as I could unto one of them that was my professed friend, but I went quite another way, assuring my self that Melander was infallibly followed
after Lidias. And yesterday by fortune I came into this Army, where curiosity invited me to stay, and see the discipline of that Country; and finding that the General of the Army did think to carry that Town at the very first onset. I had a desire to be there, and at the last Salley, I stood upon the side of a ditch, look∣ing upon the valour of your men, and the flight of the Assailants, having no dis∣position to draw my sword on either side: But I know not how, casting my eye upon you, I thought I saw the generous Melander, whom you held by the Neck, and ready to run your sword into her Breast. Oh heavens! Cavalier, how infi∣nitely was I surprised at the sight? I lept into the Ditch, with full intention to be killed in killing you; and I know not what had hapned, if the voice of some who ran after me, had not warned you of my intention; for upon it you guarded your self. But now I thank the Gods that my intention took no effect, as well be∣cause of that vertue and merit which I find in you, as because I am yet preserved, to serve that generous woman. Thus ended Lipandas; and Ligdamon with a smile and answered, I must needs confess Cavalier, that Love, above all the rest of the Gods, takes most delight in entangling the spirits of men, and in producing wonderful effects: And that you your self may confess as much, know that this Lidias, who was reported would have poysoned himself, because he would not marry Amerina, and who since came into this Country, was my self, who am Ligdamon, and who having a great resemblance of that Lidias, was like to be devoured by Lyons, and since being constrained to seem as if I would marry Amerina, who could not be per∣swaded but I was him whom I resembled and therefore to undeceive her, I brought her hither, where by a strange misfortune we parted. But that you may the bet∣ter see how that God delights in these confusions, I beseech you follow me, and you shall see how far your eyes deceived you, when you thought you saw Melan∣der in the ditch. Then taking him by the hand, he carried him into Melanders chamber. Cavalier (said he unto her) I come to let you see one of our prisoners, who will not tell us his name, and to see whether haply you know him. At the first, her thoughts were so far from Lipandas, that she knew him not. But the poor Cavalier being extreamly surprized at this encounter, as soon as ever he cast his eyes upon her, Oh heavens! cryed he out: Upon this word he fell at her feet, and would have uttered some words, which he was not able to pronounce. It was happy that Ligdamon brought him alone, for otherwise certainly Me∣lander had been known to be a woman; for she not being able to endure a man should lie so prostrate before her, did (out of her natural curtesie) offer to raise him up; and he at the last cryed out. O Melander! Is it possible your fair hand should daign to touch such a worthless person, and one whom you have so much cause to hate? Though the voice was not altogether unknown unto her, yet she knew him not; but still offering to raise him up, Oh most fair and generous wo∣man (said he unto her) I will never rise from your feet, until you have either par∣doned or punished the errour which I have ignorantly and innocently committed against you. Melander who did not yet know him, as well because she had sel∣dom seen him when she was in prison, as because it was now dark, the candle be∣ing at the other end of the chamber, she knew not what to answer, unless in words of civility, and actions which expressed her good will; yet still she continued to raise him up. Ligdamon who perceived she did not know him. It is strange Ca∣valier (said he unto her) that this humble submission of Lipandas should not ob∣tain that favour which he begs. Lipandas! (said she, and was extreamly surpri∣zed) is this Lipandas? Yes Madam (answered that Cavalier) I am the same un∣worthy Lipandas, who when he did not know you, did so unworthily treat you, and who now knowing you, does admire your vertue, and beg a pardon for his innocent ignorance. She looked a while upon him, and gave no answer; at last, taking him by the hand, yes, yes Lipandas (said she) I do with all my heart par∣don all the injuries I received from you; and the more willingly, because by this means you have given me an occasion of making my love to Lidias appear. Af∣ter this, raising him up with more caresses then ever he expected, she asked him what fortune brought him to that place? But when she understood that she was
the cause of his being taken, and that it was he who would have killed Ligdamon, out of an opinion that he saw her in danger, she could not chuse but wonder at this happy encounter: And to let you see Lipandas (said she unto him) that I do not only pardon, but also forget all the ill usage I received from you, I beseech you Cavalier (said he unto Ligdamon) to bestow this prisoner upon me. I will not only bestow him (answered Ligdamon) but all that I have upon you, but one thing I shall humbly beg of you in exchange, which is, to make him as much my friend, as I am a servant unto Lindamore and Clidemant, unto whom he is so much obli∣ged. I do not know (replyed Melander) what acquaintance he has with those two Cavaliers, but if he have any mind to oblige me, he shall make it appear, in loving and serving all those that love them, or have any dependency upon them: For I am as much obliged unto them for their curtesies, as unto him that saved my life, since being by fortune of War their prisoner, they did not only give me my li∣berty, but shewed me so many favours, that I was in a capacity to save the life of Lidias, by taking his imprisonment upon me. Fair and generous Melander (said Lipandas) these words, which are to me inviolable commands, shall be for ever engraved in my memory: and I do profess and vow my self as long as I live, a servant unto Ligdamon, and all those who are lovers of Clidemant and Lindamore. Upon this Ligdamon said unto him, I do receive this assurance of your amity, and do acquaint you, that you are obliged by your vow to serve the Nymph Amasis; as the mother of Clidemant, and Galathea as his Sister. The Mother and the Si∣ster of Clidemant! replyed Lipandas, I were unworthy to bear the name of a Cavalier, if I did not freely offer my life for them both, and I swear by Tanta∣tes, so I will. Ligdamon upon this embraced him; and after Melander had desired him not to tell any that she was a woman, he gave him his liberty. Then causing him to be better clothed, he carried him to the Nymph Amasis, and the Prince Godomar, telling them, that the curtesie of Clidemant and Lindamore, had purchased unto them that Cavalier, whom they received according to his merits. In the mean while, Meronthes who was grieved to the very soul that he had failed in his promise of opening a Port, he sent out his son, when Ligdamon salli∣ed forth to  the Engines which were in the ditch: This young man being well instructed  Father, he mingled himself amongst those that followed Ligda∣mon; an  saw every one busie about other things, he slipt away unto Polemas,  an excuse from his father, that he could not open the Port as he promised, because Adamas had changed their Quarters in the night time, and if he continued the same order, he could not promise him for the future, since he could not know what Quarter would fall to his lot: But that if he resolved to con∣tinue a formal Seige, he had thought of an infallible way to let him into the Town in a short space, which was this: The house of Meronthes stood close by the wall, in a place which the son shewed unto him; in it there was a deep cave, which was made for keeping of wine in the Summer, and the ditch about the Town was much higher then it; he promised to make a pass under the ditch from it, unto what place Polemas would appoint, if one thing did not hinder him, which was, that he knew not what to do with the earth which he digged out in making this pass. Polemas did exceedingly approve of this way, and asked him if there were any Wells about the house: and being answered that there was; Then said Polemas, throw the earth into those Wells. But (said the young man) they will be pre∣sently filled, besides another Cave which is used for keeping of wood; for all are nothing to contain the earth which will be digged out. Then (said Polemas) I will spring another Mine as neer yours as I can, that both may meet; in this I see no difficulty but one, which is, that our Works may be so streight, that they may meet each other: Sir (said the young man, to morrow about three of the clock in the morning, set a light upon the place where you intend to begin your work, and we will set another upon our house, towards which you may work and so we shall see which way to direct our courses. I shall (said Polemas) and more∣over I have two Levels, the one I will give unto you, and keep the other; when you see the light upon the place where I intend to begin the work, then plant your
Level directly towards it, as I will mine towards yours, and so we cannot miss of each other: For the Miners having the direction of these Levels to work by, they will directly make their Mine that way: Upon this he himself took the two Levels, and shewing the use of them, the young man having a quick apprehension, quick∣ly understood them. Yet Sir, (said the young man) I am to advertise you of two things; the one concerns your life, and the other the welfare of your affairs: As for the first of these, Ligdamon hath vowed your death, unless you speedily release Silvia: This advice Sir, is not to be slighted; for you know he is desperately in love with her: and he that contemns his own life, is master of his enemies. The other is Sir, That there are many who yet stand neutral, and are neither for, nor against you, who are ready to fall unto your enemies side, because they think the war you undertake against your Soveraign, is unlawful, and without good ground: Now Meronthes your faithful servant thinks it expedient to retain many who yet waver, that you seek out for a specious pretence, and a handsome colour for your War; which though it be not altogether true, yet it may have a face and probability of truth: And therefore he thinks it not amiss for you to give it ont. that Adamas aspires at the Soveraign Authority and detains the two Nymphs Prisoners; in order to which, he has procured the Prince Godomar, unto whom he has made mountainous promises of reward if he compass his design: That likewise he hath held secret correspondencies with Neighbour Princes; wit∣ness an unknown Queen that came into Marcelles, and left in it many souldiers. Briefly, by this course many things will be imputed unto him, which though af∣terwards they appear false, yet no matter, since they will serve to blind the peo∣ple, who take only the first impression of things, and will so declare themselves thereupon, that they cannot afterwards change, though they would. Polemas gave Meronthes many thanks for the care he had of his person, and for his good advice. Above all Sir, (said the young man, and interrupted him) he beseecheth you to make it appear how you resent the death of your great friend Climanthes, that all the world may see your love of those that serve you; and that it is a great shame to see him still hang before the Gate of the Town, from whence doubtless he would be taken, were it not for fear of being isovered to side with you, and so men ruine themselves without doing any conble service to you. As to this point (answered Polemas) you may tell him  know this wicked Adamas to be the instrument of our loss in Climanthes; but to mor∣row he shall see what revenge I will take upon Alexis, the daughter of that damned Villain, whom I have in my hands; Also upon Silvia, whom I have sent for, to make Amasis, and that Tray or, resent the injuries which they have done me. As for Ligdamon. I do believe the notice which Meronthes gives me is true, for I have heard as much other ways, but I shall look well enough to him: So after many thanks and promises, the young man took his leave. When night came, and was dark, the man being well instructed by his father, crept over the ditch, and coming to the place where Ligdamon had made a great slaughter of his enemies, he began to groan, and complain in a pitiful tone, so as the Sentinel hearing him, and asking who he was? Alas (said he, faign∣ing to far being heard) I am the son of Meronthes, who coming out with Ligdamon, have been here ever since amongst the dead. The Sentinel calling the Corporal, acquainted him, and the Corporal the Commander of the Guard; Order was given to throw down Cords to pull him up: So after he had bloodied his face, and durtied himself, complaining as if he were all wounds, he was pulled up the Wall, and carried to the house of his father, who was the Inventor of all this, and who seemed to be transported with joy at his sons Resurrection from the dead: For (said he) I gave him for dead, since he came not back into the Town with the rest. Oh father (said the subtle son) you may well say that the Gods have twice given me unto you; for I have been ever since I went out, amongst the dead.
The father held up his hands, praised the gods, and thanking those that pulled him up, did reward them liberally for their care and pains. Then getting him presently to bed, and seeming to send for a Chirurgion, he went with the compa∣ny to the door of his house, and gave them a thousand thanks. As soon as ever they were gone, he came into his sons chamber, and the door being shut, he gave an accompt of his voyage; advertised him of the light which would be pla∣ced where the Mine was to be begun, shewed him the level, and the use of it: and to be breif, made a most circumstantial relation of every particular passage; all which gave Meronthes abundance of contentment. And lest friends should come in the morning to see his son, and seeing him well, should suspect any thing, he lapped his head about with two or three napkins: patched his face all over, and instructed him so well with what to say, that he was prepared for all comers. In the mean time, Polemas acquainted Peledontes, Argonides, Listander, and Ligonias, with all these advertisements that had been given unto him by Meron∣thes, and the reason why he could not open a gate unto them; and entreated them they would disperse it about every where, that the cause of this taking up arms was only to set the Nymphs at liberty, and get her out of the hands of A∣damas, who under a pretence of piety and fidelty, had seized upon their persons, and intended to sell them and the whole state unto that unknown Queen; where∣upon Listander thought it expedient to print a Manifesto, and divulge it, not only throughout the Army, but also to send unto all the neighbouring Princes, in justi∣fication of their taking arms. The drawing up of this Manifesto was referred unto Ligonias, who had wit and words at will to guild over a rotten cause: and as Polemas was acquainting them with the resolution of Ligdamon to kill him, by reason of Silvia, one came to tell them that Ligdamon was brought a prisoner: O good gods (cryed he out) how favourable is heaven unto me? and causing those to enter who brought the supposed Ligdamon unto him, they presented Lidias, whom every one took for Ligdamon: come Ligdamon (said Polemas unto him) does it become the profes∣sion of a Cavalier, thus to revenge his quarrels? I have no quarrels to revenge, answered Lidias, especially in this countrey where I never was before. Were you (said Polas and smiled) never in this countrey before? Never (answered Li∣dias) to my knowledge. I do not wonder (said Polemas) that one who can ly so familiarly, should have so poor a courage; and therefore (said he to the Offi∣cers) take this impudent fellow out of my presence and guard him safe, that to morrow he may accompany Silvia whither I shall send them: so without any fur∣ther hearing, he caused him to be taken out of the chamber. A while after came Silvia, whom he would not see. but commanded she should be safely guarded till the morning; and to affright them the more, he sent them both word that they must prepare themselves for death; and because many in the Army might think this cruelty barbarous, he ordered his confidents to give it out, that he put A∣exis to death in revenge upon Adamas, who was the cause of all the warre, and detained the Nymphs whom he would set at liberty: that Silvia should suffer in revenge of Climanthes, who she, with Leonide, had betrayed into the hands of Adamas. And as for Ligdamon, he would punish him for attempting against his life. This was presently divulged all over the army, so as the Spies of Adamas gave him intimation of it the same night, whereat he was grieved extreamly: for though Alexis was not his daughter, yet remembring the Oracle, in obedience unto which he had been so indulgent unto the Shepherd; besides, the merits of Celadon and Astrea, he could no chuse but sadly resent their losse, especially con∣sidering what the Oracle speaking of Celadon said, that he obtaining his Mistress, his own age should find abundance of happiness. But the sorrows of Adamas were not comparable to those of Leonide, who hearing that Alexis and Astrea were in the hands of Polemas, and that he would expose them to the shot of the Town in the morning; she resented it so bitterly, that she could not chuse but give great testimonies of it: for she knowing that
Alexis was Celadon, who she loved but too well, it grieved her very soul to think he should be so miserably murdered; and it was well, for he she might pretend kindred unto Alexis, for otherwise her sorrows would have been known to pro∣ceed from affection; but this excuse did not satisfie Adamas, who knew what re∣lations were betwixt them, and therefore she was driven to another, before she could give him satisfaction: so as when Adamas wondered at her excessive mourn∣ing: father, answered she, if I do not shew excessive sorrow for Alexis, I shall be esteemed of a very ill nature, and it is to be feared our enterprise will be disco∣vered, so as Adamas was in some sort satisfied with this reason. But Leonide not being able to suffer the losse of that so dearly beloved Shepherd, she went unto Galathea, and with a torrent of tears, acquainted her with the taking of Alexis and Astrea, and with the cruel sentence of Polemas, against them and Silvia: Great was the grief which this news brought unto all the Town; but it had a more bitter influence upon the spirit of Ligdamon then any other: for the sor∣rows of Adamas was to see himself frustrated of the future happiness which he expected from the Oracle. Leonide resented the losse of Celadon, out of a love without hope of reciprocal correspondency: Galatheas grief for Silvia, was, be∣cause she had been ever familiar with her: To be brief, the general complaints of all the Court, proceeded only from pity; but the torments of Ligdamon proceed∣ed from love: so, as like a madman, he went up and down from one to another enquiring news, and hearing it with strange impatiency, he fell upon the most ex∣tream resolutions that are imaginable: he would go out in the night unto Pole∣mas his Tent, and drink his blood; and because they would not open the gates unto him, he would needs leap over the walls: he begg'd of Amasis, and impor∣tun'd Prince Godomar to let him out, for he would deliver them from that rebelli∣ous enemy; he told them, that if they retained him by force, he would kill him∣self; and since he was resolved upon death, it was better for him to receive it from the hands of his enemies then his own: That happily the gods would pro∣sper his designe; and so direct his hand, as he should deliver them all from the Tyrant. But Godomar, by the advice of Adamas, would not permit him; yet promised, that if the Rebel continued his resolution till the morning, they would not only open the gates to him, but rather then Alexis and Silvia should suffer, they would all go out and die with him. This promise of the Prince, being ratified by Damon and Alcidon, did a little appease him; yet not so as to suffer his eye to close all the night: and hereupon Alcidon told him, that happily reports might prove false; for some part of it they knew to be so, as that Ligdamon should be in the hands of Polemas. O Sir, an∣swered Ligdamon, bad news proves commonly too true; and assure your self, they have mistaken me, and took Lidias whom I resemble, for I was told that he fol∣lowed her who came with me into this countrey. The repors of this mistake came quickly to the eare of Melander, who being very impatient to know the truth, came presently to Ligdamon, of whom she enquired all circumstances and what he would do. What should I say, or what should I do (answered Ligdamon) but that I will die for Silvia: and I (replied she presently) for Lidias. Upon this, part∣ing from him, she wept away all the night. As these things did extreamly trouble those that were within the Town, so there were some in the Army of Polemas, who took as little rest, and amongst the rest Alexis and Astrea. This Shepherd hearing what a hard sentence Polemas had passed, it pierced him to the very soul, that his Shepherdesse was to be thus used for his sake: and when she was rudely treated by the Officers of Justice; is it possible (said Alexis) that in Forrests such savage spirits, and inhumane courages should be found, as are not moved at the beauty of Astrea? Does this countrey, where sweetnesse and civi∣lity so long raigned, now produce and nourish Monsters, more wild and keen then Africa? Certainly you have no eyes nor heart; for if you were not blind, you could not chuse but honour and reverence the most excellent work of the great gods, but all his words were uselesse: and he was no sooner in prison with her, but he
fell down upon his knees. Oh Astrea (said he) I conjure you by the love you have unto me, to have pity upon your self; and since 'tis only I whom they aim at, be not guilty of your own death: Could you exempt me by it, haply I should excuse the excess of your affection in bearing me company; but since your death will do me no good, alas, why will you add unto my grief, by seeing you die? You know that I do love you with all my soul, and what wrong did I ever do you, that you should make me the Author of your death? You know that homicide is abominable unto the Gods, and why will you incense them by committing it up∣on your self? Be not more guilty of your death then those who bring you unto it. Celadon would have continued longer, but Astrea interrupted him. All these arguments and perswasions might avail, if you were not to die (said she) but the Gods in depriving me of my most dear Alexis do know, that they deprive me of my life also, for I neither will nor can live without her; and in putting you to death, they do the same to me: Tell not me that I am guilty of my own death if I die with you, for the threds of our lives are so interwoven and knit together, that the Scissars which cut the one, does also cut the other: And as for being an ad∣dition of sorrow unto you by this action; Oh Mistris, Is it possible you should think I can live without you? Will you wrong me so much, as think I love you so little? A common Souldier will run through that fire which burns him unto whom he hath promised fidelity, nay he will be scorned if he do not; and may not as much be allowed Astrea when Alexis dies? Let not (I beseech you) any such thought harbour in your soul; but if you will have me die contentedly, say unto me, Astrea, I would have both our hearts pierced with the same spear, that our souls as they pass out of our bodies, may unite for ever, as our affections already have conjoyned our wills with a love inseparable. I use Mistris these expressions of affection and love, which perhaps becomes not the inequality of our conditions and ranks, but you have allowed this familiarity formerly, and well may now, since death is to remove all terms of inequality, and level us all alike. Celadon did listen long without interruption; for first he thought it indiscreti∣on to do otherwise; and secondly, he was so pleased to hear and receive such ex∣pressions of affection from her he loved, as he was even enchanted with her words. At last, my dear servant (said he unto her) those who love well, as I know you do Alexis, will always value the contentment of the party loved, above their own; I doubt not but it is some comfort unto you to end your days with Alexis, but do not you consider what a grief of soul it will be unto me, to see you die? Ah dearest Mistris (said Astrea) if those who love well ought to have this consi∣deration, why not you the same of me? And why do not you consider what a most intollerable despair it would be unto me, to survive you? No, no Mistris, let us not resist the will of the Gods; if it be their will that one of us should live, most certainly they will preserve the life of the other; and if I die, I believe you will not live. 'Tis true (answered Celadon.) And it is more true (replyed Astrea) that I cannot survive Alexis one minute. Thus Alexis and Astrea sighed away all the night, in giving new assurances of the affection which they bore unto each other; and though it was upon a sad oc∣casion, yet Love did draw, even out of their most bitter tears, most incompara∣ble consolations. Alexis at last, seeing his Shepherdess would not be diverted from the resolution which she had taken, did often think it now time to declare who he was, and to undeceive her in the opinion which she had of his being the daughter of Adamas; but yet some consideration restrained him: Somtimes he would say unto himself, why should I any longer conceal my self, since now we are both at the very brink of death? But then again (said he, and reprehended himself) why should I make any discovery of it, since that will also be a very death? For the knowledge of it will either please or displease her: If it please her, will not her death be more displeasing unto her? And if it displease her, why should I add more grief unto her, when we are both going to die? Thus was he long disputing with himself; at last he thought it the fittest time to declare himself as he was falling at her feet, thinking that if the transgressing her commands did offend her, he would wash away the crime with his blood.
In the mean time day began to dawn, and the whole Army began to move and march towards the Town, circling it about as the day before; and causing abun∣dance of hurdles, and faggots, and engines to march before them, it seemed they intended to fill up the ditch, as they did before; but because they of the Town began to salute them with many clouds of Arrows, and throw such heaps of stones upon them, they kept at a distance further off: Then a body of horse and ano∣ther of foot did open, and make a lane for Astrea, Alexis, Silvia, and Lidias, whom they took for Ligdamon, to passe through, accompanied with a hundred Pikes, and as many Halberdeirs, conducted by a Captain that was no Segusian, and so chosen by Polemas, because he feared those of that countrey would be too favour∣able unto those innocent persons, which had relations to the principal of the countrey. They had tied them all four together by the arms; and lest they should make any resistance or difficulty at their going before, they had each of them a Pike fasted hehind them, to the end that he who held it might thrust it into their bodies if they would not go: They had each of them tyed to their hands of a flaming link, and so were driven forward towards the gate of the Town: O most barbarous and prophane wretches (said Alexis unto them that tyed them together) is there no spark of humanity in your hearts? Dare you lay your desiled hands up∣on the most perfect workmanship of the gods, and not shut your eyes? but see∣ing Polemas himself coming to look how they were tyed: O thou most cruel Ty∣ger (cryed Alexis unto him) hast thou a heart of see die the fairest and most in∣nocent woman that ever was? If Adamas have offended thee, discharge thy chol∣lour upon me that an his daughter; but what injury has Astrea done thee, or Al∣ces her father? yet all this was to no purpose: and seeing a Souldier take the arms of Astrea to ty them he grew wild and furious, and was so transported with rage, that pulling out the Souldiers sword (for his hands were not yet tyed) he gave him such a blow as laid him dead upon the ground, and ran to another; and doubtlesse had done some brave exploit upon Polemas, or the Captain, if many Souldiers had not upon a sudden fallen upon him, and certainly had killed him, if the Captain had not restrained them, saying, that it was not for the service of Po∣lemas; but that he was to be preserved alive, to make the gates of the Town be opened unto them. The Captain thus got him out of their hands, and afterwards coming nearer unto him, brave woman (said he unto him) it is better for thee to shew thy courage in taking thy death patiently then in fury; for thou seest that force can∣not save thee: Cavalier (said Alexis) I value not my life at a straw, for I have kept it but too long, and I care not how soon it be taken away; but I cannot en∣dure to see this poor harmlesse innocent woman, so unworthily used: I had rather you would run your sword through my heart, for I cannot endure fo see it and live. What is it (said the Captain) that you call unworthy usage? you know we have command to ty her unto the end of a Pike, and to drive you before us to the gate of the Town, with burning links in your hands, to fire them if they be not opened. I know it answered Alexis, but generous Cavalier, since without offence to the gods you may do it, command that she be not treaed as a person culpable, for I do protest before the gods she is innocent; and if she must be ty∣ed, let her arm be tyed unto mine, let the knots be as fast as you will; but if you will oblige me in the highest degree of courtesie, let both the Pikes be tyed unto me, and that she who is without crime, may be only subject to the shot of the Town, which she may receive at randome, and not unto the thrusts of the rude Souldiers, who perhaps fancying she has a mind to run away, though she have no such intention, may be so barbarous as to pierce her sides. This stranger, a little moved at the earnest entreaties of Alexis, it shall never be said (answered he) that I will refuse so small a favour, unto one that is going to die; and taking a cord, he tyed their arms together; and putting Astrea be∣tween him and Silvia, he tyed the other arm unto the Nymph, and the other arm of that Nymph unto Lidias, and Silvia all the while turning her head the o∣ther way thinking Lidias to be Ligdamon. Afterwards he tyed two Pikes unto
Alexis, and one a piece unto Silvia and Lidias; so as Astrea only was without the point of a Pike to her sides: When they began to march, the whole Army was moved to pity them; and if any one would have begun, certainly these would haue been a tumultuous mutiny. But Polemas accompanying him, he re∣strained the compassion of many; and though he saw Astrea had no Pike tyed unto her as the rest had, yet he seemed to take no notice of it, because her beau∣ty had infused some resentment of pity unto him. In the mean time, Alexis had several motions to tell Astrea now at the end of his dayes, that she was tyed unto Celadon: but defferring it till he saw himself wounded, he still pressed to be before her, and to put her behind him, purposely to guard her from the shot that came from the Town; but she perceiving his designe, pressed also forward to get before him, so as in lieu of being back∣ward, they went forward, faster then those that followed after them de∣sired. The walls of the Town were all lined with souldiers, who sent whole showes arrows and stones upon the enemy: But when they saw those four persons appear tyed unto Pikes, and followed by those to whom they served for Bucklers, they were all amazed at this novelty, and as i their arms were fallen out of their hands, they ceased shooting without any command given so to do, only to behold what would be the issue of this spectacle. But Ligdamon, who with Lipandas and Me∣lander, were upon the battlements of the gate, no sooner cast his eye upon them, but presently he knew Silvia. Whether it was that he knew her by her habit, or whether the eyes of a lover can see their Son as soon as ever it begins to shine, I know not; but he knew her: and the horse no sooner opened to make a lane for them, but he cryed out like one that was desperate, and desired he might go out and deliver her out, of the hands of those Barbarians. And because the Prince Godomar was unwilling to suffer him, he beseeched Alcidon by Daphnide, and Da∣mon by Madonthe to intercede for him, that the gates might be opened. He beg∣ged it upon his knees, and conjured the Prince as he was a Cavalier, and obliged to relieved distressed Ladies, that he would let him go to the place where Silvia was so unworthily treated. And because Godomar told him, that he would only ruine himself by it, and that when it was fit time, he might and should do what he pleased for her: O Sir, answered he, my life is spent unprofitable, if I now do not imploy it for Silvia, and if you will not let me go, I vow by all the gods, these hands of mine shall deprive me of life. But the Prince being unwilling that upon any terms the gates should be opened, and those without the Town coming nearer, Melander (as she thought) saw Lidias tyed unto Silvia: O God, cryed she out (and pointed with her hand) yon∣der is Lidias. And Lipandas, speaking▪ because Ligdamon, as one out of his sen∣ses, answered not, certainly (said he) it is he, who doubtlesse will pay very deer for his resemblance unto Ligdamon, Ah Ligdamon, said she, and clapped her hands together, will you suffer Silvia to die? and shall I see Lidias perish, and we not perish with them? Ligdamon, then seeing that the Prince would not yield, and that every one gazed to see what the enemy did, he embraced Lipandas, and recommended Melander unto him, desiring him not to forsake her: and after he had bid adieu unto them both, he set his foot upon the battlements, and leaped down into the ditch in the sight of the whole Army. and all those that were upon the walls. Melander, though a woman yet transported with incredible affection, she would needs follow, but Lipandas hindred her, and put her into the hands of a Century, desiring him to have a care of her; and kissing her hand, Melander (said he) for your sake I will go and lose my life to save Lidias, and presently, before any took notice of him, leaped after Ligdamon. The place where they fell, was by fortune very soft, so as when they came to the ground, they were up to the middle in durt, without any hurt but bemiring themselves; and as good luck was, Lipandas light so near Ligdamon, that they could help each other out of the bog. Those who did drive the four prisoners before them, seeing two men leap
over the Walls, and not knowing whether or no they were on their side, and came to give them some Intelligence, they stopped. At the same time, those up∣on the Gates observed that two men, who seemed to have the command of those who pushed these Prisoners forward, did come to see whether they were fast tyed; and they were not mistaken in their observation: for the Captain when he was within fifteen or twenty paces of the ditch, told Polemas, that now the Prisoners had been driven a great way, and perhaps the Pikes which were tyed unto them, might be by that time loose again, and therefore before they went any further to the Gate, he desired leave to go and see them tyed faster, because the charge was committed unto him, and it concerned his honour to see it well performed. Po∣lemas commended his discretion and affection to the service, and bade him go, and those of the Town forbearing to shoot, he was in good hope that his designe would take good effect. The Captain then taking his brother with him, went unto them; they had both, besides their other Arms, each of them a Buckler, and in either hand a drawn sword, besides short ones that hung by their sides. The Captain went unto Astrea and Alexis, and his brothe nto Silvia and Lidias, and seeming to see whether their arms were fast tyed, they cut the cords in pieces which tyed them, and likewise the cords which fastned the Pikes unto them. Know (said he unto Astrea in a low voice) that I am Semires, whom the Gods have preserved alive, to die this day in doing you some service, and in expiation of that crime which I formerly committed against you. You fair Astrea (said he unto her) get you into the ditch with that Nymph, and the Gods assist you; and you Cela∣don (said he unto Alexis, and gave him his Sword and Buckler) now shew your self this day to be the son of the valiant Alcippes. His brother at the same time giving a Sword and Buckler unto Lidias; Celadon and he joyned with Semires and his brother, and made head against the whole body of the enemy, who stood still a while, and offered no harm, because Semires was the Captain of the Troop, so as the Souldiers durst not advance against im. But Polimas perceiving it, and also seeing Ligdamon and Lipandas who met with Astrea and Silvia, and conduct∣ed them to the walls, from whence they had already let down Paniers to pull them up, he cryed out, Kill the Traytors; upon which command all the Souldiers fell furiously upon Semires, his brother, Celadon, and Lidias. Those that saw how Celadan behaved himself in the habit of a woman, and profession of a Shepherd, might well say he did not degenerate from the courage of valiant Alcippes; all the arms he had was the Sword and Buckler which Semi∣res gave him: but not valuing his life, he fell upon the enemy with such furious agility, that he made them all keep a distance from him; Truth is, at every blow he struck, he looked back to see what was become of Astrea; and when he saw her and Silvia upon the top of the Wall, he was joyed beyond all expression, but yet they were so pressed upon, that they were not able to sustain the force of a multitudinous enemy: Semires had already received a wound with an arrow in his thigh, and his brother another in his shoulder; Lidias was almost run through with a Pike, and but for Celadon, could not have defended himself, when Ligda∣mon and Lipandas arrived. These six joyning together, and being fully resolved to sell their lives as dear as they could, they made a most incredible defence, when Polemas even stark mad at the loss of his Prisoners, did cause a whole Legion to advance. These fell furiously upon them, and they had inevitably been all lost, if the Prince Godomar at the same time had not commanded Damon to relieve them, sallying out with three hundred Archers, and as many Pikes, over a Draw∣bridge, by which they might pass unseen as far as the Counterscarp. And certain∣ly they came but in time; for all six were so wounded, that they had nothing but courage to sustain them: yet seeing this relief coming, their strengths renewed, and they did not feel their wounds: Every one admired their valour, and were ra∣vished to see what Celadon did; for the habit of a Shepherdess made all his acti∣ons more admirable: His Buckler was stuck so full of arrows, that there was not room for one more; his Sword sanguin'd from point to pomel, and himself wounded in two or three places, especially in his right shoulder with a spear, and
which had made a very deep wound: yet for all that, his extream desire of being revenged for the wrong that was done to Astrea, did so transport him, that he hardly ever felt it: But all this resistance had been in vain, but for relief which Damon brought; which being conducted by Cerastes and Merindor, did give them time to take a little breath, but not long; for Polemas sent a party of a thousand men more, they were forced to retreat to the ditch in a little disorder; and Semires being wounded in two places with a Pike, he was like to have caused the loss of many, for he could not go, and Celadon loth to leave him, the fight renewed in that place more hotly, and more dangerous then all the time before; so as the multitude of enemies were very near giving a total defeat unto all this relief. But Damon keeping the enemy off with a stand of Pikes, and they upon the Walls shooting abundance of arrows, and throwing of stones, did keep the enemy so in play; that Celadon took Semires by one arm, and his brother took him the other, and got him over the ditch, whilst Ligdamon and Lipandas did the same to Lidias, who could not sustain himself; and they were presently after both car∣ried unto the place where Ligdamon was accustomed to lodge. In the mean time, Silvia and Astrea, who were pulled up the Walls, and in the Town, they were no sooner come to the next Court of Guard, but Leonide who had beeen a spectator of all the passage, came running unto them, as well to embrace her companion, as to know whether that Druide was Astrea or Alexis. As she went, by chance she met Adamas, who for all the great affairs that he had in hand, came to take such order that Celadon should not be known, thinking that if Galathea came to see him, she would enter into some ill opinion of him: The haste wherein he was, would not permit him any long discourse; but only told her, he would have the Druide carried presently unto his Lodging, and let none speak with her, and afterwards all fitting orders should be taken. As soon as ever Silvia saw Leonide, she embraced her with abundance of joy, and Leonide was glad to see her out of the hands of Polemas: But Leonide having an earnest desire to talk with the Druide; my dear companion (said she unto Sil∣via) Galathea has a most longing desire to speak with you; go therefore unto her, whilst I wait upon this woman unto my Uncles lodging; for I perceive she is so affrighted, that I would not have Galathea see her in this condition: Upon this taking Astrea by the hand, she carried her almost by force unto the Lodg∣ing of Adamas; for she had no mind to be from the Wall, until she knew what was become of Alexis: But Leonide made her believe, that she was already in the Town, being come in at the Sally port, out of which the Relief went. In the mean time, Adamas being told that all those who went out, wete return∣ed in, he ran unto the Port to receive Celadon; and he came just in the nick of time; for that Shepherd was no sooner entred into the Town, but his loss of blood made him fall into a swoon, with Semires, who was in a worse condition then he▪ Adamas commanded he should be presently carried unto his Lodging: and ta∣king no notice of carrying Semires with Celadon, because he knew him not; Sir (said Semires unto him with much pain) it was I that saved Astrea and Celadon, I beseech you let me be carried where he is, that I may die neer them. Adamas hearing him name Celadon, and fearing left he should discover who Alexis was, he presently commanded they should be both carried together unto his Lodgings. It was well that at the same time a hot Alarm was given on all sides; for upon it, Damon, and all the rest, ran as fast as they could to make defence, never minding what Semires said. The Alarm was no false one, for Polemas being almost out of his wits at the loss of his prisoners, he gave the signe to make a general Assault, as he did the day precedent, and which was so hotly pursued, that nothing would make them retreat but night, which then he did, with the lost of many men for which much he cared not, so he could but at last find revenge: But the darkness of the night causing him to sound a retreat, every one retired to his Quarter, finding now that the Town was not so easily entred as Polemas rashly imagined, never considering that the weakness of the Walls were strongly fortified by the valour and courage of so many brave men as were within. So as Alerantes the next morning de∣parted,
to give King Gondebaut an account of all that was done, and of the con∣dition wherein Polemas was; who remembring the wise advice which Climanthes gave him, he besought Alerantes to inform the King, that this Town was not worthy the presence of so great a Prince, but to beseech him he would only send him some Forces which he promised, and to secure the person of Prince Sigismond, considering that though he was his son, yet he was deeply in love: And for his part, he would besiege the Town round about, of which he doubted not but to give him a good accompt within a few days. And lastly, to assure him of his af∣fection and fidelity, as one whom he would always acknowledge as his Lord and Master. Oh this tyrannical and horrid ambition! With what violence does it hurry mortal spirits to sacrifice their thoughts, their rest, and their lives, to satisfie its unjust and insatiable passion. Celadon in the mean time, and Semires, were carried unto the house of Ad∣mas; Semires so wounded, that every one thought he would die before they got him thither: And the faint Shepherd with loss of blood, though he was returned to himself out of his swoon, yet they had no more hopes of his life, then of the other: Yet both of them did most passionately desire to be carried unto the place where Astrea was: but the Chyrurgions would not upon any terms allow of it: for, said they, the sight of them will make their wounds much worse; and be∣sides, they stand in need of rest, which they cannot take if any company be with them: So they were carried into several chambers; and because they were still con∣continually asking where Astrea was, some made answer, that she was with the Nymphs Amasis and Galathea, and that she would come presently. Alas, answer∣ed Semires, I fear it will be too late, for I feel the pains of death coming upon me, and if there be any one amongst you that has any spark of pitty in them, let them go and haste her away, that my soul, before it depart out of my body, may un∣load it self of an intollerable burthen. And he said truly, for he was in that weak condition, as he was hardly able to utter those words. His Brother who held him by the hand, and knew why he was so desirous to see her, he turned towards the Chyrurgion who had searched his wounds; Learn∣ed Sir (said he unto him) why should you deny my brother this satisfaction, since you see his death is inevitable? Semires hearing his brother say so, Oh Gods▪ cryed he, unless you will make me die desperate, let me receive this favour from you; and because he was so extreamly importunate, also since there was no hopes of his life, it was resolved to send for her; and Leonide, who had not left her, came with her, and truly it was full time to come; for when they entred into the chamber, he was hardly able to move; yet striving with himself, and making a signe unto his brother to draw all the company from the bed, lest they should hear what he had to say: Fair Astrea (said he unto her) You see here before you that Semires, who in loving you too much, hath given you so much reason to hate him, but to wash away my crime, I have given you my blood and my life, and beg a pardon: Had I any thing more dear unto me, or precious, I would also give it to repair that fault which Love hath made me commit. I know the Gods have pardoned me, since they have favoured me so far, as to die for you. I thank them with all my heart for it, and only beg of them so much time before I die, as to hear you answer; which if be such as I desire, it will accompany me unto my eternal rest; and if it be otherwise, it will damn me to a hell of tor∣ment and despair. Semires uttered these words with such a faint and languishing voice, as wrought so upon the heart of Astrea, that she could not chuse but pity the man whom of all the world she had most reason to hate; and those tears which compassion brought into her eyes, did testifie that no offence can be so great, but a generous spirit can pardon it; yet not knowing how to answer him, she wiped her eyes, and stood mute; so as Semires finding himself at the last gasp; fair Astrea (said he) These do testifie some pity, but no pardon: Say presently, Semires depart in peace, if you will have me hear that so much desired speech. Then Astrea an∣swered,
be at peace Semires, and know that as heretofore thou caused me to lose him would I loved, so now thou hast preserved her whom only I can love. Upon these words one might see Semires so change his countenance, as if he had ailed nothing, so much contentment did they give him. Afterwards, sighing upon a sudden. May heaven be ever favourable unto you (said he unto her) and pre∣serve Astrea for her happy Celadon: These were the last words he spoke and so expired: happy in his misfortune, that he gave his life for her he loved, and in seeing the fair eyes of Astrea shed tears to wash away his crime: tears of com∣passion, though not tears of love, The out-cry which certain Shepherds made when Astrea was carried away, came presently to the ears of Diana and Phillis, who having newly dressed them∣selves, ran presently out of the house to know the cause of the Tumult: As soon as ever they were out of the doors, one of the company met them: O fair Shep∣herdesses (cryed he out in a most sad tone) Astrea is violently carried away by thirty or fourty Theives, and we being without any arms, also few in number, it was impossible for to defend her from the violence of those wicked men. At the first, Diana and Phillis suspected some knavery in the report, but afterwards thinking it not possible to counterfeit so well, and being seconded by the rest of the company that came after him, they began to believe it, and were so surpri∣zed at the news, that they could do nothing but gaze one upon another with a∣stonishment. At last, when the first apprehension was a little abated of its violence, and left them liberty to cry and complain, they gushed out into such a torrent of tears, as would have moved the most barbarous man in the world to compassion. They were both swimming in the flood of tears when Silvander came, who knowing nothing at all of the cause, began first to enquire what the matter was; and not believing that any could better inform him then themselvess, he acccosted Phillis, and in a sad low voice said unto her. May not I know what it is which thus afflicts my fairest Mistresse? Alas, answered Diana, with swelled eyes, doubtlesse you do know it, and are very insensible, if you do not share with us in our sorrows. I wish (replied he) I could as well bear it all to ease you, as I can share with you in part, and I give you a sufficient testimony of it, since not knowing the cause of your discontent, I am grieved to the very soul. Shepherd (said Diana then) I doubt not but you will share with us in our sor∣rows, when you know that Phillis and I do lament the losse of Astrea, whom these Shepherds, saw carryed away by Thieves within this quarter of an hour: How? (said Silvander then) Astrea carried away by Theives? Yes, yes, replied Diana, and as her misfortune is without remedy, so are our sorrows without an end. Upon this Diana broke out again into sighs and tears, which moved Silvander so much, that he resolved immediately either to die or recover Astrea: and in order thereunto, he went unto the Shepherds, who were present at the misfor∣tune: Fle, fle, ye cowards (said he unto them) could you suffer this injury in your sight? would you not defend Astrea as long as there was one drop of blood in your bodies: Shepherd (said one of the company unto him) it was done up∣on such a sudden, as it was impossible for us to help it. The number of those that carried her away, was treble ours; and they were upon horses and armed, but we on foot without any arms but our sheep-hooks, Was not that enough? (said Sil∣vander) Philander, in defence of Diana, killed a Barbarian compleatly armed, and had no other arms but his sheephook: 'Tis true, answered the Shepherd, and happily we might have done as much for Astrea; but they had no sooner set her upon horseback, but they galloped presently away out of our fight? O heavens (said Silvander) what became of poor Alexis when she heard of this unfortu∣nate news? Alexis (answered the Shepherd) was the first that was advertised of it, and like one transported, not knowing what she did, we saw her run after the Theives, calling them all the opprobrious names that could be devised, but I can∣not think it possible for her to overtake them, for they will go further in an hour, then she can in a day.
Diana and Phillis hearing that Alexis did run her self into so much danger to relieve this Shepherdesse, their sorrows redoubled, out of their apprehensions of some harm that might happen unto her: Mean time, Silvander in an audible voice that all the Shepherds might hear him: Come, said he, must we sit still samely, and put up this affront without resentment? For my part, I am fully re∣solved, either to die or be revenged upon these Rogues. Such a stain shall not lie upon me, and my reputation: He had no sooner uttered these words. but all the Shepherds, who being descended from generous Ancestours, had courages much above their quality, they all cried out in a loud voice, that they would lose their lives in the quarrel. Silvander was extreamly glad to hear their resolutions, and more when one of them desired him in the name of all the company, that he would be their Captain, telling him that they had great confidence in his courage and conduct, and that they stood in need of such a one to teach them what to do in such an imployment. Silvander at first refused, but being earnestly solicited, he took upon him the honour and charge of being their commander. When he was ready to depart and follow after those who had carried away A∣strea, assuring himself he should by some means or other hear of their retreat; and addressing himself unto Diana and Phillis: Fair Shepherdesses (said he un∣to them and shewed them those Shepherds) here are brave spirits that are resolv∣ed to repair that shame that might be imputed to us, for suffering your compani∣on to be thus carried away: we will follow our destinies; and if heaven favour our design, you will shortly turn your tears into joyes, at Astreas liberty. Phillis hearing this, she could not enough admire so strange a Metamorphosis, which in a moment turned a company of Shepherds into a company of Souldiers, but ex∣pecting the judgement of her companion upon it, she perceived her to look pale, and doubted that it did trouble her so as giving her the opportunity of telling him her mind concerning his so hasty departure, she withdrew two or three paces: And then▪ Diana thinking that none could hear her, Silvander (said she unto him) what do you intend to do? But fairest Mistresse (said he and interrupted her) why do you not call me your servant? Then servant (said Diana) pray tell me what your design is? You that have so often condemned rashnesse in another, can you be so guilty of it your self? Consider Silvander the danger whereunto you expose your self, since you neither know what enemies to have for to fight against, nor their number; for though they appeared not above thirty or fourty; yet per∣haps there are thrice that number engaged in the same designe, and for ought you know, may be the principal of all the neighbouring Provinces. Methinks ser∣vant, you should more seriously weigh these things, and something satisfie the de∣sire that I have, you should not attempt things impertinently. Silvander hearkened unto Diana with abundance of contentment, yet being a little too impatient, fairest Mistresse, said he, though my ruine were inevitable, and though I were sure my designe would find no favourable successe; yet would it be much glory to spend my blood and my life▪ in endeavouring to restore that contentment unto you, which is so unfortunately ravished away. And therefore without thinking whether it be pertinent or no, I ought to fall upon it: for I know, that though the execution prove not prosperous, yet the designe at least is honourable, since it aims at restoring unto you your companion▪ without whom I know you cannot enjoy any contentment in the world. Shepherd (said Diana then) you force me to make a strange confession: I must needs say I do love Astrea, and were I out of hopes ever to see her again, I should grieve extreamly; but withall, consider Silvander, that I do not hate you, and perhaps if you and she were weighed together, in the scales of my affection, you would out bal∣lance her. In saying so Diana blush'd: and the Shepherd, even ravished to hear this declaration from the mouth of his Mistresse, he was ready to cast himself at her feet; yet being restrained by those who observed their actions, he only said thus unto her: My fairest Mistresse, you have made me the most happy man upon earth, and I would prostrate my self in all humility at your feet, if there were not so many witnesses; but I protest and vow fair Diana, that I will behave my self with the same reverence and respect towards you, as is due anto a Deity: my
discretion and obedience shall make good my words, and shall be sutable unto that harmonious language which you have spoke in my advantage. If so (replyed Diana) I would have you now give a testimony of it, and obey me, when I com∣mand you not to depart so rashly, but first to consider and consult with those that are most interessed in the quarrel; if Phocion should raise forces in behalf of Astrea, I should allow his just resentment; But that Sylvander, whom it nothing concerns, should be the first that will deliver her, I cannot easily consent. The Shepherd thought Dianas judgement to be good, and that there was no reason for him to follow Astrea, before he had communicated it unto Phocion, who was her Uncle, It was then resolved upon to go unto his house, and by the way, they met with all those Shepherds and Shepherdesses who accompanied Do∣rinde to Marcelles, and returned not in three or four days; After the first saluta∣tions, they were told of the accident that had hapned unto Astrea, and how A∣lexis followed her; at which they were all extreamly grieved: For such was the beauty and goodness of Astrea, that never any saw her, but loved her beyond measure. But Licidas who was one amongst them, addressed himself unto Phillis: I verily believe (said he unto her in a low voice) that the Gods have punished Astrea, for the wrong which she did unto Celadon: For I beseech you consider it well, Was ever such an accident as this heard of in this Country before now? It is to be presumed, that it is a revenge absolutely determined by Fate; for Di∣ana or you might as well have been carried away as Astrea; and yet the judge∣ment has only fallen upon her, as most culpable. Certainly (answered Phillis) the Gods did pardon my companion for the death of Celadon, when (for the Rest of his soul) she erected an empty Tomb for him; and most assuredly there is some other hidden mysterie in the action of these Thieves. With such discourse as this, they came unto the house of Phocion, whom they found in a melancholy study, walking before his house; and his wonder was not a little, when he saw so great a company coming towards him: At first he received them as kindly as possibly he could, composing his countenance so, as he did not shew the sadness of his soul: But when he had saluted Diana and Phillis, and did not see Astrea, the first thing he asked, was, where she was? None durst give him any answer; But Sylvander considering that he must know of the accident, and that it was as good to acquaint him betimes with it, as to defer it any longer; he took him a∣side, and desiring Thamires to assist him in the office, he related unto him in few words, the disaster that had hapned unto Astrea. Phocion who loved her as his own soul, received this news like an arrest of death; but Thamires and Sylvander gave him such cordials, that at length he recollected himself, and like a man of a sound and perfect judgment, did think it better to employ the time in remedy, then in complaints. And all setting themselves to consult what course was best, a way was no sooner propounded, but they saw a Shepherd running towards them as fast as he could; and when he was come within ken, his countenance seemed as if he had some message of great concernment; which caused them all to keep silence, and look upon him: At last Licidas went to meet him, and returning, told Phocion, that this Shepherd was come to speak with him. The aged Pastor took him aside, and asked the man his business, and what it was which brought him thither in that haste. Unto which the Shepherd answered in these terms: Father (for so every one called him by reason of his age) I have been at the house of Adamas, our grand Druide, but not finding him at home, I thought you the fittest person in all our parts, to be acquainted with what I have seen, and the ra∣ther, because it being necessary to look unto the preservation of our Towns, Houses, and Families, there is none better able to do it then you. I must acquaint you therefore, that as I was looking to my Flock near Mount Verdune, I saw all the Plain of Marcelles covered with armed men, who shot whole clouds of ar∣rows into the Town, and have compassed it about on all sides: I saw also that those within the Town did come forth, and meeting with the enemy, made a long fight: I not having so much patience as to stay to see the difference ended, I thought it better for us to look to our selves, and therefore came as fast as ever
I could to acquaint you, in hopes that your prudence would direct us in the best course to prevent such misfortunes as may fall upon us and our flocks. Phocion was a little surprized at the report of this Shepherd, yet having heard some few dayes before that Polemas did secretly levy all the men he could, he presently concluded that his rebellion was broken forth, and that he had made an attempt upon Marcelles; but being unwilling to declare his thoughts before the Shep∣herd, he dismissed him with many thanks for his care, and a promise to be very vigilant in the prevention of any disorders which seemed to menace them. The Shepherd being gone, Phocion turned towards Thamires and Silvander, and taking them by each hand, he began to walk in the middle, and to say thus unto them. I need not now ask who were the ravishers of Astrea, nor where she is detained: for this Shepherd hath assured me, that Marcelles is besieged, and none being able to offer this violence but Polemas, I believe none but he would haue been the Authour of this wicked action committed against this young Shep∣herdesse; but this that hath hapned unto her is a warning to us all, and bids us look unto our selves: and in lieu of delivering Astrea, to recommend her unto the tuition of Tautates, and to seek out for some place of safety for our selves a∣gainst this rebellious Cavalier. This was the first discourse of Phocion, unto which Thamires answered, that the report of this Shepherd was very probable, and suited with the suspitions they had of Polemas; that he had heard some whispers of it in Marcelles, and there∣fore he thought it best to recommend all unto Hesus the Puissant God, and get in∣to some strong house or Castle, to defend themselves against such violences as might be offered unto their persons. Silvander began then to speak: if we retire our selves into any place (said he) it ought not to be unto any other place but Marcelles, where we may be service∣able unto Amasis, and imploy our courages in defending her against the injuries of her enemies: For my part (said Phocion) I think it to be the most honoura∣ble course we can take, and then if Astrea be in the hands of Polemas, I will summon him, either to restore her unto me, or to fight with me: though I have long discontinued the exercise of arms, I have not yet quite forgot the use of them; and though age have a little abated me of my younger strength, yet will my cou∣rage supply that fault. Thamires and Silvander admired the generosity of Phocion; and Thamires, after he had a while considered upon the proposition of getting into Marcelles, I beseech you (said he) if Polemas have compassed the Town round about, which way can we possibly enter? To that, Silvander answered, that it must be with arms in their hands, and by forcing their passage where it was conceived the enemy was weakest; but Phocion, shaking his head at it: This way (said he) is very dangerous for such as carry any women with them▪ and certainly Diana, Phillis, Celidea, Stella, and the rest, will never leave us; I think I have a better expedient then that, and if I be not much mistaken we may proceed this way: First, it is impossible that Polemas should shut up Marcelles toward the Moun∣tain; for that way unto the Town is inaccessible, by reason of the steep and sharp rocks upon which it is built, for he had need of wings to mount up by that way: Now I do know a little private back path, which is known unto very few, and which will lead us through the wood just under the Castle: from whence, after we have passed over Herdrick, which is a little river that runs between the Moun∣tain and the Town, we will shoot in a letter, which being carried to the Grand Druide, will let him know the place where we are: and for the fear of failing, we will write several coppies, and shoot them all into the Town at the ends of ar∣rows, so as so many, it is impossible but some one must come to his hand. A∣damas will undoubtedly do all he can to savour our designe, and it is to be hoped he may open unto us the next gate, which is not above a hundred paces from the place where we shall be when we shoot in the arrows. At the worst, if we should chance to meet with any hinderance from the enemy, we may hold them in play whilst the women enter, and Adamas will certainly send out a party to relieve us.
Silvander and Thamires thought this the best way that could be devised; and Silvander taking upon him the writing of the Letters, they all resolved upon the execution of this course the next day towards night, and in the interim to assm∣ble as many men as they could, and the Shepherds to provide themselves of arms: after this they returned to the rest of the company; and Silvander having ac∣quainted the Shepherds, who had chosen him for their Captain, that the Ren∣dezvous was to be the next day, they vowed not misse a minute of the time and place appointed, but would be sure to come and bring with them all their friends, and so they retired. Phocion did keep with him Silvander, Thamires, Hylas, Stella, Celidea, Licidas, Phillis, Diana, Corlas, and some others, unto whom, by the advice of Silvan∣der and Thamires, he secretly communicated the principal heads upon which they had concluded: all the day was very sadly spent, for Phocions grief at the losse of Astrea, made all the rest very melancholly, and their discourse was nothing, but upon a thousand vexatious dreams which Phocion had the night before: The next morning they all rose as soon as Aurora began to dawn, and every one began to put themselves in order. Amidst all their sorrows, it was some sport to see Pho∣cion scour up his old rusty arms, that had not seen day of at least an age before. Diana and Phillis were afflicted with a certain fear of some misfortunes that might befall Silvander and Licidas; but when they considered, that there was no other means to prevent their carrying away as Astrea was, they patienty sub∣mitted themselves unto such necessity as could not be avoided. When the Sun was at the hight of the day, the Shepherds who were appointed to Rendezvous at the house of Phocion, began to flock from all sides: before night they were all as∣sembled, and the number of them appeared to be a hundred and fifty: This re∣joyced Silvander, and particularly Phocion, who now thought himself able, if need were, to make a very considerable defence. And to defer the execution of their enterprise no longer, as soon as the Sun was set, they set forward; but not before they were ranked and filed into as good order, as if they were to fight a battel. Silvander, who yielded unto Phocion both in age and experience, and submit∣ted all unto his conduct and command, did admire the order which this generous old man did bring this troop into: First he divided them into three Companies; and himself marching in the head of fifty, he commanded the Shepherdesses to follow immediately after them: the other fifty he recommended unto Hylas and Licidas, and the last fifty he referred unto the charge of Silvander: and thus after they had recommended their flocks unto the tuition of Tautates, they set forward: had they been a little sooner, they had seen some marks of the last as∣sault which was given against Marcelles; for Polemas, whom night focced to sound a retreat, saw his men and Engines burned, and received a shameful repulse in the presence of Alerantes, not being able so much as to keep Alexis, Silvia, and Astrea, who were his prisoners. In a little space, Phocion perceived the Castle of Marcelles, and though the place which they were to descend, was very rough and difficult; yet they got o∣ver the little river without any harm, for the night was not so dark but they could find the paths, and see where to tread and hold themselves upon the rocks, over which they were to passe. As soon as they came to the place from whence Phocion said they should shoot in the Letters; Silvander, Hylas, Thamires, and Licidas, did take the bows which they had given unto Diana, Phillis, Stella, and Celidea, they tyest the Letters unto the piles of the arrows, and shot them into the Town several wayes. Each of them shot six times, for Silvander had prepa∣red several coppies; so waiting for what heaven would do with them, they stood silently upon their guard, in a resolution to defend themselves, if any assaulted them. It was not long before they heard from Adamas, for one of the arrows lighting happily near the place where he was, a Souldier did carry it presently to his corporal, who carried it presently unto the Druide; and he had no sooner o∣pened the Letter, but two more were brought unto him, which were found in other places of the Town. He received them very gladly, as thinking it some ad∣vice
for the security of the place: but when he saw it was Sylvander, who writ in the name of all the Shepherds of Lignon, his joys were extream, and as soon as he had opened the rest of the papers which were tyed to the ends of arrows, he found these words in them all. SYLVANDERS Letter unto ADAMAS. MOst Reverend Father, If you have any Indulgency towards the Shepherds of Lignon, and if their lives, which they come to sacrifice for the Liberty of Amasis, be a victime worthy of ac∣ceptance, we are here an hundred and fifty, who dedicate our lives unto her service. Our Woods are now a Receptacle only for Owls, and we have left them, to seek for Sanctuary in this Town, if your favour will give us admittance, Phocion, (whose blood boyls in his veins, as if he were but twenty years of age) has the Conduct of us, who do all vow our fidelity in particular, and will be ready to be employed upon all occasions whatsoever. We beseech you to advertise us of your resolution, who stay here in the same place from whence we sent this Lettes, which is under the Castle in a Meadow that parts Herdicke from the Rocks of Mar∣celles, The Druide presently found out the ingenuity of Sylvander, and knew that so many Letters to one purpose, was only for fear left any should miscarry: so as desiring to send them all speedy relief, he went unto the Nymph as fast as possibly he could, to communicate the Letter unto the Nymph, and found her preparing her self to go and visit Alexis, but he diverted her, so as she deferred her visit until the next morning. Amasis thought it very fit to receive Phocion, and told Adamas, that if he wanted any Forces, he should acquaint Prince Godomar with his desires, which he did; and the Prince hearing that Phocion was there, and enquiring who he, and all that came with him were, he was very glad of his com∣ing, and would go himself to bring them into the Town. Most of the Souldiers were either wounded, or weary with fighting; but as soon as ever they heard of Phocions designe, they offered to obey the Prince in whatsoever he would please to command them. Godomar mounted Alcander with those that followed the Queen Argira, and were left with the Princess Rosanira, only to discover whe∣ther there was any Treason in the designe: But it being told him that Polemas was quite retired, and that there appeared no enemy near the Town, he command∣ed Alcander to go unto the place where Phocion was, and Guad him and his com∣pany into the Town: Alcander obeyed the Princes order, and turning a little up∣on the left hand, he went down as far as the little River; he had not gone forty paces, but he espied the Troop which he was to Guard; and left he should give them too terrible an Alarm, he sent two Horsemen to advertise Phocion of his coming: The good old man no sooner heard that Alcander was come to guard them, but he acquainted Hylas, Licidas, and Sylvander, and afterwards all toge∣ther went to meet him. Alcander alighted to salute Phocion, and presently taking horse again, he commanded half of his Troop to march towards the Town; then desiring Phocion to follow, he would bring up the Arrear himself with the other half. Thus they came to the Town; Adamas stayed at the Gate in expectation of them; and the one half of Alcanders Troop being entred, Phocion appeared, whom the Druide received with cordial caresses. But since al this could not be done so secretly, and with so little noise, but Polemas must needs be advertised of it: Pho∣cion was no sooner entred with the shepherdesses & that fifty which he conducted, but they heard Alcander engaged with the enemy. Sylvander faced about with his company, and went immediately to relieve the Cavalier: Alcidon at the same time sallyed out with two hundred Archers; Phocion, do what Adamas could, would
needs do the like: but all this needed not, for the noise immediately ceased, because Alcander had taken Peledontes prisoner, and those that followed him, who were not above thirty Horse, fled all away, when they saw the inequality of the number. Thus Alcander, Sylvander, Phocion, Alcidon, and the rest, all entred into the Town, very proud of their new conquest, in taking Peledontes prisoner: for he being one of Polemas his principal privie Counsellors, they hoped to scrue much of the enemies designs out of him: Adamas obtained of Phocion, that Diana and Phillis might lodge at his house with Leonide, but he would not tell him that A∣lexis and Astrea were there already: Licidas, who knew what credit he had with Clindor, he carried thither Phocion, Sylvander, Thamires, Hylas, Corilus, Stella, Celidea, and some others; the rest of the Shepherds were put under several Cap∣tains and Officers, and had their Quarters assigned them. After the Druide had seen the Gates of the Town shut, he carried away his new guests; and Alcander committed Pelidontes to a place of security, intending to present him unto the Nymph in the morning. Diana and Phillis having now nothing in their minds but the loss of their companion, they asked Adamas by the way. whether he heard any thing of Alexis and Astrea: To which he answered in so faint a manner, as made them think he knew nothing that was good concern∣ing them: He told them, that the last news he heard of them was, that they were prisoners unto Polimas, and that they received very harsh entertainment from him. At this discourse Phillis and Diana could not refrain from Tears, and com∣ing to his house, he carried them into a very fair chamber, neither Leonide nor Astrea knowing of their arrival: After this, calling for his Neece to keep them company, he met her, and charged her not to tell those Shepherdesses that Astrea and Alexis were there: Leonide who knew her Uncles design, only winked at him; for at the same instant the Shepherdess came upon her with a thousand ex∣pressions of great affection. Whilst they were in the midst of their mutual ca∣resses, the Druide left them, with a promise of returning presently again, and he went unto the chamber of Alexis, where Astrea was; for say what the Chyrur∣gions would, Celadon would not suffer Astrea to part from him: And after he had been a while with them, he told them of the arrival of Phocion, Sylvander, Hylas, Licidas, Thamires, and at last, of Diana, Phillis, and other Shepherdes∣ses of Forrest: at which Alexis seemed to be very glad, but especially Astrea, who hearing that Diana and Phillis were in the house of Adamas, beseeched her Mistris to let her go and bid them welcome. Alexis consented, upon condition she would bring them into her chamber; and though Adamas was at first against it, by reason of his wounds, yet at last he consented▪ upon condition also they should stay but a while, and that they should be in another chamber, since it was not handsome they should see the dressing of his wounds which he received in the fight. Celadan obeyed whatsoever Adamas desired, and then the Druide taking Astrea by the hand, he carried her to the chamber door where her companions were; and desiring her not to enter until a while after him, as soon as he was come to Diana, You shall see here one (said he unto her) whom you little ex∣pected to meet, and one who perhaps you will love when you know her: Upon this Astrea entred, and such a sudden surprisal did so amuze them, that they could hardly salute each other. At last, being a little recollected, they began to em∣brace each other so affectionately, and so long that they were ready to stifle them∣selves. Their caresses had continued longer, if Adamas had not interrupted them, who taking them by their hands, Nay (said he unto them) this is not all; I will also conduct you unto the chamber of Alexis, upon condition you will not stay with her too long, because of some wounds which she hath received, which cau∣seth her to keep in bed; and that Astrea may have more time to tell you all their adventures, I will let her lie in your chamber. Then he carried Diana and Phillis unto the chamber where Alexis was; and though she was full of pain, especially by reason of a wound which she received in her shoulder, yet she received them with such an aspect, as testified abundance of joy to see them. Their discourse was not long, for it was late, and their stay
might have been prejudicial to the health of Celadon; therefore Leonide conduct∣ing them into their chamber, they all sate down upon the bed, where Astrea made a punctual relation of every passage that had hapned unto her since the time of her taking away. On the other side, Phocion, Licidas, and the rest, whom Clindor entertained, all heard what brave exploits Alexis had done in the habit of Astrea: and Phocion was so joyed to hear of his Neeces deliverance, that had it not been very late, and unseasonable to trouble Adamas at that time of the night, he would have gone to see her that very hour. Amasis had already visited almost all those who were wounded in the last as∣sault; and amongst all the discontents which she received at the insolency of Po∣lemas, it was no small consolation unto her, to consider how many brave men were armed in her defence. But Polemas was almost stark mad, as well at the loss which he had received in the two assaults, as at the taking of Pelidontes; being come into his chamber, and unwilling that any should be witnesses of his despair; as soon as he saw himself alone, he threw his hat upon the Table, scratched his head with one hand, and thumped his breast with the other, then walked up and down the room a great pace; at last he stopped upon a sudden, and stamped upon the floor with his foot. Will ye alwaies be my enemies, Oh ye Gods! who dispose of Scepters and Crowns (said he) Is my ambition to have some Empiredome o∣ver the spirit of that Beauty so great a crime, that Love, and the perfections of Galathea will never pardon it? Though there be a Law which forbids what I have done, and renders my Arms unjust; yet, Am I the first that has violated that Law, Or, whom you have let go unpunished? Then beginning to walk again: But (said he) this Nymph does not love me, Lindamore is Lord of her thoughts, as she is Lady of his liberty: Most of my men are murdred, burned, and defeated, Gondebaut perhaps will not assist me, Alexis is escaped, Pelidontes is prisoner, Oh most cruel Gods! Oh miserable Polemas! The most miserable of all men living! What canst thou do to unravel thy self out of this labyrinth of confusion? How wilt thou compose into order this Chaos of thy affairs? Upon this, casting him∣self upon his bed, he called for him that waited in his chamber, and commanded him to go for Ligonias; who as soon as he entred, was astonished to see Polemas in that posture wherein he found him; one leg lay a cross over one knee, one hand upon his brest, and the other with a handkerchief wiping his eyes, which the sire of his love and anger together had made extreamly red; and because he spoke not a word unto Ligonias, but lay sadly in this manner a long while; Sir (said Ligo∣nias unto him) perhaps you have a disposition to take some rest. So I have (said he, and turned towards him) I do seek for rest, and would buy it at the price of my blood: but I fear it is impossible for me to find it, unless in my grave. Upon this Polemas fetched a profound sigh, and Ligonias with a cold countenance said thus unto him. The truth is Sir, you have to do with stronger enemies then ever you imagin∣ed to meet with: Is it not a miracle that a Princess whom we thought destitute of all humane assistance, should in so short a time have her Town so full of valiant men, as it is impossible to take it without the favour of some Forrain help? Ah Ligonias (said Polemas) 'Tis true indeed, I have very potent enemies; but those whom I most fear, are the Gods, and Galathea. I am not so well read in the book of Fate (answered Ligonias) as to know what destiny the Gods have ordained you, but the very truth is, Galathea has no great cause to love you; for can you think to oblige her, by doing the very same things that are proper to make a mortal ene∣my? Does slaves use to hold their Lords in captivity? Why, you do kill her peo∣ple, strike at her, and are as careless in observing her Laws as any Satyre: I must confess (and I beseech you pardon the freedom of my language) that this designe has too geat a tincture of tyrannie; and your cause having no pillars of Justice to underprop it, you had need be very careful that it fall not upon your head, and ruine you. Upon this Ligonias held his peace, and Polemas spoke. I should think (said he) that I have greatly offended the Gods, if the greatest of them all had not connfessed me to use these violences against Amasis: Love is the only Author of
all these disorders▪ and since a god cannot sin, the actions which he hath done in me, cannot without blasphemy be called crimes: and therefore I hope they will regard my passion, and pity my sufferings for Galathea, since certainly they would never adorn her with so many perfections, unlesse they had desired she should be adored. As concerning the strength of Amasis, I have resolved upon your departure to¦morrow with Alerantes, to conjure and solicite Gondebaut about hasting away those Auxiliaries which he hath promised: for if they come in time, it is impossible she should resist us; perhaps we shall do something in the mean time, for if my designe with Meronthes hit handsomly, doubtless before your return I shall be master of the place, and of Galathea also: Nothing goes so near my heart as the taking of Peledon∣tes, and certainly it had been better if he had been less valiant and more prudent; for he was much to blame in fighting with the enemy, when I sent him only to disco∣ver, especially having not above thirty or fourty horse, and the enemy doubtless six times the number. Perhaps (said Ligonias) he was constrained to fight; and being dark, may be he went nearer then he determined, and was first assaulted, so as he cou'd do no lesse then defend himself. Well (replied Polemas) I will think upon his deliverance; in the interim make your self ready, for I go presently a∣bout your dispatch: upon this Polemas went into his closet and began to write. In the mean time Amasis was in her chamber with Godomar, Damon, Alcidon, and almost all the Nymphs and Ladies that were then in Marcelles: and because it was yet too soon to go to bed, the Nymph commanded Silvia to relate the par∣ticulars of her imprisonment, and how she liked the entertainment of Polemas. The young Nymphs interceded to excuse her, because they thought she could not make a right relation, without interweaving the causes of her complaint against Ligdamon. But being obliged to obey the command of Amasis, and solicited by Godomar she made a relation of it unto them, yet with so much discretion as she did not at all touch upon her relation to Ligdamon: but that Cavalier by chance coming in to do his reverence unto her, for he had not yet seen her since the reco∣very of her liberty, she changed colour two or three times, and afterwards re∣tired her self into another room, none taking any notice of her but Leonide: for the eyes of all the company were wholly upon Ligdamon, whose handsome grace, and becoming carriage, did wheresoever he came beget esteem and admiration. At last Amasis intending to present him her self unto Silvia, she rose up and took the Cavalier by the hand; but when she turned about to look for Silvia, and saw her not, she was extreamly astonished: the turning to Leonide, what have you done with your companion (said she and smiled) have you imprisoned her again? I do not think Madam (answered Leonide) that she is far from hence: go then (replied Amasis) and command her from me to return. Leonide went into the next chamber, where finding Silvia sitting in a sad and serious study: how now? (said she unto her) does your heart fail you? Truly (answered she, and blushed for anger) my heart is vexed to see Ligdamon live, after so many testimonies of his infidelity. There is something (said Leonide) which I do not understand: but since my Lady asks for you, let us go in, and in the mean time consider, that you ought not to condemn before you hear: I hear (replied Sil∣via) ah sister I will never neither see nor hear him again by my good will; and I beseech Amasis to pardon me, if I do not obey her command as long as he is in the room, for I cannot endure the very sight of the Traytor: Leonide knowing that she had a spirit that was not easily bended, did not importune her any longer, but returned into the chamber, and told Amasis in a low voice, that Ligdamon could not hear, how angry her companion was: at which, Amasis knowing how much Silvia was obliged unto that Cavalier, she could not chuse but wonder; yet not being willing to enquire any further then; well (said she) I will for this time content her melancholy humour. Madam (said Ligdamon) perhaps Leoni∣de has failed in her commission, or else may be she is troubled at something in which I may satisfie her; I beseech you give me leave to go and see what it is: It may be, said Amasis, she may receive a remedy from him that hurt her, hurt
her (replied Ligdamon) what hurt have I done unto Silvia, unlesse you give that phrase unto the love I bear unto her: I know not (answered Leonide) but I am most certain, that your presence at this time cannot cure her. Ligdamon being astonished at this alteration in Silvia, and a little offended at her action, if this be an effect of my absence, I will suffer it as long as her cruelty is pleased to ap∣point, and to begin my submission to her will, she shall not now be offended at the sight of him whom she cannot endure: upon this he retired, but being im∣patient to know the cause of Silvias discontent, he turned back again, and find∣ing the door of the closet which belonged to the chamber open, he got as near as he could behind the hangings, supposing they would be talking of his affairs. And indeed Amasis sending again for Silvia, she entred, and being importuned by Godomar to tell the cause of that hatred which she seemed to bear unto Lig∣damon, she told them, yet not without a hundred blushes, all that Lidias whom she mistook for Ligdamon, had done in favour of Amerina; she spoke of her jea∣lousie in such pritty pleasant manner as made them all to laugh, she related unto them the combate which was in her soul, when she saw him carried away prison∣er: she told them how glad she was to see her self in some sort revenged, by the danger unto which he was exposed: and afterwards her extream compassion when she considered him to be the same that chose death rather then be false in his love; but (said she and continued) he would never take any notice of me, till now he sees me out of all danger; and now he would come and fawn upon me, but I am resolved not to see him, so save him the labour of speaking, and me of hearing. Amasis, Godomar, and Galathea, would all have spoken, when Ligdamon lifting up the hanging, and throwing himself at the feet of Silvia before any body per∣ceived him: Madam (said he) if this sentence of death which you have pro∣nounced against my happiness, be only to make me feel your rigour, and so make me the most wretched man alive, I will not enquire whether it be just or no, for it is enough if you bid me die, to make me do it; but if it be to punish me for a crime whereof you conceive me guilty, I am confident my innocence will move you to revoke your sentence: should I seek for any arguments to justifie my self, perhaps you would suspect the real truth of them, since you are so prepossessed with an opinion that I have sinned against you. But if it would please this fair Nymph to speak in my favour, said he, and pointed at Galathea, you will find that if I be guilty, it is only in your imagination. Though she do not (said Ama∣sis) yet I can tell you Silvia, that if you did see Ligdamon when you were with Polemas, there is two Ligdamons. That is it, replied Silvia, whereof I accuse him. I can assure you (said Galathea) he never left me all the while you were in the prison of Polemas, but perhaps your mind was then much troubled, and you fancied only that you saw him: My mind indeed was much troubled (answered Silvia) yet my eyes were not so bad but I could see such objects as presented themselves before me; you will find Silvia (said Galathea) that he whom you saw was Lidias, and that the woman whom he talked with, was Amerina or Me∣lander. Doubtless it was (said Godomar) and now I do not wonder that Ame∣rina should heretofore take Ligdamon for Lidias, since this Nymph who brags that she can see so well, has taken Lidias for Ligdamon. Then Amasis told her how much she was obliged unto the love and courage of that Cavalier, and how he leaped down the walls to relieve her. And Silvia who indeed did see two Ca∣valiers in the ditch, she no sooner knew that Ligdamon was one of them, but she lov'd him more, and began to have a better opinion of his fidelity then ever. On the other side. Polemas finished his Letter; and because the confidence he had in Ligonias would not let him hide any secret from him, he sent for him into his closet; and being both there alone togetherr, he made him such extraor∣dinary Carresses, as Ligonias stood as if he were charmed: at last Polemas shew∣ed him the Letter which he had written, which Ligonias opening, he found thus indited.
POLEMAS his Letter unto GONDEBAUT King of the Burgundians. SIR, THis Cavalier whom I have dispatched unto you, and who is most en∣tirely faithful, will acquaint you with the miserable state of my af∣fairs, and what necessity I have of those Auxiliaries which you hav promised unto me: I have already made two attempts upon the Town with bad success: for having the valour of Prince Godomar to grapple with, it is impossible but I must be ruin'd, unless your Authority do take from me the obstacle of so so puissant an enemy. Were not your Majesty concerned in my ruine, I should not be so zealous to avoid it as I am: But since you do lose a Crown by my defeat, me-thinks you should defend me for your own In∣terest as well as mine. Ambition, that glorious Passion, which reigns in the hearts of the highest, should not (me-thinks) be asleep in you, since the authority of your Arms and Actions will make that seem just in you, which would be condemned as Tyrannical in another. Furthermore Amasis has openly declared her self against you, and mocks at your power, as if you had not any power to do her any harm. Her offence, which is no less a sin then blasphemy, (for Kings are Gods upon earth) does deserve no less a punish∣ment then the anger of your Majesty, which she will feel by the effects of that Army which I ask, and by which I shall hold a Scepter of you, which being taken out of the hands of a woman, will be better accompanied with a Lance then a Distaff. Ligonias having read this Letter, he lapped it up, and sealed it with the Arms of Polemas; and promising to make all the haste that possibly he could, he reti∣red, and prepared himself, to depart with Alerantes betimes in the morning. On the other side, Amasis desiring to bestow some time upon her particular affairs, though the night was well spent, she retired into her closet with Godomar, Adamas, Damon, and Alcidon; and having propounded her resolution of sending unto Lindamore▪ left some misfortune should have befallen Fleurial; the Prince, and all the rest approved of her designe, and told her, that the sooner it was put in execution, the better it was for her: But one thing did put them unto a little stand, which was, whom to employ in the business: for whomsoever it was, he was to run the danger of passing through the Army of Polemas: but Godomar de∣sired her not to trouble her self about that, but to dispatch her Letter as soon as she could, for he would help her to a Cavalier which doubtless would undertake it. As soon as Amasis had finished her Letter, the Prince sent for Philiander, who was a very subtle Cavalier, one of an excellent wit and spirit, and one that knew Lindamore in the Army of Clidemans, from whom he was returned only since the death of that young Prince: Unto him Godomar communicated the intention of the Nymph, and Philiander desiring nothing more then to do her some considera∣ble service, prepared himself for the execution of her commands; the first thing he did, was, was, to change his clothes, and to put on the habit of a Country fellow; and having the Letter of Amasis, he hid it under a piece of leather, which he fixed under the soals of his shooe with a hundred hobnails; and being to be let down the wall into the ditch by ropes, he so daubed his face and hands with dirt, and afterwards rubbed them with an herb which gave a yellow colour, he so chan∣ged his complexion and countenance, that none living could know him in that dis∣guise. As soon as ever he was over the ditch, he began to walk as if both his legs
were broken, and the night being already far spent, and the affairs of Polemas were in great disorder, as well by reason of his repulse, as the taking of Pelidon∣tes, it was long before any of the Army took any notice of him: At last, he was met by ten or twelve Souldiers very well mounted, whom Polemas had sent out to scout, lest he should be surprised by a Salley: As soon as ever they saw him, they set him behind one on horseback, and intended to carry him unto Polemas. As soon as the crafty Philiander saw himself in this condition, By th' Faith of my bo∣dy (said he) I thank you with all my heart; for, but for your kindness to me, I could not have gotten thither in two days: as he said so, he leaned first on one side, and then on another, as if he had never been on horseback before: he was so very troublesome unto him that carried him, that after he had bid him hold fast a hundred times, and seeing that he could not, he let him slide off the horse, to the ground, on which he fell all along, as if he had been dead. What should we do with this silly fellow (said he that let him fall) who takes that for a curtesie which were enough to affright any other to death, that is not as innocent as him∣self? No matter (answered one of his companions) since we have taken him, we must carry him; and though he be never so innocent, we should be to blame, and perhaps suspected of treason, if we do not carry him to Polemas Upon this, three of the company alighted, and lifted up Phliiander behind a fourth; then taking two gyrths, they tied the legs under the belly of the Horse with one, and tied his arms about him behind whom he rid, with the other. He was no sonner brought before Polemas, but seeing many velvet chairs in the chamber, he claps him down upon one, and counterfeiting himself full of pain and weariness, This great ill favoured beast (said he in a doleful tone) has jogged all my bones in pieces, but they have made me amends in bringing me amongst so many fine soft chairs; by my say, would all our oxen could go as fast (said he, and dried his eyes upon his sleeve, and looked upon Polemas with an innocent simple look) for if they could, our lond would be sooner tilled, and save us mickle la∣bour. Polemas, as little cause as he had to laugh, yet could not forbear, when he saw how innocently the man did sit him down in the chair, and being moved to pity him, commanded that none should do him any harm; but desiring to make himself a little merry with him, he called for a candle, and went neerer unto him, then looking a while upon him, he asked from whence he came? From whence do I come? said Philiander, why, I came from Marcelles, where I have been put to more pain in two days, then ever I was in all my life; for they tied a sword to my side, and made me hold a long piece of iron in my hand, that was fuller of nails then my shooes. Well, well (said Polemas) what news in Marcelles: I know not (answered he) but as long as I was there, it stood in the same place it was wont to do. I mean (said Polemas) what are they doing there, and how squares go? For ought I saw (said Philiander) they do there as they do here; every one goes upon their legs. But (said Polemas, and laughed heartily) how did you get out? I'll tell you all I know (answered the Pesant) they put me into a little round house, that stands amongst many stones that are on the walls, and are made like windows; and he that put me there, bade me look about me on every side, and if I saw any coming, that I should make a signe to him; when he was gone, and left me there with that great piece of iron in my hand, I fell fast asleep: Now I know not what they did after, nor how I got out of the place where they put me; but as soon as ever I waked, I found my self under the walls, with my legs, and my arms, and all my body bruised to pieces, pox on't, I feel it yet: Philiander did act all these things so to the life, somtimes rowling up the brims of an old hat that he wore, somtimes putting his fingers into a hole that was in it, and still keep∣ing his chair, as if he had taken eternal possession of it, that Polemas seeing and observing all this, he broke out into such extremity of laughter, that he made all about him do the like. And knowing what belonged unto war, he very well un∣derstood all that Philiander said, he easily knew that the round house whereof he spoke was a Tower, and that the windows were Battlements, and that he being placed there as a Sentinel, they threw him over the walls when they found him asleep.
That which most helped Polemas to deceive himself was his knowledge that there was abundance of Pesants went at first into Marcelles, many of which being very silly and ignorant in such matters, might be well capable of such mi∣stakes. This made him more apt to pity the sillinesse of this simple fellow; so as causing a piece of money to be given unto him, he fell upon serious thoughts, and commanded they should let him go. Philiander was very glad to see his coun∣terfeiting thrive so well, made two or three leggs according to the countrey mode, and went unto the next Town, where he furnished himself with all things requisite for his journey. All this while Fleurial was making all the hast he could, for he travelled both night and day without any sleep: by fortune, when he was beyond Moulins, he met many Souldiers upon the way, and enquiring of one whether they went, he understood they came from the Army of Childerick, where they had born Arms under the commands of Lindamor, and that now they were returning into the countrey of the Sebustans, the place of their birth. As soon as ever Fleurial heard the name of Lindamor, he was joyed at heart, and hoped for good successe in his journey; and enquiring further where that Cava∣lier was; he was answered that he would be at Moulins within two dayes: This answer was good news to Fleurial, and made him turn back to Moulins where Lindamor came according to appointment. As soon as ever he saw Fleurial he asked him the cause of his voyage: and Fleurial presenting unto him the Letters from Amasis and Galathea; Sir, said he, I believe these papers will give you a better accompt then I can: Lindamor took them, and retiring apart, he opened that from Amasis, and found it thus written. The Letter of AMASIS unto LINDAMOR. YOu have not received any Letters from me since the death of Clidemant, and yet this shall contain no expressions of my sor∣rows for it, but only tell you that Polemas has besieged me in Marcelles, where I am like to see the loss of my son, seconded with the loss of my state: Lindamor is now all the hopes I have in my affections, he need not now any longer shew his valour in a strange coun∣trey, since he has a more glorious occasion for it in his own: I conjure you therefore by the tears and sighs I spend in the memory of Clidemant to come hither, and give liberty to a Princess, who is deprived of it by a rebel∣lious Subject. O thou most impious wretch (said Lindamor) if heaven do not punish thee, it declares it self a sider with the unjust. Upon this opening Galatheas Letter he found these words. GALATHEAS Letter unto LINDAMOR. THough the Letter of Amasis should not have any power over you, and though I were deprived fo the command which once I had upon your will, yet I am confident that the delight you take in glorious actions will invite you to relieve us. Polemas will needs triumph over Galathea, without any other pretence or title, but the injustice of his Arms: and whilst Lindamor is striving to crown himself with Laurels, he is striving to ravish from him those Mirtles, wherewith love would recompence his fidelity: Iudge then, my Cavalier, whether any punishment can equal his crime, or any interest more considerable unto you,
then that of your own good. Come therefore and visit Polemas and Gala∣thea both, to keep him from living, and me from dying: both will be equal∣ly advantageous unto you, since in ruining an enemy you will save a lover, who will no sooner be out of hopes of your relief, but will have recourse unto sword or poison, as thinking them not so bad as the presence of Pole∣mas, in the disobedience of Lindamor. Think therefore upon what I say: Come, and all the gods be with you. Lindamor read this Letter twice over, and thinking a while upon it; Yes, yes, fairest Galathea (said he and pulling his hat over his eyes) I will come through fire and blood to pull down the arrogance of that rash man: Upon this he pre∣sently sent for two or three of those in whom he had greatest confidence, and communicating the Letter of Amasis unto them, it was concluded that Lindamor, who had appointed all his troops to meet a Rendezvous, to pay and dismisse them off, should now keep them on foot for the service of the Nymph. The Cavalier thought this to be the best expedient he could chuse: so as ha∣ving paid all his Souldiers, and asked them whether they would continue still un∣der his command, there was not one who thought it not an honour to serve him: And therefore he resolved to go and relieve Amasis with all possible haste, and vowed not to take any rest until he had done that Princess some service worthy of his valour; but his had been very small if it did not surpasse that of Polemas all that while, and particularly that night wherein Peledontes was taken: for though he lay upon the bed with endeavour to sleey, yet could he not reconcile his eyes, and before he could compose the ingratitude of his mind, the night was gone. The Moon shined very clear, and Astrea waking in the middle of the night, and having no mind to sleep again, she rose out of her bed and went to the win∣dow: as soon as she was there she began to study a little, at last upon a sudden she said, as this night will not be long, so mine methinks ought not to be eternal, and then I should receive some consolation. But, what a desperate condition is mine? for my sun once set will never rise again: afterwards fetching a most pro∣found sigh. Ah Celadon (said she) is it a signe of love or hatred, that I should suffer my self to live so long after I have been the cause of thy death? Alas I am afraid it is a testimony of hatred in thee, since thou dost now want the company of her in the Elizian fields, whom thou didst court in this world with so much passion; but also it is an argument of thy love, since thou dost still suffer her to love thee, and in her tears to wash away that crime which she committed against thy fidelity: upon this, tears flowing in great abundance down her cheeks, and dropping upon the window where she leaned: Alas poor tears (said she) why do you not the same unto me that Lignon did unto my dear Shepherd, and drown'd me; but I know the cause, you are dryed up too soon by the fire of my love. With such thoughts as these she entertained the memory of her Shepherd, and the window where she was, being towards the place where Polemas gave the last assault upon the Town, the good office which Semires had done her came also in∣to her mind: Poor Semires (said she) thy death has well repaired the wrong which formerly thou didst against me; and presently remembring the last words he uttered: but why (said she) didst thou pray heaven to keep Astrea for her happy Celadon? Didst thou imagine that Shepherd to be still alive, since I am so? thou hadst indeed some reason for thy thought, since the soul of Celadon does still live in me, or wast thou deceived by the resemblance of Alexis, and took her for him? If thou wert, I would to heaven I could be so mistaken also, and that I were not so sure Alexis as the daughter of Adamas, as I have some kind of suspi∣tion that Alexis may be Celadon? But alas, alas, I know too well that Celadon is dead; and I have not so much forgotten his favour unto me, but I well remem∣ber how I saw his Ghost. Why then Simires, who in this I must call cruel, shouldst thou offer to torment me thus? May heaven (didst thou say) preserve Astrea for
her happy Celadon. If none be happy till after death, and if Celadon be happy, then it follows he is dead, and how can I be happy then unless I be dead as well as he? Perhaps, and I believe this is thy meaning, the heart of Celadoa and mine being but one and the same, thou prayest heaven I may preserve it intirely for him, and not suffer my soul to take the impression of any other object but his: If this be thy request Semires, assure thy self it is granted, and heaven it self cannot warm me with any other flame. But pardon me, valiant Alexis, for pleasing my self in these vain fancies, and for remembring the name of this Shepherd so much as in some sort to forget my duty to you: I have but only two contentments in thr whole world, and they are to think upon him and see you. Astrea enter∣tained her self long with these thoughts, after which, seeing the night was far spent, and knowing by her eyes that she wanted sleep, she went back unto her companions, where insensibly she fell asleep, and waked not until the rayes of the Sun (jealous of those delights which the God of Love did take, in being shut up with the fairest eyes in the world) die enter into the chamber to let him out. Hylas, on the other side, whom it seems love would begin to punish for his former levity, he wondered that a Summers day should be seconded with so long a night, and as if his bed were stuck with thorns he could not find any rest in it: He turned himself from side to side a hundred times, and still found himself so out of order, that he that none so much tormented as he, being out of all hopes of any sleep; how comes it to passe (said he to himself) that I should now sigh all night long at such objects as I was wont to laugh at all the day? What Demen is it that presents Stella unto my fancy more amiable then ever she was? must her charms be so powerful as to break my sleep? Well, well, Stella (said he and turn∣ed himself with a smile full of disdain and anger) though you never committed any other crime but this, in hindering me from my rest, it is enough to make me love you no longer: afterwards imagining that he talked unto her, from hence∣forward Stella (said he and flung his arms out of bed) provide your self of ano∣ther servant: for my part, it shall go hard but I will find out of Mistresse that will let me sleep: had I waked so long for every one of those whom I have loved as I have for you, I had long since lost my wits, and have put Prince Godomar to the pains of driving a nail for me, as he has for Adrastes and Rosilion; but thanks be to the gods I have hitherto kept my wits in my head, and till now all the women I ever loved never broke me of a quarter of and hours sleep. And Stella, can you pretend to have more authority over me, then all those beauties had? but be∣lieve it, as I left all them for you, so I will leave you for the next I meet, whose humour and face pleaseth me better then yours. Thus did Hylas resolve to take his leave of that Shepherdesse, and to chuse a new one; but presently reprehending himself, what now Hylas? said he, canst thou suffer another to be master of her whom thou now possessest, and to enjoy all those favours which that fair one reserves for thee? In saying so, his soul re∣sented such sparks of jealousie as argu him to be very deeply wounded: No, no, said he, never think Hylas, that after Stella any in the world is worthy of thee; and it is for her only whom the gods have permitted thee to cast off Carlie, Stilliana, Cloris, Florice, Chriside, Phillis, Laonice, and so many others, who had not charms powerful enough to retain me any longer in their service; but let me tell you (said he presently after) if all my nights should be like to this, Stella would be quickly without a servant▪ and I without a Mistresse; and therefore I think it is best for both to part fair, and shift for our selves betimes whilst we are both well. This was his last resolution, upon which he fell asleep, and dream'd that Stella was very glad of his intention to quit her, and seemed to accept of any ones ser∣vice before his: when he waked he saw it was broad day, therefore he drest him∣self, and not thinking Stella yet ready to be seen, he went to divert himself in the garden of Clindor. On the other side, Phocion, who was extreamly desirons to see Astrea, ac∣quainted Stella and Celidea that he would go unto the house of Adamas: where∣upon
they resolved to go with him: so unknown unto Hylas, they, with Tha∣mires, Licidas, and others accompanied him unto the house of the Druide. Alcander in the interim intended to present his prisoner unto the Nymph, and desired▪ Adamas to acquaint her, which the Druide did, and afterwards told him the discourse which passed between the Nymph and him: he told him how ex∣treamly the Nymph thought her self obliged unto his valour, and how desirous she was to give him thanks; also her great desires to acknowledge so many ser∣vices, and particularly this of referring Peledontes to her discretion: He told him what reasons Amasis had to punish him, that being her subject should offer to as∣sist Polemas in his rebellion. And in conclusion, desired Alcander from Amasis, that he would be contented Justice should be done upon such an offendour, to teach others to keep within compass of their duty. Alcander, who was wholly devoted unto the interest of Amasis, and aimed at nothing more then her preservation, he consented unto whatsoever she pleased, and transferred, though with a little regret, Peledontes into the hands of Adamas, and he was presently put into the same prison where Clemanthes a little before ren∣dred up his last breath: there the Druide caused him to be clogged with Irons, and put him into such a certain expectation of great, punishment, that he looked for no less then death: Now he began to think upon the crime whereof he was guilty, and lamented the miserable condition whereunto he had brought himself. Death presented it self unto him in a thousand forms, and so dumped him, that he was desperate: he did nothing but curse Polemas, who had drawn him into that unjust quarrel: In the midst of all his horrour, he began to think which way it was possible for him to save his life: At last, the hatred which he had conceiv∣ed against Polemas, or perhaps the gods, who were not willing he should end his dayes so ignominiously, did help him with an invention, which he had such hopes would teke, that he extreamly desired to speak with Adamas; and the Druide was no sooner come unto him, but Peledontes said thus unto him. I must needs con∣fess, reverend Father, that the crime which I have committed against Amasis can∣not be too severely punished; but if you will please to consider how great an in∣fluence large promises and protestations of advancement have upon humane im∣becillities, you will also confess it extream hard to avoid the swallowing poison of such gilded pills as Polemas laid before me: I do not speak this to discharge my self, or to escape the punishment which I justly deserve, but to let you know that I did not sin out of my own inclination, but was violently tempted unto it by the strong instigations of that wicked man. Now Father I know it to be the qua∣lity of the gods, sometimes to pardon the greatest crimes, especially when the sinner does strive to make a repentant reparation; and I am in some hopes, that if you do not deny me your intercession, I may obtain a pardon for my crime, as great as it is, since I am able to repair it with advantage, and can discover a de∣sign, upon which the welfare or the ruine of the Nymph does most infallibly de∣pend. Adamas listned very attentively unto the discourse of Peledontes, without any interruption, and considering in what reputation this Cavalier was with Polemas, he thought that he might perhaps discover some secret which might be the preser∣vation of the place. Yet doubting lest it should be only some subtilty to defer his punishment, he stayed a while without any answer. Assure your self Father (said Pelecontes) that if my life may be saved, I will make good what I say; but if not, I protest no Torture or Rack shall ever get this secret out of my mouth, Peledontes spoke this so earnestly, and Adamas who knew the courage of that Cavalier, and began to compassionate his misfortune, answered, that the heart of Amasis was not made of marble, nor her soul so insensible of any benefit, but she knew how to measure her recompences accordingly; and therefore (said he) since you may very well rely upon her mercy, tell freely all that you know which may be advantageous to her, for that is the way doubtlesse to obtain any pity or pardon from her. Father (replied Peledontes) I am able to do her the greatest piece of service that ever was done: for if I should not prevent it, the Town of Marcelles will
most certainly be in the power of Polemas within these ten days. If what you say be so (said the Druide) the Nymph is obliged to preserve his life, that will pre∣serve hers; and if you have any confidence in me, I dare promise you upon the faith of a Druide, that she will grant your pardon, so you will make all this ap∣parent unto her. Your word Father (answered Peledontes) is as sacred unto me as the Nymphs; and upon this assurance of it, I will discover a treason unto you, which if it be not prevented very suddenly, will certainly be the ruine of Ama∣sis and your self. Upon this Peledontes knowing that Adamas was the Ruler of all in Marcelles, he acquai him, with the treachery of Meronthes, and his plea of bringing Polemas with all his Army under ground into the Town. He told him, that this very night the work was to be begun, and that he might know the place by a light which would be set up upon a Tent where it was intended. When Adamas heard this, he stood amazed, not being able to think Meronies culpable of such a trechery, since Amasis had been so good unto him, as to trust him with one of the Ports in the Town; yet since the time of tryal whether it was so, was at hand, he suspended his thoughts till then, and bade Peledontes adieu, swearing unto him, that if this were found true, he would obtain from the Nymph, not only a pardon for his life, but a recompence worthy for such a notable piece of service. In the mean time Phocion came to the house of Adamas, and not finding him, he went unto the chamber of Astrea, where Celidea, Stella, and the rest were no sooner entred, but that Shepherdess began to caress them, as if she had not seen them in ten years before: Presently after, Alexis sent for them; and though Adamas had no desire she should be seen, as well in respect of her wounds, as out of fear she should be known; yet she had taken such good rest, and her wounds were so little troublesome to her, that she could not endure to be any lon∣ger out of the presence of Astrea. These Shepherds then, and these Shepherdesses, went unto the chamber of Alexis, where they had not been half an hour talking, how much Astrea was obliged unto the courage of that supposed Druide, but Hylas entred: This Shep∣herd wondred not to find Stella in the house of Clindor, but hearing that she fol∣lowed Phocion, he enquired which way they were gone, and hearing it was unto the house of Adamas he went thither: As soon as he was well entred into the chamber of Alexis, he stopped upon a sudden, and looking upon all the compa∣ny, he asked if they knew him: And the Shepherdesses answering yes: Truly (said he) I wonder at it; for I am extreamly changed of late: Do you not see how I have all the signes of death in my face? Stella who laughed at him, and seeing his eye fixed upon her, she thought it her part to answer and therefore said unto him: It is very strange servant, that you should wonder at any change in your self, since it is but customary in you; but I have much ado to find any signs of death in your face, for they use to be extreamly pale, and I never saw you more red then now you are. It is then (answered Hylas) because I blush at my simplicity, in wishing you so well as I have done. That cause (replyed Stella, and was a little netled) shall never put me to the blush; for the truth is, I never wished you well. Your angry mood (replyed Hylas) is not an argument of your indifferency. Then it is of my disdain (answered she) for such a pitiful thing as Hylas cannot make me angry. All the company were much surprized at the rare∣ness of these two new Lovers; and the more, because they could not imagine what should be the cause of their quarrel; so as for better satisfaction, Astrea addres∣sed her self unto Stella, and said unto her, The ill humour wherein I see Hylas, makes me afraid to speak unto him, lest he should be angry at me also; but since I believe you are not composed of so much Touchwood as he is, good Stella, tell as what cause of discontent have you given unto him? Really (answered Stella) I am as ignorant as you; but I believe, that he not having any colourable pre∣tence of quitting me, he will needs quarrel with my innocency. Astrea and the rest did know very well that Stella spoke as she thought, yet not being able to believe the levity of Hylas so great, as to break off with a woman without some appearance of reason, Phillis ventured to talk unto him: Hylas (said she) we
cannot imagine the reason of your ange, unless it be that you are resolved to dis∣oblige all manner of women. Fair Phillis (answered the inconstan man) my anger reaches not so far as you, nor any further then Stella; and could I not re∣member her, which will be ere long. I should forget that ever I was angry. You shall make good haste (said Stella, and interrupted him) if you forget sooner then I; for I protest, I begin already to think that I never saw you. No matter (re∣plyed Hylas) whether I go post or no, so I arrive at my intended port, all is well enough. All this (said Phillis) does not give us any satisfaction. Fair Shepher∣dess (said Hylas) I can tell you what the matter is in f ords; it is because this woman which you see there, will not let me rest in the night. Oh heaven! said Stella, is he so impudent as to say that I ever went unto him when he was in bed? Yes, yes, answered he, I did say, and will say again, that you were with me when I was in bed; not in your proper person, but your Image did take up a lodging so long in my mind, and kept possession of it so strongly, that do what I could, I could not for my heart get you out of it. Stella who expected to hear somthing that would offend her, now hearing that he complained only against her Image, and that he accused her of a thing, unto which her very thought was not so much as accessory, she broke out into such a fit of laughter, as made all the rest laugh for company: at which the Shepherd being netled, well, well (said he) laugh on Stella, as this first harm you have done me; but I swear by my self (for that is now the only person whom I love) that I will never give you any cause to laugh at any harm you shall ever do to me again. Hylas spoke this in a very serious manner, and Stella still laughed more and more, testifying by her actions that she repented of nothing of what she had ei∣ther said or done. I promise you Shepherd (said she) that I shall neither laugh nor cry at either your good or bad fortune, and it shall be the least of my cares, whether you be dead or alive. Hylas did not hear these last words, because he was walked to the other end of the room in a melancholy study; and sitting down near the bed of Alexis, he heard Alexis say unto him. Hylas, what do you think upon? I am thinking (answered he) upon whom I should bestow that heart which I have taken from Stella; and that which most troubles me, is, that truly I do not know a woman that better deserves it then she. Then (said Celidea) You cannot do better then to bestow it upon her again; and I assure my self, she is not of such a marble composition, but she will melt, and receive it. Your advice (replyed the Shepherd) is good, and the better, because it suits with my inclina∣tion: as soon as he had said so, he went and cast himself at the feet of Stella, and taking her hand by force, he kissed it, and said: If our Laws and conditions fair Shepherdess, were tyrannical, it were injustice to observe them, and I believe I should sin against you the first minute I began to put them into use; but since they aim at nothing but liberty, and since they are of your own establishment, I hope I shall not be condemned if I put them into practise: Now Mistris, the same Law that allows me to take away my heart when I will, does allow you to receive it again when you please. I do now present it unto you again, and swear by the Moon, by the winds, and by all the waves of the Sea, that I will never again re∣voke it: Upon this, Hylas kissed her hand again; and Stella, after a seeming de∣nial, was at last constrained to remit him into grace, being condemned unto it by all the company. All this while Celadon durst not speak, left if should be inconvenient unto him, but he took much delight in this passage between Hylas and Stella. Diana only and Sylvander seemed sad; and indeed both their souls were so full, that they had much ado to hide it: It was happy for them that all the windows of Celadons chamber were shut; so as it being very dark, and being near each other, Silvander, not to let such an opportunity of discourse with his Mistris to slip, he began thus. How does the fairest Diana? You look (me-thinks) as if your mind were af∣flicted with some new sorrows. My sorrows (answered she) are not more grie∣vous then ordinary, nor worth the talking of; but I shall be glad to know from whence proceeds those sorrows which I see in your countenance more then were accustomed. My countenance then (replyed Sylvander) is more eloquent then I
am, since it can better speak my sorrows then my self; and since you command me tell you the cause, he pleased Mistresse to know that my sorrows are the legiti∣mate children of your discontentments. I shall much complain against the bad∣ness of my humour (said the Shepherdess) since it is the cause of yours: and I (said the Shepherd) shall much commend my humour for being conformable un∣to yours: And from hence, fairest Mistress, you may draw an argument which testifies my affection, and the power which you have upon me, since it is impossi∣ble I should be any otherwise then as you would have me. Did your Fortune de∣pend upon me (said Diana) and were I the disposer of Scepters and Crowns, I do esteem your merit at that night, that I would make you the Monarch of all the world. The glory of being your Slave (answered Silvander) is deares unto me then an Empire; but my dearest Shepherdess, shall I not know the cause of your sorrows? You will know it but too soon (answered she) both for your con∣tentment and my own. Let not the harm which can happen unto me (said Silvander) hinder you from telling me what it is, for considering my condition I am to fear the worst, an un∣known vagabond, without support of Parents, or any hopes to accomplish my desires, unless in death which is the end of all things▪ I am a man the least of all men in Fortunes favour, and I can justly say, that the gods can take nothing from me but the favour of Diana. Though they do not take my favour from you, replied the Shepherdesse, yet they will rob you of all hopes in receiving any fruits of that favour: for, at which word she stope, and fetched a deep sigh, at which Silvander was much troubled: I Mistresse (said he) I beseech you go on▪ the end of your discourse cannot be more sad unto me, then the beginning which of it self is enough to make me die: For Paris (replied she) will no sooner be returned but he must marry Diana: in saying so, she took a handkerchief out of her pocket, and turning aside left the Shepherd should see her, she began to drive up those tears which she could not restrain: Silvander, who had no less cause for tears then she, yet he constrained himself; for seeing such a fit opportunity of talk, he thought the time better imployed that way then in tears: he told then that the misfortune which the Oracle did threaten unto him, was not absolutely without a remedy, if love, or the consideration of his services did oblige her to have pity upon him. Diana then speaking lower, lest they should be heard, Shepherd (said she un∣to him) I must needs confesse that I ow all manner of affection unto that good will which you have expressed unto me; and let me tell you freely, that my affe∣ction unto you shall go as far as ever honour will permit me; but consider how far that is, and you will find, that if my mother be resolved to give me unto Pa∣ris, it is impossible for me to disobey her. Certainly (said Silvander) she will never force you unto it; the virtue of Belinde is repugnant unto such Tyranny. But (said Diana) if she do express her desires only of having it so, is not her will a perfect command unto me? What desires soever she expresseth, replied the Shepherd, your consent is alwayes necessary, without which she will proceed no further. Did you live only for the contentment of another, and not your self, I should not condemn this thought in you; but since you are the person most concerned in it, and the weal or the wo of all your life depends upon it, most undoubtedly you were much to blame if you do not rather follow your own humour, then theirs, who not knowing your inclination, aim more at their own conveniences then yours. What then would you have me do (replied the Shepherdesse) would it become me to proclaim at the Market that I will have Silvander, and not Paris? Believe it Shepherd, my honour is dearer unto me then my life, and I had rather endure all manner of torments then fail in my duty, and will sooner re∣fuse all happinesse then do any thing that becomes not a woman of virtue. To take one and refuse another (answered Silvander) does not at all stain the re∣putation of a woman, and though you should say you love Silvander better than you do Paris, cannot your affection plead a full excuse for it? if those upon whom you have dependency will allow you some particular means which hast
please your taste, ought they not as well to allow you the choice of that man with whom you are to live and die? No, no, fairest Diana, you are not in the condition of slaves, whose tongues are not their own; you may speak and speak boldly in a business which concerns your self the most, and in which none but your self must answer for the successe. Silvander expressed himself so very af∣fectionately, that the heart of Diana began to melt, and so far as to testifie it by her tears, and the Shepherd seeing that she did not speak, but wavered in her re∣solution, he would try if he could make a compleat conquest, and therefore he said thus unto her. When the gods told me I should die, they knew (my fairest Mistresse) that your rigour would be the cause of it; and I shall soon verifie their words, since you are not pleased to afford me the consolation of a word: I beseech you consider into what raptures I am ready to fall, and how excuseable my fury will be, since it seems you have flattered me only to betray me; and has raised my ambition high, only that it might have the greater fall. I shall not greive to see my self an object of scorn by every Shepherd, since I am the object of your cruelty; but it will be ten thousand deaths unto me to see my enemies triumph o∣ver me, without any other arms but your want of affection. Shepherd (said she) you may lose me, and see me in the possession of another, but you shall never lose my affection; The knowledge that I have of your merits, and of my obligation unto your discretion, are chains strong enough to retain it eternally. The gods are my witnesses, how I desire your contentment above my own life: Hope therefore Silvander in the goodness of the gods, and in their justice; as she spoke these words, her eyes did so overflow with tears, that they took away her sight; so as she took no notice when Silvander leaning his cheek against hers, did kiss her: Dearest Shepherdess (said he) let this kiss inspire that life in∣to me which you would have me preserve. Shepherd (said Diana) your bold∣ness does extreamly displease me; Discretion and Fidelity are the arms wherewith you have overcome me, and without which your victory will not continue long; and this is the way to make me dry up all my tears, and never grieve for the losse of you. The Shepherd began to ask her pardon for his offence when Adamas entred, so as she made all the haste she could to tell him, that if he did acknowledge his crime, and promise to offend no more, she would pardon him; and Silvander (said she) commit not such a fault again upon pain of my extream displeasure: upon this he rose up to do reverence unto the Druide. Adamas did not expect to find so much company with Alexis, and was at first surprized at it; yet con∣sidering they were all his friends, he was better satisfied, and was not sorry for their visit of Celadon: After the first complements he went to the bed of the supposed Druide, and told her that it was convenient to dismisse all the good com∣pany that her wounds might be dressed: Celadon obeyed him, and after thanks unto Astrea, Diana, and Phillis, those Shepherdesses took their leaves and went out of the chamber with the rest of the company, but parted not from Celidea, Stella, Phocion, Silvander, Hylas, Licidas, and the rest, until it was dark night. Polemas amidst all his discontents did not forget the resolution he had taken with Meronthes, by the negotiation of his soon: so that as son as day appear∣eed, he pitched a Tent as near the ditch as he could get, where having erected a light, he gave his level unto those that were to work in the Mine, and command∣ad them, that as soon as ever they saw another light in the Town, they should fix their level to point at, and be their guide in the work. But Adamas who ex∣treamly desired to surprize Meronthes, and to know whether Peledontes told him truly, he no sooner perceived the Tent which Polemas had erected near the ditch, but he suspected their dangerous design: He took therefore a good party of Soul∣dirs, and entreating Damon and Dalcidon to go with him unto the house of Meronthes, they were no sooner come, but they broke open the door, and went presently into the cave, where the Traytour had prepared all things necessary for his intended work. The noise which they made in breaking open the door did so surprize Meronthes, that when Adamas came to him he looked as pale as death.
And the Druide seizing immediately upon his person, Traytor (said he unto him) is this the way to pay that fidelity which thou o west unto thy Princess▪ Father (answered Meronthes) I am a most faithful subject, and never failed in the service which I owe unto my Soveraign. Thy works are testimonies of what you are (said Adamas) and in saying so, he put him into the hands of the Souldiers: af∣terwards asked him, to what purpose he placed a light upon the top of his house? To this he answered with a confident Brow, that in doing so, he did the part of a good subject; for his house being neer the Walls, he always set a man in that Tower with a light, to discover whether the enemy made any approaches. Then Adamas asking him what was the meaning of all those spades, hatchets, and mat∣tocks? He answered, that they were such as he was wont to use in the Country a∣bout the husbandry of ground, and when he doubted the rebellion of Polemas, he brought all his houshold-stuff, and other moveables out of his Country house, into the Town, for safety. The Druide admired his impudence in lying, and com∣manded he should be searched, to see whether he had the Level about him; and a souldier no sooner put his hand into the pocket of Meronthes, but he found it. Alcidon and Damon in the mean time seized upon his son; and putting the same questions unto him which Adamas did unto the father, their answers were so different, that they alone were enough to convince them of their villany: yet Adamas desiring their own confessions might be witnesses against them, he fol∣lowed them into the prison; where telling them of the detention of Polemas, and charging them home with their enterprise, he made them at last confess their in∣tended treachery against Amasis. Meronthes fell presently into tears and supplications and falling down upon his knees, implored the Druide to intercede for a pardon: But all his shews of repen∣tance would not move that Princess to grant it; for as soon as ever she heard of their confessions by the the report of Adamas, she did so abhor their treason, that without any motions of mercy, she commanded they should be presently strangled, and hanged upon the walls, opposite to the Tent which Polemas had erected, for an example unto all Traytors. The Nymphs command was executed the same night, and their punishment was thought by every one so just, that none did pity them. Their deaths was the life of Peledontes, for Adamas was as good as his word, yet upon condition he should still remain a prisoner, till it was seen how the designs of Polemas against the Nymph would end. All things thus passed, whilst Laonice lived in the same solitude which the Ora∣cle commanded should be her retreat. This Shepherdess was no sooner parted from Thirsis, but she resolved to wan∣der so long, as till she had forgotten the disdain of that ungrateful Shepherd, and till she had found out a handsome way of revenge upon those whom she thought to be the Authors of her misery: But not being able to live so far from the place where her beloved Shepherd, or rather her own soul resided, she changed her purpose, and went unto Mount Verdune, where she offered her sacrifice of pray∣er, and beseeched the Deity of that place, he would be pleased to afford her some comfortable hopes by the mouth of his Oracle. Her request was not in vain, for the same day she consulted with the Oracle, she received this answer. The Oracle. WIthin this Wood, a secret Cell Will all thy sorrows cover well: If Laonice constant be, Heaven does her promise remedy.
This Oracle being pronounced, and Laonice having written it in her Table-book, lest she should forget it, she rendred thanks unto the Gods for putting her into some hopes of remedy against her misery; and though the way was very ob∣scure unto her understanding, yet she thought not any impossibility in it. The first thing she did, was to pay obedience unto the first verse of the Ora∣cle; and assuring her self that the Wood mentioned therein, was the Wood of Mount Verdune, she went unto it, and sought out for a secret Cell which was in it: By Fortune she found one more pleasant then ere she expected, for it was a thick kind of an Arbour, and no way to get into it, but a little path which con∣ducted into it, and through into a Grotto, which both Nature and Art had caved out of a Rock: As soon as she was in it, she began to look about her, and consi∣der some particulars which she found in several places; but because she could not comprehend the mystery of them within the compass of her understanding, she thought the place had been formerly the retreat of some Druide: so not think∣ing to find a fitter place, she resolved to stay there, until the Gods did direct her unto some other course; and so sustaining her self with some Country fruits which the Woods afforded, she spent her time, somtimes consulting with the Eccho, and calling upon Thirsis, was answered with Thirsis again; and somtimes talking to the Rocks and Trees: but still that Shepherd was all the only subject of her dis∣course. Thus this Shepherdess led her life, which seemed less tedious unto her, be∣cause it was in expectation of that remedy which the Gods had promised unto her, and in the hopes whereof she only lived; for she had no other rest nor de∣light, but only in thinking continually upon Thirsis, whose soul in the mean time was wholly devoted unto the memory of his dear Cleon. Polemas, who had all the night thought upon his intended work, and flat∣tered himself with a thousand hopes, that by this means his Love, and his Ambi∣tion, would obtain a happy conclusion; he no sooner saw day appear, but he a∣rose, and went to see how things went forward; and finding that he had already got within six paces of the ditch, he was infinitely pleased; so as commanding those who had wrought, to rest themselves until the next night, he appointed o∣thers to supply their places. This command was no sooner obeyed, but it was broad day; and the Sun guilding the top of the mountain Isoures, Polemas by chance cast his eye upon the house of Meronthes, always imagining that if he made as good haste with his works, it was impossible but Galathea, and the Town too, would be presently his: But the bodies of that Traytor, and his son, being hung upon the Walls, and exposed to the view of all Polemas his Army, that Cavalier did quickly know them: At the first he would fain have given his eyes the lie, and did what he could to make some doubt of that which was too apparent; but after he had rubbed his eyes a hundred times, that he might see the better, he found that it did but make him more clearly see the marks of his misfortune: Then did he begin to vomit out all the curses and blasphemies against the Gods and Amasis, that fury could inspire into a desperate soul: Afterwards recollecting himself a little, Is there no way of revenge (said he) left me? Has my cursed fate deprived me of Alexis, and Astrea, and Sylvia too, Is Semires turned Traytor, and I not know whether he be dead or alive? Ah Vilain! continued he, thou art the causer of all my miseries, and if ever I get thee again into my hands, the most cruel tor∣ments that ever Tyrants invented, shall bring him to a cursed deah: But certain∣ly this Traytor could not know of my correspondency with Meronthes; and if Pelidontes have not betrayed us, certainly they have used Witchcraft to discover it: But alas (said he, and looked upon the corps which he saw hang upon the Walls) yonder is Meronthes that suffers for my rebellion: Poor Meronthes! thy fidelity unto me did not deserve so sad a recompence: But dear Meronthes, in what place soever thy soul is now, I would have it know, that my end shall not be more happy then thine, unless I have taken a full revenge upon thy enemies and mine. In saying so, his sorrows so encreased, that he was constrained to retire; and commanding that the work should cease, because he knew that his designe was
discovered, he was once in a mind to attempt another desperate assault upon the Town, and either to die in the head of his Army, or else force it to submit. But Argonides and Listander, who were then with him, knowing very well that he was not in a condition for such an enterprize, advised him to return unto Suriea, where the rest of his Artillery and Engines were; and that he should fortifie that place, and stay there with all his Army, until the King of the Burgandians did send him his promised relief: They propounded also, that if he saw that relief from Gondebaut slow in coming; he should under some honourable pretence offer a Truce unto the Nymph, for as long or short a time as he should think expedi∣ent. Polemas, whose soul was all in confusion, by reason so many misfortunes up∣on the neck of one another, he gave ear unto the councel of Listander and Ar∣gonides, never considering whether it was good or bad; so as giving orders for the retreat of his Army, he sent a Herald unto Amasis. This Officer was no sooner at the gate of the Town, but Adamas was advertised of it, and causing a draw bridge to be let down, they gave him entrance, and conducted him into the Castle. All the Cavaliers were then with Amasis, so as the Herald being a∣mazed to see so many men of merit, he conceived it would be a long time before the Town could be forced; yet it not being his office to judge of their strength, but to acquit himself of his Commission, as soon as he saw Amasis, he kneeled down upon the ground, and being commanded by the Nymph to rise, he spoke in this manner. Polemas my Master, being unwilling to neglect any way of sweetness, where∣by he way obtain from you that contentment which he deserves, does yet offer to lay down his Arms, if you will put into his hands the Nymph Galathea, whom he desires to marry; and because he knows very well, that though you should have a disposition to consent unto it, yet you have many about you to con∣sult withall: He offers unto the term of fifteen dayes consideration, during which time, if you please, there shall be a cessation of Arms. Upon this, the Herald having made an humble reverence, Amasis told him that he should have an an∣swer within an hour: during which time, she would advise with Godomar, Ada∣mas, Damon, and Alcidon; which she accordingly, and all were of opinion that she should accept of this Truce, since in that interim, Sigismond, Rosilion, or Lin∣damor, might come unto her relief: upon this resolution she returned to the He∣rald, and gave him this answer. Herald, tell thy master Polemas, that as yet I do not think his arms are able to maks me consent unto that which his arrogance does pretend unto; but since he will give me that time of consideration: Tell him I would have him in that in∣terim bethink him of such a course as may move me to forget his crime, and to pardon it: That otherwise, I do not think this cessation of Arms will do any good, but make me hate him the more, and think him lesse worthy of pity. Up∣on this Amasis arose, and the Herald went away, whom Adamas conducted to the gate of the Town. Polemas, who expected his return with much impatiency, was very glad the Nymph had accepted of the Truce; but when he heard that she advised him to think upon some way which might render him worthy of her favour, this stung him to the soul, imagining that this Princess was not yet in any inclination of any will unto him: yet not being able to avoid his misfortunes, he rejected all such good motions of mind; and still flattered his presumption with huge hopes of that relief which he expected from Gondebaut. In this obstinacy he command∣ed his Army to make a retreat, and return unto Suriea, fully resolved to begin the siege again, the next day after the expiration of the Truce: assuring himself, that within fifteen dayes he should receive that relief which was promised unto him by the Burgundian King. On the otherside, Adamas was not imployed in the preservation of Amasis and the State, but he thought upon the recovery of Celadon, so as by the help of some Medicaments, he was in a short time able to rise out of his bed; at which Astrea was so overjoyed, that it was apparent she valued his recovery above her own life. The Druides greatest care was to keep Amasis from any visits, lest Ga∣lathea
should come with her; yet he found out such handsome excuses as prevented that danger. About the same time the Queen Argira ended her journey, and came unto Po∣licander, who still lived as if he had made a league with death, to let him live un∣til he rendred up his last breath in her presence: As soon as ever he saw her he rouzed ny himself, for his intellectuals were as perfect as ever; and not being a∣ble to restrain some tears which pity brought into his eyes, he turned himself, though with much ado, towards that Princesse; and seeing her already upon her knees at his bed side, and her eyes flowing in tears: Madam (said he in a faint voice) the gods have favoured me so far, as to suspend my death, that I might observe that promise which I made unto you; and that you being a witnesse of my death, I should receive the greatest comfort that I ere can hope for. But since my sicknesse will not suffer me to be so ceremonious as I desired, be pleased, Madam, to accept of my good will, and to know that I am no less yours then if our marriage had been solemnized with the most sumptuous Ceremonies: upon this he stopped, as if it were to recollect a little strength, and whilst the Queen was drown'd in sorrows, he began to speak again. I do declare before the gods and all the world (said he, and turned himself towards all the Grandees of his Kingdome) that Argira is the wife of Policander, and that I am her le∣gitimate husband; and if any one do desire to know the causes of this marriage, let him know this, that it is the will of heaven and my own duty that cummands it. Then holding out his hand to the Queen, who taking it and bedewing it with tears, Sir (said she unto him) I do with all my soul receive this favour which you do unto me, and protest that I take this honour for the greatest advantage that heaven could advance me unto: But alas must I now lose you? heaven has favoured me in the recovery of Rosilion, and I hope they will not deny me when I begg for yours. At the name of Rosilion the King began to change colour, and looking upon him, he could not chuse, notwithstanding the violence of his sick∣ness, but give some expressions of joy. Rosilion, who was even dead with sorrow, and whose face had as few signs of life in it, as in that of Policander, he advanced towards him, and falling upon his knees close by the Queen, he heard the King say thus; The Law of death is so common unto all men, as you ought not to think it strange I should pay that debt which I ow unto Nature. Did not Kings use to die as well as other men, you had some reason to wonder I should be excluded from that priviledge, and that my Scepter and my Crown should not defend me against the blows of death; but a Monarch has no more right to live then the poorest Shepherd: we do dayly see their ashes and their Monuments; as this methinks should be a great consolation unto you all; to know that I die because the gods will have it so, and that they never made any man who was not subject unto death: therefore my dearest Ar∣gira, if you have any consideration of my rest, and have any desire to please me. I beseech you stop the current of your tears which do but grieve me. I do not require any greater testimonies of your love, then those you have already given me, and wish for no more but leave to die. Policander uttered these words with such a dying voice, as if his soul had gone out of his mouth at the last word: the Queen was deeply overwhelmed in sor∣rows, as Rosilion, whose groans did testifie the sadness of his soul. The wrong Ce∣lidontes, unto whom Policander had already given the Crown of the Ambarres, of the Boyers, and of the Lemovices, upon condition he would marry Cephise, was so extreamly afflicted, that he could not rejoyce at the return of Argira, nor resent that contentment, which at another time, the recovery would have been unto him. At last the King perceiving himself every minute to grow weaker, and weaker, and finding himself not able to hold out any longer; he began to strive with him∣self: Argira (said he▪ with a deep sigh) I conjure you by that which you love best, and I think that is my memory, to have a care of those whom I leave under your tuition: Make them, by your example of virtue, to abhor vice; and con∣sidering that riches are as fading as our selves, remember that all the good or bad
which we are to have in the other world, depends only upon the merit of our acti∣ons in this life. And you Rosilion (said he, holding out his feeble hand) or rather the true Celiodantes, forgive that crime which in my ignorance I committed a∣gainst you: Do not accuse me of ingratitude; and may Rosanira, whom I give unto you, long enjoy those Grandeurs wherein you shall share, as King of the Santons and Picts: Love him for my sake, who hath so long usurped your name. In saying so, he turned towards the wrong Celiodantes; and you my son, said he unto him, pay back with interest the good will he shall bear unto you: Love Peace: Never take up Arms but in a just cause: Have God still on your side: and above all, carry your self well towards Argira: This is all I desire from you, Farewel my Sons, farewel dear Argira, farewel Ro▪— At this word he ex∣pired, and his eye remaining still fixed upon Rosilion, they knew his intention was to have named him, but could not pronounce the last part of his name; which the Queen perceiving, and finding Policander to be as cold as marble, it was an hundred to one but she had followed him that very hour. All former considera∣tions of her voyage, which should have been consolations unto her, were quite forgotten, and not one thought could keep her from a present despair; one would have thought that she had drowned her reason in her tears, and that she had sought for the soul of Policander, in the roots of that hair which she pulled from her head. The wrong Celiodantes was almost out of himself; and though the death of the King did leave him an Empire, yet he testified, that he thought the loss of his person made him no gainer. Cephise and Rosilion were no less afflicted; and all the Cavaliers present, expressed abundance of grief for the loss of their Prince: They came all unto the Queen, and swore fidelity unto her and Celio∣dantes; but she was not in a condition to hear what they said unto her; and if the Ladies had not got her into bed, perhaps she had died. Thus they all retired, almost as sad for the sickness of the Queen, as for the loss of the King. But as in the vicissitude of things, nothing is durable; so the sorrows of Argira, of Celiodantes, and of Rosilion, at the last lessened, and their reason having escaped the shipwrack of the first resentment, the Queen began to remember that aid which she had promised unto the Nymph, and she thought upon nothing more then her preservation. At the end of a few days, the people over whom Policander reigned, did put the Scepter and Crown upon the head of Celiodantes, with the same ceremonies as they were accustomed to crown their Kings; and Rosilion making all haste to the Picts, did levie by the Queens permission, twelve thousand men; and afterwards taking leave of Celiodantes his brother, did take the field with his Ar, being resolved to relieve Rosanira, and oppose all violence that should be offered unto Amasis. The Sequel of the History of LIPANDAS, AMERINA, MELANDRE, and LIDIAS. DUring this while, Lipandas recovered of his wounds, but not of his passion: and though this Cavalier had not much acquaintance with Melandre, yet did he know her spirit, and that she was the most gene∣rous woman in the world. This was a cause, that as soon as the Truce was concluded, and Polemas raised the siege, he was grieved to the very soul: He was not sorry that Amasis had great hopes in that relief which was promised unto her; but when he considered that this took from him the means of shewing his courage, and of overcoming the soul of Melandre by those testimonies of his valour which he intended, he grew almost desperate: yet knowing no remedy, he resolved to wait with all possible patience, until the end of this cessation of Arms, and afterwards to perform such glorious exploits, as she should in some
sort of think it an honour to be served by a Cavalier so full of courage and affection. In the mean time, it was permitted him to see her; and because in this liber∣ty he lost not a minute of time, which afforded him the opportunity of entertain∣ing her, he endeavoured a thousand times to make her sensible of his passion. But she would never be moved unto any further then pity; for she appeared always so prepossessed with the thought of Lidias, as he could hardly ever hope for any al∣teration in her inclination. As oft as he considered by how many Laws he was obliged rather to die then leave loving her, he was confounded he mentioned the combate wherein he was overcome, when she exposed her self unto the fury of his Arms for the liberty of Lidias; and telling her it was a kind of miracle she should go off the field with that advantage which she had; he endeavoured to perswade her, that it was the Will of the Gods so to suffer it, only to let him have the glory of being furmounted by the charms of her eyes, as he was by her sword. He told her how much he was obliged unto her curtesie in procuring his enlarge∣ment of Ligdamon, and swore unto her, that when she thought to set him at li∣berty, she so made him her slave, that he could not think any thing could be more pleasing then his captivity: In conclusion, he expressed unto her all that his pas∣sion could suggest unto him: But all would not melt the heart of Melandre: for when he talked of his love, she talked of that affection which she preserved for Lidias; and if Lipandas begged any comfort from her, she told him that she stood in as much need of it her self. Thus some days passed over, during which, all that the Cavalier could obtain from her, was, that in the end she consented he should call himself her priso∣ner: and whilst he lived in some sort comforted by the delight he took in that T∣tle which he thought so glorious unto him, Melandre was more and more afflict∣ed; for hearing no more news of Lidias since she saw him tyed with Alexis and Astrea, in the head of Polemas his Army, she was full of jealousie and despair: somtimes she imagined that he was escaped with Amerina, and that in prejudice of the fidelity which he had vowed unto her, he would marry that woman in the first Town they came at: Afterwards considering it was impossible but he should be extreamly wounded in the combate, she perswaded her self that he was dead. Amidst the confusion of these vexing thoughts, she was likely to die her self, and certainly had done so, if heaven had not shewed some compassion upon her, and sent her some news of him in this manner. Amerina whom Lidias talked withal under the window of that chamber where Polemas kept Silvia prisoner, she no sooner saw her Lover carried away, but she beg to follow him; and though she protested a thousand times that he was not Ligdamon, she could not keep him from being as the rest were, she begged of them upon her knees to put the same cords upon her hands; but seeing she could not obtain that favour, which they used upon Lidias as a punishment, she resol∣ved however not to forsake him, but to die with him. In this resolution she fol∣lowed the Army of Polemas; and as soon as she saw Lidias by the favour of Se∣mires, loose from his cords, and in a condition to defend himself, she went straight unto him; and having no other Arms to fight with but her tongue, she made use of it to animate him; and did infuse so much courage and strength into him, that he began to think himself invincible: but at last, not being able to resist so great a number, he retreated, as the rest did, into the ditch, where he fought until he was so weak, by reason of several wounds, and loss of blood, that he was con∣strained to fall down upon the ground. Then did Amerina fall down upon her knees, and without losing any time in vain complaints, began to help him; so as pulling out her handkerchief, she stopped the blood which ran from a wound in his arm. A while after Polemas was entirely repulsed: so as when every one went back into the Town, Lidias had recovered a little strength; so as by the assistance of Amerina, he rose up; for she taking him by the arm, and holding him up, she got him within the walls: as soon as they were within, Lidias finding himself to faint, did turn his languishing eyes upon that woman, and would have bid his last adieu: But she whom Love had inspired with strength, did so sustain him, that
she got him some thirty pces further into the Town: Now did Amerina believe she should lose him: for he falling into a swon▪ and she having an strength to sustain him any longer, she was forced to set him down under the near house upon a stone seat, which she found by chance; and there finding no motion in Lidias, she could not chuse but cry out, and so violently, that the noise came unto the Master of the house; and though all the Town was in arms, you so it hapned, that he not being in a condition to bear Arms he never stirred out of his house, but stayed within at his prayers, and o expection of what success the Gods would give unto the Arms of Amasis. This man was a Chirurgion by professions, rich in the secrets of Nature, but so very old that he could hardly stir out of his chamber; and being very charita∣ble, he no sooner heard the cries of Amerina, but he doubted the cause, and commanded some of his domestiques to take a light and see who it was: They were no sooner in the street, but they brought back word, that she who made the Lamentations was a very fair woman, and bewailed the losse of Ligdamon, whom she held all bloody in her arms. At the name of Ligdamon the good old man changed colour, for he loved Ligdamon extreamly; yet recollecting himself, per∣haps (said he) that Cavalier is not quite dead: let him be brought hither unto me, for if there be any life, I hope by my remedies to prolong it. Upon this command, almost all that were in the house went out; aand whilst they were pre∣paring a bed to lay him upon, Lidias giving some signes of life, the Domesticks laid him thereon, who heard Amerina sigh extreamly, and she hearing them sigh and say ah Ligdamon, alas poor Ligdamon, she hoped that as his name was the cause of Liias his wounds, it might, perhaps, be the cause of his cure. She re∣solved therefore not to name him, but let them go on in their mistake, and not to divert them from their charitable intentions of helping him; so as entring with him, and seeing what cure the old man had in getting him to bed, and to look upon his wounds, she began to have some hopes in his assistance. Lidias was found not to be mortally wounded, though he had received four very great ones, two in his left arm very near his shoulder; one in his thigh, and one on his right hand, which could not be cured without the loss of a finger. As soon as the Chirurgeon had searched all these wounds, he came unto Ame∣rina; and telling her how the wounds of Lidias were, he gave her assurance, that within a while he would be perfectly recovered: at which she changed colour, and though she was much disordered in her dress, and bloody in several places, yet she appeared so fair in the eyes of this charitable old man, that he could not chuse but think the passage extreamly strange, for he knew that Ligdamon was never married: And therefore upon the first opportunity he beseeched her to tell him, from what relation did that love proceed which she expressed unto Ligdamon▪ Amerina answered him, that in the condition wherein she was, she could not pos∣sibly satisfie his curiosity: besides, the story was such, as she could not tell it without blushing; but as soon as Ligdamon was a little better recovered, she would entreat him to make a relation of it. This answer confirmed the man in his first opinion, and whetted his desire of further satisfaction; yet being unwil∣ling to be importunate, be seemed contented to stay until the Cavalier was better recovered; and indeed he began to mend in a few dayes, for a feaver not seizing upon him, and his greatest harm proceeding from his excessive loss of blood, it was no great difficulty to cure him; which Amerina perceiving, she told him all that had hapned, and conjured him to continue the mistake until he was perfectly recovered. Lidias therefore did personate Ligdamon as well as he could, and when the good old man desired to know who Amerina was, he ingeciously told her name, and related all that she her self had related concerning the adventures of that Cavalier: the old man had heard something of it; so as after he under∣stood the whole truth, he was so well satisfied, as he thought himself sufficiently recompenced for the cure which he had of his cure. One day Amasiel (for that was the name of the good old man) would needs go out to be present at a particular sacrifice which Amasis intended to offer, for the safe and soon return of Lindamor; and he took that liberty, the rather, be∣cause
Lidias began to walk up and down the chamber▪ so as supposing him to be past all danger, and stood in no need of his presender he was carried n a chair unto the Temple. Presently after he was entred, Amasis came also, waited upon by all the Nymphs and Ladies that were in Marclles; and with them came Godomar and all the gallantry of the Court. It was not long before good Amasiel spied Ligdamon amongst them, and this sight did so much surprize him, considering the condition wherein he thought he left him, that he went as well unto him as he could, and seemed to be more then half angry. Ligdamon (said he unto him) you are very undiscreet in venturing your self so soon abroad, and had I thought you would have come out of the house, I would not have stirred out: Ligdamon, who esteemed this man very much, and had his age in great reverence, did answer him a in mild manner, and protested that he did not know what he said: I say, re∣plied the good Man, that your striving to walk so much, may cause the wound which you have in your thigh to open again: upon this the Cavalier bethinking himself of all the wounds that ever he received, and not knowing any such as he mentioned: I never had any wound in my thigh, replied he, and unless you bet∣ter explain your self, I shall not understand you. Ligdamon spoke these few words in such a strange manner, that the Chirurgeon thought he would not acknowledge his wound, because he would not acknow∣ledge his obligation unto him for his cure, and wondering to find so much ingra∣titude in the soul of that Cavalier, whose generosity was esteemed by all the world: Sir (said he unto him) the care which I have had of you deserves a bt∣ter acknowledgement, but though you do not think me worthy so much as of thanks, yet I shall not lose my reward; for the gods will accept of my good in∣tentions. Upon this Amasiel was silent, yet testified by his actions that he was a little disconted, and Ligdamon not being able to imagine the cause: Amasiel (said he unto him) if I do not with all my hart desire to serve you, may the gods pu∣nish me; but I do not know what you mean by these words, of wounds, of ob∣ligation, and of reward. I think (said the old Man and interrupted him) that you either imagine me in a dream, or else would make me believe that I am mad. Can you deny that you have been eleven dayes in my house, and that I have dres∣sed your four wounds, one in your thigh, another in your hand, and two in your arm? Now Ligdamon begun clearly to see the mans mistake, and knew that it was Lidias whereof he spoke: therefore pulling off his gloves, and shewing his bare hands unto him: Father (said he) do you see any such wound in my hand? The old man casting his eye upon the place where Lidias received his wound, and finding not so much as the least scratch, he stood in a strange confusion; and Lig∣damon beginning to speak; bat Father (said he) do not think your charity any worse bestowed: for you have helped a Cavalier who resembles me; one who my name had like to have been his death, as his formerly had like to have been mine, being for him exposed unto the fury of Lions: The good office which you have done unto him, shall be acknowledged by me as thankfully as if it were done un∣to my self; after the Sacrifice is done, give me leave to go unto your house and visit him, for I have longed to know what was become of him. Amasiel heard all that Ligdamon said, but he was not able to answer him a word, for his wonder had taken away the use of his tongue: one while he would cast his eyes upon the face of Ligdamon, and fix them a long while together; and then upon a sudden, he would take his hand, and wonder he could not find the wound which Ligda∣mon received. But the Sacrifice beginning, they were both forced to give over discourse and fall to their prayers. The Sacrifice was no sooner ended but Ligdamon carried Amasiel to his Coach, and went to his house; and Amerina no sooner saw Ligdamon coming; but she went to tell Lidias, who had such an earnest desire to see him, and so glad to hear the news of his coming, that a fresh colour came into his cheek; so as Lig∣damon no sooner cast his eye upon him, but he thought that he saw himself in a glass. They were a long time in saluting and carrying each other, for Lidias knowing how much he was obliged unto that Cavalier for Amerinas sake, thought he could
not embrace and look upon him enough: yet at the last, falling into discourse which touched them more nearly, Ligdamon related what Lipandas had done, when to satisfie the desires of Melandre, he leaped over the walls, only to relieve Lidias. At the name of Melandre, Lidias and Amerina were both equally sur∣prized; the one, for the secret obligations which he had unto that Fair one; and the other, by reason of such sparks of jealousie which entred into her soul; which Ligdamon perceiving, I assure you (said he) you must prepare your self for a sharp combate; for the love of Melandre unto Lidias is as violent as ever; and though Lipandas do all he can to divert her, yet he cannot do any good. Then Lidias, I assure my (self answered he) that when Melandre knows what I have, promised unto the fair Amerina, she will not wonder, that (as a Cavalier) I have observed what I was so solemnly and strictly obliged unto. I believe (said Ame∣rina) that it is the best for us both not to let her know any thing, but to steal away out of her presence, and accord all hazards that she may attempt against us. Unto this Lidias answered nothing and Ligdamon was almost of the same opi∣nion: But for all the desires to put this in execution, it was not in their power, for the domestiques of Amasiel, who talk f this unto several persons, that the very same day almost all the Town knew of it: Melandre no sooner heard this news, but she made great complaints against Ligdamon, and as soon as ever she could steal from Lipandas, who left her as little as possible he could, she went un∣to the house of Amasiel. In the way thither, her mind was full of various thoughts, somtimes she fancied the contentment which she should have in seeing him, for whom she ran so many dangerous fortunes: and otherwhiles thinking Amerina to be with him, she had changed his mind, and was vexed at her apprehensions of his infidelity. At last, after a long dispute with her self, she came unto the cham∣ber of Lidias; and not having quitted the habit of a Cavalier, she was hardly known unto him. She found him upon his knees before Amerina, who sitting upon her bed, held the head of her Lover in her lap; at which Melandre was so much offended, that being all anger and jealousie, well, well, perfideous man (said she, pulling Lidias by the sleeve of his doublet) are these any signs of that acknowledgement which you ought to give me? Upon this Lidias knew her, and rose up to salute her: But she pushing him away, No, no (said she) continue on your submissions unto that fair on; but she shall not long enjoy the sacrifices of service which you offer unto her, for I have a way to be revenged of thy perfidy, and if heaven do deny me justice, I have courage enough to carve it out of my own despair. Upon this looking upon Amerina, and then upon Lidias, with an eye of extream discontent, she went away, and would not give that Cavalier so much time, as to speak one word. As soon as ever she was out of the house, she went straight to the Castle, and never consulting any further what to do, she cast her self at the feet of Amasis, and spoke thus unto her: Madam, That Justice which you have so happily executed, and never denied unto any, I do now emplore upon my bended knees, against the perfidie of a Cavalier, whom I conjure you to com∣mand that he may do me right and reason in your presence; Our combate shall use no other Arms but the Laws; and if the sight of his crime will bring him unto any repentance, I do protest I will presently forgive him; however Madam, be you the Arbytrator of our differen and when you have heard what we can say for our selves, I shall most willingly submit unto your doom. Then Melandre was silent: And the Nymph who took her for a Cavalier, and thought it better to take up the matter, then to let it proceed unto a quarrel, she consented unto her motion: So Lidias was sent for by a Herauld, and command∣ed to appear that very hour before Amasis. Amerina began presently to suspect the designe of Melandre, and told Lidias how much she feared the loss of his affection; but he assured her, that he would rather die a hundred deaths, then break those first oaths which he had sworn unto her. All this was not so secret, but almost all the Court knew of it; so as when Lidias was brought before the Nymph, the chamber was full of Ladies and Cava∣liers: Lipandas and Ligdamon were not then there; But Amerina who would not leave Lidias, entred almost as soon as he, and placed her self amongst the women.
The Herald had no sooner commanded silence, but Amasis told the sad Ca∣valier, that she was ready to hear him; whereupon Melandre after an humble re∣verence, began thus. I know Madam, that it would become me better to blush and be silent, then to speak, since the habit wherein I am, which is as contrary unto my sex as my hu∣mour, doth accuse me of impudence, before the most vertuous Princess of all the Universe: But since nothing can better condemn Lidias, nor convince him of in∣gratitude, then the same Arms and habit wherewith I made him owe his life unto me; I do most humbly beseech you Madam, to pardon me, for not leaving them off, and for making use of them, to reproach him with the greatest infidelity that ever any Cavalier used. Perhaps Madam, the various adventures of my life, are as well known unto your Highness, as unto my self, for Clidemant had the relati∣on of them from me; but if neither he nor Lindamore ever writ any the particu∣lars unto you, I have great cause to lament the death of the one, and the absence of the other, since by them you might have known how much Lidias is obliged unto me, and what right and reason I have to pretend unto is affection. Upon this she made a stop, to wipe away the tears which the memory of Clidemants death did bring into her eyes, and gave the Nymph time to do the same; after∣wards she went on thus. They could have told you, Madam, when Lidias was forced to fly for his life, and when the kinred of Aronthes, whom he had killed, would not let him live in any place of the world, my house was his safe sanctuary: I had at that time a greater regard of his honour then of my own; for not being able to avoid those wounds which he gave me, I was at last forced to imitate the goodness of my fa∣ther, and give him the same entertainment in my heart, which my father gave him in his house: It was not long before this wavering minded man became master both of the one and the other: but almost the very same day that he let me know he loved, the very same day also he assured me of his treason: The truth is, he quickly cast me off, and to make his crime the more enormous, he left me, with∣out so much as bidding me a civil adieu. I will not speak of my resentments, be∣cause I shall make us both blush; him at his crime, and me at my follies: let me only tell you, that at that instant, I forgot what I was, and changing my habit and my name, I resolved to overcome all those horrors which fear commonly im∣prints in the soul of a woman: I left then all my Parents, and Gd knows how much against my mind I committed this absurdity: But at last overcoming all the difficulties of a journey, and all the injuries of weather, after a thousand rubs of fortune, I undertook to fight with Lipandas, thinking it no matter by what hand I died, so it might be in the presence of this perfideous man. If thou hast any spark of memory, Lidias, of those dangers whereunto I ex∣posed my self, and of the favours which I shewed unto thee, thou wouldest con∣fess that this young Beauty which is now an occasion of my jealousie, and an ar∣gument of thy inconstancy, never had the courage to defend thee as I have done. But that is not the greatest obligation wherewith I will charge thee; and if thou beest unwilling I should name it unto thee left thy crime should have too many witnesses, ask secretly those chains which fettered my arms and feet, which I as∣sumed upon my self to release thee: Ask the Vermin of that place where I was imprisoned, whether my sorrows for thy departure were not blacker unto me then the darkness which environ'd me: Consult with the walls, and if thou beest not deaf to their answers, as thou art now unto my love, thou mayest understand the quality of my sufferings, and how more sad I was at thy sin then at my own mise∣ry: But Madam (said she, and turned towards Amasis) to express how my Lidi∣as is obliged unto me, is to express the whole course of my life, for I have sworn a thousand times that I would never live a minute longer then I loved him: Nay, let him speak himself, for if he have any memory of my favours, it is impossible but he must needs confess himself wholly mine: You may perceive Madam by his silence, how faint he is to excuse himself and his inconstancy; and I most humbly beseech you, to declare that he in right belongs unto me, and that if there be any glory to be gotten by possessing him, that it cannot be denied unto me, since he is obliged unto me for his life and liberty.
This was the discourse of Melandre, which was hearkened unto with a univer∣sal murmure, some admired her courage; others the Grandure of her love; but all did abhor the humour of Lidias, and thought it impossible for him ever to wash off that stain of ingratitude, yet when the noise of the murmure was cea∣sed, Lidias in all humility bowed unto the Nymph, and offered to speak; but Amerina, into whom the discourse of Melandre had infused some new fears of losing Lidias, she advanced, and begging leave to speak uttered these words. It is very just, Madam, that I do prevent Lidias, and before the sentence, on which my life or death doth depend be pronounced, I do shew legitimately the possession of this Cavalier, be granted unto me before Melandre. I cannot de∣ny but that she hath done even miracles for him, but I must tell you that all her actions are nothing in comparison of mine; and that if I could surmount her in merit as much as I do in love, the dispute about him would be quickly determined: the only advantage which she can boast of above me is, that she was not so mis∣taken as I was; and that the testimonies of her love were given unto Lidias, where mine was given unto Ligdamon; but why should that fallacy prejudice my cause, since the grandure of my affection is still apparent, and has given all the testimo∣nies of a most inviolable faith? You know very well courageous Melandre, that I was the first unto whom that Cavalier did sacrifice his liberty; so as when he seemed to put his heart into your hands, he did but deceive your innocency, since he never did take it back out of mine: you may happily tell me that his oathes are too many, and too great to be broken; but why should they not be broken, rather then those he has sworn unto me ten thousand times? I confesse that he ows his life unto you; but if he take what I did unto Ligdamon as done unto him, he must needs say, that when I delivered him from a den of ravenous Lions, he is al∣so a debtour unto me for his life: and I must tell you, that I have done more for him then you have; for when you ventured your life in a hopes of overcoming, I looked upon death as inevitable, when I pledged Ligdamon in the cup wherewith he intended to poyson himself; so as I have the glory to say, that I dared to do more then you, who never ventured further then the hazard of a private duel: But great Nymph (continued she and turned towards Amasis) since as they say, the first inclinations are most strong, what right hath this fair one to pretend un∣to Lidias, since he had so long since devoted himself unto me, and since at this very day, his passion does consent unto his first servitude? If Lidias had two hearts, I would consent she should have the one, and that she should dictate such laws unto him as she would have him observe; but since he has but one, and since his first promises has given me the absolute Empire over him, is it not most fit she should desist from her enterprise, and leave pursuing a thing which my love cannot yield unto her? Amerina used other arguments to set forth the justice of her cause, but Amasis seeing Melandre about to reply, did ordain that the division of the controversie, should meerly depend upon the will of Lidias, and to that end gave him all that night to weigh the reason on both sides, and that neither of them should see him, until he had declared his ultimate judgement: so every one retired; and Melan∣dre being extreamly ashamed to be seen in the habit of a Man, after she had de∣clared her sex, she took the offer of Galathea, and being dressed in some of her clothes, she fully resolved never to stir out of the Castle, but either to marry Li∣dias, or else to go out of the world. Lidias in the mean time returned to the house of good Amasiel, and Adamas took the care of Amerina upon him; but do what he could, he was not able to dissolve that sadness which appeared in all her actions and countenance: he offer∣ed himself a thousand times to serve her upon all occasions, but she still told him, that the only office which could oblige her, was to make Lidias hers: The Druide offered his assistance in that, and this made the young fair one so confident as to say unto him thus: I do conjure you father, by that which is most sacred and dear unto you to contrive it so, that I may discourse with Melandre in pri∣vate: this is all the consolation that I ask, and if I obtain it, I shall more easily sup∣port
any misfortune Adamas conceiving that this might easily be done, and that there was no injstice in the desire, he went the same hour unto Melandre, and made the proposition unto her: That generous woman consented unto his desire, and offered to go unto her; but the Druide not knowing whether Ameri∣na would be pleased with that, he thought it better that he stayed in her chamber, and undertook to bring Amerina unto her: which he did; so as making them both to promise that nothing should passe in their discourse which might make his mediatourship to be imputed unto him as a crime, he went out and left them a∣lone: he was no sooner gone out but Amerina shut the door, and spoke thus unto Melandre. Do not wonder generous Melandre, that I should stand in fear of the judge∣ment of Lidias; for your own merit is the cause of it; and I know that unless he be blind he cannot prefer my beauty before yours: you are owner of so many eminent qualities above me, that I am forced to beg that from your pity, which my own merit can never obtain: I know very well that my demand is high, when I ask this Cavalier; but then consider, that if you grant him unto me, you do render your glory and my obligation to be extream: I am sure, fair Me∣landre, that you know very well how due this recompence is unto pains, and that my many years sufferings deserves no less reward: If you tell me, that you may pretend unto him by the same title, and that you have endured as much as I, consider I beseech you, that your courage, which is naturally prompt unto great things, was never put unto so much difficulty as mine, whose inclina∣tion never reached above that of a silly woman, and who never durst attempt a∣ny thing, if love had not used a particular violence upon me. Again, discreet Melandre, you have many persons here about you, the possession of whom will be no less glorious unto you, then if you enjoyed Lidias, and will be a Fortune as advantageous unto you: Wheas if I do lose what I do expect from the incli∣nation of that Cavalier, I am utterly undone; left desolately alone, far from my native countrey, destitute of all humane help, and, perhaps, abandoned to the mercy of some ravisher who will triumph over me, and has none to defend me from any violence: I do conjure you therefore, even by Lidias himself, not to deny me this comfort which I begg; and consider, that if you have so much pi∣ty as to yield unto me this, upon which all my joy and felicity does depend, I shall not be so ungrateful, as for your service, to lose that life which you shall pre∣serve. Amerina expressed her self in such a sweet obliging manner, that Melandre was exceedingly moved: and had not love been abundantly predominate above her compassion, she had at that very instant granted unto this fair one that con∣tentment which she asked, and seemed to merit. Yet her own interest being a∣bove that of Amerinas, she paused a while, and studied what to answer: at last she broke out thus. The gods be witnesses, fair Amerina, I am extreamly grieved that I cannot ren∣der you this contentment which you ask: for pities sake put your self into my room, and tell me what you would do if I should make the same supplication un∣to you? If you do love Lidias above your own life, would you not rather die then suffer another to enjoy him? but alas, I am extreamly afraid left that misfortune befal me, and that his judgement will be advantageous unto you: for I must yield unto you in all those qualities, wherein you think I have the advantage above you. But however this is my designe, sage Amerina, to wait upon that judgement which he shall pronounce: do not think it is any want of affection unto you, which moves me not to yield that happiness which you desire: for command me to attempt things even impossible, nay even to die for your contentment, and I protest I will do it, so my love unto Lidias may be excused. This was all the answer that Melandre gave, at which Amerina was so stung, that she was not able to stay any longer with her; after, therefore, a civil adiew, she went away in such a dejected manner, as it was apparent she was not all satis∣fied: by Fortune, as she went out she met Adamas, and went with him unto his house, beseeching him to let her go to bed without any supper, or being seen
by any. The Druido would hardly consent unto it; yet to satisfie her importuni∣ty, he permitted her to do as she would. All the night long she never closed an eye, and though the last testimonies which she received of the love of Lidias was a great subject of consolation unto her, yet she could not chuse but fear, and ex∣treamly afflict her self, as oft as she thought upon the promises which he had made unto Melandre: The remembrance of this, forced some tears to trickle down from her eyes, and afterwards to fall into a thousand dangerous resolutions. The last of which, and upon which her mind fixed was, not to suffer that her Rival should ever tryumph over Lidias; so as to prevent that, she intended to arm her self with a poniard, which she would wear under her Gown; and in case the sen∣tence was pronounced in the favour to Melandre, she vowed to kill her, afterwards Lidias, and lastly her self. Lidias for his part was as much disquieted as they; all his obligations unto Melandre came into his memory, and swelled his soul with such lively apprehen∣sion of them, as he thought he could not chuse but satisfie her desires, unless he suffered himself to be branded with extream ingratitude. On the other side, his vows unto the fair Amerina had such an influence upon him, and the merits of both held him in such an inequality, as he knew not which of them to chuse or re∣ject: Lipandas also received such a hot alarm when he heard of the passages at the house of Amasis, that he would never let Ligdamon be at rest, but forced him to accompany him unto the Castle, where he so expressed his passion unto Me∣landre, that if he did not move her unto any love, yet he moved her at the least unto pity. The hour when they were all to appear before Amasis was no sooner come, but all the Court assembled there, especially the Lovers, but with very different thoughts and resolutions: Lidias endeavoured to oblige Amerina without offend∣ing Melandre; Amerina was afraid that Lidias would not be favourable unto her, and therefore prepared to execute her dismal designe: But Melandre being more confident then any of the rest, before Lidias was commanded to speak, did cast her self at the feet of Amasis, with these expressions. It is to believed Ma∣dam, that every one will wonder that after so violent a pursuit of a happiness, I should now deprive my self of all hopes therein; but if they will be pleased to take so much pains as to consider the reasons which induce me thereunto, doubtless they will rather commend then condemn me. At the first Madam, I was in hopes to enjoy Lidias without any prejudice un∣to Amerina, whose affection does merit to be preserved; but now if I do volun∣tarily yield unto her an advantage which perhaps she may obtain in spite of me, I shall so oblige her, as I believe that her affection unto me will be for ever immu∣table: And since Madam, though Lidias should give his judgement in favour of me, he would still be guilty of breaking those oaths which he hath sworn unto this fair one; and though he should be favourable unto her, he could never clear him∣self of infidelity unto me; so as Madam, either Amerina or Melandre must of their own motion quit the interest which they have in this affection: Therefore since the Gods have inspired me with the desire of it, and have now given me the cou∣rage, I do intend never to give Lidias any cause to hate me, but will for ever love him only in the degree of a Brother. I beseech you therefore Madam, to let them enjoy that contentments which fortune hath many years denied them, and which now I do most earnestly wish unto them: Thrice happy shall I think my self in contributing any thing to their contentment. Upon this Melandre was silent, and made an humble reverence unto the Nymph. All the company admired to hear this language proceed from her; but above all, Lidias and Amerina; who seeing themselves at a higher pitch of felicity then ere they expected, made an humble reverence unto Amasis; and after they had asked leave to thank Melandre, they expressed themselves unto her with all testi∣monies of acknowledgement and affection. This being done, Amasis offered to rise, but was hindred by Ligdamon, who holding Lipandas by the hand, and presenting him unto the Nymph, beseeched her to determine somthing for the satisfaction of that Cavalier: Lipandas cast
himself down upon his knees, and after a relation of his love and adventures, be∣seeched her to dispose the will of Melandre to receive him into the room of Lidi∣as. Amasis found so much Justice in the desire, that she made the proposition un∣to Melandre, who after some modest refusal, remembring what he had done for her upon several occasions, especially when to relieve Lidias, he leaped down the walls of Marcelles, she obeyed the commands of the Nymph, and granted the desires of Ligdamon. Thus these four Lovers did in one hour reap the fruit of all the pains which Love and Fortune had made them endure: These two marriages were consumma∣ted before the Truce was ended; and in the mean time, Lindamore lost no op∣portunities of advancing his Troops and having met with Philnder, who ac∣quainted him with the affairs of Amasis, and the intentions of Gondebaut against her, he determined not to go into Lions, but to cross over the Rhosue about half a league from them, and the next morning to go unto Vienna. On the other side, Gondebaut who thirsted to be revenged upon Amasis for the affronts which he had, as he conceived, received from her, and being pressed by Ligonias, who every minute presented unto him the inconveiences which would happen in case Polemas was not relieved according to promise, he issued out his Commissions, and raised thirty and two thousand men, which he committed unto the conduct of Ligonias, with command unto all the Officers to obey Pole∣mas, unto whom he writ this Letter. GONDEBAUTS Letter unto POLEMAS. I Have sent thirty and two thousand men unto Polemas, not out of any ambition to enlarge the limits of my Empire, but only out of a de∣sire to raise his glory unto the highest pitch of glory that he can wish. I have made choice of such Souldiers for him, as best know how to obey, from whom I do expect even wonders to be done, being under the conduct of a man who knows most perfectly how to command them. But how great so ever the victories be which they shall get, they are still less then the hopes I have in your courage, the Grandeur whereof may assure any one of the con∣quest of the world, if he will be pleased to employ it. Fight therefore pre∣sently, brave Polemas, or rather vanquish presently; for I know, that with you, to fight, and to overcome, is one and the same thing. Whilst affairs went thus, Sigismond had but a very dull time of it; Gondebaut had locked him up in a strong Tower, the better to secure his person, it being doubted, that if he were at liberty, he would not have suffered any designs to be against Amasis, Godomar, or Dorinde, without opposing it with all his Interest. Thus this Prince thought his detention insupportable; for hearing of this Armies departure, he was sensible of the danger wherein his Brother was; he was so extreamly displeased that he was not able to help himself, that all those who saw him, might read in his countenance the marks of a most violent sorrow: At last, heaven who reserved him for a more glorious end then to languish in prison, did permit him to make an escape in this manner. Amongst those whom Gondebaut had set over him to prevent his escape, there was two kinsmen of Ardilan, who also carried the same name; the one of which finding more favour with the King then the oher, he had obtained the sole dona∣tion of his deceased Cofin; which the other extreamly stomaking, yet not daring to murmure at the injustice which was done him, he resolved to be revenged by favouring Sigismond, and freeing him from the Tyrannie of his father. He made the overture of it unto him, the same morning that the Army was drawn into the field; and Sigismond being confident of his fidelity, since (said he unto him) you do offer me your assistance, and your own good will hath prevented my re∣quests,
I do swear by all that's sacred, that if you do help me to escape, to raise thy fortune above any Subject in all the Kingdome, but be sure you fail me not, for if thou dost deceive me, I will most infallibly be thy utter ruine. Upon this the Prince began to walk up and down the chamber, and the young Ardilan fearing lest some should hearken at the door, he came nearer and said unto him in a low voice: You never need Sir to doubt either of my affection or my fide∣lity, and I will contrive the matter with so much prudence, as if it shall not mis∣carry. As soon as he had said so, the hour which Ardilan was to stay with him was expired, and he quitted his place unto another who came for the same pur∣pose: he was no sooner gone, but to lose no time, he provided one of those small boats, which they used upon the River Arar, and also providing two Fisher∣mens habits, some nets, and a rope long enough to reach from the Tower where Sigismond was detained; and at the entrance of the night, he carried them him∣self unto the Princes chamber, where he was to watch that night with one of his Comrades: Sigismond was no sooner in bed, but he seemed as if he were asleep, and Ardilan who also brought a great bottle of wine with him, did so entertain his companion, that he was constrained to trust the keeping of the Prince unto him: so soon as Ardilan perceived his Comrade to be so fast asleep that he could not be awaked, he pulled the Fishers habits out of a sack, and putting one of them on, beseeched the Prince to put on the other; then fastning the rope to the window, they both wen down by the rope without any noise. As soon as they were down, Ardilan carried him to the boat, and throwing their nets into the water with more fear of being taken then desire to take, they came unto the chains which crossed over the water just as day began to dawn, and they stayed not long before they were opened unto them; so as rowing as fast as ever they could they entred presently into the Rhosne, whose impetuous current was such, that it carried them to Vienna in lesse then three hours. When Ardilans companion awaked, and did not see his Comrade, he ran pre∣sently to the Princes bed, and not finding him neither, he went to the window, where finding the rope, he concluded that they were escape, and disputed with himself whether it was not his best course to escape also: at last considering, that if he should be taken, he should be punished as a complice, he chose rather to re∣ly upon his innocency, then run the hazard of being thought culpable: he began therefore to cry out as loud as he could, and shewed unto the first that came unto him the marks of Sigismonds flight. Gondebaut was quickly advertised of it, and coming himself unto the place, he saw the Princes and Ardilans clothes lying to∣gether upon the bed; but this made no excuse for him whose office it was to watch them, and he swore that he should presently be hanged; but when he saw the rope, and considered that if the man had been culpable, he might easily have escaped also, he turned all his anger against the young Ardilan, and presently proclaimed throughout the Town, that if any one could bring him either alive or dead, he would give unto him a large pention for his life; but all inquisition was to no purpose, for they were already got into Vienna, and it fell out very happily for them, that Lindamare came thither that morning. Their entrance into the Town was after a pleasant manner, for having left their boat at the port, they came into the first house they found open, and asked for something to eat; and being thought to be Fisher-men, very homely victu∣als was set before them, such as were enough to turn the stomach of the Prince: but Ardilan, who had rowed very hard, and never slept all the night, did fall a∣bord with such a sharp appetite, that Sigismond after his example did taste such course food as he found. During their repast the Prince was very inquisitive after the news of the Town, and left their host should think it strange, that any in such habits as they should enquire after news, the Prince told him that they came from Lions to sell their fish in Vienna: for Gondebauts Souldiers took up all provisions in their countrey, and never payed the owners for them; and therefore they came away with their boat, to see what money they could get for their fish in that place: The Host told him that they were come in a very good time: for there was newly come to Town one Lindamor, whose valour was very famous, and
brought with him four or five hundred Noble men, besides four thousand Soul∣diers. I have (said Sigismond) three or four fishes of a strange bigness, and I believe they would very willingly buy them, if I knew how to let them know as much. Alas poor fellow (answered the Host) dost thou think such men as they use to go unto the Market as we do? No, no, they have servants and officers that take care for such things, and thy fish, perhaps, shall be bought and sold be∣fore thou ever see any of them, or they know any thing of them. So I have money for my fish (replied Sigismond and smiled) I do not care, and silver is as good from the hand of a servant as from the Master: Well (said the Host) I will carry thee to their house where thou maist speak with some of their servants, and to tell thee truly, I have a great desire to see this man they call Lindamor, for I have heard tell such wonders of him, that I can hardly believe he is like unto o∣ther men. Sigismond could not chuse but laugh at the conceit of this man, and calling to memory all that he had heard of Lindamor, I had a conceit that his return from Childerick, was purposely to assist Amasis against the attempts of Polemas. Think∣ing therefore that his best course was to joyn with him, he and Ardilan desired the Host to conduct them unto his lodging. As soon as they came there, the Prince desired to speak with Lindamor, and because he saw they made some diffi∣culty of it, he told them that he had some businesse of importance to impart, which Lindamor would be very glad to know. This man unto whom he addres∣sed himself, finding more in the aspect of Sigismond then usually is in the common sort of people, and thinking him better then his clothes promised, also remembring how Philiander got out of Marcelles, he did imagine that happily he might be one that came from the Nymph; so as without any more ceremony he carried him up a back stairs towards the chamber of Lindamor; and leaving him there at the stair head with Ardilan, who knew not what would be the issue of this visit, he went and told Lindamor that there was two men in the habit of Fishermen, the one of which said that he had some businesse of consequence to impart. Linda∣mor pretending some dispatches in his closet, he left the company and came to the place where Sigismond stayed. As soon as ever the Prince saw him he liked his countenance and behaviour, as indeed, Lindamor had a very charming way & mind to win love; and saluting the Prince very affably, he returned the salute in a way more sutable to his quality then habit, Sir (said he unto Lindamor) I come to ac∣quaint you with an accident which happened in Lions of which we have been wit∣nesses, and in some sort Complices: which is, that the Prince Sigismond hath escaped out of that prison where his father detained him, and we have brought him away in our little boat, without any other company but one man who escaped with him. Lindamor had hardly patience to let him speak out these last words, for clap∣ping his hands together, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, blessed be the great gods of heaven (said he) for delivering him from such great injustice: In say∣ing so some tears of joy escaped from his eyes, which pleased the Prince so well, that he was ready to discover himself immediatly: yet deferring it a little longer, Sir (continued he) we heard him often by the way name you, yet not knowing (as I think) that you were so near him: so as at our arival here, hearing of your return and where you lodged, we thought it would be welcome news unto you, to the end, that whether he be your friend or your enemy, you might make what use you pleasdd of it. Dear friend (said Lindamor unto him) I give thee hearty thanks, and I will and I will recompence thee very well before we part, for this good news; but I pray thee tell me where he is, that I may go unto him and kisse his hands. Sir (replied the Prince and shrugged his shoulders) he landed on the other side of the Rhosne, and I am afraid he is taken horse to go unto his brother in Marcellos, for we heard him say he intended it. O heavens (said Lindamor and stamped upon the ground) how unhappy shall I esteem my self if I do not serve upon this occasi∣on he commanded to make ready horses with all possible haste, and intended to fol∣low him immediately; yet being desirous to reward those that gave him this in∣telligence;
he commanded to give them a good sum of money, and after many hearty thanks would have dismissed them; but Sigismond, who was much de∣lighted at hit trouble and impatiency, Sir (said he unto him) we most humbly beseech you to let us wait upon you in your journey, perhaps we may be a means of your sooner finding him: Lindamor, whose mind was more upon something else then heeding what he said, was a long while before he answered; at last, alas (said he) it will be a long while before we provide boats for you both; besides you do not know what a deal of difference there is between riding a horse and rowing a boat: upon this he would have gone out, and Sigismond, not being able to hold any longer, Sir, said he, there needs neither boats or boat, nor any horses to meet with him whom you desire to see, since Sigismond is already very near you: As he said this, he embraced him, at which Lindamor was so surprized, that he knew not what to say: and upon a better survey he found so much Maje∣sty under the cloud of that poor habit, as he found his errour; yet not to persist any longer in it he kneeled down, and all the Princes entreaties could not make him rise until he had obtained that pardon, which the Prince said he was rather to ask for deceiving him so long. Their first complements being ended, the Prince went to bed, during which time order was taken for some clothes sutable to his quality, and Lindamor yielded his chamber unto him, giving it out that he was troubled with the head-ake, purposely to prevent visits, and to have the better opportunity of discoursing upon the affairs of the Nymph: so the Prince wa no sooner got into bed, but he desired Lindamor to sit down by him, and then be∣gan to speak thus unto him. This picture (said he, and opened a case set with very rich stone, which he wore about his Neck) will tell you that Dorinde is partly the cause of all Gonde∣bauts disorders: That fair one whose Image you see, and whose perfections are so great, as no Painter in the Universe is able to imitate, hath so captivated the mind of my father, that he is fallen into such extravagancies, as indeed are un∣worthy a man of his quality: When his affection was first known unto me, I was in such fears that he would marry her, that I resolved to be as great an obstacle un∣to it as I could. The first course that came into my fancy was, to seem as if I were in Love with her; but oh how dangerous a thing it is to jest with matters of Love! for a little after I became so desperately lost in a real Love of her, that I cannot believe ever any passion was so violent as mine; but however, my first designe of ruining the pretensions of my father, did prevail; for whether that fair one did think my age more sutable unto hers, and found more sympathy in our humours, or whether she thought the Kings intention was not so honest as he pretended; but so it was, that I gained her affection, and after the death of her father, I perswaded her to go into Forrests, where I intended to follow: but I was so much interrupted, that all I could do, was, to send my brother thither; who after several encounters, carried her into Marcelles, where now they are. Now the perswasions of Polemas, who promised to hold that estate meerly of my father, and my fathers desire to be revenged upon Amasis, who took them into her protection, has caused him to declare war against that Princess, and no longer since then yesterday, sent above thirty thousand men unto Polemas: But lest I should engage my self in this quarrel, which was partly begun upon my score, the King shut me up in a Tower, out of which I escaped by the assistance of this man, whom you see disguised as I am, and now am come unto you, to act somthing that is glorious unto Amasis and Dorinde. Lindamore was joyed beyond all expression at the discourse of Sigismond, and protesting that he could not better employ his arms; then in defence of that Prin∣cess, he beseeched him to make all the haste he could to do her that favour: First (said the Prince) I conceive one thing is expedient to be done, which is, that we employ four of your men who are least known, two of them to go and divulge it in Lions, that I am in Viena, and the other two to get into that Army which Gon∣debaut sends unto Polemas: and this will be the consequence of it; I have many friends in Lions, who will not value the Kings displeasure, so they can but serve me, and follow my fortune; and I dare confidently ever, that almost all the No∣bility
are for me: Most certain it is, that as soon as ever they know where I am, they will make preparations to serve me, and will follow me: As for those who are in the Army which my father hath sent unto Polemas, certainly some are for me, and those that are, will draw others, so as I expect a good party will revolt, and come unto me. Lindamore approved of this designe, and that very hour dispatched away four such as he most trusted, and giving them all requisite instructions, he returned un∣to Sigismond, and said thus unto him, I do verily believe Sir, that the Gods do intend to be very favourable unto Amasis, and are resolved to free her very sud∣denly from all manner of oppressions, since they proceed by ways that are even miraculous: For in your discourse, I observe some extraordinary passages: As the flight of Dorinde, the voyage of Prince Godomar, and the interest which you have both in him and her, makes much for the advantage of that afflicted Princess. Philander spoke of a certain Queen called Argira, who came not long since a∣bout the cure of a Cavalier called Rosilion; he told me also, that she left behind her a daughter very fair, with a promise to send for her by an Army strong enough to resist all the power of any enemies. For my part, I thought that I could not die more gloriously, then in the service of her, unto whom I owe my life, and all I have, and therefore resolved to force my way into the Town, with those soul∣diers that I brought with me, and afterwards defend it to the last. Your resoluti∣on is most commendable (said Sigismond) and I assure my self, you might effect it, for there is no greater danger in it, then formerly your valour hath encountred withal, and gloriously executed; but you must know, that as the state of the Town is at the present, it is not in any necessity of either your or my being there: My brother writ me word at the beginning of the siege, that there are so many brave Cavaliers in it, and I believe Philander told me as much, that without any assistance, they could defend it for two moneths; and since so, it is much better for us to make up a Body wherewith we may keep the field, and as we see occasi∣ons, either give battel, or enter into the Town. Lindamore thought this advice so good, that he resolved to follow it; the only difficulty that he found in it, was, left Gondebauts Army joyning with Polemas, before they had formed a considerable body, should violently fall upon them; and there∣fore he propounded it unto the Prince, whether it was not best to advance a little forward with those men he had, to amuse the enemy, whilst he stayed in Vienna, to receive those men who came to take his part. The Prince answered, that it was very necessary so to do: And upon this resolution, Lindamore spent the rest of the day in giving orders for their departure, as in the morning he did, with all his forces. The same day, those that Lindamore sent unto Lions, arrived there; who ha∣ving told unto five or six persons that Sigismond was in Vienna all the Town knew of it before it was night. Gondebaut was vexed at it to the very soul; and doubt∣less if he had not sent away all his Forces, he would have besieged him there: for his humour was barbarous enough to prompt unto any violent resolution. But on the other side, most of the Nobility and Cavalry of the Town were so joyed at the news, that they spent all the night in nothing but preparing themselves to go unto the Prince in the morning. The King, whose passion had blinded his judgement, and who never feared any harm could happen unto him, did permit the Gates of the Town to be opened, for they had been shut ever since he heard of Sigismonds flight; so as there went out several ways no less, then five thousand men, who the same day came unto the Prince. The next day after he went to joyn with Lindamore, who had appointed Boen for his Rendezvouz. In the mean time Gondebauts Army was advanced within a little of seeing the walls of Marcelles: Polemas who was swelled with joy, and proud with the title of General over such a puissant Army, did promise unto himself no less then the conquest of Galathea, and went half a days journey to meet these Auxiliaries: There he received Gondebauts letter, which he kissed two or three times; and ha∣ving received the oath of Fidelity from all the Captains, he swore that the greatest interest that he had in this war, was only for the glory of Gondebaut. After this
he made a speech unto the Souldiers, in which he omitted nothing that might move them to fight valiantly; and got so much credit and authority amongst them, that there was not one amongst them all which was not very glad to be under his com∣mand. And lastly, being desirous to know certainly of what number this new come Army consisted, he wondered to find of thirty two thousand not above four or five and twenty thousand; for the rest had disbanded themselves as soon as ever they heard of Sigismonds intention. As this was prejudicial unto Polemas, so it was serviceable unto Sigismond, who in less then three days, found himself sixteen or seventeen thousand strong com∣prising those which Lindamore brought from Childerick. Rosilion on his side, he made all the haste that possibly he could; for his love unto Rosanira, was such a spur unto him, that he could not rest until he had given some signal testimony of his valour; so as he was within a days march as near Marcelles as the Burgundian Troops. The Truce was to end the next morning; so as the retardment of Rosilion, the arrival of these forces unto Polemas; and no intelligence of Lindamores return, did put Amasis into a most extream perplexity: she knew nothing of Fleurial and Philianders success, so as she grew even desperate of all relief, and was excessive∣ly afflicted: Adamas surprised her as she was almost drowned in sorrows; and though he knew them to be but just, seeing so little hopes of any remedy, yet ha∣ving a firm belief that the Gods would never abandon so just a cause, he candemn∣ed her excessive sorrows, as out of season: Which the Princess not being able to relish; Alas Adamas (said she) how can I chuse but be sensible of all these sad accidents which are even ready to ruine me: every thing contributes unto it; Strangers deceive me; my Neighbours assault me, and my own Subjects betray me. Upon this she pulled out he handkerchief and wiped her eyes, which not∣withstanding the Grandure of her courage, did send forth a flood of tears: which the Druide perceiving, and desiring to comfort her: Madam (said he unto her) I must needs confesse that you have some causes to fear, but pardon me if I tell you, that you have no cause to dispair: A high born soul as yours is, cannot be culpable of such a crime, which is a mark of a base spirit that is dffident in the goodnesse and omnipotence of the gods: by the grace of Tautates our affairs are no in such an extremity as to expect nothing but certain ruine; and though we were all to perish infallibly, methinks it should be a great comfort unto you, to know that though the gods have permitted it to be so, yet it is not for any crime which you have committed: I do know, Madam, that Estates have some∣times their revolutions and changes; but I know also, that it seldome happens without some legetimate cause have drawn the anger of the gods upon them. Now Madam, no such cause can ever be found in you, whose piety has ever been so observable, that the least shadow of any crime could never be found in all your actions. The most religious of all my actions (answered the Princess) is as bad as a crime, since I do suffer the punishment of them: This is no good conclusion (answered the Druide) no more then if you should say you never did any good act since the gods do not recompence you. But, Madam, you must know, that the eye of man is too weak to see the secrets of the gods, nor can our shallow thoughts reach the sublimity of theirs; and it is a thing most difficult to find out the causes of the good or the bad which they do send unto us: sometimes they are pleased to suffer the good to be overwhelmed with miseries and calamities, whilst the bad do swim in good Fortune and prosperity; but alas, Madam, it is because they think that the prosperity of this world is not recompence good e∣nough for the good, and therefore their reward is referred unto the next world. But Adamas (replied the Nymph) admit all this true, yet in the mean time this Traytour Polemas will triumph over my daughter and my dominions: If the gods have so ordained it (answered Adamas) all humane power is not able to hinder it; but the best way is to suffer patiently without murmure. I know (replied the Nymph) that if Galatheas courage be like unto mine, we shall not want reme∣dies to keep our selves from falling into his hands. The best remedy of all (re∣plied the Druide) is to have recourse unto the gods, who will never deny you
what is necessary: The Gods are so just (replied Amasis) that they have given me power to die when I please. Upon this, she was so swelled with grief, that she left the Druide in the chamber, and shut her self in her closet: Adamas fear∣ing lest the Nymph should fall upon some dangerous resolution, he went in all haste unto Godomar, who had with him Damon, Alcidon, Lipandas, Ligdamon, Lidias, and some other Cavaliers, and telling them in what condition Amasis was, and all the discourse they had together, he beseeched them to go unto her: after∣wards giving them some particular instructions, he accompanied them unto the closet door, and afterwards went into the Town to give necessary orders for the preservation of it. Amasis was already laid down upon her bed, in hopes to find some rest, but found none: for joyning to her sorrows, at the bad estate of her affairs, the loss of Clidemant her son, in whom she had placed her greatest hopes, she was so drowned in sorrows, that she was even ready to sacrifice her self unto the vio∣lence of her despair. She had a thousand designes in her mind, and the most ad∣vantageous was to die: And though she knew well enough that complaints and tears would do no good, yet she still complained and cryed, because she could not chuse: Alas, my dear Clidemant (said she) must thy death be the cause of mine? and must thy loss be succeeded by the loss of my estate? did the safety of all this Province depend upon thy life? and was the good of my people wholly built upon thine? Alas, alas (added she with a deep sigh) what reason had I to think so, since before ever thou camest into the world they flourish'd with so much glory, that there was no fear of any change, but that it was their fate to perish with thee; Ah Clidemant, Clidemant, my dearest Clidemant; and would have continued in her Lamentations, but hearing some knock at the door she stop∣ped, and as soon as she was told that it was Godomar, she covered her tears with her handkerchief. The young Prince, in whose valour was all her hopes, used such excellent ex∣pressions, and the Cavaliers who accompanied him, did make such promises of service and affection, that she received some comfort: so as desiring them to sit down, she told them that the courage of a woman was not strong enough to re∣sist the blows of Fortune; especially when they threatned the loss of reputation with the loss of life: Hitherto I have with some patience resisted the assaults of my misfortunes; but now since the forces which Polemas has received, it has put me out of all hopes to punish his rebellion; and since I see my daughter and my self ready to be sacrificed unto his arrogance, I must confess my reason bids me despair when I see armed against me no fewer then fourty thousand men. All that number (answered Godomar) may be shaked into dust, by one single blow of heavens anger. It is not the number that gets victories; courage and a good cause are the sure foundations of getting combats and battels, which makes me believe, that you, Madam, having so much right on your side, and your ene∣mies so much injustice, and the carriage of those which serve you being incompa∣rably above theirs, it is impossible but all this great puissance which you see, must vanish before your arms, as the light of many little Stars will at the arrival of the Sun. All the rest of the Cavaliers added some such discourses, and gave her such hopes, that her countenance began to reassume fresh colours again: After this, they retired, and went unto the walls to look upon their enemies. Celadon in two dayes was so well recovered of his wounds, that he began to stir out of his chamber; and that day in particular, he went to visit Clindor and his Guests, and return them thanks for their visits; and therefore Adamas went thither also, who finding them in the Garden, did first salute Clindor; afterwards taking Alexis by the hand, who was talking with Astrea, he said unto that fair Shepherdess, will you fair one give me leave to take her out of your company a little, whom you seem to love so well though she deserve it not? The Authority (answered Astrea) which, Sir, you have both upon her and me, may do what you please without asking my consent; but since you are pleased to ask it, I must tell you, reverend Sir. that I will give it upon condition you restore her quickly a∣gain for the truth is I cannot enjoy any contentment in any other company but
hers. The Druide smiling at her innocency, and admiring to see how perfectly she was deceived, I will keep her so little from you (said he unto her) that you shall have no cause to chide me for crossing your contentment: In saying so he carried Alexis into another walk where none could here; and Astrea retiring into an harbour with other Shepherds and Shepherdesses, he began to say thus unto her, are you resolved Celadon to languish thus eternally in this habit which you wear? Do you not consider that you have been now above two moneths with A∣strea, and abusing her credulity under a fiction which cannot long continue. Con∣sider I say, that you are Man, and it is impossible you should continue long in the disguise of a woman; in time will your beard grow▪ in spite of your Petticote, and if you should be discovered, what a soul blur would it be unto my reputation, and what advantage would you give unto my enemies; They would talk of this action as a Scandal, and so stain my repute in the opinion of men, that they would look upon me as an Impostour, who to make Celadon triumph over the chastity of Astrea, made use of this Artifice. Father (answered Celadon) all the actions of your life are unblameable, so as you cannot offend either against heaven or men; and the honour of Astrea is so splendent that it cannot be cloud∣ed by any suspition: so as you need not fear to let me continue still in this condi∣tion wherein I am: you may safely suffer me to stay still with Astrea under the umbrage of Alexis, since I am sure I cannot live under the notion of Ce∣ladon. Adamas then shrugged his shoulders, and recoyled two or three paces; then taking the Shepherd by the hand, he began to walk, but I must tell you (said he) that this desire of yours was reasonable the first time that you assumed this habit; but now, when by a thousand expressions in the advantage of Celadon, you may conclude she loves you, methinks you should not be so much an enemy unto your self, as to lose the contentment of appearing Celadon. My design was to have you marry Astrea, and not this habit, and since you stay only for a command from her to restore her that, whose loss hath cost her so many tears; you may plainly see that she has a desire of that restitution, and that desire may serve you for a command. Ah Father (answered Celadon) she did banish me in expresse termes; had she said go Shepherd, and let me not see thee again until I make it appear that I do de∣sire it, I confesse, that now I see her desire, I were infinitly to blame if I did not appear; but since her fatal words were, Go, go, perfideous man, and come not in my presence untill I command thee, I should disobey her if I should appear Celadon, having not yet received that blessed command from her. But yet (said the Druide) this way of living with her must one day have an end; and since it is inevitable, why should you defer it so long? That does depend upon her, re∣plied Celadon, and not me; and until she be pleased to give the command, I am not to blame if I hide my self from her: for all the miseries and discontent that I can fall into by concealment of my self, are less then the crime of disobeying her. But (said Adamas) whom would you have her give this command unto, since she believes him unto whom it is to be given, not in the world? This (an∣swered the Shepherd) is a secret which the Gods have reserved unto themselves: but I who am resolved to die a thousand deaths rather then fail in the least circum∣stance of a perfect lover, I will wait with patience, and not dive too deep into the Mystery. Son (said the Druide) do no wonder I should still persist in my desires of your enjoying Astrea, since my contentment is inseparably linked with yours, and since the Gods have promised a contented old age unto me, in case you receive that happiness. Now you know the state of our affairs, and since you have a clear judgement to ponder all these things, I would gladly have you consider that I can never meet with that felicity which the Gods have promised unto me, nor give you unto your Shepherdess at any other time but this: if things were in a better condition, and the Treason of Polemas had not brought this Province to the very brink of ruine, I should stay with as much patience as you; but since all is in a desperate condition, and ready to be irrecoverably lost, I earnestly beseech
you my son, even for Astreas sake, who hath the greatest power over your spi∣rit, not to oppose any longer the desire that I have of seeing you two united to∣gether. Celadon hearkned unto the Druide very attentively; but when he heard him mention the pitiful condition unto which the affairs of Amasis was reduced. Make what haste and diligence you can (replied he) to render me this happiness, it cannot be compleated so soon as the miseries which threaten this City; so as, Fa∣ther, it is better never to begin to be happy, then not to enjoy it after the ob∣taining. My own particular interest is not so separated from the Publick, but that it is my duty as well as other mens to endeavour the delivery of Amasis from her oppressions, and I believe so you will permit it, I shall not altogether be un∣profitable, and few there are that will endeavour more boldly then my self, the glory of dying honourably: And therefore, Father, I do most earnestly and heartily beseech you, and conjure you by all those cares which formerly you have had to hinder me from dying, to find out some invention or other, by which I may fight as Celadon, and yet Astrea not perceive it. Adamas did in his soul commend the courage of this Shepherd, and was ex∣treamly glad to find in him such marks of the generosity of his Ancestours; yet finding much difficulty in the design, and yet desiring to trye his courage, he told him that the thing was impossible, and bad him never think more upon it: at which Celadon was so troubled, that not being able to hide his discontent at this answer, he changed colour; therefore to satisfie him, Adamas said unto him, your desire Celadon is not so unjust but I would willingly grant it, if I did but know how to mannage the matter: for to tell you truly, I am afraid that the love which Astrea bears unto you will open her eyes, and make her observe our acti∣ons more narrowly then yet she hath: upon this he paused a little, and afterwards continued. I begin (said he) to think of a way which may happily take effect; you must know, Celadon, that as men commonly have recourse unto the god, more zea∣lously in adversity then in prosperity: so in most desperate affairs they use to im∣ploy the prayers of such as they think have most prevalency with the gods. Now doubtless, such as live out of the affairs of the world have more free accesse unto the gods, then such whose minds are wholly upon the earth, and who hardly ever look up to heaven, unlesse to see what weather it will be: I do therefore con∣ceive it expedient to pretend that Amasis hath commanded me that you shall im∣ploy your self in offering up some prayers according to the custome of Druides daughters; and because during that time their eyes are not to be profaned by any terrestrial object, well will pretend that you have cloystered up your self in my house; and afterwards covering your face and the rest of your body with such Armour as Godomar, Damon, and other Cavaliers were, you may do as your cou∣rage inspires you, yet still without hazarding your self too rashly. Celadon, more glad of this expedient then he was able to expresse, did kisse the hand of Adamas: and after he had thanked him for the care he had of him, the Druide carried him back to Astrea: after this he returned to the Nymph, but not before all the Shepherds did swear unto him a thousand times, that they would spend every drop of blood they had in the service of that Nymph. Clindor and the rest waited upon him out of the Garden: Astrea only stayed with Alexis; for her extream desire to know what discourse Adamas had with him, made her defer it no longer, but to ask what it was: seeing her self there∣fore without any other witnesses, but the flowers and the fountains wherewith the Garden was adorned, dearest Mistresse (said she unto her) give me leave to be so inquisitive as to ask, what discourse was it which Adamas and you had to∣gether? With all my heart, servant (answered Alexis) for your desire to know my business, makes me believe that you think your self interested in it, and it is a great argument of the affection which you bear unto me, to shew your self sen∣sible of what concerns me: I should (replied Astrea) be the most ingrateful person in the world if I were not, since your merit obtains as much, even from the most barbarous dispositions; but, dearest Mistresse, I beseech you hold me
no longer in suspence, but tell me what was the subject of your discourse? I shall tell you in few words, replied the supposed Druide, all our discourse was of no∣thing else but the calamities of the State, and of those troubles which afflict the mind of Amasis: after this he thought upon the best remedies to prevent them, and found none more expedient then those which come from the gods, and told me that it was very necessary I should make some prayers unto them for that pur∣pose, and beseech them to deliver us from those calamities which threaten us: I make no question (said Astrea) but you promised that you would: I did indeed (answered Alexis) but servant you know that there is a great deal of businesse to the accomplishment of this promise: What can there be extraordinary, said the Shepherdesse? for you can very easily send up your thoughts unto heaven as you are accustomed, and because they should not go unaccompanied, I will joyn my prayers with yours, and present them with you. I am afraid (answered Alexis) that you are ignorant in our manner of praying, and think this action as easie, as to obtain of me a kisse, or some other trivial favour; but Servant, know that the gods will not be served by any in a slight manner. We must make great pre∣paration for it, and beget in our selves a fitting disposition to receive their fa∣vours, otherwise in lieu of hearing our prayers, or descending into our hearts, they will be far absent from us, and leave us in the dark in lieu of clearing our understandings. What must we do (said Astrea) to get this disposition in us which you say is so necessary? Should I tell you every particular (answered A∣lexis) our discourse would be too long; but in short it is absolutely necessary to separate my self, for eight or ten dayes, from all manner of company, nay al∣most even from my very self, and that I do not suffer my eyes to look upon any object that is prophane. How? (said the Shepherdess and was a little surprized) how then can Astrea subsist when she is so long from Alexis? I cannot tell (said the supposed Druide) but I am sure that Alexis cannot live without the presence of Astrea. The Shepherdess, who did not comprehend what Celadon meant, alas (said she) Alexis indeed will not be upon the earth, for her thoughts will be all in hea∣ven in sweet raptures, whilst I being absent from her, and far from all consolati∣on, shall droop and die a hundred times in a day with grief and inquietude: But Mistresse (said she and reprehended her self) is it not possible, I that may be left out and not comprehended in the number of those objects, which you call prophane? and being but a woman, shall not disturb your solitude. Upon this Astrea began to shed some tears, which the Shepherd stopped with his lips, lest they should drop into her brest; but after he had spent a little time in this plea∣sing office, I swear Servant (said he unto her) the time of this absence cannot be so sad unto you as to me; and yet when I consider, that I do not separate my self from you, but only to render unto the Nymph a service of considerable im∣portance, it is a kind of comfort unto me, and moves me to conjure you by all the testimonies of love that formerly Celadon hath given unto you, that you do not any more oppose my desire of imploying my self for the safety of that Prin∣cess, and preservation of all Forrest. But if (said Astrea) Polemas should be∣come Master of the Town whilst I am out of your sight, and will expose us unto the barbarisme of his Souldiers, will you not give me leave, Mistresse, to die ra∣ther then suffer such villains to triumph over me? Celadon was nettled at these last words, and fearing that such a misfortune might happen, Servant (said he) I do not only consent unto it, but command it, as a Victime which you oghut to sacri∣fice for the preservation of your honour, and let nothing in the world hinder you: for assure your self that I would do the same; and as soon as ever they attempt any thing upon you, if I be not there to defend you, I am not in the world: however (said Astrea) in the other world there will be no obstacle that can hinder our contentment; and I assure you, fairest Mistresse, the presence of Celadon will not be one of the least joyes which you will find there. I hope, said the Shepherd, that he will be an eternal witness of your Carresses; in the mean time, Servant, receive this adieu which I bid unto you, and promise to love me for ever with the same passion which you have hitherto expressed. I do most
faithfully promise it (said Astrea and kissed him) and if ever I fail in the per∣formance of that duty, may heaven punish me: upon this they came near unto Clindor, Silvander, Diana, and others, who were newly entred into the Garden; and all of them went together into the next arbour, where the good old man caused abundance of excellent fruit to be brought, whereof every one did eat according to their appetites. Whilst these Shepherds and Shepherdesses spent their time thus in the house of Clindor, and had no other perplexities, but such as were common to all the State, Rosanira and Galathea seldome ever lest each other, and had united themselves in such terms of amity, as it was very hard to meet with two whose affections were more inviolable. That day they went to passe away the afternoon in Rosaniras chamber, because Amasis desired to be left alone, and because the sorrows of that Nymph did extreamly trouble those two Princesses, as soon as they came in∣to the chamber they sate down upon a bed; and Rosanira embracing Galathea, I would to God (said she unto her with tears in her eyes) that it were in my power to restore that contentment unto you which you have lost: if it were, I swear, fair Nymph, I would not spare my life it self to procure it. Madam, answered Ga∣lathea, that is a great deal too much: it is enough that you are so good as to ho∣nour me with your good wishes of it; I speak it, said Rosanira, from my very heart, and I beseech you believe it, that I cannot render you any service so great, but whatsoever it be, it will be less then your merits. After Galathea had given many thanks for her good will, if heaven and Polemas (said she) did not hate me worse then you do, Amasis would never have been reduced unto these extre∣mities which afflict her and make me despair, because I look upon my self as the only cause of all these disorders: if heaven (answered Rosanira) would hearken unto my prayers, or if Polemas would hearken unto reason or equity, all your miseries should end this hour, but to my grief, both are deaf: Ah, Madam, re∣plied Galathea, it was a fatal minute when first Polemas looked upon me with the eyes of liking: for had he never loved me, or had I at the first given, a check un∣to his vanity in pretending love to me, doubtless I had stopped all these misfor∣tunes in their very beginning, and all our sorrows had died with those hopes which have since nourished his presumption. It was not in your power, replied Rosanira, to keep your self from appearing fair in his eyes, because you are really so in the eyes of all the world; but indeed, you might have kept him at such an humble distance, that the effects of his pre∣sumption should never have dared to appear: And indeed, I cannot comprehend within the compass of my knowledge, what interest he has to pretend unto you; for if he do love you, how dare he be so bold as to displease you? and if he do not love you, what makes him so eager to overcome you? Madam (said the Nymph) believe it, he is the most persidious and dangerous spirit that breathes upon earth: He loves me only for some ends; and if the State were to descend unto any other but me, I believe he would not so much as look upon me: You must know, that his ambition soars higher then the thoughts of any mortal man could ever reach: Besides, he is of such a jealous and envious nature, that the happiness of another puts him into a burning Feaver, What has he not attempt∣ed against Damon? he has several times indeavoured to murder him, and takes those honours which my mother renders unto his merit so impatiently, as I be∣lieve it is one of the main causes of his discontent; he has also had some bicker∣ings with Lindamor, who was a very brave Cavalier; and when he saw himself forced to yield unto the valour of his enemy, there was no treason nor trick which he did not invent to ruine him: At last, seeing all his pernicious subtilties turned to his own shame and confusion; he openly took up arms, and takes the advan∣tage of my brothers death, and of the absence of all our best Cavalry to ruine us, under pretence of a desire to marry me. Thus did Galathea condemn Polemas, whose undertakings were indeed most un∣just; and Rosanira, for a better information of her life, desired her to tell her more concerning those two Rivals, which the Nymph was very willing to do: so as she related all the Treasons of Polemas, the Juglings of Climanthes, the scan∣dalous
reports he had raised against Lindamor: The combate wherein that Cava∣lier overcame him; and indeed all the remarkable accidents, which happened an consequents of that affection. Which Rosanira hearkning unto with admirati∣on, certainly, said she, before he compass his ends, it will cost him much blood and pains. Truly, answered the Nymph, if he should prevail, and I not die with grief, I think I shall become my own executioner. We shall within a few dayes (answered the Princess) see what will be our Fates, and then we may guide our thoughts and our hands accordingly: For my part, if Rosilion fail to relieve you, I shall have no joy in life, but would most willingly die to punish him for his negligence, with those torments which my death would cause unto him: As she said so, she embraced her again; and Galathea, still kissing the cheek of Rosani∣ra, why should I, said she, be the cause of so much misfortune unto you? It is not you, replied the young Princess, that would be the cause of it, but his negli∣gence, or, perhaps, his infidelity: with such discourse as this, they entertained each other upon a subject of sorrow which was common unto them both. Silvander in the mean time kept close by Diana, and by good fortune he found a fit opportunity of talking unto her, not out of the presence of other Shep∣herds and Shepherdesses, but so as they could not hear him; and because he would not sit idle whilst othert were labouring for the defence of Marcelles, he beseech∣ed Diana to let him get some honour as others did in dangers: Not Mistress (said he) that I stand in any need of your permission to whet my courage, but because I am certain that all I attempt will prosper if it be done by the consent of fairest Diana. The Shepherdess who did infinitly love him, and who could not any longer conceal her passion, was a little surprived at this request, and her fears of losing him made her begin to look pale; but fearing withal that notice should be taken of it, she recollected her self as well as she could, and answered him in these terms: Servant (said she) what need you ask me any leave to do that which your humour is so prompt unto that nothing in the world is able to divert you from it? If you hope that it would give good fortune unto your arms, you may consider it is impossible I should give that which I have not my self, and that being the most miserable woman that lives, I can impart nothing unto you but my mis∣fortunes. It is no matter (replied the Shepherd) what successe my Arms have, I shall think my self abundantly happy, if imploying them in the defence of Amasis, I can but please Diana; and therefore I most humbly beseech you to express your approbation of my designe, to the end that if I die, it may be with this satisfa∣ction that I did not displease you. I wish withal my heart, replied Diana, that you would not follow this course; for your safety is dearer unto me, then perhaps, you imagine: But since it is inevitable, I will not be opposite unto the sentence of our Destinies: The truth is, if that power which you have given me over you, had so much prevalency as not to be denied what I shall request of you, I would have you make a most inviolable promise unto me, not to venture your self too desperately into any perils, and in your greatest dangers to remember, that the least misfortune which can happen unto Silvander, is a very great one unto Diana. Actions (answered the Shepherd) which may be condemned of rashness, are not such as I think worthy of a man of courage; and therefore you may believe, that I will be as wary as becomes my honour, and will not so carelesly expose my life, but that if I do perish, it shall be honourable unto me, and profitable to the Nymph: But Mistress (continued he) since Paris must enjoy you, and since you have not resolution enough to defend your self against him, can I desire to die more gloriously then in these wars, or in a season more advantageous unto me then this? since you seem to pity my misfortune? Shepherd (answered Diana) you have good reason to say that I have not resolution enough to defend my self from marrying Paris, since it is Bellindes will, and since the gods have command∣ed me to be obedient unto her: But for all that believe me, what cause soever you have to seek for death, I am sure it can never happen unto you, but it will be most
sad unto me, and perhaps intollerable: And therefore I tell you once again, that if you do value my contentment and satisfaction, you must preserve your self. As she said so, Silvander would have kissed her hand; but she observing that some eyes were upon him, she withdrew it, and pressed his very hand, which was the greatest favour that ever he received: And because she was afraid, that if she pursued this discourse it would move too much passion, therefore she listned unto what others said, and then she heard Hylas say thus unto Tyrcis. I cannot imagine Tyrcis, what object thou hast for thy courage, nor for whom thou shouldst fight, because since the death of thy dear Cleon, who lives still in thy excellent memory, all things are meerly indifferent unto thee, methinks an∣swered Tyrcis, that your imagination is very shallow, and that thou hast a wrong opinion of me, when thou thinkest, that to fight I stand in need to propose un∣to my self any private interest: as if all actions which have such objects, as to be esteemed valiant, to become rich, or such like, were not false Images of true va∣lour: It is enough for me if I can serve Amasis as I ought, without the thought of any other recompence, but the satisfaction of doing so; for virtue is a suffici∣ent reward unto it self: Lord how wise you are (answered Hylas) but for all that I have reason to suspect thy courage, since Laonice could make thee afraid: If I did fear the subtilties of that woman (answered Tyrcis) it was not for want of any courage, but rather a horrour that I had against her wickedness; and if I be not much mistaken (continued he looking upon Hylas and afterwards upon Silvander) thou oughtest to put a great difference between that kind of fear which is directly opposite unto courage, and those apprehensions which makes us fear a person only out of a knowledge we have of some ill qualities in her. I per∣ceive (answered Hylas) that thy eyes require some help from Silvander, but we will at this time defer our discourse unto another; only consider, I desire thee, that if I had leasure, I would make thee know that this Shepherdess is not so much to blame as you imagine her: Upon this he rose up, because Clindor began alrea∣dy to walk out of the Arbour, and Tyrcis had not time to make any other an∣swer, but that he believed all the eloquence in the world was not able to perswade him, but that she was unworthy, not only of his amity, but of the meanest Shep∣herds upon earth. This was the opinion which Tyrcis had of the love and beauty of Laonice, who being not so far distant as he imagined, did passe away her dayes and nights in her solitude, without any our thoughts, but upon the ingratitude of this Shepherd. Upon that day she was walked up to the top of a rock, which being very high, surveyed all the plain of Forrests; and because she could perceive every thing, e∣ven to the least shrub, she quickly spied the Army from which Polemas expected the establishment of his Fortune. At the first it put her into a fright; but after∣wards thinking it a thing impossible they could do her any hurt in that close soli∣tude, unto which the gods and Tyrcis had confined her, her fears reflected only upon her Shepherd; and though she was well assured that he loved not her; yet she could not chuse but wish his safety, and fear lest some harm should happen un∣to him: These considerations made her wet the very rock with her tears, and af∣terwards to dry up those tears again with the wind of her sighs; and thus she continued until night, which invited her to retire, and left her only as much light as to find out the way unto her cell: into which entring, she fell into her constant exercise, which was to pray unto the gods, and to think upon the ingratitude of Tyrcis. At the arival of this relief from Gondebaut, Polemas caused all his own Forces, and all his Artillery to march out of Surlea: so as his joyes swelled to an unmea∣surable hight, when he imagined that the power which he had now under his com∣mand, was enough to bring Marcelles unto his will in a short time: when he thought upon what he had gotten by the flight of Sigismond, he could not ima∣gine that the Arms of the Son were able to give any check unto the Arms of the Father: He knew nothing of Lindamors return, who yet was not so far distant from him as he supposed; for that Cavalier, having marched with extraordinary haste, was already come to the rendezvous which he had appointed unto Sigis∣mond.
That Prince on the other side, made as much haste as possibly he could, and was so far advanced with his Troops, that he joyned with Lindamor about the middle of the night. They were no sooner met, but one of those Scouts which Lindamor had sent abroad, brought them word that Rosilion was also advanced with ten or twelve thousand men, and that he was already on this side Moutbri∣son, at which they were so joyed, that they resolved to joyn with him, and ac∣cordingly they sent that Scout unto him with twelve of their Cavaliers, to pre∣pare him to receive them; and afterwards, by the favour of the night, they took the field: Rosili who wish'd for no better, and was extreamly desirous to see armed in the deg of Amasis, not only Sigismond and Lindamor, but all the world together, he advanced to meet them as fast as he could, and when they did meet with each other, their Carresses were so great, that the Sun seemed to rejoice at them, and began to gild the mountains with the luster of its beams. Polemas had slept but a very little, by reason of his longing desire to see the Truce ended: so as being awake very early in the morning, day did no sooner dawn, but the received intelligence of this Armies arrival: his wonder was so much the greater, by how much it was beyond his expectation; yet finding it to be upon equal terms, he believed the loss or the winning of a battel would decide the difference. He commanded therefore all the Officers of his Army to be in readinesse, and did not draw any line about Marcelles, nor erected any of his Engines, lest the separation of his forces should weaken him too much for a field fight. On the other side, Lindamor, who knew to a very man the strength of Pole∣mas, did conceive it a very hard task for this Rebel to resist the valour and pru∣dence of Sigismond and Rosilion; and though he made no question of giving him a defeat, yet it grieved him extreamly to think that so many men should be invol∣ved in the interest of one single man, and thought it a thousand pities, that for the crime of this one single man, fifteen or twenty thousand should be punished with death. This consideration made him think upon a remedy against such a mis∣fortune; and finding none better then to move Polemas unto a descission of the controversie by single combate, he resolved to use all possible incitations that might spur him up unto it. Yet being unwilling to attempt any thing without the consent of Sigismond and Rosilion, he did communicate his intention unto them in this manner. Sirs, (said he unto them) I make no doubt but you do know as well as my self, that all these violencies of Polemas against Amasis, do aim at no other end but the usurpation of her Estate. Now since the crime of this Rebel is committed immediately against a Princesse, unto whom I am both by birth and inclination a Subject, none can more justly then my self revenge the wrongs which she hath received from the arrogance of this perfideous man; not, but that I know you have power to ruine the Rebel when you please, and his rashnesse must needs sub∣mit unto your valour. But I beseech you consider who are the enemies that you are to fight withal, and finding them to be almost all Subjects unto either Gonde∣baut or Amasis, does it not grieve you to ruine them? I do therefore most hum∣bly beseech you, not to suffer so many people to perish for the fault of him that hath seduced them, but to consent, that in the sight of your Army and his, I may punish his pride by a single Combate, so shall the guilty be punished according to his merit, and the blood of my Princesses Subjects saved. After this Lindamor was silent; and Sigismond, without any long study what to answer: let me pe∣rish (said he) if I had not the same thought before, and if I was not ready to make the same proposition unto you. I do not know what Polemas is; I never saw his face, nor know of what temper he is; but I have so great an inclination to hate him, that difference of qualities shall not hinder me from measuring my sword with his, if I knew by any means how to oblige him unto it. His courage, replied Lindamor, is not so mean, but he deserves to be held in some considerati∣on; yet it is accompanied with so many wicked qualities, that it must be acknow∣ledged his bad ones do extreamly surpasse his good ones: He is extreamly vain∣glorious
and ambitious; the most jealous man alive, and of such a pernicious na∣ture, that he cannot endure any other should be owner of those virtues which he is not: there needs no description of his humours (replied Sigismond) It is e∣nough that I know what he attempts against Amasis and Galathea, to make me think him a most wicked man: let me only tell you, that if I could bring to pass what I have already propounded, I should receive a most extraordinary satisfacti∣on. I do conceive (said Rosilion) that we cannot in justice deny Lindamor the re∣quest which he hath made unto us. It is very true that you and I being both come to testifie unto the Nymph our willingnesse to serve her. I ceive Lindamor ought to imploy us both, which he cannot do this way, unlesse he admit us both to the same service. Sir, said Lindamor, what you have already done for the re∣lief of Amasis is not so small, but by what arm soever she obtains her deliverance, she will acknowledge her self infinitely obliged unto you. Brave Lindamor (said Sigismond and interrupted him) you cannot be against this, I see what it is the cou∣rage of Sosilion aims at, and if you will needs fight with Polemas, it must be upon such conditions as this Prince hath proposed. That (said Lindamor) cannot well be, for there is none in that Army worthy of this honour, nor who dare accept of it. To remedy which, said Rosilion, you may send a challenge unto him to fight three to three, and happily he will accept of it without asking who the two are who take your part: Lindamor thought that it became him to submit to their wills, and therefore without any further opposition, he sent Philiander, with a Herald, to carry this Challenge unto Polemas. LINDAMORS Challenge unto POLEMAS. DId I not perfectly know that Polemas is a man of courage, I should fear he would not accept of that Combate which I offer unto him, and of which he himself shall make the conditions: but having upon former occasions seen some experience of him, I am confident he will be glad to end that now, which then we did but begin: I would have for witnesses of our actions, both our Armies: And I would have for companions of my Lot, two Cavaliers to fight on my side, if you can find two that will so venture their lives for you. Let me speedily know your determination, and since your ruine is inevitable consider that you cannot die more gloriously then by the hand of Lindamor. As soon as Palemas had read this defiance: Truly, said he, if his valour be equal to his presumption, I shall find no feeble enemy to encounter withal; but I believe he has not so much advantage of me as his hopes do flatter him he has: Upon this, promising Philiander that he should receive answer within an hour, he went to consult with Listander and Argonides upon the matter. Afterwards, being resolved upon it, he returned to Philiander and gave him this answer: I do accept of the combate which Lindamor offers me, upon such conditions as are ex∣pressed in this paper which you shall give unto him: And that he may know by the haste which I shall make, how much I desire to see the end of all his hopes, with the end of his life, tell him; that within this two hours Argonides, Listan∣der, and my self, will be on horseback: upon this Philiander threw down a Gant∣let which Polemas took up, and returning unto Lindamor, he gave him an accompt of his successe, and presented unto him the paper of Polemas: which Lindamor opening, he shewed it unto the two Princes, who found in it these words.
The Answer of POLEMAS unto the Challenge of LINDAMOR. YOu are come very opportunely to preserve unto my reputation, that Luster which in some sort it would have lost, in vanquish∣ing only women, my glory wanted nothing but your return, and since heaven has harkened unto my desires; I am glad that I need do no more but overcome you before I enjoy those favours which are more due unto my merit then unto your vanity. You shall see me therefore this day in the condition of a man, who is triumph both over his Rival and his Mistress: and since I can engage thirty thousand men to fight for me, you need not doubt but I shall find two that will think themselves highly honour∣ed in following my fortune; and therefore since you have left the conditi∣ons of our Combate unto my choise: These following are they which I pro∣pound, unless you find any thing repugnant to your mind. The death of Lindamor or Polemas shall be the sole discission of the Combate. It shall be lawful for the first vanquisher to help his two Friends. The Armies shall follow that side which proves victorious. And it shall not be permitted the Conquerours to exercise upon the bodies of their conquered enemies, any act that may render their memories less glorious. These were the conditions upon which Polemas accepted of Lindamors Chal∣lenge, in which Sigismond found nothing but what was just: Rosilion only pro∣tested, that this article which obliged the Armies to follow the Conquerours, ought to be understood only of that Army which Lindamor brought from Chil∣derick: for, said he, I am most certain that there is not one of my men who will not die to revenge me, or to get Rosanira out of the power of Polemas. Sir, said Lindamor, the gods do fight for us, since justice is on our side: Let us give this Traytour that contentment which he askes, and consider that it will be the last he must ever make. Rosilion who would not be any obstacle unto this design, did consent unto it, and proposed it as a good expedient to advertise Amais of all passages; but Lindamor and Sigismond were of a contrary opinion, and said, that if the Combate did end well, the joyes of the Nymph would be the greater, because she would be the more pleasingly surprised: and if it fell unto the glory of their enemies, it was still best for the Nymph to be kept from despair, and not be at once from a hope of happiness into a most certain misery. Upon this reso∣lution Lindamor sent word unto Polemas: upon the same conditions which he had proposed; also caused the Articles to be published; Polemas on his side did the same, and afterwards went to make choise of the best arms and horses he could find. Things standing upon these terms, Amasis who knew of no passages without the Town, was so much overcome with grief, as she could hardly tell what she did: she took but very small rest all the night; but when day appeared, so as the Army of Sigismond, Rosilion, and Lindamor, might be seen (which this afflicted Princesse took to be a fresh supply coming unto Polemas) she was ready to send her self into another world; She wished for death a hundred times; and was an∣gry with the Sun, because it would not let her hide her self in eternal darkness. Ah me (said she) how dismal is this day unto me, wherein being deprived of my Estate and Galathea, I have left me nothing in the world that I care for: O how
sad a thing it is, that the words of men should be nothing but so many lies, and how false are all such hopes as are built upon such failing foundations: Upon this she was silent a while, to wipe away those tears which had bedewed her cheeks, then she began again to expostulate the sadnesse of her condition: O heaven (said she) how canst thou suffer so much injustice; why dost thou not punish Linda∣mor for his negligence, and Rosilion for keeping the promises of Argira? Surely thou art a favourer of sins, since thou dost suffer the perfidie of Polemas to pass unpunished. With such disparing expressions as these, this Nymph did lament her condition, when Godomar, Damon, Alcidon, Adamas, and some other Cava∣liers, who were no lesse troubled at the coming of this new Army, did come un∣to her, after they had visited the ports and the walls. She was then upon the top of one of the Towers in the Castle, from whence she might look upon those Forces which she thought to be enemies, and seeing all the plain which was wont to be so fertile in grasse, now filled with armed men, and so many Pikes as resem∣bled a thick wood: O ye pittiful gods (said she) what a deplorable change is here since yesterday, and how silly are all such as seek for any stability in the pos∣session of humane things? In saying so, she fixed her eyes so attentively upon the two Armies, which were not distant from each other above five or six hun∣dred paces, that she did not see Godomar when he came unto her; but he surpriz∣ed her so sunk in sorrows, that she was even ready to die: She thought the Town already exposed to the fury of the ravenous Souldier; and fear had so seized up∣on her soul (an evident testimony of the weakness in her sex) as she thought the rattling of the Princes armour to be Polemas who was come to seiz upon her: so as she gave a loud scriek, and such a cold chilnesse seized upon her, that her leggs failed, and she fell as dead into the arms of Godomar. Adamas astonished at this accident, did run as fast as he could for such remedies as might recover; and there∣fore Rosanira, Galathea, and Dorinde, who that night lay all in one chamber, were quickly advertised of it; so as they run to help the Nymph; but when they came unto her she was returned out of her swound. Galathea was the first upon whom Amasis cast her eye; and because that young Princesse was all in teares: Ah daughter (said she unto her) our tears are now unseasonable, and are only testimonies of our pusilanimity: For in such despair as ours, we had better die then cry. Madam (answered Godomar) what reason soever she has to desire li∣ving no longer, a precipitated death is odious unto the gods, and rather argues pusillanimity then magnanimity: such as for fear of any future pain do rashly shorten their dayes, are such as want courage, and who falling from one extre∣mity into another, do fall from temerosity into despair: It is much better pa∣tiently to obey whatsoever the heavens ordain, and she will receive more content∣ment by it: The contentment which she can expect, replied Amasis, is so inconsi∣derable, that if she have no other then it to desire living, it is better to prepare our selves betimes to die; but if we have so much courage as to try how far our misfortunes can go, we still live on: Therefore, Galathea, let us not die until Po∣lemas perish with us. Upon this she was silent, and her countenance shewing more confidence then before, she seemed at that time to assume some strange re∣solution. Galathea, whose sorrows for Amasis pierced her very soul, did answer in no language but that of tears, who seeing her self seconded by Rosanira and Dorinde, he, sad soul, swelled the more with sorrows, and seemed to be proud of such good companions in grief. Damon, on the other side, who was all pity, did strive as much as he could to turn his eyes from off these fair ones; and by good fortune, looking towards the plain, where the two Armies appeared in very good order; he saw three Cava∣liers come out from one of them, without any other company but three Trum∣pets, and three Pages, who carried their Lances: their comly manage of their horses did extreamly delight him, for all his hatred unto those of Polemas his par∣ty: so as calling to Godomar, and shewing him the countenances of these three Cavaliers, Alcidon came also to see them, aferwards Adamas, and after him A∣masis and the Ladies who were with her; all who, not knowing what the designe of these Cavaliers was, they resolved not to stir from thence until they saw the conclusion of this passage.
Celadon in the mean time had desired Adamas to execute the intention which he resolved upon the day before; but the Druide having deferred it until the next morning, by reason of some affair he had concerning the arival of these new forces, he was constrained to return to Astrea: and that fair Shepherdesse per∣ceiving by Celadons discourse, that she was to enjoy the company of her dear A∣lexis longer, she was so extreamly joyed at it, that she was not sensible of those afflictions which tormented the minds of all the world. Clindor, Diana, Silvan∣der, Phillis, Licidas, Hylas, Stella, Alexis, and Astrea, were all come together un∣to the walls of the Town, to look upon the new Troops that were arived; and they had not been there above a quarter of an before they spied those three Ca∣valiers which Damon saw: and conceiving by the Trumpets and Pages, that they came not thither without some design, they stayed to see the successe, and it hap∣ned thus. Sigismond, Rosilion, and Lindamor, who were the three Cavaliers before men∣tioned, no sooner appeared, but Polemas, Argonides, and Listander, appeared also; so bravely armed, and every way accomplished, as was impossible of better: they also had their Trumpets and Pages, so as after they had faced each other a while, the Trumpets began to sound; and the Pages giving them their Lances, upon the first sign which was given, they set forward so furiously, and encountred with such force, that the rocks ecchoed back the noise of their blows. Amasis did wonder at the novelty of this spectacle; and asking Godomar the cause of this Combate: Madam, answered he, we cannot know it but from themselves; but it is credible that some difference is amongst them concerning the command in the Army, and ambition and jealousie are the causes of their coming hither, and they are resolved to decide their differences by Arms, which they cannot any other∣wayes compose: the Nymph found some probability in this, and observed that their first course was not ended upon equal advantage: Rosilion broke his Lance upon Listander, and hitting him upon the right shoulder, did break a piece of his Curasse without doing him any other harm: Listander also broke his very well. Sigismond, whose activity and valour was not inferiour unto any, and being to encounter with an enemy, that was accomplished with all the ornaments of a brave Cavalier, did give and receive his blow almost in the same place; for the blow did light upon the mouth of his helmet, and the point of his Lance piercing through did a little hurt the lip of Argonides; and he himself received a hurt un∣der the left eye, but so happily, that the point did but glide by it. Lindamor, un∣to whom the life of Polemas was abominable, he ran with such fury upon him, that he thrust his enemy out of the saddle to the ground: so as because he scorned to take advantages, he presently alighted, and accosted him as soon as ever he was got up from the ground. In the mean time Rosilion and Listander had taken new Lances, and at the se∣cond course the Prince disarmed the arm of his Antagonist, and made such a wound in it, that the Cavalier not being able to weild either Lance or sword, but losing a great abundance of blood and his speech, he fell dead some thirty or fourty paces distant. Sigismond broke three Lances against Argonides, and find∣ing that he had got but a very little advantage of him, he advanced unto him, and said, our Lances Cavalier, have done their office, let us therefore see whether our swords can determine our Combate. Argonides, who found himself a little wounded, and who knew very well what an unjust quarrel he had espoused, he wished that he had never undertaken the Combate: yet seeing that without the loss of his honour, which he valued above a hundred lives, he could not refuse the of∣fer of his enemy: Brave Cavalier (answered he) I am ready to do as thou de∣sirest; and if my courage do not deceive me, thy sword can do me no more harm then thy Lance: In saying so, they both drew their swords, and be∣gan to lay on such load, that fire sparkled out of their arms, like unto a hot piece of Iron which the Smith is striking upon his Anvil. Polemas in the interim was disputing for his life with Lindamor, whose agility at every blow made a fresh wound: At last, the Rebel finding himself wounded in several places, he resolved to seek for that in his despair which he could not find
in his valour, and to imploy his whole strength at once; so as closing with Lin∣damor, he endeavoured to throw him to the ground; Lindamor, who was not at all weary with fighting, did easily perceive his design, so as preparing both his sword and his foot for it, he ran the one up to the hilt into his thigh, and tript up his heels with the other so nimbly, that he laid him all along in the dust. Po∣lemas yet made some resistance, but Lindamor finding out the defective part of his Curasse, did run his sword so far into his body, that his soul came out be∣fore it. Rosilion, who did not think his enemy would die upon that wound which he had received, he no sooner saw him fall from his horse but he alighted, and when he came unto him, seeing him give up his last breath, he presently mounted a∣gain: This chanced to be at the very same time when Lindamor had dispatched Polemas▪ so as now there remained none but Argonides: who remembring the conditions of the Combate, and seeing Rosilion and Lindamor approach, he re∣coyled two or three paces, and said thus unto Sigismond; By that experience, Ca∣valier, which I have of thy valour, I know thou hast no need of any assistance to vanquish me: I see here thy friends are come to help thee; if therefore thou wilt have the glory of vanquishing me alone, let them not do me any harm. Si∣gismond admiring the courage of his enemy, and thinking it pity to ruine him; do not think (answered he) that I will suffer any other arm but my own to get that victory of thee which is infallible; but if the desire which I have to let thee live do concur with any desire in thee not to die in so dishonourable a cause, render up thy sword unto me, and I will promise thee upon mine honour that none shall do thee any injury. Argonides seeing there was no disputing against three, here generous Cavalier (said he and surrendred his sword) the honour to be over∣come by thy courtesie, is as dear unto me, as the glory to overcome half the world. Then Sigismond took his sword, and Rosilion and Lindamor being come near unto them, they heard Sigismond return this answer; how great soever the advantage I had over thee might be, yet I do acknowledge my self more behold∣ing unto the good fortune of my arms, then unto my own valour: yet since thou do freely yield unto me a victory which thou mightest still dispute, here (said he) I do give thee thy arms again, upon a promise thou will never imploy them again against the service of Amasis: Argonides having solemnly sworn that he would not, Lindamor sent unto Ligonias, who was the sole commander of Pole∣mas his Army, to know whether he would observe the conditions of the Com∣bate: unto which Ligonias himself coming to give an answer, and submitting himself unto all that Lindamor commanded; he ordained the head of Polemas to be brought unto him, and his body to be very secretly buried with Listanders; and afterwards they all turned their course together towards the Town. Amasis, who all this while never took her eye off the Combatants, had a hun∣dred several conceits in her mind; and as no misery is so great, but there is still some spark of hope in it; so the Nymph sometimes conceited that happily this disorder might produce something to her benefit; yet she was not long flattered with this imagination: for beginning to consider that they were all her enemies, and that this Combate was only to deside the controversie which of them should have the glory of doing her the most harm, she fell again into her usual appre∣hensions, and lost all those hopes which her first thoughts had infused into her. It was not long before she observed that the Conquerours, in lieu of returning unto their Army. did come straight unto Marcelles, and therefore she adverti∣sed Godomar of it, who, no more then she, could imagine the end of this adven∣ture; and therefore he thought good to send Adamas unto the gate, to hear what propositions they would make. The Druide was no sooner come to the gates, but the Conquerours met him, who crying in a loud voice, Liberty, Liber∣ty, did put the spirit of Adamas into such an amazement, that he knew not whe∣ther it was real or a Dream. The people, who longed for nothing so much as this contentment, they were so sensible of this word, that they run immediatly through all the streets crying, Liberty, Liberty; so as their voices reached unto
the walls of the Castle, and came unto the eares of the Nymph: This made her colour to come and go two or three times, and make her think the voice of the people to be the voice of God; yet she had so many causes of fear that she hardly durst allow any room for hope: At the last Adamas came to assure her that the Gods were pitiful unto her; that Polemas was dead: That he who had o∣vercome him desired permission to kisse her hand, and lay at her feet the Trophies of his victory: At this news Amasis was so surprised with joy, as not being able to answer, she entreated Godomar to supply her defect; and the Prince finding no danger in opening the gates, since they were so small a number, Adamas went out in order thereunto; and Godomar himself, with all the Cavalry in the Town, went to meet them. The novelty of this accident, and the noise which the Trumpets made in the streets, did assemble together all the people of the Town, so as Lindamor found it to be better manned then he imagined: Adamas went before to advertise Ama∣sis of their arival: Godomar accompanied Sigismond, who seeing that his brother knew him not, did laugh under his arms to see him so deceived: Damon was up∣on the left hand of Rosilion, and Alcidon went in the middle between Lindamor and Argonides. In this order they came to the Castle, and Adamas receiving them at the gates, did carry them into a great Chamber where Amasis was already, accompanied with all her Nymphs, and all the Ladies that were in Mar∣celles. As soon as they entred, Amasis arose from her chair, and Lindamor advancing (as it was agreed amongst them) Madam (said he in a loud voice, and kneeling upon the ground) your complaints have at the last reached heaven; and the ju∣stice of your cause hath moved us to leave a countrey where Mars has imployed our courages and our arms, to restore unto your people that Liberty which they desire, and unto you that tranquility which you deserve. Polemas is punished for his perfidie, and his head which I do bring unto you, will witnesse his defeat and my fidelity: Upon this he took it from his Page, and threw it at the feet of Ama∣sis; but the Nymph looking another way, and raising up the Cavalier, Sir, said she, what thanks soever I do give you for this benefit which I receive from your valour, they will still come short of that good will which I have to acknowledge it. And if you will compleat my joyes; take away the head of that Rebel, and let me see the face of my deliverer. Lindamor, who could not disobey this com∣mand, did pul off his helmet, and stooping down to kisse the skirt of her garment, he was prevented by her, who knowing him, and taking him in her arms, she could say nothing unto him but, ah Lindamor, Lindamor. Whether Galathea was glad of Lindamors return, I leave any to judge that ever was in love; but so it was, that she stood like a statue immoveable, and wavering between love and respect, she was so transported, that she seemed defective in both. At the last, Amasis giving some respite to her Carresses, Lindamor presented Sigis∣mond and Rosilion unto her saying, here, Madam, are the Cavaliers unto whom all the favours you are pleased to confer upon me, are more justly due, and, who do better deserve the title of your deliverers: Their courages have overcome all difficulties, and there is no obstacle which they have not generously surmounted to relieve you: Then the two Princes advancing, and the Nymph received them with a countenance full of joy; but brave Lindamor (said she) since I am so infi∣nitly obliged unto them, why will you not let me have the happinesse of know∣ing them? Madam (answered Lindamor) do not wonder at their silence: They are Cavaliers, and have vowed not to discover themselves until you have obtained from some Ladies that are about you, those favours which they have a desire to ask. The Nymph who was extreamly desirous to see these persons whom alrea∣dy she esteemed so dearly: I do believe (replied she) that if it be a thing which they can lawfully grant, they will consent unto it for my sake: which most of the Ladies protesting they would do, Sigismond took off his headpiece, and saluting Dorinde, Madam, said he unto her, the favour that I ask from you, is only a par∣don for being the cause of so much misery unto you, since your coming from Lions: And I (said Rosilion having uncovered his face) fairest Rosanira, do claim
from you the performance of that promise which you made unto my love, and that obeying the will of Policander, you receive me for your husband. Ama∣sis could not have the patience to permit these Ladies to answer: for hearing Go∣domar name the one Sigismond, and knowing Rosilion, she ran to embrace them with more joy then is possible for any tongue to expresse. Adamas had no sooner done what was due at the arrival of these two Princes, and return of Lindamor, but he went to advertise Clindor of the joyes which A∣masis had received: He found with him all the Shepherds▪ and telling them the name and quality of the Conquerours: Children (said he unto them) I am most heartily glad that all our enemies are dead in the person of Polemas, and that by the blood which Lindamor hath drawn from the veins of this Rebel, the gods have preserved yours. I protest Father (said Hylas and interrupted him) I am as glad of it as you: for I was ever more apprehensive of an arrow from our ene∣mies, though it did but hit my little toe, then I am of a hundred arrows which they say love shoots at our hearts. Yet let me tell you, answered Adamas, the wounds of the soul are much more dangerous then those of the body: Yes, yes, replied the inconstant man) unto melancholly people; but I who can in a mo∣ment find a hundred remedies to cure my self of such wounds, I had rather have twenty wounds in my soul, then a little scratch upon my body: Heaven (said the Druide) has out of its abundant goodnesse freed you from all fears of any harm: and as well a wisher as I am unto the safety of Amasis, I am as glad of your pre∣servation as of hers: Heaven (said Astrea) has shewed unto us the effects of her piety; but is it not as much to be ascribed unto the supplications and prayers of Alexis, since by her pious intention only of praying, she hath obtained our de∣liverance? The gods (answered Alexis) have hasted their helping hands to shew that the just cause of Amasis has more prevalency with them then all my prayers, the power whereof is so little, as it is almost impossible they should e∣ver obtain any thing they ask. Ah Mistresse (said Astrea) pardon me if I say, that then they must be made into marble: for if they be directed unto any that have reason, it is absolutely impossible you should be denied any thing you ask; and for my part, I must tell you without flattery, that there is nothing in the world which you can require from me, but I shall most freely and willingly grant it. Take heed Servant, an∣swered Alexis, that you do not engage your self further by promises then you are willing to perform. No, no, said Astrea, I will not except any thing; and I say it again, nay swear it by all that is sacred, that you have the absolute command of my life and all I have, and there is nothing which I would not most willingly do to please and obey you. We shall see that one day (said Alexis) and in the mean time do not forget what you say, and remember that you have promised it before all this good company, so as you cannot go back without being blamed for too much Levity. After some other discourse, the Druide returned unto the Castle, to put Ama∣sis in mind of the Liberty which she had promised unto Peledontes; and as soon as ever he made mention of him, the Nymph sent to release him out of prison, and so graciously pardoned his crime, that this Cavalier for ever after was faithfull unto her. Adamas also presented unto the Nymph the suffering of subjects ever since the rebellion of Polemas began, and the extremity under which they were still pressed, having at the least sixty thousand Men quartering upon them: of whom the Nymph had so much compassion, that she resolved to take some course for their consolation: she communicated the matter unto Sigismond, Rosilion, and Godomar, who the very same hour took such good order in the businesse, that the next morning most of the troops were dismissed and ready to depart the coun∣trey: Sigismond disposed Ligonias to take upon him the conduct of those forces which he brought from Polemas, and gave him a Letter unto Gondebaut: Rosilion also writ unto the Queen Argira, intimating the successe which they had: After this, the Nymph carried them unto the Temple, to be witnesses of those thanks which she would render unto the gods for their goodnesse in delivering her from the fears of captivity, to the enjoyment of perfect Liberty, in so short a time.
The rest of the day was spent i feasting and joyes: so as in the excesse of this publick jollity, Amasis did quite forget all her past miseries; the death of Clide∣mant only remained in her memory, and therefore she took Lindamor aside to acquaint her withal that he had done since the death of her son: This Cavalier desiring nothing with more passion then to testifie his obedience, did prepare himself to satisfie his curiosity; and whilst the Cavaliers were discoursing with the Ladies and Nymphs in the Chamber, he held this discourse. The Sequel of the History of CHILDERICK, of SILVIANA and of AN∣DRIMARTES. I Do not know, Madam, whether that Cavalier whom I sent unto you after the death of Clidemant, did well acquit himself of that commission which I gave unto him; and whether he made a faithful relation unto you of all those circumstances which happened concerning the disgrace of Childerick: He did relate unto us (answered Amasis) the passion of that young King unto Silviana: his designes of breaking the marriage between Andrimartes and her; The violences he committed in the house of a new married woman in the absence of her husband: The flight of Silviana in the habit of a boy; and lastly, the revolt of the people, and the loss of my son, which was almost seconded by the losse of your self; for he told me that you were extreamly wounded in the same encounter. Then Madam, replied Lindamor, he hath neglected nothing which he was to relate unto you; but because you do not know after what manner Sil∣viana and Andrimartes met, nor what befel them since they came into Gaul Ar∣morique, whereof Semnon hath made them superiours, I shall relate the particu∣lars unto you, having received them from themselves: For Andrimartes, who ho∣noured me with his love, passing by the city of Rhemois to complain unto Queen Methina of the extravagancies of her son, was pleased to visit me as I lay in bed, by reason of my wounds, and related unto me these accidents which you shall hear: after this Lindamor was silent a while, afterwards he began his relation in this manner. The good advice which Guyemant gave Childerick▪ did work so well upon the spirit of this young King, that he was fully resolved in his very soul, and protested a thousand times never to relaps into the same or the like sin again; but the com∣motion of a people being much resemblant unto Torrents, which in their first fu∣ry carry all before them that makes any resistance, Childerick was forced to yield unto that enraged multitude that were risen up against him, and to acknowledge, that to the reparation of a crime repentance is not alwayes sufficient: he fled a∣way therefore in a disguise, as soon as he had divided the piece of gold with Guye∣mant: and because he could not better commit his safety unto any, then those whose fidelity and courage he had tryed, he desired, although I was extreamly wounded, that I would bear him company until he came unto Basin, Duke of Tu∣rin, into whose protection he resolved to fly: I who after the death of Clidemant, did not at all value my life, did consent unto his desire; and though I knew unto what danger I exposed my self, yet I would go with him. And so we departed after he had bid adieu unto Guyemant, who shed tears at this sad separation. Childerick in this departure did shew the generosity of his courage, which was the only good quality he had; for without so much as any changing colour, dear friend (said he unto Guyemant) I do depart in pursuance of that councel which you have given me; and I would have you believe that my departure is a very great argument of that power which you have over me; but for you I had washed a∣way the crime which I committed, with my own blood, and had not lived a mi∣nute after the loss of my Crown: But since you promise me to labour for my reestablishment, I am resolved to live, that you may know I do not despair of that
help which I may receive from your prudence. After this intreating him afresh to imploy his wisdome in order thereunto, and embracing very affectionately, we took horse, being accompanied with some Segusian Cavaliers which then I had with me, and within a few dayes after we came to the city of Rhemois, by which Childerick would passe to acquaint the Queen his mother with his exile. It is the most lamentable spectacle that is imaginable to this sad encounter: for as soon as Childerick entred into the Queens chamber, he did cast himself at her feet; and that Princesse who knew not the cause of his coming, looking upon him with a more joyful aspect then his misfortune required, she advanced to embrace him; but he gently, thrusting her back, Madam (said he unto her) do not prophane your pious hands by touching the sinful corps of him whom the gods do hate, and who hath most shamefully dishonoured you: How? said the Queen, and was extreamly astonished, are not you Childerick my son, the King of the Franks? I am indeed Childerick (answered he) whose crimes have made him unworthy the glory of being called your son, as the Franks have already taken from him the quality of King. Upon this the Queen suspecting the misfortune which had hapned unto him: O Childerick, cryed she out, what is this you say? In saying so, she arose up with a stream of tears in her eyes, and the Prince being retreated back two or three paces, she went unto him, and taking his hand, she carried him into her closet. She then sent presently for me, and as soon as I entred I offered to kisse her feet; but she embracing me, ah Lindamor (said she unto me) how truly did Me∣rovens Prophecy, and how unfortunate am I to see the effects of that which that poor King so much feared? Madam (said I unto her) it is a misfortune which is now come to passe, and which none but the gods can now revoke: It is true, Lindamor (answered she) but if Childerick had been virtuous, it was in his power to prevent it. I who knew what just cause she had to accuse him, but de∣sired to infuse some consolation unto those sorrows which I saw her suffer: Ma∣dam (said I unto her) we are sometimes hurried unto things by such a secret and vehement violence, as it is almost impossible we should resist it, and it seems there is a kind of fatality in it, which is unavoidable. But (said she and interrupted) a man of any sound judgement, and that has any respect unto the gods, will ne∣ver obey the unruly fury of a brutish appetite; and how vehement and violent soever their inclinations be that push him forward, he will still find such arms in his virtue, as will be to surmount them: but (added she and sighed) Childerick had ever such an inclination unto vice, as he alwayes held those for his mortal enemies who endeavoured to divert him. His passion at thee, unto Silviana, replied I, could not absolutely be termed vitious, since notwithstanding the inequallity of their conditions, it had virtue for its object; but indeed, after he was out of any hopes to enjoy her, he ought to have extinguished the desires of it, and not to have endeavoured to dishonour her: Did he offer any violence (said the Queen unto me) unto Silviana? I did not well know what answer to return, when cast∣ing his eyes upon me, Nay, nay, (said he) go on boldly, and satisfie the Queens curiosity: make me as enormous as you can, you cannot describe me so wicked as my own conscience tells me I am. Sir, answered I, and turned towards him, since you are pleased to command me, and since the Queen desires to be informed of all passages, I will not conceal any thing from her: Then I related all unto her, yet adding some arguments that might in some sort extenuate his crime, and ren∣der it pardonable. I had no sooner ended my discourse, but this afflicted Princesse addressing her self unto her son: Now Childerick (said she unto him) you find a recompence for all your actions: now you are without a Crown, without a Scepter, and in a con∣dition to seek the protection of another; now you are deposed from the title of a King, to assume that of a Tyrant, and I without any other consolation amidst so many calamities, but what I receive in admiring the just judgement of the gods in your punishment. O ye most just Deities (said she, lifting up her eyes and hands to heaven) I do call you all as witnesses of my innocency, and do earnest∣ly beseech you to turn away your anger from our family; you only do know the
thoughts of my soul, and punish m if ever I have neglected any care in the good education of my son, either by discourse or example: In saying so she begun to shed such abundance of tears, that I had much ado to restrain mine. Childerick after he had studied a little upon it; Madam (said he unto her) though I had a soul that was altogether insensible of any sorrow for my sins, yet your tears are able to inspire me with repentance: And believe it, my soul is so exceedingly sorry for what I have done, that I would most willingly do any pennance in the world to repair it; but not knowing any satisfaction that equal the grandure of my sin, I do most humbly beg of you, Madam, a pardon for this offence, to the end the gods, after your example, may cease to pursue me, since they have already made me very sensible of the effects of their vengeance. The Queen was so full of sorrow, that she suffered Childerick to continue up∣on his knees, and knew not what to do; but at the last raising him up, Childe∣rick said she unto him) I beseech the gods as freely to forgive you as I do, and may your repentance move them as much as it hath overcome me. But consider how much I suffer for the haynousnesse of your crime; and if my commands have not prevalence enough in them to keep you from relaps, let the considerati∣on of your own Interest be so preualent with you. It is not pertinent to relate unto you, Madam, all the promises which Chil∣derick made unto her, nor the rest of the discourse which the Queen and he had together: It is sufficient you know that she accompanied us with a Letter unto the Duke of Thurin, and suffered us to depart the next morning, which we did; and I assure you, though I had a very excellent Chirurgeon with me, who dres∣sed my wounds every day, yet the length of the way was very troublesome unto me. But within a few dayes, we came to Thurin, where we were kindly receiv∣ed; for Bassin, being both the cousin and allie of Childerick, was very sorry to see him in such affliction, which made us confident of obtaining that reception which we hoped for: As soon as I presented the Queens Letter unto him, he o∣pened it, and having read it, shewed it unto me; afterwards he addressed him∣self unto Childerick, and protested that he would protect him against any that had any designs to hurt him: perhaps then (said Amasis and interrupted him) you have the Letter which the Queen did write unto him, for it was left in your hands: I believe I have, Madam, answered Lindamor, and if you have a desire to see it, I am confident I can find it: The Queen expressing much desire to have a sight of it, he put his band into his pocket, and amongst many other papers he found it; which opening he read these words. The Letter of Queen METHINA unto BASSIN Duke of Thurin. CHilderick does come to cast himself into your arms, in hopes to find a fafe sanctuary against all the misfortunes that persecute him: but if there be as great an inequalitie in your inclinati∣ons as there is disproportion between his vice and your virtue, I expect but a very bad successe of his voyage: Yet if the kindnesse which you have ever expressed unto the mother, can be any way communicated to the son, I shall not altogether despair of his safety, but will at the least be∣lieve that you will favour him so far as to let him live. His sins have of∣fended heaven, and I fear that in revenge it will not let him find a safe retreat upon earth: But be the anger of the gods never so much exasper∣ated against us, yet I know that they are not always inexorable, nor so deaf, but his repentance and my tears may open their eares, if you once be∣gin to be sensible of those tears which I mingle with the ink that writes these lines. Take therefore some pity, I beseech you, upon the affliction of
Methina, and upon the miseries of Childerick, and since both the one and the other have the honour of some alliance unto you, let their interest be in some sort yours, and let that little hope which I have remaining, be kept alive under your protection. This, Madam (said Londamor) was the Queens Letter unto him, which had such influence upon his soul, that he protested, as I told you before, to serve and protect him against all whomsoever. For my part, I made as little stay at Thu∣rin as I could, because Guyemant so advised me; but though my desires of re∣turning soon unto you were never so great, yet I could not: for being engaged to return unto the City of Rhemois, to acquaint the Queen with the good rece∣ption of Childerick, my travel did cause two of my wounds to open, and a Feaver seizing upon me, I was forced to yield unto the violence of my dis∣ease, I was brought into such a condition, that I almost despaired of my reco∣very. In the mean time, Silviana was gone from Paris in the habit of one of An∣drenecks children, and had with her only the wife of that good man, and one that was servant unto Andrimartes: It hapned, that being gone from under the hedge where they lay all the night, and being in the high way towards Gandelu, she had not gone above half a mile, but she heard a great noise of men and horses coming towards her: Her fears, by reason of the danger which she shun∣ned the day before, did make her presently look about: and because she saw they gallopped very fast, and heard them cry, stay, stay: O God (said she unto the wife of Andreneck) yonders the Tyrant still pursuing me; but (said she) if you escape with your life, I command you to tell my Andrimartes, that I will die be∣fore they shall do any injury unto my honour or his: in saying so she drew her sword, and looking for no safety by flying, she stood still, and expected the suc∣cesse of her Fortune. Mean time, those that pursued her came so near as to observe her posture, and ta∣king her for a Cavalier, they wondered what should move him to stand so in a po∣sture of defence: thinking it fit to ask the reason of it, they made a stand some fourty or fifty paces distant, and sent one of their company to ask why he stood so with his sword drawn. Silviana, still seeming a Cavalier, she answered boldly, that about two dayes since, a Traytour had made some attempts against his honour, and thinking that he was now come to execute his murderous design, was the cause of his standing in the posture of a man that would sell his life at a dear rate: Then the man assured him, that those whom he suspected, would alwayes be more ready to serve, then to hurt him, and the reason why they rid after him, was, because they took him for one of their friends, who went from their house not above an hour since, and hearing that a Hart was to be coursed, they called him to be a partaker of their sport. Silviana, very glad of her mis∣take did put her sword, and began to prepare her self for the continuance of her voyage; but the man desiring to know her name: My name (answered she) is Cephindres, who shall think himself very happy in any occasion to serve you. Upon this, she rid away, and going towards Gandelu, she observed that those who had followed her, did go into a thick wood which was upon the right hand. In the mean time, Andrenecks wife seeing her self out of that danger which so af∣frighted her, she began to be a little angry, but so handsomly, that the brave Ce∣phindres could not forbear laughing: Madam (said the good woman unto her) if you be so forward to draw your sword, and defie all you meet, I beseech you make it your profession to be a Knight errant, and maintain my beauty against all the world; but to tell you truly, I think your courage was not very seasonable: Good mother (answered Silviana) what I did was not so much out of season as you imagine; for consider what abundance of reason I have to fear: Childerick, seeks my ruine, and perhaps at this very hour is lying in ambush for me, or else sending after me. Childerick (replied the good old woman) hath now other matters in his head; and let him use what endeavours to get you he can, I believe
it is out of his power; this habit does so disguise you, that you can never be known, and therefore, I say, you were too much startled at the arrival of these Ca∣valiers, and should have trusted more to your disguise then your valour. Alas, replied Silviana, you do not know what an exasperated spirit may do; and I am in such a great distrust, that I think fidelity it self may deceive me: there is no∣thing so cruel, but I have reason to expect it from the malice of Childerick, I be∣lieve that Tyrant will put Andreneck to such torments, as will force him to con∣fesse the truth, and know from him, what the boy which was our guide did com∣municate unto him of our designe. For heavens sake, Madam (said the woman) do not entertain any such thoughts, but believe that he will sooner perish then do any thing which shall be prejudicial unto you or Andrimartes: Good woman (said Silviana) when we feel no pain, we are perswaded the most cruel torments are not able to force any secret from us, but in the extremity of pain, it is a most hard matter to continue constant; and therefore imagining that Childerick will put him to the rack, I am afraid he will confesse that which I would not have him discover unto any. With such or such like discourse as this, they beguiled the length of the way, and Silviana, who longed with abundance of impatiency, for a sight of her dear Andrimartes, she imagined every man that appeared to be him: yet for all her eager desire of it, she found her self mistaken, and all that journey could not hear any news of him. The wife of Andreneck did comfort her as well as she could, and still the young man that guided them, affirmed that Andrimartes could not come any other way but this which they went: after this sort she came to Gandelu, where indeed she lay, but did not rest; for her eager desire of depart∣ing, did invite to rise before Aurora; and as soon as she was on horseback she took the way of Coucye. I, should tyer you, Madam, if I should relate unto you all the thoughts which afflicted her during her voyage: for she was in a perpetual restlesnesse; and from the time she first fancied that Andrimartes had taken some other way, she was almost quite desperate; but all these fears were nothing in comparison of that which she apprehended, that Childerick had procured some to be his assassinates: when this came into her fancy she changed colour, afterwards would sigh, and lastly, her eyes gush out with tears: ah mother (would she say unto the wife of Andreneck) I am afraid all our labour in this journey is but lost. The good wo∣man who wondered at this change, why (said she) have you that opinion? be∣cause I fear (answered Silviana) that yonder Barbarian hath murdered Andri∣martes. Good God, said the woman, why say you so? the very suspition of such a thing makes me to tremble: for God sake do not imagine any such thing can be, for such misfortunes seldome happen, but I use to have some presages of it beforehand: The likelyhood of it, replied Silviana, makes me fear it; for reckon from the time of his departure, and judge whether he should not be re∣turned before this. Andrenecks wife began to think with her self, and to count the dayes upon her fingers; truly, said she, according to my weak judgement, let him make what hast he could, he could not be returned thus far before this time: the boy who guided them, casting up his account also; assure your self, Ma∣dam (said he upon a sudden) the woman is in the right; for her account and mine do perfectly agree. Upon this they came to the top of a little hill, which surveying all the plain be∣yond it, permitted Silviana to spie some horsemen afar off, who came in great hast towards them; at the first▪ she could not distinguish neither the persons nor the number; but shewing them unto Andrenecks wife, Mother (said she) do you not perceive some men coming towards us? I have a conceit that it is Andrimar∣tes: The good old woman whose sight was somthing dim, I do not see any such, answered she; but if it prove Andrimartes, as I pray heaven it may, what then will you do? I shall even die, answered Silviana, with excesse of joy: No, no, replied she, you had better fight with him, or at the least defie him, as you did yesterday the Cavaliers. Alas, answered she, it is long since he overcame me; in saying so, she fixed her eyes still upon the men which she saw, and as soon as ever
she perceived one with a plume of white feathers in his hat, she clapped her hands together: O mother▪ said she, yonder is Andrimartes, I know him both by his feather and his habit. Madam (answered the woman) if it be he, I would advise you keep your self still to your disguise, and try if he will know us: Doubtlesse, replied Silviana, he will know us; for his servant is not disguised as we are: As for that, replied the woman, there is a remedy, for he may hide him∣self until we call him. Upon this, Silviana commanded the young man to stand behind a tree, which he did accordingly; but Silviana, who in the excesse of her joyes minded not what she did, she never heeded her bridle, and her horse being almost tired, did stumble so downright, that Cephindres, who was none of the best horsemen, did fall three or four lengths before the horse: This fall did much harm in the presence of her husband; but she got up presently, and told the good woman, that all the harm she had was a little hurt upon her nose; which, indeed, did fall so against the ground, that blood gushed out. Andrimartes was already so near, that he saw Cephindres fall, and therefore to help him he galopped as fast as he could, and came unto him just as he was got up upon his feet; and because Silviana did presently take out her handkerchief, and held it unto her nose to receive the blood, Andrimartes could not possibly know her; yet thinking himself obliged by the laws of civility to say something to him, Sir, said he, I made all the haste that possibly I could to help you, but now I see you do not stand in any need of my service: Silviana blushed when she heard him speak, and could hardly forbear revealing her self; yet desiring to make some sport in this disguise, Sir, answered she, and altered her voice, your inten∣tion was the same, and does infinitly oblige me in saying so, she looked upon him with the same eyes which had long since inflamed him, and Andrimartes observ∣ing some glances, which formerly made him sensible of loves power, he had a confused fancy, that he had formerly seen that Cavalier in some other place; and as he was ready to speak unto her, he observed that her horse was broke loose, and ran up and down the fields; and therefore he commanded those that waited upon him to run after the horse, and bring him back: In the interim he alighted from his horse, and entreated this unknown Cavalier to sit down upon the point of a rock which was in the high way; which Silviana did not refuse, for indeed she was necessitated unto it; and Andrimartes knowing the name of Cephindres, he beseeched her to tell him what news was stirring in the world. Silviana being resolved to perplex him as much as she could, to make him think the meeting with her more sweet: The news (answered she) which I do know, will fill you fuller of horrour then delight when you hear it; for being (as I suppose you are) a Frank by Nation, as I my self am, it is impossible but you must needs abhor to hear of so many, and so great crimes in a Monarch, who may boast that he has the most glorious Empire in the Universe under his govern∣ment: yet since your civility would tax me with a crime if I did disobey you, I will tell you, that Childerick has stained his honour, by committing the most foul∣est and wicked act, that ever any Tyrant was guilty of. Andrimartes trembled at this discourse▪ which Silviana perceived, and continued thus: His impiety is so high, that it has emboldned him to dishonour a woman, whose merit and virtue was as high as her beauty; and it is probable that you having been at Court have seen her with eyes of admiration; for Silviana (that's her name) was never looked upon by any eye, but she won the heart of him that owned it. At the name of Silviana, Andrimartes was dash'd quite out of countenance, and rising up as if he were transported: O Heavens (said he in a loud voice) has that bar∣barous Tyrant satisfied his brutish fury? has he triumphed over the virtue of Sil∣viana, and the honour of Andrimartes? Indeed, replied Silviana, he did at∣tempt it, but the resistance of that young woman, did frustrate the design of that Luxurious Tyrant; and her virtue made her have recourse unto a remedy, which was no lesse necessary then violent. The last words did a little calme the spirit of the Cavalier, and therefore ad∣dressing himself unto Cephindres, who kept her handkerchief still before her face:
Cavalier (said he unto her) I beseech you relate unto me the particulars of this passage, and suffer not my soul any longer to languish in this inquietude where∣in it is: why? said the pretended Cephindres, have you any concernment in the accident? So great (answered the Cavalier) that Andrimartes himself has not a greater interest in it then I have. Then (said Silviana) I will certainly make the relation of it unto you; and though I do not think you can apply any remedy un∣to it, yet I will give you the relation, that you may afterwards behave your self according to your best discretion: upon this Andrimartes took his handkerchief out of his pocket, and laying it upon his hand, he leaned his head thereon, and Silviana seeing him look down with a drooping countenance, she grew the more bold, and taking away hers which she held before her nose, she pursued on her discourse thus. Were I but acquainted with the successe which accompanied the love of An∣drimartes and Silviana, I should take more delight in making a relation thereof unto you; and you also would be glad, I believe, to hear it; but since I am igno∣rant in the story of their lives, and know nothing but what has hapned since their marriage, I must only tell you, that as soon as ever they came to reap the fruit of all their labours and pains, Childerick under a faigned and imaginary pretence, be∣gan to disturb that tranquility which they were to enjoy: and because the love of that Prince unto Silviana, had no legal foundation, he did not keep within com∣passe of discretion, but on the contrary, it made him attempt to corrupt or to force her. He sent therefore Andrimartes unto the Queen Methina, to the end, that in his absence he might have the better opportunity to execrate his pernici∣ous intention; and as soon as ever that Cavalier was gone, he took his time so, as he came unto Silvianas house when none was with her but an old woman, who was she from whom the whole truth was known. You may easily imagine how much Silviana was astonished when she saw Childerick enter; yet she did set as good a countenance upon her fears and dis∣pleasure as she could, and coming unto him with a look far different from the thoughts of her heart, she would have said something unto him; but Childerick preventing her, fell down upon his knees, and taking her hand offered to kisse it: at which Silviana was so surprized, that she pulled it away from him: upon this the Prince rose up, and sitting down upon a seat, he forced this young woman to sit down by him; and there, after some amorous looks, accompanied with a hundred sighs; Come, come, fair Silvi∣ana (said he unto her in a sudden rapture) why should you deny me that fa∣vour which Andrimantes hath already obtained obtained? Since time and oppor∣tunity allows it, why should we not enjoy that pleasure which I esteem the sweet∣est of all my life: Mistrust not my discretion, night it self shall not be so silent and secret as I shall be. At these words Silvania blush'd, and being in such a state, as without a sin against her duty, she could not hear such discourse from any mouth, but that of her dear Andrimartes: Sir (said she unto him very boldly) I do very well know the duty that I do ow unto my husband, and though I do not doubt of your discretion, yet let me tell you, that you do but in vain attempt to make me guilty of an act, which the eye of heaven will most severely punish. Silviana said something else which the Prince did hearken unto with a very impa∣tient eare; but Silviana (said he unto her) why do you persist so obstinately in a refusal? to preserve that (answered she) which I will never lose but with my life: perhaps you may be deceived, replied he, for you are not strong enough to resist my will; and believe it, if you continue in your denial, you will force me to use that violence which will overcome your cruelty. In saying so, he took hold upon one of her arms, and would have seized upon the other, but Silviana pulled it away, and catching hold of the Princes hair: hold off Sir, cryed she out, or else you will force me to go beyond the limits of that respect which I ow unto your birth. Childerick, who would not any longer defer the execution of his wicked intention, he called out for some men who came with him for that end, who opening the door, and seizing upon Silviana, would have thrown her upon the bed. She who saw that all resistance was in vain, did
at that instant fix upon a most strange resolution, and promised Childerick the satisfaction of his desires, so he would dismisse those men: Childerick flattering himself with this sweet promise, did command them to withdraw, and they obey∣ing, Silvana went nearer the Prince, and desired him to let her put off some of her clothes in her closet; to which the Prince consenting, Silviana put off her gown, and all her rich ornaments: afterwards coming out again, all undrest, and her brests and arms almost all naked, and Childerick seeing her in this amorous e∣quipage, he was infinitely ravished; and being transported with joyes, in hope to enjoy such a beauty, he rose up and offered to embrace her; but she pulling out a Poniard which he had prepared: Stay (said she) upon pain of your life, and hearken unto me: upon this command, the Prince stopt upon a sudden, not knowing for what designe she brought those arms; and then she said unto him, see here, thou cruel Tyrant, this is the remedy against thy luxurious fury: This, this, shall put an end unto my dayes and thy impudent lust; this shall help me to quench thy fire with my blood, since all my tears were not able to do it. Turn now thy lustful love into an honest compassion, and let not this corps of mine, when it is dead, be poluted with one of thy looks: Andrimartes will revenge himself upon thee; and if the gods will suffer the truth of this action to appear unto the eyes of the world, they will know that I had rather die then sin against heaven or him; and thou shalt see that it is an easier matter to triumph over my life, then my honour. Hereupon, this fair one did give her self two such great blows upon a vein, that all she could do before she died, was to utter these two words, adieu Andrimartes. Silviana could not chuse but to laugh to her self, as she related this last accident; but it was not long before she repented of her mirth, for Andrimartes lifting up his eyes, and looking upon Cephindres: Do you then assure me (said he sadly unto her) that Silviana is not alive? She is not alive (answered Silviana) un∣lesse she live in you: in saying so she put her handkercheif before her face; and the Cavalier, who heard that Silviana did not live unlesse in him, alas (said he) then the life that she has will be my death: Upon this he stopt, and put his hand∣kerchief to his eyes; afterwards upon a sudden he said, yet my misfortune is not without a remedy: for as my dearest Silviana could dy because she would not of∣fend me, I can do the same to follow her; and you Cavalier (said he and looked upon Cephindres with an eye of rapture) as you have been an eye witnesse of Sil∣viana's courage, so shall you be of my despair: In saying so he laid his hand up∣on his sword, and drawing it out of the scabbard, Silviana closed with him, and seizing upon his arm, did all she could to keep him from running it into his body; yet all her strength had not served, if the wife of Andreneck had not also fallen upon him, and he striving with them both, they all three fell to the ground to∣gether, ose that were in pursuit of Silvianas horse returned back; and seeing their  own with a naked sword in his hand, striving against two men, they  that their intention was to murder him: They galloped up therefore as  hey could, and the foremost of them alighting from his horse; ah ye vil∣la cryed he out, ye shall never execute your wicked intention: As he said so, he rn with his sword drawn against Silviana, and had run her through, if the servant of Andrimartes, who was hid behind a tree, had not at the same time come in, and cryed out that it was Silviana: Silviana, hearing her self named, did presently turn her head about, and seeing what danger she was in, did think some mischief might ensue, if she continued her disguise any longer. Desiring therefore to give her dear Andrimartes that contentment which she had conceal∣ed from him Andrimartes, said she, is it possible you should not know the face of your Silviana? Do you recompence the pains I have taken in seeking after you, with oblivion in lieu of love? Upon this Anrimartes looked seriously upon her, and seeing nothing before her face which might hinder him from knowing her, he came out of that errour into which Silviana had put him; and knowing both his servant and the wife of Andreneck: Fie, fie, said he, and took Silviana in his arms, what crime have I committed, that you should punish me with the inven∣tion
of such sad news? Silviana not able to answer him any other way but with kisses, it was long before she spoke one word: at last, making her sex known better by her tears then her habit, she gave him a particular accompt of all that passed since his departure. Andrimartes then knowing in earnest how far the insolency of Childerick was grown, he intended to retire speedily into Gaul Armorique, and to spare no pains in the drawing a memorable revenge from this libidinous Tyrant; yet con∣ceiving it a kind of ingratitude to depart, before he had returned thanks unto the Queen Methina, for the favours she had shewed unto Silviana and him, he resolved to passe by her: so as taking horse, they took that way from whence Andrimartes already came. But, Madam, humane intentions do often meet with many rubbs before they arrive at their accomplishment; and the sequel of this discourse will let you know, that Fortune does often cause us to find a shipwrack, where we thought to find a safe harbour. Andrimartes was not gone above half the way to Rhemoi, when, lest the schorching heat of the Sun should be offensive unto Silviana, he desired her to alight and rest her self under a shade of willows, untill the heat was over: She, who had no will but to please him did presently alight, and the Cavalier doing the same, they left their horses and went into a large meadow which was near the high way: there they found two rows of little trees, which art had planted in a straight line; between which was a pleasant walk, and because the place seemed very delightful unto them, they resolved not to stir from thence, until the Sun, and the flames of their love, were a little cooled and abated of their violence; yet as he began to suck the sweet of those which were upon Silvianas lips, he was, notwithstanding the ravishment of his soul, constrained to retire, by reason some swords which he heard clashing very near them: he had no sooner turned his head, but he espied in the next meadow two men with swords drawn, and stri∣ving withal their strength to take away the lives of each other: and because he thought he could not do a better office then to part them, he passed through the willows, and run with his sword drawn towards them, intending to prevent their Combate from becomming a Tragedy; but he, of the Combatants, who thought himself most injured, thirsting for revenge, he no sooner saw Andrimartes com∣ing, but he resolved presently either to dy or to vanquish; and therefore he fell most desperately upon his enemy, and made such a lucky pass, as he ran his sword through his bod, which wound proved mortal: after this, he presently escaped; and all that Andrimartes could do, was to come time enough to hold up the corps of the wounded Combatant, who beginning to stagger, and not able to sustain himself, he fell into the arms of this Cavalier, and in a dying tone, said unto him: Know Cavalier, whosoever you are, that I am most justly punished; my van∣quisher hath earned a just revenge for an injury, which he could not put up with∣out the loss of his reputation: whilst he was saying so, Silviana, who followed Andrimantes, came unto him, and tore her handkerchief to stop the wounds of the man; but he finding himself out of all hopes to live, lifting up his eyes to heaven, and afterwards fixing them upon Andrimartes: Alas, alas, said he (with a feeble and sighing voice) your courtesie in helping me is in vain, I know my death to be inevitable; yet that this benefit may not altogether be uselesse, let it serve for a discharge of him that has slain me, whom I do pardon as freely, as I wish he would forget the offence formerly he received from me: upon this he stopt, and losing both his speech and his life, he remained cold in the arms of Andrimartes, who was exceedingly troubled at the accident; but since there was no remedy, he took up his sword which he cast upon the ground, to be the more fit for helping the wounded man: afterwards presenting his hand unto his dear Silviana, they returned to their horses, and went on their journey. They were not gone above three or fovr hundred paces, but they met a great number of horsmen, who seeing Andrimartes and Silviana stained with blood in several places▪ they began to murmure amongst themselves: afterwards dividing themselves, some followed within sight of Andrimartes, and others went on to
see whether they could hear any news of that misfortune which they suspected something: As soon as they found the body of Clsioderus (for that was the name of him that was slain) some galloped as fast as they could to acquaint those that followed Andrimartes: and afterwards all together, seized upon him, Silviana, and all their company, before they could so much as defend themselves: Judge, Madam, how much they were amazed, when they saw themselves thus treated; especially when an old man, who was hardly able to speak for anger, addressing himself unto Andrimartes: Perhap, murderer (said he unto him) thou thinkest the day to be as black as thy crime, and that thou canst hide the infamy where∣with thou art branded for murdering my son; but the gods have suffered it to be discovered, and before two dayes be exspired thou shalt suffer what the Laws have ordained against thee and thy Complices. Andrimartes, seeing himself suspected for a murder of which he was a witness, and not an actour; and thinking he was more obliged to answer unto the injury of the old man, then to plead in behalf of his innocency, also relating the the action which he had seen, he looked upon him with an eye nothing like a guil∣ty person, and said unto him, I am neither guilty of any black actions, nor any murder of thy son; but my actions are irreproachable, and will help me to give the ly unto any that dare suspect me of any perfidie: The old man was so en∣raged at this answer, that he with the same sword which he took from Andri∣martes, had run him through, if one of his servants had not fortunately stayed his arm, and told him that it was too much for a prisoner to die by his hand, but fitter to perish by that of a hangman: this consideration stayed the hand of the hand of the old man. But Silviana seeing him so near death, was so frighted, that she knew not what she did; and her eyes twinkling, she began to stagger, and doubtlesse had fallen, if some that stood by her had not taken her by the arm, and held her up as long as her swound continued: yet they not knowing the true cause of her sorrows, they thought it had been only remorse of conscience for the crime which they thought she had committed. The wife of Andreneck also looked as pale as death, and amidst her sighs and tears, letting the word Madam sometimes escape her tongue, she caused those that looked upon her to think that fear of punishment had already distracted. In this manner they carried them into the Town of Fisme, which is not far from the City of Rhemois, and there they shut up in a most nasty prison, where the Sun was ashamed ever to shine. I cannot expresse, Madam, the sor∣rows of Silviana and Andrimartes for their captivity: I will therefore only tell you how they got out. He who killed Closiodorus, had no sooner given him his deaths wound, but he fled away as I told you before; and getting into the next Town, he changed his habit with the first Shepherd that he met, hoping to get unto his own house by the help of this disguise; yet hearing in the beginning of the night, that the Ca∣valier who came into the meadow to part them, was seized upon as guilty of the fact, he altered his mind, and resolved to die, rather then let the innocence of Andrimartes suffer for the murder which he only had committed. In order to the effecting of this resolution, he wended his way towards that City, and there resting himself as long as the night lasted, he came unto the Pallace of the Queen Methina, as she was going unto the Temple to offer a Sacrifice in the behalf of Childerick. As soon as be perceived her he stepped forward, and hit upon his opportunity so handsomly, that he had cast himself at her feet, before any came to give him the stop: The Queen, who is the sweetest Princesse that evere bore a Scepter, did presently stand still, and casting her eye upon this Shepherd, did ask him what he would have? Madam (answered the stranger) I do upon my hum∣ble knees, most earnestly beseech your Majesty to grant unto me my life, and to hear those reasons which perhaps will move your clemency not to deny it: what have you committed (said the Queen) that does deserve death? my crime is (re∣plied the stranger) that because I could not live after the losse of my honour, I have taken away the life of a man, that would have taken it from me. How? re∣plied the Queen and smiled, are the Laws of honour as inviolable amongst Shep∣herds
as amongst Courtiers? This habit, Madam, which you see me wear (said he) is not sutable unto my quality; but I did assume it only as a means to bring me in safety unto your presence. The Queen apprehending some mystery in the matter, which deserved better examination: Well (said she) at my return from the Temple, I will hear your reasons and do you Justice. In saying so she went on, and the stranger was no sooner risen up, but he was compassed about with a great number of Cavaliers, who would not leave him until they knew his adven∣ture. The Sacrifice being ended, the stranger was conducted into the Pallace, and from thence into the Queens chamber, who no sooner commanded him to speak, but he faithfully related the offence which he had received from Clesiodorus: He told her how in Lions they had both been rivals in the service of a great beau∣ty, and how Clesiodorus, prompted unto it by the motions of his jealousie, was re∣solved to ruine his reputation▪ In order unto this, Clesiodorus had assembled ma∣ny of his friends together, and meeting him as he was single by himself, he struck him three times with a bastinado, before he could have time to defend himself: afterwards all his friends fell upon him at once, and used him so ill, that they left him for dead in the street: after this he related how he recovered, and how the flight of Clesiodorus made him to seek him out in another Countrey, where having found him, he challenged him the field, where he did let out so much of his blood, as to wash off the dishonour that had stained his reputation. But Madam (con∣tinued he) since this, has hapned an accident, which doth extreamly perplex me: Two Cavaliers who came to part Clesiodorus and me, are, as I am informed, seized upon as culpable of this homicide: and because they are put into a prison in Fismes, I am afraid their innocence will not sufficiently appear, unlesse my con∣fession do clear it: and therefore though I could have passed away without being either taken or known, yet I resolved to submit my self unto the mercy of your Ma∣jesty, and do most humbly beseech you to stay all violent proceedings against those innocent prisoners. Thus ended the stranger; and the Queen being inclinable to shew him favour, did for several considerations promise him a pardon, upon condition he could ve∣rifle all that he had said to be true, and at that very instant commanded to send unto Fisme, and to bring before her those persons whom the father of Clesiodorus had taken prisoners. This command was executed with so much diligence that Andrimartes and Silviana were the very same day conducted unto the Pallace; and as soon as ever the Queen saw Andrimartes, she entertained him with such extraordinary Carresses, that the father of Clesiodorus was astonished; yet being extreamly sensible of the losse of his son, he cast himself at the feet of Methina, and demanded justice against the Cavalier whom he suspected to be the Assassi∣nate of his son. But the Queen causing them to enter into her closet, did use such arguments unto the old man, in justification of Andrimartes, that he was quite convinced of the bad opinion which he entertained of him. The Father of Clesiodorus was no sooner satisfied, but Andrimartes understanding from the Queen what the stranger had done, he began to relate the successe of the Com∣bate between him and Clesiodorus, and did so faithfully report the last words of that dying man, that after the example of the son, the father was forced to par∣don the Conquerour. This accident was the businesse of the Court, until it began to be late, and the Queen dismissing the father of Clesiodorus, she was no sooner alone with Andri∣mantes, but the memory of the misfortune, or rather the debauchery of Chil∣derick did cause her to fall into a stream of tears. Andrimartes did exceedingly pity her; and notwithstanding the great cause he had to be revenged of Childe∣rick, he was even forced to grant unto the tears and the prayers of the Queen, that pardon which she begged for her son. After this she enquired where Silvia∣na was; unto which Andrimartes answered, that he heard she was returned into Gaul Armorique, and that she had sent her brother to give him an accompt of what had passed. The Queen commanded presently that he should enter, and as soon as ever Silviana did obeysance unto her, truly (said she unto Andrimar∣tes) he is the handsomest young man that ever I saw, and has many of those fea∣tures
which makes his sister so much admired: when Silviana heard the Queen say so, she blush'd, which the Princesse perceiving; he has not yet (said she un∣to Adrimartes in a low voice) well tasted the aire of the Court: for I see he is a little bashful, and blushes when one looks upon him. But Cavaller (continued she and addressed her self unto Silviana) what good news can you tell us of your Sister? At this Silviana cast her eye upon Andrimartes, as if she had said answer for me; which the Cavalier▪ understanding and not being willing to delude the Queen any longer: the most certain news (said he) that she can give you, Madam, is, that she does present her self unto you in that habit wherein now you see her, and which she is forced to wear for a safety of her self, from the pursuance and Ty∣ranny of Childerick: In saying so, he took Silviana by the hand, who casting her self at the Queens feet, did receive from that Princesse all the Carresses and favours which she could expect amidst that disorder and affliction, which the in∣solence of her son had brought upon her. After this, she told her what testimo∣nies she had received of Childericks repentance, and what had passed within a few dayes: at which Silviana was exceedingly joyed. Yet not conceiving that the life of Andrimartes could be safe any where, but in those Territories where Semon had made him Lord, she beseeched the Queen to let them depart the next morning, which being condescended unto, Silviana and Andrimartes received the Queens commands; and being retired, Methina sent them a great abundance of clothes and jewels for Silviana; and for Andrimartes a coach with six horses, the finest that ever eye beheld, Thus they departed, and Fortune being now weary with disturbing their contentments, she permitted them to arrive at the place where they desired, without any disasterous encounter. Some few hours before their departure, Andrimartes hearing that I was in the Pallace, retained there by my wounds, he was pleased to honour me with a visit, and there, after he un∣derstood from me all the particulars of the Combate wherein I had been wound∣ed, he related unto me all that you have heard. Within a few dayes after I found my self in some sort recovered; so as my Chi∣rurgeon telling me that I might venture to travel without any danger; I went to kisse the Queens hand, and because she was infinitly desirous that Childerick should be reestablished, she solicited me not to stir from Guyemants until it was effected: I told her plainly, that it was a businesse which required a long time, since a multitude of people are like unto spirits, easily raised, but very hard to be laid again: and yet she had reason to hope well, since Guyemant had promi∣sed the utmost of his service, and that I thought time would bring it to passe: Then she asked me, if I knew upon what grounds Guyemant intended to transact; and I who was desirous to give her all the consolation I could, I told her in short what Guyemant had communicated unto me, which was, that he hoped to make Gilon, who was of a most covetous disposition, to loaden the people with such a∣bundance of Subsidies, Taxes, and Imposts, under a pretence of keeping them under, and within their duty, that thereby he would render all the nobility his e∣nemies; and so by this action render him odious to all the world: That after∣wards he would take his time so well amidst these disorders, as he would remon∣strate unto the people how Tyrannical the government of Gilon was above that of Childerick, and perhaps should have such an influence upon them, as to make them revolt against Gilon, and call back their former King. The Princesse seemed to hope well in this design, and permitting me to depart, I returned unto Guye∣mant in Paris, who finding my stay there to no great purpose, he consented that I should depart with those forces which Clidemant and I had: so as I did depart in a resolution to dismisse them at Moulins; but meeting with Flurial, and receiving your Letter, I retained them on to imploy them in your service. Thus Lindamor ended the discourse which Amasis desired to hear, and it being something late, every one prepared themselves for sleep: Amasis accompanied them to their several chambers; and having left it unto Galathea, to wait upon Rosanira and the rest of the Ladies into their lodgings, she beseeched them all to command freely any thing that was within the compasse of her power, and
confessed that she owed all she had in the world unto their courages and af∣fections. As soon as day dawned, Ligonias departed, and Astrea waked: That fair one lay that night in the house of Adamas, because she was not able, without extream sorrow to her self, to be one minute out of the presense of her dear Alexis; and though there was a partition between her chamber and Celadons, yet it was abun∣dance of consolation unto her to think that she was not far off him▪ & that nothing but the god of sleep was able to part them; She no sooner opened her eyes, but being in abundance of impatience to see her Mistresse, she dressed her self with∣all the hast she could, and went into the chamber of Celadon, and made as little noise as possible. The Shepherd, who was not asleep, observed the warinesse of Astrea, and counterfited himself still asleep, that he might the better see the motions of her soul: He saw then the Shepherdesse kneel down by his bed side, and afterwards did kisse him two or three times, and sigh very loud: at last she said, alas, alas, why is it not permitted me to give these kisses unto him, whose Image you do re∣present unto me? Although these be more hot and more moist, yet are they not lesse innocent and harmlesse: upon this she was silent, and then began again with a deep sigh, saying, but since I cannot kisse Celadon, yet I will adore this face in memory of him: in saying so, she kist him again, and dwelt so long upon the lips of the Shepherd, that he being ravished with delight, he could not chuse but sigh and open his eyes: which Astrea perceiving, O fairest Mistresse (said she) I most humbly beseech you pardon my rude indiscretion in waking you. Then Celadon, to make it the better, believed that he was asleep, I give you most hearty thanks, dear servant (said he unto her) that you would take so much pains as to visit me: I beseech you tell me (continued he) how long it is since you first came? but a little while (answered Astrea) and had only so much time as to kisse you twice: It was very well (answered Celadon) love was my frien in it, and knew that your favours are so pleasing unto me, that I am contented with them either in reality or in a dream; but dear servant (continued Alexis) and caused Astrea to sit down upon her bed side) what is the reason of your being so early, for I know by my eyes that it is not very late? O my fairest, Mi∣stresse, replied Astrea, I need no other alarm to waken me, but my own thoughts, which fill me so full of inquietudes, as I do very believe, that unlesse you do give a remedy unto them, they will distract my wits: O heavens (said Alexis and sighed) why do you expect any remedy from me, who expects the same from you? from me? (said the Shepherdesse and was a little astonished) what can you expect from me? To contrive it so (answered Celadon) that we may be e∣ternally inseparable: May heaven for ever hate me (said Astrea) if that that be not my chiefest desire; but, Mistresse, that does depend more upon you then me: No, no, (said Celadon) it is your consent only that is requisite and necessary for the accomplishment of this desire. I do most freely consent unto it (said Astrea) and do most earnestly beseech heaven there may be no other obstacle but my con∣sent: It is very well, replied the Shepherd, there wants nothing but one thing, without which this happinesse will not be obtained. O heavens! said Astrea, I beseech you tell me quickly what it is, for I swear it must be an absolute impossi∣bility, if to obtain this happinesse, I do not do it. It is nothing, all that you need do (replied the supposed Druide) is to command me that — upon this word a colour came into her countenance, and her speech falling her, the Shep∣herdesse might well imagine that some strange accident or other had befallen her: at which being exceedingly troubled; Mistresse (said she unto her) I perceive you are not well, will you be pleased to take any thing? I need not take any thing (answered Alexis) but only a little courage: In saying so, Adamas entred into the room, which pleased Celadon very well, who plainly saw, that had he not come, he could never have come off in this discourse, without declaring part of his crime: his joy at it appeared presently in his face, which Astrea perceiving, fa∣ther (said she unto Adamas) you are the best Physician in the world, for your very presence can cure diseases▪ These words did a little trouble the Druide, and
going a little nearer Celadon to enquire the truth, the Shepherd told him in a low voice, the danger from which his arrival had rescued him. But Adamas con∣ceiving tha the conveniency of the place, and the disposition of the persons, did afford an opportunity of undeceiving Astrea, he resolved to do that which Cela∣don durst not, and to do it before the Shepherd could hinder him; therefore he did not speak unto him, but causing Astrea to sit down in the place where she was, and sitting down by her, he held this discourse. I do believe Astrea, that you know I love you, and has observed in all my a∣ctions, a more particular good will unto you then unto many other persons whom I am obliged to esteem; and therefore I am very confident, that you will take the councel that I shall give you in good part, and not doubting but I shall have as great a care of your welfare as my own, you will apply what I shall say unto you to your best advantage: Now, Astrea, you must know that this Druide, whom you see before you, and passes under the notion of your Mistresse, yet her greatest glory is to obey you, and what features soever you find in her face, she is the same— then he was going to pronounce Celadon when he saw Dia∣na and Phillis enter, who coming from the house of Clindor, upon a visit unto A∣strea, did imagine she would be in the chamber of Alexis, since they did not find her in the place where she was was wont to lie. As soon as Adamas spied them, he took Astrea by the hand, and pressing it a little, Sweet heart (said he unto her in a low voice) that which I did intend to communicate unto you, must not have so many witnesses, and therefore I will defer it until another time: In the mean time, entertain your companions, whilst I advertise Alexis in all things which she must do to carry you with her unto Carnutes, whither you have so great a desire to follow her. Astrea upon this went to meet the two fair Shepherdesse, who were come al∣ready very near her, and as soon as they had saluted Adamas, and the supposed Druide, they went and sate down in one of the corners of the Chamber, where Astrea, with a face of extraordinary contentment, spoke to them in these terms. The common Proverb (my companions) is very true, which sayes that a good Fortune as well as a bad one, never comes alone by it self. Within these two dayes I was overwhelmed with a multitude of miseries, and now since the deli∣verance of Amasis and our selves, every minute affosds me a fresh subject of delight. You need not tell us any more of your contentment (answered Diana) for we find it in your face; and I swear unto you (said Astrea) it is lesse in my face then my heart: but Sister (said Phillis) I beseech you tell us from whence proceeds this great joy? From some hopes (answered she) that Alexis will carry me a∣way with her; O Sister (said Diana) you are extreamly cruel, in threatning us with a separation; and I cannot chuse but wonder you should take delight in a thing which perhaps will kill us with grief: I do indeed believe, said Astrea, that you a little lament my departure, but I hope your sorrows will not be so great, but that Silvander and Licidas will chear you up again in a few dayes. To tell you ingeniously my mind (said Phillis) were I to chuse whether I might live alwayes with Licidas or with you, I should certainly prefer the com∣pany of my Shepherd before yours; and let it be spoken only amongst our selves, I believe Diana has more wit, then not to be of my opinion; but if it were possi∣ble for me to enjoy both your companies, I could desire no greater happinesse. You mean (answered Astrea) that your contentment would be compleat, as mine would be, if heaven would be so kind as to let me also enjoy the company of Ce∣ladon and you: But since the gods, by the death of that Shepherd, has denied me this felicity, it is but requisite you share with me in my misfortune, and suffer in the losse of a Sister, as I do in the losse of a Lover. I shall be more sensible of the losse of you, said Diana, then the losse of all men living; and though I do highly honour Silvander, yet I will not except him: O stay (said Astrea, and laid her hand upon her mouth) you ought to love that Shepherd above all, and though you should render your affection equal unto his, yet you would not do more then is due unto his merit. Let us talk no more on't (said Phillis) for Sister
I hope you will not leave us, and there needs no more to send me out of the world, then to deprive us of your company. With such sweet discourse as this, Astrea prepared the spirits of all these fair ones, not to take her separation from them over sadly. Adamas also in the mean while prepared Celadon, not any longer to oppose his desire of making himself known unto his Shepherdesse; and because this poor Lover observed how they had been interrupted; certainly Father (said he unto him) there is a kind of fa∣tality opposite unto your design; far had not Diana and Phillis entred, I know not what would have become of this disguise which we have used. Certainly (said the Druide) the gods do sometimes teach us what their will is by trivial things, as well as by great ones; and I will with you believe, that it is not their pleasure, Astrea should here have the honour of knowing her Shepherd: And therefore, I will shortly take my leave of Amasis, since now she has no need of my service; and I will carry all the Shepherds and Shepherdesses to my house, where we will with more leasure advise upon the best expedients, how to make you happy in the enjoyment of Astrea. Celadon stood a while without any re∣ply; and Adamas asking the reason of his silence: Father (answered he with a great sigh) if we have any secret foresight of things that are to happen unto us, I do presage very sad accidents that are to befall me by the knowledge which this Shepherdesse shall have of me: you have entertained that fear so long (replied the Druide) that now it is become a belief, and your wit is too ingenious in affli∣cting your self. You do now take it as a thing infallible; but know that my opi∣nion is quite contrary unto yours, and I dare promise you all imaginable content∣ment in that course: whether the event prove good or bad (said Celadon) I am however infinitely obliged unto your indulgent care of me, and I wish my own welfare as much for your contentment as for my own: Dispose therefore of me as you please Sir; and if ever I disobey the least of your commands, let me be branded with the ignominy of the most ungrateful Shepherd that ever lived. A∣damas infinitly satisfied with Celadons answer: Son, said he unto him, since you are resolved to trust your self unto my care and submit unto my will, if you do not enjoy your Mistresse, the fault shall be only mine: In saying so, he kissed his cheek, and rising up, he bad adieu unto all the fair ones, and afterwards went un∣to Amasis. He was no sooner out of the chamber, but Astrea being extreamly impatient to know, what it was the Druide intended to say unto her, she went unto the bed side of Alexis, and beseeched her to give her that satisfaction: but Celadon in lieu of telling her truly, did put her off with so many other things, that she could not understand any thing of it. Diana and Phillis came also to her beds side, and almost at the very same time when Leonide entred, who doubting that Celadon durst not rise before them, she carried them into another chamber till he had dres∣sed himself. Adamas in the interim was come unto the Nymph, and intending to ask leave to return, as soon as he could speak unto her, he knew so well how to set forth an urgent necessity of returning unto his house, that she consented thereunto, upon condition he would return again with in a few dayes: which the Druide promis∣ing, he humbly thanked her, and went away without taking his leave of Galathea, lest she should be desirous of seeing Alexis, or enquire of Celadon: so he came unto the house of Clindor, where Astrea, Alexis, Phillis, and Diana, already were, and with them all the rest of the Shepherds and Shepherdesses: having therefore propounded his intention of carrying them back, he found them so impatiently desirous of seeing their flocks again, that they were all very willing to depart at that very instant: Clindor only was very sorry to part so soon with so much good company; yet seeing no remedy, be took Licidas aside, and after he had desired him to love Leontidas his son, with the same affection which wont to be betwixt Alyppes and him, he made him promise him above a hundred times to return a∣gain, and bring with him the same persons that were now to depart. After this, he embraced Phocion, and though he could hardly walk by reason of his great age, yet he would not bid adieu unto any of the Shepherds or Shepherdesses in his
own house, but would needs wait upon them out of the Town, where he recei∣ved all their thanks, and after a sad departure, and looking after them as far as he could see, he retired by the help of Leontias, who led him by the arm unto his own house again. All this great troop, to whom was added the brothers of Circinea, Palanice, and Florice, were not long before they arrived at the house of Adamas, who intending to receive them very well, did carry them into a very noble room, where they found a collation ready: After which, carrying them into his gallery, unto some he expounded the Pictures; he made others admire the excellency of the work; all being very pleasingly diverted, they were in the conclusion disposed to sit down. On the other side, Amasis did all that she possibly could to treat the Princes with all magnificence, and her endeavours were not lost: for though the siege might excuse many defects, yet she was so very careful in entertaining them well, as they confessed that the sumptuosity of her banquets was not inferiour to the expences of the greatest Monarchs. That day after the repast was done, she acquainted them with her fears, that Gondebaut would Arm anew against her. But Sigismond, Rosilion, and Godomar, did promise so often never to forsake her until she was in a condition free from all manner of fears, her mind was satisfied. Giving them therefore most hearty thanks, for the testimonies of good will which they had expressed unto her, she beseeched them not to live in any way of constraint, but to command freely any manner of thing that was in her power. After this, she went unto her closet, and took order for her Domestick affairs; and the Princes going into a chamber where most of the Nymphs, Ladies, and Cavaliers were, Sigismond drew Do∣rinde a little aside, and held this discourse with her. What cause soever you have, my fairest Dorinde, to think all men inconstant, I am confident that what I have done is enough to make you change that opinion, or at the least make you confess, that my fidelity deserves an exception from the common sort of men, as well as doth my birth. Sir, answered Dorinde, that you have done much more, then I know how to merit, is without all manner of doubt: but that your fidelity is above the strain of other men, pardon me, I beseech you, if I do not absolutely confess it, since it is alwayes the end that crowns any work, and since I cannot tell whether you will be as constant for the future, as you have been hitherto. This diffidence, said the Prince, is no small argument of your small affection: It is an argument, replied Dorinde, of the sensibility which I have of my own imperfections, which are more like to quench affection then to inflame it. The only imperfection whereof I assure you, (said Sigismond) is that you do not love me enough; and yet you are in some sort excusable, since it is a very hard matter to finde one man amongst mor∣talls, that is worthy of so great an honour and happinesse as to enjoy you. These flattering expressions (answered Dorinde) do smell too much of artifice and dis∣simulation, and are unworthy of a man that makes profession of loving rightly: If you intend to use no other language but this, I will not say that you may be∣come unfaithful, but will think you are so already. What thoughts soever you have of me (said Sigismond) I must still esteem you above all the women in the world; and if you do not think that those testimonies which I have given of my self, do not proceed from a clear heart and soul, I beseech you appoint me Laws, and tell me how you would have me behave my self, for I protest I will most invi∣olably observe them: It becomes not me, Sir, replied Dorinde, to give Laws un∣to you; and since your rank and quality is not to receive them from any but the Gods, if you do love me, let the God of love prescribe them unto you. It is love, my fairest, answered the Prince, which commands me to think that all the beauties in the world are inferiour unto yours; and that all merits are too little, if compared unto your high perfections. Love then, replied Dorinde, is like unto those spectacles which deceive the eyes, and makes all objects seem greater then they are: No, no, my bright Star, said the Prince, I do look upon you as you are, and let me perish if I do not think, that envy it self is not able to find the least shadow of any defect in you:
I perceive, answered Dorinde, that complacency and flattery is a vice so common, as it is inevitable; bu good Sir, continued she, let us talk no more of my beauty; for if you do, you will but anger me, since I am in the least degree owner of what you prescribe unto me; but I wish I were, that I might be more pleasing unto you: All I can say is, that such as I am, have a perfect inclination to honour you: Then all I can say (said Sigismond and interrupted her) is, that I am the most happy man alive, and that the love which I bear unto you, joyned with the assurance which you give me of your affection, is a thousand times more dear un∣to me then my Fathers Scepter: O heavens (said Dorinde) the Scepter of Gon∣debaut, and the affection you bear unto me, are two things which will sute very ill together: For the one will no sooner come into your hands, but the other will go out of your heart. All my oaths, vows, and protestations (answered the Prince) should methinks remove all such suspitions out of your mind, and believe it, my fairest Dorinde, the effects of my fidelity may well make you cease doubting of my faith, if you would but please to call them into your memory; but to my great happinesse, you do not judge rightly upon my humour, and are perswaded that the name of King can exclude that of Lover: but, No, no, my dearest Dorinde, the discretion which you have seen in all my actions, is a most evident demonstration that I do not pre∣tend unto any thing which can offend you, and that entertaining no passion but what is legitimate, I shall still preserve it as pure and sacred when I have an Em∣pire, as now when I am only in hopes of it: I wish I were more free then I am, that I might be able to give you a better assurance of it; but since I do absolute∣ly depend upon the power of a father, and a Father incensed, I cannot at this time do any more then make a most faithful promise to marry you, as soon as e∣ver I am at liberty. Dorinde, flattering her self with the title of Burgundean Queen, and imagin∣ing that this Prince might raise her fortune as high as her ambition, she did fully build upon these last promises, and suffering a pritty, kind of shame, mixed with incomparable joy, to appear in her cheeks, she returned this answer. The good will, Sir, which I bear unto you, does not proceed from these great hopes which you are pleased to give me; for I dare say, and that most truly, that I do love your person above your Crowns and Scepters, and your merits above your quali∣ty; yet since you are pleased to assure me, that your love is so great unto me as to make me a sharer in the glory which your birth doth cast upon you, I do most willingly accept of the offer which you make unto me, and promise never to dis∣pose of my self, but according to those commands which I shall receive from you; and in testimony of what I say (continued she, pulling out a ring which Sigismond gave unto her, and breaking it in two) let this be the Symbole of our union: The time whilst the pieces of this ring do remain separate, shall emblem our ab∣sene, and when you are in a condition to accomplish what you have promised, their conjunction shall be ours also. Then Sigismond taking the one half of the ring, and kissiing it several times, I do swear (said he) that I will never believe my fairest Dorinde defective in her fidelity, until she send me back the other half of this ring which remains with her; and I would have her think the same of me: in saying so, the Prince took her hand, and laid it to his heart: be assured, my dearest Dorinde (said he) that this heart over which you lay your hand, is much more yours then my own, and will sooner die, then fail in the least tittle of what I have promised: Dorinde looking silently upon him, and the eyes of the Prince meeting with hers, they both swore an unalterable fidelity unto each other, by the language of their eyes: which though mute, yet did more eloquently ex∣presse their passions then any tongue could tell: At last, Dorinde fearing to lose her self in this rauishment, she first withdrew her eyes, and blushing a little, she beseeched him to go unto the rest of the company. Lindamor in this interim, had not ill imployed his time: for as soon as he saw Rosilion apply himself to Rosanira, and Sigismond to Dorinde, he went unto Gala∣thea, and knew so well how to set forth what she owed unto all his labours, that he obtained leave to court her openly: and though he had a great confidence in
the good will of Amasis, yet he thought it not expedient to consult with her, without communicating his design unto the Druide, who, beside the power which his virtue had gotten him with the Nymph, had a very particular inclination un∣to him. He propounded then unto Galathea that desire which he intended to ac∣quaint Adamas withal, and that Nymph thinking it to be very just, Lindamor sent to seek him; but word being brought that he was gone out of Marcelles: I per∣ceive (said Galathea) that he was very desirous to carry home unto their habita∣tions those Shepherds which Clindor entertained; and truly I am very sorry that he did not acquaint me before he went: but I will entreat Ligdamon to go unto him, and solicite him to return as soon as possibly he can: Upon this, Galathea beckning unto Ligdamon, who was then entertaing Silvia, that Cavalier came un∣to her, and had no sooner received her commands to go, but he went immediat∣ly and took horse. Amasis came out of her closet at the same time; and because she had been a long while cloistered up in Marcelles, she was very desirous to ride out into the fields to take the air: she caused therefore her coaches to be made ready; and going into one, with the three Princes, Lindamor, Rosanira, Galathea, and Dorinde, the first place she visited was the place where Polemas had pitched his Tent and his Camp: from thence she went unto the plain, where the blood of that Rebel was still to be seen; and remembring the fears she was in, she related unto them the extream perplexity and anguish of spirit, in which she was when they fought. At last, after they had sufficiently aired themselves, they re∣turned to the Castle, where Amasis did all she possibly could to Carresse them, so much did she acknowledge her self obliged unto them, for the great care they had in delivering her from the insolence of her enemy. Ligdamon in the mean time, came unto the house of Adamas, whom he found walking in his gallery with the Shepherds and fair Shepherdesses of Lignon; when the Druide first saw him, he was a little surprized, and was afraid that some new disorder had hapned in Marcelles: yet, when he aked the cause of his coming, he was very glad that it was only to desire him from Galathea, to come unto her as soon as he could. He intended therefore to go very early in the morning, that he might be there as soon as the Nymph was ready; and beseeching Ligdamon to be his guest till then, he took him by the hand and carried him to the rest of the company: They were no sooner there, but they perceived Cercinea, Palanice, and Florice, were standing all about Phillis, unto whom Cercinea spoke thus: But fair Shepherdesse, or rather the Interpretour of the gods, since it hath pleased heaven to make choise of you, to give us that satisfaction and tranquility which we have long prayed for, when will it please you to afford it unto us? Why are you so slack in doing the will of heaven? are you not afraid that the same Diety which hath inspired you with the knowledge of his Oracle, will charge you with neglect, and punish you for the miseries which we suffer? To which Phillis smiled, and returned this answer. Fair Shepherdesse, should I refuse to give you that sa∣tisfaction which you expect from me, I should confesse my self most worthy of punishment, as being guilty of an unpardonable sin; But I most humbly beseech you to consider, that your satisfaction do not wholly depend upon me, but that there are two persons more who are also necessarily required, and whom I believe we cannot easily meet withal; yet I do most faithfully promise to endeavour, with all my power, the satisfaction of your desires. Upon this she embraced them all three; and Adamas not being able to imagine the meaning of all this, he entreat∣ed Phillis to tell him why these fair ones made this request unto him? Father (an∣swered she) since you do know, that the Decrees of the gods are unalterable, you will not wonder at the relation which I shall make unto you: These three fair ones not long since received an Oracle, which commanded them to come in∣to Forrests, and there to seek for a remedy against those miseries which love had bred amongst them: and that you may know from whom it is, they ought to ex∣pect it, I shall repeat unto you the same Oracle which they received.
The Oracle. AGainst the pains which all you three endure, In Forrests you shall find a certain cure: On that was dead, and afterwards shall live Unto you all a medicine shall give: Another medicine you shall have from one, To whom against her will a good is done, Which she rejected with her will: 'Tis she Not you, by whom the overture must be: What she ordains, as if ordain'd by me, Believ'd as Oracle by you must be. Now Father, continued Phillis, I cannot tell whether by inspiration or how it was; but so it certainly was, that having met them about a month since, I re∣peated their Oracle unto them, and at the same time beseeched them to tell me the stories of their lives; but some particular consideration did hinder me from giving them that full audience which was expedient for them, I beseeched them to defer it until another time, which at my request they did; and finding now a fa∣vourable opportunity for it, they desired me to give them the hearing now: A∣damas was extreamly astonished at the discourse of Phillis, and not knowing how she should come to the understanding of the Oracle, he attributed it unto a kind of Miracle, and addressing himself unto Cercinea, said thus unto her: I do see, fair one, that this is the time wherein you are to receive that contentment, which you with so much impatience longed for; for having found out them who is to be the Judges of your differences, I cannot see any difficulty in the rest. First you may, and go no further, meet with those two persons who are to be the Arbitra∣tours of your Fate: and certainly, by the person dead and yet alive, the gods do mean—upon this he was ready to name Alexis, as the person that lived af∣ter the death of Celadon: but seeing he could not name her without discovering the designes and secrets of that Shepherd, he stopped, and having a quick and present wit, he named Ligdamon: for, said he, and continued, every one does know that he was believed, and condoled, as dead, and when he took the Dormative in lieu of poyson. The other, unto whom that benefit which she lost with her will, shall be restored against her will, is Celidea, unto whom Damon, maugre her resistance, will restore that beauty which she deprived her self of, by cutting her face with the point of a Diamond. Upon this, Palanice, transported with abun∣dance of joy: Father (said she, and took the Druide by the hand) we have rea∣son to denote this day, as the happiest of all our lives, and to acknowledge our obligations unto you to be infinite, since by your means our eyes are opened, and we do now plainly see those things, which before were as obscure unto us, as dark∣nesse it self: There now wants nothing but to let us see the persons that are to be our Judges, to the end we may relate our cause unto them, for we do not doubt, but this is the very place, where we must receive our tranquility: Adamas who was very desirous to divert Ligdamon whilst he stayed there: Then (said he) put all your three names into a hat, and that person whom Phillis shall draw, is the name of that person whom the gods have decreed to be the speaker for you all. Cercinea, Palanice, and Florice, consented thereunto: The Druide writ their three names in three pieces of paper; and folding them up, then putting them in∣to a hat, Phillis, unto whom the hat was presented, did draw the name of Florice, who seemed very glad of the Commission, and was obedient thereunto: so as af∣ter Adamas had entreated all the company to sit down, she looked upon Phillis, and began her discourse thus.
The Sequel of the History of CERCINEA, PALANICE, and FLORICE. I Wish, fair and discreet Phillis, I could compose the discourse which I am to make, into such an order as might clear me from all disobedience to the gods, and discourtesie towards you: but having not wit enough to avoid disorder in the relation of it, I beseech you let your ingenious judgment sup∣ply my defects, and pardon me, if I present a relation unto you, which is not much unlike a skene of ruffled silk, very difficult to be unwound: for we our selves, whom the businesse most concerns, have much ado from losing our selves in the disorder of it: The accidents that have hapned amongst us, are so many, and so strange, that should I enter into the whole Series of them, they would require a large volume; but knowing that Hylas hath been long in this Countrey, and he being an enemy unto all silence and secrecy, questionlesse he hath imparted many of our affairs unto you; and therefore I shall omit all impertinencies and superfluities, hinting only upon the principal effects, to the end you may the better Judge upon the motions of our souls, and ordain which of these Cavaliers ought to possesse our affections. Be pleased to know therefore, O our just Judge, that Cercinea, Pa∣lanice and I, have each of us two brothers, and (since it must out) two ser∣vants, if at the least any faith or credit be to be given unto the tongues and oaths of men; but to the end this may appear more plainly unto you, I beseech you give me leave to draw a little figure of them unto you: upon this she took pen, ink, and paper, and drew this figure. Brothers   Servants Sileines of Cercinea Clorian Lucindor Alcander Clorian of Palanice Sileines, Cerintes Amilcar Alcander of Florice Lucindor Amilcar Cerintes Afterwards, she proceeded thus; Now in this ruffle of disorder, our interests are so mingled and intangled, that Cercinea cannot do good offices unto Lucindor towards me, without disobliging Cerintes, who is brother unto Palanice, and without fearing, that by way of revenge he should ruine her towards Clorian: Palanice cannot speak unto Cercinea in behalf of Clorian, without angrying me in the person of Alcander, and unlesse she oblige me to ravish Amilcar from her; and I cannot countenance the two passions of Alcander and Amilcar, un∣lesse I do vex Cercinea and Palanice, who had some right to take from me, the one Lucindor, and the other Cerintes: This made us for a while look a squint up∣one another, and live in most intollerable constraint and Tyranny; and because we imagined that this confusion would cause a breach in our amities, we went all together unto an Oracle, who gave us this answer. The Oracle. LEt six within this place remain Till honour otherwise ordain: No answer to the Female three Expect, unless alone they be.
This answer made us think that the Oracle had something else to say unto us; and therefore consulting with it alone, we received that answer which the gods have communicated unto you as well as us: This now is the principal cause of our voyage, and coming into this countrey; but since it is most requisite I should in∣form you what inclinations we have unto these Cavaliers whom now you see with us; I shall begin with Cercinea, and tell you, that, before Alcander, my brother, ever cast any eye upon her, Clorian had so far ingratiated himself into her favour, by the intercession of Palanice, as it was believed this amity could not be bro∣ken: Alcander must pardon me, if the affection which I bear unto him be not strong enough to make me tell a lie; and if being forced by a greater power to speak truth, and confesse that this fair one is every way obliged unto Clorian. It was he that first began to serve her, and found in her those flames which burned him; his affection was not born with him for any private interest, but only be∣cause he had discovered in her tender years, some sparks of those charms, which now have inflamed him, and made him admire her: he was so obsequious unto her in his youth, that for all her ingratitude towards him, she must needs confesse her self much beholding unto his conversation, for much of that gentilnesse which she is Mistresse off: And truly I cannot chuse but laugh, when I remember some of those replies which she retorted upon him when he began first to love her: Be pleased to know, she had not then attained to above the age of seven years, when he began to be sprinkled with passion, and talk unto her of love with as much ar∣dure, as if she were at full age; One time standing by the fire, he fell down up∣on his knees before her, I wonder how it's possible (said he unto her) that my fairest little Mistresse should ever have any desire of warming her self, since she is able to inflame and warm a whole world? Servant (answered she very sweetly) it is not to be thought I can warm any thing; for were it in my power, I would warm the weather, so as it should never be cold. The fire I feel (replied Clori∣an) and which your eyes have kindled in my soul, will not suffer me to doubt but that you can; but I professe unto you, it is so great, that I had rather dy then extinguish it. Do you then burn? said Cercinia (and interrupted him) yes, re∣plied Clorian; but it is in the sweetest flame that ever heart was schorched in: I wonder then (said Cercinea) that I do not smell it; for if one cast a bone, or a feather, or a little coth into the fire, it will smell all the house over: Whether it do smell or no (answered Clorian) who had much ado to forbear laughing, I am certain my fire will encrease from day to day, and perhaps will become so great, that before you be able to remedy it, it will reduce me unto ashes: It is good then (said she) to apply some remedy betimes; in saying so, she would have gone a∣way, but Clorian, holding her by the arm, what remedy (said he) would you fetch't me? I believe, answered she, that if two or three dishes of cold water be cast upon you, it will do you much good: for I observe they use to do the same unto wood when it burns too fast: Ah my fairest (said Clorian) the fire you speak of, is much different from that I feel; for if water were able to extinguish the fire of a Lover, tears would do it, but they do rather nourish then extinguish such flames. Another time, when he was going into the countrey about some businesse con∣cerning his estate, I went to visit Cercinea, and to play with her, though my age then was above the play with little children: I found her at the first a little trou∣bled at the absence of her lover; for though she was incapable of knowing what love was, yet she had some sentiments of an amity above the common strain; and asking her how long it was since he went from her: believe me, answered she, I have not counted the dayes: How? (said I) they say when one loves a person very well, they will not only count the dayes of his absence, but the howers, and the very minutes. That (answered she very coldly) is a testimony of more affe∣ction then he must expect from me: for do you think I can keep an accompt of such things, that can hardly tell how many the clock strikes? Such discourse and entertainments as these (fair and wise Shepherdesse) they used, during the innocency of that age, and I was a very frequent witnesse of them: for being near neighbours, I saw Cercinea almost every day; and Clorian
himself, who knew me more capable of reason, did take much pleasure in rela∣ting unto me her pritty answers; yet this Cavalier seeing he was to serve a long prentiship unto a child, and that it would be at least six years before she could pay what was due unto his love; he resolved to imploy his time in the wars, and did as he resolved. In his absence he got great reputation; and Cercinea became such a perfect beauty, that at his return, he found himself a most perfect slave unto her: She was now past a child; and though she did remember the name of Clorian, yet she seemed not at all to remember that liberty which she formerly had given him: she received him indeed very civilly, and well, and being of a sweet and affable disposition and deportment, all her actions and expressions, confirmed this Ca∣valier in a belief, that he was still loved: Now consider him a most perfect lover, and if Hylas would but take the pains to relate the passages of this affection, at the return of Clorian, he might instance more particulars of it then I can: for I know, that this Cavalier made use of him in the businesse, and that Hylas afer he had ta∣ken upon him to be his mediatour unto Cercinea, he began to speak for himself, and to forget all his promises, as well as the interest of his friend: It is so long, said Hy∣las, since I have related all those follies unto a hundred of these Shepherds, as I think it needlesse to speek any more of them, since their memories is good enough to re∣member them all: I do not speak it (replied Florice) to trouble them with any long and tedious relation; but I only say, that you were a long time his rival, and that you left him peaceably to the courtship of this beauty: But O our equitable Judge, do but observe how heaven is pleased to dispose of us. Clorian was no sooner out of those apprehensions, which the courtship of Hylas had caused un∣to him, but as they say, he fell into a feaver of a cold strain: for Alcander, my bra∣ther, being returned out of that countrey into which my Father had sent him, to better himself in all noble qualities, he no sooner cast his eye upon Cercinea, but he loved her; and his passion made him so assiduous unto this fair one, that Clo∣an in a few dayes became jealous upon good terms. At the first, the resentments of it were not of a deep strain: for he imagined that the authority of Pa∣lanice would give a stop to the matter. But at last, seeing, that neither the perswa∣sions of his Sister, nor his own vigilant assiduity (for he was hardly ever out of her sight) could not divert her from Alcander, but on the contrary, every thing made worse for him, he was so extreamly transported with jealousie, that he could not enjoy any manner of rest. To relate all the passages that were fuel unto his fits of jealousie, and to tell you how Alcander courted the affection of Cercinea, will not be very pertinent: It will be enough to know, that he had in a short time so ingratiated himself, that he might boast himself to be as high in her favour as Clorian; yet Cercinea being extreamly soth to disoblige Palanice, unto whom she was so much beholding and engaged for marrying her uncle; and not being able to downright hate Clorian, though his jealous humour did as much displease her, as the discreet behaviour of Alcander, take her; therefore she carryed her self swimmingly betwixt them both, and is without regret rea∣dy to receive him whom the gods, by you and your doom shall ordain and com∣mand. As for the affairs of Palanice, I can very easily & exactly give you an accompt of the greatest part of them: for she and I have been long very good friends, and be∣ing both of us a little elder then Cercinea, we had contracted a more intimate league of amity, then we had with that fair one: And this was the reason, that as soon as ever Sileines fell in love, I knew of it, almost as soon as the sister of that Cavaliers: for Palanice had no sooner a glimps of it, but she did communicate it unto me, and desired me to give her my opinion of it. To be ingenious and plain, I did not disswade her from him; but on the contrary, Sileines seeming very amiable in my eye, and seeing what esteem every one had of him, I thought it  glory unto her to be courted by a man whom every one esteemed: I found the humour of Palanice did rellish my opinion; whether because she had already some inclination to love him, or whether she was swayed by the good opi∣nion I had of him, I do not know; but so it was, that as soon as I ad∣vised
her to entertain the affection of Sileines, she expressed her self unto me, in these terms. I have good reason (dear confident, for so we used to call each other) to ask your advice in the carriage of my self towards him: for you must know, that the day after he danced in a Masque, wherein he represented Narcissus, who was in love with himself, he met me at the Queens lodgings, who is the mother of Sigis∣mond, and discoursed with me upon matters of meer indifferency; but as soon as I talked of the Masque, and told him how admirably well he danced. O heaven I my fairest Palanice (said he unto me) do not put me in memory of a grosse fault which I then committed, and which were I out of hopes to obtain a pardon for, I should not live. I who did not understand what he meant, did answer him, that I knew of no fault he had comitted, but on the contrary took notice how e∣very one admired and commended his behaviour. If every one did so (said he) then am not I like unto them; for I know that I did commit a very great fault in personating to be in love with my self, whereas it ought to have been, in really personating my self in love with you. God knows how strangely I was surprized, when I heard this discourse come from him: I swear (dear confident) it was discourse which I little expected; and because I could do no other, I blusht, and in a little anger answered: Though you should Sir, change the object of your love, yet you cannot change your destiny, since you cannot hope ever to obtain any thing from me, more then from that Image which you personated to adore in your glasse: In saying so, I removed a little from him, imagining he would not pursue any further, because my companions advanced; but he putting his hand into his pocket, he pulled out some sweet-meats, and presented them: Every one took some, and I, to testifie that I had no cause to complain against him, I took an orange comfit which he presented unto me; but as soon as I bad it in my hand, I began to play with it, and tosse it up and down like a little ball: He, who feared that it would fall, came to me, and said aloud, do you, fair Palanice, make so little account of my pre∣sent? I who did a little better understand his mind then before, and that he ta∣citly alluded unto the affection which he had already expressed unto me; I do not at all slight it (answered I) but the reason why I thus play with it is, because it is so light. Take heed (said he) that it fall not into the power of some of your companions; for perhaps they will make better use of it then you do. There is none of my companions (answered I) that will offer any such thing: then cast∣ing down his eye, and speaking in a low voice, though it be only to shew (said he) that I am not your deadly enemy, I beseech you eat it, believe me it is not poyson unlesse love, by my carriage of it, has given it a tincture of that which hath infected my heart. Upon this, he retired, and I must needs confesse I suspected his craft; but since there was no remedy, I resolved to keep this Orange comfit from being stoln from me, lest if any one should have discovered the cunning of Sileines, they might think I consented to the invention: The Queen at the same time retired, and as soon as I saw my self alone in the chamber, I began to dis∣pute with my self, whether I would open it or throw it into the fire; but my cu∣riosities being above all other considerations; I broke it in two, and saw a little paper inclosed within it: I took the paper, and opening it, I found these words written in it. The Letter of SILEINES unto PALANICE. Pardon me, my fairest Palanice, if I made use of this device to de∣ceive your cruelty, and put not an unhappy construction upon my love, though the first testimony of it be a piece of juggling: If your pity do afford me any favour, I shall blesse the invention which my passion prompted me to use, with a vow never to use it again, in the ex∣pression of my devoted service, which you cannot refuse without making me the most miserable men in the world.
I had no sooner read this paper, but I resolved to shew it unto you, and not to let Sileines know I had seen it, until I had consulted with you what to do, and therefore I told you the whole truth, to the end you may advise me unto the same course you would take your self, if the like accident should befal you. This was the first discourse that Palanice and I had of it together, by which I was fully informed of the passion of Sileines, and of her inclination to entertain his courtship: so as having in some sort found out her humour, I solicited in his behalf, that after removal of some small difficulties, she permitted him to serve her; upon condition he would behave himself so discreetly, that his very thoughts could not be condemned: which Sileines promised with so many protestations, that I believe the earth would have opned and swallowed him up, if he had been perjured. Ever since that time, he continued his courtship, with so much love and assidui∣ty, that the heart of Palanice had been a hundred times harder then Marble, if she had not been sensible of his expressions: I remember one day he desired her to give him a favour; she, desiring time to consider of it, came unto me the very same day, and entreated me to tell her, whether it were just, she would give him some testimonies of her affection: to which I answered, that since she did really love him, and knew his discretion so great as might assure her of his love, she might well let him know, that she esteemed him above any other; but yet I advised her to make triall upon some occasion, whether his love was answerable to his expressions. Palanice hearkned unto my advice, and first she gave him a favour, which was a bracelet of her hair, woven with gold thred into letters, which made these words; Better the Heart then the Arm: The first time Sileines saw her, he begg'd again for a favour; I will (said she) give you a testimony of my amity, but withal, I would have you give me in exchange a testimony of your obedience. Sileines, who to obtain this honour, would have promised impossibilities, did swear whaso∣ever she desired. Then (said Palanice) all that I require of you, consists in two things; that you will not laugh at this favour which I give you, though it be un∣worthy of your merit: Secondly, that after I have tied it about your arm, you will not look upon it in three dayes. As to the first of your commands, (answered Sileines) there is no great difficulty, Madam, in obtaining it; for nothing can come from you. but is more worthy of admiration then laughter: But, Madam, as for the second, pardon me I beseech you, if I do not promise more then I am able to perform: for I am so infinitly desirous to see that which is a testimony of your affection, as I dare not swear I will abstain a day from the sight of so dear a favour: Well, replied Palanice, then promise me you will not look upon it, un∣til you be come unto your own chamber: I will Madam (replied Sileines) since you desire it. Upon this, Palanice causing him to hold his hat before his eyes, and charged him not to take it away; she unbuttoned one of his sleeves, and after she had put on the bracelet, she buttoned it up again: As soon as Sileines had leave to take a∣way his hat, he fell down upon his knees, and taking the hand of Palanice, fairest hand (said he and kissed it) which this day daigns to admit into the number of Palanices sleeves, I do swear by thy fair self, that I will never break the marks of my captivity; and that there is no consideration whatsoever, that can indure me to cast of my bonds. Upon that, not staying so long as till Palanice could speak one word, he ran out of the chamber, and as fast as he could unto his own. As soon as he was there, he went into his closet, and locked the door: Then open∣ing his sleeve, his eye and his mouth went both at once to that part of his arm which he perceived to presse him a little: But O, in what a wonder was he, when he found it to be Palanices hair, compos'd into a bracelet of fine curiosity: he has told me since, that his astonishment was the greater, because he expected it to be only some of her knots which she used to wear; he stood a long while, and looked upon it, not daring to utter one word, for interrupting his ravishment: afterward, upon a sudden, kissing every letter in it one after another: Yes, yes, fairest Palanice (said he) it is most true, that this favour is better upon the heart then the arm: After this he was silent again; and kissing it a thousand times, par∣don
me (O ye great gods, said he) if I do commit this Idolatry, and adore the giver of this, as the most perfect work of a great divinity. Fair Phillis, it would be superfluous to relate all his expressions, upon this plea∣sing subject: it is sufficient I tell you, that he stayed in his closet above two howers, and would have stayed there much longer, if Lucindor had not called him, who came to invite him from Sigismond, to a course at the ring, which was to be held within two or three dayes by the Queens command. It was not long before I knew from Palanice her self, that Sileines had this bracelet; and there∣fore I told her that she had already done much at the request of this young Cava∣lier; and that I thought it expedient for her to try by some artifice or other, whether he did really love her. Palanice told me that she would, and that be∣fore eight dayes were over, she would tell me what she had done: but it it fit I should tell you how she went to work, that you may see the quicknesse of her wit. I told you before, that within two or three dayes after Sileines had the brace∣let, the Queen was to bestow a ring, at which she would have Sigismond to run, and with him all the Cavalry of the Court; and Sileines being one of the great∣est Gallants in it, he was invited unto it by this young Prince. The next morning, then he went to acquaint Palanice; and she, who was very glad of that occasi∣on to execute her design; as soon as Sileines began to speak of it, and say that he thought none was able to dispute with him for this ring, since he ran at it for the love of her: You (answered Palanice) shall not dispute for it with any, for you shall not run at all. Pardon me, Madam, I beseech you, said the Cavalier: for Sigismond commanded me unto it by Lucindor. And I, replied Palanice, do forbid you. I hope, replied Sileines, you are more just, and a greater friend unto my reputation, then to forbid me the performance of what I have promi∣sed: Ah Sileines (said Palanice) this is but a slender argument of any power that I have over you. Why, Madam, (replied the Cavalier) were it that your service called me another way, I protest I would excuse my self, and had rather displease Sigismond then you; or if you do positively command it so, I will o∣bey; Then (said Palanice) disengage your self from your promise; for if you do love, or will obey me, do not run, but stay with me all that day whilst the rest are at the sport. Sileines was a little importunate to know the reasons which moved her unto this; but Palanice her self knowing none, it was impossible she should give him any. The very same night, he went unto the chamber of Si∣gismond, and being not able to think upon any thing but the commands of his Mistresse, he took his opportunity so fitly, that as he was coming to this young Prince, his foot slipt, and he fell down to the ground: At the first, none thought he had received any hurt, but Sigismond himself began to laugh; but when they saw him get up, with much pain, and that he complained, every one came to him to know how he did; he told them that his ancle was out of joint, and the young Prince believing it, caused a coach to be immediatly made ready to carry him un∣to his chamber: afterwards sent several Chirurgeons with special charge to have care of his cure; but Sileines who would not be visited, lest a report should be made of his heart, contrary to his intention, he told them he had sent for a Chi∣rurgeon of his own, in whose experience he had a great confidence. The noise of this mishap which was believed to befall Sileines, was quickly spred all over the Town, and Palanice was not the last that heard of it: yet seem∣ing to be ignorant of the cause, she entreated Cerintes to go and see him; but Sileines hearing that Palanice was pleased to have any care of him, I beseech you Sir, said he unto Cerintes, assure Palanice, that since she is pleased to pity my mishap, I feel no pain: and were I freed from my displeasure, that I cannot wait upon Sigismond at the Course, there is nothing now that would trouble me: which Cerintes having told unto his sister, she presently understood his meaning, so apt are Lovers to expound the words and actions which do any thing concern them. The day assigned for the Course at the ring came, and Sileines with a staff in his hand, as if he could not go without it, coming to the lodging of Palanice,
he waited upon her unto a friends house, whose windows looked towards the place where the Course was to be: It was not long after before Sigismond came, and with him a great number of Cavaliers, all whom, after a long dispute, yielded the praise unto the agility of that young Prince, who carried it away, to the great contentment of all the Court. Whilst they were running at the ring, Palanice and Sileines did nothing but talk; and if it were true which she since told me, their discourse was to this purpose: They leaned both together upon the same window, and Sileines looking upon his Mistresse, as if he were ravished at so fair a sight; how infinitly have you obliged me Madam (said he unto her) in forbid∣ing me to appear amongst these Cavaliers, that I might enjoy the happinesse of being so near you? Some (answered she) are often near in body, who are far off in heart. That misfortune (said Sileines) is inevitable unto all such as are own∣ers of so little merit as I am. Truly (replied Palanice) I must confesse you have qualities enough to win esteem; but I cannot perswade my self you have such, as will make all the women that look upon you, run out of their wits for the love of you: I swear (replied Sileines and smiled a little) that as I have not the pow∣er to do it, so I have not so much arrogance as to think it; and should I desire to be perfectly loved by any one (I mean not so far as run mad for me) I protest I should wish it were your self, whom I adore, and for whom my life is only plea∣sing unto me: you will quickly leave off that wish (answered Palanice) since you can never gain any thing upon me, who am inviolably resolved to hold all men alike indifferent. O heavens, Madam! (said Sileines and interrupted her) do you not remem∣ber those oathes and protestations you have made in my favour? I do remember, replied Palanice, all the promises that I made unto you: and if your memory be as good as mine, you will find, that though I did swear to love you▪ yet I did not thereby swear to hate all other men, but will on the contrary, carresse them e∣qually, without giving one more credit or authority over me then another. May then every one, replied Sileines, pretend unto the same favours which I have ob∣tained from you; how can I put any high value upon them, if your melting kind∣nesse make them common unto all the world? Then he held his peace to hear what Palanice would answer; but seeing her to look another way; O most cruel fair one (continued he) is it possible you should in so short a time change your inclination? and do you intend to recompence my obedience no better. I per∣ceive (said Palanice) you think that you have done a great matter at this time, and think me much beholding vnto you, for depriving your self of the pleasure of one poor day; but Sileines, since you have so good an opinion of your self, and aspires unto so great a recompence for so small a matter, I pray look betimes for some that will give them unto you: as for my part, I will not, and swear un∣to you, that I shall be very glad if you will trouble me no more. Sileines, asto∣nished to see her so angry, and not knowing what in the world should be the cause: Fair Palanice, answered he, if it be my love that troubles you, pardon me if I tell you, my fidelity will not suffer me to give you lesse; but if it be my presence which vexes you, you shall not long languish in that displeasure: for I do protest not to present my self before you, until I be well assured that you de∣sire my company: In saying so, he went from her, and would have gone out of the chamber; but Palanice who followed him with her eye, called him back as he was opening the door. As soon as Sileines heard himself named he turned back; and coming to her, she said unto him, with a scornful look, since you intend to retire your self, Silei∣nes, it is not reasonable you should keep a companion with you that may trouble you in your solitude, therefore (said she) pray rstore me back my bracelet; for I will have it again. I wish with all my heart (answered Sileines) that I were a∣ble to give you that contentment; but having sworn never to part with it as long as I have life, you must, if you would have it back command me to die: Die or live, said Palanice, I am indifferent, so I can but obtain what I ask, and have my own hair again: Fair peice of cruelty (replied the young Cavalier) can your rigour find a heart to kill me, before I know the cause of it? Will you use me with more
Tyranny, then those whom they use to doom unto death before they be convin∣ced of any crime? Do not accuse any for the treatment which you receive, an∣swered Palanice, but the shallownesse of your own merit; and unlesse you will most mortally displease me, restore unto me immediatly the bracelet which you had of me. But Madam, replied Sileines, you gave it unto me freely without a∣ny condition; therefore, replied Palanice, I would have it freely again without any condition. As long as I have done nothing (said Sileines) which renders me unworthy to enjoy it, is it not extream injustice to ravish it from me: tell me no more of injustice (replied Palanice) all the reason in the world allows me to take my own where ere I find it: I am afraid, replied Sileines, that you will have much ado to unty it; for there are a thousand knots upon it: No matter, no mat∣ter (answered Palanice) I have a pair of Scissers which will do that office excel∣lently well, if you will but hold out your arm. Well, well, persidious woman (said Sileines in a rage and holding out his arm) satisfie your fury, and take your fill in ruining me, I will not give you so much advantage, as to say hereafter, that ever I opposed your will in any thing: Upon this Palanice did cut the ribband which tyed it together, and having put it into her pocket: Go now (said she un∣to him) even whether you please, and say that you are beholding unto me for cut∣ting your chains and setting you at liberty: in saying so, she went to the win∣dow, not so much as casting a look upon him; and poor Sileines, sunk in sorrow, went away; but quite cured of his lamenesse, for his rage had made him forget his staffe, and to counterfeit a cripple, as he did when he came. His humour (said Hylas, who sat and said not a word till now) point blank contrary unto mine: could I with any patience ever endure she should call me troublesome, and accuse me of too little merit for her? Let me dy if I would not have given her, not only the bracelet, but dublet, shirt, and all, to be delivered from the Tyranny of such a peevish piece. Sileines did not so, replied Florice, but being enraged at such treatment from that fair one, he resolved to come no more where she was; and began to prepare himself for travel, so find some re∣medy against his sorrows. As soon as the running at the ring was ended, Palanice came to give me an ac∣compt of all she had done; and because I knew by her looks and speech, that she repented of it, I advised her to think upon a remedy. We went therefore to see Cercinea; and though that fair one was his sister, yet she knew nothing of his secrets, for Palanice durst never trust her, because she was very young. Though we had known nothing of what had hapned unto her brother, yet we might well have imagined it by the disorder in the house: for the inquietude wherein Cercinea was, and those tears which somtimes fell from her eyes did give us sufficient knowledg of it: yet seeming to be ignorant of all, we beseeched her not to conceal from us the cause of her sorrow. She was not at all shie in telling us all very freely; how about two hours ago she had seen her brother so extreamly troubled and offended, that it greived her very heart; for, said she, he asked some money of me, which he gave me to keep, he caused all his clothes to be packed up, he commanded his horses to be made ready, and I saw him in such strange disorder, as it troubled my very soul: I wish (said Palanice) that he were here, for he would not hide from me the cause of his discontent: Alas, said Cercinea innocently, never believe that; I think he loves me very well, and that I have as much power with him as any in the world, but all my prayers and desires could not get one word from him. In saying so, they saw Sileines enter, and passed by, not seeing who was in the chamber: Palanice, thinking all that Cer∣cinea said of her brothers despair was true, she seemed to have something to do out of the chamber, and went unto the Hall dor, out of which Sileines must of necessity passe, before he could go out of the house: Sileines, so troubled in mind, that he never took any notice of me, he took his cloak and sword; but when thinking to go out, he saw Palanice at the door, he was extreamly astonish∣ed. She, who stood in the midst of the door-stead, and held out both her arms to stop the passe, with her face from the house; as soon as she heard him coming, who is there? (said she, and turned a little about) Sileines then, not so much as
lifting up an eye, it is I, answered he, that would go out. Out? said Palanice, what? out of my heart, or out of the house? out of the world, replied Silei∣nes, since your cruelty will not suffer me to live: after this, striving a little wih her, as being desirous to passe whether she would or no, Palanice catched hold of his arm; I wonder (said she) you should so much forget the Laws of civility, as to force those that have taken the pains to come and visit you: No, no, repli∣ed Sileines, you love your own contentment better, then to take any pains to come and visit a man that is so troublesome, and of so shallow merits as I am. Palanice, who knew well enough what he meant; whether you be troublesome or welcome unto me (said she unto him) I will not now dispute; but be it which it will, I would have you stay in the house, and if I have any power of you, I command it. But fair Phillis, to shorten my discourse, Palanice carried the matter so, that she stayed him, and gave him such full satisfaction, that in the presence of his Sister, who ever since had a share in his secrets, she swore, that as long as he carried himself with the same fidelity and discretion as formerly, she would never change. Now, O our fair and just Judge, I cannot tell whether it be that men grow weary in prosperity, or are glutted with too many favours; but most cer∣tainly, they are all inconstant, and more by being too much loved, then too little. Sileines is an argument of it in his change: for without any good excuse and co∣lourable pretence, he cast off my companion, and devoting himself unto Dorisa, did so extreamly offend Palanice, that in revenge she permitted Rosiliander to make addresses unto her; but though a marriage betwixt them was almost fully concluded, yet she resolved, that if her persidious Sileines would return again un∣to his duty, she would find out some invention or other to break off with Rosili∣liander: she ventured therefore a Letter unto him; but he, in lieu of giving her any hopes, returned this answer. The Letter of SILEINES unto PALANICE. You think that the Letter which you writ unto me is a testimony of your love; but I take it to be a full assurance of your infideli∣ty. You are like unto such as are ready to die, and would never have any recourse unto any remedies, till their disease be past all hopes of cure. Marry freely Palanice, since heaven and you have con∣spired my ruine, and do not think I will ever forbid the banes, since it is not fit men should contradict the ordinances of the gods. I must needs confesse, that he whom you shall love, shall enjoy the richest treasure that is this day upon the earth: But since I shall never be jealous, nor have any desire to buy it at so dear a rate as the losse of my liberty, I shall not envy him: your inconstancy has begot in me such an odium unto all women, as if they do but hate all men, as much as I do hate all them, the age wherein we live will be the last of Nature, and so adieu. This Letter did put Palanice into such a rage against him, that to put him out of all hopes of ever pretending again unto her, she gave her self unto Rosiliander, who after he had married her, did carry her into the most fruitful place of the Sebusi∣ans. Sileines repented himself of his fault; but it was now too late; and all that he could ever obtain from Palanice, was some Letters, by which she assured him, that she did esteem him as much as the condition wherein she was would permit her. In fine, Rosiliander died; Palanice returned to Lions, and the lover▪ of Si∣leines and she began to kindle into as hot a flame as ever; yet with lesse tranquili∣lity unto him: for Amilcar his brother, who returned at the same time, became his Rival, and fell so desperately in love with Palanice, that after a million of ex∣pressions of it, she could nor chuse but wish him well. I must confesse, that at
the first I would have diverted him; but at last, when I saw his wound was incura∣ble, I left Sileines, and took Amilcars part; and do what Cercinea his Sister could, I did so harp upon this string unto Palanice, that the first falling away of Sileines had made him so unworthy of ever being loved again, that if I did not absolutely overcome her, yet at least I made her confesse, that both of them had an equal weight in the ballance of her esteem, and that she would give her self unto him whom the gods appointed her by their Oracle. Now fair and wise Shepherdesse, there remains no more, but to acquaint you with the follies of my youth, which I could wish any other were to relate; but since the lot is fallen upon me, I will relate them without any artifice, and be∣seech you to excuse me, if my imperfections make you think the relation te∣dious. Be pleased to know, fair and just Judge, that of these two Cavaliers, to wit, Lucindor the brother of Cercinea, and Cerintes the brother of Palanice, Lucin∣dor was the first that professed love unto me. I will leave it unto Silvander, to find out the cause of this affection: for my part, I do ingeniously confesse my self not to be so good a scholler as to know it. But however, thus it began: Lucindor hapned one day to come into a great deal of good company, where they fell into talk of me, and to lament the death of a young Cavalier, who they say served me, and who some five or six months before was slain by a man whom he loved. This Cavalier was called Meliseor; a man of an excellent wit, and one who though very young, yet esteemed one of the best Schollers of all Gaul-Ly∣onesse. Now after many a sigh at the remembrance of this losse, they assured Lucindor, that there was an extream resemblance betwixt him and Meliseor, and that they found the very same features in both their faces: which Lucindor being very glad of, and proud of that resemblance, he resolved to see me, and to try whether he should have the same inclination unto me which the said Meliseor had; but see the power of Sympathy, or rather Destiny: Lucindor being brought by Cercinea, unto a place where I was in company, he no sooner cast his eye upon me but he was ravisht; and suffering himself to be captivated by that appearance of beauty which he saw in my face, he made a secret Sacrifice of his liberty unto me. For my part, I must needs confesse, his handsome mind so charmed me, that I presently began to have a design upon him, and to spruce up my self to catch him; but it was not long before I saw, that the place which I intended to besiege was already rendred unto me: for Lucindor, after some amorous squints had pas∣sed between us' coming nearer me: Did you know, fair Florice (said he unto me, an encounter that is befallen me, it would make you laugh: and you may make it sad or pleasant unto me, as you please. I answered only with a smile which told him, that his first accost was not displeasing unto me, and this made him the more confident and bold to go on, and relate unto me what they had told him of the resemblance he had with Meliseor; and truly (said he) I do verily believe it, since they told me at the same time that he loved you, and since the first time my eyes had the honour to see you, I was never able to defend my self against those overcoming charms wherewith you have captivated me. You ought not (answered I) give any more credit unto them that Meliseor loved me, then I do unto you when you would perswade me that you also do love me: 'Tis true, I knew that Cavalier, and I did no lesse esteem his merit, then I do lament his sad and fatal end; but I am of an humour so far from suffering any courtships of men, as I know, that though I had a desire unto it, yet he durst never be so arrogant as to presume any mention of it: In saying so, I cast my eye upon Lucindor, and perceived that he changed colour; for the coldnesse of my answer went to his heart and struct him dumb; but afterwards taking a little better courage: If e∣ver he did love you (said he unto me) I cannot believe but he did expresse it un∣to you; and truly though you are pleased to accuse him of a fault if he had, yet what punishment soever I must expect, I cannot chuse but commit the same crime. I shall trouble you, my Judge, with a relation of his answer, and what argu∣ments he used to win my consent unto a reception of his service: But so it was
that I yielded unto his importunity, and permiting him to expresse his passion in writing, I received almost every day a Letter from him for a long while together, all which he gave unto me himself; for want of a person whom I durst trust with the interest which I had in him. Within a short while after, Cerintes, he decla∣red himself; and because he feared I was too far engaged in my affection unto Lu∣cindor, he did not discouer himself at the first unto me; but he knew so well how to comply with the humour of my Father, that the good old man▪ thinking him a convenient match for me, he did command me to love him. This did not put me to a little pains; and the more, because Lucindor, having some touch of a jealous nature, did evidently make it appear unto me, that he could not brook his Rival without abundance of impatiencience; yet I carried my self so swim∣mingly, both to the one and the other, that they both went away without any reason to boast of any particular satisfaction. Yet I had a stronger inclination un∣to Lucindor then Cerintes; and the greatest light that ever he had of it was one night when we were at the table, and jesting with one another, my Father gave a book unto us, out of which we might draw our fortunes; either for war, or for riches, or for love, or marriage, or many other several things: Cerintes was the first who cast the dice, to know whether or no, he should obtain his Mistresse, and met with a very favourable lot which gave him great contentment. Lucindor on the contrary, he was so unfortunate, as he met with the most unkind answer in all the book; at which seeing him a little troubled, cast the dice again (said I un∣to him) for to be more assured of the truth, one must try more then once: to which Lucindor consenting, he threw the dice the second time; but meeting with the very same fortune, he fell into a most furious chase, and swore he would eat the dice if he met with the same lot again; but he might well be angry with his Fortune, for it changed not; for throwing the dice again he was as unhappy as before. Let me die, if it did not extreamly astonish me, for though I gave no credit unto such fooleries, yet I could not chuse but suspect that our affection would meet with some sinister event. Being no lesse damped at this chance then he, I took up the dice; but Lucindor laid his hand upon mine to take them from me, and eat them according to his oath; and seeing I resisted him, he prayed me to give them unto him: but I said unto him in a low voice, I fear Lucindor, that you will use them ill, if I submit them to your mercy: I will use them (said he) as an enemy, that has robb'd me of all my hopes, unlesse you will be pleased to make my Destiny more kind unto me then they have: your welfare Lucindor (said I unto him) depends upon your merit, and not upon chance; and therefore, if you have any good opinion of your self, let me advise you to hope well. You must peremptorily command me so to do (replied he) if it be your pleasure I should live. Well (said I unto him in a low voice) I do then command you, and be confident you shall be as happy as I can make you. Upon this, I threw the dice upon the Table, and we continued in our rallary, until it was my Fathers pleasure to retire. It was not the latter end of Winter, and as ill luck was, an Aunt of mine who lived in the countrey, fell sick, and sent to entreat my Father that I might come and stay with her. Upon this I went, and being well assured, that both Lucindor and Cerintes would come and visit me, I was afraid, lest some fits of jealousie should make them fall foul upon each other, as they met upon the way; and there∣fore I charged them both, upon pain of my displeasure, not to stir out of Lions: Cerintes was obedient, and I must confesse his obedience did much please me, But Lucindor, after he had endured this absence, with as much grief as a man that loves well could do, and imagining, that what crime soever he committed, I loved him so well as to pardon it, he resolved to see me, and began to consider upon the way how. Fortune presently after favoured his desires: for my Aunt sending a young man to acquaint my Father with her recovery, Lucindor chanced to meet with him, and knew so well how to tickle the fellow with fair words, that he made him pro∣mise to bring him unto my chamber, when I was ready to go into bed. So as when the young man was returned, and told us how glad my Father was to hear
of his Sisters recovery, he began to think upon the promise which he made unto Lucindor, who according to appointment, was to come that night: The Cava∣lier in the interim forgot not his time; but before I tell you how I received him, I will tell you what befel him by the way. First, he set out of Lions in the evening, none taking any notice of him; and because the gates of the Town did use alwayes to be shut very timely, he went out also betimes, and stayed in the suburbs until it was a fit time for him to set for∣ward. The air was very muddy, and much disposed unto rain: so as he was no sooner set forward, but the clouds began to open, and shower down in such a∣bundance, that though he had a very thick cloak, yet was he as wet, as if he had been thrown into a river: The Moon lent no light at all; and thus accompanied with rain and obscurity, he went on his journey; yet chearing up himself in hopes of enjoying two or three sweet hours with me. He had not gone above the third part of a mile, but missing his way, and galloping through woods and bushes, he hit his head against something which struct off his hat: at the same instant he spied a man, who, as he thought, had an intention to pull him off from his horse: At the first, he apprehended him to be some thief who wait∣ed in the way for a prize; therefore spurring on his horse, he galloped some four∣ty or fifty paces, afterwards he stopped, and drew his sword, ready to defend himself against any that followed him: He stood a while in this posture, still en∣during all the rain, which powred down faster and faster. Seeing none came af∣ter him, he listned with his ear, to try whether he could hear any noise; and then he thought he heard some laugh near the place where he saw the man; but not thinking it possible to find his hat again, he put his cloak over his head, and in this equipage he came to my Aunts house, and at the gate, he found the fellow that had promised to let him enter. Lucindor was so pitifully wet, that his clothes made a stream of water where∣soever he came, yet being shewed which was my chamber,  entred just as I was beginning to undresse my self. He presently cast himself at my feet, and taking my hand kissed it, I making no resistance, for I was so surprized at his arrival, that I was even ready to fall into a swoon. Yet imagining, that perhaps some grand reason had induced him unto this disobedience, I asked him with a trembling voice, if my Father was well, and he answered, yes. What is it then (said I unto him) which makes you so bold as to come out of Lions and despise my commands? My love, replied he, which would not let me live and not see you. How? (said I) will so small a matter move you to displease me? Madam, answered he, do you think the life of a man that loves you above all the world, so small a matter? very well, Lucindor, replied I, and seemed to be extreamly angry, since you do love your life so well, and since it concerns me to have a care of my reputation, stay not a jot longer in this place, where neither of us both can be in safety. He offered to reply something, but I interrupted him, go, go, said I, haste away as fast as ever you can, upon pain of eternal displeasure. Upon this I ran into my Wardrobe and shut the door, resolved not to come out till he was gone out of the chamber: But Lucindor, at the first stood still, as if he were immovable; but at last, enraged at my cold entertainment of him, he went out in a most desperate mood, and took horse without a hat, though the fellow which gave him entrance did offer to lend him one. As soon as he was gone, I would needs know by what trick he had thus sur∣prized me; and the young fellow confessing that it was by his means, also that Lucindor told him, he came upon businesse that was very serviceable to me; though I first threat to make him be turned away, yet afterwards, upon his asking pardon, and his repentant tears, I could not find in my heart to punish him. Lucindor in the mean time returned homewards, the most afflicted man that e∣ver received any ill treatment from his Mistresse; but as if the weather were more kind unto him then I: the clouds cleared up, and the Moon shined upon him as if it were a new day; and therefore riding on, he espied upon his left hand, a gibbet, raised up above the ground, about eight or nine foot, and some three or
four paces further, a corps lying upon the ground, he began to think it the body of some Fellon, but he could not imagine why the corps that should have been upon the gibbet, should be under it. At last, considering upon it, he remembred what adventure he met withal about that same place and imagining, that per∣haps riding under this gibbet, he light upon the corps and threw it down, and then believed that this was the theif whom he suspected; and to confirm him in this belief, as he rode a little further he found his hat, which he took up, and continued in his way: the only thing wherein he was not satisfied, was, that he thought he heard some laugh; but hearing upon a sudden, the cry of some Owl or night Raven, which used to feed upon that corps, he found his mistake, and that his fears at that time had in some sort disordered his judgement: Lucindor hath since confessed unto me, that he could laugh heartily at this adventure, if the condition wherein he was would permit him to entertain any other thoughts, but such as bore the image of despair: and if it was true which he told me, his soul was so sunk in sorrows, that nothing in the world was able to raise it unto a∣ny pitch of mirth. Thinking therefore upon the cold entertainment which I gave him, he began to sigh out so many sad complaints against me, that his journey ended sooner then his sorrows. Yet night not being done, he called at the house from whence he departed, and staying there till the gates of the Town were o∣pened, he went unto his own house; in which he was no sooner entred but a fea∣ver seized upon him, and in a short time grew so violent, that every one despaired of his recovery. My Aunt was now perfectly recovered; and my Father sending for me home. I was no sooner returned, but I heard Lucindor was ready to die. I must con∣fesse, that I was very angry with him: but hearing this sad news, I did so quite forget his fault, and was so exceedingly troubled at it, that my Father himself, by the alteration of my face, perceived my sorrows, and certainly I had some reason to be sorry for him for when I began to consider, that if he had not loved me, he would never have ollen out in the night time, to come and see me, and con∣sequently, would not have endured such rain, wind, and weather, as he did: all this made me pity him so much, as if it had been possible, I would have endured the one half of his pain, as a punishment upon my self, for being the principal cause. All the Physicians of Gondebaut were imployed about him; but as he told me, I had better Physick for his disease then all they: for indeed, as soon as ever he heard that I had pardoned his disobedience, he began to mend, and within twelve dayes after left his bed. Cerintes in the mean time had entirely gotten the good will of my Father, and yet being unwilling to marry an enemy, he did all that possibly he could to make me a friend; but still finding that Lucindor was highly in my favour, and that I looked upon him with a more favourable eye then upon himself, he began to be almost furious. He intended therefore to testifie his resentments to the height; and thus he went to work. One evening, when Lucindor and he did come to keep my Father company, after some ordinary discourse, I entreated Cerintes to sing: he taking my Lute, musick Madam (said he unto me) does not sympathize with my sadnesse; yet since you command me, I shall sing you a very new air, which one of my best friends composed, and none but my self ever heard as yet: upon this he sate down, tuned the Lute, looked upon me, and sung certain verses which extreamly reflected upon his Rival. Afterwards, he laid the Lute down upon the Table, and sat silent: I blush'd; but on the contrary, Lucindor grew pale; and I observed, that he had an itching desire to call him to an accompt for the words of his song. Yet being in a place where respect tyed him to the good behaviour, he contented himself to say this unto him: Your song, Cerintes, is very fine, and I believe, that if he who com∣posed it should sing it before any that was concerned in it, it would beget a quarrel: Perhaps (answered Cerintes) it was so intended: Then they looked upon each other in such a manner, as made my Father plainly perceive the cause of their quarrel: and therefore intending to stop the course, he carryed them both into his closet, and used such perswasive arguments as made them friends; and con∣ceiving
the only way, to take away th ffects of their ill will, was to take away the cause, he swore unto them both, that he would bestow me upon Theombres, and that he was well pleased with it: Lucindor was ready to bite off his fingers for anger, and passing through the chamber where I was, he went away without so much as bidding me good night; but as soon as he came to his chamber, he wrote me such a Letter, as did presently let me see his fury; but this did not af∣ford me any means to remedy it: for indeed my Father did give me unto Theom∣bres, and this Cavalier having married me, did carry me with him unto his house within eight dayes after. Yet during this absence, the affections of Lucindor and Cerintes did not die; but were, as it were nourished by my absence: and I knew it to be so, because Theombres dying, they began their addresses afresh; and as if heaven would remove all obstacles out of their way, I lost a Father, soon after, a husband: yet not being able to resolve how I should demean my self unto either, or both of them, I willingly consented to take that course which we re∣solved upon all together, which was to consult with the Oracle in the Temple of Venus: whose answers, most equitable Judge, you have heard, together with the stories of our lives, the tranquility of which depends upon your doom. After this, Florice was silent; and Phillis taking Ligdamon and Celidea, and asking Florice, whether there was any danger in calling Adamas and Alexis to councel, she answered, that there was no particular prohibition to the contrary: so as the Druide and Celadon, being added unto Phillis, Celidea, and Ligdamon, they all severed themselves a while from the rest of the company, they all gave their several votes unto Phillis; and then they returned again, and sitting down, she uttered these words in an audible voice. Since it hath pleased the gods that your differences should be referred unto me, and since they have ordained that my Doom shall be an inviolable Law unto you, upon the grave deliberation and advice of those whom I took to be my As∣sistants, I do judge, that all you three being almost equally obliged unto those who have the honour to serve you, therefore it is of necessity, that the gods do further make it known, which of these Cavaliers are destinied to be your several and respective husbands. I do therefore ordain, that the discission of it shall be by lot, and that each of you, with each of your two Lovers, shall be blinded with an Napkin; and each of you shall marry him who first falls into her hands, without any permission unto those to whom destiny is averse, to murmure ei∣ther against me, or against heaven, whose will is as I have pronounced. After this Phillis rose up, and taking napkins, she first blinded the eyes of Cer∣cinea, and afterwards Clorian and Alcander; and carrying them into one of the corners in the gallery, she gave two little keys unto Clorian, and two unto Alcan∣der, to the end, that they making a noise with them, Cercinea might hear and know where to find them: After this, turning  about several times, and giving them a watch-word when they should begin their walk: Cercinea at the o∣ther end of the gallery, set forward at the noise of the keys, and went blindfold whether her Genius did lead her: the first that she met with was Alcander, who seeing himself more happy then his Rival, did embrace Cercinea so close, that she could not possibly escape out of his arms. This controversie thus decided, Phillis took the napkins, and putting them over the eyes of Palanice, Sileines, and Amilcar; she observed the same ceremonies as before, until at last she fell unto the lot of Sileines. Florices turn was nex, and she having a more particular inclination unto Lu∣cindor, the gods favoured her desires, and cast him into her arms before Cerintes, at which she was extreamly well satisfied. In the mean time Cerintes still looked on, and Hylas having gotten Lucindors keyes out of his hands, he made a noise with them, as if Florice had not yet made her blind choise: at last, not to let him any longer run on in that vain and unprofitable quest, he put himself into his arms and embraced him: Cerintes, who thought at the first, that he had Florice in his arms: O my fairest Florice (said he) now at the last you are mine for ever: Yes
(said Hylas) if it please Lucindor to p with her: Cerintes, then finding his mistake, wretched fellow (said he unto Hylas) is it not enough to see me deprived of Florice, but I must be mocked at? why mocked? replied Hylas, I would have you know Cerintes, that you are extreamly obliged unto me, and that in taking me, you are more rich then you imagine. Away, away, replied Cerintes, do not so extreamly disoblige me with thy foole∣ry: I protest (answered Hylas) I am in good serious earnest: for if a Lover be transmigrated into the person loved; as Silvander affirms, then consider who am I, that in putting my self into thy arms, I have in lieu of one beauty, presented thee with a hundred that have loved me: every one laughed at the rallery of Hy∣las, Cerintes only, Clorian, and Amilcar, seemed discontented, and resolved to go the next morning after Sigismond, and so they did; Adamas with Ligdamon, bear∣ing them company, as far as Marcelles. Adamas had so short a mornings walk, that he came to Marcelles long before either Amasis or Galathea were awake; and therefore he went straight unto the chamber of Lindamor, whom he found almost ready: for his love would not let him lie in bed so long as others: and there inquiring the cause of Galatheas so sudden sending for him, Lindamor answered him in these terms. The reason, re∣verend Father, why that Nymph did put you unto the trouble of coming, does equally concern both her and me, and for your full satisfaction, I will make a re∣lation of it unto you: Know therefore Father, that as the state stands with me, my life does absolutely depend upon three persons, and they are, Amasis, Gala∣thea, and your self. Perhaps Amasis may consider my services; and as soon as my intention it known unto her, she will not deny me a happinesse which hath al∣ready cost me many a sigh: Galathea is almost overcome, and if it may be spoken without vanity, she has desires which are entirely to my advantage: I want only your assistance in the businesse, and that you will be pleased to mediate for me un∣to the Nymph, for none has a greater influence upon her then your self, whose prudence is so well known unto her and all the world, that the charm only of your approbation, is enough to move her unto any thing: but Father, to the end you may know in what a desparate condition I shall be, if my designe be not second∣ed with a happy successe, answerable unto my desires and hopes, I will make you a particular relation of my love, and other accidents of my life: provided you will be pleased to pardon a grosse crime which I have committed, in so long conceal∣ing from you, an interest which cannot but prove very fatal unto me, with that assistance which you may afford unto me. Upon this, the Cavalier desired the Druide to sit down, and began to prepare himself to make a long Narrative of all that had passed betwixt Galathea and him; but Adamas, who knew it perfectly already, by the relation of Leonide, prevented him and said: Brave Lindamor, you do think me more ignorant of your affairs then I am; but to save you the labour of any relations, let me tell you, that I do know so many pass oncerning your love, as perhaps will make you wonder, when you hear me,  them to the very least particular: and in testi∣mony of what I say, was it not Lindamor who fought with Polemas, and having vanquished him, did retire himself, and would not be known by any? Do you not remember the time, when in the habit of a Gardiner you presented a hart unto Galathea, which she found to be a living hart, in lieu of a dead one that she expected? Did you not that very same night make many promises unto her? and did not she vow, that she would never deny her consent unto any thing that you desired? You see Lindamor, I know all that concerns you, and be not sorry for it, for I do honour you so much, as I will make use of my knowledge, rather to serve, then to hurt you: I must tell you, therefore, that if ever you had any rea∣son to hope for good fortune, it is now, just now, when all things contribute un∣to it; only let me advise you to carry your self very discreetly, lest if your pas∣sion should make too great a noise, it might in some sort offend Amasis and Ga∣lathea. Lindamor did hearken very attentively unto all the Druide had said; and he presently apprehended, that it could be none but Leonide that could be his in∣former;
yet not willing to lose any time in condemning her for it, he seemed to be very glad that he knew the truth of all, and afterwards returned him this an∣swer: since Father you are not ignorant in any one accident of my life, and does know that if Galathea be denied me, I can never live contented, I do most hear∣tily and humbly beseech you to tell me, what course I should take to obtain her. I know one single word of perswasion from you, has more prevalency with A∣masis, then all that I can do; which to say truly, is not so considerable as to hope for so fair a recompence as that Nymph: therefore, dear Sir, I conjure you by all the effects that pity can produce in a soul capable of resentment, to make the proposition unto Amasis, and represent unto her, that Galathea can never meet with one who will love her, honour her, and serve her, better then my self. Lindamor uttered these few words with so much passionate affection, that A∣damas was much moved by them; and to give him a testimony of it: Generous Lindamor (said he unto him) you shall ere long see how much I desire you should enjoy that contentment which you merit; and for the better effecting of it, I would advise you to acquaint Sigismond, Rosilion, and Godomar, with your design, and oblige them to break the motion unto the Nymph: probably she will deny them nothing, and though she had a mind to deny them, yet she would not, until she had communicated the matter unto me, which if she should, then shall I be ready to serve you, and not be wanting in my perswasions of her. Up∣on this, Lindamor took the Druides hand and kissed it, and promising to follow his advice very punctually, he rose up to send and know whether Galathea was yet up; but Adamas, who had no mind to see her, left she should chide him for de∣parting the day before without taking his leave: Sir (said he unto Lindamor) if the Nymph Galathea have no other businesse with me, you may give her an ac∣compt of my voyage, and of the businesse whereof we have discoursed: for my part, I do intend to return, for the Ghests which I have at my house, do long for my return. As for your Ghests (said Lindamor and interrupted him) I believe she is very desirous to enquire of them, for she was very sorry that she did not see them before they went. They, answered Adamas, do so little know how to behave themselves, as they are excusable, if they did not do those complements as are belonging unto the Grandure of Amasis and Galathea, but I hope you will make their excuses, nor should I put you upon it, did I not think that it does much concern you to have a special care that Amasis does not know how I came upon your businesse, lest she should suspect me, and think that I aim more at your particular contentment then her service. Lindamor thought this consideration so good, that he consented unto all that Adamas desired. Thus the Druide depart∣ed: and the first thing that came into his thoughts by the way, was the obstinancy of Celadon, in shunning all occasions which might make him known unto his Shepherdesse: yet not being able to imagine the cause, he resolved, whatsoever came on't, not to suffer this delusion to continue any longer. In the mean time, the Shepherd was awake, and lying in the same chamber, with Astrea, Diana, and Phillis, he no sooner opened his eyes, but he drew the curtain, and looked towards the bed where his Shepherdesse rested; but Astrea who waked almost at the same time: I beseech the gods (said she unto him) make this day as happy unto my fair Mistresse, as she can desire, or I wish it- You need not wish it (said Celadon) for it is in your power to make it as you please. O heavens! (said the Shepherdesse) I swear, that if it be in my power, you shall never have an ill one: for I do so unexpressably well, that I will do any thing in the world to content you. I do protest, replied the supposed Druide, my affe∣ction unto you is such, that I do devote my self solely unto your contentment: the sweetest day of all my life shall be bitter unto me, if it be not pleasing unto you; and my bitterest day shall be sweet unto me, if it delight you. Mistresse, replied Astrea, you do expresse your self so affectionate unto me, that you will either swell me with joy, or make me suspect that you do mock me: The Shep∣herd would have answered, but that Diana and Phillis waked upon their talking; and therefore he was silent to hearken unto Diana, who rubbing her eyes, and
turning towards him, Madam (said she) I think Astrea and you, have done no∣thing but talk all the night; for when I fell asleep the last night, I left you talk∣ing; and still find you talking when I wake: I must confesse (answered Alexis) if that fair one could as well forbear sleep, as I desire to do, perhaps we had spent the whole night in discourse. Truly (said Astrea) I had no great disposi∣tion unto sleep; but fearing lest I should disturb your rest, I was the first that gave over talking. That consideration, replied Alexis, ought not to have stop∣ped your mouth: for I expect more rest from your words, then from any sleep: Well, well, replied the Shepherdesse, I hope one day we shall enjoy this sweet rest you talk off, if you will but hasten the accomplishment of that promise which you have made unto me: Celadon was ready to reply when Phillis interrupted: O God (said she unto Astrea) why are you so hasty to be with that fair Druide and live in some place with her, where our presence cannot divert you? As I live, were I in Dianas room, I would throw you out of bed, that you might go and take possession of that place which you so much desire. In saying so, she began to thrust Diana, and Diana Astrea, and so hard, that Astrea was thrust more then half out of bed: Diana (cryed she out) before you thrust me out, you should first have known whether my Mistresse will receive me into her bed: The Law (an∣swered Alexis) which forbids us to lie with any, is not so strickt, but in cases of necessity I may receive you: In saying so, she opened her arms, and made a sign as if she should come thither; but as ill luck was, the smock of Alexis being o∣pen before her brest, did let appear the Ribband, in which was Astreas picture, and the ring which he tied unto it, when his despair made him cast himself into the river Lignon: which Astrea perceiving, and remembring that the colour of the Ribband was very like unto that knot which Celadon took from her, she be∣gan to change colour, and not being able to remove her eye from off that object. she stood still a long while and said not a word. The Shepherd, who all the while expected her coming, did wonder at such a sudden alteration, and could not chuse but ask the cause: to whom Astrea answered, I protest Mistresse, I am so much ravished at that which you wear about your neck, that I cannot take my thought off an accident which had like to have cost me my life. Celadon upon this look∣ing down, and seeing those dear pledges of his love and Astreas jealousie to hang out of his shirt, which he had so carefully till then concealed; he was ready to fall into a swound: yet conceiving, that the best way to deceive her, was to set a good face upon the matter, he began to recollect himself and smile: Servant (said he unto her) never let this which you have seen trouble you, for I will shew them unto you when you please, and freely tell you from whom I had them, upon con∣dition you will assure me not to be jealous. In saying so, she put the Ribband, as it ought to be, out of sight, and Astrea in extream impatience, I were exceed∣ingly to blame (said she) if I did not receive your offer, and satisfie my mind concerning what I have seen: upon this she offered to go into Celadons bed, and when she was in the midst of the room going to him, she heard some coming up the stairs and name her; and because she feared it might be some that came to vi∣sit them, as Adamas, or or Leonide, she returned as fast as she could, and went in∣to her own bed, though Diana and Phillis would hardly receive her: immediatly after this, Leonide entred; and God knows, to the great contentment of Cela∣don, when he saw himself delivered from the perplexity, into which the curiosity of Astrea had put him. But as great as his joy was, it was not comparable to the astonishment of Dia∣na, when she saw Leonide to be the usher of Bellinde: yet that fair Shepherdesse dissembling her displeasure, which the coming of her mother caused, she received their embraces with many testimonies of gladnesse: Phillis and Astrea did the same; and whilst Leonide went unto Celadons bed, and asked him how he had rested. the Shepherd answered: The night (sage Nymph) has been as kind unto me, as the cruelty of my destiny will permit, which is still finding out new wayes to afflict me: Leonide, a little surprized at this, why (said she) what new acci∣dent has hapned since yesterday? one so sad, replied Celadon, that if you had not come in the very nick of time, I had been plunged into the most strange perplexity
that ever Lover was: then he related unto her, how the Knot, the Ring, and the Picture of Astrea appeared upon his brest, and how Astrea spying them, did change colour: he told her also the intention which that Shepherdesse had of coming in∣to his bed to be satisfied in that doubt, which that object had put in her; and in fine, the perplexity he was in, to find out some invention that might deceive her. Leonide, after she had heard all this; truly (said she) I am afraid the gods will punish you for the injury you do unto your Shepherdesse, in deferring the giving her the contentment of knowing you▪ but if you will follow my advice I shall councel you to defer it no longer, but this very day find out an opportunity of telling her that with your tongue, which your eyes have told her a thousand times. had she understood that language: May my miseries be eternal (said Celadon) if I do not most passionately desire to know what happinesse or what miseries I am to expect: for you may well imagine, that in such uncertainties as we are in, I am not him that suffers least: Well (answered Leonide) I will talk with my uncle, and tell him how willing you are to submit unto whatsoever he will direct: In the mean time I conceive it your best expedient, to put the Knot, the Picture, and the Ring, into my hands, to the end, that if Astrea do come and enquire after them, I shall be your lawful excuse in denying her that contentment. Officious Leonide, answered Celadon, without any giving them unto you, I can tell her that you have them, and shall not lye, if I swear that you did desire them of me, but pardon me that I dare nor part from them, no not for a minute: for such would be my grief at such a separation, as it would be the hazard of my very life. Leonide, who knew she should never obtain them, did not importune him any longer; but having told him in what manner he ought to receive Bellinde, that Shepherd behaved himself so well, and did his complements so handsomly, that he would have deceived not only Bellinde, but all the world. Adamas at the very same time returned from Marcelles, and met with Paris close by his house, who came to meet him, and acquaint him with the coming of Bellinde: Paris giving him a particular accompt of his voyage, Adamas did bid him as heartily welcome home, as a son could expect from an indulgent Father. Belinde was immediatly acquainted with the return of the Druide, and therefore she left all the fair ones to dresse themselves, and went to acquit her self of that respect which she owed unto the affection and qualitie of Adamas. But the Shep∣herdesse Diana (for all her constraint) could not hide the displeasure which the coming of her mother caused, knowing that her intention was to make up her marriage with Paris; so as at every pin which she used in dressing her self, a sigh did second it, at which Astrea wondering, and asking the reason, Diana answer∣ed, that the coming of her mother had swelled her with such an excesse of joyes, that she was transported with it, and her mind in such a confusion that she seemed to be in that disorder of spirit, more sad then glad. Phillis, who heard her say so: I am afraid (said she) that the joyes of Silvander are not like unto yours; and that the return of Paris has given his soul such a breakfast of joy, as will ne∣ver be seen in his face: I believe (answered Liana) that it will be very indifferent unto him, or if he have any resentment of it, it will be rather of joyes to see my mother, then sorrows to see Paris. I know not what it will be, replied Phillis, but I would not have that contentment which I expect from the enjoyment of Li∣cidas, should be like unto that which Silvander will receive, when he hears the news of her coming: for Diana, I do know his humour and temper so well, as I dare swear, that he will not only be sad, but even desperate when he hears it; and as good a face as you do set upon the matter, you know him to have more judge∣ment then to be ignorant, that her coming is to make up your marriage with Paris. O heavens sister (said Diana with tears in her eyes) why do you say so? As she said so she blush'd, afterwards added; and you know Silvander to be a man of so much judgement, you will also know, that he will not think it strange I should o∣bey Belinde, and observe her will as a Law inviolable. I do not say (answered Phillis) that he will condemn your obedience; but I do say, that he will be ex∣treamly afflicted at it, and that the sorrows which he shall resent, will be so vio∣lent, as perhaps will force him unto some desperate course. Diana the shrug∣ing
her shoulders, and lifting her eyes up to heaven, I wish the gods (said she) would give him what he deserves, and which to make him happy I would give him, if it depended only upon me. This (said Phillis) is a fine reward indeed: whilst you bestow all your great and particular favours upon another, poor Silvander must be put off only with a bare wish, as a recompence for all his services: alas (said Diana) what would you have me do for him, in this condition wherein I am, and wherein I cannot do anything for my self. I dare not tell you, replied Phil∣lis, what I would have you do; but I know what a woman of courage ought to do, and what I my self would do were I in such an extreamity. My sweet com∣panion, replied Diana, I know you to be so wise, that you would not transgresse against my duty, but would rather suffer, and never complain of any injustice done unto you. This is the resolution which I have taken and will follow, what miseries soever my Destinies prepare for me. Diana uttered these words after such a man∣ner, as Phillis and Astrea knew, they came from her heart: Beginning there∣fore to lament the lot of Silvander, they continued dressing themselves, and when they were ready, they went down into the room where Adamas and Be∣linde were. On the other side, Ligonias, who knew he could not do Sigismond a greater pleasure, nor Amasis better service, then to carry out of Forrests all the forces under his conduct, as soon as he could, he took long marches, and quartered them within the territories of the Burgundian King; the next day he got up be∣times, and marched in such speed with them, that they all arrived in Lions at night. Ligonias went presently, and cast himself at the feet of Gondebaut; and gave him a very particular accompt of all passages relating to the defeat of Polemas. This King, extreamly offended at all these unhappy events, did turn all his anger against Sigismond, as the principal authour of Polemas his ruine: unto this must his jea∣lousie be added; for beginning to remember that that flight of Sigismond was not so much to relieve Godomar, as to give some testimonies of his love unto Dorinde, his anger turned almost into stark madnesse: he stood a long while, and spoke not one word: At last, after five or six turns in the chamber, this disobedience of Sigismonds, doth most infinitly displease me (said he) but let me lose the qua∣lity of a King, if I do not ere long let him know, that he is no lesse unworthy to live, then to bear the name of my son. Upon this he was silent again; and Li∣gonias thinking it not fit to say any thing in Sigismonds defence, till the storm of his anger was over, he looked still upon the ground, until he heard the King be∣gin to speak again. Pray Ligonias tell me (said he) when Sigismond gave you commission to bring back my troops, was that ungrateful person sad or joyful at their departure? I believe Sir, answered Ligonias, that he was both: for Sir, your anger is a most sad affliction to him, and I believe he is glad that Amasis is deliver∣ed from those mortal fears which your forces had infused into her: and as an ar∣gument of it, when I took my leave of him: farewel Ligonias (said he unto me) carry back unto the King my Lord and father, those men who deserve to be im∣ployed upon better occasions; and because I see him angry with my brother and me, beseech him to pardon us, and tell him it would be much more just to receive his two sons, as supporters of his Crown, then as the objects of his hatred and arms. Ligonias delivered this message in such a mild and handsome manner, as did most sensibly melt the King into compassion; and as violent as his passion was, he could not forget, that those whom he accused were such as he gave being land edu∣cation unto; yet having a kind of fear that Ligonias had invented what he had told him; I cannot believe (said he) that any repentance can come from one in whom ingratitude is so predominate: If your Majesty do doubt of what I tell you (replied Ligonias) I have that in my hands which will plead my justification: and conceiving that I could not meet with a better opportunity of presenting a Letter which Sigismond had writ unto him, he took it out of his pocket and kneel∣ing down, presented it unto the King: Gondebaut changed colour two or three times, and was in a great dispute between affection and anger; yet in fine, paternal love prevailing, he received the Letter, in which he found these words.
SIGISMONDS Letter unto GONDEBAUT. My Lord, IF the heal of your anger against me, have not excluded out of your soul all manner of pity, I most humbly beseech you to look upon these few lines, and to believe that they are not like me, altogether unwor∣thy of your view. You will find in them abudance of grief that afflicts my sad soul for displeasing you; and if there be any hopes of a pardon, they will not want words expressing my repentance: The truth is, my sorrows are much above my crime, but I hope and desire, that both may be below, and lesse then your compassion. I will not, my Lord, make any mention of my past actions: It is enough, and too much tha they have dis∣pleased you, and it were a kind of a second crime to offer a justification: I most humbly beseech you only to consider, that they are not of so black and horrid a die, as in justice to merit your hatred and my banishment; yet if if it be your dire doom, I will not murmure against any of your ordinances: but I dare be so bold as to request, that the interest of Amasis may not be mingled with my disgrace. That great Nymph doth desire from you a peace, which her innocence most justly merits: and if you should refuse this fa∣vour, it is to be feared you would have all the world to fight with, and be∣come your own enemy: It is in your power to remedy all these disorders in a moment; and by reeiving the amity of this Princesse, you may boast that you have overcome her by the arms of your goodnesse. This, Sir, is the last fa∣vour that I will ask of you, but will wait for the return of this Cavalier, who will tell me whether Godomar is to be as miserable as my self, if no pardon be to be hoped for from you, dispair must then be the portion of them whom heaven had done a favour unto, if it had never given them life, since it is the worst of fate to be thrown out of your service and affection. Whilst Gondebaut read this Letter, Ligonias observed all his motions, as so well, that he conceived very good hopes in the successe of his voyage. He saw the King pull out his handkerchief, and wipe his eyes two or three times, afterwards he heard him sigh several times; and at last, His demands (said he) are of such consequence, as I must think better upon them: tomorrow you shall know my answer. In saying so, he began to walk up and down the chamber again, and Ligonias would have left him, if Clotilda had not at the same time entred, unto whom Gondebaut, shewing the Letter of Sigismond, and Ligonias giving her a short relation of his service, she seconded the request of that Cavalier, and had such a perswasive influence upon the King, as she obtained from him at that very instant, all manner of advantageous promises towards Sigismond and Go∣domar. The affairs of Amasis and these Princes were in this condition, whilst Adamas (as I told you before) was with Belinde, and entertaing her with all imaginable Carresses and welcome. He was then walking with her in the great chamber, where Alexis, Diana, Astrea, and Phillis, already were, and almost at the same time, Ceroinea, Doris, Florice, Palanice, Delphire, Dorisea, and others came al∣so, all whom saluting Belinde, she was even astonished at their beauties, and handsome behaviour. Presently after entred Paris, but with as much joy as Dia∣ana was of repentance, for ever giving him leave to propound a marriage unto her mother. Whilst they were in the height of their complements, they saw come into the
chamber a Shepherd, who at the first they knew not: his complexion was as pale as death it self, his eyes shrunk into his head, upon which hardly a hair was to be seen; his cheeks lean, his looks languishing, and his feeble legs, which testified the weaknesse of him that owned them: As soon as he entred, he did his humble reverence unto the Druide, and unto Belinde, who at the first gave him but a cold reception; but presently after, Adamas looking more attentively upon him: O God (said he and embraced him) I beseech you are not you Adrastes? how comes it to passe you are so soon returned, and so extreamly changed? At the name of Adrastes, all the Shepherdesses came about him; and Doris not imagining he would ever return without Palemon, she began at the first to be much troubled, and to fear she should never see him again: following therefore the suggestion of her fears, she approached unto him, and as soon as he had returned an answer unto the Druide, good Adrastes (said she unto him) what news of Palemon? The Shepherd then looking upon her with a kind of smile which was mixed with indif∣ferency, better news of him, fair Doris (said he) then you expect, if at the least I may judge of your thoughts by the palenesse in your cheeks. You may indeed (answered she) tell me better then I do expect; but if he be not return∣ed with you, I am sure it is impossible it should be so good as I desire. I wish you could enjoy that contentment, answered the Shepherd; but since heaven is yet pleased to deprive you of that happinesse, all I can do for your satisfaction, is to give you an accompt of his actions and mine, since our departure from you, until the time of my departure from him. Upon this he retired a little, as having a desire to talk with her in private: but Adamas, who perhaps was as full of cu∣riosity as she, he stayed him, and said, that if the news which he was to relate unto Doris, was not of so great a secrecy, he would be glad to hear it; and the Shepherd, being well disposed unto it, they all sat down, and fixing his languish∣ing looks upon Doris, he began his relation in this manner. The Sequel of the History of ADRASTES. IF, fair Shepherdesse, the sad accidents of my life were not already known unto all about the river Lignon, I should think my self obliged to keep my sorrows secret: and as bitter as they have been, and great, yet are they lesse then my silence; but since it hath pleased the gods to make my affli∣ctions both in their beginnings and progresse, known and bewailed almost by all, I beseech you take it not, if their end have the same fate that their beginning and continuation had, I do know, that rigour will condemn, as ceremonial, all the passions which I resent; but when you shall know that in their very extremity they cannot displease Palemon, it is credible you will be moved unto as much com∣gassion, as your virtue will permit. May I die, if my ambition ever reached any higher, and if I did not think my self worthy of the worst of torments, if I should not measure my love according to your Devoire and my discretion. I tell you this, fair Doris, to the end you may know the state of my soul, and may judge of your beauties power by the quality of my wound, of which I would never be cured, since the cause of it, which is the life of Palemon, is a thousand times more dear unto me, then all the remedies that can be given me. But to the end you should not think the affection I bear unto him has any artifice in it, which I would make any use of to engratiate my self into your favour, I shall relate unto you some of my obligations unto him, that you may know how infinitly I am beholding unto his amity, for the favours which I have received from him. Be pleased then to know Father (continued he and turned toward Adamas) that the day on which we departed, was the day in which all my contentments died: for I was so extreamly sorry to be at such a distance from Doris, that I did ever sinc, not only lose all my hopes, but also all delight or desires in my life. I passed over the first dayes journey in such a profound melancholly, that Palemon, who thought some other strange misfortune had befallen me, did use all his best
inventions to divert me: but when night came, and he saw that I would not eat any meat, this did exceedingly trouble him, and caused him to get me into a bed, that I might at the least get some rest: For his part he eat but a very slender sup∣per; but Halladine, who minded nothing but his own preservation, he did eat like a man that intended to live: and therefore he sate longer at the table then Palemon, who came presently into my chamber, where I was already in bed, he asked me how I did? I that was afraid to trouble him, and saw how sadly he re∣sented my condition, I told him, that I was much better then I was the day be∣fore, and that fasting, with a nights rest, would make me perfectly well a∣gain. I swear unto you dear, Adrastes, (said he unto me) you cannot tell me better news: for I do verily believe, this journey will cost me my life, if your disease should encrease: I thanked him for being so sensible of my sufferings, and be∣seeched him not to encrease my trouble by his own, beseeching him to go to bed betimes, because we were to go away early the next morning: upon this, Halla∣dine entred, who coming to my bed, and looking a little upon me, he gave us good night, and went to his own bed, where he slept till we waked in the morn∣ing. Palemon no sooner saw him laid down, but he whispered me in the eare and said; This is the happiest man alive, all his care is to please a master that loves him: there is nothing that troubles his mind; and I do not think any thing in the world can disturb him of one minutes rest: Then (said I unto my self) alas, alas, Palemon, he is not so happy as thou art, who triumps over my Mistresse who loves thee: afterwards I answered him aloud; 'tis true indeed, Halladine is hap∣py as he deserves, as a just recompence for his fidelity. Sometimes (said Pale∣mon the most faithful are not the most happy: No, no, said I unto my self, for if they were, Adrastes should be as happy as Palemon, for he is as faithful, and yet Doris is none of mine: afterwards I replied aloud, the fault may be in the in∣gratitude of the masters, which is a thing whereof Halladine cannot accuse Da∣mon; for he has more judgement then not to acknowledge his services according to their merits. In such discourse as this, we spent near half an hour, after which he asked me, if he was not troublesome unto me, to which I answered no, but was very glad of his company, and desired that one bed might serve us both during all our jour∣ney: so undressing himself, he was no sooner laid down, but he observed that I burned as hot as fire, for indeed I had already some symptomes of a feaver; and therefore laying one hand upon my brest; O God Adrastes (said he unto me) how you burn? yes, answered I, my body is in a most extream heat, but said I to my self, this heat is nothing in comparison of that heat which consumes my soul; but (said he) I am afraid, I shall be too troublesome unto you, and perhaps if I did not lie with you, you would not be so hot but would rest better. You cannot, replied I, make my disease worse then it is, since (said I in my self) to do that, Palemon must either leave the world, or Doris must drive me out of it: he talked still on, and I believe, would have talked on till it was day, if to be a little more free in my thoughts, I had not seemed as if I were asleep, and did not for a while answer him: so as he thinking that I was disposed to rest, he left talking and fell asleep. For my part, I ended the night as I begun it which was without ever closing an eye, or finding any ease amongst those fretting thoughts, which the happinesse of Palemon, and misfortune of Adrastes, infused into me: Then did I experimentally find, that of all diseases there is none that hath so few remedies as love; but this experience did nothing else but fester my wound, and the more, because being out of all hopes ever to be cured, I never durst so much as pretend unto, or look for any comfort. Whilst I was even losing my self in my own fan∣cies, Palemon waked very often, and because he laid his hand every time upon my brest near my heart, cruel friend (said I in my self) doft thou doubt whether or no I am still alive, after thou hast taken Doris from me, who is the very soul and life of my heart? afterwards continuing, and faigning still to be asleep: silly man (said I) to seek for my heart in this bed, as if that beauty who had charms able to ravish it from me, had not charms also to preserve and keep it.
I was still broad awake, and turmoiled with these fretting thoughts when the night began to vanish, and Palemon wakening took notice that day began to dawn: At the first▪ he durst not speak for fear of disturbing me: which I per∣ceiving, I seemed to awake also; and therefore be casting his eyes upon me, though he could not perfectly see me, he told me, that I was very restlesse all the night long; to which I answered, that indeed the night was not very delightfull unto me, but that it had enabled me to continue on our intended design; In say∣ing so, I got up, and Palemon doing the like, we wakned Halladine, and depart∣ed before the sun was up: This fit of a feavour which I had, besides my natural complexion, which was never good, did make me look so pale and meager, that Palemon could not chuse but tell me, that it was my best course to return, and that our journey being long, I was never able to go through with it, since I found my self so ill the first day; but I, who desired no better Fate then to die by the way, did so contend with him, that he was forced to yield unto my desires of go∣ing forward, and so we came to Lions: unto which we were no sooner come, but Pa∣lemon knowing that it could not be a single fit of a feavour that could cause in me such a profound melancholly, he took me aside in a chamber, and sitting both down upon a bed, he used this discourse which I shall relate unto you, that I may not omit the least circumstance relating unto the interest of Doris and me: and so he began it thus. Dear Adrastes (said he unto me) I beseech you pardon me, if I be so inquisi∣tive as to ask you what the cause is, which makes you so extreamly melancholly and sad? I know very well that you are something indisposed, and that travel may something trouble you; but I cannot believe it possible all this can cause you to be of so sullen a temper. If any memory of the last sad accident which hapned unto you be the cause of it, and if that thought do nourish a sorrow in it, for not being alwayes in your perfect senses, I beseech you consider, that such a sor∣row ought not to trouble your mind, by reason of your joyes at your perfect re∣covery: besides, that were to grumble at the will of heaven, which was pleased to deprive you of your reason only for a time, to render you afterwards a more eminent measure of it: I heartily beseech you my dearest Adrastes, to tell me what it is which troubles you: I do conjure you unto it, by the torments which I suffer to see you so sadly afflicted; by the affection which I bear unto you, and which I desire you should bear unto me, I beseech you do not hide the cause of it from me, and to believe, that if it do lie within the compasse of my power to apply any remedy unto it, I will not spare my own contentment, or my life, to procure it. This was the first discourse that Palemon and I had of it, unto which I answered in these terms. It does grieve me extreamly, my dear Palemon, to see that my malady is so contageous, and that my sorrows should be any cause of yours: I wish for your own contentment, that you had lesse compassion of me, and wish for my own sake, that I were lesse sensible then I am; but since you your self do confesse it extream imprudence to grumble at the will and pleasure of heaven, I think that you are no lesse to blame in taking so much pains to know my disease, then I should be, did I hope ever to be cured of it: Therefore, dear Palemon, I do most heartily beseech and conjure you, even by that which you love best, to cease all this improfitable care which you take for my preservation, and not to mingle my bitter sorrows with those contentments which heaven does give you. I spoke this with such an accent, that Palemon was moved to drop some tears: in fine, em∣bracing me, my dear Adrastes (said he unto me) why will you still offer to con∣ceal that, which pale looks do force you to tell me: if it be because you know me unable to remedy your misery, do not discover it unto me, as unto a Physician, from whom you expect some remedies; but tell them unto me, as unto a friend, who will be ready to lessen your pain by partaking of it with you: I answered, that the argument which he used to induce me unto it, was the only thing which restrained me, since I loved his contentment so much, as I would never consent that the relation of my miseries should ever make him a sharer in them. But in conclusion, Palemon was fully resolved to know the cause of my affliction, or
else never to let me rest in quietnesse: Adrastes (said he unto me) or rather my brother, for I will never suffer you to call me otherwise, I do once more con∣jure you, even by my affection, and by the love that you hear unto Doris, to ease my mind of that impatiency which is caused by your silent▪ reservednesse; and to believe, that if any man living can give you any comfort in your misery, I will rather die then suffer any other but my self to do you that good office. I must needs confesse, Father, that at the name of Doris all my blood did rise, and now thinking it a crime against her not to satisfie the desires of Palemon, being conju∣red unto it by her name: Dear Palemon (replied I) you have such a command∣ing influence over me, that you may obtain any thing in my power; and you not use any other asseverations by your command, and therefore I will no longer de∣fer the satisfaction of your desires; for I know that it were a crime punishable to oppose whatsoever you desire. Let me tell you therefore in the first place, that I do most gladly accept of that alliance which you offer unto me; and next, I do most ingeniously confesse, that the very same thing by which you have con∣jured me to discover my grief unto you, is the only thing which is the cause of my griefs: Do not wonder, dear brother, to hear me say, that though I do love Do∣ris, yet I love Palemon too; and that though my affection unto her be never so great, yet it is not able to make me forget those respects which I do ow unto you. I would it had pleased God (continued I) that the first day my eye ever saw her, had been the last of my life, as it was of all my happinesse and tranquillity: then should I have avoided a thousand deaths by suffering one, and should not, as now I do, be forced to nourish a flame, which burns, but does not consume me: Believe it Palemon, the arrow that first wounded me, was shot from the fair eyes of Doris; but it was shot by the hand of a God, which did communicate part of his own Nature into it, and made my wound immortal: and therefore it is, that though I do despair of any cure, yet must I needs love the hand that gave me the blow, and do know, that it is much easier to cease living, then not to love that dear cause. Fair Doris (continued Adrastes and turned towards her) your dear Palemon heard all this without any interruption, and without taking his eyes off mine; and when I saw him still look and not say a word, I perceive (said I upon a sud∣den) that my love, as much tempered as it is with discretion, does make an im∣pression in you, and that you cannot endure the continuation of it without very great impatience; and therefore, to stop your jealousie and my own torments both at once, it is most just I do ruine my self, and betimes rid you of a man, whose presence will be alwayes a heart-burning unto you. Upon this, I leaped off the bed where I sat, and ran to take my sword which lay upon the table, my intention being to go out of the house, and afterwards to end my sad dayes in some solitary place, where the Sun should never daign to look upon me: But Pa∣lemon, who saw me in such a fury, and feared lest I should do my self some harm, he fell upon me, and took my sword out of my hands, I making no great resi∣stance, for I was so very weak, as I was hardly able to sustain my self. He began presently to chide me for my rashnesse, and used such handsome arguments, as he qualified my mind unto his own will; and as I was still hinting unto him, how im∣possible it was my affection unto Doris should not displease him: that, brother (said he unto me) were indeed very true, if I did not very well know her virtue and discretion. But on the contrary, I do desire that you should love her, and to assure your self that your affection shall never trouble me. Upon this, he took me about the neck: Come, come (said he) love her still, perhaps heaven will have pity upon you, and will one day permit you to possesse that place, which I confesse I have in a manner tyrannically usurped from you: I wish to heaven it were now in my power to transfer her unto you; if it were, I swear the condition wherein you are, and have been for her sake, does move me unto so much pity, that she should be the wife of Adrastes, and the sister of Pale∣mon. As he said so he embraced me most kindly, and bedewing my cheeks with his tears: Not but dearest brother (continued he) my love unto her is infinitly
beyond all my expressions; but I must confesse, that my compassion of you is not of a lesse degree. I stood a while without returning any answer but in sighs; at the last seeing that he said nothing unto me, I were extreamly ungrateful, replied I, if I did not the same thing for you which you would do for me. Therefore, Palemon, live for e∣ver, unto Doris may you be happy, in the enjoyment of her many years, and as long as I shall my misfortunes; and be assured of this, that she shall be the sister of Adrastes, as long as she shall be the wife of Palemon. Upon this, I grasped him in my arms a long while; at last we parted, for such a coldnesse seized upon me at the same time, that without his assistance, I could not get my self to bed. At the first, Palemon did not know my disease; but when he saw me vomit up a∣bundance of green and yellow water, he conceived that a fit of my feaver had seized upon me: He sent presently for a Physician, who was no sooner entred in∣to the chamber; but he sate down in a chair by my bed side, where after two or three coughs, and a supersilious spit, he took my arm and felt my pulse; then be∣gan to consider upon the quality of my disease. Presently after, he asked me whe∣ther or no, I had been excessive in any thing; to which I innocently answered, that I had never been excessive in any thing but love; but he who put a wrong construction upon my meaning: that (said he unto me) is very dangerous, espe∣cially at this time, now the canicular dayes approach: Afterwards, coughing two or three times again, I observed that Palemon took him aside, and as I under∣stood afterwards, did infuse a better opinion of me into him then he bad conceiv∣ed, and gave him a particular exact accompt of all the accidents that had hapned unto me; after the Physician was better instructed, he came unto me: Well, well Sir, said he, take courage, we will not prescribe you any thing until to morrow. when we have seen the state of your disease: mean time, eat but little, nay no∣thing till your fit be past, or at least past the violence of it: Palemon promised to be very careful in seeing his directions observed, and waited upon him down the stairs. Halladine in the interime, came to my beds side, and began to use some arguments of disswading me from continuing the journey, when Palemon presently returned, who joyning his arguments and entreaties unto Halladines, did conjure me not to think any more of keeping them company; not (said he) that I do intend to leave you, for if your disease continue, I will not go away un∣til you be perfectly recovered; but the reason why I disswade you, is because I see you altogether unable to perform so long a journey without extream prejudice to your self. Halladine, who heard Palemon say that he would not depart untill I was perfectly recovered; but Palemon (said he unto him) do you not consider, that whilst we stay for the recovery of Adrastes, we shall lose the opportunity of our imbarkment, we must of neceessity take the time when it is, and not carry till a tempestuous reason hinder us from executing our intended designe. I knew he said truly, and therefore told Palemon, that the next morning we might go in a boat unto the Town of the Massilians, and when we were there, I might take sea or return, as I found my self in a condition; they approved of my pro∣position; but to be short, I was not able to go any further: for my feaver con∣tinued, and the Physician, who visited me the next morning, assured me, that without extream danger of my life, I must not take the water; but that it was far better for me to stay there, where I might be accomodated with all things requisite and pertinent to my disease: it was therefore determined amongst us, that I should stay at Lions; and because Palemon and Halladine could not any longer defer their departure, and my feaver grew worse and worse, Palemon came unto my bed side, and with tears in his eyes, used this language. Now my dear Adrastes I am ready to depart, or rather ready to die; for I cannot call our se∣paration a life, especially, since I must leave you in so sad a condition; but I be∣seech you consider, that were I not by oath obliged unto this voyage, nothing in the world could make me undertake it: I call the gods to witnesse how sorry I am to leave you, and may they punish me to eternity, if it be not be sorest displea∣sure I ever received: could I devise any pretence to excuse my self from my oath concerning Celidea, I would make use of it; but certainly there is no evasion,
and doubtlesse, heaven would punish either you, or me, or both, should I per∣jure my self: you see then, dear brother, how impossible it is to avoid this de∣parture, and how I am obliged to the performance of my promise, and I hope you will not condemn me for it, though I leave you in a condition that requires the assistance of all your friends. Palemon used these expressions, with such a deep resentment of my condition, as I knew he loved me; and therefore turning my languishing eyes towards him, and putting one of my hands out of bed, I took his, and grasping it as hard as I could, go dear Palemon (said I unto him) and endeavour the cure of Celidea: continue on your journey without being troubled at me: for I know I cannot survive our separation one day; and therefore I conjure you to bid me your last adieu, and receive this kisse, as the last testimony of my affection. O Heavens, dear Adrastes (said he unto me) why will you blast me to death with such sad news; have you not courage enough to overcome the violence of a feaver, which will last no longer then you harbour some ill humour in your body to nourish it? Though I had the means to cure it, answered I, yet I have no will unto it, for I am so extreamly weary of living, that a doom of death is the most welcome news unto me. But, Father, why should I trouble you any longer with a tedious relation, it is sufficient Doris knows, how Palemon perswaded me so far, as to promise him two things: The first, that I would do all I could for the recovery of my health; and the other, that as soon as I was recovered, I would return unto our flocks, and give Doris a Letter which he left with me. Thus Halladine and he, after a thou∣sand embraces, sighs, tears, and adieus, did take sea; and left me in the hands of a Physician, who since their departure, never left me, unlesse when upon extream necessity, he went to see some other sick person. My feavor continued above a fortnight, after which, it was not so violent; and though I stood not in need of any more Physick, yet my Physician saw me every day, until I was perfectly re∣covered, and in a condition to return back: every time he came to visit me, he brought me some news; it was he that first told me of the siege of Marcelles, and of the flight of Sigismond; by him I understood that Gondebaut had sent an army unto Polemas, which troubled me so much, that had I been able to travel, I had gone then unto Sigismond, who was then in Vienna, and as they said, raising an Army to relieve Godomar his brother. The last time he took the pains to see me, he told me that the siege was raised, and that Lindamor had killed Polemas; at which I was so exceedingly rejoyced, as I believe it did perfectly recover me. And indeed, after I had taken my leave of my Physician, and thanked him for his par∣ticular care of me, I went from Lions, and by the way found all his relations true, for I met a party of those Souldiers which Gondebaut had sent against Amasis. After this, Adrastes held his peace, and presented unto Doris that Letter which Palemon sent unto her, which she opening, found inserted these words. PALEMONS Letter unto DORIS. THe concernment which I have in the preservation of Adrastes, moves me to use all manner of remedies, that are conducible to this cure. And because I know that your affection is the best I can imploy; you must, dear Doris, love him, since he does deserve it, and since I would have it so: your virtue keeps me from prescribing any limits unto this love: yet, lest under pretence of honour, you should treat him lesse kindly then I desire, I would have your amity to him, no less then unto a brother: Prepare your self therefore to give me this contentment: and consider that in so doing, you will preserve two who ought to be most dear unto you: I mean, the life of Adrastes, and the contentment of Palemon.
She had no sooner read this Letter, but he changed colour, which the Druide perceiving: fair Doris (said he) why do you blush, certainly there is something in that Letter which nearly concerns you: Nothing of such near concernment, answered she, which I shall not most willingly shew unto you: if I did blush, it was at the desire of Palemon, who commands me to love Adrastes, as if I could without a crime have any favourable inclination unto any whosoever: Adamas then taking the Letter and reading it: I protest, replied he, the thing he desires is so just, that you are much to blame if you deny it unto him: and for my part, I do advise you to give him that contentment which he desires, since he seems to be so much concerned in the life of Adrastes, that perhaps he would love you lesse, if you should suffer him to die. These words, together with that esteem which Doris had of Adrastes, had such an influence upon her humour, that she permitted him to love her as his sister, promising him to value him in the degree of a brother. Upon this, Adrastes rose up to kisse her hand, by way of thanks, for that favour; but he was pre∣vented by the coming in of a very fair Shepherdesse, who at the same time came into the room, took him about the neck and kissed him. This salute did a little surprize him; and the more, because he knew not who it was that seemed so kind unto him: supposing then that she had mistaken him for another, he recoiled two or three paces, whilst his amazment would not permit him to speak a word; but the Shepherdesse following him: Is it possible Adrastes (said she unto him) that you should have done me so great favour and yet not know me. Adamas did think he knew the voice; yet thinking it so improbable it should be her whom he thought upon, he looked upon her very attentively: Adrastes then, he shrugged his shoulders; fair Shepherdesse (said he unto her) I beseech you do not won∣der, that I should not know you: for I have been so long ignorant of my self, as I am partly pardonable, if I do not remember that ever I had the honour to see you. Yes, replied she, you have seen me in Marcelles, and upon the banks of Lignon; but though you have forgotten me, yet perhaps Astrea, and Diana, will remember me: In saying so, she went unto them, who received her very ci∣villy, but with as much amazment as Adrastes: at which this unknown Shepher∣desse, smiling, O heavens (cryed she out) was ever the like known? Is it possi∣ble you should all, since this very morning, forget Celidea? Upon that name, all the Shepherdesses began to look earnestly upon her, and upon one another: At last, remembring that Palemon and Halladine were gone about her cure; and calling to mind the features of her face before she spoiled it; they knew her, and rejoyced with her, for the recovery of her former beauty: It was long before they did any thing else but embrace each other; whilst Adamas made an exact re∣lation unto Belinde of the last accident which befel this fair Shepherdesse; and at last, going to her, fair Celidea (said he unto her) shall we not know in what manner you have been cured: for the remedy had such a sudden operation, as I cannot chuse but wonder at it, especially when I consider, that though you were yesterday as much disfigured as ever, yet this day you are as fair and handsome as ever you were before: Father, answered the Shepherdesse, with a countenance that spoke her contentment: I cannot possibly tell you how it was done, for truly I my self do not know further then this, that this morning, after Thamires was gone out of the chamber to walk with Silvander and the rest of the Shepherds, I arose out of my bed, and sitting before my glasse dressing my self, I observed within a quarter of an hour, that I did not look so ugly as ordinarily I did: and seeing that every minute my complexion came more and more into my cheeks, and that my scratches healed very fast; I did imagine, that this might happily be an effect of those good hopes which Damon made me conceive. I sate thus the space of an hour, and every time I cast my eye upon my glasse I found some change in my self. In fine, seeing my self in a better condition then ever I was before, and thinking it a most arrogant presumption if I should expect to be better, since I had already obtained more then ever I hoped for, I finished the dressing of my self, and going down the stairs, I no sooner heard that Adrastes was returned, but be∣ing even ravished with joy to see my self so handsome, I could not chuse but come
and Carresse him by way of gratitude, for the benefit which I had received, where∣of he was partly the cause. Thus Celidea related all that she knew concerning her cure, whilst Adrastes was talking with Doris: Dearest sister (said he unto her) you need not now en∣quire any further concerning Palemons journey: the face of Celidea tells you, that hitherto it hath been prosperous, and that all we have to do, is to wish him a safe return. Truly (said she) there is a great probability in what you say: yet for all that I cannot chuse but be full of faint fears, because he is to return by sea, which as they say, is a most cruel and mercilesse element. Doubtlesse, replied Adrastes, Fortune will look upon with a smiling eye, and will never suffer him to feel the effects of her inconstancy, the glory that he has to enjoy you, is a most evident argument of it. In saying so, he sighed very loud: which Doris observing, and doubting that his sighs were sparks of the fire which he entertained in his soul, she was in some sort moved not unto love but pity. Wondering therefore to see his passion should survive his hopes, she was once in a mind to advise him to place his affection upon some, from whom he might expect more recompence; but con∣ceiving, that this perhaps might more open his wound and fester it, she chose ra∣ther not to mention it, but leave it unto the disposition of time, which often proves the best remedy against such diseases: so she left off that discourse, and making a sign unto the Shepherd, that she desired to hear what Adamas said con∣cerning Celidea, he leaned his eare that way, and heard the Druide speak in this manner. It is to be thought that Thamires will not be a little joyed to see you in this condition, since he was such a passionate desirer of it. I believe Father (an∣wered Celidea) that his joy will not be a little at it; but I believe also, that it will not last long, since that which is the cause of it, is but a glance, a flash, called beauty, and cannot continue in me long, because it is a tribute which we do ow, and must pay, unto a few years, which will be sure to imprint wrinkles upon the fairest cheek. However it be, replied Adamas I shall ere long see him enjoy that contentment; and since he knows nothing yet of your cure, I would advise to deceive him a little. Ths was no sooner consented unto, but Thamires entred with Alcander, Si∣leines, Lucindor, Calidon, Licidas, Thomantes, Hylas, and some others. As soon as they came into the room, they saluted Belinde; but Adamas took Thamires by the hand, carried him to Celidea, and made him believe, that it was her sister whom Belinde brought with her. Thamires was the more apt to believe it, be∣cause indeed Celidea had a sister, and because he found in her face the very same features which formerly he adored in his Mistresse. He went therefore unto her, and after a hundred thousand welcomes, he asked her whether she had▪ yet seen Celidea. This fair Shepherdesse could not chuse but smile at this, and was upon the point to speak; but the Druide, fearing left he should know her voice, he in∣terposed, and told him, that truly she had seen her, but stayed not long with her, because she was not well, and therefore left her to her rest. This did much trou∣ble Thamires, in so much, as leaving the company, he went into the chamber where he thought Celidea was, The first thing he did when he came at the door, was to hearken whether he could hear her complain; but hearing nothing, he went to the bed whose curtains were all close; and hardly daring to breath, lest he should make too much noise; he endeavoured to make it little lighter, that he might see her face. Adamas, in the mean time, who followed him held Celidea by the hand, and seeing Thamires so busie, he could not chuse but laugh: which the Shepherd per∣ceiving; you laugh, perhaps (said he) to see me look for Celidea, whom you have hid in some other place. Hide her (said the Druide) no, I do bring her unto you in a better condition then ever she was. Thamires was amazed at this, and could not understand his meaning; but Celidea taking him about the neck and kissing him; what Thamires (said she unto him) do you make so little ac∣compt of the present that is brought you, that you will not so much as thank the bringer? To what purpose were you so careful to see me in my first beauty, since
now it is is brought unto you, you will not so much as know it? This voice did per∣fectly undeceive Thamires; and taking her in his arms, O Damon (said he) how infinitly am I obliged unto thee for this favour? In saying so, he began a new to kisse her, sometime her mouth, sometimes her cheeks, and sometimes her eyes; and probably, he had longer continued the expressions of his love and content∣ment, had he not though himself obliged also to thank the Druide, who thought it fit, that before the day was done, he should go unto Marcelles to give thanks unto Damon, and render him an accompt of Celideas cure. Thamires prepared himself for that journey; and Adamas, not knowing what was become of Silvander, asked aloud how he did; and Hylas taking upon him to speak for all the Shepherds, did answer, that he left him in the company of Tircis, and that as he thought, they were discoursing upon some businesse of great importance: The Druide asked whether he knew the subject of their dis∣course, and Hylas in a smiling manner answered: Father (said he) I do not cer∣tainly know the subject, but probably their discourse harps upon the old melan∣cholly string; and Silvander, who as they say can Philosophize upon the ribs of a Gnat, or the beard of a Mandrake, is, perhaps, perswading something which the other cannot easily vnderstand. Belinde was well pleased to hear him talk in that manner; for she had heard tell of his humours, and therefore to make him the freer in his discourse, she ad∣dressed her self unto him, and said, that she had formerly heard of all the pas∣sages in the love of Tircis and Cleon; but she admired at nothing so much, as at the passionate humour of that Shepherd in still doting upon the cold ashes of his dead Mistresse. Sage Belinde (answered Hylas) were that fine judge here who condemned Laonice, he would by his Sophistry make you believe, that he should sin extream∣ly against the Laws of Love, if he did keep that affection inviolable, but this Les∣son he did not learn in my school: It is a most grosse and absurd ignorance, and the worse, because it has no ground, and because there is no Law which com∣mands us to love that which is not; but this constancy which he so much cries up, and would fain make a goddesse, and erect altars unto it, is that which makes him maintain all these fond opinions, and infect this Province with a doctrine, which ought to be condemned by all those that love liberty and quietnesse. I wish he were here (replied Belinde) for besides the esteem I have of his merit, I would gladly know what he would answer unto your discourse of him. Madam (said Hy∣las) were he here, Lignon would sooner leave running then his tongue; and the devil on it is, besides his most pernicious doctrine in matter of Love, he can so glosse over his arguments with fluent eloquence, as almost all are charmed with it. With such discourse as this, Adamas, Belinde, and the rest, passed away the time, until dinner was ready: whilst Silvander, who was indeed walking with Tircis, and using all the arguments he could possibly device to divert that sad Shepherd from his intention of leaving Forrest; but all his arguments and reasons would not do: for this poor desolate man was weary of having so many wit∣nesses of his melancholly, and was▪ fixed to his resolution, imagining that now the banks of Lignon were likely to have too many delightful objects, to sute with his sad temper; and therefore, as soon as he met Silvander in a place convenient for his discourse, he said thus unto him. It is needlesse for me, sage Silvander, to tell you the subject of my affliction, because you do already know a great part of it; and therefore I will only acquaint you with my design of seeking out my best conveniency, to render what I ow unto the memory of my dear Cleon. You know, however, since the judgement which you pronounced in my favour, against the importunities of Laonice, I have been persecuted by her, until I heard from her own mouth, the Treason which by way of revenge she intended to use against you, and against Phillis; and then I began to be so extreamly incensed against her, as immediately upon it she forsook For∣rests. And certainly it was well she did, for I verily believe, I should have trans∣gressed what I ow unto her sex. to have done her some signal displeasure. Now
being, rid of this troublesome woman, who I hated as I doe a divil, and desir∣ing never to meet with her again, I am resolved to retire my self into some soli∣tary place, where none can come to interrupt my meditations, nor divert mee from expressing my fidelity unto my dear Cleon. I must confess my self ashamed to depart with out bidding my last adieu unto Adamas, and the rest of the shep∣hards of my acquaintance; But I hope, dear Silvander that you will excuse mee to them, and move them rather to pitty my misfortunes, then to bee angry with me for my faults: Upon this Tircis held his peace, and Silvander having ob∣served what he said concerning the treason of Laonice, he beseeched him for a relation of it: which Tircis did; And Silvander admiring at the artifice which she had invented to revenge her self, he learned also at the same time what was the cause of Dianas anger, which Phillis had so subtily dissembled. This sign of jea∣lousie in his Mistress, was unto him a main argument of her affection: And though this contentment was enough to take up all his thoughts, yet he did put Tircis in mind of the little reason that he had to absent himself from a place where every one loved him, and to go and live in a desart, where will beasts were ready every minute to devoure him. But the poor dejected man in leiu of being moved by his reasons; The cruelty of those beasts (answered he) cannot torment me so much, as that vast num∣ber of cares which continually afflicts me: such is my despaire as it makes me love any thing that is likely to advance my end; and I wish with all my heart, I might without offence doe the same office my self. Thou should'st then know Cleon, how little value I doe set upon my blood; and thou shouldest see how soon I would present thee with the soul of Tircis which languisheth in a torment ten thousand times worse then any death, in staying untill I see thee, and have the honour to enjoy the heaven of thy imbraces with out disturbance. In saying so, his eyes which he lifted up towards heaven, began to flow with tears; at which Silvander was so much moved, as he was not able to restrain his, and whilst he stopped the course of them with his handkerchief he thought upon the con∣stancy of Tircis, and afterwards making reflections upon himself, he considered in what a sad condition he should be, if by the like accident, he should lose Diana. Thus they stood a while with out uttering one word, but walked together in the wood: At last Silvander broke silence: I doe find dear Tircis (said he unto him) That your resentments are so just: as nothing in your sadness can be con∣demned, but that excess of it which moves you unto a desire to leave us: For ha∣ving contracted here some habitudes which may conduce much unto your quiet∣ness, I conceve, that unless you be an enemy unto your self, you cannot part from us: The way of our lives is sweet, our conversation not at all babarous: and if any evill should happen unto you, there is no place in the world where you can find better helps then amongst us. My quietness, replied Tircis, depends upon the last munite of my life, which cannot come so soon as it is desired, and Cleon, who doubless loves me more then ever she did, does blame me for being so long from her: I beseech you therfore even by that with is most dear unto you, not to take it ill, if I follow my first resolution, and that you take so much pains as to assure Adamas, and all those unto whom my name is known, that what place soever my fate does guide me, I shall most inviolably preserve the memory of their courtisies. But (said Silvander) I beseech you tell me whither you intend to go, that we may sometimes have the happiness to hear from you; and let you know the passages upon the banks of Lignon. It will be hard for me (replied the discon∣solate shepheard) to tell you that which I do not know my self. I shall confine my self to the woods and rocks, where I shall not merit the honour of your memory; and where I presume you will not bestow any thoughts upon an object so displea∣sing as mine: In saying so, he embraced Silvander, and Silvander doing the like unto him; May you even (said he) find full satisfaction unto all your desires: And may you Silvander, (replied Tircis) ever enjoy those favours, and that happiness which heaven owes unto your merit. Upon this they parted; and Tircis wandering into the woods, not knowing which way to take, Silvander went to∣wards
the house of Adamas; He did not yet know the sad news with the return of Paris brought unto him; and had been longer ignorant of it, if Lucinder, by fortune walking with a young man, who brought him the news from Lyons, had not informed him of it as very welcome news; He told him also of Bellinde; and that shepheard, who presently began to suspect the cause of their coming, was so damped at it, that he could not chuse but let his sorrows appear in his face; yet he did conceal from that Cavelier, the cause of his resentment, and least knowing of Bellindes coming, they should tax him with incivility if he did not go and present his service unto her; he gave a check unto those thoughts which per∣swaded him, that since her coming was only about the contentment if Paris, he ought to fly from her presence: He went therefore into the house, where Bellinde receved him with extraordinary kindness: And since he was come, din∣ner was brought up, and all the Company sat down at the Table. Dinner was no sooner done; but Alcander, Silenies, and Lucindor, resolved to leave forrests, and go unto the bankes of Arar, and there reap those sweet contentments which they expected from the enjoyment of their Mistresses, Cerce∣nea, Palanice, and Florice, were easily perswaded therunto; and therefore, as soon as they rose from the table, they went unto Adamas; And after a thou∣sand wel-expressed complements of thanks, for his love, and civilities to them, they bad adieu unto him, and all the rest if the Company, and seemed very sorry to part. Florica, Circenea, and Palanice; could not restrain their tears, when they took their leaves of Alexis, Diana, Astrea, especially Phillis, unto whom they thought themselves most particularly obliged for drawing them out of those perplexities, in which the Oracle had long held them; yet considering that they came not thither to stay always there, after they had obtained the end of their coming, they bad their adieus with less regret, and set forwards, notwithstand∣ing the earnest entreaties of Adamas to stay longer at his house. Thaumantes, Delphire, Dorisea, and the rest of that Company, not thinking to find a fairer day for their return into their several habitations, from which they had been so long absent, they also desired the Druides leave to be gone; unto which he con∣senting, because he would stay them no longer from the pleasure of seeing their friends and flocks, he heartily beseeched them to visit him sometimes, and pro∣tested they should be most heartily wellcome unto him; the sheapheards gave him a thousand thanks, and after they had taken leave of all the Company, they departed extreamly well satisfied with the Druides entertainment of them, and those fair shepherdesses whom they left in his house. Alexis was not a little glad of their departure, because she thought that now she could with less constraint enjoy the caresses of Astrea, and talk of her passion: But Silvander, who hoped to find better opportunities of talk with Diana, a∣mongst such a multitude of Company, he was very sorry for their departure, and heartily desired they would have stayed longer at the Druides desires. In the mean time Adamas, who could not forget his resolution not to let the day pass before he had undeceived Astrea, as soon as he had rendred all civilities unto those that went from his house, he went into his garden, where after two or three turns, thinking what course he had best take to bring his intention to pass; he caused Leonide to be called; and communicated his design unto her. After this, he carried her into his closset, and having made choice amongst his books of one which he thought most fit for the use he did intend it, he put it into the hands of his Neece and directed her what to doe, and how she should carry her self to make Celadon happy in his dear Astrea; The Nimph did promise to obey him most faithfully: and returning into the great Chamber she addressed her self unto Alexis who was talking with Silvander and Astrea, whilst Diana was puz∣led to find out answeres unto the discourse of Paris: For though she gave him but cold entertainement yet he did not stick to shy them unto her: Can any wish, fairest Diana to be more happy then I am, since the Gods are pleased to let me enjoy her whom of all the world I love best? I cannot tell, answered Diana (very faintly) whom you mean, But I doe not wonder at your good fortune, for it cannot be better then you deserve: My meaning is (replied Paris) that the
gods have assured me by their Oracle, that you must be mine, and that's the rea∣son why I am so full of joy: for to tell you most truly, my affection unto you i▪ most violent, and of all the favours that heaven can shower upon me, none can be more dear unto me, then the honour to enjoy you. Diana then casting her eye upon Silvander, who had fixed his upon her: That (said she with a deep sigh) is the least of ten thousand, and I cannot chuse but wonder you should take the pains to look after it: I am so mean a thing in comparison of you, that the disproportion affrights me, and hinders me from any joy in that, from whence any other then my self, would draw a happinesse. O Diana (said Paris) do not sin so much, as to esteem your self so little, whose beauty and perfections are such, as merit ten thousand times better then my self. Could I dispose of Scepters and Empires, as freely as I can of that estate which the affection of a Father will confer upon me, I swear, my fairest Diana, I should humbly cast them at your feet; and should be as prodigal of them as I am of my liberty: See, replied Diana, how the gods are pleased to mingle bitters with the sweets of our lives; since in ordaining me to be yours, they will not let my consent go along with them: but will have that honour which would accrue unto me by your alliance, to be accompanied with my sorrows, that I can have no inclination unto it. How? (said Paris much astonished) I beseech you from whence proceeds this repugnancy? Did not you freely consent that I should go and ask Belindes consent unto our marriage? I must needs say (answered Diana) that I did so far consent unto your seeming desires of having it so, not remem∣bring that Astrea and I, had made a vow never to part from one another: Now since your departure, it hath so fallen out, that she has an intention to go and live amongst the Carnates: so as I being more obliged unto her then unto you, I must needs follow her, and have engaged my self to no kind of life, but what she lives. I cannot tell, said Paris, how heaven will dispose of Astrea; but I am sure, that unlesse you do openly infringe the doom of your Destiny, you cannot op∣pose your self against that happinesse which I beg from you: Come, come, my fairest, you must give your self unto Paris, as Paris does most inviolably vow ne∣ver to be anyes but Dianas. In saying so, he took her hand, and lifting it unto his mouth against her will, alas continued he, how unfortunate should I be, if in leiu of the highest happinesse I can ever wish, I should find all my hopes blasted? has any of my actions, dearest Diana, offended you? If I have sinned, let me know wherein, for I have courage enough to punish my self, and love enough to make you satisfaction. Upon this he leaned towards her, and Diana, who for all her good will unto Silvander, could not hate Paris. The greatest fault which you have committed (answered she) is against your self, in addressing your self unto one, in whom you cannot find any thing answerable unto your merits, I wish you had placed your thoughts upon some more noble object then my self; for as there you would find more honour, so also would you meet with more contentment: not but that I do set a high rate of esteem upon you, and value you as your vir∣tue and quality deserves; but I must needs confesse, that I should think my self infinitly obliged unto you, if you would cease this addresse unto me, and not op∣pose that earnest desire which I have of going with Astrea, and ending my dayes amongst the professed Virgins. Paris was ready to reply when one came unto him from Adamas, who was in his closet with Belinde; so as supposing that he was sent for to treat concerning this match, he said nothing unto Astrea but this; your Fate and mine, fairest Diana, are in the hands of those who can dispose of us, and I believe you will think it a crime to disobey them: for my part, I am fully resolved to observe whatsoever they shall ordain concerning me. In saying so, he kissed her hand, and went to the place where Adamas and Belinde stayed for him. Silvander no sooner saw him out of the chamber, but he left Alexis, Leonede, and Astrea, and came unto Diana, but so dejected in his countenance, as if he would have died. First he fell down upon his knees, because none remained in the room whom he mis∣trusted, and casting his eyes upon Dianas, which stood already in water; well,
my fairest Mistresse (said he unto her) now am I utterly undone. Belinde is now come; Paris is all joy, in hopes ere long to enjoy you: Dianas desires are now accomplished, and poor Silvanders hopes quite blasted. O heavens! answered Diana, why will you wound me to the soul so mortally? Is it not enough that I am constrained to suffer the Tyranny of a Mother, and that I languish in the most affliction ever poor woman endured, but you, Silvander, must grieve me more by your suspitions, and think me guilty of a misery which is to befal us? My sus∣pitions (answered Silvander faintly) were turned into assurances, that very mi∣nute you first permitted Paris to make his addresses to you, it was an easie matter to judge, that his quality would win upon the will of Belinde, and that the ho∣nour of being the son of Adamas, was of it self sufficient to make him merit that happinesse which he is going to enjoy; but Diana, I do wish you all joy, at the rate of my own misery: may you long live contented in the enjoyment of my rival: bestow upon his quality, that which my love might very well obtain; if I do murmure, it shall not be against you. Heaven had been unjust, had it en∣dued you with more fidilety: it is not fit you should be the conquest of a Vaga∣bond, a Stranger, a miserable wretch, upon whom the Stars have shot their most malignant influences: Paris only is worthy to possesse you, not because he loves you more, but because he is more rich and more fortunate then I. The last sen∣tence which must doom me unto him, replied Diana, is not yet pronounced, and I do promise you to put as many obstacles, as my duty will in any handsomnesse give me leave: I have already told him, that I had made a vow to confine my self un∣to the Carnates, and that I could, with lesse violence upon my self, execute that design, then receive his alliance; but he protests he understands from an Oracle, that I must infallibly be his: that I confesse does most trouble me, because if it be the decree of the gods, I am afraid all our endeavours are not able to thwart it. I also must confesse (said Silvander) that it were an impardonable piece of folly in me, to desire a happinesse, which by eternal decree is forbidden me: The gods cannot lye; and since they have ordained that Diana must marry Paris, and that Silvander must die, it is most just we should submit unto their wills. I will go therefore, fairest Diana, and seek out some means to obey them, and deliver my self all at once from those miseries which persecute me: In saying so, he rose up; but the Shepherdesse laying hold upon him, whither will you go Silvander, said she unto him? will you offer to attempt any thing against my contentment? your love unto me ought to be above all other considerations, and you can by no Law be dispensed from that obedience which you ow unto me; The Law which bids me despair (answered Silvander) ought to be the most inviolable, because it is most sutable unto the will of the gods: Their intention is, that I should cease to live, and since they would have it so, both you and I are obliged to be also conformable. Therefore, Diana, do not hinder me from that benefit; by it I shall have the accomplishment of my desires; if you love me, you will not deny that which end all my miseries, and begin all my delights: should I follow your inclination, and prolong the course of my miserable dayes, what would it advan∣tage you further, then to be a witnesse of your violated faith? and Diana, what do you think would become of me? Do you think me able to survive that fatal sight of seeing you in the power of another. Alas, alas, Diana, assure your self I should run stark mad, and do such strange things, as posterity should wonder at. It is therefore better for me to distance my self from you betimes, and by one sudden death, avoid ten thousand which your marriage would put me to, and so testifie to the world, that I have more love and more courage then you have. Silvander expressed himself in such a manner as made Diana extreamly pity him; and because it vexed her to see him in such a fury, it was long before she answered him in any other language but that of tears: at last, clearing up her voice, and looking him in the face. did I think Silvander (said she unto him) that death were an argument of my affection and courage, perhaps I should open my veins sooner then you imagine; but I am afraid, it would be in me a mark of infamy, and would give unto my survivers a subject to accuse me of some greater fault,
then that of loving you: Life is not so dear unto me as my honour, and were it possible to leave the one and not the other, Paris should nere triumph over Dia∣na, nor would I ever be forced to receive any other husband then you: Believe this Silvander, for a most certain truth; I do invoke the gods to be witnesse of it; and let heaven never pardon me, if I would not execute that design with as much courage as now I do mention it. I perceive for all this (replied Silvander deject∣ly) that all you say, is only to assure me that I must not pretend any more unto you; and since so, can you think that I can ever receive any comfort after such a losse? O my dearest Diana, do not injure me so much, as to think I can live in this world after all hopes of you is gone: Let what arguments be alledged that will or can, I will not stay in it; nor do I think any can be found strong enough to condemn my despair. Upon this, Belinde entred into the room, which did not a little surprize Diana, who being infinitly afraid to lose Silvander, was very desirous to sweeten in some sort, those bitter displeasures which she saw him resent. She hasted therefore to say unto him in a low voice: Servant, if I have any power over you, I do com∣mand you to live, at the least until you hear for certain, that my marriage is con∣summated: upon this word, she rose up to go unto her mother, who made a sign unto her, so to do. Alexis, Leonide, and Astrea, who had also discoursed upon their affairs, did rise up at the same time, and joyning themselves with Diana, went altogether un∣to Belinde; who carrying them into the garden, desired that she might have some privacy with Diana, to tell her of some particular businesse which she had to com∣municate unto her. Upon this they severed themselves: Leonide, Astrea, and Alexis, went into the thick of the Grove, whilst poor Silvander, not knowing which way to go, went out of the house, and took the first way that his foot step∣ped into. He came by Fortune unto the place, where formerly he had taken delight in discoursing unto the rocks concerning the beginning of his Love; and leaning himself against the trunk of an old willow, which the river had insensibly under∣mined, he stopped a while to look upon the roots of it; and finding them to be almost all quite bare and out of the earth, he compared the state of that tree un∣to that of his love. Poor stump (saist he) upon how small a thred does thy life and mine now hang? thou art sustained only by two or three small strings of a root, which the swelling of the river Lignon will loosen from the earth, and carry thee away. So likewise miserable I, who only do subsist by one bare command of Dianas, and cannot live any longer, until the anger of heaven do put me out of all hopes to enjoy her: Afterwards, casting his eyes upon the little waves which dashed a∣gainst the banks, and presently retired back: Clear waves (said he) is it not me whom ye call unto you? and do not you invite me to follow you? This sweet murmure wherewith you flatter my griefs, does it not assure me, that you will be more kind unto me then Diana? do you not tell me, that you are so pitiful, that you will most willingly receive me into your bosome? Ah Celadon (continued he) how happy thou art, in finding amongst these waves a remedy to all thy sorrows? For let them talk what they will, in lieu of falling into the water to help Astrea, I believe thou didst cast in thy self, only to help thy self, and be safe from those storms which her anger, or perhaps jealousie, had raised against thee. O Hea∣vens! O Celadon? why should not I do the same? Lignon does offer me the same help; Diana does give me the same cause; but cruel woman that she is, she takes away from me the power of doing it, and most unjustly does oblige me unto the observation of a vow which I have made to obey her. After this, leaving unto his thoughts the liberty of wandering whither they would, he stood near an hower studying upon the several accidents of his life; but after a thousand thoughts, he fixed them all upon his love: and comparing all the pleasures that ever he received with his present pains, he found so great a disproportion, as he had much ado to remember that ever he enjoyed any contentment; this made him curse his first flames, and not being able to check the first motion, made him re∣pent
that ever he lived; yet calling to memory the perfections of Diana, and considering, that since it was his Fate to die, he could not lose his life in a better cause: he condemned his first thoughts; and as if he would professe himself an enemy unto himself, in loving this Shepherdesse still, he wished more misery upon himself, that he might be the more her Martyr. Probably he had spent all the rest of the day in these imaginations, unlesse by Fortune he had coughed, and a neighbouring Eccho returned the noise back again unto him; and though he knew well enough from whence that hollow voice came, yet would he needs consult with it upon the present condition of his life; and therefore he fell to interrogatories with the Eccho, which still answered him, that the heart of his Mistresse was as hard as any Rock. After he had discoursed thus a long while, he held his peace; and then broke out again in these terms: Cease, cease, poor miserable wretch, cease for ever all complaints, and without consuming thy self in unprofitable sorrows, begin to think, that perhaps this is the fatal day, in which Paris must triumph over Diana: O most dismal day, wherein I must see my Mistresse a subject unto my Rival; or rather a day of Jubile, wherein I will deliver my freeborn soul from the prison of this wretched body: Thou shalt be unto me the most joyful day of all my life, and I will mark thee in my Almanack with the red Letters of my blood. Thus did Silvander expresse his grief for the losse of Diana; and so great was his despair, as he swore that he would never enter into the house of Adamas, un∣til he certainly knew what was resolved upon, concerning the marriage of this Shepherdesse: and whilst he was thus disputing with himself, he retired himself into his own Town, and there he would lose himself in some solitude or other; but then, he began to think upon the fault which he had committed against the Druide, in going from his house without any return of thanks for his favours, or so much as bidding him adieu: yet he followed his first thoughts, and resolved to see him no more until he heard the doom of death or life pronounced upon him. I know very well (said he to himself) that Adamas has cause to complain against my ingratitude, and to have an ill opinion of my humour; but I do find the in∣convenience which may happen unto me upon it, much less which I should suffer, if I should give him the opportunity of using that authority which he hath over me, and if he should command me not to depart from his house until I were pre∣sent at the marriage of Paris, which he does not think would be so fatal unto me, as it would. In saying so, he still wandred on; and at last, never so much as minding which way he went, he came unto his own Cabine: where not finding his flock, because the boy which kept them, had driven them out very early, he stayed so little a time there, as did apparently shew, that the cares of his Love did much more busie his mind, then the cares of his estate. So leaving his own home, to please himself in his inquietudes, he took the first way his foot light upon, not so much as minding or knowing which way it would conduct him. Belinde, on the other side, being alone with Diana, and wanting nothing but her consent to marry her unto Paris, she began this discourse: Diana (said she) the authority which I may justly clame over your will, would allow me to dispose of you without consulting with any but my self: yet being unwilling to make use of that power which Nature hath so absolutely given me over you, I conceive it requisite to communicate unto you, my design of marrying you. I am sure you cannot be ignorant that Paris loves you, and I make no doubt but you love him also: The journey that he took unto me, makes me so well knowing in it, that had it not been for the siege of Marcelles, I had been here sooner to give him that contentment which I see he courts with so much zeal and sincerity: now his affection aiming at no other end but marriage, and since you can never meet with a more advantageous match, I was very desirous to know your mind, and to tell you mine, that you may see how great a care I have of your good. My design is, not to let him languish any longer in his quest; but to consummate the mar∣riage as soon as may be: Delay in such cases does often prove prejudicial; and it is as grosse simplicity not to take a happinesse when it is offered, as it is to bewail
it after is lost. Tell me therfore freely Diana, what you think upon the motion, and pn unto me your most secret thoughts, assuring your self, that I do love you as much as a Mother can a child, and have as indulgent a care over you, as any thing in this world. Diana who all the while Bellinde talked, held her eyes fixed upon the ground, now lifting them up, Madam (answered she) I need not tell you what inclina∣tion I have unto Paris, nor in what manner I receive his addresses, since I know but too will, that you are resolved I should be his, and since what reasons soe∣ver I alledg to the contrary, it will be perhaps impossible for me to alter your de∣termination. Yet to give you satisfaction and to leave you no longer in an opi∣nion that I have any affection towards him, I will tell you that truely I doe not hate him; but I most tell you withall that I doe not love him so faire as to desire to be his wife: Not that I will ever contradict any thing that you shall command me, but doe refer my self more unto your judgement then my own, and such is my conformity unto all your commands, that my very desires shall never con∣tradict yours. Bellinde, who knew nothing of her love to Silvander, and imagined that all this language was only hid from her, for the affection she had unto Paris: Diana (said she) all these trivial excuses are not now seasonable:  have not so much forgotten the passages betwixt me and Colion, your Father; but I know what a young woman can say, who is ashamed to confesse her thoughts: I know that you do love Paris, and I am glad on's: his merits may well pretend unto a bet∣ter fortune then you have, and therefore you are the more beholding to him, since he does value only your virtue, and your self, not your fortune; Madam, re∣plied Diana, I protest unto you, that Paris is as indifferent unto me, as all other men are; There is only one thing which moves me to esteem him, which is; That in all his good will towards me, his discretion hath been so great; as it was im∣possible but I should a little wish him well: But Madam, this good will which you are pleased to speak of, goes no farther; and I dare say, never will go farther in terms of amity then such as a sister bears unto a brother: And therefore I most humbly beseech you, not to think that in bestowing me upon him you procure me such advantage as will bring me any contentment; I protest, I wish with all my heart, that he had never looked upon my face, but with eyes of indifferency: And the greatest favour you can do me, is to let me continues as I am, and to live as I have done hitherto: the demand, replied Bellinde, is not just, and I were extremely to blame if I did consent unto it: The strongest law that I can impose upon you, is my peremptory command: But that you may not think I will constrain you unto any thing but what reason dictates unto me; I would have you consider whether it be possible I should suffer what you desire; first, this amity which you have contracted with Astrea, and Phillis, will at the lst have an and, or at the least, not afford you that plesure which formerly it hath, because you must all part; and though not on your side, yet probably on theirs; then will you not find any felicities in life, when two Companions, who are so dear unto you, are gone the very places where you lived together, will after you have lost them, present you every moment with fresh subjects of sorrow: But suppose it possible that this knot of amity should last eternally, and that you were inseperable; you must yet know Diana, that you cannot resist the power of a few years, which will wrincle you with age; and then God know, how much you will be ashamed of a thousand disadvantageous reports that will go upon you. Some will say, that it was in you a sign of a weak judgement, that could not take a good match when it was offered; others will say, that you are a woman of such shallow merit, that none has a mind to make any addresses unto you: And almost all, without any farther inquiry into your life, will he squibbing a∣gainst you any thing that comes into their fancies: whereas by living under the power of a husband, you are safe from all these slanders, and quietly enjoy the pleasure of being inseperable from one that perfectly loves you: Madam (said the shepherdess) Marriage is not always the ma to stop the black mouths of scandalous people: Those who have a mind to blast the actions of others, will
soon find matter enough to work upon in any kind of life that one can live: I have heard say, that slander resembles an arrow which is shot and must necessarily light some where, and has this ill quality with all, that most comonly it hurts the innocent, and makes the lest actions condemned as crimes: So as Madam, if any have an intended design to blast my reputation, I cannot avoid the blow, nor do I think the name of wife a better armour, then the name of a maid: however it be (said Bellinde) I must of necessity discharge my self of that care with I am bound to have of you, to the end, that those few days I have to live, may be the more seriously imployed in the service of our Gods. But I beseech you Madam, (said the shepherdess) if you find so much satisfaction in the ser∣vice of those divinities, may not I also pretend to be imployed in the same? Doubtless you may, (said Bellinde) but the gods have made known their plea∣sures unto me, and have commanded me to Marry you unto Paris: For you must know Diana, that as it is not my humour to do things rashly, so would I not at the first hearken unto the request which Paris made unto me; but taking a little time to consider upon it, I first did what I could to know whether his inclination unto you were as real as he pretended it; And in order thereto, I con∣sulted with the Oracle of that Deity, whom I adore, who commanded me to consent unto it, in these very words, The Oracle. ENquire no more Bellinde: Go Order and contrive the matter so, As he whom ere Diana marryes Be son to Adamas, calld'd Paris. Oh good gods! (cryed out Diana) how insufferable is this necessity which is imposed upon me; and how shall I ere be able to endure the tyranny of this hus∣band? In saying so, her eyes began to flow in tears; with Bellinde perceiving; But what abundance of pleasure (replied she) will you enjoy in the possession of this lover who will be a second self unto you? Madam, replied Diana, and kneeling down) I do conjure you by the memory of my dear Father, and by that love which once you bore him, to consent that I may end my days no where but in your Company: you cannot procure unto me a greater advancement; and if it be true that you do value my contentment, out of pitty, grant this request unto me: Bellinde, who imagined that the tears and expressions of Diana did not proceed from her apprehensions of being under the power of Paris, but rather from a kind of bashfullness, which is inseperably incident to her sex: Diana (said she unto her) I do know better then you, what is most convenient for you; and unless you will exceedingly displease me, you must not oppose your self against him whom I have propounded unto you: In saying so, she commanded her to rise up, and afterwards she continued thus, though the quality of Paris were not so considerable as it is, yet his virtue being in so high a degree, you have no cause to doubt but you may be more happy in being his, then you can deserve: and therfore I charge you to let me see no more of any such signes of discontent to appear in your face: if I do, I shall take them for so many testimo∣nies of your disobedience: I think Madam, (answered the shepheardess) I shall have so much power over my face as to keep it from telling you my displeasures: but I am afraid I have not so much power over my inclination, as to make me receive the alliance with Paris, with any joy: I do much better love Sil— heere she made a stop; and was surprised that the name of Silvander was so neer comming out: And Bellinde commanding her to go on, Diana, who knew that if she had named Silvander, her mother would not have liked of it therefore she replied thus: I say Madam, that I do much better love Silence in my grave, or to live amongst the Carnates, if you would be pleased, the in the
company of Paris. I tell you once for all (answered Belinde, seemed to be angry) that you ought to have no other will but mine; and since I desire to be obedient unto the gods, who would have me bestow you upon Paris, you will extreamly anger me if you be in the least against it. Begin therefore betimes to prepare your self; for since Adamas hath consented unto it, I will have the busi∣nesse fully resolved upon this very night: Upon this, she left her to the mercy of a thousand tormenting thoughts, which came into her mind; and not staying to hear any answer, she went unto Adamas. Diana no sooner saw her self alone, but she opened a passage for those tears which that respect she bore unto her mother had kept within her eyes; and now being at liberty to sigh. Though (said she) they will not please me, yet they cannot hinder me from complaining: Afterwards, considering the abundance of tears which flowed from her eyes, and down her Rosie cheeks, like rivers: alas, poor feeble tears (said she) why will you attempt a thing so full of difficulty? Alas, you can only bedew and make grow those flowers which the earth brings forth, whilst you drown and wither those that Nature has placed in my cheeks: Alas, they require some nourishment that is a little more mild and sweet; you, cruel tears, are too sharp and bitter for them; you do proceed from a cause too sad, and would, in any other then my self, be a cause rather of death then life. In saying so, she stopt a little, and afterwards broke out again: Alas (continued she) you are arguments of my faint courage, since I dare not have recourse un∣to no other remedies then you, as if Nature did not offer unto me other arms, wherewith to revenge my self upon the injuries of Fortune. For what use were poysons created? what are swords for? what Precipices? what flames? what waters? but to be imployed in the relief of miserable wretches: Courage there∣fore Diana; make use of some one of these remedies to ease thee of thy misery: make choice of the most violent, that the act may be the sooner done, and en∣deavour to prevent this very minute which is to blast all thy hopes of any joy. Upon this, she went out of the Garden, not to go into the house of Adamas, for that was odious unto her, but to go into the wood, in hopes to meet with some of her companions, to whom she might without fear, sigh out the cause of her grief: She was almost at the very banks of Lignon, before she met with any; but at last she spied Astrea, who was set under an old oak, holding a handker∣chief in one hand, and leaning her head upon the other: Diana much wondered to see her self out of the company of Alexis and Leonide, because she knew they went out together, and knowing that she would never have parted from them without some reason, she was very desirous to know the cause, and made so lit∣le noise in coming to her, as she was within four or five paces of the Shepherdesse and was never perceived. The sighs and groans which Astrea sent forth, made Diana believe that she had received some extraordinary displeasure, especially when she heard her say with a deep sigh, traiterous and persideous wretch, durst thou be so bold as to offend me so extreamly? Cruel Shepherd, wouldst thou offer to abuse my inno∣cence so long, as in the end to blast my reputation? Then stopping, as if the vi∣olence of her sighs would not let her speak any more; miserable wretch that I am (said she again) how dare I ever appear in the world again? I see my self now obliged to blush eternally, and to seem as if I were guilty of a crime which I ne∣ver committed. Upon this, flowing with tears again, and still lifting her handkerchief to her eyes, she fell into a deep study, and that so deep, as Diana came and sit down by her, and stayed a long while before Astrea ever perceived her; at last, Diana being desirous to apply some remedy to her troubled mind, though she stood in as great need her self: Sister (said she and pulled her gently) what new affliction is this that is fallen upon you? Astrea then rowsing her self, as out of a deep sleep, and seeing one so near her whom she so much esteemed, yet never answer∣ing to Dianas question; for she no sooner heard her voice, but we embraced her, and fell into such a flow of tears, that Diana was no lesse afflicted then she, and finding such an object of pity could not restrain her tears neither: so being both
silent, they sate a long while embracing and crying together. At last, Astrea, in a voice interrupted with sighs: ah Sister (said she unto her) ah Sister, Sister, I am utterly undone: Why Sister (said Diana) what's the matter, and who has cau∣sed all this sorrow unto you? Celadon (replied Astrea) Diana then imagining, that the death of this Shepherd came fresh into her memory, and that being so near Lignon, she could not chuse but resent the sad accident. Sister (answered she) I will not condemn your tears, but you must give me leave to tell you, that if all the tears which you have shed for him, since his losse, were all together, they would make a river as big as that wherein he was drown'd: Come, come, companion, believe it, you have wept enough. Ah me, dear Sister (said Astrea, and interrupted her) you know not what cause I have to weep: I would to God when he threw himself into the River, I had been drown'd with him, then should I not at this hour be so grieved as I am, nor should I have been the common talk of all the world, as now I must: Diana, not being able to understand her mean∣ing, Believe it Sister, replied she, I shall be long ignorant, unlesse you do better inform me, but I beseech you speak freely unto me, and let me know the cause of your displeasure, assuring your self, that I shall as freely discover a thing unto you which troubles me extreamly, and the more, because I am out of all hopes to find any remedy. I will tell you what it is which troubles me (answered Astrea, beginning to wipe her eyes and sit down in her place again) for though I would not render that duty unto the affection which is common betwixt us, yet should I do it out of an∣other prevalent consideration, which is, that we two having been almost all one, and our very thoughts no more hid from one another, then our actions, it is ne∣cessary that you should answer for my deportment, and that those who shall make any doubt of my virtue, may cease to entertain any ill opinion of me, by the re∣ports which you will make in my advantage: I do not think (replied Diana) any man can be so simple as to blame you for any thing you ever did; but if there should, I promise most faithfully to vindicate you, and to speak in your behalf as I ought to do. And therefore, my dear companion, I conjure you to conceal nothing from me, but freely open your soul unto me, with this assurance, that I will never deny any thing you shall desire of me. Then Astrea having dryed her eyes: I ever thought (said she unto her) that your affection unto me was as per∣fect as I could desire, nay more then I could deserve: and to the end you should not exceed me in love, I will make a discourse which none but you or Phillis should ever get out of me: Know therefore, my dear companion, that whilst Paris was talking with you, Leonide came unto Alexis and me, and after she had asked what was the subject of our discourse, she said unto me, what will you give me Astrea, if I do tell you as good news as you can possible desire. Fair Nymph (answered I) I have nothing that I can dispose of; for all that I have is this day transferred into the power of my dearest Mistresse; but I shall be very ob∣liged unto you, if you will tell me any thing which imports either her content∣ment or mine: what I have to tell you (said Diana) does equally relate unto you both; and to hold you no longer in suspence, Adamas came to assure me, that it should be only your fault, if you did not tye such a knot, as death only could unloose: Then he knows (answered I unto her) that I shall obtain a∣mongst the Carnates, that place which I desired. He is most certain of it (an∣swered she) for he commanded me to bring you the news of it, that you might betimes prepare your self for it, and rejoyce: I have so long disposed my self for it, answered I, that I am ready at an instant, but I durst never build any certain hopes of it until now; and therefore I will with a most joyful heart go unto him, and thank him for the remembrance he had of my Fortune. Thus we went on talking together, when Leonide, after a while of silence, whispered me in the ear, Astrea (said she) tell me truly; will not the company of Celadon be as pleasing unto you, as the company of Alexis? Sage Nymyh (answered I) why do you ask me that question? Because, said she, it is very necessary that I know it for some considerations which I shall tell you. Upon this I observed that Alexis did withdraw a little from us, and under a pretence of looking upon some Pictures,
she began to walk up and down the room. I being then alone with the Nymph: Celadon (said I unto her) was a Shepherd unto whom I ought to have no great inclination, by reason of the enmity that was betwixt our Parents; and Alexis is a Druides daughter, whom all things do oblige me most perfectly to love: and therefore in all probability, I shall be more delighted in her company, then in that Shepherds, who can never be, in my opinion, more then in a condition of indifferency. This dissimulation (said Leonide unto me) might be good at another season, or before one who has not so much knowledge of your affairs as I have; but to me, who knows to a syllable all the Letters that ever you writ unto him, and who am not ignorant in any one of all the accidents that ever befel you, witnesse your jealousie, which was the cause of his throwing himself into Lignon; it is to be thought, fair Astrea, that these dissimulations are to no purpose, and that you do your self an injury, if you do not speak more freely unto me. Judge Diana, whether or no, I was surprized when I heard her talk thus: re∣ally it did almost ravish me; but desiring to know more, how (asked I) came you to know all this that you have told me? I shall tell you (answered she) but I beseech you never speak of it unto any, and swear unto me, that of all the se∣crets you know, this shall be the most inviolable. I who never in all my life de∣sired any thing more passionatly, then to know how she came by all these things, I swore unto her even what she would, and then she went on thus: You must know Astrea, that my uncle, as he is in a quility much above the common sort of men, so he is owner of such rare qualities, as makes him come near unto a Die∣ty: few men ever equall'd him in excellency of wit, or profundity of Science: his humility, which is incomparable, makes him even with care hide that, which another out of oftentation would make appear; I who have relation to him, have so great a share in his affection, as he seldome ever conceals any thing from me: I can say, that he hath very few secrets, of which I have not had some ex∣perience. Mow, being some dayes in Marcelles, and in my chamber there, he came un∣to me, and I know not upon what fancy, asking me some questions concerning you, at the first I was very shie in making him any answers: At last, know Leo∣nide (said he unto me) that this Shepherdesse is born under a constellation which doth promise unto her abondance of happinesse, but this happiness is mixed with so many bitter disasters, as very few persons would condition to be happy upon the same terms: She had a most passionate affection unto Celadon, and doubt∣lesse she does yet burn with the same fire which that discreet Shepherd did kindle in her soul; but this flame has so few witnesses, as Diana, Phillis, and Alexis, are the only persons unto whom she does discover the violence of it. If you desire to know what successe shall befal her, here is that which will make you more knowing: Then she told me, that Adamas gave unto her a book, and that open∣ing of it, she had no sooner inserted certain Characters unto those that were be∣fore in the book, but thereby she found all that heretofore I told you concerning my life, and the life of Celadon; and having related a great part unto me, she continued thus, you see Astrea, how little reason you have to conceal any thing from me: what I have already told you, is enough to make you trust me; con∣fesse therefore freely unto me, that you shall meet with more contentment in end∣ing your dayes with him, then in living with Alexis, who in the quality of a Druides daughter, cannot, as I conceive, afford you more then common de∣lights. Since fair Nymph (said I unto her) all the actions of my life are as well known unto you, as unto my self; and since this prodigious Science of Adamas can tell you them to the least circumstance, I will not deny, but that I did love Celadon, with a most pure and holy affection; and that the most sensible displeasure I ever resented, was the losse of him: But the gods, who do all things for our good, not permitting our loves to arrive at a happy end, I have brought my mind to en∣dure this separation with patience; and it is only upon this accompt, that I have devoted my will unto the merits of Alexis, not conceiving that the ghost of my
beloved Shepherd will be any thing offended, if to avoid the entertainment of any other I do confine my self unto her, and to live with her in any place where my thoughts may be free, where I shall be little in the company of Calidon, or any other whom Phoion would have me to marry: Your design (answered Leonide) is so just handsome, that Adamas is resolved to procure your contentment which you desire; but because that confinement is a kind of death, I wish Astrea, you would tell me ingeniously, whether before you die to the world, and leave all those delightful habitations, where you have heretofore spent so many merry dayes with your dear Shepherd, you would not be very glad to have a sight of him once more, and to let him know that it is for the love of him you leave this countrey, where since his absence you never found any thing dilectable. Alas, fair Nymph (answered I) what contentment could I ever receive, since it is only to aggravate my grief, and to assure me that is impossible ever to be hap∣py again: No, no, sage Leonide, I have too much offended his love not to be e∣ternally punished with the torment I endure, in assurance that I shall never see him again: That time, in which I saw him cast himself headlong into Lignon, his head down, his arms spread, as if he were desirous to embrace that element which was more kind unto him then I was; That time (I say) that Fatal time, was it, which taking him out of my sight, did also take away all my hopes of his ever loving me again. Do not ask me (said she unto me) whether or no it be impossible I should give you that contentment: leave the care of that unto me, and the thing per∣haps will not be so difficult as you imagine, only tell me whether or no you have any desire to see him: for to tell you truly, I am able to do it; this very book which my Uncle gave me, is it which will help me to shew you the Image of your so much loved Celadon: In saying so, she opened a book which she held in her hand, wheae I saw a great number of figures and characters, which were un∣known to me; so as when I cast my eyes upon it, I knew not whether it was only a meer effect of my own imagination, or really some kind of virtue contained in it; but certain it is, I found my self seized with an unaccustomed fear, and my blood began to rise; therefore it was a long time before I spoke a word, which Leonide observing: Astrea (said she) have a good heart, and put on a strong resolution: for this is the summ of all; you do either love Celadon, or you do not love him: if you do love him, commit your cause unto the god of love; he is a puissant god, and able to give good successe unto all our enterprizes; if you do not love him, then blot his very name out of your memory, and save me the labour of shewing him unto you; for I have no desire unto it, further then as coaducing unto your contentment. Ah fair Nymph (answered I) you touch up∣on the most sensible part of my soul: Alas, why do you make any doubt whether or no I do love the memory of Celadon; if you have of late read the secrets of my life, certainly, Leonide, you know, that if you do find in me any repugnan∣cy unto your motion, it is not but that I have a most earnest desire of seeing Ce∣ladon again; but it is, because I am afraid I have not courage enough to observe all that you shall perhaps command me; but if you will be pleased to tell me first, what you would have me to do, I shall prepare my spirit for it. In that (answer∣ed she) I shall easily satisfie oou, and tell you, that in the first place, you and I must retire our selves into some place within the wood, where none can come to molest our armorous mistery: O heavens (said I and interrupted her) I am cer∣tain this is impossible for me to do; if you do put me to go alone with you unto the place where you will make your figures and characters, and where perhaps you will use some black inchantment, I am afraid my spirit will be troubled as well as the air, which you perhaps will darken, and the images which you present un∣to my eyes, will be so affrighting, that they will make me die before I can see poor Celadon. Let that be the least of your fears (said she unto me) for what I shall do will not offend the air, nor shall the Sun grow dark; but on the contrary, the flowers shall appear more beautiful, and you shall see every thing smile at the pleasure which you will receive; but you must be alone, for it is to be feared, that in the
habit wherein Celadon will appear unto you, he will be ashamed to be seen by any strang eye: why (sage Nimph, (said I unto her) do you think the goast of Celadon will be offended at the presence of Alexis? Leonide seeming as if she thought letter upon it: I beleive (replied she) that the good will you have unto her will rather be pleasing unto Celadon then offensive, and therfore I think though you should invite her unto this ceremony, it will be no hindrance unto it: well (said I unto her) so my Mistress be there, I will go wheresoever you please, nor shall I fear any thing as long as you will let me be in her Company: Let us then see (said Leonide whether she will consent unto it; and afterwards we will go about the business. Upon this I went unto her, as you might observe I did: I protest sister, (said Diana) I did not observe it: For as I believe, it was at the same time when I was talking with Silvander: right, sister, replied Astrea, I saw Silvander then with you: but to continue the discourse which I began: I told you that I went unto Alexes; who as you heard before; was walking about the Room, and looking upon some Pictures: As soon as I came unto her, Mistress, (said I unto her) I come to aske your aduice, and beseech your assistance in a business which much concern me. Servant, answered she, you may command me any thing, and you need not doubt but I shall do it with all my heart; But I am afraid (said I unto her,) that the prayer which I shall make unto you will not be pleasing, because perhaps you will think, that it does something contradict my duty unto you; Noe (said she) for be certaine, I shall take any thing in good part that proceeds from you; will you promise me Mistress, (said I) that it shall not displease you, and that you will lend me a little of your courage, to execute my design? I doe promise (answered she) to give you, not only my courage, but my self also, if it will any thing conduce unto your contentment: Is is most essentially necessary (said I unto her) for Mistress, be pleased to know; That Leonide having read, perhaps in my soul, that there are yet some of those flames which Celadon kindled, unextinguished; and seeing that I am to go with you amongst the virgine Druides, so for ever leave those places where the presence of my shepheards were so pleasing unto me, she is resolved before my departure, to give me the delight of once more seeing his Image. I observed, dear sister, that as soon as ever Alexis heard my proposition, she blush't; and presently after, those Roses in her cheecks vanishing, she grew as pale as one upon whom the doom of death had passed: but not being able to divine the reason; I asked her, from whence that alteration which I observed in her might proceed: at the first, she was extreamly put unto it for an answer: but at last she said unto me, I assure you servant, the design of Leonide does exceedingly affright me and I cannot comprehend what invention she can use to satisfie your curiositie. Oh Mistress (said I unto her) did you but know what things she has already tole me, and how she can when she pleases; panetrate into the most hiden secrets of a soul, you would cease your wonder: I was at the first as much amased as you are: but when she told me all the particulars of my life which certainly none else but the gods, Celadon, and my self, could know, I thought that what she promised me was noe more impossible then the rest. For my part (said Alexis, and was much troubled) I shal do what soever you would have me; but I conceive it very good, that before you engage your self any farther in the matter, you prepare your self for any vexatious accident that may happen unto you, for I can tell with what eye you wil behold this shepheard: perhaps he wil appear unto you so displeasing, as you wil hate him, as much as now you imagine you love him: should it so happen that any of your thoughts should pro∣cure unto him that discontent, doubtless it wil drive him into a second dispair: a thousand times worse then the first: That would be a means to lose him eter∣nally without any hopes that any art of magique is ever able to raise him again from the place unto which his soul shal retire it self. Mistress (sayd I unto her) I do not so much fear my hatred wil drive him away, as I doubt whether my love wil retain him; But since this officious Leonide, wil do me the favour to shew him unto me, though but for a quarter of an houre, I beseech you do not hinder me
of the delight which I expect: upon this with tears, in my eyes, I innocently took her hand, and kissing it a hundred times, I carryed her unto the Nimph, who understanding that Alexis consented to go with me, did place her self be∣twixt us; and when Bellinde, and you were gone out, she carried us into the wood, where I received the most sensible displeasure, that ever poor innocent, harmless woman ever resented. Upon these words, Astrea began to weep, and so violently, that she was forced to leave of discourse; and Diana beginning; I protest sister, (said she unto her, it was about the very same time that I also was afflicted with the most bitter pill of sorrow, that ever I received; but if you desire I should relate it unto you, I pray do not leave me in a languishing desire of knowing what was the event of your business, that I may mingle my tears with yours, and that our afflictions being participated, they may the more easily be endured: I beseech your sister, replied Astrea, to excuse the excess of my sorrow, and do not wonder it should hinder my speech, since it is enough to take away my life. But before my sorrowes reduce me to that extremitie, I wil relate unto you the rest of this adventure. Upon this Astrea was ready to proceed when she heard the voice of Phillis who now knowing where her Companions, were went al over to seek them; and was now singing a songe which Licidas gave unto her the day before. Thus this sheapheardess went on singing, little thinking she had so much cause of sorrow, in the behalf of her Companions: As soon as she had ended her song she came unto the tree under which Astrea and Diana sate so as she spied them: At the first, she advanced towards them with a face full of joy: But when she saw their countenances so full of sorrow, she was amased; therefore she serted her self down by them without speaking a word, and not knowing which of the two she ought to speak unto, so equally were they both dejected, for a long while together she did nothing but look upon them, sometimes upon one, and sometimes upon the other; at last lossing al patience, my dear Compa∣nions (said she unto then) do you only counterfeit this sadness to make me afraid, or have you any real reasons for your being so melancholly? Alas sister, said Astrea with a deep sigh) any affliction is but too real, and arived to the highest point it possibly can. And mine (said Diana) is nothing different from yours; for it is in the highest degree: you cannot find (replied Phillis) a more competent judge in this matter, nor one more equitable then my self, if the laves of our friendship wil but alow you to relate unto me what it is which makes you thus sad: For my part (said Astrea) I shal quickly do it, for when you came, I was then began to make the discourse of it unto Diana; and I beleive she wil be as willing to relate her basiness unto you; upon this she began to make a short repetition of al that she had told Diana, and afterwards continued thus: Now my Companions you must know, that whilst we were going unto the thick of the wood, Alexis appeared to be very timerous & by her countenance seemed as if she had much rather have gone to her death then to the place, where I hoped to receive some assistance from her: her pace was slow, and her leggs fainted, and there was no more colour in her face then in that of Adrastes when he was di∣stracted: I who took notice of it, and saw her every moment to faint more and more, Mistress (said I unto her) I thought my self the most faint hearted woman in the world: but for ought I see, you are no more courageous then I am. Truly servant (said Alexis to me, I do know so little whither Leonide will carry us, nor what she intends to do with us, with this incertainty does amase me, and makes me doubt whether the place where she will carry us, will prove a place of torment or a place of happiness unto me. I believe, (said I) we shall quickly know that, for we are already under such a shade of trees whose leaves are so thick, that there is hardly light enough to know our faces: and to facilitate her enterprise, shee has found out a place to observe, that she cannot find the like in all the wood: The place (said Alexis) is indeed very solitarie, and I cannot conceive how it is possible Leonide should present you with any pleasing object in it: So she perform her promise (answered I) and shew me Celadon, I shall be contented, and what horrour soever the place does promise, doubtless it
will all vanish upon the first appearance of my shepherd: Are you then fully contented, replied she, that he should appeare before you: so fully contented, answered I, that I do command it a thousand times, and I did never desire to see any thing so passionately in all my life as I do to see him, since it is so (said Alexis unto me with a more confident countenance then before) let us go fairest Astrea, unto the place where heaven, by the mouth of Leonide is to pronounce the sentence of our felicitie: I who thought that she spoke of our being admitted amongst the Carnutes, and stayed by nothing but my desire of seeing Celadon, once more before I went; Let us go Mistresse (answered I) unto the place where heaven wil free me from all obstacles of my felicity. In saying so, I observed that Leonide stopt, and turning her self towards us with a voice more loud, and a tone more grave then ordinary, she said thus unto us: Here Astrea, is the place where the gods have ordained that Celadon shall be restored unto you: be sure you be very attentive unto the ceremonie, and resolve with your self to keep silence for a while, least you should prophane it with your words: upon this▪ she began to open her book; and kneeling on the ground with her left knee, her face turned towards the sun rising, she took a knife out of her pocket, and en∣graved some characters; then pronounced some words which I understood not, after this ske rose up, and coming to us; Remember Astrea (said she unto me) you punctually observed all that I shall command you: be sure you faile not in the least tittle upon pain of offending those spririts, whose assistance I have in∣voked: In saying so, she turned her self towards the East, afterwards towards the South, then the West, and last of all towards the North, and at every re∣moval muttered something: At last she came unto me, and after she had made a circle upon the ground, Stand here fair Astrea (said she unto me,) and pre∣pare your self to receive far greater contentment then ever you had: Afterwards turning her self towards Alexis, and placing her in another circle: Oh ye most puissant gods (said she in a loud voice) ye who command the destinyes, espe∣cially thou puissant god of Love, by whose favour I do put a secret into practice which was never known unto any mortall, but only Adamas: oh ye most blessed sprits, who do enjoy those pleasures which does produce an inviolable amity: oh ye gods! oh love! oh ye spirits! I do call you all for witnesses, or rather for authors of this miracle, and conjure you to restore back unto the shepherdesse Astrea, the Image, or rather the person of Celadon: upon this, looking upon me with a smiling countenance, and coming to me with a very grave pace; I perceive (said she unto me) that the only reason why Celadon does not present himself before you, is because you did forbid him ever appearing in your pre∣sence untill you did command him; Will you therefore be pleased to command him? I will sage nimph, (answered I) did I but know in what manner, and in what termes I should pronounce it. To save you that pains, replied Leonide, do you only repeat what I shall say: Then she beginning in a loud voice, Celadon, Celadon, said I after her, I command you (said she) I command you (said I after her) to present your self before me (said she) to present your self before me (said I) after this, first looking upon me, and then upon Alexis. Now fair Astrea (said she) do you not see Celadon? I see nothing yet (answered I) then was I afraid, that to punish me for the offence which I had committed against his love he would deprive me of the Joyes of asking him pardon: Then I cast my eye upon Alexis, and seeing her in a trembling posture, perhaps Mistresse (said I unto her) that you do see him: Alas, alas, answered she) indeed I do see him, and touch him, but as soon as ever she had said so, her voice failed her; and Leonide speaking, probably Astrea (said she) you have failed in something which I commanded you, though not in words yet perhaps in thoughts. I assure you, fair Nimph (said I unto her) I do not think I have failed in either. Then having made me repeate these words three times over; Celadon I command you upon pain of my displeasure, to present your self before me: Oh heavens! my Com∣panions, what shall I say! I saw wretch that I am Alexis, or rather Celadon prostrate at my feet, and kissing them, here, my fairest Astrea (said he unto me) here is your son whom the waters have spared and could not extinguish the
least spark of his zealous flame. I who thought still that it was Alexis, oh Mistress, (said I unto her and embraced her) could you be so cruel as mock me thus? Fairest Astrea (replied Celadon) it is not now fit I should be called your Mi∣stresse, it is glorie enough for me to bear the name of your most humble servant: and in testimony that formerly that honour was conferred upon me, see here (said he and pulled out the same riband which he snatched from her the same day he cast himself into Lignon) this is the last testimony of your anger. Then open∣ing the case wherin my Picture was, and presenting it unto me: be not so un∣gratefull, (said he) as to dilown your own fair face; and though I be so unfor∣tunate as to be worn out of your knowledge, yet do not execute your rigour upon your self; upon this he was silent, and his silence was such a cause of mine, as I stood still, and was not able to utter one sillable. Truely (said Phillis and interrupted) I do not wonder at it, for well may you be surprisd, when we that only hear of it can hardly tell whether it be a dream or a truth: Alas (said Astrea) it is but too true, that this cruel traytor thus betrayed me: And to make it only a dream, I would it would please the gods I might sleep an eternall sleep, why, why? replied Diana, are you troubled at the knowledge of that which you so passionately desired? I did not think (an∣swered Astrea) that it would ere have been so disadvantageous to me, nor that it was possible it should fall out so: I was ignorant of Leonides artifice and of Celadons triumphing over my innocence under a pretence of Alexis nor did I think that Nimph would have abused my credulity under couler of a science which was never known unto her. However it be replied Phillis, it is very happy newes that Celadon is alive, and will be no smale Joy unto my Licidas, However it be, answered Astrea; it is a misfortune unto me to be thus deceived, and that this perfideous shepheard should be the cause of a thousand crimes which I have committed to the great hazard of my reputation. I do not believe (said Diana) that any in the world has any cause to blame your actions: But if any be so ma∣licious as to condemn you, you have a good way to stop their mouthes by mar∣rying Celadon, who I? (said Astrea in a great rage) perhaps he is out of the world by this. How? said Phillis, what should take him out of it? have you committed a second fault, after you payed so dear for the first. I do not think (answered Astrea,) I committed any fault when I testified my ressentments against him for deceiving me. For god sake sister (said Diana) let us have the full relation of the matter. I will, replied the shepherdess, provided that Phillis will afterwards Judge without passion, whether I had not reason to do as I did. Proceed then, said Phillis, and doubt not but I shall freely tell you my opinion. Then Astrea continued her discourse thus. As soon as I had cast my eyes upon my Picture, upon the ring and the riband which Celadon presented unto me, I fixed my looks upon him, and did so perfect∣ly know his face, as I wondered I should be so long mistaken: At the first, I was upon the point to embrace him, and to follow the first suggestion of my love: but then calling presently to memory the condition wherein he had seen me, the favours he had received from me, and how I had given him liberty to kisse my cheek, my neck; my eyes and my mouth, this put me into such a confusion, as I stood immovable; then did a combate begin in my soul betwixt love and rea∣son; pity took part with one of them, and honour the other; love pleaded the exstream obedience of the shepherd, his inviolable fidelity, his passion, and his fortune; and pity would needs perswade me to put an end unto his miseryes. But reason and honour did cleerly demonstrate unto me the bad designs he had cloaked under this disguise, and commanded me to do some act which might te∣stifie to the world that I was in no wise an accessory unto that disguisment: In conclusion I fixed upon this last resolution, and entring into a greater anger against him then ever I was, not considering how long he had been upon his knees, nor so much as bidding him to rise: cruel wretch, (said I unto him) that has attempted against my honour, and who with insufferable impudence durst yet present himself before that person who has all the reason in the world to hate thee; how canst thou forbear blushing at thy arrogant boldness? Perfideous
and deceitfull Alexis, no less then death can expiate thy crime; How couldest thou find malice enough to betray me? upon this, shaking of his Arm as well as I could, I began to fly from him: but he holding me by my coat: Alas fair Astrea, (said he unto me) I did not expect from your rigour, a reception more favorable: I knew my fault did deserve a punishment as great; but since it is my fate to die, and since your own fairest self hath doomed it so: I beseech you even for pities sake, to tell me what kind of death it is your pleasure I should die, to the end my repentance and obedience which I will tender unto you in that last moment, may in some sort satisfie your anger: I must confesse, the tone wherein he ultered these expressions did most sensibly move me, and I was even ready to yeild unto the suggestions of compassion: but being already fully resol∣ved to do some violence, not only upon him, but upon my self, I seemed to be very obstinate in my first design; and pulling my coat away from him by force: Die what death thou wilt, (said I unto him) so I may be no more troubled with thee. Upon this I left him, and Leonide followed me some twenty or thirty paces; but seeing that Celadon took another way, she lift me to follow him, being unwilling, as I beleive, to forsake him in that sad affliction wherein I left him. As soon as they were out of sight, I began to dispute with my self, whether I had done well or ill: and in the time that I was coming hither, I think I did a hundred times approve of my actions, and a hundred times repent I ever did it: but finding no way to revoke what I had said, and not being able to put out of my mind those favours which his disguisement had obtained from me; at last I seated my self under this tree, where, when Diana came unto me, I had began to lament both my own fortune and Celadons. Thus Astrea ended the discourse of all the passages which hapned unto her in the new acquaintance that she had with her shepherd: and Phillis, who was extreamly greived that the cruelty of her Companions had imposed upon Celadon a more dangerous penance then she first: Sister (said she unto her) I do not wonder, nor shall hardly pity you; if you suffer any more misery, and if heaven should condemn you unto some now subject of grief: for I professe you have most strange, odd, and perticular wayes to bring sorrow upon your self, and such as I believe no other but your self would ere have thought upon; Fie, fie, what necessity was there to drive away this shepherd from you again? If you did think thereby to stop the mouths of such as might accuse you of any crime, did you not plainly see there was no necessity of any such extreams, since the authority of Adamas was enough to free you from all suspition? Ah sister (answered Astrea though there be some likly hood that Adamas does know some of these passages, yet am I not assured that he does: and to tell you truly, I never thought upon him; I was taken upon such a sudden, and my judgment so surprised and intangled, that it was very hard for me to entertain any other considerations, then such as prompted me to condemn this shepherd of the grea∣test treason he could ere commit against me: Well, well, replied Phillis, per∣haps ere long, heaven will let you know the secret of all this business, to the end you may be tormented with more sensible remorse, For so ill using the favour that was shewed you, in rendring Celadon again, Mean while, because I will not be so uncharitable as you, I will go and think upon some means which may prevent that shepherd from doing any harm unto himself, and acquaint Lycidas with all that hath hapned. Upon this, never staying to hear the answer of Astrea, nor what Diana pro∣mised to tell her, she rose up and went towards the house where she thought to find Lycidas. Astrea and Diana began to follow her, and conceiving that as they went, they had time enough to talk of their business; Diana began to re∣late almost word for word all the discourse which Paris and she had together, she told her of Silvanders despair, and lastly of Bellindes command upon her: and having throughly informed her of all, she proceeded thus: Now sister, to open unto you the very closset of my soul, I must freely tell you, that I have nothing so great an aversion to be marryed unto my grave, then unto Paris; Not that I have any cause to hate him, nor so little Judgment as not to know what honour
and advancement it would be unto me: but to confess ingeniously, I do love Silvander better; and though nature has put an inequality betwixt them, yet beleive me, love is revenged, since the same advantages which birth gives unto Paris above Silvander, my affection does give them unto Silvander above Paris. See how heaven does play with me: in giving me an inclination unto one, whom I must not pretend unto, and an aversion unto him, to whom I must be sacrifi∣sed. Your misfortune (said Astrea) is not yet comparable unto mine: For in the accidents of your life nothing has hapned which can wound your reputation: whereas in the disguisement of Celadon, the most innocent of my actions may with some colourable pretence be taken for a crime. Besides; whether you marry Paris, or Silvander, yet fortune offers you some hopes of contentment: But whether I do marry Celadon, or never see his face again, yet still I must bear all the faults that every evel spirit can charge me withall: But (said she and sighed,) I am resolved ere long to find out the remedy which dispair uses to teach such souls as cannot bear them. Upon this she was silent and Diana began: Companion (said she unto her) you do find your misery to be greater then mine, because you think it so: But I do find mine to be greater then yours, because I know them to be more stinging: assure your self the causes which make any calamity intolerable, are more easily to be found in my affliction, then in yours: For as the state stands with me, I have the same displeasure which you have, which is not to enjoy the person whom I love yet I have one which you know not, which is, that I am constrained to submit my self unto the tyranny of her who can dispose of me: yet sister, I am resolved as well as you, to have recourse unto that common remedy which cannot be denied unto any; and I will sooner die then pronounce that fatal word, Yes, which will be the first munite of my misery. With such discourse as this, these fair ones came so nere the Druides house, that they perceived Lycidas coming out with Phillis, and seemed by his counte∣nance to have some very earnest business in hand: Astrea desired Diana to step a little aside, and avoide the meeting them, which Diana easily consented unto; and they went into a by walk, on the side of that where they were to pass, and hiding themselves behind a bush; It was not long before they heard Lycidas walk a great pace, and say: but Phillis, do you not know from that cruel woman, in what place this tragedy is to be? I protest, answered she, it is the only thing I have forgot; But look well about you, perhaps we shall meet Leonide, and she can tell us all. Oh heavens, replied Lycidas (and hasted away) if Astrea would, she might spare me all this pains; But I think, she was born to be the ruine of our house. This was the last word they could hear; and when they thought them out of sight, they came out again; And were no sooner entred into the great walk, but they saw Phillis returning alone: They therefore stayed for her; and as soon as the was come unto them: Well Phillis (said Astrea unto her) I be∣leive Lycidas is very angry with me; has he not good reason? (answered Phillis) do you think he has so little interest in Celadon, as not to hate all those that are the cause of his ruine? Alas sister (replied Astrea) I must confess that I was the cause of his first being lost, and that I was to blame in condemning him so lightly; But now he may blame himself for his misfortune: unto whom can be impute any fault, but unto his own scurvy humour which moved him so indiscreet∣ly to obtain a thousand favours from my innocency, under a false disguisement? Indeed Phillis the preservation of this shepherd ought to be very dear unto me; But my honour ought to be no less considered: you have seen how oft he has imbraced and kissed me, insolently abusing the liberty which I gave him under the notion of Alexis, and whereof I might have been blamed had it been from the person of Celadon: Not but that I beleive I should in a little time have par∣doned the offence; But when I call to memory the Image of things past, I am so transported, as I could ordain him a worse punishment, then I have, if I could think upon it sister (said Phillis) is this your repentance for distroying Celadon before? Come come Astrea, you had better abate something of your rigour, then be put to the pains you were before. Sister replied Astrea, those that can temper their passions and motions, are more then Men: we are all too weak
to have that dominion over our selves: we must, whether we will or no, ob∣serve such lawes as our passions will impose upon us: we cannot upon a sudden foresee such accidents as may happen: Do you think, if at that instant, honour had told me. Celadon was unworthy to live, can you think I say; that I should repent bidding him die? No no: beleive me, but on the contrary, I should have thought, that I owed such a revenge unto my reputation, and should have been glad to have preserved it, at the rate of that very shepherds life; But on the other side, (said Phillis) perhaps you would not have been angry with him, but have received him with Joy, a little before Leonide presented him unto you. I wish, answered Astrea, that he had never undertaken to delude, and deceive me, that I might without any harm unto my self, have paid what I owed unto that affection which he bore me: but since that misfortune is hapned, I must confess that what regret soever I resent, I cannot condemn my self for wha I have done. In saying so, Astrea went forward, as being desirous to retire into the house because it began to grow late: But Diana, who observed it, and who had no less horror to that place then to a dark Dangron, having no mind to go into it till the obscurity of night did force it; Companion (said she unto her) me thinks we have yet time and light enough to go as far as the labyrinth; I beseech you, let us go and walk so far as it. I will go, (answered Astrea) whither you please; Then they turned a little upon the left hand, and being entred into the walk which led that way, presently they spied Leonide, coming a great pace, and having the countenance and garb of one that had some great cause of sorrow. This wrought a strange effect upon the soul of Astrea: for she being in some hope that Leonide would hinder Celadon from attempting any harm unto himself, as soon as the saw her return alone, she was even ready to fall down for greif. First her greif appeared in her face, and afterwards beginning to sigh; Oh my Compa∣nions (said she) yonder is Leonide coming to tell of Celadons death. That, an∣swered Phillis, does not much trouble you, because you desired it, and did ab∣solutly command him to die. In saying so, the Nimph came so neare unto them, that they could easily perceive the trouble wherein her mind was; And because Leonide was a little angry with Astrea for treating Celadon so ill, as soon as she perceived her, she offered to turn into another walk to avoid meeting with her; But Phillis ran after her, and entreated her to stay which she condescending unto, as soon as she came into the presence of Astrea; You have reason (sage Nimph) said the shepherdess unto her) to shun the Company of a miserable woman, who yet has more cause to complain against you then you have to hate her; You have reason to complain against me, (said Leonide a little faintly) as against one who has taken abundance of cure and pain to procure you a happiness which you have rejected, and which you will never enjoy; For the gods are most just, and will punish your cruelty by some strange chastisements. The gods, replied Astrea, do know my soul, and all my thoughts: It they do find any crime there, I do not refuse any chastisement they will impose upon me: But I am most confident they will compassionate my innocency, and will not find any cause to condemn me. None of all this discourse (said Phillis) is satisfaction to my mind: I would gladly know where Celadon is: and therefore, good Leonide, tell me. Do you know then (answered Leonide) that Celadon is alive? I do know (replied Phillis) some part of this dayes passage, and how cruelly this peevish peice condemned him the second time unto dispair. Since so (said the Nimph) I will acquaint you with what has hapned unto him since, that you may judge whether Astrea have any cause to complain against me: upon this, Leonide sate down upon the grass, and Diana, Astrea, and Phillis sitting about her, the Nimph began thus; Did I not se the day almost done, and that I have not time enough to say much, I would satisfie you all in every doubt that can arise in your minds, concerning the life which Celadon hath led since he was taken out of the water; But refferring the relation of that History untill we have more time, I will tell you, that as soon as ever Astrea parted from us, I ran after Celadon; and quickly overtaking him be∣cause he did not think I followed, and taking hold of his arme, as if I had some
fears he was in a condition to do himself some harm: Shepherd said I unto him, Astrea commands you to live and to love her: he was a little surprized at this: for as I told you, he did not dream I was so near him, since he saw me go after Astrea; but turning himself towards me, and gazing upon me with a strange a∣mazment; Astrea, answered he, does not desire that I should live, for she has commanded me to die; and she does me wrong in commanding me to love her, for maugre her sharpest rigour, my soul cannot chuse but adore her more religi∣ously then ever. I must confesse I wondered to see him so calmly composed, for I expected to find him all fury; but yet still fearing the worst: Celadon, said I, I tell you nothing but what Astrea her self will say, if you will take so much pains as to see her again: who I? cried he and started back, alas Leonide it is not in my power: you heard the sentence which she pronounced against me, it is my full intent to execute it; nor do I make the least dor at it. I am at all times ready to observe all her ordinances, and the delight I shall take in living, is not so great as that which I shall take in obeying her; but replied I, what do you think will become of me? can you imagine that I will leave you in this transport? assure your self Celadon I will not, but will hinder you as much as possibly I can from doing any harm unto your self: Sage Nymph, answered he, though you do not intend to leave me, yet the night will force you unto it, and will be more prevalent with you then all my entreaties; nor will I take much pains to sollicite you, the horrour of darknesse and solitude of these woods will not agree with the soft and tender mind of a woman, and therefore you ought to value your own safty and rest, a∣bove mine, and not to be more careful in preventing my death, then in preserving your own life: all this will not do, said I unto him, for I am resolved upon it, and will not part from you as long as you are in so bad a humour. If the horrour of this solitude do beget any fears in my soul, I hope the gods will enable me to over∣come them. In this you are much mistaken, answered he presently, for the best office that you can do unto me, is to let me do as the justice of Astrea hath commanded: be∣lieve it Leonide, that Shepherdesse never was, nor never shall be, disobeyed by me: give me leave therefore to do as she did bid me, and give her no cause to hate you for hindering me. Whilst he was using all these perswasive arguments unto me, I called into my memory the words which you spoke unto him in the heat of your anger, and conceiving I had found out a good invention to comfort him: Celadon (said I unto him) I will not hinder you from rendring unto your Shepherdesse all that obedience which you do ow unto her; but withal, I would not have you go be∣yond it, nor to afflict your self in imagining such things as never were: I pray let us see what it was which she commanded, and if we consider well upon it, we shall find no great cause of complaint: nor (said he) will I so much as murmure against it: it is sufficient I know, she would have me out of the world; and death being the only way, I must, I ought, and I will take it. I do not think (said I unto him) she ever had any such thought, for if she had, she would have otherwise expressed her self. I do believe indeed, her intention was to shew you how much she was ashamed at her being so deceived, and at her affording you some, perhaps, over particular privacies; but when any matter of pennance came into question, believe it Celadon she never intended any unto you: To whom then (said he) to Alexis, answered I: ah Leonide (replied he pre∣sently) you are much mistaken, I did so clearly read in the face of Astrea her desires and intention to ruine me, that if she did name Alexis in lieu of Celadon, it was only because that name was more frequent in her mouth then mine; but however it was, I am sure it was unto me she spoke, it was me that she condemned by the fury of her looks, and it was from me she broke away with more hatred then if I had been some Tiger or some Satyr. With such expressions as these, he still went further from me; and I seeing the night coming on, and knowing that as good a face as I set upon it, yet I was not able to undergo the horrours of the night; but good Celadon (said I unto him) what is it that you resolve upon? to conform my self, answered he, unto that
which Astrea hath commanded me. Then, said I, you must not attempt any thing against your self: for though she did command you to die; yet she did not command you to kill your self. Upon this, he began to consider a little; and when I saw, he did not answer me: I cannot conceive, said I, that this command of hers ought to trouble you, no more then that command which Nature gave when you came into the world; for Nature, as soon as you began to live, did command you to die; and certainly, since Astrea did not assign you any time, you ought to stay till she prefix it, or till the weaknesse of your humanity, does exact from you that tribute which all creatures pay. Fair Nymph, said he then unto me, Astrea did not assign me any time, because she knew I ought to be as ready to execute her commands, as she to pro∣nounce them: questionlesse she meant the same day whereon she let me know my fault, should be the day whereon I should be punished: I do therefore conjure you not to crosse my desires any longer: tell that unthankful fair one (for doubt∣lesse you will find her full of joy at my misfortune) that I dare not so much as grieve at my death, lest my sorrows should provoke hers unto the like: assure her that of all the favours she ever shewed me, I hold this for the greatest, since in a moment she has delivered me from all the torments she was able to make me suf∣fer: for when I am dead, that fair one will not be angry at me; but if by ill for∣tune her mind be not enough revenged, even for pities sake move her to pardon the surplus of my crime. I would willingly come and do my pennance before her, but not having time, nor knowing how to do it better then in the losse of my life: Tell her, fair Nymph, that I am going to finish it for the love of her; and that as there is none but she for whom I would live, so there is none but she for whom I would dy. Fair Shepherdesses; I must confesse that I heard all this, without saying any thing unto him: for my heart was so sadly compassionate, that I could do no∣thing but dry up my tears which began to trickle down my cheeks: so as when I began to speak, he interrupted me thus: but why am I so slack in such a noble act? Why do I resist the will of Astrea, who would have a fresh cause to con∣demn me, did she know how I delay the pleasure which she will take in my death: Adieu fair Nymph, adieu sage Leonide; be not, as Astrea is, insensible unto the motions of compassion. Give me leave, I beseech you to steal one poor kisse upon your fair hand, in assurance that you will obtain one from the Shepherdesse, or at the least, that you will take so much pains as to ask it, as a testimony that she will forget all my offences: upon this, O how sad my soul is to think upon it, he took my hand, and having lifted it to his lips three times, he ran away from me as fast as ever he could, and though I made as much haste after him as possibly I could, yet I lost the sight of him presently: This accident made me almost mad; I knew not what to do: I was out of all hopes to find him, and yet I could not find in my heart to return without him. At last, in this confusion of thoughts, one while apprehending the harm that might happen unto him, and an∣other while blaming your too sudden rigour, I saw the day did bid farewel to the world: so seeing no possible remedy against this disaster, I returned back, still calling Alexis, Alexis, Celadon, Celadon; but hearing none return any answer unto my call, my sorrows began to be almost intollerable, and imprinted in my face such signs of death, as doubtlesse you saw, when first I came unto you. Such was the discourse of Leonide, which infused such strange affrights into the mind of Astrea, that she was even rady to run out of her wits, her eye was not at this time able to drop a tear: for her heart was so infinitly oppressed with sorrow, as it was impossible she should weep; but in exchange, sighs and groans issued in such abundance, as did quite take away the liberty of speech: Phillis, who knew the humour of her companion, and feared lest this last dispair of Celadon should drive her into dispair also, she resolved to apply some remedy: fair Nymph, said she unto Leonide, since Licidas is abroad, I am very confident he will remedy all these disorders, and will never return until he has set all streight again, or at the least, till he have shared in his brothers sorrows. Alas, alas, sister, said Astrea, and could hardly speak, it is to be feared that the fury of Celadon, will prevent the
help of Licidas; or that the despair of the one surmounting the perswasions of the other, cannot save him from the same precipice, in which, perhaps, both are already fallen: And should it be so, I should be doubly criminal, by committing two murders in the person of Celadon, and in making my revenge to reach the innocence of Licidas. Upon this, Leonide rising, and taking Astrea by the hand, the very truth is (said she unto her) I cannot tell how to excuse your cruelty; for indeed it has been extraordinary: but since you are not now in a condition to help it, I con∣ceive it best to talk no more of this accident, unlesse unto such as are in a capa∣city to apply some remedy. Diana, Astrea, and Phillis, finding this motion to be good, all four took the way unto the house, and came thither just as Adamas had concluded the Articles of Paris his marriage: the conditions whereof were not so secretly carried, but some of the Domestiques came to know them, and divulging it frome one to another, the noise of it went through the house, and from thence into all the neighbouring Towns. Belinde no sooner saw Diana, but calling unto her, she gave her an accompt of what was concluded upon with the Druide: at which the Shepherdesse was so surprized, that notwithstanding all the good councel which her mother gave unto her, she was ready to fall into a swound: yet being a person of a most admirable judgement, and discreet, above all the Shepherdesses in Forrests, she dissembled her sorrows as well as she could, and addressing her self unto Belinde; but Ma∣dam (said she unto ber) methinks the businesse is done with a little too much pre∣cipitation: Daughter (answered Belinde) a good action can never be done too soon; besides, I have not long time to stay here, for you know that my profes∣sion calls me another way, and therefore this very night the marriage must be consummated. As soon as she had said so, she went unto her chamber to make some prayers unto Hymen for a prosperous event of this match, and left Diana alone. This Shepherdesse, whose soul was over-swelled with sorrow, she would needs go immediatly out of the house, perhaps to do some desperate act upon her self; but Phillis, who was also by her self, whilst Adamas was talking unto Leonide and Astrea, she ran unto her, and began to talk with her. Diana, who could not hide her displeasure, though she had been the cunningest woman in the world; and who besides, knew that she might confidently open her soul unto her compa∣nion, she began to hold this discourse, but with so many sighs and tears, that Phillis was extreamly moved to pity her, and to wonder that Belinde should so tyrannize over her will. In the mean time Adamas who was very desirous to hear of Leonides negotia∣tion, and hearing what successe she had, O heavens, Astrea (cried he out) what do you mean? will you be the cause of the losse of the most amiable and faithful Shepherd that ever lived upon the banks of Lignon? Father (answered Astrea) it will not be long before you will be rid both of him and me: for if I be the cause of his death, he shall be the authour of mine, only it angers me that his way of treating me, hinders me from dying with honour: for I am extreamly a∣fraid, there will be such a blame upon me, for permitting him so many favours, unto which he would never have aspired, unlesse he had been faulty, both in his love and discretion. Daughter, replied Adamas, these faults whereof you ac∣cuse him, are the perfections which might well make him hope for a better enter∣tainment then he hath received from you; but he never failed either in his respect or in his love: and were you well acquainted with the actions of his life, doubt∣lesse your opinion would concur with mine. Father, replied Astrea, I never en∣quired after him since he threw himself into Lignon: for never thinking he had escaped that danger, I thought upon him only as a person whom I did esteem, and unto whom I had a greater inclination then the enmity that was between our Pa∣rents required. Well (said the Druide) I will better inform you, as soon as I have commanded some to follow him. Lycidas, said Astrea, is already gone to that purpose: it is enough, replied the Druide, for that Shepherd will not neg∣lect any course that is requisite for his preservation: in saying so, he took Astrea
by the hand, and leading her into a corner of the room, he commanded Leonide to go and entertain Diana and Phillis, and then began his diurse thus; I have told you, (my dear Daughter) so many passages of this shepherds passion, that though you had no other testimonies of his love then such as I shall give you, it were enough to make you love him above all Men living: you think him defi∣cient in his love, and in his discretion; but in the relation which I shall make, you will observe such strange testimonies, both of the one, and the other, as you will admire his constancy, and wonder at his virtue: You must not think Astrea, that I am ignorant of any accident in the whole course of your life: I have been instructed by him who caused, and resented them, and who would not tell a lie for a world; And that you may not wonder why I have been so carefull for his preservation; you must know, that the gods have linked the happiness of my old age unto that which this shepherd is to enjoy; and the tranquility of my dayes is to be such as I procure unto Celadon: Judge therefore whether I have not good cause to complain against you since you have ruined all my hopes, and under a scrupulous pretence of honour, you have put me into such a condition, as never to enjoy any contentment in the world. Yet I dare not despair of the goodness in the gods, least they should render me unworthy of their blessings, and therefore I take all in good part, and resign my self wholly unto their wills: But that you may not accuse Celadon, as any way accessary unto the misfortune that may hap∣pen unto me; but that on the contrary, all the fault may be imputed unto your rigour, I will acquaint you with her life ever since you banished him from you. You know very well Astrea, that then he threw himself into Lignon: But yet he was no drownd: for the current of the stream having cast him upon the sand on the other side of the river, he was ayded by Galathea, Silvia, and Leonide, who carried him secretly into the Pallace of Isaures: then he related unto her the passionate affection of Galathea unto him; the lamentations which Celadon made when his letters were filched from him: his constraint in not knowing how to avoid the offers of the Nimph, his sickness, his relappes, and in fine his coming in the habit and under the name and notion of Lucinde: After which he told her the life he began to lead in his ca; the stratage which Leonide invented to get him out; The laborious industry he used in erecting the Temple of the god∣dess Astrea: his ravishments that morning when she erected an emptie monu∣ment for him in the Company of all the shepherds and and shepherdesses of Lig∣non: and lastly by what meanes he perswaded him to pass in the habit and name of Alexis: Now, said Adamas and continued, you know better then I, all that has hapned unto him since. But that you may be no longer angry at him and your self for permitting so many privacies, let me tell you, that those things which another would have taken for high favours, he received them as extream punishments, and I have seen him so often afflicted and greived, as I have wished a thousand times that you had not so much affection to him as you expressed: And indeed Astrea, if you will but take so much paines as to examine your me∣morie, you will find, that it was you alwayes, which began to Carress and to kiss, for I dare lay my life, he had rather have dyed then ever offer it; and he did re∣strain himself least you should suspect any thing of his disguisment. This Daugh∣ter, has been the life of Celadon, whom you have most earnestly desired to en∣joy; and of whom you have set so great a value, though now make no accompt of him when it is permitted you to obtain him. If heaven do help Lycidas to bring him backe, good Astrea promise me, to look upon him with a kind aspect, and that you will forgive and forget all the injuries which you think he has comitted against you. Astrea who did not forget one syllable of all the Druides discourse, and who by the consideration of so many successes was confirmed in a belief that her shepherd was really innocent: Father (said she unto him) if Lycidas do bring him backe, which I do not expect, knowing how sudden he is in all his resolutions, I do pro∣mise to behave my self towards him, as you will appoint me, and upon the least sign that I shall see of his repentance, I shall be ready to acknowledge, that as
severe as I have been towards him, I will not here after be difficient▪ in the remu∣neration of all his services. Upon this promise, Adamas kissed her cheek, and carried her backe unto Leo∣nide, Phillis, and Diana; then went into Bellindes Chamber to entreat her that the marriage might be deferred until the next day, when he thought he should not have any cause of sorrow, in hopes to hear good newes of Alexis. Unto which Bel∣linde consenting, Diana was presently advertised of it: who seeing his misery one night further off, did a little lessen that extream grief which hung upon her soul. Thus did this day pass in the house of Adamas, whilst love produced contrarie effects in Marcelles. Amasis was every day in hopes to obtain a firm and uni∣versall peace very shortly. Sigismond was ravished with those charmes with he found in the face and affection of Dorinde: Rosilion fully assured of Rosaniras constancy and love was restless till he went to enjoy those favours, which she could not grant him, but in the presence of her Argira. Damon was even upon the point of marriage with Madonthe, who thought she owed her self unto the merits and valour of her Cavelier: Alcidon found nothing in the mind of Daphnide to contend with, and waited for nothing but the disenchantment of the foutain, to commemorate his joyes. Ligdamon, and Silvia also held good correspon∣dency: But amongst all these felicities, the happiness of Lindamor might pass for extream. This Cavelier being resolved to follow the Counsel which Adamas gave him, he was no sooner out of bed, but he went into Sigismonds Chamber, where finding Rosilion, who came to go a hunting with him, he was very glad to meet with this opportunity of talking with them when they were both together: So after he had bidden them good morrow, and told them that he would shew them the best places to find sport: But Sirs (said he unto them, and smiled:) If I do take upon me the honour to wait upon you in this chase, may I not hope you will be pleased to favour me in that which I do intend to pursue? Sigismond, who partly knew his meaning, (for Dorinde had told him some particulars of the Caveliers love) for my part (answered he) you need not doubt but I shall be most ready to serve you, and give all the assistance that possibly I can, provided you will but direct me which way. And for my part, (said Rosilion presently) I am most confident, that Lindamor makes no doubt of me; For he knows how much I esteem him: Sirs replied Lindamor, I do embrace your good wills, as my most Soveraign happiness, and I will assume the boldness to acquaint you with my business, that you may judge whether the assistance which I desire from you be fit to be obtained. If I mistake not (said Sigismond) we have now lea∣sure to tell you, for I do not think we shall see the Nimph untill it be late. Yet Sirs (replied Lindamor) that is not the principal cause of my coming hither, for my design was only to come and present my most humble service unto you: But since you are pleased I should make use of this time, and that in relating unto you the most secret actions of my life, I shall let you know such thoughts as my heart has harboured this two or three years last past: I do most humbly beseech you not to condemn my presumption, in suffering my ambition to soar far higher then eyther my merit or my birth ought to aspire; but rather to believe that it is an effect of Galatheas power, who robbing me of my reason, has not left my judgment so sound as it ought to be; but yet sound enough to know that I am no way worthy of her. Give me then leave to tell you, great Sirs, that Adamas being pleased to take so much pains at to come unto my Chamber this morning, and like an officious and charitable friend, having propounded unto me some ex∣pedients to render me the prossession of this fair Nimph, the more easily, he found none more necessary nor more likely to prove effectuall, then your fa∣vours; upon which he advised me to build the foundation of my fortune: For (said he unto me, if those Princes will but honour you so far as to become your advocate, and intercede for you unto the Nimph, most certainly she will deny them nothing they can ask. This, great Sirs, was the advice of this grave Drui∣de, which without any farther dispute, I am resolved to follow, though I must confess, how great soever the necessity be of your assistance, yet it is grand pre∣sumpsiton
in me to offer so much trouble unto you. But since your flowing good∣ness towards me, bids me hope for the honour of your assistance, let me freely tell you, that the happiness, or the misery of my life, does meerly depend upon the confession, or deniall of Amasis, unto the request which you shall prefer unto her in my behalf for the possession of Galathea. And that you may know, your only difficulty is to obtain the consent of that great Nimph, though it be a little vanity in me to say it, yet I must tell you that her fair complasence towards me, does put me into great hopes of gaining her consent. Upon this, Lindamor began to relate some arguments of Galatheas good will; after he had hinted upon the most probable and remarkable accidents; Generous Lindamor (replied Rosilion) you need no other mediators in your behalf, but those qualities which are eminent in your courage and virtue: they alone are able to acquire Empires, since they do adorn you with illustrious merit. However, I am most willing to take upon me this commission with Sigismond and Godomar; who doubtless are better able to serve you, then I am: but however, I am in∣finitely desirous to have the glory of contributing something unto your conten∣ment. T'is true indeed (answered Sigismond) I do not think that my brother and I, are altogether unproffitable; but I cannot grant that we have more pre∣valency then you, unto whom Amasis is highly beholding. However it be (said Godomar) we do all owe this office unto the valour of Lindamor: and I conceive it requisite, that upon the first opportunity we find, we sound the mind of Ama∣sis, who doubless will be inclinable unto it by way of recompence for all the great services which she hath received from him. Lindamor having committed the mat∣ter to them he accompanied them into the Nimphes Chamber, where Rosanira, Galathea, Daphnide, Madonthe, Silvia, and many others were already come. Afterwards all went unto the Temple, and stayed there till dinner time: After which Amasis was very desirous to take the air, and shew unto her princely guests, the sport of hunting, and many other delightfull diversions. On the other side Clotilda desiring to strike when the iron was hot, and to take Gondebaut when he was in a good mind, least he should forget the promises which he had made in Sigismonds favour, she went unto him in his closset, in hopes to make all friends. She found him with that Princes lettet in his hand; yet his browe seemed as if his mind was not well satisfied: But she in a surprised man∣ner said unto him: think no more upon it Sir; The promise which you have al∣ready made, must without more thinking upon it, be out of hand performed; Do not suffer this seperation of your two sons Sigismond, and Godomar, from you, to be laid in your dish, or accused as a bad father: And let not the world look upon them any longer as bad sone. I swear Clotilda (answered the king) you have hit upon my very thought, but not of all; For I was thinking too, what will become of Dorinde; should I consent unto her return, Sigismond would doubt∣less dote upon her as he did before, and I should be very sorry to be an eye wit∣ness of it: It she remain with Amasis, I fear that—at this word he stopt and shook his head two or three times, and sighed: but Clotilda, who smelt his meaning, and knew he feared that her absence would be a great regret of heart unto him, yet she would not take the least notice of it: but dissembling her, thoughts as well as she could, Sir replied she, if she do remain with Amasis, you need not doubt but to find out many wayes to cure the mind of Sigismond of his passion towards her: Be pleased therefore to leth live still with that sage Nimph, and command your sons to return home, for absence is an excellent remedie to cure the wounds of love, besides such others as your wisdom may make use of. Gondebaut began to smile at the thought of Clotilda, little thinking that she had hit right upon his: And this young Princess knowing very well how to lay hold upon this opportunity, and take him in that good humour. Oh Sir (said she) I do long exceedingly to see Sigismond again that I may chide him for his follies, and shew him how little care he has of his honour, in engaging himself so incon∣siderately to love a woman far below his merit, and quality: Ah Cotilda (said the king with a deep sigh) it is not without reason that love is always painted blind: For, (and I speak it knowingly) he does blind our eyes, and so much disorder our
judgments, that we cannot consider any thing but our own pleasures. In saying so, he began to walk; and Clotilda fearing to waken that passion which the ab∣sence of Dorinde had lulled asleep; But good Sir, (said she unto him) is it your pleasure that Amasis should enjoy that peace which our Princes have desired in her behalf? All your people doe abhor that war: and for your part, I can∣not think it will be prosperous or any way advantageous to you, because it is be∣gan upon such a weak foundation: Though I should make a peace with Amasis (answered Gondebaut, Dorinde will not be included: Clotilda, who knew the thoughts of his heart, and knew that all this discourse proceeded from his passion, but seeming not to understand his meaning; Sir (said she) I cannot think but you will pardon her; for alas she is unworthy of your prinely anger. Upon this Gondebaut was even ready to say that she was not unworthy of his love: yet being unwilling to shew that he entertained any advantageous thoughts of Dorinde, he turned his discourse, and looking upon Clotilda, since you desire the return of Sigismond (said he unto her) and of Godomar, you shall see how willing I am to content you, and how ready I am to forgive and forget their faults; let me therefore give Ligonias that answer which he stays for, and leave me for a while, that I may dispatch some letters. Clotilda upon this kneeled down, and having kissed his hand, she went out of the closset, and set to seek for Ligonias, with whom she talked, whilst Gondebaut was writing. As soon as she thought the king had done, she entred in with him; and Gondebaut, causing him to come neerer, Cavalier (said he unto him) I do give you full and absolute power to treat and conclude a peace with Amasis tell her that no other considerations moved me unto it, but the knowledge which I have of her virtue and goodness: Assure her, that if the wicked design of Polemas had been well known unto me, I had never offered to countenance his persidy: for injustice did never please me. Here (said he) is a letter unto Sigismond: tell that son of mine, that I do pardon him, and command him to leave Dorinde there, and bring Godomar with him: In saying so, he permitted Ligonias to kiss his hand: and the king embracing him as a te∣stimony of that esteem which he had of him, he gave him leave to depart, and commanded six of the bravest Cavaliers in all his court to accompany him in his journey; Ligonias also received Clotildas letter, and commands, not without returning unto that young Princes many most hearty thanks for her good nego∣tiaton; After which he departed with a resolution to make as much haste as possi∣bly he could. Ligonias riding most part of the night, he came to Marcelles in the morning before Amasis was up▪ He went first unto the quarters of Prince Sigismond, whom he found newly out of his bed: after a saluting complement, he presented King Gondebauts letter unto him; At the first, Sigismond durst not ask him what was the success of his comission, least he should hear some ill newes: but after he had embraced him, and found more signs of Joy then sorrow in his face; well Ligonias (said he unto him) what does the Burgundian King intend to do? To have you with him again Sir (answered the Cavalier) upon any termes in the word: I do beleive it (said the Prince) but upon what termes does he mean; termes of his anger, or termes of his goodness; Ligonias smiling at this question, Sir said he unto him, upon such termes as an indulgent Father, desires to see his child: he does desire to see you Sir with a thousand protestations and assurances, to forgive and forget that offence which (as he conceived) he had received from you: And to promise to correspond with Amasis as you would have him, and as I shall conclude with her, by virtue of that power which he hath given unto me: This, replied Sigismond, is the best newes that ever could come, or I ex∣pect; but, said he, did he not mention Dorinde? Yes Sir; answered Ligonias, the most express command of all concernes her: for he does desire that you will leave her here, and bring Prince Godomar with you. In this, (said Sigismond) he has fully satisfied my own desire; for I was resolved not to expose her any more unto the mercy of his passion, and am extreamly glad, he has commanded it to be so, since I can so willingly and so easily obey him: In saying so he opened King Gondebauts letter, and found it thus written.
GONDEBAUTS Letter unto SIGISMOND. THat pity makes a thunder bolt to fall out of the hands of the gods, is it which disarmes me of that anger where with I intended to destroy you. Your repentance has a strong influence upon me, and your Letter, which desires a peace with Amasis, has this operation, to remem∣ber me, that I am your Father, and to forget that I was her enemy: My hatred towards her, was not so just as my resentments against you, and yet I am disposed equally to forget both; to the end, your obligation being the greater, the greater also may be your acknowledgment of it: That which I do now desire of you, is your return, and you will no sooner return unto that duty which nature obliges you unto, but you shall find me extreamly affectionate unto my own blood. Let your presence then be accompanied with Godomar, and live so hereafter, as there may no  correspondency a∣rise betwixt us, Adieu. The reading of this Letter did go to the very heart of Sigismond, and did let him know, that with what fury soever the heart of a Father be incensed against his children, it is hard for him to forget that duty which, Nature, does exact from his affection: now did Sigismond in some sort repent that ever he had displeased him; and when he began to consider how happily things stood, he did assuredly believe it to be done by the Providence of the gods and heartily rejoyced at the peace which was procured unto the two Princesses, Amasis and Galathea. He was still upon this thought, when he opened the Letter from Clotilda; and finding therein her earnest desires of his speedy return, and her joyes for his victory, he was pleased beyond all expression or thought, and resolved with himself to give her that satisfaction. In fine, after some discourse upon Clotilda with Ligonias; without any more stay in this place (continued he) let us go unto Rosilion; my brother is already gone to his chamber, and let us impart unto them the good news you have brought us. I shall wait upon you Sir, answered Ligonias, whither you please, provided we lose no time to advertise the Nymph, for I would not upon any terms hinder her one minute of that pleasure which she will have when she hears the news. With such discourse as this Sigismond dressed himself, and hearing that Gondebaut had sent some Cavaliers to accompany him, he caused them to be sent for, and kindly entertained them. After this, they went all out, and as soon as they entred into Rosilions chamber, both he and Godomar ran to embrace Ligonias, and wondering at the haste which he had made, they asked him concerning all those things where∣of Sigismond was fully informed; and having answered that Sigismond could tell them: See here, said Sigismond, what testimonies I have received of the Kings clemency: Pray see (continued he and the Letter unto Rosilion) how kindly he writes: That Prince then having read the Letter: Now (said he) may Amasis rejoyce, and believe that her safety is settled upon such a sure foundation as can∣not be shaken: I am so full of joy (said Godomar) as I will accompt this day the happiest day of my life: It shall be a holy day to us all; said Sigismond, and I do believe Lindamor will have a share in it. As they were thus discoursing, they understood that the Nymph was ready, and might be seen: Godomar stayed with Ligonias, and Sigismond with Rasilion went to bid her good morrow, and acquaint her with the happy return of that Cava∣lier: at which Amasis was so joyed, as one might judge she built all the happi∣nesse of her life upon it: But because she was to receive Ligonias as an Envoy from the Burgundian King, to treat and conclude so solemn a peace: As soon as Rosanira, Galathea, Madonthe, Dorinde, Daphnide, Silvia, and the rest were come into her chamber, she went down into the Hall to give audience unto this wel∣come
Embassadour: Godomar was presently advertised of it, and preparing him∣self to bring in Ligonias, he caused him to walk before the six Cavaliers of Gon∣debaut, and Godomar leading him by the hand, conducted him unto Amasis. The Nymph advanced two or three steps to receive him, and the Cavalier kneeling down upon the ground, and at the Nymphs request rising up again, Madam (said he unto her) Gondebaut, the King of the Burgundians, does consent unto the peace which you desired: He would have it ever hereafter to be so solid and firm, as that it cannot be broken, without the sin of perjury upon the first Violator: He never had begun this warre, but at the solicitation of Polemas, who colouring his perfidie with specious pretences of right, implored his Arms; but since that rebellious subject has found the punishment of his treason, he is resolved that the end of his life shall be the end of all your dissentions: and in lieu of ever attempt∣ing any thing that may be prejudicial unto you, he will live with you no longer as an enemy, but as a neighbour and friend. After this, Ligonias held his peace, and Amasis answered him: I do, with abun∣dance of joy, accept the favour and kindnesse of Gondebaut; I shall hold it al∣wayes a great glory to render him what is due unto his merit and quality; and since he is pleased t honour me so far as to live peaceably and in quiet with me, I shall cherish his amity as one of the principal supporters of my estate. In say∣ing so, she pulled off her glove, and laying her hand upon that of Ligonias: This (said she) is a Symbole of that Faith which I do swear in the presence of gods and men never to violate or falsifie: Ligonias having sworn the same; and this, said she, (taking two pieces of a broken Javelin) shall be a testimony of our Re-union. In saying so, she tied both the pieces of the Javelin together; and the said, for a testimony unto future times, that this peace shall be pure and in∣violable, this Javelin shall be consumed by the purest of all the elements: and then in the presence of all the company, she threw it into a fire, which was ex∣pressely kindled for it. This Ceremony was no sooner ended, but Amasis cau∣sed the Peace to be proclaimed, and the People, in joy of such good news, made Bonfires in every part of the Town, and every one danced and feasted in sign of joy. Adamas was presently advertised of it by a Cavalier whom the Nymph sent un∣to him; and though he resented this good news with joy, yet was there a mixture of those misfortunes which hapned the day before in his house: The prosperity of Amasis did extreamly glad him, but the disgrace of Celadon did infinitly af∣flict him. He knew very well that his duty was to wait upon the Nymph, and to rejoyce with her at this new peace; but the interest he had in this Shepherd was a chain which tied him to his house. So not being able to forsake Celadon in this di∣stresse, he beseeched Amasis to excuse him, for he had some businesse of great consequne at home, of which he would come and give her an accompt as soon as ever he had any leisure. Amasis received these excuses, and Sigismond, left he should give his Father any discontent, resolved to depart that very same day, after some discourse with Dorinde: he bad Godomar therefore prepare himself, and desired him to invite Rosilion, Lindamor, Damon, Alcidon, and other Cavaliers, to come and spend some dayes at Lions in the court of Gondebaut, which Godomar promising to do, he acquitted himself so well, as he obtained a promise from Rosilion, upon condition he should not stay above three dayes at the most. Lin∣damor, Damon, Alcidon, Ligonias, Ligdamon, and the rest thought it fit not to pro∣mise any thing without the consent of Amasis, who knowing that Rosilion had promised, was well pleased they should bear her company. As soon then as they had dined, d Amasis gone unto her closset to resolve upon something concerning the departure of Sigismond, that Prince addressing himself unto Rosanira and Galathea, who held Dorinde by the hand. I think fair Ladies (said he unto them) that if my journey should be according to your wishes, it would be very bad, since doubtlesse you do wish me very ill, for the crime which I shall commit, in taking from you your Cavaliers. It is very true, answered Rosanira, and did I think the return of Rosilion would not be very speedy, I shall never consent unto his departure, and should have a just action of
complaint against you; but being confident you will not offer to take him away, but with intention to return him safe and soon again, I can with more patience put up the injury you do me, without any thoughts of revenge. This, fair Nymph, (said Sigismond, and addressed himself unto Galathea) perhaps is not your hu∣mour: Sir, answered Galathea, in this her mind concurrs with mine, and I can∣not answer you better then in her words: Is it you then fair Dorinde, said he, that will not pardon this crime? Dorinde would have answered, but Sigismond inter∣rupted: Nay fairest, said he, I would not have you pronounce your doom before so many witnesses; I would have you, by the leave of both these fair ones, speak it unto none but my self. Upon this Rosanira and Galathea withdrawing a little from Dorinde, Sigismond took her hand, and leading her unto a place where some seats were, desired her to sit down, and then spoke to her in these terms: Did I think, dear Dorinde, that my departure would make you judge otherwise of me then as I desire, certainly the time of my departure would be the time of my death, or at least, I would not upon any terms in the world consent unto such a sad separation: I do know exactly how much I ow unto the commands of a Fa∣ther, and I know also what obedience is to be given unto the commands of love; and if my Father command any thing which shall crosse the affection which I do hear unto you, I think it no sin to disobey him: I conceive the stay that you are to make here will not be tedious unto you, and the lesse, because you will not be hanted with the impertinent courtship of Gondebaut, and because I shall every ment be saluting you with Letters of love and assurances of my fidelity: If you think you should enjoy more contentment in another place, honour me so far as to tell me into what part of the world u would have me carry you: I protest I will do it, and lay aside all considerations in the world to please you. Sir (an∣swered Dorinde) I see so little ground to hope for any good from your absence, as I am not to be blamed if I fear, that the day which takes me from your presence, will take out of your soul all this love you talk of: Had I any▪ qualities either in my birth, wit, or Fortune, able to keep an affection after it is once got, I should not be altogether in such a desperate opinion; but knowing how extreamly de∣fective I am in all, or at the least in comparison of you, I expect all the rigours of a bitter absence, after I am once at a distance from you. Not but that I do consent unto this departure: for I will not have so much care of that amity you are pleased to honour me withal, as I have of your Fortunes: but I must confesse freely, I do not expect any good unto my self by it, but I do infallibly believe, that either the perswasions of King Gondebaut, or the mallice of my enemies, will extinguish all your love to me. Mistresse (replied Sigismond) for I dare swear you merit that name, and shall have it before any woman in the world; be fully assured, that this shall never be, and that it shall be more easie for them to take away my life then my love. Know Dorinde, that I have prepared my self long since to answer unto all such points as they dare propose unto me: for indeed, what can they object, but that there is a great inequality between our conditions; and that you being born a subject unto the King my Father, it will be little honourable for me to marry you? This is all they can alledge against my affection to you: for as concerning your virtue, they know it is without any exception, all the malice and scandal upon earth is not able to blemish it. But I shall answer them, that I being no slave, but a Prince, born free in my own choise and will, it were most abominable Tyranny and injustice to constrain me unto any other alliance, then where my own free-born inclination moves me unto. I'll tell them, that the knowledge which I have of your hu∣mour and wit, does promise me more contentment then I can find in any strange Princesse, who being born and educated in a clime contrary unto mine, will be of a contrary Genius, and not so sutable and pliant unto my desires and mind; and for a conclusion I'll tell them, that it is the property of Kings to do memorable acts, and I shall take delight in surmounting Nature, giving the quality of Queen unto a woman, whose birth denied it unto her; but if these arguments should not prove valid and full enough to stop their mouths, I have another which is more strong and prevalent, and I know they cannot gain say it, when I shall per∣emptorily
tell them that it is my will. Therefore, my dearest Dorinde, you have no reason to fear, but that my passion unto you will have as good a successe as we can desire. Alas Sir, (said Dorinde and sighed) If I do fear, it is because I do e∣steem you, and fear and amity are alwayes inseperable. I do not doubt but you mean well, and will to your power perform what you promise. But when I consider, with what stratagems and arguments they will endeavour to subvert your constan∣cy; and what malicious devices they will use to ruine me in your opinion: I must confesse, I cannot believe you will be able to resist them. I do freely con∣fesse Sir, that I have an inclination to you, perhaps more then becomes me to have unto any man; but I do swear, that if even I hear you begin to fail in that fidelity which you have vowed unto me, I will hate you so abominably, as though I cannot be revenged upon you, yet I will upon my self for loving you more then I ought: I hope, dearest Dorinde (said Sigismond) that you will sooner hear of my death then my inconstancy: and if it should so happen, that the malice of any Rival, or perhaps Gondebaut, should raise some false reports which shall belie these assurances which now I do give unto you, if you love me believe them not, nor suspect me as faulty in any one of those promises which I have made. I pray heaven (answered Dorinde) I never be deceived in my hopes and pretentions: for if I do fall from that height unto which you have raised my ambition, the fall will most certainly be mortal unto me, and it will be you only that would be cul∣pable of all the harm that happens. Dearest Dorinde, for pities sake, drive all suspicions out of your soul, and be assured, that as soon as ever I am at my own liberty and dispose, I will add unto the quality of a Lover, the title of a husband, and shall be more proud of that happy name, then of such a Scepter as would make me possessour of all the world. Alas, heaven would be the punisher of my selfnesse, and hell would let loose all its Furies to torment me, should I falsifie my word, or swell you up with vain hopes: No, no, Dorinde, believe it, my love is a pure and a holy flame, and consequently pleasing unto the Gods; I never entertained any thought of you which was not holy and lawful: and since it hath pleased the gods to suffer the continuance of my passion thus long, certainly they will never let it die: At the least, I do protest and swear unto you by all the Divinities which inhabit heaven, by that love which I bear unto your fairest self, nay, by your adored self, my Dorinde, that all the care which a devoted lover can have for the preservation of his zealous flame, I will imploy to the preservation of mine, to the end that if it be possible it may live even after my death. In saying so he took her hand, and lifted it to his mouth, which Dorinde did not deny, for she was so taken up with sad thoughts of this doleful separation, as she hardly knew what she did, but because Sigismond did in an amorous rapture, as it were, dwell upon her fair hand, she suddenly pulled it away, and said unto him, what protestations and oathes soever you make to assure me of your fidelity, yet my fears, Sirr of your change makes me doubt, that they are not able to make your words good, unto which I do give all the credit and faith that can be given unto the word of a Prince. I will, to my consolation, believe that you will not change, and will be perswaded that you do love me: I will think your passion to be very high, and that it cannot admit of any deminution; but however, give me leave to resent your departure, as the greatest injury that Fortune could do unto me; and if you do need any further testimony of my happy wishes of your welfare, receive my tears as the greatest that I can give. Upon this she let fall some tears, which she offered to restrain but could not, which Sigismond no sooner perceived, but he cried out, O my dearest Dorinde, preserve those pearls only for the god of Love, and do not recompence my love with Jewels of so high a price: wipe away those obliging tears, lest they should move too much sor∣row, and force me after your example unto the like. Dorinde then, lifting her handkerchief up to her eyes, provided (said she) that my eyes may never be provoked unto this sad office by your infidelity, I will not shed any more at your departure; but if it happen (as heaven forbid it should) that I should ever have any cause to accuse you of infidelity, I shall chide those tears which now I have
propped, and condemn them as accessaries unto your Treason. I do protest once more, dearest Dorinde, replied Sigismond, that you shall never have any cause to condemn either your tears or my love: I will most inviolably observe my pro∣mises, and you shall find that the end of my affection shall not be sooner then the end of my life; you may believe it, and the sooner, because I say it without constraint, or without any design in the world. Make me so happy as to be no lesse religious in the observances of all your promises, then I shall be in mine; and know, that I shall enjoy no happy minutes during this absence from you, but such as are imployed in the thoughts of you: In saying so, he kissed her hand three times, and went away without giving her so much leisure as no answer; not being able to resist those violences, which his love and compassion raised in his soul. Rosilion at the same time, asked Rosanira leave to go and see Gondebaut; and though at the first she was hardly to be perswaded unto it, yet at last being over∣come by his reasons, she consented he should go, upon condition of return with∣in five or six dayes at the furthest limit. For (said she unto him) if the Queen Argira should send, and prescribe limits unto our return, how shall I be able to obey her, when you are so far distant from hence? I do not know any thing in the world that should be more dear unto you then her presence; and the rather, because if you love me, you know it is she only from whom you are to expect the accomplishment of your desires and mine: My fairest Princesse, answered Rosi∣lion, the design which carries me unto Gondebaut, perhaps, is greater then you imagine: you know how puissant that Prince is, and how much his amity is to be sought after: Now I do hope by that inviolable contract of friendship which is betwixt Sigismond, Godomar, and me, to gain something upon the good will of the Father; and to make him my Allie. I do not enquire, replied Rosanira, after the cause which moves you to go, but I do only solicite you to a certain the time of your return. I know all you propositions and designs, have some legal and noble object for their end; but I fearmdash;upon this Rosanira stopt; and Rosi∣lion observing by her countenance some impression of fears; what does my dear∣est Princesse fear? (said he unto her) is it that I shall die of those torments I shall endure when I am out of your sight? No (replied she very dejectedly) I rather fear, that when you see Clotilda, you will die for love of her. Jealous Princesse, replied Rosilion, your suspicions wound me to the soul, but I will not go; and though I did conceive some necessity in making this voyage, yet I will slight it for your sake, and will let you see, that the conservation of your amity is more dear and considerable unto me, then the safety of that estate which is to fall unto me. Rosanira then quitting her first apprehensions, and looking upon Rosilion with a smiling eye: pray Sir, said she, excuse my fears, which ought to be arguments unto you of my love, since I do fear the losing of you; but for all that, do not alter your intentions of going with Sigismond: for I do promise to endure your absence, rather with longing impatience of your return, then any fears of sa∣crificing your self unto another: Me thinks (answered Rosilion) that my services may merit that belief from you; and if there do remain in you any doubts of my fidelity, I have as much love as ever I had, and can begin new assurances of my self: believe it fair Rosanira, I can be none but yours; and things absolutely impossible shall become easie to all the world, before I cease loving you with the same zeal I first resented when I made profession of it unto you. I do believe it, said Rosanira, and do vow, never to doubt it any more, provided dear Rosilion that you will also believe my faith to be inviolable. After this, Rosilion asking her whether she would honour him with any service: All that I desire from you (answered she) is to return soon again, and not to let the luster of Lions Court, make you forget that which will make you Lord of many Provinces, as you are already of my inclination. Rosilion promising to make his stay as short as possible, he went unto Sigismond, and finding him much troubled and sad; for he was then ready to leave Dorinde, he desired him in all love, to tell him the cause; and Sigismond whispering him in
the eare, look (said he) in the face of Dorinde, and tell me whether it be possi∣ble to part from her without extream displeasure: I do protest continued he) that now I do most sensibly find love to be the most smarting of all other passions, since the affection which I bear unto that fair one, is able to make me forget both my Father and my Fortunes, and all things else but her: I did ever think, replied Rosilion, that when this passion does meet in a brave spirit, it is most difficult, nay even impossible to separate, unlesse it be smothered by some great injury receiv∣ed, as it will by disdain or change; and therefore I do not wonder that you be∣ing once taken by the charms of Dorinde, should believe this love can never die in you: for I believe most confidently, that she will live in your soul as long as that fair one shall endeauour to keep the fire alive. This, replied Sigismond, does make the tyranny of Fathers most odious unto me, who under a pretence of that authority which Nature hath conferred upon them, do constrain the will of their children, and force them with intollerable violence, to deny their own inclinati∣ons, only to follow such motions as their ambition or avarice does prompt them unto; as if it were not reasonable we should enjoy the same priviledges that is allowed unto other animals, who in their harmlesse passions do without any constraint follow that party which they best like▪ Let me not live (continued he) if I have not ever, since I knew the merits of Dorinde, extreamly envyed all those, who in condition far inferiour unto mine, yet may do what they will with them∣selves, and are not forced to comply and please any but their own desires. Such (said Rosilion) do meet with obstacles that are worse, and which hinder them from a perfect gust of such contentments as men do enjoy; therefore we ought all to remain contented in the Sphaere of our own conditions, without any envy unto any: for doubtlesse, even those whom we do envy, would, were it in their Liberties to chuse, most willingly cease being what they are, to become what we are. The held on some further discourse, whilst Lindamor related unto Galathea, how the Princes had promised to do unto Amasis; and she being a little troubled that they had not alread spoken unto the Nymph. Madam (said he unto her) I cannot think they wil forget the promise which they made unto me; & though they have not made any solicitations in my behalf, yet doubtlesse they have sworn too sollemnly, to fail me. However it be, replied Galathea, you see they are upon the very point of their departure, and to resolve upon a thing of that great im∣portance, there will be required more time then they have to stay. Madam, re∣plied Lindam, we need no more but the Nymphs consent; and I hope, that to obtain it, there needs no more but to ask it: so as there being time enough for that, there is yet time enough to make me the most happy man upon earth. Do you think then (said Galathea and smiled) that it is so easie a matter to obtain my consent? Madam, replied Lindamor, it is much more hard to merit. Truly it (said Galathea) you are full of vanity, but fuller of love (answered he) and of such hopes as you have given me; but I shall be extreamly sorry that it does displease you: Upon this word Galathea interrupted him, and fearing that she had angred him; my Cavalier (said she unto him) you cannot anger me, and whatsoever you desire shall not displease me; and to shew you, that how great soever your desires are to enjoy me, they are not greater then mine to be yours; know that I am already wholly devoted to be yours, and if by crosse Fate my mothers will should thwart ours, I will die before she shall give me unto any other but Linda∣mor: in saying so, she observed that Rosanira was a little parted from Rosilion, and went to Dorinde, and therefore she left Lindamor to go and put the Princes in memory of their promise. Almost at the same time, Amasis came out of her closset, with eyes which indeed were something watry; for she still grieved to think she was to lose them, unto whom she was obliged for her life and liberty: and Sigismond, who had al∣ready given order to make all things ready, he came unto her to bid her adieu. As soon as the Nymph saw him coming, she went into her closset again, where the Prince following her, with Rosilion and Godomar with him, he spoke to her in these terms: You have seen, Madam, what command I have received from the
King my Father, and how earnestly he desires my return unto him. My fears to incense his hasty humour again against me, and make him repent of the pardon which he gave me, moves me most humbly to beseech you I may give him that contentment which he desires: protesting unto you, Madam, that if the desire which he has to see Godomar and me again, were any thing against your safety and rest, I believe I should rather suffer the inconveniency of his anger, then ever re∣turn unto him. Sir, answered Amasis, you need not doubt but your departure will much af∣flict me, and make me sensible of that losse, as of the estate which I am obliged unto you for preserving. Not but that I think it most just you should obey the commands of Gondebaut, since he intends only to deliver you from the inconve∣niences which you receive here, and to restore you unto the first luster an magni∣ficence of his Court; but I must needs confesse, it grieves me extreamly to part with you, and to know, that being in no degree able to requite so many good offices done, I am constrained to seem ungrateful towards you. Methinks, Ma∣dam (said Rosilion) that you ought not to take any care how to recompence us, since we have reason to think our selves infinitly obliged unto you, for furnishing us with the means of acquiring glory, and given us an honourable subject wherin to exercise our arms lawfully. Sir, replied the Nymph, your reputations were before at as high a pitch as they could attain unto, and this last occasion wherein you have made your cou∣rages to appear, can be nothing else but arguments of that pity which you had of me: the truth is, I am she that only reaps the benefit of it, and am most ob∣liged unto you; and when I consider, that after so many benefits and favours re∣ceived, I must lose you, and suffer you to depart without any testimonies of re∣sentment, it does grieve me so to the heart, as I do hardly enjoy that happinesse and well being which you have gotten me: And your departure is almost as sad unto me, as all those fears which the insolence of Polemas did cause unto me. Madam (said Godomar) probably our departure does a little trouble you, because it takes out of your presence two persons over whom your merit gives you a most absolute power; but there is no reason in the world it should grieve you, because in what parts of the world soever we live, our affections and services shall alwaies testifie that we are most perfectly yours: The truth is (said Amasis) I have al∣ready received so many testimonies of your good will, as I have no reason to doubt but you imploy it for me, upon all occasions wherein your assistance is re∣quisite; but this does not comfort me in those sorrows which this sad separation causes in me: for I would have you depart better satisfied from me, and would gladly acquit my self, in some measure, of those obligations wherein I am bound unto your valour. Madam, replied Sigismond, the care you have had of Godomar and Dorinde, since they came into Marcelles, is no way inferiour then that which I have im∣ployed to serve and help you, though I dare say, that the favours which they have received from you, does much surpass all that I have done: because you were less obliged to receive them, then I was to free you from all such inconve∣niences as might have hapned unto you for their sakes: so it is I who am the ob∣liged party, and am most concerned to complain, that Fortune offers me no bet∣ter means of grateful returns. Yet, Madam (continued he) if it be your plea∣sure I should attribute this unto your civilitie, and that I should think what I have done for you, deserves some kind of recompence, I will believe it so, since it is your pleasure, and to the end I may have some kind of right to hope, that you will be pleased to grant two humble requests which I have unto you: Sir, answer∣ed Amasis (with a countenance lesse sad then before) no greater pleasure can come unto me in all the world, then to do any thing you shall desire, I beseech you therefore, and conjure you unto it, to command me whatsoever you desire, that I may testifie how great a desire I have to obey you. The first thing then that I desire, Madam (said Sigismond) relates unto the In∣terest of Dorinde, whom I beseech you permit to stay a while with you: I think there is no need I should tell you my reasons; for you knowing both her life and
mine, doubtlesse you know them also as well as my self. Only I assure you, that the favours which she hath already received from you, and those which she ex∣pects from your amity, shall be put upon my accompt of obligations to you, and shall be so well imprinted in my memory, as I will never forget them. As to the other humble request which I am to make, it conceirns as well the In∣terest of Rosilion and Godomar, as my own, for they▪ also engaged themselves to present it; but yet it conceirns a Cavalier, whose virtue may without ostentation, aspire unto the highest degree that Fortune can raise a man: And, Madam, to leave you no longer in a dubious suspence, I will freely tell you, that Rosilion, my brother, and I, do must humbly beseech you to give the possession of Galathea unto the merits of Lindamor: You, Madam, do know, better then any, the qua∣lities of which he is owner, and what proofs he has given you of his valour and courage; you know all, that if your Estate is to be sustained by the valour and judgment of a man, none can more legitimately pretend unto it then he: There∣fore, Madam, if it be your pleasure to confer upon him any recompence for the perils he hath undergone, and whereunto he exposed himself for your sake, and if you will not shame us with the denial of a request so just, we conjure you by the memory of Clidemant whom he hath so faithfully served, and by the prospe∣rity and welfare which you and your dominions are to enjoy, to approve of this his humble desire, and of our motion in his behalf. As he said so, Sigismond took the hand of Amasis, and stooping to kiss it, the Nimph smiled: Sir said she unto him, I doe with all my heart consent unto all you ask: Dorinde shall never far worse, nor be less dear unto me then Galathea her self: And though I were not obliged to give Lindamor what he desires of me as a recompence which I owe unto his courage, yet I doe know his quallity and merits so well, that I would grant him what he now requests: I doe desire only to consult with Galathea and know her mind, yet assuring my self she will not disapprove of any thing I shall doe. Madam (said Rosilion) though Sigismond only did present the request unto you, and you have been pleased to grant it, yet I must needs give you must humble thanks, and do protest, I doe think my self no less obliged for any fa∣vour you do unto Lindamor, then if I had received it my self; this shall make me hasten my return that I may be present at this happy marriage, and I dear say the dayes that Lindamor does spend in Lions, he will not think, the most pleasant of his life. Indeed (said Godomar) neither you nor he will take much pleasure in being there, but however, you shall be bid most kindly welcome: and if the King will give me leave, I will return with you, to be a witness of Lindomar or, & your happi∣ness: Indeed (said Amasis and sighed) I should be happy if you would be as good as you say: That Madam, replied Godomar, does wholy depend upon the will of Gondebaut: I should think my self infinitly happy (said Amasis) if he would be pleased to consent unto it; nor should I ever be possesed with frights, and terrors, as long as I should be so happy as to have your presence: It shall not be long of me Madam, said Sigismond, if my Brother doe not obtain that leave, for I will undertake to aske it for him, and will use the best endeavors I can to move the King, that he may have the honour of seeing you again: In the mean time Madam, the last favour which I desire to obtain from you, is the continua∣tion of your good will, and doe most humbly beseech you to beleive, that what fortune soever I be in, I will never forget the oath which I have made to serve you against all your enemies: In saying so, he kissed her and bad adieu, but Ama∣sis holding him in her armes, alas Sir, said she unto him must we be so miserable as to lose you? Heaven was not so kind in giving me the happy honour of your acquaintance, as it is mortally cruell in depriving me so soon of you: Upon this she could not refrain from teares; and Sigismond, who was extreamly moved, Madam replied he, what necessitie soever it be which calls me unto the King my Father, yet it shall not be so prevalent as your command if you doe bid me not to go: Indeed seeing I could not now be much servicable unto you, I though you would dispence with my obedience unto him, and not complain of my depar∣ture. Your obedience unto him (replied Amasis with teares in her eyes) can∣not
be condemned, noe more then my sad resentment of your departure: Pay unto Gondebaut that which nature does exact from you: And I will pay that un∣to you, which unless I were the most ungratfull woman in the world, I cannot deny unto those great benefits which have obliged me unto you. Yet since it is more reasonable that the interests of a Father, should be more considerable unto you then mine, I will receive this adieu which you bid me, yet upon condition that you will honour me so far as to promise, though I be at a distance from you, yet you will sometimes call me into your memorie. Upon this, she embraced him again, and Sigismond embracing her, I doe not only promise it Madam (said he) but also swear it by the soul of my Father, and all the oathes that ought to be in∣violably kept: beseeching the gods to afflict me with all manner of torments, the first moment I offer to break them: And I Sir (answered Amasis with teares and sighes) doe vow sooner to die then cease to honour you and love you as I am obliged. In saying so, she left Sigismond, whom she had all be dewed with her teares, and addressing her self unto Rosilion; and you Sir (continued she) if ever you intend to oblige me any farther, I beseech you shew it in contriving it so as Gondebaut may not deny Godomar the libertie of returning to me: Rosilion ha∣ving promised to imploy the utmost of his endeavours Godomar, advanced, who making a low conge to bid her adieu; Pardon me Madam (said he unto her) if I fail in any of those respects which I doe owe unto you, assuring you that I am most ready to make reparation as you shall ordain: Nay Sir, answered she, I beseech you the miseries which I resent, if during the stay you have made here, I have omitted any thing which was due unto your birth: Protesting that if any where, they proceeded not from want of any affection, for I have as much to you, as ever I had to Clidemant. Upon this shedding some tears in sign of her sorrows, she went out of her closset with a countenance so sad, that all the Ladies who were in the Chamber, especially Dorinde, began to lose their collours as they did in the time of their calamities, Galathea was ready to drop down for fear the Princes had forgotten their promises unto Lindamor: And that Cavelier who knew that their favours was the best foundation he had for his hopes of his Mistresse, he was also in a most pitifull impatience to know what success they had obtained for him: yet not daring to let his perplexities appear, he wished himself already in the Country, that he might know the doom of his good or bad fortune. Galathea who sat upon thorns, and as wel as he was once upon the point to put Dorinde upon it, to ask Sigismond what news: yet considering that it was too much against the hair of a womans modesty, she resolved to enquire no further; but patiently to stay till the time came. So when the Princes came unto her to salute her, and bid her adieu, she returned her complement as handsomely as she could: Rosanira, Dorinde, Daphnide, Madonthe, Silvia and the rest of the Ladies, having done the same, Sigismond enquired by what meanes he might assure Adamas of his good affection, and charged Thamires with that commission, because he was to goe un∣to that Druide, desiring Thamires to tell him, that though he departed without seeing him, yet would he be his perfect friend, Rosilion and Godomar did the like, and afterwards bad their last adieu unto the Nimph and all the Ladies, and then took horse. Godomar had already surrendred the office of Publique Dictator unto which he was elected, as well to drive the nailes for Rosilion and Adrastes, as for other particular affaires of Amasis; so as there being nothing that could stay them any longer, they all departed, and the Nimph causing her chariot to be made ready, she would needs accompany them a little way out of the Town. It was a most goodly sight to see these Princes so bravely mounted, their man∣nage of their horses was incomparable, and they also made a very glorious shew. For besides all those who were no strangers, as Perlandor, Merindor, Lidius, Lig∣damon, Lipandas, Silrines, Alcidon, Damon, and many others; Rosilion took with him the hundred Caveliers which the Queen Argira left with him, for the safety of Marcelless in this Equipage then they went out of the castle court, where they were all assembled: And the inhabitants being advertised of this desparture, con∣sidering that they, who departed, were the deliverers of their Town, they did rank
themselves on both sides the streets, where they were to pass: and there, upon their knees, and with hands lifted up to heaven, some weeping for joy others for sorrows, all, even the very children, prayed heartily for all prosperity upon them. Clindor amongst the rest, would needs see them depart, and calling to memory that Alcippes and he had been such Cavaliers in their dayes, he could not chuse but pay some sighs for the losse of so dear and faithful a friend. When they were a little way out of the Town, the Princes were advertised that the Nymph followed, and therefore they turned back, and most earnestly be∣seeching her to go no further, they had their last adieu unto her, and all the La∣dies that accompanied her, and afterwards continued on their journey. Linda∣mor, who was not able to live any longer in that impatiency, but longed beyond expression to know what answer Amasis returned unto his request which he doubted whether the Princes had presented or no, he addressed himself unto Go∣domar, because Sigismond and Rosilion were in discourse together; and beseeching him to tell him what successe he might expect from his amorous request, that young Prince did at the last set his heart at rest, and assured him, that the Nymph liked so well of it, as she had faithfully promised to be no obstacle against it. Lin∣damor, even ravished at so good an answer, did first lift up his eyes to heaven, afterwards, looking upon Godomar Generous Prince (said he unto him) may heaven be propitious unto you in all your attempts, for being so great a Patron unto me in my love to Galathea. But good Sir, continued he, do you not flatter up my passion with these sweet hopes, and endeavour to deceive that dispair which the refusal of Amasis would have driven me into? Brave Lindamor (answered Godomar) do not think I disguise the truth I tell, you with any tricks; I assure you Amasis is all yours, and never proposed any other condition unto the request which Sigismond made in your behalf, but only to consult upon it with her daugh∣ter Galathea, whether it stood with her will: Now if Galathea be not against it, the business is done, and probably will be accomplished at your return. But Lin∣damor (continued he) I should not have told you this good news▪ for I am a∣fraid your impatiency to enjoy those favours which you have already so long since purchased, will make you think your journey with us tedious: Sir, replied the Cavalier, the honour to be in your company is as great a delight unto me as any other; but I must ingeniously confesse unto you, that if my service were not ne∣cessary, I should be very glad if you would command me to return unto the Nymph, that I may put her in memory of that promise, which she has made un∣to you in my favour, and to solicite the accomplishment of it. Koow Linda∣mor, replied Godomar, that where we are to go, you shall have no lesse liberty then my self; and I will be so far from hindring your return, that I will accom∣pany you, if it will please the King to permit me: for believe it, I find so much sweetnesse in the conversation of Amasis and her Nymphs and see them enjoy such a sweet and dilectable tranquility, that I would willingly buy the liberty of being amongst them at the price of my blood: Sir (replied Lindamor) you have seen only a shadow of those pleasures and delights which that little countrey used to enjoy: for the loss of Clidemant, the rebellion of Polemas, and the Army of the King your Father, and others, have so disturbed that Tranquility and Felicity which Amasis and her people were wont to enjoy, that whilst you were in Marcel∣les, I dare say, you saw but a false of those swe which accompanied their lives in the time of peace. This is it which makes me say (said the Prince) that now their contentments must needs be high, since I received so much amongst them during the time of their adversity. With such discourse as this they made the length of the way seem short; and Amasis, who took towards the Town, was no sooner entred into the Castle, but leaving unto Galathea the care of entertaining of all the company she went into her closset to find out of her own virtue some consolation for the absence of the Princes; and as she was calling to mind all the various successes which had hap∣ned unto her during the whole course of her life, and found by the death of her son; how irrevocable is that Law which condemneth all to die she resolved at the return of Lindamor to accomplish his marriage with Galathea, and after she
had conferred the government of the state unto him, to retire her self into Mountbrison, or into the Pallace of Isoures, there to spend the rest of her dayes. Galathea, whose age used not to entertain any such holy considerations, began to think upon a hundred sports wherein to divert her self, till Lindamor returned with the rest of the Cavaliers; but finding none that could surmount those sor∣rows which their departure had caused, at last after a little study, she addressed her self unto Rosanira, and said unto her. You can judge, Madam, upon what I am now thinking: It is very true, answered Rosanira, for my eyes are not good enough to see into your soul: Truly, replied the Nymph, I am thinking upon the discourse which Thamires had yesterday concerning the cure of Celidea; and I believe it would be much pleasure unto us to see her now: for before she had disfigured her self, she was reputed for one of the fairest women that ever came upon the Banks of Lignon. I believe (replied the Princesse) that the least inti∣mation of your desire to see her▪ would be enough to make her come hither: I do indeed believe, replied Galathea, that she would not deny me that content∣ment if I should desire it, but I conceive it better to see her where she is, if you would but do as I would contrive it: Galathea then desiring to be pleasant, and Rosanira desiring to tell her how she would contrive it; I would have us (said the Nymph) to dresse our selves like Shepherdesses, and go and surprize Adamas in his house; there we shall see Celidea; Astrea perhaps will be there also, unto whom I shall be very glad to impart a secret which I know will be welcome unto her: Silvander likewise, is doubtlesse there, and if we chance to find Hylas there also, we shall not want diversion enough. Dorinde, who till then said nothing, because the thoughts of Sigismonds de∣parture took up her mind, she presently began to put in her vie: I have yet my Shepherdesses habit (said she) and Madonthe and Daphnide I believe have not parted with theirs, so as if you will provide habits for your selves against to mor∣row morning, we will all wait upon you thither. Daphnide and Madonthe, liking the proposition of Rosanira, did willingly consent unto it. I believe, said Dorin∣de, that I shall be the least merry in the company, but I shall endeavour to do as I can. For my part, said Galathea, I shall contribute all I can to make you so; but (continued she) we do only want the consent of Amasis unto the design: None can do that (said Madonthe) better then your self: I conceive it good therefore, that you make the motion unto her: I conceive not so (replied the Nymph and smiled) and therefore I desire that it may be put to the vote who shall ask her, and let the plurality of voices carry it. I will give mine unto you (said Rosanira) and I the same (said Daphnide) then fair Galathea, said Dorinde, prepare your self for this commission, for the vote falls upon you. Here is a con∣troversie (said the Nymph) soon determined, and since you command it, shall be as soon obeyed. Upon this, she went very confidently into the closset of Amasis, whom she found very pensive and sad; and having propounded the motion unto her, she approved of it, and resolved to go her self unto Mountbrison, and spend her time there, whilst they were merry at the house of Adamas: Galathea having made an humble Coage unto her, she would have gone away, but the Nymph called her back again; and after she had looked a little seriously upon her, Galathea, said she, tell me truly: If Lindamor should take part with Gondebaut, and forsake my service as he intends, would you not accuse him of extream ingratitude? I cannot believe, Madam, answered Galathea, that he has any such intention; for he sets a greater value upon your Interest then so: But, replied Amasis, I have now no great need of him, since Gondebaur and I am friends. No matter for that, Madam (replied the Nymph) it is enough he once served you, to make him never serve Gondebaut, unlesse you do expresly command him; you think so very well of him (said Amasis) that I do believe you bear some good will unto him: Truth is Madam (answered Galathea and blusht a little). I have no reason to hate him: Well, well, (said Amasis) go and look unto your flocks, since you are all resolved to become Shepherdesses; and we will talk more of this another time:
Amasis smiled as she spoke these words, and Galathea, who observed all her mo∣tions, did from thence draw good hopes of success to her desires. As she went out, Thamires came to the closset dore, and Galathea taking him by the hand, carried him to the Nymph, who knowing that he came purposly to receive her commands, charged him to tell the grand Druide, that she was very sorry she had not his presence at the conclusion of peace; yet if any news of consequence fell out, she would advertise him: Thamires humbly bowing him∣self promised to do all her commands and after he had bid adieu unto the rest of the Ladies, he went to see his dear Celedea, who thought one dayes absence from him, an age. He was no sooner come within a hundred paces of the Druides house, but he met her, yet with so sad a countenance, that he was exceedingly troubled at it and desired to know the cause. The shepherdess, who loved him as her own soul, and had no other desires but to please him. The sadness which you see in my looks (said she unto him) proceeds more from the interest of others then my own, and if you take so much paines as to go into the house of Adamas, unless you be very insensible, you will be as sad as I am: All are there in extream dis∣order: almost all those whom you left there, went away yesterday presently af∣ter you, and there is such an confusion amongst those shepherds and shepherdesses that remain, as is impossible to be expressed unto you. Alexis is lost: Silvander never was heard of since yesterday: Diana and Astrea, went out of their cham∣bers this morning before day, and no news can be told of them Paris is gone to look them: Leonide, Phillis, Licidas, Stella, Hylas, Doris, Adrastes, and the rest, are gone to do the like: and had I not thought that you would have re∣turned about this time, I would have gone after them. This is a strange alteration indeed (said Thamires:) but that they may not think we have less good will unto them then the rest. Let us do the Druide the best service we can, after I have given him an accompt of what Amasis has particularly commanded me to tell him. All we can do (answered Celedea) is to seek out Astrea and Diana, for his grea∣test cares are for them: well (said Thamires) wee will do our best: In the mean time rest your self here under this shade of trees, and I will return as soon as pos∣sible I can: so Celedea kissing him, she sat down, and Thamires went to the Druides house. He went first to the chamber of Adamas without meeting any living soul, and because he found the dore shut, whilst he was disputing with himself whether he should knocke or no, he heard Adamas say in a loud voice: but Bellinde, to what purpose are all these teares? They will not do any good at all, but are dis∣pleasing unto the gods: These few words, made Thamires listen the more atten∣tively, and he heard Bellinde answere with a deep sigh: Alas alas, all the teares in the world cannot wash away the crime which Diana hath comitted: but I will make her resent it, as well as I do, and make it appear unto the world how much I disapprove of , and that I did not expect such bad fruit from such good education as I gave her. Yet, replied the Druide, I dare not accuse her: for she has been but half a day absent from you, and perhaps when she returns has a just and lawfull excuse for it. Oh Heaven (answered Bellinde) was it such a heard matter to have asked my leave before she went? But when I call to memorie her shifting answeres which she gave me yesterday when I founded her mind, concerning her marriage with Paris (of whom she is not worthy) I easily apprehend that she had some design in her ancy which is dangerous to disclose, because happly it might be prejudi∣ciall unto her reputation and mine, we shall see ere long (said Adamas) whether she be to blame or no: mean time have no reason to afflict your self as you do, in saying so, the Druide went a little towards the dore, and Thamires fearing to be surprised, he knocked, as one that had some earnest business: Adamas there∣fore opened the dore, and Thamires seeing him alone with Bellinde he retreated two or three paces, as if he were afraid to disturbe them, but the Druide desiring him to enter, did ask him what news from Marcelles, to whom Thamires an∣swered thus: Reverend Father the Nimph Amasis commanded me to tell you, that
now she enjoyes a perfect peace by the solemn treaty which she had with Ligonias, who came expresly from to Burgudian King to conclude it: she has deferred the day which once she had appointed for the sacrifice, untill the return of Rosilion, who as she beleives will be back within these five or six dayes: And the Princes commanded me to assure you from them that they will be ready to serve you upon all occasions I do hartily rejoyce (said the Druide) at the happy estate wherein the affaires of that great Nimph are: and I am very glad she has deferred the sa∣crafice, by reason of some accidents that are faln upon me, Celedea, replied Thamires, told me something confusedly concerning Diana and Astrea, but I did not understand her meaning; it is (answered Adamas) that those shepherdesses have not been within, all the day, and we are now in quest to know what is be∣come if them. I will go then (said Thamires) and do my endeavours to find them: upon this, he humbly bowed himself, and whilst the Druide returned unto his discourse with Bellinde, he returned to Celedea. As soon as she sawe him coming she rose up, and taking his hand they went both togeather in quest of these shepherdesses. But it had been strange if they had found them, for they fearing to be diverted from the design which they had concluded upon the night before, and doubting they should be followed and sought after, they were so carefull in hiding them∣selves, as it was almost impossible to find them out. They lay all the night togeather in a bed, and Leonide, who in the absence of Alexis, would needs lie in their chamber, she desired Phillis to keep her Com∣pany: So as Astrea and Diana, after some triviall discourse with Leonide and Phillis, as soon as they thought them asleep, they began to talke freely of their common affliction. But Astrea being overcome with the discourse of the Druide concerning the fortune of Celadon she was the first who began to talke in these termes: Alas Sister (said she and sighed) must our miseryes be eternall? are we predestined never to enjoy any contentment? I am no sooner faln into one calamitie but in lieu of being delivered from it, I do find my self seconded with another more sensible and great: I have heard Silvander sometimes say that all things have their vicissitude and change, but my misery has none: and since fate began to perplexe the condition of my life, I never found any alteration. Sister (said Diana) certainly we are not such whom fortune is pleased to smile upon, nor whom heaven is pleased to shower any favours: For my part, I am sure that since Silander died, I never found any kind of sweetness in my life, and I dare say it betwixt you and me, that the least offence I received, has been the affection of Silvander, but as if fate were a professed enemy unto my prosperitie, I had no sooner grounded som hopes in the amitie of that shepherd, but a thou∣sand obstacles do intervene and oppose my happiness: And so untowardly have I been crossed, as the bitterness of it does not proceed from another but from my self who gave the greatest blow unto my happiness: for I must needs say, that had I not given any credit unto those reports which Laonice made unto me, I had never permitted Paris to go and treat with Bellinde concerning a marriage twixt him and me, nor ever seemed to like of his address: Nor did I ever think he would have offered to possess me against my consent, or that I should; as I am now, be forced to commit an impardonable fault both against my own Love, and the satisfaction of Silvander. The gods me thinks (replied Astrea) should be satis∣fied, since by the miseryes which we have endured, they have sufficientely re∣venged those faults which we have committed, you against Silvander, and I a∣gainst Celadon. And yet they persecute us still, nor do I think they will cease un∣till our lives do cease. If they will cease then (said Diana) their anger shall not last long: for I am resolved to put an end unto my miseryes ere long: and truely I think I shall be forced unto it, for I am not able to live one hour under the power of Paris. Upon this she stopped a little, and then beginning again, ah Sister, (continued she) you have used a terme which goes unto my very heart when you said, that you would applie that remedie unto your miseryes, which dispairs does teach such as cannot suffer them, and I swear, that I do wish for death which as eager a desire, as ever I did for any of fortunes favours. When I said
so (answered Astrea) I spoke it in my passion and as I thought. And I assure you my resolution is as unalterable as the doom of fate is: for to what purpose should I live, unless to tast the bitterness of my misfortunes, and to consider that most certainly I have committed some great sin against the gods, since to punish me, they invent every day new tortures to torment me? No no Diana, it is much better to live with them, who, as they say, carouse in full bows of Nectar and Ambrosia, in the Elizian fields: Let them desire to live, who drink of such sweet Liquors here, and live only in the world to taste the favours of Fortune; but such as I, must not hope for any felicity in it, and therefore it is grosse folly to de∣sire life: Did I not most perfectly know the humour of Celadon, and that when I commanded him to die, he would most infallibly do it, I might have some ground of hope to keep me alive; but since he is most certainly dead, I must confesse I cannot live. And I (replied Diana) could find invitations enough to move me unto the same, and when I do consider the present condition of my soul, doubtlesse it is a lawful cause to desire death: for if life be not sweet, unlesse it be accompanied with some, contentments, why should I value mine, since I have lost all hopes of any: As you could desire to live for Celadons sake, so could I for my Shepherd; but I see that cannot be, unless I accept of an alliance with Paris, and by conse∣quence, be a cause of Silvanders ruine, who hath sworn not to live a minute af∣ter he hears it. Ah, dear Astrea, if we should attempt to look death in the face, I am afraid we have not courage enough to grapple with it. As for you, re∣plied Astrea, probably you may be afraid of death; but as for me, I have found out the best and most lawful way of dying, that any in the whole world can make choice of: I will die, for the happiness and tranquility, not only of a Province, but of the whole Universe. Diana, who did not know her meaning, ah Sister (said she) I beseech you let me know how you mean, that I may do the same: I do not think (answered A∣strea) that any other then my self ought to aspire unto it: but yet I will tell you which way I mean, because you shall not think I will conceal any thing from you, it is this: The Fountain of verity is as you know, so enchanted, as that enchant∣ment can never have an end, but by the death of the most faithful he lover, and she lover, that ever came into this Province. Now knowing that my fidelity is arrived at the highest pitch, that ever any womans can, I am resolved to sacrifice my self for the Publick, till after my example some Shepherd will be found, who will expose himself for the worlds content also. Indeed (replied Diana) this is the bravest and most glorious resolution that ever entred into the thoughts of a woman: ah, Sister, I shall esteem my self most happy to accompany you, and share with you in the same Fortune. Sister (said Astrea) I should not refuse your company, did I not know, that it is only one of our sex that is to die: and I would not wish you to incur the dan∣ger: Come what danger the gods please, replied Diana, I will not forsake you, but will expose my self unto any peril that can come. If you be so resolved (said Astrea) then we must carry our design as close as possibly we can, and must not acquaint Phillis with it; for she loving us as she doth, she will not suffer us to take that way, but will so obstruct our design, as we shall never bring it to passe: To prevent which (said Diana) let us go from hence before either Adamas or my mother be out of bed, for I fear they will send for us as soon as it is day, to make me marry Parris: But (said Astrea) as soon as they misse us out of our chambers, they will follow after us, and if they find us, they will bring us back; and after that we shall never hope to steal away from their vigilant eyes: As for that, answered the Shepherdess, we shall not want a remedy; for as soon as ever we are gone out, we will hide our selves in some place or other all the day long, and when night comes, we will go unto the place which must put an end unto all our calamities. If we should fall asleep again (said Astrea) it would but disor∣der our design: I do not fear that (replied Diana) for though I would, yet it is impossible for me to take any rest; and therefore Sister let us dress our selves, now Leonide and Phillis are fast asleep, and cannot hear any noise we make. Upon
this, Diana arose out of her bed, and finding her clothes; by the help of the Moon, did dresse her self very handsomely: Astrea did the like; and after∣wards both lay down upon the bed again, till the night was a little further spent. They were no sooner laid down, but they heard Phillis sigh, and because her sighs were mixed with some lamentable groans, they thought that perhaps their design was discovered; and to make them the more believe it, she began to cry out; what? without me? Ah Sister, ah Diana, no, no, no: by these words of Sister; and Diana, they thought all was discovered, and were so affrighted, that Astrea rose up to tell her all the secret of their voyage; but stooping to whisper her in the ear, left Leonide should hear, she saw her eyes shut, upon which A∣strea did infallibly conclude, that certainly she only spoke in her sleep: she saw also tears trickle down her cheeks; which moved Astrea unto so much compassi∣on, as she also could not chuse but weep. So she returned to her companion, and assuring her, that Phillis was asleep, Sister (said Diana unto her) let us go out of the chamber, and try if we can get out of the house; it will be day before we are aware. Let us go then (said A∣strea) but make as little noise as we can, left we should waken Leonide or Phillis. In saying so, she gently opened the door, and softly treading down the stairs, they came into the Court. As soon as they appeared in the Court, two great doggs, which were kept for the guard of the house, began to bark, & put them into such a fright, as they turned back and suddenly shut the door at the stair foot: afterwards, they saw the fellow who kept the keyes of the gates, and who rose up at the noise which the doggs made: a little after they saw him open the gates and look about him, and went in again with his doggs into a little room, and shut the door after him, leaving the key of the gates in the lock: This made them a little more confident, so as they thought, that if they stayed but a while till the fellow was asleep, they might gently cross the Court, and get out; which they did, with as many timerous apprehensions, as if they had committed some great crime. As soon as they were out, they took upon the left hand, and began to run as fast as ever they could, still looking back to see whether any followed. When they were quite out of breath they stopped; and after they had blowed, and a lit∣tle recovered themselves, Diana, who was most affrighted: O my God, Sister (said she) what shall I do? shall I have courage enough to compleat our design, who have so little at the beginning of it? We are about to accomplish a resoluti∣on (said Astrea which will free us from the Tyranny of all those miseries which have tormented us; and therefore we must not faint but take courage, since upon this action depends the rest which we are to enjoy in the second life. I do know very well (replied Diana) what benefit will acrue unto us by it; but for all that I cannot chuse but startle at the way, by which we are to arrive at it. Yet dear companion (continued she and kissed Astrea) your presence does put me into some heart, and makes me think, that no ill which can happen unto me, can be so great, but the pleasure I take in your company is greater. Sister (replied A∣strea) in that you will find but small contentment, and I much; but not to trifle away our time in such discourse, let us look out some convenient place to hide our selves, and make provision of such fruits as we can find upon the trees; for I con∣sider, that since we must not stirr from our secret lodging all the day, probably we shall find a necessity of eating: Truly (said Diana) it is strange, to find in one and the same mind, two such different wills: We came out this morning with an unalterable resolution to die, and yet we talk of eating, as if we had some extraordinary care of our lives. And so I have, answered Astrea, because I would not for a world die any other death, then such as will disenchant the Foun∣tain unto which we are going. Well, said Diana, let us then gather some fruits; let us eat, and let us die, I will do whatere you please. In saying so, they went forwards towards the banks of Lignon, resolving to stay at the first place which they should think fit for a lurking hole all the day. As they went, they gathered fruits, and after a long walk, Arstea saw Aurora to ap∣pear,
and afterwards the Sun, gilding the tops of the mountains, and by degrees descending into the valleyes to give them the same luster, they made the more haste to find out a close habitation; and were more inquisitive then before, they lodged themselves in several places; but like Criminals, who never think their place of retreat safe enough, unlesse it be the very center of the earth, and still imagine themselves exposed to the sight of all the world; so did they, in what place so∣ever they found. At last, after much wandering and seeking up and down, they found upon the side of the River a little Cavern, which seemed to sute very well with their minds, and there they resolved to stay. Into it they entred then, though with much ado, by reason of the thick bushes which hindred them; and sitting down upon the Cussions of Mosse, which seemed as if they had been made by Art, they waited, and prepared themselves for any Fortune that heaven would send them. Almost at the very same time, Phillis, whom they left in bed, did waken; and because she had still a confused memory of some troublesome dreams which had disturbed her all night long, she arose gently from Leonide, to go unto her com∣panions bed, and give them an accompt of her melancholy Fancies; but when she found them not there, nor saw any of their clothes, she began to doubt som∣thing, and to fear such misfortunes as her dreams bad threatned her withall. First she drew the window curtains, and seeing the Sun up; what strange haste (said she to her self) has Astrea and Diana made to rise more early then usual? after∣wards, bethinking her self why they should go out of the chamber without telling her; but why (said she) should they leave me in bed? how long have I been held in suspicion amongst them? ah Sister, ah Diana, I did not think you would ever have failed in that duty which was owing unto our common Amity? In say∣ing thus, this Shepherdesse did, by little and little, dresse her self; and as soon as she was ready, she went down the stairs, and went into the Hall; but finding no body, she ran into the gallery: afterwards going into the Court, and not meet∣ing any one of the domestiques, she was even at deaths door; and not knowing what course to take in that extremity, she returned into her chamber, and waken∣ing Leonide: Pardon me fair Nymph, said she, for interrupting your rest; I am undone, if you do not help me unto some remedie against my perplexities. A∣strea and Diana are not here, and I fear, since they conceal their flight from me, that they are gone to do some violence upon themselves in some place or other. Leonide extreamly astonished at this, for she knew the state of their souls and their loves, she dressed her self as fast as ever she could; and afterwards both went together unto him who kept the gates, to know of him whether any went out. The fellow swore unto them, that he opened not the door unto any: True it was, he heard the doggs barks a little before day; but rising up and seeing no body, he went to bed again, and slept ever since without hearing any noise. Leonide and Phillis, in a great amazement went to the gates, and finding the Key in the door, they knew then the Shepherdesses passed out that way. They conceived the best way was to acquaint the Druide, and waiting till he was up, they went into the gallery; in which they no sooner were, but Phillis being una∣ble to withold her tears any longer: Alas Madam, said she, my heart foretold me all this; and to my grief, I was but too true a Prophet of that which falls our. I have been tormented all the night long with strange inquietudes, and troubled with so many melancholly imaginations, as I never slept worse in all my life. Dreams, answered Leonide, are only illusions and Fancies, and no truth or credit is to be grounded upon them. Ah, sage Nymph, replied the Shepherdesse, assure your self they are not so at this time, for I saw every thing as perfectly, as if I had been awake: For, Ma∣dam, be pleased to know, that after I was asleep, and thought it about midnight, me thought I saw the ghosts of Celadon and Silvander approch unto the bed of Astrea and Diana; and that of Celadon being more offended then the other, it said unto my sister, in a tone mixed both of love and anger, ungrateful Shepher∣desse, Celadon is dead, and indeed in obedience to your unjust command; and it is your duty also to die at his most just request: behold here his ghost which waits
to conduct you into the Elizian fields, and which will never cease tormenting you, until the very last minute of your life. Then the other, me thought, began to speak; and you Diana (said he unto her) who by the power of your charms has triumphed over me, if you retain any me∣mory of my fidelity, keep constant unto the affection which you promised me; and after my example rather resolve to die, then live under the reproach of infi∣delite. After this, the ghost was silent, as I think, to harken unto Astrea, who in answere to the first, yes, yes Celadon (said she) I will satisfie thy request; I will with all my heart lay off the burthen of this body and accompany thy soul whither soever thou wilt conduct me. Afterwards Diana in answere, and you Silvander (said she) be sure thou dost not depart from me, I will make my self inseperable from thy blessed soul, so as though we could not unite our selves during our lives, yet we will after our deaths. In saying so they dressed themselves, and afterwards following these two ghosts who were their guides, they are gone to cast themselves into the armes of love, who having some compassion upon them, has given them that contentment which they asked. I remember well, that I did what I could to keep them from follow∣ing; I wept, I was angrey, I cryed out sometimes against Astrea, sometimes against Diana, telling them they ought not to attempt any thing without me: but these ungratfull Companions slighted me, and went away without so much as bid∣ding me adieu. Those accidents which hapned yesterday (said Leonide) are the cause of these imaginations: for they say, it is the qualitie of dreams to fill our fancies in the night time, with such things as entertained it in the day: And these ghosts of Celadon and Silvander: their discourse with the shepherdesses, their answers and resolutions, all these are drawn from the design which Celadon resolved upon to die, from the complaints which he made against Astrea, and from the reason which Silvander had to hinder Diana, from marrying Paris. However it be, replied Phillis, you see, Diana and Astrea are gone, and you see some part of my dream is more then fancy. That, answered the Nymph, is rather from some other accident: for it may be, that those two fair ones waking be∣times in the morning they went to divert themselves without any such designs as you suspect, no no Madam (said Phillis) they would never have gone without telling me, unless they had some strange resolution to execute: but (continued she) I will follow them whether they will or no, and as cunning as they are to hide themselves from me, It shall go heard, but I will find them out: In saying so, they went out of the Gallery; and hearing that Adamas was out of bed, Phillis went unto him to acquaint him with the flight of her Compa∣nions: At the first, the Druide laughed at it: for he thought it to be only some passage of merriment: but when he heard and considered all circumstances, and examined the porter, he thought what Phillis said was not without some proba∣bilitie. Then began he to call into memory the last command which Astrea laid upon Celadon, and that to make him some satisfaction, she might attempt some desperate act; Then did he think the apprehensions of Phillis to be just: but searching into the cause why Diana also should fly away, he thought that the in∣timacy of friendship which was between her and Astrea, might perhaps make her forget her duty unto the commands of Bellinde: so being confirmed in his fears that these fair ones might make some desperate attempts upon themselves he de∣sired all the shepherds and shepherdesses in the house, to run after them, which they did: For, Hylas, Stella, Celadon, Phillis, Adrastes, Doris, Leonide also, and others, they all went imediatly in quest after them, and none was left behind but Celedea, who stayed for the return of Thamires, to oblige him also to go with her, after them. Every one that went in this quest took a severall way: some went into the woods; others into the plaines, and Phillis guided by a better genius, took all along the river Lignon: she had not walked much above half an hower, before she spide Lycidas lying all along upon the grass, by the river side, and so neer the water that he dipped his hand in the little waves which the wind did gently dash against the bankes; this encounter did infinitely joy her, for she longed ex∣treamly
to see him, that she might acquaint him with the condition of Celadon: making therefore a little more haste she surprized him; good morrow Lycidas (said she unto him) where is Celadon? Upon this she sate down by him, and the Shepherd turning himself towards her, much amazed to meet her alone, in a place so little frequented; Mistresse (answered he with a sigh) certainly he is not in our coasts, since I find him not here: I have taken all the pains that possibly I could to find him, so as I believe he has cast himself again into the river of Lig∣non: for there is not any close corner in all the Woods, which since yesterday I have not most carefully searched: if he be dead, replied Phillis, I fear Astrea is followed him; for she stole away from me, and I cannot devise which way she is gone: Diana, I believe is with her; for no news can be heard of either: I know very well she repents heartily of her using Celadon so harshly, and is in such a rage as is apt enough to drive into despair. Her repentance, replied Lycidas, can∣not be so great as the crime which she has committed both agai my brother and me; and herein, it reflects upon you: for it, as you have often told me, you think your self concerned in any accidents which befal me, certainly she has diso∣beyed you, by the injuries which she has done unto me: ah Licidas (said Phillis) she has angred me exceedingly by offending you; but I must tell you, that if it were as easie a matter to remedy those misfortunes which are hapned, as it is for me to pardon her, we should quickly enjoy that happinesse, which now we can∣not hope for: for you must know Lycidas, that as great as you think the faults are which Astrea hath committed, she does not want arguments to excuse her self, and to justifie all those resentments which she hath testified. Phillis (said Licidas and interrupted her) if you will have me believe you love me, for god sake do not take part with that inhumane woman: I doubt not but she has inven∣ted all that her wit can devise to discharge her self of her sins; but you and I have been long acquainted, and knows her humour to a hairs bredth: We, I say, can∣not doubt of the crime, in sinning against the fidelity of Celadon: Alas, alas, (continued he) when I call to mind how he has lived, and what he has suffered for this pievish woman, it would make any other heart, but this insensible wo∣mans, to bleed: in what a hell of misery did he live, when he confined himself to the Cave? never was man more undone then he: his hair was grown long and disorderly like a wilde mans: his face was grown so lean, as it seemed longer by half then it was when he was well: his eyes, which you know were beautiful and lovely, they were so shrunk into his head, that you could not see them: his com∣pexion was grown yellow, and so changed, as none could know him: As I re∣member (said Phillis) you told me that his cave was close by the river Lignon: so it was, answered Licidas, and if you desire to see it, you need only but turn your head, for it is within ten paces of you: The entrance into it is not very ea∣sie; for I see many bushes, briers, and rushes at the mouth of it, but it is very handsome within. In saying so, Phillis and Licidas rose up, and went unto the door of this Grot∣to: As soon as Phillis was near, she put forward her head to look in; but not being able to see any thing, by reason of the bushes and obscurity, she began to make her way through: I have so great a desire (said she) to see Celadons habi∣tation, that though I tear half my skin with these bryers, yet I will enter in. The Shepherd, who feared that she would do her self some harm, he stayed her, and said, that rather then she should receive any hurt, he would make the way more easie for her: and indeed he took his sheephook, and broke down the bushes and bryers that grew before the entrance. God knows how extreamly Astrea and Diana were astonished at this; for those two Shepherdesses who were hid in this cave, as a place of safety, they heard e∣very word that passed between Licidas and Phillis: At first they thought that chance only had brought them to that place; but when they heard Phillis come near the Grotto, and would needs look in, they thought it a piece of witchcraft; and that it was impossible she should find out that place, but that way. Yet re∣resolving to stay and see the furthest, at the first blow which Licidas gave to break down the bryers, they rose up, and placed themselves in the darkest corner they
could find. They had no sooner hid themselves as well as they could but Phillis entred, who having but a very little light, because she standing in the dore, did take away the most, she durst not go very much further; but stopping at the first step, Licidas (said she) was Celadon here six months together? He was there, answered the Shepherd, all the while his banishment lasted: for he never came out, unlesse sometimes to mingle his tears with the waves of the water, and trust it with the secrets of his amorous thoughts. Truly, replied she, I could not hold out half a day here, for the place is too full of horrour for me, because I fear nothing in the world more then darknesse. When one is within, replied the Shepherd, it will not seem so dark, especially: after a little stay there; which I do not intend to try (said Phillis) and went hastily back, for the place is fitter for serpents then men or women. In saying so, she went out, to the great contentment of Astrea and Diana, who feared extreamly, that she would find them out, which certainly she had done, if she had stayed never so little longer: for then her eyes would have been accustomed unto the gloominesse of the place, which at the first coming out of the Suns brightnesse, seemed there to be blind. As soon as she was out, Licidas and she went unto the place where they sate before; and the Shepherd beginning discourse first: But my dearest Phillis (said he unto her) is it possible Astrea should undertake any design without acquainting you? believe it (answered Phil∣lis) it angers me she should; and if ever I do see her again, I shall chide her more then perhaps she imagines I will. But not with so much reason as I have (said Licidas) for abusing Celadon as she hath. However, replied the Shepherdesse, I will let her see how ill she has observed those Laws that were established a∣mongst us. Alas, alas, replied the Shepherd: how should she observe the Laws of friendship, when she has so cruelly offended against the Laws of Love? We have the greater cause to complain against her (said Phillis) and that it were only to punish her for it, I will continue on my voyage, and will not spare any pains of care to find out this ungrateful woman. Well, said Licidas, I am sure you have more pity and care of her, then she hath of us; and since you desire it, I do wish you as much contentment in your quest of that cruel one, us I do unto my self in seeking Celadon. After some other discourse they parted: and Phillis taking her way, Licidas stayed still by the side of the river, where a plump of Willows, made a very de∣lectable shade; and after he had spent a good part of the day under it (for he was very weary with looking up and down) he said himself all along upon the grasse, not being able to resist a heavy inclination to sleep which surprized him, for he had neither slept nor rested all the night before. But how great soever the inquietudes of Licidas were, yet were they nothing comparable to the restlesse cares and cold fears of Silvander: For this amorous Shepherd having lost himself in the thick of the wood, and being surprized by the obscurity of the night, he resolved to stay and enjoy the fresh air, although it was nothing able to allay or cool the flame which consumed him. He seated himself therefore upon the ground, and leaning his head against the bulk of an ancient and shady oak, there was not one accident of all his life, which did not pre∣sent it self into his memory, not to comfort him, but to make him think the con∣dition whereunto he was reduced the more intollerable: He continued in these restlesse thoughts very near two hours; but when he saw the Moon appear, then did his sorrows encrease, as if it were fatal unto him to have his fury take beginning from her: yet taking this Planet for a witnesse of his misfortunes, fair Cinthia (said he) who by the luster of thy radiant beams seems to dispute with thy brother, the Sun, for supremacy of brightnesse: Glorious light, which in thy course about the world, is pleased to make another day where ere thou shewest thy self: Clear Planet, which does discover and see all those sweet secrets which are taught in the Schools of Love, tell me, for pities sake, if ever thou didst hear any complaints more just then these I make, and whether it be possible any mortal should be a more real Lover, or more afflicted then my self: then staying, and musing a while, and afterwards breaking out again: O thou delightful flame,
glorious Moon, shalt thou never see me contented? Wilt thou never blesse me with any kind influence? I conjure the by my love, to shower down some sweet influences upon my Mistresse: Move her heart: she is fair, and she is Diana, as thou art. Upon this Silvander was silent, and in his silence giving his greifes their full liberty, he wisht for death a hundred times, and complained against Diana, the Hunteress, who formely did dwell in forrests, that she and her Nymph had distroyed all the Lyons and Tigers in the Countrey, and not left one to de∣vour him. After this, considering what little or no hopes he had ever to enjoy Diana, he did so abundon himself unto greif, that is probable he had been for ever lost, if sleep more kind unto him then himself, had not in some for, allayed the bitterness of it and made him find some ease in his inquietudes. But as if this rest were only to enable him for the enduring of more miseryes, he no sooner waked and seeing the sun a good height, he resolved to enquire of some or other what success the design had of marrying Diana: Up therefore he got, and find∣ing a path way, he followed it yet not knowing which way it would lead him: he had not walked above a quarter of an hower or there abouts, but he heard very near him the sound of a flute; and turning that way, he espied some sheep passing a long, and after them a young boy dancing and playing both togeather. This boy was all alone, which made Silvander imagine, that he had some great cause of mirth, since he was so merry by himself: Silvander no sooner came near him, but the young shepherd left of dancing and turning his face towards Silvander, Silvander knew him for it was the boy that looked to his flocks. As soon as the young fellow saw his Master, he ran unto him, and seemed to wonder that he was not amongst the rest of the shepherds. Silvander, who some∣times took delight in talking with him, because of his pritty innocent answeres, where wouldst thou have me be but with my flocks (said Silvander) ah Master (said the boy) it is so long since you used to have so much care as to visit them, as I cannot beleive any thoughts of them brought you unto them now. Indeed (said Silvander) it is a meer chance I met thee now: but since I am here, I am resolved not to forsake them any more. I beleive (said the boy) you do not intend to be absent so long again: but I know you will leave your flocks a little, if it be but to go unto the house of Adamas where a great feast is kept: what feast? (asked Silvander and was a little surprised) a feast (replied the boy) for the marriage of Paris with a young shepherdess, who is the daughter of a certaine woman, whom they call, I know not what: Doubtless (said Silvan∣der) it is Bellinde: the very same (said the boy,) and he who keeps the flock of Lycidas told me, that they say the marriage is past, for Hoboyes and Bagpipes were gone thither, that the shepherds and shepherdesses might dance and be merry togeather. Silvander ravished at the disorder of his answere, but con∣firmed in his opinion, that this marriage was in effect accomplished, he retired himself without any shew of transport, and without recomending his flocks unto him that had the charge of them, as having neither any hopes or mind ever to see them again: he went once more into the thick of the wood again, and having walked a little way, his strength began to faile, and a great trembling seized upon him; and therefore not being able to sustaine himself, he leaned against a tree, and by degrees sinking down to the ground he fell all along at the tree roote: he lay neer an howre as if he had been in a swound: but at last, seeing his faintress would not give him that death which he desired, he resolved to give himself that ease which nothing else would: Now did he know that it is much easier to give good counsell unto others, then to take it himself, for he who had often blamed all such who for want of courage to graple and bear an affliction, did suffer them∣selves to sink under the burthen of dispair, he himself was ready to commit the same fault and yeild unto the violence of it. The greatest enemy he had was his own imagination which never thought upon Dianas obedience but he found some suggestion to taxe her with ingratitude & infidelitie. Afterwards thinking upon the good fortune of Paris, and of his own ill fortune, alas (said he) how blindly are the destinies of men decreed? Good gods? must I because I, am not rich enough, nor well enough known, lose in one moment all that my affiduitie and
faithfull services have meritted from that fickle Shepherdess? Was ver age so depraved as this? Did nature ever govern with such little order as now? Must men be weighed, and esteemed according to their riches? Is money the only thing that makes a man? Ah Bellinde: Ah Diana: what an unworthy estimate is this? Then stopping a little: but sensless man that I am, (said he upon a sud∣den, and reprehended him) I am extreamly to blame my self for finding fault with the choise which they have made, as if Paris were deficient in any thing which may render a man most exquisitly accomplished: No no Bellinde, you owed unto his merit as much as you did; but Diana, she owed her self unto my love, she, she, alone, is too blame; for how great soever the qualitie of Paris be, and let the virtues of his soul be never so many, yet she has shewed more affection unto me, then him; and it was she only who gave my ambition leave to aspire so high as the glorie of pretending unto her: And yet will this incon∣stant woman, sacrifice me upon that altar of which Paris is the god. This per∣fideous fair one Laughes at my misery, and has forgot all oathes of fidelitie, that ever she swore unto me: Ah most cruel fair one, I do see you joyed in the sweets of his embraces, whilst I die in that horrid dispaire into which your inconstancy hath brought me: I see you, Diana, take life from the moist and warme lippes of my Rivall; but I shall never see any of my hopes ever revive again, for you have stifled them under the rigour of your change: ah happy Paris, how many glorious beauties are this day submitted unto thy mercy? How gloriously mayest thou tryumph over thy rich spoiles? Ah Silvander, how unfortunate thou art, in ever desiring them, in ever hoping for them, and in being so miserably di∣stant from all meanes of ever enjoying them. Upon this he stopt to give the more liberty unto those sighes and groanes which his sorrowes sent from his brest: And after he had long sighed and sobbed, still thinking upon those delights which he fancied Paris to enjoy: but poor and un∣fortunate Shepherd (said he upon a sudden) to what purpose is it to murmure eyther against the destinies, or her? The doome which hath submitted Diana unto the power of Paris, is irrevocable: and since she has so much power over her self as to consent unto it, I have now so much libertie as to do what I will with my self: in saying so, he remembred the last words which he heard Diana speak, and knowing that she did not forbid him any longer then till he heard of her marriage: Now (said he) my disign has no obstacle, and since there is no spark of any hope left in my soul, her forbiddance to die is determined: dye then Silvander, and soon, since the destines will have it so, and since Diana consents unto it. Then being fully resolved to put an end unto his life, he began to think of such meanes as might most easily shew him the way, and after he had thought upon the way of poison, upon the way of sword, and upon the way of water: These remedies (said he to himself) me thinks are very incertaine, and too far off to be applied unto a disease so desperate, as requires a more near and speedy assi∣stance: for it is to be feared that if I should make use of poison, I may be de∣ceaved, as Ligdamon was, and so make my intention too much known: Should I imploy a sword, Cryserde she opened her veines, and the blood which congealed in the orifice of the wound, was a cause that she did not die: and should I throw my self into Lignon perhaps some fisherman will take me up as Damon was; so as I doubt that none of these three wayes can give me such a death as I desire: then beginning to think upon it, by fortune he cast his eye upon the same rock, from whence Laonice used sometimes to veiw those beauties, which the plain of Forrests did present unto the eyes of the inhabitants: And imagining that it was a thing most impossible he should not perish there if he did precipitate himself from that top to the bottom, he stayed himself upon the thoughts of this kind of death: Yes yes  said he this death will be the most honourable I can chuse, and most sutable unto the state of my love: for punishments ought in some sort to equall the offences; and is it not just that since I aspired higher then it was my humble duty to pretend unto, I should fall from such a precipice as wil be mortall unto me? Now this which almost reaches heaven, may be taken for an Emblem of Dianas perfections, which are as far above the common sort, as it is from the level of the
earth: I, out of an indiscreet vanitie did think to arrive at the top of my hopes: afterwards; precipitating my self, I find my self almost reduced to dust and all my rash desires converted into smoak: In saying so, he went towards Mount-Verdun, yet chasing the least frequented way, least he should be hindred in his disign by meeting any. On the other side: Alexis was no sooner escaped out of Leonides hands but he began to prepare himself for the execution of Astreas command, and as if the gods were minded to make his fortune, in some sort, equall unto Silvanders, as soon as she was at libertie, and amongst the horrors of darknesse, she disputed whether the night or her sorrows were the blacker, or whether both were so dismall as the cruelty of Astrea; she began to consult with her soul which way she should take to find a suddain death. There was no invention to make one self away which came not into her fancy. But a good genius, and perhaps the very same which inspired Astrea did perswade him, that he could not lose his life more gloriously then in helping to disenchant the fountain of loves veritie: so he fixed upon this resolution: The only obstacle in her disign was, she knew not where to find a female lover so faithfull as to attempt the same: for (said she to her self) Astrea doubtlesse does love her life too well, and since she who is to die, must be one that has lived in a most inviolable fidelitie what know I but that ungratful Shepher∣desse is stained with the crime of some new change? Diana me thinks also should not be accepted off for she has burned in two severall flames through thee love of two Shepherds who served her: and Phillis who has to her very hearts desire gusted all the delight of a pure and holy amitie, she will not forsake Lycidas upon any termes in the world: yet Celadon (said he) it is not for the to prye too narrowly into the secrets of the gods: Content thy self, with this, that thou must die: never stay therefore untill dispair have driven some femal lover to be the Companion of thy fate: it is sufficient for thee to shew the way, and to make it known unto posteritie, that never any love was more pure and holy then thine. Then did he lift up his eyes to heaven, and observing that darknesse did begin to vanish by reason of the moones new light, he sate down upon the ground untill it was a little lighter: but being very weary with walking, he was no sooner upon the green grasse, but being overcome with sleep, he slept till morning. Aurora surprised him at his waking, and as if she would shed some teares for the disgrace of this Shepherd, she had wet his checks, with the humiditie of her dew. When he waked, and knew not whether he should be sad or glad for pas∣sing away the night without any farther progresse in his design; This rest I have taken (said he) has made me waite with lesse impatience for that glorious light which is to be a witnesse of my love and courage. It is for criminalls to fsie the light, but to such whose actions are honorable, the day cannot be too clear. Upon this Alexis arose, with a design to go away: but hearing some noise she stayed, and spied Silvander, who having broken some branches which hindred his passage, did passe through the wood with much hast. The face of this Shepherd, having all the signes of dispair in it, did much trouble Alexis, because she was a reall lover of his virtue: so as desiring to know the cause, and thinking he would not con∣ceale himself, she began to follow him, and resolved not to leave him untill she had some long discourse with him. Silvander in the mean time who had nothing in his thoughts but a desire of death, at every step he went, he felt some new consolation in his soul because he drew so much nearer the place which he had chosen to put an end unto his dayes: so as not thinking any followed him, nor ever looking back, he came out of the wood, and got up to the toop of the highest rock of all those which Joyn unto Moutverdan, having still Alexis at his back, who wondering Silvander should take so much paines to go unto that place which perhaps never any Shepherd be∣fore him, had so much curiositie as to visit: there Silvander stayed; great gods (said he) whose pleasure hath been to submit my soul, ever since I was born, unto all sorts of sorrows. Heer I am, ready to obay that fate which hath followed all the actions of my life; Happy I am at this last moment, that I have not by any sin, rendred my soul neither guilty nor accessarie unto the miseryes which are
falne upon me: Now Diana have I found that welcome remedy against all my miseryes which I have longed to be delivered from. Pardon me Diana, if I have in any manner failed in any respects which I owed unto you: and how great so∣ever any of my faults are, I do conjure you to beleive, that I never failed in my love; And you Bellinde, who by a most intollerable tiranny has forced Diana to receive the imbraces of Paris, if ere my death do come to be know unto you, never bestow any sighes or teares upon me, for it is sufficient, these rockes will weep, and Zepherus will sigh for my sad disaster: In saying so, he steped to the very brink if the praecipice, and Celadon who feared extreamly least he should cast him self down, he steped forward to prevent him, and laying hold upon him, fie, fie Silvander (said Alexis to him) heaven would not have you cast your self away. Silvander upon this turning himself about, and looking upon her with the very face of death, ah too pittifull Alexis (said he) what De∣mon sent you hither to hinder me from that contentment which the gods did pro∣mise unto me? The most kind one (answered Alexis) of all those that have any care of your life: Nay, said Silvander; it was rather the greatest enemy unto my tranquilitie: who ever it was (replied Alexis and would not let go her hold) you shall not die at this time, and if you have any respect unto the ranke which my birth conferred upon me, grant unto me one request which I shall make unto you, which is, to lend an ear unto some things which I must comunicate unto you. Silvander seeing himself obliged to obey the commands of Celadon, whom he thought to be a woman and a Druide, he retired himself a little from the edge of the praecipice, and both of them being a little removed from it, they sat down upon another rock which was convenient for that purpose: and there Celadon began to talk unto him in these termes. You will wonder Silvander, at the dis∣course which I shall make unto you: and the more, because you are blinded with the same mistake which Astrea, Diana, Phillis, Lycidas, and all the Shepherds and Shepherdesses are, concerning me: For you must know Silvander, that this habit wherin I am, is nothing sutable to my sexe, and though it be the habit of a Druide, yet it is upon the body of a Shepherd, and to be short Silvander, upon the body of Celadon: at the sound of Celadon, Silvander stood amused; And Alexis contiuning, and to the end (said she) that you may render unto those that survive me a testimonie of my discretion and of my love, I do conjure you to harken with patience unto the relation of my fortune, and afterwards to grant me a request which I have unto you, and for which only I followed you, not knowing you had any such ill intentions against your self, as you seem to have. Silvander not being able to recover himself out of his astonishment, he did not answere one word; but looking him stedfastly in the face, he did let him know by his silence, that he would willingly hear him; And therefore Celadon related unto him, all that ever hapned unto him since he threw himself into Lignon: and having told him in what manner Leonide made him known unto his Shepherdesse: Now (said he) this cruel and ungratfull woman, in lieu of ever considering the testimonies which she had received of my love and obedience, she commanded me to die, and that so peremptorily, as it is impossible but I must needs obey her. Now that which I desire from you, sage Silvander, is, that you would be pleased to take so much paines, as to go tell Lycidas from me, that I desire him as he loves me not to trouble himself at my death, nor to take any revenge upon Astrea for the crimes which her rigour hath committed against him, and against me: In the mean time I will go and content that in humain woman, and expose my self unto the rage of those Lyons and unicornes which guard the enchanted fountain, that I may in some sort oblige posteritie, and give Silvander himself the delight of knowing how truely and sincerly he is beloved by his Shepherdesse Diana. Upon this Alexis was silent, and Silvander who during her discourse had time to recollect his spirits, and to confirm himself in a beleif, that it was really Ce∣ladon who spoke unto him, he took him about the neck and embracing him: Oh heavens Celadon▪ (said he) is it possible I should before I die be so happy as to see you again? In saying so, teares dropped from his eyes, and afterwards continuing, no no Celadon (said he) it is by no meanes just, that the anger, or rather the
ill humour of Astrea should cause the ruine of the most amiable Shepherd in all Forrests. Live, live, Celadon; live for Astrea, and let me alone to accomplish the design which you intended: Let me die; for my fidelity is pure enough, and the same advantage which you willed me by your death, you may receive from mine: Nay, nay Silvander, replied Alexis, live you for Astrea: Alas, alas, replied the Shepherd, why should I do so, since Diana lives only unto Paris? Unto Paris? (said Alexis in a great amazement) yes unto Paris (said Silvander) and that is the cause of my transport; let me therefore, dear Celadon, go and mingle my blood with the water of this Fountain: that is now the only object of all my de∣sires, and so great is my impatiency of it, that it alone is able to be my death. Sage Silvander, replied Alexis faintly, had this design been just in you, doubtless the gods would have inspired you with the thoughts of it, as they did me; and therefore I conceive you have no right to contend with me about it nor dis∣pute it any longer, since no other but my self can doubtlesse obtain it. However (said Silvander) I beseech you let me joyn my Fortune unto yours, and let us both find the same Fate. Alexis would have disswaded him; but Silvander be∣seeched her with so many forcible and importunate arguments, that at the last she consented, and received him as a companion in this enterprize. Astrea had no sooner heard Licidus say, that the Grotto wherein they were was the very same which formerly harboured Celadon, but she was all amazement, and from that time thought that very rock it self did tell her of that Shepherds love: all the objects which presented themselves unto her senses, did treat her in the same manner: for when she heard the hollow murmure of the river Lignon, or the noise which Zepherus made at the entrance of her Cavern, she still thought them composed of nothing but those amorous sighs, wherewith Celadon accom∣panied the rigour of his voluntary banishment. Diana did very well observe this astonishment, but not being able to imagine that it did proceed from any other cause then her fears that Phillis would surprize her, she did not speak unto her, but only waited with a little impatience to see what would become of the design which Phillis had to look into the Grotto. But when that Shepherdesse was gone our, and found the place more full of horrour, then likely to keep alive the flames of a Lover, and when she had bid adieu unto Licidas, and went in quest of those whom she left behind her, Diana seeing her companion continue still in the same assright she was▪ she could nor chuse but ask the cause: To whom Astrea answer∣ed, Did not you hear Sister, how Licidas said that this Grotto wherein we are, is the very same place where Celadon lived and complained against my inconstancy, when his Father, by a subtil insinuation, did make him believe that Corebes was to marry me? I heard him say so, replied Diana, but I did not think that was a∣ble to trouble you so much as I see you are: Truly, said Astrea, it does not much trouble me; but I must confesse, when I think upon the accidents which befel me at that time, and comparing the present condition of my life with that I then li∣ved, I cannot chuse but grieve to see how fare will never cease tormenting me, but is still putting obstacles unto such felicities, as I promised unto my self. There are very few (answered Diana) who have not the same accusation against Fortune: you complain: I complain, and I think so does all the world: for it is a most impossible thing to receive any joy which is not mixed with a thousand subjects of sorrow: I do believe it (answered Astrea) but still I dare affirm, that of all those who ever had any cause of complaint, none ever had so much as I. For if I do but look back upon the successes of my life, I cannot find one which was not accompanied with some sad event or other. Sister, replied Diana, we had never lesse reason to complain then now, now I say, when our miseries are so near their remedy, and when we are upon the very point of easing our selves from all those displeasures which we have endured: Love has been the cause al∣most of all, and it must be love which must deliver us, to the end the same hand which gave the wound, may also give the plaister. Indeed Sister (said Astrea) we are arrived at the Eve of our tranquility▪ but yet as near as that moment is, which will end all our miseries, the memory of those miseries does torment my
mind. In saying so, she looked a little more seriously then before upon every thing that was in the Grotto; and finding something upon her right hand which was engraved upon the rock, she went nearer unto it, and found her own name which Celadon had engraved, almost all over the Cavern: and on one side she saw written these ensuing lines. Judge, fair Astrea, unto what point my Destinies have brought me: I know very well that death is a remedy against all mise∣ries; and yet I will not have recourse unto it: not that I find it hard to die, but out of fear that being dead, I shall not love you any longer. These words made her apprehend, that he had at that time a mind to make a∣way himself, but that some good genius had diverted him, by putting this consi∣deration into his thoughts. All those objects were so sad unto her apprehensions, as they did steal from her eyes many a tear; but as sad as her soul was, yet she could not chuse but look upon the testimonies of her Shepherds inviolable love: At last, after she had looked all over, and had left no place unsearched, she found in one of the corners, a bottle wherein Celadon kept this ink, and also finding a pen near it: Alas (said she and sighed) here doubtlesse is the very same pen, wherewith he used to expresse his amorous thoughts and passions: This is the faithful pen which has so often received all his secrets, and which hath been partly a cause of my knowing the despair of my dear Shepherd: Without thee dear pen (said she and kissed it) I had never known in what part of the world he had been; and in that ignorance, I should never have found out the means to recal him. But dear pen, what shall I do unto thee in recompence of that good office? These tears and these sighs can do thee no good, for thou art not sensible of them: yet, perhaps, they will be acceptable unto thee, because they relate unto him that was once thy master, and who by a high priviledge of Love, did perhaps take a∣way thy insensibility. Upon this she was silent; and Diana looking upon the ground, Sister (said she unto her) I see something lie at your feet: then Astrea stepping a little back, Diana stooped, and saw that it was a sheet of paper lap∣ped up: she presently took it up, and saw it superscribed in large Characters THE SORROWS OF A BETRAYED SHEPHERD, and within it these words. I Once thought, fair Astrea, that the river of my tears would have washed away the crime of your infidelity. But now, when I think upon the many dayes which my eyes have spent in that miserable of∣fice, I am quite out of all hopes, and see that it is death only which can bring any remedy to my griefs  and it only do I call for to cure those wounds which your inconstancy have made. It is it only unto whom all my sighs and groans are addressed: and it is it, which a thousand times more pitiful then your self, will receive such prayers as I make unto it, to rid me of my pain. Thus do I look for help from it which Nature bids me fly; and I expect my ruine from her, whom reason commands me most religiously to love: A strange effect of your ingratitude, Astrea: since to be exempted from your persidies, I must fly unto the pity of my enemies: But will; if you expect from my disgrace only the ruine of— This half ended sentence made Diana think that Celadon intended to fill the whole sheet with the like compliments: but that he was diverted, perhaps, by the command which Licidas brought him from Astrea, he had not time to write any more then what you see. Astrea, who was the Reader of it, she was very sorry that it was no longer, for it was very pleasing unto her; yet putting it into her bo∣some.
This complaint, poor Celadon (said she) which thou makest against me for a crime, whereof I was not guilty, shall serve to condemn me, for that which I committed in the last sentence which I pronounced against thee; and that it may be a witnesse to publish my injustice, I beseech the gods this paper may survive me, and that it may have as much power to withstand the injuries of time and weather, as I have to punish her that has offended against the fidelity of Celadon: Upon this she found a great weaknesse in her self; and Diana, who saw her look pale, and feared she would swound, she run unto the river side to fetch some wa∣ter: she had lesse ado to go out of the Cavern then she had to enter in, for Li∣cidas had made the passage more easie: she made haste to the river, but could not return so fast for fear of spilling, so as she had time enough to see Licidas lying at the root of a Willow: This sight did extreamly astonish her: yet observing that he was asleep, she went unto the Grotto as fast as ever she could; and find∣ing Astrea a little better, Sister (said she unto her) let us fly away as fast as we can, unlesse we would have Licidas surprize us: Why? asked Astrea; because, replied Diana, he is still in the same place where he talked with Phillis, and I fear he has heard our discourse, or at the least will come into this place, to passe away the rest of the day. Is it possible (said Astrea) that this Shepherd should be there yet? Doubtlesse he is (answered Diana) and if you have a mind to see him, it is but going to the entrance of the Cavern, and casting your eye unto the river side: I would gladly see him once more, said Astrea, and in saying so, she went unto the mouth of the Grotto, and saw him lie all along upon the grasse, which Nature had covered with a little Moss. As soon as ever she had seen him, she would have retired, for she was afraid to be seen; but growing a little more con∣fident, she began to fix her eyes so stedfastly upon him, that it was a quarter of an hour before she removed them. Diana, who all the while observed, she pulled her by the coat, Sister (said she) I think you are ravished with looking upon that Shepherd: Truly, answered Astrea, his innocence makes me to compassionate him extreamly; and I am beyond expression sorry he should be so sensible of Ce∣ladons sufferings: for being conscious of my own fault, it grieves me he should have so much cause to complain against me: yet (continued she) I mean to try his good Nature, and if there be any spark of pity in his soul, I am confident he will have much ado to deny that pardon which I shall ask him. In saying so she went into the Grotto, and taking the pen which she found, she dipped it in the bottle of ink which was half full, also tearing a little piece of paper which she had put in her pocket, she writ a Letter unto Licidas, which was no sooner finished, but seeing the day almost done, she resolved to leave the Grotto and that paper in the hand of Licidas. Unto which Diana consenting, they went out with as lit∣tle noise as they could, and coming to Licidas, Astrea kneeled down upon the ground, she pinned the paper to the sleev of the Shepherd: O Love (said she) even for pities sake give good successe unto this Letter: let it not be lost; but if it be possible, let it touch the very heart of Licidas: Then she arose, and looking round, they continued their journey. Phillis was already returned to the house of Adamas, very sorry she could not hear any news of her companions: Leonide came presently after her, and a little after that, all the Shepherds and Shepherdesses which were at the house of Ada∣mas: so as all of them having given an account unto the Druide and Belinde, of their strict inquisition after Diana and Astrea, they began to conclude, that they were both fled together upon some dangerous design: Adamas was much trou∣bled for the Shepherdesses; but for all that, he could not forget the interest he had in Celadon: Enquiring therefore, whether any could tell where he was; Phil∣lis answered very plainly, that she thought he was dead, since Licidas swore he had not lest any place in all the plain unsearched. The Druide then, seeming to be very angry at her answer; but (said he) let us at the least save Licidas, and prevent any new disaster that may happen unto him: Father (said Phillis) I left him lying upon the ground a good way from hence; yet very near the river Lignon: and to go unto him, one need but go streight up by the river side: perhaps (said Adamas) you left him asleep: if so, it is possible to find him and bring him back,
I believe one may, replied Phillis, but then it must be by command from some whom he dares not disobey. Paris (said the Druide) may perhaps perswade with him. Upon this, commanding Paris to go thither, this new Shepherd went and found Licidas, a little before the Sun was set. Almost at the same time he awa∣ked, and knowing Paris, he started up upon a sudden, not taking any notice that the Letter which Astrea pinned at his sleev, did fall to the ground: Paris perceiv∣ing that Licidas did not see it, he stooped to take it up, and having it in his hand, here Licidas (said he unto him) this is doubtlesse some expression of your Love. I cannot tell what it is, answered Licidas, but it can be no expression of my affe∣ction, unlesse Phillis gave unto it you. Nay, replied Paris; but on the contra∣ry, it may be I that must give it unto Phillis, and will be willingly the Carryer of it, since you have writ it. Who I, answered Licidas, I swear I have not seen either ink or paper this two dayes. However (said Paris) you did let it fall: perhaps (said Licidas) it was your self, for I am certain that I had no papers about me. That will be quickly cleared, answered Paris, for I believe you will acknowledge your own hand: In saying so, he presented the Letter unto Licidas, and the Shepherd casting his eyes upon it: alas, said he, this Character is as much contra∣ry unto mine, as the cruelty of her who writ it is contrary unto my contentment: Paris not understanding what he meant, Licidas continued: This Letter, said he, came from Astrea;  but I cannot imagine which way it should come into my hands: perhaps (said Paris) you have had it long: No answered Licidas, I ne∣ver saw it till now; and believe she writ it very lately, for the ink is fresh: Then he began to read what was within the paper, and found these words. ASTREAS LETTER unto LICIDAS. YOur anger against me, dear Licidas, I find to be most just; and the more, because not having heard any of those reasons which might plead my justification, it is impossible but your judge∣ment should be byassed by the interest of your brother. I do ex∣cuse your resentment, as I do blame his disguisment: And to leave you no longer without some satisfaction for the crime whereof you accuse me, I am going to die, since the juglings of Celadon are a cause, that I cannot live any longer in the world with honour: I do verily believe, that in the heat of my transport, I have used a little too much rigour; but how I impose a petty pennance upon him, when I conceived his sin beyond all parallel or pardon? yet since you will needs say that I have done amiss, I will say so too, and confesse that my fault deserves no less a punishment then death: I tell you therefore once more Licidas, that I am going to die, and that your anger against me is to blame, if you do not take my death for a sufficient revenge. If for the rest of my soul, a pardon may be obtained from you, grant it good Shepherd: my tears do beg it; and the love which Celadon once bore unto me, do forbid you to deny it. Adieu Licidas, I have but a moment to live, and let Phillis take it in testimony of my remembrance: Adieu. At the reading of these last words, Licidas could not chuse but melt into tears, and pulling out his handkerchief to wipe his eyes: Alas, alas, (said he) how great reason she has to confesse her self culpable? for all the misfortunes which have fallen upon us, had their beginnings from a trivial jealousie which once she conceived, and conceived it upon the weakest grounds in the world. I do wonder (said Paris) that she mentions not a syllable of Diana, since it is thought they are both together? I cannot tell, answered Licidas, what may be the cause of it; but doubtlesse they are both together: for if Diana had not been with Astrea,
then Astrea would have mentioned her in the end of her letter, as well as Phillis whom you see she remembers; however it be, said Paris, I conceive we cannot take a better course then to go speedily and acquaint Adamas, to see what he will con∣ceive upon this last accident. Heere is Astreas letter, replied Lycidas; you may communicate it unto him: and if you please, I will waite heere for your com∣mands: Lycidas said this, because he had no great mind to go unto the house of the Druide: but Paris did so well perswade with him that at last, he prevailed and carried him along. It was now night when they came at the house of Adamas, so as Bellinde being out of any hopes to hear any news of Diana, she grieved extreamly, and all the consolations the Druide could invent to flatter her sorrows, did nothing but make her more sensible of them. In this condition she was when they told her that Paris and Lycidas were returned, so as she ran unto them as unto her last refuge: but hearing nothing from them which gave her any hopes, she relapsed into her first sad apprehensions. Adamas, he looked upon the letter which Lycidas received; and finding no mention of Diana in it; he let Bellinde know that in this incertainty of things, she had no reason to dispair. That it was credible Diana was not so senslesse as to expose her self unto death, since it looks with such a grim and hor∣rid face, and since Diana being but a woman, there was no likly hood her ti∣merous disposition durst ever attempt to graple with it, what resolutions soever she had: Perhaps indeed Astrea might infuse some desires unto her off attempting it: but when it came too't neither of them both had so much courage as to exe∣cute it; Adamas used severall other arguments which Bellinde did not take as ab∣solutely good, nor could she absolutely condemn them: and the Druide having waited upon her unto her Chamber, he went unto his own, where calling for all the Shepherds and Shepherdesses, he desired them to be all up betimes the next morning to prosecute the search which they had began; and every one promising to obey, they bad him good night and went to bed. Astrea and Diana, had in the mean time gone a little way after they parted from Lycidas: But when night came, and they saw the air duskye and full of clouds, and that the heavens amidst the obscuritie did send forth such flashes of lightning as promised so many Thunder-bolts; Then chill feares did seise upon them, and that courageous spirit which they shewed did now began to droop and vanish when they came to consider that they were but poor silly weak women. The imbecilitie of their sexe did infuse a thousand considerations into their souls, whereof the least forcible, was strong enough to hinder them from going any furthe They resolved therefore to turn fairely back, and seek out a shelter from the raine which began to fall, so as they returned into the same gratto from whence they departed: They were no sooner lodged but the air began to discharge it self of such great abundance of raine, and with such great clappes of thunder and lighting, as they began to fear that the rockes were not able to preserve their lives from the injury of such tempestious weather. Lignon began presently to rise, and with a swelling pride to overflow its banks: such torrents fell from the neigh∣boring hills, as still did swell it more and more: so as in two howers space, it came up to the very mouth of the gratto; And that place which once harboured the flames of Celadon, was constrained now to receive the moistur of this cold Element, and it entred in so suddainly, as all that Astrea and Diana could do was to get out: and as good fortune was, they were no sooner out, but the raine ceased: so as seeing the air begin to clear, and the Moon to shew her argent complexion, they set forward, and never rested till they arived with in three hundred paces of that fountain which they had made choise of, for a remedy a∣gainst all their displeasure. There they found the forme of an altar, raised from the ground upon a little square, the steps whereof were stained with blood in se∣verall places, and blacked with the smoak of victims that had been there sacrifi∣ced. At the first; they conceived it to be consecrated unto some dyety, and imagining, that the dyety of that enchantment, perhaps resided there, they both fell down upon their knees at the bottom of the staires, and Astrea began to pray in this manner: Oh most puissant god of love, preserver of nature, absolute God of
souls: take away I beseech thee the maske that blindes thy eyes, and see whether my fidelity be not as great as my courage; Heere is the female lover that must appease thy wrath, and who by the loss of her life is to have the glory of stopping the mouths of these Lyons and Ʋnicornex▪ which rendring this fountain inaccessible, do hide from all lovers the verity of these great misteryes. Accept oh thou Son and Father of Eter∣nity, of that blood which I shall shed: and to keep me from allignominy that may follow my death, take care, I beseech thee of this my body which I do voluntarily expose unto the cruelty of those mercyless animals: in saying so she went and kissed the foote of the altar, and then Diana lifting her eyes up to heaven, great God (said she) that which Astrea does aske from thy pitty, do I implore from thy hatred: Thy rigour has never ceased from tormenting me: Let my miseryes and thy tyrannies this day cease, I will not give the y accompt of my fidelity: thou dost see it in the secret of my soul, and knowes that it was even inviolable; Spare, oh god of love, spare the beauty of Astrea: do not let thy Lyons be insensible: inspire their fierce souls with fear and re∣spect, and do not let them glut their hunger and thy cruelty upon her most beautifull and delicate body. After this she arose up, and having kissed the foot of the altar three times, she went down to the place where Astrea stood. Oh Sister (said that Shepherdesse unto her) you have done me wronge, for your own preservation ought to have been the subject of your prayer and not mine, and if the gods should grant your request I should taxe them with injustice, and therefore (said she and fell down upon her knees again) I beseech thee, oh god of love to punish this iniurious Shep∣herdess with a deniall: and make her know that as I have more right unto what she prayeth for, so I ought to have more hopes of obtaining it. Then would Diana have kneeled down, but Astrea hindred her: and putting her hand before her mouth. Sister (said she unto her) if you love me do not disoblige me any longer, for your request is directely contrary to my desires and tranquility: in saying so, teares came into her eyes: and Diana not being able to restrain hers, they said not a word more, but began to embrace one another. And sitting down upon the ground because they were weary with travelling a whole day and a night togeather without any rest, and prompted unto it as I think by the inchantment, they both fell asleep, and remained thus embracing each other, as they did before the sleep did surprise them. They were no sooner falen a sleep but day appeared; and appeared much fairer then the winds and storms of the precedent night promised: Alexis, and Sil∣vander were not yet awake; But Bellinde who hardly ever closed an eye by reason of her great inquietudes, she no sooner spied the first blush of Aurora, but she started out of her bed; and putting on her gown, she ran unto Leonides cham∣ber, and desired her to solicite Phillis unto so much paines as she had taken the day before in the quest of her Companions; she found that Nymph already drest and Phillis also for both of them were so zealous in behalf of their two friends, as they both got up betimes purposely to go and look after them. Bellinde wondered at their early diligency: and as she began to tell Leonide the cause of her comming unto their chamber, she was prevented by Phillis who addressing her self unto her; You see Madam (said she) what a deal of trouble and paines Astrea and Diana does put me unto; but if ere I find them, this crime which they have committed against me, shall not be unpunished. Alas fair Shep∣herdess (answered Bellinde) I am afraid you are already sufficiently revenged: Madam replied Phillis, I am not so easily satisfied as perhaps you imagine▪ For I am of such an humour that I never think sufficient reason is done me, unless I take revenge my self. Pray heavens, replied Bellinde, is ever come into your power; I am afraid the penance you would enjoyn them, is far inferior unto that which they have already suffered. Madam (said Leonide) it is impossible but before this day be at an end, all our doubt will be cleared: we shall imploy so many people in the quest, that though they be drowned in Lignon, (which I do not think) yet we shall find some markes of their death; I pray the heavens, re∣plied Bellinde, that my feare prove false, and that you may bring better news of them then I expect. In saying so she went out; and with her Leonide and Phillis,
who having found  with him all the  they all went in . On the other  with a strange impatiency to talk with Astrea,  Celadon,  the morn∣ing and  of Shepherdesses  provided the day  and Silvia, did  they went into the chamer of Amasis, who  had admired the comliness of  dresses, though far short of their usual ear, she  a good speed▪ and dismissed them. They went in a coach, and sent it back, as soon as  the Druides house▪ and then Madonthe, and Daph who were  well versed in the way of Shepherdesses, they taught the  how they should hold their sheep∣ooks, nd by what language they must make the sheep to understand them: Af∣ter this▪ they entred into the Court, and met no living body; at which Galathea wondering and not being able to imagine what should be  in the house: at last she believed all the Shepherds and Shepher∣desses were gone into the Woods, to divert themselves under some cool shade in the heat of the day. In this thought they went up the stairs, and Adamas being advertised by him ho looked to the gates, that some Shepherdesses were entred, he came to re∣ceive them at the stairs top. At the first sight he knew Madonthe and  for he had seen them in that dress before; and afterwards knowing the rest also, O heavens, my most honoured Ladies (said he with a pleasant aspect unto  and Galathea) what good Fortune is it that honours me with so much hap∣piness as to bring you hither▪ Surely Father, answered Galathea, it is not the cu∣stome to speak with so much respect unto Shepherdesses; but let me tell you; that since the departure of Sigismond, Rosilion, Godomar, Damon, and all the rest of ur Cavlier; we f a design of coming to visit you, and participate of those innocent pleasure which are to be found, under the habits wherein you  (replied the Druide with a sigh) you come to be witnesses of those  wherewith the innocence of this kind of life is  for be pleased to know,  disorder at  which have befallen u within these two dayes. I profess, replied  do both astonish and grieve me, for if did not think to find you in such a great con∣fusion. In saying so, they went into the dining room, through which they went into the chamber of Adamas: and there the Druide began to speak unto them.  make you acquainted with our sorrows, said he, I need but only shew you the face of Belinde, who is mother unto Diana: for yesterday she lost her daughter, who stole away from hence with Astrea; and all this, as I believe, is come to pass be∣cause Alexis was lost the day before: How I (said Galathea) is not Alexis the here? We do not know where she is, replied the Druide, but perhaps  glad to hear her Fortune, for you have some interest in it. Galathea ot e∣ing able to understand his meaning, I cannot chuse but be much  her (said she) since she did belong unto you. Upon this Belinde being called, and knowing the names of all these new Shep∣herdesses, she rendred what was due unto their birth and  with a countenance full of cares and grief, Rosanira,  she had sa∣luted her;  thought, (said the Princess unto her) that we were  admire the beauty and perfections of your daughter▪ but I perceive; that we have those  to give some comfort unto you. Madam, answered  but since you do  I am not ashamed to confess before you,  as makes me almost incapable of any  (aid Galathea) and by con∣sequence
must needs be sensible of what concerns your own blood: but I hope your sorrows are not without some remedy, if heaven do but love you half so well as we esteem and love you. Upon this, Adamas beseeched them to sit down; and being desired by Gala∣thea, to tell them all that related unto the loss of Alexis, and of the flight of Astrea and Diana, he acquainted them with every particular circumstance; So as Galathea understanding that Alexis was the very same Lacinde, who escaped out of the Pallace of Isoures: I do not wonder (said she and was much surprized) that you have alwayes kept her out of my sight: for doubtless you know that I should have known her: I did at the least fear it, replied the Druide, and I was sure, that acquaintance would not at all have helped Celadon: for he was then so obstinately unwilling to appear before Astrea, that he had rather have died a hun∣dred deaths, then I should have discovered his disguisment. This discourse lasted until it was dinner time: after which Rosanira having a desire to see the Gallery, Adamas conducted all the company thither; and they had not been there above a quarter of an hour, but word was brought unto Ada∣mas, that there was three men at the gates which desired to speak with him: He presently commanded they should be let enter: and the first that appeared was Halladine, whom Adamas and others did presently know. Halladine had no sooner saluted the Druide, but he did his reverence unto Madonthe: and hearing that Damon was at Lions, he beseeched their leave to go thither; but Madonthe telling him how short a time Damon would stay: I had rather (continued she) that you would give us an accompt of your journey, and tell us how Celidea was cured. Madam, answered Halladine, to tell it exactly unto you, requires a bet∣ter wit then mine; but here is a man come with me, who is able to relate every circumstance unto you: Upon this, he told them that those two who came in with him, the one was the great Olicarsis the African, and Authour of Celideas cure: The other was Azahides, and that no man in the world was better able to tell her what she desired to know, then he. Upon this, all the company fixed their looks upon these two men: one of which was Olicarsis, whose habit, stature, and deportment, was no small subject of astonishment unto them. Adamas went unto them, and knowing by Damons report how considerable this old man was, for his rare and admirable qualities, he received them with all possible demonstrations of kindness: and Olicarsis, who though a Barbarian by birth, yet not so by humour, he thought himself so obliged by the kind expressions of the Druide, as from thence forward he began to have a most particular affection unto him. After the first complements were performed, the Druide desired them to sit down with all that good company; and by Fortune, Olicarsis at the same time, did cast his eye upon some Pictures, wherewith that Gallery was admirably well furnished: and chancing to know one of them, I think (said he) that yon∣der Piece is the Picture of Eudoxe, whom Genserick brought into Africa, after he had triumphed over Rome and Sicilie: Most true, answered Adamas, and all the principal accidents which befel that Princess from her birth, until that time, have been related unto us by such persons as were most irreproachable witnesses; but since Ʋrcases and Olimbres went from the Massilians into Africa, we never heard any thing at all. Alas, replied Olicarsis, Fortune has been a most cruel Persecutor of that Sage Princess, since that; and did I not think I should be too tedious, I should relate unto you many remarkable accidents that have befel her: All the company seemed very desirous to hear him, especially Adamas. So Oli∣carsis began his discourse in this manner.
The Sequel of the History of EUDOXE, of URSACES, and of OLIMBRES. GEnserick, loadned with the rich spoils of Rome, and proud of so many glorious conquests, he no sooner came to Carthage, but the People is honour of his valour, began to chant and extol his triumphs; and himself tickled with that happy success which followed all his enter∣prizes (being resolved to let his ambition have its full swing) he began to think of arming himself the second time, and strike a terrour, not only unto Italy, but all the world. Yet, first being willing to allow some time unto that rest which he thought he had deserved, he intended, till all things was in readiness for his second voyage, to enjoy all those pleasures and delights that his heart could de∣sire: and the first that he proposed unto himself, was, to triumph over the cha∣stity of Eudoxe, as he had already over her Empire. The memory of those ob∣ligations which he had unto this Princess, did not at all move him; but on the contrary inspired him with a secret fear; that as she had called him out of Africa into Italy to deliver her from the Tyranny of Maximus, and to revenge the Par∣ricide committed on the person of Valentinian, so she might draw the odium of every one upon him, and in the end become the ruine of him and his Estates. This apprehension was a cause that he kept her up very carefully in a Pallace, where leaving her without any company but her two daughters, he ordained that none whosoever should come unto her without special permission from him, upon pain of death. Some Eunuchs only were appointed to wait upon her; and that but at some certain hours neither, when she eat her meat. The resentments which this Princess had of her captivity, and her grief for the loss of Ʋrsaces, who only she loved, did bring her in a few dayes to such a sad and miserable con∣dition, that those who waited upon her thought fit to make report of it unto Genserick. This barbarous King being moved at the news, yet only to keep her alive, that he might act his impious designe, he sent for me; and adding mountains of pro∣mises unto his earnest desires and commands, he appointed me to visit her, and to use my utmost endeavours to cure her. He knew before by many experiences, what I was able to do in the most desperate diseases, and the life which I restored unto Thrasimond his son, after all Physicians had given him over, was a sufficient testimony unto him, that I could do whatsoever it pleased me to undertake. This good opinion which he had of my skill did so prejudicate his mind, that he imployed me; and I who did not desire any thing with more passion then to see that Princess, whose Ancestors I knew, I accepted of this commission, as the greatest advantage that fortune could offer me. Being brought then into her Pal∣lace, or rather her prison, I was conducted into her chamber; but O heavens? how pleasing, and how deplorable both, was this first sight which I had of her? she was that day in a gown of carnation Satten, imbroidered with Pearls: her sleeves were of Satten, white as her complexion, imbroidered with gold and Dearls, and enriched almost all over with an infinite number of small Diamonds: her hands were bare, and in one, she held a handkerchief, which she was often lifting to her eyes: her hair was in her night dress, and yet I saw some little cur∣led locks which hung negligently about her cheeks: she had a scarf about her neck, her face seemed to be very much shrunk and lean, as if it were impossible to preserve that natural plumpness which she had of her own: This Princess was given up to sorrow, that her eyes, which since her captivity were seldome with∣out tears, had quite lost their luster, and seemed to burn: she walked up and down the chamber, and holding her eyes down, seemed to muse most profoundly upon somthing. I must needs confess, that as it was long before she perceived me, so it was long before I could do any thing else but admire her: and as if I stood in need to re∣collect
my self, I durst not enter, till she by fortune casting her look towards the dore, she spied me, and knew that I did not stand there but upon some design. Se had heard what a strickt command was given concerning her: so as seeing me in another kind of habit then comonly was worn, she was exceedingly surpri∣sed, and I cannot tell whether it was with fear, or with desire of death: but so it was, that when she saw me put my foot into her chamber, she came to meet me, well (said she) how does Genserick intend to dispose of my life? Will he, to make me infamous unto postentie, that I should lose it by some disgracefull way? And has he commanded you to bring me the news, that I may prepare my self for it. She looked upon me all this while with a fixed eye, and I observing that she expected my answere: Madam (said I unto her) if the King should have any ill designes against you, it is more then I do know, nor would I ever be the messenger of any sad news unto you; He seemed unto me to be very indul∣gent over you, and to have a care of your health, and therefore commanded me to see you, and to contribute all that was in me to preserve your health; These few wordes were enough to let this Princesse know, what my profession was: so as laying aside her first opinion of me; Alas (said she unto me with a deep sigh) my disease is not any of those with in the compass of Phisique; If that Barbarous Prince who keeps me a personer has any mind to put me out of my miseryes, let him make hast and take away my life, which after the loss of my dominions and liberty cannot be pleasing unto me: we are three victimes heere, and I should say four, which that tyrant may sacrifice unto his fury when he will: good gods? Why should he spare us, after he ruined the stately temples of Rome? After this, Eudoxe began to walk again, and the teares she shed, did easily make me know that in the resentment of her great losses, her soul stood more in need of remedies then her body: and see how much compassion may work upon a spirit which is not altogeather void of resentment; I protest I was so much moved at her mise∣ryes, that I would have attempted any thing in the world to serve her. I gave her all the testimonies of it that I could, but I perceived that her fears of being deceived was a cause, that at the first she did not much value what I said: yet she thanked me, but in such a cold manner as made me judge she doubted my fidelity. After she had commanded me to report unto the King a thousand complaints which her passion did suggest unto her, she gave me leave to retire; And Gensericke who waited for my return with much impatiency, to know how Eudoxe did, he knew no more by me then was necessary for his tranquility. I did not tell him what the Princesse commanded me, but only made a faithfull relation of the condition wherin I found her; and spoke so highly of those charmes which I observed in her, as I did innocently set an edge upon that sword, which since, had like to have killed us all. I thought that as I was moved unto compas∣sion by seeing her in that condition, so surely would he upon the report which I should make unto him: but in lieu of being sensible, it did so blow that fire which had begun to burn in him, as he dispaired ever to quench it: had I had but any knowledge of his design, I should have been very far from adding any fuell unto it since it was not honest nor lawfull; But not knowing he had any thoughts against the honour of that Princesse; truly I thought that I had done very much in her behalf, in speaking unto him of those merits which I found in her. Genserick then knowing that Eudoxes malady was most in her mind, and concea∣ving that the solitude wherin he detained her, would never be a remedy against it, he commanded me to go and visit her often, and gave a me permission to go as often as I pleased; and therefore, after many visits, having at last made known unto that Princesse, the great desire which I had to do her any service▪ I did oblige her to put some confidence in me, and to protest that she would commu∣nicate even her very heart and thoughts unto me. It hapned one day, that remembring the discourse which formerly we had; and asking her what she meant by the three victims which might be sacrifised unto the fury of Genserick, and by the fourth which might be added; she made me sit
down upon her bed side; and there whilst the young Eudoxe and her Sister Pla∣cidia were busie playing in a closset, she related unto me all the Storie of Vrcases his love: she told me all the circumstances which fell out in the beginning of that Caveliers affection; her sort ows when she married Valentinian; the love of that young Emperor unto Isidore; The violence he offered unto her: the revenge which Maximus took: and lastly, she told me her design which she had with Vrcases, to fly unto Marcias who then commanded the Empire of the East; The promise she then made unto that Cavelier never to marry any but him: her dis∣paires when she was constrained to give her self unto Maximus; And lastly how she called Genserick to Rome to deliver her from the tiranny of this new husband: but when she came to speak of Gensericks resolution, to plunder, and to carry her into Affrica as the glory of his Tryumphes: she told me what Vrcases did to carry her away: and afterwards of his death which she thought to be certain, and all this with so many teares, sighes and groanes, as I was once afraid they would have stopped her breath. Truth is, she fell into my armes in a swound, and I had much a do to recover her. At last, after she had gathered some strength, she ac∣quainted me with the affection which Olimbres had unto Placidia, and told me that this was the fourth person of whom she spoke, assuring her self that he would not survive his Mistresse, if by fortune any perticular consideration had kept him alive after the loss of Vrcases. She had no sooner done relating her fortunes, but I used my best endeavours to comfort her: I did not omit any argument which I thought would perswade her unto what I desired; and in conclusion I offered her all the service she could expect from a man of my condition. I told her that my age, and the qualities wherwith heaven had endued me, had given me so much credit with the King; that I hoped to obtain any thing I should aske him; That it was true, as for her liberty, it was above my reach, and I durst not so much as think of it; But as for any thing which conduced unto the mitigation of her greif or feares from her detention, I did not think he would deny me any thing. This Princesse accepted of my offers with such a charming sweetness, that I did protest▪ I would not spare my very life to procure her contentment; and I cannot tell whether my expressions infused any hopes into her: but so it was, she appeared not so sad nor so dejected as before, and in a short time became as plump and fresh and fair as ever she was. Geneserick, who was quickly advertised of it, and did give me many thanks for the good effects I had wrought upon this Princesse: and as the fire of his love in∣flamed him with a desire of enjoying her, above all the world; so he thought that it was but so much labour as to aske her the question: since in the condition she was, it was not likely she would denye the least of his desires: In order to this then, he prepared himself for a visit: and least his design should make over great a noise he took none with him but Thrasimond to entertaine the two daugh∣ters. I do so much abhor the memorie of this accident, as I am not able to tell you, with what importunity this Barbarian accosted Eudoxe, let it suffice to know that after this tyrant had used a thousand gilded expressions of his passion, seeing her still obstinate in deniall he betook himself unto violence, and swore that what∣soever it cost him he would overcome her. The Princesse fearing the Barbarisme of this incensed King, she did a little diminish her rigour, and beseeched him to give her some dayes time to consider upon it. Geneserick conceiving▪ that the less force he used in this victory the more plea∣sure it would be unto him, he did consent unto her request: after which he re∣tired, and carried Thrasimond with him whom the charmes of the young Eudoxe had so captivated, that he could never since shake of her fetters: and certainly if ever beauty could inspire love, it was she: and without flattery one may say of her as the Philosopher Leonitias said formerly of Eudoxe his Daugher, who af∣terwards was wise unto Theodosius and grand Mother of this: for being, asked why he gave all his estate by will unto his two Sonnes, and nothing at all unto his Daughter; It is portion enough (answered he) if I leave her but that which fortune doth promise her: Meaning, that he observed so much virtue, beauty and merit in her, as was beyond all portions he could give her.
But to return unto my discourse: Genserick had no sooner left Eudoxe alone, but by fortune I came in; and finding her all in tears, I wondered at so sudden a change; but when I knew the cause, I must confess, I found she had most just cause for it. Now did I begin to see clearly what the drift of Genserick was, which was before unknown unto me; but now I found all his compassion of this Princess was meerly passion, which made him wish for her recovery: she told me e∣very syllable he said unto her, and when she told me what term of time she had ta∣ken, was only to acquaint me with her misfortune, and to pray me that I would apply the best remedy I could. Madam (answered I) tomorrow I will take the honour to talk with you more particularly, and do promise you to think upon it all the night: Mean time, be of good comfort, and be assured, that if my life and blood will deliver you from these fears that afflict you, you shall not be long before you be delivered. Upon this, I went out of her chamber, and retired home, where, according to my promise, I spent all the night in thinking which way I should best serve this sage Princess; but after I had stretched my brains, and turned every stone, I could not hit upon one expedient, the execution whereof seemed possible unto me: for if I thought of getting her out of captivity by flight, I saw that we had not time enough to gain the guards, nor to furnish our selves with all things necessa∣ry for our enlargement: To divert the King from this amorous fury, I saw but little likelyhood: for very well knowing his vicious Nature, I know that nothing but death would quench his lust. To kill him, besides the enormity of the crime, and the inevitable danger that would fall upon my self, I did foresee this perhaps was not the way to deliver Eu∣doxe, since he would leave two sons, who doubtless would succeed him in his hu∣mour, as well as his Empire. Thus, not being able to invent any thing that would do her good, as soon as night was past, and her chamber door open in the morn∣ing, I went to give her an accompt of my thoughts▪ and this Princess finding what difficulties I met withal: but Olicarsis (said she) there is one remedy which you have not thought upon, and which is a very easie one. I asking then what it was, you know (replied she) what Cleopatria did before she would fall into the hand of Cesar: now since I find a great conformity between her misfortunes and mine, it is but fit I should imitate her in her violent end: she would not survive the loss of her dearest Anthony, and why should I live after the loss of my dearest Ʋrsaces, who was so infinitly dear unto my soul? Upon this, Eudoxe held her peace, shewing by her countenance that this resolution was pleasing unto her, and that she wanted not courage to execute it. And therefore I told her, that indeed this remedy was the most sure of all, but yet I did not think it fit she should have recourse unto it, until the utmost extremity: I told her, that I would first talk with Genserick, and try whether I could divert him from his vicious design, and after that, I would not be against that expedient which she had propounded unto me, but on the contrary would help her the best I could, and if need were, I would serve her as a guide through that dismal passage, and ad∣vise her rather to die then lose her reputation. I presently found, that my dis∣course did please her humour: for taking my hand, go dear Olicarsis (said she unto me) the most generous person alive; go, and if you can bend the soul of yonder Tyrant do: Remember what you have promised unto me; and be assu∣red that I will die a Princess. Upon this compassion moved me to drop some tears; and having left her, I went unto Genserick. I was no sooner out of the chamber door, but a young man whose face I knew, asked to speak with Eudoxe from Thrasimond, and as soon as he was brought into the chamber, he kneeled down upon the ground: and having told her that he came from his Master, to desire leave that he might deliver a message unto the young Eudoxe her daughter, the Princess did presently consent unto it; and to give him the fairer oportunity, she retired into her closset, leaving none with her but Placidia. The young man whom Thrasimond had trusted with his life, did presently take a Letter out of his pocket, Madam (said he unto her) here is a pledge of those promises which my Master made yesterday unto you: by which
you will find, in what state his soul is, since you did wound it. At this the young Princess smiled, and not daring to take the Letter; Thrasimond (said she) must excuse me if I do not receive it; but upon condition to open it in the presence of my Lady and Mother: If you think not that fit, you may carry it back, and tell him, that I do give him most humble thanks for honouring me so far at to remem∣ber me- Madam, replied the young man, Thrasimond is so much your most hum∣bly devoted servant, as he will not desire any thing, but what you shall think fit; but I beseech you let me not return till I know whether you will ordain him death or life: In saying so, he offered her the Letter, and the young Eudoxe taking it, she went with Placidia into her Mothers closset, where opening it, they read these words. THRASIMONDS Letter unto the young EUDOXE. Fairest EUDOXE, I Am most insinitly in love with you, and if my passion be not as pure and Legitimate as ever was any, then may your rigour make me the most miserable amongst men. I do know very well, that my affection is a testimony of my rashnesse; but it is also a testimony of my re∣sentment, and your merit: If you think the one worthy of punishment, I hope the other is as worthy of recompence: Thus in this uncertainty, whe∣ther you should punish or recompence, refer it unto the decision of time, which is the best Judge of all things: Punish me if I lie; and if I love you, love me again: I vow, dearest Eudoxe, I do pity your Fortune, since I became a slave as you are. The knowledge which Eudoxe had of Thrasimonds love, did put her into great hopes, imagining that she could make him do great matters: and therefore she her self came with the two young Princesses to give an answer unto this welcome messenger, and to tell him, that she received the affection of his Master, as a most high honour; that for want of paper and ink, they could not thank him any o∣ther way but by voice; and if he expected any other answer from them, they should be glad to give it unto himself, the next time he honoured them with a vi∣sit. The young man told them, that he was gone abroad and would not return till night, but as soon as he did, he would obey their commands: After this, he went out. In the mean time, as I told you before, I went unto Genserick, and falling up∣on the subject whereupon I intended to talk with him, I told him in what a sad and miserable condition I found Eudoxe after he left her: I told him also what inventions I used to make her tell me the cause of her grief; and that when I knew it, I came expresly from her, most humbly to beseech him once more not to make any attempts against her: I laid before him how angy the gods would be at such ingratitude, and that he rendred himself culpable of a most horrid crime, if after the spoils, over which she had made him triumph, he should ra∣vish away her honour. I put him in mind of the Ancestors from whom that Prin∣cesse was descended, and of such men unto whom she had the honour to be al∣lied: That it was abominable, she who is the daughter and wife of Emperours, should be treated as a slave, especially since he had never thought upon the con∣quest of Rome, if she had not invited him: I told him also, that he was behold∣ing unto her for the glory wherewith history would honour his life, and that it was not just, but shamefully, he should eclipse the luster of it, by an act. To foul and horrid: and indeed, I used all the best Rhetorick I had to perswade with
him; but in lieu of lending any ear to reason, became all rage, and mixing jea∣lousie with his fury, he began, unhappily for me, to fear that I had some thoughts to enjoy the same happinesse, over which he was resolved to triumph. This blind passion did so disorder his judgement, as without any thoughts of Eudoxes virtue, he suspected me to be guilty of that crime, from which I would have re∣claimed him; and therefore with a fury that sparkled in his eyes, he swore he would that very night have his fill either of love or revenge: and forbidding me ever to see her again, he commanded me to retire unto my own house, where my cham∣ber was to be my prison, upon pain of the greatest punishments his anger could invent. I must tell you, it was not the fear of death that made me obey him; but being resolved to give unto that wise Princess, the remedy which she intended to imploy when all things were in desperation, I went and confined my self to my chamber, hoping my captivity would not continue long, since it would end by the death of Eudoxe and my self. I no sooner came into my chamber, but I went into my closset, where I kept all those secrets and wonders in Nature, which I had been in collecting above fourty years: and because, with abundance of study, I had knowledge in all rare and admirable secrets, it was not long before I found such ingredients, as would compound a poyson so subtil, as would quickly accom∣plish my design: first I took black Agarick, which I had pounded into powder, and having incorporated it with the juice of Thapsis, I mingled an essence with it which was extracted from the leaves of Lethale, commonly called deadly Night∣shade; and the leaves of Texo, which the Gauls call, If, or Ewe: afterwards I put into it Aconite, or Wolf-bane; and of all these together, having made an extract, I put in a little scumm of the deaf Aspick: and as soon as I had put the one half of this into a little glass, I took ink and paper, and writ this note unto Eudoxe. The Note of OLICARSIS unto EVDOXE. IT is now time, Madam, to take that remedie which I have prepared against your miseries: The injustice of Genserick hath slighted my perswasions; and having involved me in your misfortunes, he hath inspired me also to die with you. This night he hath vowed to accomplish his wicked designs, by the loss of your honour, unless you prevent him by the losse of your life: Consult therefore with your courage upon it, and be assured that you never had a more glorious occasion to imploy it. All things being ready, I called a slave which waited upon me, and who used to follow me when I went to visit the Princesse: with one hand I gave him the little glass, telling him it was a Medicine which she desired of me, and indeed I did not lie: with my other hand I gave him the Note, which I pretended to be a direction how she should use it; but above all, I charged him to be very secret, and to make as much haste back as possibly he could. Be pleased to know, that because I would be out of the dinn and trouble of the people, I lodged in the most dark and private corner of the Town I could chuse; and because such places are commonly the receptacles of Thieves and Rogues, ra∣ther then students, it chanced that three or four young men that were conscious of some robberies & murders, were come for a refuge into a lodging very near mine. Justices were presently advertised of their coming, and intended to surprize them in the beginning of the night: These Thieves were stout and desperate, and by consequence terrible unto almost every one: so as to run the lesse danger, it was contrived to catch them in snares; and in order thereunto, they laid in the streets several cords, about a foot from the ground; and distant one from another about five or six paces. After this, all the neighbours were commanded to stand ready in their Arms, to fall upon them when they were caught in the
snares; The stratagem did take according to their desires: but harke I beseech you what hapned before: my slave, who as I told you, was gone upon his errand, and as fortune was, went through this street; And had not gone above twenty or thirty paces, but running very fast, his foot was catched in a snare and down fell he with his nose next the ground: now as it is naturall upon such acci∣dents to save the face with the hands as much as one can, he broke the glass in a hundred peices, and had like to have broak his neck. At the noise and out-cry which he made upon his fall, some neighbours opened their dores, who as I told you had command to fall upon those theeves and thought that it was now their time to fall on; But when they saw only the poor slave whose blood gushed out at his nose they came gently to him, and without farther enquiry whither he went would have lent him a light, to pass the street with more safty: but he who saw the cause of his voyage broken, he stood still lamenting and complaining, whilst as ill luck was, two great dogges wherewith one of the neighbours used to bait, bulls, at Publique shews, did come into the streets: and being greedy of blood, they presently began to licke that which the slave had innocently mingled with the poyson. They had not lapped with their tongues above three times, but they tumbled with their feet upwards and died imediately: at which the owner of them was so extreamly angry, that needs would he kill my slave the very same instant: and to know the cause of so suddain and strange an end, he seised upon him, and car∣ryed him to his house: where the poor slave having given him an accompt of the business wherin I imployed him he gave him the paper also, assuring himself, that it would serve for his justification. The man did quickly find out my design, and conceiving it most fit to acquaint the King, he went presently to advertise him of it. I understood since that Genserick was ready to fall down at the sight of my letter: but at last recollecting himself, and turning all his fury against me, he commanded twelve or fifteen of his guard to go imediatly to my house and seise upon me, and to put me in that prison where traytors used to be locked up: which command was presently obayed; And I being prepared to die, staying only for the return of my slave, they found my dores open, and a glass upon the table full of the same poison, which I thought Eudoxe had received. I will not tell you in what a condition I was when I saw this obstacle unto, my resolution it will suffice you know that imagining the Princesse to be dead I did exceedingly rejoice at all those tortures which I conceived were preparing for me. Thrasimond was returned from hunting a little before: and being extreamly impatient to see his Mistresse that he might know what effect his letter produced, he went unto the Palace where Eudoxe was, and telling her all the storye which you have heard, he made the Princesse think that her resolution was not unknown unto him no more then the wicked design of Genserick. Eudoxe then seeing all was discovered, and fearing least the King should that night execute what he threatned, she thought good to make use or Thrasimonds love, hoping that the honest and legitimate passion of the son would give a stop unto the burning and unlawfull lust of the Father: And indeed, she armed her eyes with all the persawsive charmes she could to move pitty: she took her hand-handkercheif, and listing it to her eyes two or three times, she began to speak unto him in this manner. Since Sir you know what intentions Genserick has upon me it is impossible but you should approve of the design which I have to prevent by my death that shamefull staine wherewith he would sully my honour and repu∣tation. Though nature had not made me the Daughter unto Theodosius: and though fortune had not twice submitted the Emperedom of the East unto me, yet it is enough that I do know what a wife and a woman does owe unto virtue, never to consent unto the loss of a thing the price whereof is beyond all value; And certainly what tiranny soever Genserick is resolved to use unto me, his passion shall still find resistance. That which his violence will not let me execute upon my own person, my rage shall attempt upon his: and perhaps he shall to his woe, find what dispair can do in the incensed spirit of an honest woman, if he be weary of her life which he has undertaken to protect: and if it anger him to hear himself
accused for violating faith: let him with all my heart take away this life with I live with sorrow: and if he will let me die gloriously and with honour, he shall see how little I will startle at death; By this, generous Thrasimond, you may per∣ceive that if there be no remedy to stop the fury of Genserick, there is no hopes of my life, or of my two Daughters whom heaven has only left me for witnesses, or rather Companions in my misfortunes. If, as our last refuge, the love which you profess unto young Eudoxe be grounded upon honour, certainly you will be her Protector, and will be ashamed to marry her, after her Mother has lost that only thing which will be a glory unto her in the match: shall it be ever recorded to future ages in history, that Genserick would glut his brutish lust upon Eudoxe the captive, and that Thrasimond, the glory of his time, stood still and would never offer to be an obstacle unto such a blacke design? Oh good Sir do not suffer such a blur to dim the story of your life: And if the young Eudoxe have any power with you, or if you have any pitty upon miserable persons, let me execute what Olicarsis had prepared for me; And good Sir, let not that mans innocence bear the blame of that crime which I only committed: it was I who forced him to prepare that poison: and his feares only, that I would attempt upon the person of the King, made him consent unto it. Now Sir if for any particular interest you may have in my life, you do intend to hinder my death turn, if it be possible, the mind of Genserick I conjure you; I do conjure you unto it even, by Eudoxe if you love her, by these teares which I drop at the memorie of my miseryes; by your self: and by these armes which I fixe about your knees, which I will never let go untill you promise what I implore from you. In saying so, she fell down at the feet of Thrasimond, and clasped about the leggs of that Prince with so much strength as he was not able to rise so soon as he would: at this, he was so milted into pity, and Eudoxes desires to preserve her honour did please him so well, that his love encreased, and made him think that no greater advantage could be unto his for∣tune then to marry the Daughter of so virtuous a Mother; Besides this, the glory to see at his feet a Princess whom so many millions of people had obeyed, did so pleasingly flatter him that from thence forward he resolved to use his very utmost endeavours for her delivery out of those paines which her feares had infused into her: and therefore unloosing Eudoxes armes as well as he could, he presently kneeled down upon the ground, and helping her up, Madam (said he unto her) hope well in the goodness of heaven and in my love: Genserick shall joyn my death unto yours; or if his pity preserve me, his passion shall never hurt you. Upon this, he left her to go unto the King: but he found him not in the Castle: for that Barbarian having no thoughts in his mind but the ruine of Eu∣doxe, and fearing that by the accident which hapned the death of that Princesse would be some obstacle unto his desires, he resolved to prevent it: and therefore when night came he took two or three eunuchs with him, and by a backe dore, went into the Palace where Eudoxe was detained. As soon as Thrasimond was gone out, by fortune the Princesse had shut her Chamber dore, so as Genserick was constrained to knock: and Eudoxe knowing his voice, also hearing the eu∣nuchs murmure, she doubted what design brought him thither: seeing her self out of all meanes then to defend her self, she put the table and all she could lay her hands upon, against the dore: hoping perhaps Thrasimond would come to her releif. But when she had a while sustained this seige wherin the passion of Gense∣rick warred against the virtue of Eudoxe: she resolved upon a most generous de∣sign for a woman. She with the help of her two daughters, took all the mattes that were under their beds, and other combustible things and heaping them to∣geather in the midst of the Chamber, she took two lighted candles, and setting them a fire: dear flames (said she in a loud voice) be more pure then those of Genserick, revenge upon me the pernitious designes of that Barbarian and be as mercylesse unto him as he is unto me: she pronounced these words so loud and distinctly that the King heard every sillable: so as finding thereby the intention of the Princesse, and fearing some misfortune should follow, he and his eunuchs redoubled their strength and at last broke upon the dore: but the fire being kind∣led
and the smoke being inclosed striving for a passage, it found it at the opening of the door, and that with such violence, as two of those that were at the door were choaked. Genserick, surprized at this accident, began to flie, and never thinking of any way to quench this fire, only thought of saving himself. But Thrasimond, after a long search after the King, and coming again to the place where Eudoxe was, he no sooner saw her Pallace on fire; but he presently thought it an effect of that Princesse her courage, or of the revenge of Genserick. And because he saw those flames were like to devour all the sweet hopes he had of en∣joying his Mistresse, he was two or three times ready to cast himself also into the flame; yet desiring first to know all particulars of the truth, he began to enquire of all he met, but none could tell him any thing more, then that Eudoxe her self used this extremity to free her self from servitude. In the mean while Vrsaces and Olimbres, unto whom the Councel of six hun∣dred had refused the poison, imbarquing at the Port of the Massilians, and flat∣tered (as I understood since) with a thousand sweet hopes which an Astrologer had infused into them, they set forward: But as heaven took delight in putting every day new obstacles unto their prosperity, it suffered them to fall into the hands of a Pirate, who in taking away their liberty, took away all the content∣ments which were promised unto them. The name of this Pirate was Cloroha∣lantes, vulgarly called the bloody Pirate; because, besides his being a Native Barbarian, and banished Africa for a thousand crimes committed by him, he had made a solemn vow, never to pardon any whom Fortune made his slaves. He pulled out the eyes of some, cut off the noses, ears, and tongues of others: thus took he delight in torturing men. Sometimes when he was enraged he would pull out the hearts of some, and others he would sacrifice; sometimes unto Nep∣tune, and sometimes unto Mercury, as the god of theft. His retreat was most commonly into the Isle of great Brittany, where he found many that was sutable to his own humour, and by that means found a more safe refuge. So as he scour∣ed up and fro the Ocean, and often passing the straits of Gibralter, otherwise cal∣led high Earth, he fell into the Mediterranean Sea, and most insolently roved about the Coasts of Spain. This was the Barbarian that met with the ship wherein Vrsaces & Olimbres were, and in a short time borded her: But those two Cavaliers who ne∣ver used to be startled at any dangers, they seized each of them upon a sword and buckler, inciting some Merchants to defend themselves, advanced themselves to hinder any from leaping into their ship: Some Marriners, to whom the name and trade of Pirats were odious, seeing an inevitable death had surrounded them, them, they resolved to sell their lives at as dear and noble a rate as they could: So as seizing upon Arms, and joyning themselves unto Vrsaces and Olimbres, there began a most sharp dispute. When they first began Clorohalantes did nothing but laugh, seeing the inequality of forces: But when by the valour of his ene∣mies he saw many of his men dead, he began to be very angry, and arming him∣self, he himself would needs become a combatant. At the sight of their Com∣mander, all those who followed his Fortune assumed fresh forces, and having him for their guide, did leap into the ship where Vrsaces and Olimbres did so bravely dispute for their lives, as every blow that fell from their Arms were mortal unto all upon whom they light. But not to insist upon every particular, it will suffice you know that Clorohalantes, seeing what little advantage his side got, he com∣manded that they should at the same time charge on in the Poup: which was done accordingly, and so sharply, that those which defended themselves, not being a∣ble to withstand the over numerosity of their enemies, they let them have such free accesse▪ as in lesse then a quarter of an hour they were masters of the ship; and the sooner because Vrsaces and Olimbres, after a long resistance, fell at the last one by the other, and were exceedingly weak with loss of abundance of blood. Clorohalantes more proud of this victory then of any he ever got before, he quite forgot the price at which he bought it; but still he retained in his memory the brave resistance which Olimbres made, and a slave that fought next him. There∣fore he caused them to be brought into his ship, and commanded their wounds to
be dressed, being resolved to make a most solemn sacrifice of them as of the most glorious prey that ever he got since he knew what belonged unto Arms or Sea. In order to this design he turned sail towards great Brittain, and seeing he had a very favourable wind, he would needs by way of diversion know, who those were, which by their valour had killed so many of his men. And therefore as soon as Ʋrsaces and Olimbres, had recovered themselves a little better, they were brought before this Pirate, who addressing himself unto Olimbres, as unto him who seemed to be the Master, he asked him who he was, and from whence he came? Clorohalantes (said Olimbres unto him, with a deportment that shewed the generosity of his spirit) I am a Cavalier and a Patrician of Rome: My name is Olimbres; and if thou wilt know by what Fortune I am become thy slave, then know, that to save the life of a friend, I did not follow Genserick, when loadned with the spoils of Rome, he returned into Africa; Since that, finding no felici∣ty in life, many considerations moved me to seek out for death; and in order to that, I went to demand poison from the councel of six hundred, which being de∣nied me, I was constrained to consult with an Oracle, the answer whereof made me wend my course towards Africa: So I did, imbarquing my self in this ship, o∣ver which thy Arms hath triumphed, and submitted me unto thy will: As for this slave, whom thou seest with me, I do not know his Fortune, nor what he is: for having bought him but a while since, I have no knowledge of him; only I begin to think, by the fight which he hath made with me, that his courage and affection deserves a better Fate then that which is fallen upon him. This was all that Olimbres said unto him, and Clorohalantes remembring that he had formerly heard of the name: Was it not you (said he) whom Eudoxe sent unto the King of the Vandals to solicite him to deliver her from the Tyran∣ny of Maximus? Olimbres answering that it was, the Pirate smiled, and biting his fingers ends: 'Tis very well (said he) the innocent shall once suffer for the culpable. In saying so, he caused them to be carried away, and commanded their wounds should be carefully dressed: from hence forward, he resolved to be revenged on the person of this Cavalier, for all the injuries that he had receiv∣ed from Genserick; and imagining that he should do an extream displeasure unto that barbarous King, if he shewed his hatred upon this occasion, he resolved to make Olimbres suffer all the infamous tortures he could invent: And to begin his affliction betimes, he sent him word what he was to expect: which message O∣limbres received without the least dismay; but fearing what would become of Vr∣saces, he began to make such sad complaints, that even Clorohalantes himself, though a Barbarian, could not hear them without compassion. Olimbres knew, that but for him, the life of his friend had never been exposed unto so many mis∣fortunes: So as finding himself culpable of all the miseries which Vrsaces suffer∣ed, and of those which were menaced, he could not chuse but curse the very day of his birth. Olimbres prepared himself for the worst, he did all that possibly he could to comfort himself in this thought, that the last minute of his life would be the most glorious unto him, since it gave him a means to make it appear unto what degree his affection was arrived. Thus they continued some dayes; during which, their wounds healed so fast, as they were perfectly cured: and as if heaven were weary with tormenting them with any longer miseries, a tempest arose at Sea, and so violent it was, that the ships of Clorohalantes, being forced to yield unto the violence of the storm, they were driven by the wind and we then amongst the rest of those ships which Gen∣serick had loadned with the plunder of Rome, and which lying at Anchor for a favourable wind: Then Clorohalantes, because he would not fall into the hands of Genserick he killed himself: This unlookt for deliverance was an Omen of good Fortune unto Vrsaces and Olimbres, who being released from their fetters, longed to embrace each other; but they forbore, lest their Caresses should too much undisguise them and make them known. It was not long before they had a wind according to their wish so presently after, they came within sight of the Towers in Carthage; and because he who commanded in chief would send unto
Genserick, not only the news of their arrivall, but also of taking and defeat of Clorohalantes, Olimbres as being the most undeniable witness of it, was put upon this commission, he went therefore into a cockboate, and taking Vrsaces, and some other with him, he made towards the port in the beginning of the night: and whem they came near they perceived some little lights like unto starres in the Firmament which made them conceive they were very near the Town, the sweet hopes of seeing Eudoxe and Placidia, filled Vrsaces, and Olimbres with so great a joy, that they were even transported: and whilst they were consulting how they should carry themselves in this busines they presently perceived a great smoak, in which appeared many great flashes of fire, which sometimes broke out into flames, which seemed to proceed from some furious conflagration. This made them fixe their looks upon that deplorable object: and as they drew near they saw the fire greater, and sometimes they heard a confused murmure of many voices togeather, they could not chuse but greive to see the fury of this insatiable element, and though they did not know that they themselves were more interested in the misfortune then any, for it was the same fire which Eudoxe kindled to avoid the violence of Genserick, yet were they much troubled at it. They were no sooner come to the port, but Olimbres making himself known, they ran presently to acquaint the King: In the mean while enquiring only out of curiosity, the cause of that fire, he presently understood by the common bruit of the Town, that the fire was in the place where Eudoxe, and her daughters were detained, that it was almost impossible they should escape, and that consequently they were perish∣ed in the flames: and that it was generally beleived Eudoxe her self did set the house on fire, to free her self from captivity. At this sad news Vsraces fell down: and Olimbres stood so confused, that it was long before he was able to open his mouth; but to spend no time in needless relation of their sorrowes, since you may easily imagine them let me only tell you, that after many a complaint against heaven for preserving them so oft from severall perills, they accused the gods of injustice, as if they had preserved them from a lesser burthen of miseryes to en∣dure a greater. At last, hindring each other from making any attempts upon their persons, they intended to return unto the Massilians assuring themselves that now they had such good reasons to die, as it was impossible the poison should be denied them. They had no sooner fixed themselves upon this course but Thrasimond came unto the place where Olimbres was: and because those who went to carry the news of Olimbres arivall, could not speak with the Father, they were constrained to make their addresses unto the son: and because Olimbres in his African voyage had gotten the affectionate freindship of that Prince, Thrasimond went with joy to receive him; They had no sooner embraced each other, but Thrasimond began first to speak: dear Olimbres (said he in a loud voice) you are arrived at a time wherin you will find all our court in great disorder. If I be not mistaken (an∣swered the sad Olimbres) I do know the principall cause, and certainly, after the death of three such fair Princesses, joy were far out of season, Olimbres could not chuse but send forth a most profound sigh as he said so: and Thrasimond to con∣ceal his joyes whispered that Cavelier in the ear; The misfortune (said he unto him) is nothing so great as is beleived: upon this taking him by the arme he car∣ried backe into the boate, wherin none was but Ʋrsaces who was striving betwixt life and death: and causing all the men to stand at a distance and candles to be taken away, when he thought none could hear but Olimbres, he began this dis∣course. Dear freind (said he unto him) I must make two very particular con∣fessions unto you; by the one I must confesse my own rashnesse, and by the other, my Fathers shame: upon this, he related unto him, how he was in love with the young Eudoxe, and how she received him: afterwards he related the vio∣lence which Genserick used towards Eudoxe, the Mother; He told him of my im∣prisonment by reason of the poison which I had prepared for her: at last he told him of all the attempts which the King had made upon the Chamber of that Prin∣cesse, and how she set it on fire: after this; Now dear Olimbres (continued he) you must know, that Eudoxe had no sooner kindled the fire, not any horrors of
death, but sorrowes to be a cause of her two Daughters death did so far enter into her soul, as she could not chuse but retire her self into another Chamber where the two Princesses lay; Then shutting the door, and remembring the affection which I had professed, she began to think, that perhaps if she could escape this danger, Genserick would leave pursuing her or that I would find out some way to stop him. This consideration made her consent not to die yet: so as opening the window towards the garden, by fortune she espied at her feet two sheets▪ which she tyed togeather, and by them she first let down Eudoxe, next Placidia, and lastly her self; Olimbres having no patience: How? (said he, and interrupted) is not Eudoxe dead? she is not (answered Thrasimond) she ran unto a little house in the corner of the garden belonging to the Gardiner, whom she awaked, (for as you know, those kind of men go to bed betimes) she made him open the door, and as soon as she was entred: freind (said she unto him) the palace is all on fire. Upon this the Gardiner who by reason of the darkness did not know Eudoxe, he went out, and was not long before he saw the flames flash out of the Chamber from whence the Princesses came; then coming in again in a great amase, good gods (said he) what will become of the fair prisoners? They are in a place (an∣swered Eudoxe) where their lives do depend upon thee; and if thou wilt preserve them, I will make thee happy for ever. Upon this, she caused him to light up a candle; and the poor fellow in a mighty confusion asking her what she would have him to do; all that I would have thee do (said Eudoxe) is to hide us, least some should come and surprise us; then would I have thee ran in all hast and ac∣quaint Thrasimond where we are but above all, be sure that no living soul know it but only he. The Gardiner then finding no safer place to put them in then a little cave which was near his house, their he hid them, and came to tell me what Eudoxe com∣manded. He had as much a do to get unto me, as I had to get out of the croud; for you must know Olimbres, that the town is in such a confusion, so as one could hardly know another in the disorder. But at last I followed him to his little house, upon which abundance of sparks began already to fall; which making me fear it would at length be burned I could not not give any testimones of my joy unto the Princesses: but carrying them as secretly as I could unto the house of one of my domestiques not far from thence, I gave some money to the Gardiner, and charged him upon paine of his life to be silent. Leaving them then in safty there, I returned unto the Castle to see the King, but I could not: for the horror of this accident had so terified him that he would not be seen by any. Thus was I the first that knew of your return where at I much rejoyce, and assure you, dear Olimbres, that I will continue in the same desires which I have, and ever had to love and serve you. This was the discourse of Thrasimond, which was abundance of joy unto Olimbres and I should have said it had bin the highest degree, if the joyes of Ʋr∣saces had been comparable unto his. That disguised Cavelier heard all that the Prince said, for he being behind in the boate, they took no notice of him; And his joyes to hear that his Mistresse was alive did so transport him into the other extream, as formerly he was in his miseryes and greif. Yet heaven which would preserve him for the felicity of Eudoxe, would not suffer him to die upon this ex∣cesse of delight: but following Olimbres, whom Thrasimond would needs have to lodge in the Castle, they were no sooner alone, but they began to embrace each other, and spent almost all the night in relating their adventures. The next morning Genserick heard of the return, and of his shippes, and of Olimbres but the memory of this late dismall accident, would not suffer him to be sensible of those joyes which at another time, he had resented. Yet he welcomed Olimbres as well as he could: and desiring to hide from posterity the true cause of Eudoxes death, he began to invent, all the excuses he could devise to palliate that crime which he had committed. Olimbres seemed to beleive all the King said, and fetching a hundred dissembled sighes for the losse of these three Princesses, he observed, that the memory of this sad tragedy had infused some repentance into the King: and indeed, he greived so extreamly at it, as one might read repen∣tant sorrow in his eyes: and to leave some testimony of that esteem which he had
of Eudoxe, though a captive, he caused her corps to be searched amongst the reliques of the combustion. They found the bodies of the three Eunuches which the flame had smothered, but so consumed as none of them retaining any form, they were taken for the corpses of the Princesse, and her two daughters; Gense∣rick he prepared a most statly monument to be erected for them, and command∣ing them to be put into coffins of silver he also gave orders they should be very carefully guarden. In the mean Thrasimond who feared that Eudoxe was not safe enough in the Town, he caused her to be carried unto a very fair house which he had in the Countrey, not far from Carthage. As soon as conveniently he could, he car∣ryed Olimbres thither also, under a pretence of diverting him: but as soon as Eudoxe saw him, she was so surprised as she fell into a swond, yet at last reco∣vering, and desiring to speak with him in private, she carried him into another chamber, leaving Thrasimond with the young Eudoxe and Placidia. As soon as she was alone with Olimbres, she called into her memory all the services of Vrsa∣ces, and the thoughts of his death did so afflict her, that her teares, and her sighes would not of a long time let her tongue do its office. At last, as soon as she could speak, well Olimbres (said she unto him) what do you think of my fortune? Am I not extreamly miserable that whether I would or no, must live after the loss of your freind? In saying so, her voice was lost again, amongst her sighes, and teares, and Olimbres beginning to speak, Madam, answered he, since heaven has so ordained it, you are infinitly to be commended, for conforming your will unto it: and perhaps in recompence, it will one day deliver you from the me∣mory of that sad accident. Alas (replied Eudoxe) it will rather to punish me: for know Olimbres, that let this memory bring me what miseryes, and affliction it will, I had rather die then not preserve it. But since all my teares cannot call Vrsaces backe, good Olimbres acquaint me with the particulars of your voyage, and I shall relate my misfortunes unto you. Madam (said the Cavelier) Prince Thrasimond has made me acquainted with most of your affaires: and a in relation to my self I shall quickly satisfy your curiosity. Then he told her of the last freind∣ly office, which he seemed to have done unto Vrsaces, and afterwards told her how he was taken captive by Clorohalantes: then how the counsell of sixe hun∣dred had denied him poyson; how he was delivered and lastly how he came to Carthage, without any other trayn but a slave which he bought to bestow upon her. What soever it be (said Eudoxe) that comes from the hand of Olimbres, I shall hold it in a most particular esteem: but if you will bestow him upon me it shall be upon a condition that I shall give him his liberty. Madam, (said Olim∣bres) I do not think that he would have it: upon this he went out to look for Vrsaces, who was in such impatience to her who had the disposition of his life, as his soul was sensible of all extraordinary motions; At last, being swelled with love, with fear, and with respect, he was brought into the presence of Eudoxe: as soon as he entred into her chamber he cast himself at her feet; Then the Prin∣cesse laying her hand upon his head, I do take you for mine (said she unto him) since Olimbres will have it so, and will from hence forward take away the name of slave, and make you free. Upon this, she commanded him to rise: Madam, (said Vrsaces) another would give you thanks for this favour; But truly I think no felicity comparable unto my servitude: I told you (replied Olimbres) that he would not take the liberty which you would give him: In saying so, he cast his eyes upon the Princesse, and observed her to change collour: and indeed, at the voice of Vrsaces all her blood came into her face, and stepping back to looke upon him, Vrsaces rose up: and Eudoxe in a strange surprise. Good gods (said she) is not this Vrsaces whom I see? It is he Madam, (answered Vrsaces, and went unto her) who is come to seek from you that death which both gods, and men have denied unto: Oh my dear Vrsaces (cryed out Eudoxe) upon this she took him about the neck and for a while remained in an extasie with in his armes. At last, being recollected, Vrsaces rendred her an accompt of all the accidents that had hapned unto him: and after that Olimbres beginning to speak Madam (said he unto her) first, the habit which Vrsaces weares do sute well with the
condition wherin his soul is to you wards: secondly I thought it the best way, to hide him from the knowledge of Genserick for he knows it was that Cavelier who killed Maximus, and having committed almost the same fault against you, he has reason to fear the like punishment; and therefore I conceive it best to conceale your joyes, to the end Thrasimond, who perhaps being like unto his Father, may not discover his disguisement. Eudoxe did approve of Olimbres counsell: so as after she had given thanks unto the gods for the preservation and return of Vrsaces, she went unto Thrasimond, who after many testimonies of joy at the favours which he received from his Mistresse, told Olimbres it was time to return unto Carthage, to see in what humour Genserick was. Ʋrsaces, yet he stayed with Eudoxe; but I will not mention those sweet en¦tertainments which they had together: for at the same time Genserick would be revenged upon me for all the displeasures which he resented by the pretended death of Eudoxe; and had not Thrasimond told him, that since Olicarsis had saved his life, he could do no less then do the like for him, I verily believe he had put me to some ignominious death. Olimbres continued some dayes at Court, and had no other contentment but what he received from the friendship of Thrasimond and Placidia, whom he visi∣ted very often under the pretence of waiting upon the Prince a hunting; for the King grieved so extreamly at the memory of that Fatal fire, as he could not look upon any with a kind aspect. He is, as I told you before, of a nature barbarous enough, and yet he did much value his honour: so as knowing how this last acti∣on of his would stain it, he grieved beyond measure, and did all that possibly he could to stifle the memory of it. Olimbres then seeing he could not be any more serviceable unto Eudoxe, he designed to return unto Marcian, hoping the authority of that Emperour might procure the liberty of this Princesse: But Thrasimond who had other thoughts, when Olimbres did communicate his intention to him, I would have you seem (said he unto Olimbres) as if you did take your leave of the King, that you may so try his affection unto you; but I would not have you leave me, for I shall im∣ploy you in the service of Eudoxe. Olimbres promising to obey all his com∣mands, he went unto Genserick, and most humbly besought him for leave to re∣turn, since he had no service to command him there: assuring him that he should think himself infinitly honoured in the continuance of his friendship. The King, who loved this Cavalier well; and knew that the death of Placidia who was pro∣mised unto him, had extreamly offended him; he resolved not to let him go with∣out some satisfaction, and therefore desired him, not to think of his departure for some certain dayes, after which he should be at liberty to do what he pleased. Olimbres was contented to stay as long as the King commanded, and the King, communicating unto Thrasimond his design unto Olimbres, he asked him what he should do to oblige that Cavalier: The Prince propounded several wayes, and was very glad to find the Kings affection beyond his hopes: He acquainted Olim∣bres with it, and told him, that if he could but comply handsomly with that op∣portunity, he might dispose Genserick unto what he would. Olimbres even ra∣vished at this, beseeched him to negotiate so with the King, as to get him to go unto the house where Eudoxe was; and told him that the only expedient was to invite him unto a dinner in that place, which indeed was the finest seat about all Car∣thage: Thrasimond thought this no hard matter to do, and therefore making the proposition unto the King, they appointed a day for it. In the interim the Cavalier acquainted Eudoxe with his resolution, and though she did find some difficulty in it, yet she did approve on't, being assured of Vr∣saces his love, of Thrasimonds promises, and Olimbres his fidelity. The day ap∣pointed being come, Genserick, Thrasimond, Olimbres, and many others of the best rank in all Carthage, went betimes in the morning unto the house where the Prince had ordered the Tables in the dining room, to be near unto the cham∣ber of the Princesses. And there, as soon as dinner was done, Olimbres addres∣sing himself unto the King, did beg that leave which before he had asked: Gen∣serick then in a most affectionate manner, dear Olimbres (said he unto him) I do
find your desires so just and reasonable, as I should be extreamly ashamed to op∣pose them any longer. 'Tis true I am very sorry that I have not given any testi∣mony of that affection which I bear unto you; but till occasions fall out that I may, I beseech you accept of my good intentions, and be assured, that I would do any thing which would be contentment unto you. Sir, replied Olimbres, after many thanks, you may if you please do two high favours for me in one moment, and did I not fear denial, I should assume so much boldnesse as to ask them of you. Upon this, the King making a solemn vow not to deny him any thing he would ask, Olimbres kneeled down upon the ground, Sir (said he) since it is your Royal pleasure to say so, I do ask of you the liberty of Eudoxe and Olicar∣sis. In saying so, Thrasimond opened the chamber door where the Princesse was trembling with her two daughters: and the King surprized at an accident so little expected, stood a while and knew not what he did. At last, being moved at the tears of Eudoxe, who came presently and cast her self at his feet, having Placi∣dia in one hand, and her sister in the other, he granted the request of Olimbres, and promised for the future to treat her as a Princess, not as a slave. Thrasimond, who would also make use of his time, he beseeched Genserick to give him the young Eudoxe for his wife; and the King knowing what advantages this would be unto him, did consent unto it. Amidst this common joy, I was not forgotten, for Genserick at that very instant sent for me; but I, who knew I was never to go out of prison, until I went to execution, I confesse that I had so prepared my self for death, as I thought they only jested with me: At last my own eyes cleared me all those suspicions: for being brought into the Kings presence▪ there I saw Eu∣doxe at liberty, and received a pardon for my life. The news of this accident was quickly spred all over the Town, and the Prin∣cesses were waited upon unto their lodgings with all usual magnificence. Vrsaces was the only one unsatisfied, as fearing the King would fall into his passionate fits again; but presently after, he found by the King repentant tears, that he would never make more attempts against the chastity of Eudoxe, but had quenched his flames with tears, and indeed a little while after, he sent her back to Constanti∣nople, with her two Daughters, in a most honourable Equipage: unto which she was no sooner come, but Vrsaces having married Eudoxe in great solemnity, he received that happiness which Fortune had made him pay so dear for: And where Olimbres, by the command of Marcian, and consent of Eudoxe, he found his long'd for happinesse in the arms of Placidia, as a reward of his fi∣delity. The great Olicarsis had no sooner ended his discourse, but Phillis entred, yet so out of breath, that she astonished all the company, especially Adamas and Belinde, who feared extreamly that she brought them some ill news concerning Astrea, Diana, and Alexis: therefore the Druide, who thought it best, that if any disaster had hapned, not to acquaint Belinde with it upon such a sudden, he rose up and went to meet her: and Phillis no sooner was come up to him, but with extream amazement, O Father (said she unto him) I can tell you the strangest accident, that ever was heard or seen: Astrea and Diana are found; they are both asleep close by the Fountain of Loves verity. Abundance of Shep∣herds & Shepherdesses stand looking upon them, but not one has so much courage as to go near them. For (and this is the greatest wonder) the two Unicorns lie close by them, with their heads upon the knees of my companions: they grinn and roar so terribly at any that offer to come near them, that not a Shepherd dares attempt it. This did extreamly astonish the Druide; for he plainly saw the design of the two Shepherdesses, but that which most troubled him was, his fears that they were dead already; and that none daring to come nearer them, it was credible they all thought them so: yet being unwilling to tell Belinde what he thought, he went unto her, and told her what Phillis had seen: Belinde rose up presently, and in her excess of joy, forgetting her duty unto Rosanira and Galathea, she went out of the Gallery, intending to run unto the place where she thought Di∣ana was; but Adamas would not suffer her; be not so hasty (sage Belinde, said
he unto her) you need not take the pains of going to them, for we will send some others: Pardon me, answered Belinde, I must not defer it one minute lon∣ger: I cannot live, if I do not immediatly see her, and since Phillis has told me where she is, if you love me let me go unto her and bring her back. My inten∣tion, Madam (answered the Druide) is not to hinder you from seeing her, but on the contrary, I will make as much haste as you: yet since Phillis does know so well where these two Shepherdesses are, let her be my guide, and never trouble your self, for I will take upon me the charge of bringing her back. However, Father, said Galathea, do not refuse our company, for it is a sight so remarkable, as all of us will be glad to be spectatours of it. Surely (said Belinde, when she saw Adamas consenting unto it) I am she that has most interest in these women, and why should not I also see them? and believe it I must, for I had rather in∣cur your displeasure, in disobeying you, then not see them in what place soever they be. Adamas would willingly have disswaded her, as thinking still that these fair ones were not in such a condition as would give her any contentment: but all his argu∣ments being not so prevalent as the love and impatiency of Belinde, it was resol∣ved upon, that she would make one of the company. They set forward then al∣together: and the Druide asking Phillis, how, and in what manner, Astrea and Diana were found, you must know Father (answered she) that this morning we all parted, every one taking a several way as we did yesterday; Licidas he took towards the Fountain, I told him also which way I would go, and in case any of us heard any news of them, we agreed to meet all at noon, at the same place where we met yesterday, which was by the side of the river Lignon: I came un∣to the rendezvous before him, for to tell you truly I began to despair in my quest: After I had been there a while, I saw him coming a great pace towards me, but as sad as he was in the morning when we parted: As soon as he was come unto me: Ah Phillis (said he very sadly) if you would see Astrea and Diana, they are not far from hence: I saw them close by one another fast asleep: Then I interrupt∣ing him, have you seen them? (said I in a great amazement) for god sake, good Lycidas conduct me to them, and make no more delay: Indeed (answered he) I did see them, and will let you see them also; but if you love me, do not oblige me to speak unto them, or go near them: for if I do, it will prove as fatal unto me as death it self. You think (said I unto him) that Astrea is angry with you; but you may very well be satisfied, since she has asked you pardon: Alas, alas, replied the Shepherd, words are never able to repair that injury which I received from her in the person of my brother: whilst we were thus talking, we came nearer; and as soon as he shewed me the place where my companions were, or at the least where he left them: Do you see yonder old Altar (said he unto me) which time hath demolished? They do lie at the feet of those stairs upon which it is erected: I did see the place to which he pointed with his finger; but being unwilling he should leave me, I still went on, and seemed as if I did not see it. At last, when I began to perceive Astrea and Diana, me thinks (said I unto him) that I do see something; but it is so confusedly, as if you do not go along with me, I shall hardly hit the way unto them: Alas Phillis (answered he) why will you be any cause of so much sorrows unto me? upon this looking up, and seeing we were nearer then he thought: unless you be blind (said he) you cannot miss the place where they are: as he said so, I observed that he looked upon them very attentively, but (said he) I see something there, which was not there when I left them; perhaps (said I) it is Alexis: This hope made us go something nearer, but when we were within fourty or fifty paces, Licidas made a sudden stop. Mi∣stress (said he) for gods sake go no further, for I see two fierce beasts with them, and if I be not mistaken, they are the Unicorns which use to guard the Fountain of verity in Love. I must needs confess Father, that a secret chill fear glided through all my veins; and I was glad that at the very same instant, Hylas and A∣drastes appeared in sight: for under pretence of going to advertise them of this Novelty, I got further off from their fury; but yet, taking a little courage, I returned with them, and finding my self more strong in their company, I looked
more confidently upon my companions: I saw them in the same condition as Li∣cidas told me, to wit, lying at the stairs foot of that Altar: Moreover, I ob∣served they embraced each other, and the two Unicorns leaned their heads upon them. I could have wished with all my heart, that these two cruel creatures had stood in as much fear of me, as I did of them, that we might have had more free access unto my companions; but they would not stir from those fair Shepherdesses, and there was not a Shepherd that durst stir a step nearer them. Seeing then, that my stay there would not at all advantage them, I thought best to come, and ac∣quaint you, and in comming, I met Celidea, Thamires Stlla, Dois, and severall others, whom I told where they might be witnesses of this adventure: Alas alas (said Adamas) this is a most sad adventure: for Astrea who feares the world has an ill opinion of her virtue, by reason of Celadons disguisement, will have this way to be a tryall of her purity: because it is the property of those beasts never to come near any have been once poluted. Thus all the Company talked as they went, whilst at the same time Alexis and Silvander were in their way to execute that enterprise which they resolved upon the day before: They awaked not so soon as they desired: for they feared that if the Sun were up they should meet some who would be obstacles unto their design; yet being fully resolved to go on through all difficulties, and thinking upon nothing but this last munite which would free them from all the Tyrannies of fortune, they went so fast that they came in a very short time unto the Altar where Astrea, and Diana lay asleep; Alexis was the first that espied them, and being suprised at this encounter she made a sudden stop: Silvander who obser∣ved her astonishment, and asking her the cause; Alas dear freind (answered Alexis) would not you be a most supprised person, if as Astrea does present her self before me, Diana should once more honour you with a veiw of her fair face? Indeed I should (said Silvander) but that were a happiness, which is so far beyond my hopes, as I think it impossible to be. Yet, replied Alexis, if you turn but your eye towards yonder altar, which is a little raised up above the le∣vell of the plain, and which is not far distant from us, you shall see with Astrea a shepherdess to whom you wish no ill. Silvander then looking that way, and seeing Diana, his colour went, and came into his face two or three times; and in this amazement being hardly able to speak: Oh heavens (cryed he out) oh Diana? Upon this, making more hast towards them, they came so near those shepherdesses that they could discern every feature in their faces, and Alexis, who fell down at the feet of Astrea, cruell fair one (said he in a low voice, and with a deep sigh, heaven is unjust to grant unto you so much rest after you have by your hatred cause myne to cease. And you Diana (said Silvander unto her) do you come unto this alter to thank the gods for giving you the possession of Paris? or do you come to complain against them for ravishing you from the in∣violable love of Silvander? after this, both being silent a while; But fair Astrea (replied Alexis) who maugre all your rigours, is most dear unto me; cannot I read in those fair eyes, the cause your comming hither? Oh sleep, be not thou as cruell unto me, as thou art sweet unto this in humain fair one: Oh thou god of rest and comfort, let her look once upon me, before I die; But (continued she, and reprehended her self) I have no reason to invoke thee, since the cruelty of Astrea shews me, that Divinities themselves are sometimes insensible. Fairest Diana (said Silvander, and gently kissed her fair hands) receive these few teares, which I now drop upon the Lillies of your hand as the last testi∣mony of your shepherds love: Receive oh ye fairest lips this sad, and deplorable adieu: and if it be possible my passion can inspire any thing into your soul, let not my name die in your memory. In saying so be adventured to kisse her, and yet she did not waken: for she had been so long without sleep, and was so very weary, as she slept most soundly; Alexis on her side, she stole the same favour from the ruby lips of Astrea, and afterwards, looking upon Silvander, but shepherd (said he unto him) unto whom are we debtors for these favours, but to their insensibility? Let us retreat Silvander, and not mixe such sweets with so many bitters which we use to tast, let us leave these beauties whom we have so reli∣giously
adored unto their rest, and not stay till they shall awake, and condemn this last action of our lives, of too much presumption; Let us go Silvander whither our destinies do call us: come on, answered Silvander, let us go and die; But (said he before he went, and kissed the hand of Diana) adieu, the fairest that ever lived upon the bankes of Lignon; adieu Diana: adieu the object of my love, and the cause of my torments. Upon this he rose up, and heard Alexis say: and thou the fairest, and most inhumane that ever was, dear Astrea, if it happen that the fury of the Lyons, and Unicornes do leave so much reliques of me as may let you know my deplorable, and generous end; know also that my love made choise of this kind of death, and your rigour was the cause of it; I do not desire from heaven any revenge upon your cruelty; but I beseech the gods to make my innocency, and fidelity to known unto you, as you may never doubt but that as I have been the most faithfull of all lovers, so you have been the most cruell of all Mistresses; in saying so she rose up, and taking Silvander by the hand; they went both togeather towards the fountain. This encounter passed whilst Lycidas went to advertise Phillis of the place where he had found the shepherdesses, and before they returned Alexis, and Silvander were got so near the inchanted fountain that the two Unicornes which first espied them, left the Lyons to guard it, and came straight towards them. Alexis who looked for nothing but death, stood still: and Silvander who looked for no less, did open his armes to receive that mortall wound which would take him away from the number of men, but the Unicornes, which came most furious towards them, passed by, and did them no harm. This accident which was far beyond their hopes did extreamly astonish them: but desiring to know what would be the issue, they turned about, and looked after them. They saw them go gently towards Diana, and Astrea, and after they had gazed a while upon the ground, they layed themselves down upon the ground, and leaned their heades upon those shepherdesses: at first they feared that these Animals would have done them some injury, and therefore they advanced to releive them: yet as soon as they saw them laid down, they stopt, and admired to see so much sweet∣ness from them as in nature they might well expect most cruelty. They were in these considerations when they saw Lycidas, and Phillis com∣ming: so as fearing to be perceived they laid them down upon the groud, and hiding themselves behind a little bush, observed a while their actions, and asto∣nishment: at last, when they saw Phillis leave Lycidas, a while after espied Hy∣las and Adrastes, and all the rest unto whom that shepherdess had told the newes of finding Astrea, and Diana. Alexis then seeing a great number of persons assembling themselves togeather, he turned towards Silvander: shepherd (said he unto him) pray go you unto that good company: you had much better be with them then with me whose Company is so contageous as does infect all that are with me, with a desire of ding. Your Company (answered Silvander) does not produce the same effects in me, since on the contrary I may say it has hindred me, or at least deferred my death; For certainly had not you diverted me yesterday from my resolution, I should ere this have paid that tribute which I owe unto nature. But as for you Celadon (continued he) why should you so will∣fully fly from the looks of your fair shepherdess? though Astrea was angry with you, yet it was only out of a passionate fit which she could not resist, and since it was so violent as could not last long; Follow my advice go, and appease the spirit of that fair shepherdess, who doubtless is in extream impatience to know what is become of you: you will thereby oblige all the shepherds, and shepher∣desses in this Countrey; for I am sure there is not one who is not much interested in you eyther by blood or affection; But I, poor silly wretch I, wonder who would care whether I do live or die; First Diana: she will find a subject of incompara∣ble satisfaction by my death, because thereby she will be rid of him, whose pre∣sence will eternally accuse her, and make her appear culpable of perfidy: as for the rest of shepherds, and shepherdesses: alas why should any of them be sensi∣ble of my miseryes, since my death must needs be as indifferent unto them as my life; For not being known unto any, no my own self, not knowing what I am, why
should any make me the object of his amity? a vagabond, and a miserable wretch who has resented the very worst of fortunes malice. Your merit replied Alexis, hath supplied all those defects which you alleadge, and has given you as much esteem from all of any quality in this Countrey then if you had been descended from the most illustrious families in all Forrests, No no, assure your self Silvander, your death would be infinitly lamented by all, and every one will lament your loss: as losing the glory of the Province in losing you who are the most perfectly accomplished shepherd in it: so as your will in exposing your self unto the fury of the Lyons is not just: because you do not only offend the gods, by distroying their most perfect work, but also men, by ravishing from them the rarest example of virtue they ever had. Follow my advice Silvander; let me die alone, reserve the remainder of your dayes for actions that will be glorious unto you: and re∣store him back unto Diana, for who I know her soul has sent forth a thousand sighes of love; whatsoever you make conjecture, I am fully perswaded but she has done some violence to keep her self from falling into the power of Paris: and the condition wherin now she is, me thinks is a strong argument that the mar∣riage is not consummated; For why should she come with Astrea unto a place so little frequented since the inchantment of the fountain, but only to conceall her self from Bellinde for some dayes, and to give her time of consideration how little inclination her Daughter has unto that alliance? alas (said Silvander, and inter∣rupted her) this small absenting her self, and this self are arguments more strong to confirm me in a beleif that my dispair is just, and that her infidelity is true; For may I not well think that this ungratefull woman did absent her self, to kindle the flames of Paris the more, and that this sleep is part of that rest which my rivall would have stoln from her the first night, by his carresses? oh what dismal causes of jealousy do I find? and how this passion transports me into fury? Can you think it just, Celadon, that I should live to be a witness of all those kisses which this husband will gather from those lippes which have pronounced the sentence of my death, and his happines? Do you not think that those favours which this fickle one publiquely conferres upon him as innocent as they are yet, do not appear unto me most horrid crimes? alas you do not love aright if you think they are not enough to kill me: assure your self every look she casts upon him is a dagger to my heart; No no shepherd, I had better let them alone, to enjoy their delights freely: my presence will but disturbe them, every thing does invite me unto this design more then you, who has no legall warrant to authorise the resolution which you have taken but only the bare passionate humour of Astrea, which perhaps has made her weep a thousand times since, and repent she ere concealed from you the good, though secret, acceptance she had of all your services; Therefore dear Cela∣don if my prayers have any prevalence with you, I beseech you let me only run this adventure: it is a faithfull lover who ought to die: do not dispute the matter any longer with me; And pardon me, if I say out of the knowledge I have of my love, and humour, that it is most impossible to find one man in the whole world who can excell me. In saying so, he embraced Celadon, and conjured him again to let him obtain this favour which he required: but Celadon seeming ill sa∣tisfied with his request, truly Silvander (answered he) you do resemble him who received as a sharer only in a treasure, yet will needs become the sole master of it, and drive out him who first admitted him only at a sharing Companion in his for∣tune; It was I who first designed this disenchantment by giving my life, and now I have communicated my design unto you, it is you that would hinder me from the execution of it, and would your self take all that glory which the gods reserved only for me. Dear Celadon (said Silvander, and interrupted him) do not blame me for desiring to take that advantage from you, which will procure you a far greater; I mean the enjoyment of Astrea; I dare swear that fair shepherdesse would think your presence at this hower her greatest happiness; Take my advice Celadon, present your self before her once more & if she do not forbid you to die, I will confess my self injurious in advising you to live. Nay (answered Alexis) that cruell one shall never have the pleasure of condemning me the second time. I know what obedience I owe unto all her commands, and will not put her to so
much pains as to pronounce them often. But as for you Silvander, live, and live for Diana, since you know she desires it, and did never command the contrary: all the arguments, perswasions, and reasons, that you can possibly devise, can never alter me from that resolution which I am fixed upon to die, by the mortal claws of these furious Lions, which cannot be so cruel, but will leave me so much time as they are tearing me in pieces, as to remember that Astrea is more pittiless. These last words stole some tears from the eyes of Alexis, who seeing how con∣trary her end was unto those sweet hopes which she had conceived in the begin∣ning of her affection, her heart could not chuse but melt at the memory of those kind promises which Astrea once made unto her: and Silvander, who also had the same considerations, he began to embrace Alexis, and saw those tears which dropped from her eyes: they embraced each other a long while, and perhaps had done longer, if Alexis, who alwayes looked towards Astrea, had not espi∣ed a great company coming towards them: he presently advertised Silvan∣der of it, and both looking earnestly at them, it was not long before they saw it was Adamas, Belinde, and Phillis; but Silvander knew not Galathea, Rosa∣nira, nor the rest of the Nymphs, because of the change in their habits. Fear∣ing then, that if the Druide saw them, he would hinder them in their designe: Come, come, dear Silvander (said Alexis and rose up hastily) let us not dispute any longer upon this point, let us go and see to which of us the gods will judge the price of fidelity; and since they only can decide our difference, it is folly to consult upon it any longer here. Upon this, she went towards the Fountain, and Silvander following her, if it happen (said he) that we both die, we shall have this advantage at the least, to shut up in one Tombe two friends, who have almost the very same Fates in their loves, would suffer the same deaths. In saying so, they were come so near the Lions, that those fierce Animals heard them, and looked upon them with most affrighting looks; but the Shepherds were so far from any signes of fear, that there was a fresh vermilion in their cheeks: and as if an horrid object were an ob∣ject of joy and felicity, they began to smile, and to shew, that their courages were not lesse then the Ferocity of those mercilesse Guardians. Alexis, who came thither only to die, and not to fight, did at the first prepare her self to re∣ceive their cruelty: whilst the Lions, at the sight of this new prey, did beat their sides and the ground with their tails, and were rowsing up anger enough to devour these Lovers, she kneeled down upon the ground, and looking up to heaven, O ye merciful gods (said she) who have inspired me with this remedy to keep my miseries from being infinite, as is your power; accept, I beseech you, of this sa∣crifice which I offer unto you of my body, and I would say of my soul also, did you not know that it is still a captive in the charms of the fairest, but most un∣grateful Shepherdess that ever was; even for pities sake, O most puissant Divi∣nities, let my death satisfie you for all her injuries: and as great as her crimes are which she hath committed against Love, for my sake cease your resentments of them; and let that cause which moved her to desire my death, be a motive unto you to prolong her happiness and life. Alexis had no sooner ended her prayer, but Silvander began: O ye pittilesse Destinies, cryed he out, who by irrevocable Laws have ordained I should spend my miserable dayes, in all the afflictions which any soul is capable to resent, now, I beseech you, see your own doom executed. As you have spoke all truth, con∣cerning the miseries that menaced my life, be you as true also in what you have spoken concerning my death: In saying so, he opened his brest, and joyfully pre∣pared himself to receive those wounds, which would let out his soul with his blood: he saw the Lions approaching towards them with eyes that sparkled fire, and lift∣ing up their paws, they shewed their crooked claws, whose points were as sharp as any needles. In the mean while Adamas and the rest, were come within fourscore or a hun∣dred paces of Astrea and Diana: The two Shepherdesses waked at the same time, and were so affrighted to see the two Unicorns so near them, that they never
looked towards the place where Licidas was, with Thamires, Celidea, Doris, A∣drastes, and the rest, nor towards the place where Galathea and Rosanira were with Adamas and Belinde: All they could do in that amazement, or rather that affright, was to offer themselves unto those Animals, as thinking they came thi∣ther only to devour them: but seeing them upon a sudden to run towards the Fountain, they thought that it was there only where they were to die, and that the Unicorns did only shew them the way. Astrea and Diana therefore ran after them, and were no sooner come to the place where Alexis and Silvander were expecting their deaths, but they saw those two Shepherds upon their knees, with∣in ten paces of them, and the Lions, with enraged fury, ready to tear them in pieces. This encounter did extreamly surprize them; but having no time to con∣sider what to do, they followed the first suggestion of their passion, and stepping betwixt them, it is we that are to die (said they) and not those Shepherds, who are not culpable of any crime. Alexis and Silvander, ravished at this spectacle, and fearing lest those Shep∣herdesses should receive some harm, they fell upon the Lions, and began to fight with them more for the interest of their Mistresses, then their own preservati∣on; but being without any arms, they were quickly thrown down, and the two Unicorns, as taking their parts, came at the very same instant, and falling upon the Lions, there began a most sharp combat betwixt them. Adamas, Belinde, and the rest, who saw Astrea and Diana go away, did follow them, but they came not time enough, for the combate was almost ended: the heavens, which before were clear and serene, was now all cloudy; and the Sun was so obscured, as if the world were to perish in horrid darkness. The fields, which with variety of flow∣ers used to render us most fragrant odour, now lost that sweetnesse, and stunk of sulphure: No light was to be seen but that of lightning, with such horrid claps of thunder, which speaking the anger of the gods, it is easie to be be believed, that they intendd to destroy the world, and reduce it unto the confusion of its first Chaos. This made the most courageous to be sensible of fear: Adamas himself in this disorder, who by his profession had learned to resign himself unto the will of the supream powers, did wonder, and was amazed when the earth trembled under him. Often did he offer to speak, but the horrible claps of thunder put him out of all hopes to be heard; and when he would have looked upon those who were in his company, he found the use of his sight as much hindred as his speech. Sometimes he wished they were all in his house, for a shelter against those storms that menaced them; but when he considered, that such blustering storms were able to throw down the strongest buildings, he condemned his first wish, and found it unjust, because the most secret places were open to the knowledge of the gods, and there was no place that could shelter a mortal from the anger of the Dieties. Galathea and Rosanira wished a thousand times, that their journey were to be∣gin again: but as great as their fears were, their loves had made so deep an im∣pression in their memories, that in lieu of having recourse unto the mercy of hea∣ven, they never ceased invoking Rosilion and Lindamor as their Divinities. Belin∣de, thinking Diana was dead, was ready to wish for her own: giving her self therefore over unto grief, she laid her self all along upon the ground, leaning her head upon her two arms which lay acrosse, not daring to lift up her eyes to heaven, because she thought it her most mortal enemy; ah Diana (said she to her self) how dear does thy indiscretion cost us? Thy fault has louly offended the gods, since they take so great revenge. Immortal Dieties (continued she) whose justice does exceed your pity: if punishment be inseparable from the crime which this woman has committed, why did you not inflict only upon me? Was not a Victime able to appease you? had not I blood enough to wash away the crime? O most cruel! you have despised that blood which I would most willing∣ly have shed for the safety of this sinner: and to shew how odious the disobedi∣ence of children is unto you, you have punished her with so much severity, as ren∣ders your anger remarkable unto all posterity.
Upon this thought, Belinde fell into a flood of tears; and Adamas, who was already upon his knees to pacifie the anger of the gods by his prayers, casting his eye accidentally towards the place where she was; a flash of lightning, made so much light at the very same time as he could plainly see in what condition she was: seeing her hen lie all along upon the ground, and thinking her killed by some clap of thunder, such a sorrow seized upon him, as he became almost sens∣lesse. He went unto her as near as possibly he could, and as if he would make her hear, maugre the thunder, alas (sage Belinde cried be out as loud as he could) what infortunate accident was it that separated us? and why should it be mortal unto you and not unto me? Belinde did hear the voice of the Druide, but she could not distinguish his words: and Galathea, who was not far off, hearing con∣fusedly the words: Belinde, and mortal, she thought her and all, but dead peo∣ple: Rosanira, who held her by the arm believed the same, and their opinions passing unto Dorinde, it went from one to another till it came to Hylas, who knowing no reason why he should bear the punishment of anothers fault, he wihed himself heartily in Carmagues, although it were upon the condition of ne∣ver seeing Stella again or any of the Shepherdesses, unto whom he had any in∣clination; But when they were all in the deepest apprehension and belief of this danger, the lightning and thunder upon a sudden ceased, but not the darkness, for it remained as obscure as before: And in this dismal silence, none durst begin to speak, for every one thinking themselves the only one alive, were afraid to incur the same misfortune. In fine, the darknesse began to dissipate by little and little; the Sun gave light to the world again, flowers assumed their fragrancy, and trees gave shadows again. Adamas was very glad to see this hidious storm ceased, and the Sun to break through all these dusky clouds; but his joyes to see Belinde alive, surpassed all o∣ther contentments: so as he went to embrace her and acquaint her with his fears. Yet Belinde, still thinking upon the loss of Diana; and not thinking the fair∣ness of the day any comfort unto her, she told him that heaven would have ob∣liged her, if out of pity it had suffered her to follow the Fate of her daughter: The life (said she) which it has left me, and for which you seem so much joyed, is a most intollerable burthen unto me, since my Destiny will not let it be accom∣panied with those comforts which I expected from the virtue of Diana. Upon this, Belinde began to grieve again: and Rosanira, Galathea, Silvia, and the rest coming unto her, every one endeavoured to give some comfort unto her; but her grief was too great to be so easily allayed, especially by such weak remedies as words. She therefore giving no intermission into her tears and sighs, they all resolved to refer her cure unto time; and in the interim they observed that the clouds wherewith the air was obscured for a time were all gathered together o∣ver the Fountain, from whence all this enchantment proceeded. This obscurity made it inccessible▪ and Belinde, who extreamly desired to give up her soul up∣on the cold and pale lips of her daughter, and seeing this obstacle was unto her desire. Wilt thou not. O pitilesse heaven, give my misfortunes so weak a com∣fort, as to see the marks of thy cruelty upon the body of my daughter? O ye Destinies, whose rigour has ravished her from me, are ye more deaf then trees and rocks? Hearken, I beseech you, vnto the prayers of a wronged mother, and render her unto me, for one hour only, who ought to be mine all her life: I do ask you nothing but what belongs unto me: The soul of Diana is indeed the gods, and they may take it when they please; but her body is absolutely mine, I would have it, and without extream in justice you cannot deny it unto me. In saying this, she had her eyes still towards the Fountain. Adamas and the rest, after her example they looked upon the thick darkness which overshaded it, out of which one might often see proceed a thick smoak, as from some great combu∣stion, and sometimes a blue flame, like unto that of Sulphure and Aqua vit fined. After they had gazed a while upon those Prodigies, they perceived, that with this smoak many of the clouds were dissipated▪ which gave some good hopes un∣to the Druide: and Belinde, who thought now to have light enough to find either
her Daughter, or the Lions that had devoured her; she advanced as near the foun∣tain as she could: But Adamas, pulling her back to look upon something which he had observed, they perceived that all the thick darkness which remained was risen a yeard from the ground: thinking therefore that it also would vanish as the rest did they resolved to stay a while; and then upon a suddain they perceived in the midst of this obscurity, a cupid full of shining brightness, who rising up by little and little, seated himself upon the top of a Piramide of Porpherye. At the sight of this god, all fell down upon their knees: and when Adamas, Bellinde and the rest were in their height of admiration at this, so little expected novelty, they saw that he held in one of his hands a table of black marble wherin were written these words in capitall Letters. Be not Amazed nor murmure at these miracles But cause these bodies to be caryed away And tomorrow come, and consult with my Oracles. They no sooner knew the will of this god of love, but this god did throw him∣self unto the fountain, and left no markes of himself but immediatly all the clouds vanished, no darkness remained, only so much as hindred from looking into the water. Bellinde, ravished with joy at this permission, she lost not a munite of time, but passing close by the Unicornes and Lyons, she went straight to the place where Astrea, and her Daughter lay upon the ground seeming as if they had given up their last breath. Adamas after he had bidden Paris to go, and fetch the coach, that he might obey the commands of the god of love he followed Bellin∣de, and was all amazement to see that these four beasts had no motion in them, and this gave him so much boldness as to approach nearer them: but then, he found them absolutly imoveable indeed: And indeed, by the power of this great inchantor, whó first placed them for guards of the fountain, they were all turned into four figures of marble, yet still retaining their shapes, and coulours? As soon as all the Company was advertised of it, and come near to be witnesses of this miraculous metamorphosis, they were all seised with incredible astonishment but yet not comparable to that which they resented, when in lieu of two corpses which they expected to find their, they perceived four, two of which were known to be Alexis, and Silvander. In the mean while Bellinde would needs embrace the body of Diana, and finding it without any pulse or motion, she fell into such extreames of greif as was able to move deaf death it self: Phillis, she ran unto the body of Astrea, and Lycidas being gone to that of his brother, the Druid went unto the body of Silvander; They thought to have found them full of wounds, and torne in peices by the Lyons; but they did not find so much as one drope of blood upon them which made them think they were only stifled by the weight of those furious animals. Galathea who at that instant remembred those flames which Celadon had kindled in her soul, she could not chuse but be so sensi∣ble as to shed some teares; Rosanira and the rest, after her example, much grei∣ved to see all things in such a sad disorder: and certainly they had no souls that would not be moved unto Compassion by such sad spectacles, especially by the lamentations of Bellinde; For that sadly afflicted mother tearing her hair, and scratching her face: ah my Diana (said she) art thou dead, all cold as ice? what? my dear child not one look? Ingratefull child, or rather ungratefull de∣stines who have ravished her from me, is it not just my hopes should have a more happy success? Such were the complaints of Bellinde whilst Lycidas whose com∣plaints were no less: who in the resentment of his sorrowes, did taxe heaven with all the injuries he ever received: he called it a hundred times cruell, unjust and Barbarous; and still harping upon the rigour of Astrea, he seemed angry with Phillis, for the assistance which she gave unto that shepherdess. But this did not hinder Phillis from continuing all her endeavours to help her, or at the least bid∣ding her a last adieu. Yet seeing all her teares were in vaine, and that Astrea could neither see nor hear her: Oh Lycidas (cryed she) how cruelly are you revenged: in saying so, sorrowes did so seise upon her, that she fell down to the ground,
and remained as in a swound upon the body of he Companion. This did a little trouble Lycidas: for being poised betwixt love and amity, he knew not whether or no he should leave his brother to go, and help Phillis; and doubtless if he had found any armes wherewith to have killed himself, he had followed his first apprehensions which prompted him to give that remedy unto all his miseryes: but having nothing wherewith he could hurt himself, he was forced, whether he would or no to live, and be a witness of the accidents that were to happen. He was still grieving that he could not die, when he heard Adamas command every one to make themselves ready to put the corpes of Astrea, Diana, Alexis, and Silvan∣der into the coach: which was quickly done by the assistance of severall shepherds who came in to see this spectacle: And as soon as they all came unto the Druides house, Astrea, and Diana were laid in one Chamber; and Alexis, and Silvan∣der in another. The news of this accident was quickly spred throughout all For∣rests, and Amasis was soon advertised of it; who having writ the news of it unto Rosilion and Lindamor, she left Moutbrison, and came to her Palace of Isoures, where she intended to entertain Rosanira, it being the most pleasant Place for diver∣sion. The Sequell of the History of TIRCIS, and LAONICE. IN the mean time Tircis, since the time he left the house of Adamas, or to say better, all the shepherds and shepherdesses of Lignon, he had a fate that was very strange. For that sad shepherd, who as I told you before parted from Sil∣vander, he no sooner saw himself out of that shepherds presence, but lifting up his eyes to heaven: Now, great gods (said he) I can say that I am at liberty, and that I can without constraint pay unto my dearest Cleon, those testimonies of my love which she may as tribute expect from me: my teares and my sighes will not have no beholders that can condemn them: but on the contrary, the winds will help me to lament the loss of so fair a Mistresse. As he said this, he walked still on untill he came unto the bridge of Bouteress, there he stayed upon the midst of it: and from thence he beheld those places, where he had resided, and bad them for ever adieu. Upon this subject, these thoughts presented him with a thousand imaginations, whereof some begot a sorrow in his soul, that he was to leave a ha∣bitation, where so many lovely shepherdesses did so sweetly pass away there dayes: and other imaginations did comfort him with this, That since the death of his deerest Cleon, he was obliged to renounce all the delights of life. This last con∣sideration being stronger then the first, he continued on his voyage: and he was no sooner some two or three hundred paces from the bridge, but as if some secret violence had stayed him, he stopped; and once more turning his face towards the Town where Astrea, Diana, and Phillis dwelt: I do not wonder (said he to himsef) I should be so loath to part from those groves, where the justice of Sil∣vander, and the eloquence of Phillis, did deliver me from the importunities of Laonice: that only were enough to oblige me never to be absent from them, if my griefs, which make me wearisome to all the world, did not perswade me, that I shall do them a good office in taking from their presence, an afflicted per∣son, whose conversation is intolerable. But (continued he) I do not consider, that thinking not to separate my self from them, I distance my self farther from the place, where her sacred dust does rest, who was once my very life. Ah Tircis, Tircis, the most miserable of all those that ever loved. Since thou art obliged to take thy delights in that which is the punishment of others: Alas, were it not better for thee to go, and once more view those sacred reliques, and shed such a flood of teares upon the grave of Cleon, as drowning thy self, and misfortunes in them, thou mayest obtain the glory to be inclosed in the same sepulcher.
He had no sooner uttered these words, but resolving with himself to return unto the banks of Arar, he turned back again, and when he was upon the bridge of Bouberess. But why, said he, should I go and seek the body of Cleon, as long as I carry her soul with me? and why should I go visit her ashes, as long as I retain those very flames in my heart, which she kindled towards me? No, no, (continued he) go on in thy first design: Go Tircis and lose thy self in the hor∣rours of some dreadful Defart, where the air, the earth, solitude, and affright∣ing shades, will take away from me that life which is odious unto every one, and intollerable to my self. Upon this last resolution, he looked towards Mount-brison, and losing all thoughts of returning to Lions, he prepared himself for the woods and Forrests which cover the mountain of Isoures, and there seek some contentment to his me∣lancholly humour. He did not know that Laonice was already retired thither; for doubtless, had he had the least thought of that, he would never have wended that way; but fancying to find that solitude and liberty of life which he desired, he resolved upon it: and without more dispute with himself, he went to take up his lodging almost upon the very top of all the mountain. There seeing himself something nearer heaven, he conceived himself something nearer Cleon: and not imagining he could ever be diverted from that solitude which seemed already so sweet and pleasing unto him, he resolved to passe away in quietnesse that little time which he had to live. For the first and second dayes he did nothing else but contemplate upon Cleon, who was fresh in his memory; and having none to im∣part his sorrows unto, the rocks and the trees became the confidents of his se∣crets; unto the one he related every particular accident that befell him, ever since he first loved her; and upon the bark of the other he engraved the name of Cleon: but imagining, that without a grand crime he could not separate that sa∣cred name; and the name of Tircis asunder, he engraved it also. Sometimes loadned with some fruits which he had gathered, he would go unto a little rivolet, which falling down into the plain, does water some pleasant meadows, and after∣wards empties it self into Lignon; and there contemplating upon the cataracts, and great falls of this water: This (said he to himself) has a great resemblance unto my misfortune. Heaven would never let me take any rest, and if ever I hope for it, surely it will be when I am ready to enter into my grave, like to this little rivolet, which is never in quietness until it has lost it self in Lignon, which is its grave. In such kind of solitary entertainments he passed away the day; after which he went unto his sad habitation, and never stirred from thence, until the Sun had dried up the tears of Aurora: he had met with a cave not much unlike that of Laonices, which was not far off; probably these caves were made by other hands then those of Nature; and the Druides, in the infancy of Religion not being much conversant amongst men, made choice of these retreats so near each other, as they might meet and confer about matters of Religion. It hapned, that the third day after Tircis came thither, that he began his customary exercise, and went out of his cave, as soon as the Sun had cleared the day; but not wending his course towards that little rivolet, he passed away almost all the day in contem∣plating the beauties of that place, which he had chosen for his last residence. On the one side he viewed all the Forrests, and saw as far as the farthest part of the Sebusians: and on the other side, his prospect reached as far as that stately city, which the Rhosne and the Arrar do wash with their crystal streams. Sometimes he admired the talness of the trees, whose leavy branches did shade him from the scorching heat of the Sun: Otherwhiles looking upon the ground, in which his eyes took deep root, he was astonished to see it so clean and neat, and so even, that there was not so much as one shrub to hinder his walk. Being thus taken up in these little ravishments, he took no notice that night surprized him: So as being a good distance from his cave, and not well knowing the passages, the night also growing dark, he could not hit the way unto his habitation. He laid him down therefore under the first tree he came unto, where it was long be∣fore sleep came upon him: yet at last, after he had spent a good part of the
night in his ordinary contemplations, his wearied limbs received that pleasing re∣freshment. Laonice on the other side, who thought that help which the gods had promi∣sed unto her, long in coming, she wakened very early, to go according to her custome, and talk of her sorrows unto the flowers and the winds: yet she walked not long before she found some engravements upon the barks of trees, which being freshly done, did easily discover themselves. She went presently unto them; and her thoughts being alwayes upon Tircis, as Tircis was upon Cleon, jea∣lousie, which opened her eyes and judgement, made her know that there they were both together. This did extreamly astonish her; and not being able to imagine what Demon it should be that did her this ill office, she was more and more ama∣zed: and to compleat her amazement, she perceived Tircis himself lying all a∣long under an oak, some ten or twelve paces from the place where she was. A∣midst her joyes to see him, she was seized with an extream fear to appear before him; because at that instant, all the contempts, slights, and rigours, of that Shepherd against her, did come into her memory. Remembring then principal∣ly his last words, as being the most bitter that ever his tongue uttered against her: This Shepherd (said she to her self) does measure his hatred according to my love, and takes delight in seeing both extream: he thinks he has banished me out of Forrests, and perhaps would drive me out of the world, if he should see me again: I will not therefore shew my self unto him; but, said she upon a sudden, why should the gods promise me a cure, unlesse that Tircis be the remedy? Per∣haps those kind Dieties have disposed his spirit to pardon me, and his soul to re∣ceive me in lieu of her, for whose love he rejected me. Upon this consideration, she went gently nearer him, and finding his eyes closed: I with, O love (said she) that his heart were not as fast asleep towards me: permit, O heavens, that the desires of this Shepherd may not any longer be contrary to my happinesse, but that my soul may share with him in that rest which his body now enjoyes: In say∣ing so, she observed, that the Sun made so much entrance through the leaves, as with his Rayes to kisse him: whereat she appearing a little jealous, she kneeled down: Those kisses, lovely Tircis (said she) would be better imployed, if thou wouldst give them unto me in recompence of those miseries which thy cruelty hath made me suffer; Why, why? is my passion so full of crime, as it takes away from thee all desires of enjoying me? O good gods (continued she and sighed) can loving thee perfectly merit thy hatred? this is most cruel and barbarous: Up∣on this, she bended her self to kisse him; but fearing to waken him, she arose up without stealing that contentment: yet wondering at her want of courage; but why (said she) should I not have as much courage as love? Alas (continued she) what could this Shepherd do if he were awake, if he can make himself thus feared when he is in the arms of death, or at least of sleep, which is the i∣mage of death? Upon these last words she stopt, and Tircis began to groan; at which Laonice was so surprized, that she got further off, lest he should perceive her: yet hiding her self behind a great tree, some twelve or fifteen paces from him, she put forth her head as softly as she could, and ob∣serving that he still slept: Perhaps (said she) he was not asleep when  spoke and when he groaned it was out of compassion; but if so, why then should he sleep on? and why does he not give unto my passion better testimonies of his? No, no, Laonice (said she) never flatter thy self with these pleasing imaginations: Tircis does hate thee as much as he loves Cleon: he does abhor thy memory, as much as he does adore hers; and thou mayest well believe, that if he would die for the love of her, he will never live for any love of thee. Upon this she would have gone away, but casting her eye once more upon Tircis, she saw him awake, stretching out his arms, and rubbing his eyes: This made her lurk close behind the tree, & make no noise; and by Fortune, the Shepherd rising up, and seeing the Sun a good hight, he went the other way, thinking upon nothing else, but how to find out his cave. Laonice seeing him go away, she felt no lesse pain then if her heart had been pulling out; and never thinking what she did, nor losing the sight of this Shep∣herd, she followed him from tree to tree, until he found what he sought for; and
it was not long first: for he found the little Rivolet, unto which he paying his tri∣bute of a few teares, he presently after went straight to his cave. As soon as he came their he entred in: and as soon as Laonice lost the sight of him, she doubled her pace, and without any feares of being seen, she got as near the mouth of it as she could, and there lending a most listning ear to hear what the designes of Tircis might be, she heard him say; Dear habitation which may cover me from the injuries of heaven, as thou dost from the importunities of Laonice; Pardon me, for having lost my way in the confusion of my thoughts, I absented my self from thee a whole night. Into what a lamentable dump did these words strike Lao∣nice: she was even ready to run out of her wits, and now seeing all her sweet hopes blasted, she was even ready to die. Yet hearing Tircis say something else, she wished for life only to hear him, and therefore heard him proceed thus: But dear cave, if thou wilt make me the most happy man that ever was, I beseech thee let me live no longer; to kill another would be Barbarisme, but to kill Tircis, charity. If because thou knowest not the dismall successes of my disasterous life thou beest ignorant of the cause I have to wish for death; Know, dear Cell. That I did love Cleon: That her death did seperate me from her, and that my death is the only was to reunite us: upon this he was silent, and because he continued so long, Laonice thought that his teares had drownded his speech, or that perhaps he was kissing the rock in which he was shut: Needing therefore to hear no more: she retired her self the most sadly afflicted woman in the world, only she received a lit∣tle poor consolation when she considered that since he intended to inhabite no where else but there, she might often have the pleasure of seeing, and hearing him. So leaving him in his Cell, she returned to her own, out of which she durst not stir all the day. Tircis did not so; for after he had sighed a while in his little Grotto he went out; but durst not go far, least he should lose himself as he did the day before: he sate him down under a shady tree: and there he pulled out of his pocket, all the favours, and Letters which formerly he had received from Cleon: and reading then one after another, all the passages of his love came so fresh into his memory, as at that instant he fancied her to be yet alive: but this pleasing imagination lasting no longer then the time he imployed in reading them, he had no sooner ended, but his sorrowes began again. Thus having kissed them, and lapped all those dear Letters in a bag which he called his treasury, he rose up, and walked up and down till night invited him unto his Cave. Laonice did not spend the day so: for she durst not stir out of hers, least if Tircis should, it would make him quit his habitation for ever; which he had chosen for the tranquility of his last dayes: yet not being able to leave thinking upon him, she never lest contriving out some way or other which might in some measure allay that irreconcilable hatred which was in the soul of this shepherd towards her. Amongst all her thoughts which most touched her to the quick, the Oracle which she had received, held the prime place: so as continually thinking upon it; But if the gods (said she) have promised a kind remedy unto my passion, is it not most just I should hope well in their goodness: and if I may hope why may I not think upon such meanes as may obtain it; a ghost (did thy tell me) must be the remedy unto my affliction; but what ghost can this be? It cannot be the ghost of Tircis. For if Tircis were only a ghost, my misery in lieu of being less, would be extream; I value his life at such a rate of love, as if any fatal accident should ravish it away, I should conspire against my own; It cannot therefore be Cleons: for the dead do either know the actions of this life, or else they do not know them: if they do know them, then it is impossible but the soul of that fair one must rejoyce to see Tircis continue his love, and fidelity unto her. So as it is in vain to expect any assistance from her, since it concernes her interest rather to prejudice then to help me. If the dead do not know what we of this life do, why should I look for any help from a place where oblivion raignes with so much Em∣pire? No no Laonice, thy miseryes must be eternall: and thou mayest think that if the gods had any mind to put a period unto them, they would have inspired thee with some invention more easy. But (said she) is it not a beginning of hap∣piness, that Tircis is brought so near me? Has not the world other deserts?
Forrests it self has other woods vvhere this shepherd might have found his solitude, if some kind Demon had not brought him hither to case thee: Upon this thought she opened the table book where we had written down the Oracle that concerned her: and having read it over severall times; The gods (said she) do assure that if Laonice be firm in her affection, the heavens will send a remedy unto her passion; Does this remedy depend upon the affection of Lao∣nice, or upon Laonice her self, or upon the ghost? or are not Laonice, and the ghost one and the same thing? Upon this she stopt; and falling into a most pro∣found study, as if she had some deep design in her head: come what will on (said she upon a suddain) I will venture an undoeing, it is credible the gods would never have put it into my mind unless they did intend it should take effect. She spent all the rest of the day upon this thought, and as soon as night came, she went out of her Cell, unto that of Tircis. All the way she went she was ravel∣led with a thousand irresolutions, and her feares not to bring her enterprise to pass, made find her almost an impossibility in those things that were most easie. Some∣times she conceited that to get the love of Tircis by fallacies was the way not to keep it long; otherwhiles she perswaded her self that he would know her voice, or that when the Moon shined, it would discover that secret which she would not trust unto any thing but darkness. But when she remembred, that in love all sub∣tilties even the fits are allowed, and began to think he could hardly know her voice, also that the Moon might perhaps not shine into his Cell, she took a little courage, and kept to her first resolution. Her greatest fear was to meet him out of his cave: for no other place but it, could be favorable unto her design; And therefore as she went thither she looked about her very circumspectly on all sides to see whither she could spy him, and seeing nothing of him, she came in the midst of the night unto the same place where she had lodged him a little before: at the first, standing still at the mouth of the cave, she listned with her ear to hear whether or no, he was a sleep; with she was no sooner assured off, but recommending her self unto love, and to the god of sleep and dreames, she be∣gan to name Tircis, three times: at that name, the shepherd half wakned, and fetching a deep sigh he turned towards Laonice, who began to hope well, in her design; Know Tircis (continued she in the same tone) that I do come from the gods to command thee, that thou cease thy unjust hatred against the beauty of Laonice: her love ought to be the sole object of all thy desires upon paine to in∣cur the wrath, and anger of that diety who commands it: and that thou mayest more clearly know, that this is the will of the supream powers, be assured that to morrow thou shalt find this shepherdess near unto this place so disposed to par∣don all thy rigours, as thou oughtest to repent of them. Faile not therefore to comply with her: never fear offending Cleon, since it is she her self who brings this command unto thee. Upon this Laonice retired, and Tircis who at the name of Cleon began to open his eyes, he had so much time only as to see her vanish: For at that instant the Moon shined so clear into his Cell, that the shepherd not being able to endure the light, was constrained to turn the other way. He had confusedly heard what Laonice said, and retained the sence in his memory: but as if he were not well wakned, he fell a sleep again after he had sighingly pro∣nounced the name of Cleon twice. Which Laonice distinctly heard for she had no sooner retired her self out of the Cell, but she listned with her ear at the mouth of the Cave to hear what Tircis said; Being certain then that she was heard she re∣tired her self to her own Cell, and rested her self as well as she could untill it was day. Tircis on the other side he got up very early: and having nothing more pre∣sent in his thoughts then the love he preserved for the ashes of Cleon, it was not long before he fell to muse upon the passage in the night time; at the first, he fancied it only a dream: But then remembring what he had heard, he made not doubt but that was a Vision. Also never thinking upon any such fallacy as was put upon him; but infallibly beleiving that it was the ghost of Cleon which he saw. But dearest ghost (said he with teares in his eyes) is it possible thou shouldst be so soon weary of my sighes and teares? is that inviolable passion I have enter∣tained
with such holy purity, become so far troublesome as to displease and anger thee? If in that felicity which thou dost enjoy; and whereof this great splen∣dour which waits upon thee even in the horrours of night, is a most undeniable proof unto me: If, I say in that happy estate it does grieve thee to see that I can give but poor and weak testimonies of my love: Consider, I beseech thee, dear∣est Ghost, that in this the effects are far different from their cause; and these poor testimonies of my affection, do perish almost in their conceptions, yet my love which produceth them, will last to all eternity. Upon this he was silent for a while, and afterwards beginning again: But Cleon (continued he) who is pleased to put thee upon things the most difficult, does command thee to love Laonice, knowing well thou mightest as well attempt an impossibility: If thou dost disobey her, though it be the first fault thou didst e∣ver commit against her, it is a crime no lesse punishable, then if it were commit∣ted against a Diety. And if thou dost obey her, who will dispence with thee for all the vowes and oathes which thou hast so often sworn, never to have any incli∣nation unto any but only her? Doubtless she her self (said he) for as she had so much power to make me swear them, so has she the power to make me break them, after such an absolute command. Ah dearest Cleon (said he and repre∣hended himself) how intollerable is this last rigour which thou dost inflict up∣on me? It were far more just to command me to die, then to live with Laonice. Upon this, he went out of his cave, not to go and seek for this Shepherdesse, but only to divert himself, and to see which way he should dispose of himself to do as he thought Cleon had commanded him. But as it was impossible, that now Laonice should have no room in his thoughts there was not one testimony of love which ever she had given him, but it came into his remembrance. And this wrought more effect upon his soul, when he considered that she continued her love, notwithstanding all his hatred and disdain. After this, she being very fair, the remembrance of the features in her face seemed to inspire him with pity; and as often as he thought upon those cruelties wherewith he requited her affecti∣on, he was moved unto a kind of repentance: the only thing which did most of all retain his anger, was the memory of that revenge which she took upon Sil∣vander and Phillis, thinking such premeditated wickedness, and carryed with so much art, did argue a trayterous and malitious spirit. But as if he would not condemn her without a hearing: yet (said he to himself) revenge is sweet in what mind soever it be; and how is it possible a weak woman should defend her self a∣gainst it, since the greatest persons which our Histories mention, found more a∣do to resist the motions of this passion, then to conquer Kingdomes? It were unreasonable to think that Laonice had not her imperfections, as well as other mortals; and perhaps this was it which made Hylas say lately unto me, that were he at leasure, he would make me confess that Shepherdess was not so much to blame as I imagined: Doubtless he would have told me, that her resentment was advan∣tageous to me, and that I was obliged to her, since she had made it appear, that in losing me, she had lost the only thing that could force her to commit a trea∣son. He would have represented unto me, that she had imitated those desperate persons, who not knowing how to regain that which death or Fortune had taken from them, they would be revenged upon the gods, and break down those Sta∣tues which before they had erected unto their honour. With such, or such like discourse as this, Tircis entertained himself: Sometimes condemning the subtilties of Laonice, and otherwhiles excusing them; and some∣times condemning himself for being the principal Authour of the evil which she had done; but as soon as ever Cleon came into his thoughts, the memory of her transported him, and kept him from thinking upon any thing else a long time af∣ter. In this Combate of thoughts he passed away almost all the day, and stirred not from his cave, but only to drink at the little rivolet, which relieved him in that necessity. But Laonice, seeing the day almost gone before she heard any news of Tircis, she began to fear that her devise was discovered: yet she waited still at the entrance into the wood, where the trees gave a more delectable shade then in any other place; and such was her impatience, that at every blast which
moved the trees, she looked about, imagining it to be Tircis. At last, having thus spent the day in such inquietudes as are usual unto one that loves perfectly, she resolved to counterfeit a Ghost the second time, with an oath never to be∣come her self again, in case her plot took no better success then it had before. Then (said she to her self) will I intent this Barbarian eternally. I will never let him take a minutes rest: I will kindle a flame at the fire of my love, which a thousand times worse then that of the Furies, shall scorch him without intermissi∣on, and without conforming him. In this design, she prepared her self to go in∣to the place where Tircis was, about the same time of night she did before; but fearing the Shepherd should be awake, in hopes to see Cleon the second time, she thought it better to go thither a little before day. So she passed away most part of the night under those trees, and when she thought it time, she went to execute what she had proposed. As soon as she came to the caves mouth, she listned with her ear as she did be∣fore, and when she was assured that Tircis was asleep, she entered in with as little noise as possibly she could make: the first thing she did was to cal him by his name, knowing very well, that naturally every one has a greater disposition to hearken unto his own name, then to any other word; and indeed, the Shepherd upon the instant of naming him, did give some testimonies that he was not fast asleep: and therefore Laonice said unto him: Tircis, thy disobedience hath offended the gods and Cleon, and the rigour of Laonice unto thee shall be the punishment of thy crime; unlesse thou wouldest have her spirit become inexorable unto thee, prepare thy self to repair that fault this day, which thou didst commit yesterday: and once again consider, that it is Cleon which commands it, and thou must never expect any favour from her, if thou dost not obey me. Upon this, she went out again; and hearkning at the door, she heard Tircis fetch a deep sigh, and afterwards raising his voice: Alas, my dearest Cleon (said he) why dost thou so soon fly out of the presence of him, who once was half thy life? or why dost thou now impose that upon me, which thou didst abhor? Good gods! Is it possible there should be any alteration? Can you be guilty of that common fault in men? Then he held his peace, and Laonice, who thought she had now said enough, she was now ready to return, but upon a sudden she heard him say; Well Cleon (said he) I will follow thy councel, and obey thy com∣mands; and since the gods have inspired thee with some pity upon Laonice, it is not just I should be lesse sensible of her miseries then thou art. In saying so, he began again to sigh, and the Shepherdess being all joy to hear it, she would not stay to hear any more; but going some two or three hundred paces off, she resolved to give him all opportunities, to render reall obedience unto the faigned command which she had imposed upon him. In the mean time, Tircis could not sleep any more, but thinking upon the qua∣lities of Laonices body and mind, and now having no more aversion to make him abominate all she did, he began to think that the time he should passe away with her, would be something more pleasing unto him then that which he should spend in the solitude which he had chosen. In order hereunto, he got up as soon as day dawned; and not being able to imagine where he should meet with this Shep∣herdess: but why should I trouble my self about it? (said he upon a sudden) the same gods who commanded me to love her, will doubtlesse give me the oppor∣tunity to see her. Upon this he went out, and not knowing which way to wend his course, he followed the first path his foot fell into. Laonice, who was within ken, was not long before she saw him appear; and going into his path, she sat down, and when he was within hearing the began to sing. At this voice Tircis stood amazed; and admiring the providence of the gods, in the conduct of this affection, he stole from tree to tree, till he came just unto the place where she was, as she had ended her song: He presently fell down upon his knees; and the Shepherdess seeming to be extreamly afraid, she got up, and would have fled away: But Tir∣cis catching hold of her: Fair Laonice (said he) as Cleon was formerly the cause of that little esteem which I did set upon your beauty: so she is now the cause of
that love which I come to offer unto you, and doubly happy shall I be, if I can but find a favourable reception. Laonice seeming still to wonder at all this; cruel man (answered she) are you not yet weary with tormenting me? how came you hither to persecute me, in a place which I had chosen as a remedy against your cruelty? If you be the same Tircis who has so often and so cruelly tortured me, what moves you to come now and flatter me with fair promises of happinesse, which you have so often put me out of all hopes ere to obtain? And if you be but only his Ghost, then tell me, what makes thee forsake the soul of that Cleon, whose ashes you have so long Idoliz'd? I am really the same Tircis, replied the Shepherd, who not being able to cease loving that fair one, would rather have died then changed; but since I have the command of Cleon for it, no other upon earth but only La∣onice, is to have the glory of possessing me. In saying so, he offered to take her hand, and the Shepherdess stepping back, as not daring to touch him: Stay Tir∣cis (said she unto him) I am yet in a doubt, whether what I see be real, or only an illusion; either let me recollect my spirits, or you will affright me to death. Ah Laonice, replied Tircis, could we as easily believe miracles as the gods can do them, you would soon cease your wonder. Indeed (said Laonice and interrupt∣ed him) to see Tircis upon his knees before Laonice, and to hear him talk of any love to her, are two no small miracles; and yet (said Tircis) it is not more cer∣tain that I live, then it is that I love you. I do equally make a doubt of both (an∣swered Laonice) and that which troubles me, is to know what proofs I ought to ask of what you say. Proofs most infallible (replied the Shepherd) which is my hearty repentance of the rigours which formerly I have returned you for the good will you had unto me, and an inviolable vow never to be any ones but yours: Upon this, he suddenly took her hand, and kissed it: and Laonice smiling, now (said she) I know that you have a body and are no illusion; but I will think, that certainly there is some delusion in this, unless you further acquaint me with your intention: My intention (answered the Shepherd) is sutable to my words, and if the affection which I offer unto you, do merit a kind of reception which I de∣sire, then I do conjure you, for my sake, to quit these desarts, which are places more proper for Bears and Tigers, then such beauties as yours: and let us both go to∣gether unto Mountverdune, where you shall receive from me the last testimony of my sincere affection. Laonice, who asked no more, yet was at first something shie in the matter, did ac last consent unto the desires of Tircis: As they went on the way, Tircis asked by what Fate it was, that they both met so hapyily in that Forrest, and Laonice shewed unto him the Oracle which she had received. Afterwards Tircis told her with abundance of innoceney, all the passages of the Ghost which appeared un∣to him: at which Laonice could not chuse but smile, to see what happy success her artifice had effected, which the Shepherd attributing unto her joyes to possess him, he never had the least suspition of her cunning: At last being come unto a Temple, Tircis desired Laonice to give her consent, that a Druide might mar∣ry them; which she consenting unto, the marriage was presently after solem∣nized: and then they went down together into the plain, to tell the news of their unlookt for marriage unto the Shepherds and Shepherdesses of their ac∣quaintance. These accidents hapned unto Tircis, whilst the rest of the Shepherdesses of Lignon were in extream disorder, by reason of the interest which every one had in the persons of Celadon, Astrea, Diana, and Silvander; but above all, Licidas seemed most worthy of compassion, by reason of that fury which the death of A∣lexis had caused in him: And indeed, all the way as they went, Adamas did not interpose one word unto the complaints of that Shepherd, for he found them all so just, as he could not condemn him for it. But as soon as all the company was come unto his house, and Astrea, Diana, Celadon, and Silvander were laid in those chambers which the Druide had appointed for them: Belinde and Phillis, who still kept the one with Diana, and the other with Astrea, they observed that by little and little they opened their eyes, and by some sighs which they sent forth
seemed to be yet in life. Phillis ran as fast as shee could to acquaint Adamas; who very glad of this newes, went immediately unto Celadon, to see whether any signes of life were in her: But hee found both him and Silvander also, in the same state they were at the Fountain: But though hee saw no hopes of reco∣very, yet hee and Lycidas undressed Celadon, whilst Thamiris and Hylas got Sil∣vander into bed. And when they were both in bed, the Druid laid his hand to the heart of Alexis, and found that still there remained some heat. And in∣deed, shee was only in a swound, but such a swound as by force of the Inchant∣ment was much longer and more violent then ordinary. This did so over-joy him, that he went immediately unto his Closset for such remedies as he thought more proper to fetch life again; and indeed they had such good operation, as in lesse then a quarter of an hour, they both revived out of that Lethargy into which they were fallen. Lycidas no sooner saw his brother alive, but repent∣ing himself of all his furious impieties which hee had uttered, hee kneeled down at the beds feet, and lifting up his eyes: Oh yee great Gods (said hee) who by a great Providence unknown unto us, do govern all things, I render unto you most hearty thanks, for the favour you have done me in, in restoring Celadon. Oh yee puissant Divinities, against whom my Fury did belch out Blasphemies: I do confesse the horridnesse of my Crime, and beg your Pardon. Upon this hee rose up; all joyed to see Celadon not dead. On the other side, the shepherd no sooner opened his eyes, but hee remem∣bred the danger unto which hee had exposed himself: and thinking to finde him∣self lying upon the ground full of wounds and all bloudy, hee was amazed when hee saw himself in a delicate bed; where there was not Lions nor Unicornes, but in lieu of them, Adamas and his brethren standing by him. The accident which hapned unto him in Galatheas Chamber after they had taken him out of the water, ame presently into his mind: yet not being able to imagine how he came to be rescued from the clawes of the Lions, which hee thought would have torn him in a thousand pieces, he cast his languishing eyes upon the Druid, and put∣ting one arme out of bed, hee took his hand and spoke not a word, as doubting whether the objects hee had seen were reall or only imaginary: And therefore the Druid leaning over the bed, Celadon (said hee unto him, and kissed his cheek) the Gods have been kinde unto us, and prevented the ill designes which you had against your selfe: you are still alive, my Son, maugre all your attempts to dye; and since there is a kinde of strange Fatality which will not let us lose you so soon, I do hope it will prove both unto your contentment and minde: Father, (answered Celadon then in a weak and languishing tone) I am afraid, that the same subject from whence you draw some hopes of contentment, will cause in mee a more violent despair then ever yet I resented: For if this part of life which remaines to mee must be imployed to mourne for the death of Astrea, whom I saw with mee in the same danger, and who (doubtlesse) has received from the Lions that injury which they refused mee: believe it Father, every mi∣nute that I live will be a torture to mee ten thousand times worse then death. Upon this Lycidas took him about the neck, and embracing him with a million of carresses; No no, dear Brother (said hee unto him) Astrea is as well as you are, I heard Phillis tell the Druid as much. Oh good God (cryed out Celadon) in this you have shewed your Justice: But Father (said hee to Adamas) may I believe what Lycidas saies? You may (answered the Druid) for all this is but an effect of the great enchantment; and the Lions and Unicornes are turned into statues of Marble, still keeping their form and colour: Moreover, the same things that have hapned unto you, are hapned unto Astrea, Diana, and Silvander. How? (said Celadon) is not Silvander dead? No (said the Druid). In saying so, hee drew the curtain a little, and let him see that shepherd whom Thamiris and Hylas were comforting as well as they could: For not knowing the true cause which induced him to look for a death, they thought that his sorrowes, to live so ignorant of himself, did make him desire to die: and therefore they used all the best arguments they could to perswade with him: They told him that his misfortune of being ignorant of himself, ought not to trouble him, since
the door of heaven was open unto all well qualified men alike; That his merits had gotten him the effectionate hearts of so many shepherds, as would at all times supply his necessities, and make him live as well as themselves. In fine, they gave him the best language and comfort they could; but not touching the right string, nor hitting right upon his maladie, their musick did but jarre in his ears, & did not work upon his humour, nor could they get any answers from him, but such as made them think that his sorrowes being so extreame, they did pro∣ceed from some cause unknown to them. They left him therefore in this con∣dition: For the Druid, at the instance of Celadon, who desired no other witnes∣ses but Lycidas, did draw them out of the room. As soon as they were gone, Silvander went into Celadons bed; who having received him, Shepherd (said he unto him) I have no reason to wish you well. Why? (said Celadon) Because (answered Silvander) you did divert mee from my designe of precipitating my selfe; for had it not been better for you to have been a witnesse of my death, then of the continuation of my miseries? But see now, unto what a sad con∣dition I am reduced, since I can no longer avoid the presence of Paris and Dia∣na: the envie unto one, and the change of the other, will be double death un∣to mee. I cannot repent of what I did (said Celadon) for it is my glory to have contributed any thing unto the preservation of such a shepherd as you are; but I am very sorry that you have made your self a companion of my Fortune, since you are the only cause of my not dying in this adventure: and the Gods would not have let mee live, but onely to punish mee for suffering you to hazzard your life in such an occasion wherein no other Lover but my self ought to have pe∣rished. That is a secret (said Silvander) known onely to Tautates: But Cela∣don, to let these deep miseries alone, pray tell mee if you know any thing of Diana? I had not so much leasure (answered Celadon) as to enquire, but I heard that Astrea was still alive: yet Lycidas perhaps can satisfie you. Upon this hee called him; and Lycidas sitting down at the beds feet, related what Phillis told unto the Druid: which joyed Silvander a little; but upon a sudden, fetching a deep sigh, Alas, alas replied hee, Paris is doubtlesse now with her swimming in carresses of Love. No, answered Lycidas, Paris is very busie in giving the en∣tertainments of the house; and though the accident which hapned unto Diana did not a little trouble him, yet hee was constrained to that civility by the com∣mand of Adamas, who would needs have him entertaine Galathea, Rosanira, Daphnide, Medonthe, and other Nymphes which came from Marcelles. Ce∣ladon upon this asked his brother, how long it was since they came? to whom Lycidas answered, that they came in the morning, and were all trimmed in the habit of sheperdesses, purposely to passe away the time more pleasantly. At this, Silvander began to sigh; but Lycidas even ravished with joy to see his brother, hee could not chuse but laugh. Celadon asked him the cause of his laughing. I laugh, answered Lycidas, to see Silvander jealous, and to see how that passion does produce the same effects in him, which it did in mee when hee made it his sport to vexe mee in that angry mood: and certainly to heare him talk, would make one believe that Diana has had two or three children by Pa∣ris, when God knowes, that not so much as a promise of marriage has passed be∣tween them. Silvander, who thought that Lycidas only mocked, hee changed neither face nor humour; but, on the contrary, seemed more troubled then before. Alas shepherd, said hee unto him, have you no more compassion ten to rub upon my sorest wound? What great offence have I committed against you, that can deserve so cruel a revenge? I protest, replied Lycidas, I have no thoughts of any revenge upon you: But if you could as easily hinder Paris from marrying Diana, as it is certain they are not yet married, you would quickly put an end to all your miseries. Silvander then seeming to be extreamly glad of the newes; The Gods (said hee) are my Friends: For had I dyed, I had disobeyed Diana, who did absolutely forbid mee dying, untill I hear her marriage was consumma∣ted. But, said Lycidas, what made you believe shee was married? I had no other as∣surance of it (answered Silvander) but the report of a boy which looks to my
Flock, and told mee of it with so much innocent simplicity, as I could not sus∣pect the truth of it. The same encounter is hapned unto you, said Celadon, that happens unto many others, when reports do passe through many mouthes▪, for every one addes a little, and the last will sweare they saw that which neither is, nor ever was. Most true (answered Silvander); for this young boy swore unto mee, that hee who serves Lycidas did assure him, that hee saw all the Ceremonies, & danced after the musick of the Ho-boyes, which sounded all over the Plaines: But since this Fatal Ceremonie is not yet past, Good Gods (said hee, and looked up to heaven) for pities sake prevent it, or else let my death pre∣ceed it. Silvander had no sooner uttered these few words, but hee looked upon Cela∣don, Shepherd (said hee unto him) why should wee thus slugg away the time in bed? there is nothing that hinders us from rising. True, said Celadon; Though Adamas will not let us stirre from hence, yet wee may walk up and down the Room. Upon this, Silvander took his cloaths, and whilst Celadon was seeking for his, hee had almost drest himselfe: But neither Celadon nor Lycidas could finde his cloaths; for the Druid, who as hee went out, had carried away the cloaths of Alexis, hee had forgot to put Celadons in lieu of them: so, as being forced to keep his bed, Silvander and Lycidas sate down by him: And falling into discourse concerning the Inchantment, Lycidas related unto them all that hee had seen. In the mean time, Adamas went to see Astrea, and that shepherdesse no sooner saw him near her bed, but looking upon him with such: an eye as plainly testified the astonishment wherein shee was; Father, said shee unto him, how comes it to passe you should now see mee in this bed, and nor rather in my coffin? and by what misfortune am I severed from Alexis? To this, answer∣ed the Druid, I cannot answer; for I know nothing of the accidents: But if the Gods should never let you see her again, I should think them just in it, since you have already treated her with so much disdain, as they may think they are kinde unto you in it. But Father, replied the shepherdesse, would you have mee pardon the offence which I have received from her disguise? You have told mee so much of her innocence, that I do consent to love him no lesse then for∣merly I did: and since they know that I am not now angry against her, nor can live without her, why do they not restore her unto mee? When I told you of her innocence, replied the Druid, I told you but what I thought obliged mee not to conceale, knowing her discretion so well; and you have not known since, that I said nothing but truth. Since the Unicornes were seen by you, and it is a most infallible truth, that those Animals never come near a woman who is in the least blemished in her Chastity. But the greater the innocency of Alexis is, the greater is your crime; and therefore I am a∣fraid, that the Gods do intend to punish you for it, and will never suffer you to enjoy a person whom you have without any reason twice banished from your presence. I perceive Father, said Astrea, faintly, that Alexis is dead, and that the Gods are just in punishing mee so. But they will not be just, if they let mee live, or at least will not suffer mee, after I have been punished for the unjust an∣ger I conceived against Celadon, to be recompenced for the Love which I preser∣ved for him in the midst of our greatest misfortunes. In saying so, her eyes gushed out with Tears: And Adamas having compassion upon her, Daughter, said hee do not thus immoderately afflict your self, until you hear more particulars of the losse of Alexis: my cares of bringing you hither, were a cause of my not knowing what was hapned unto her: but if you will promise to stay untill I returne with patience, I will promise to bring you a faithfull relation. Father, answered Astrea, though the condition wherein I saw her, makes mee more cer∣tain of her death, yet since you command it, I will stay till you return, that you may afterwards think my design of following her the more just: But, Fa∣ther, (continued shee) even for pities sake, do not slatter mee, in thinking to comfort mee, you will make mee the more desperate. Adamas did promise to do whatsoever shee desired, and seeing Bellinde in talk with Diana, hee would
not interrupt them, but went straight into Celadons chamber, where finding Sil∣vander out of bed, and his countenance not so sad as before, hee seemed to re∣joyce much at it. Afterwards going unto Celadon; How comes it to passe (said hee unto him) that you are not up as well as Silvander? Is not your cou∣rag as good, or are you not so well as hee? Lycidas prevented his brother in his answer; Father (said hee) neither of those are the reason of it, but because I cannot finde his cloaths. Then Adamas remembring that hee had locked them up, hee went and brought those that hee was wont to wear before his dis∣guisement; and giving them unto him, Here son, said hee unto him, may you be happy in that habit, and enjoy her whom you love best. Celadon did take them with a thousand thanks for his good wishes, and as soon as hee began to cast his eies upon them, so many thoughts came into his minde, that hee could not chuse but fetch a deep sigh: which the Druid observing, How now Celadon (said hee)? had you rather continue in your disguise, then assume this habit? I cannot tell Father, (answered the shepherd faintly) which of the two make me the more happy: For under the habit of Alexis, Astrea commanded mee to die, and under that of Celadon shee banished mee her presence. Adamas, who saw that the memory of these things did trouble him, and having no minde to talk any more of them, but withdrawing a little, to give him the more time to dresse him, Celadon (said hee) do not dispute upon the choise any longer, but weare this that I have brought unto you; and if you will referre all the rest unto mee, I will finde out a way to make you happy. Upon this, Celadon dressed himself; and when hee was ready, Adamas embraced him: Then Ly∣cidas did the same with so many tears and expressions of Love, as it was easie to judge, that the affection which tyed them together, proceeded from some stron∣ger causes than consanguinity. Silvander was extreamly joyed to see it; and as handsome as hee had appeared under the disguise of a Druides daughter, hee appeared much handsomer in the habit of a shepherd. Adamas took him by the hand, and carrying him out of the chamber, Sonne (said hee unto him) you must know, that Astrea does infinitely desire to know what is become of you, and because such welcom newes will be best from your own mouth, I think it most fit you should carry it your selfe. At this Celadon changed colour: But Father (said hee) shee has commanded mee to die, and though I did endeavour to obey her, yet it is to be feared shee will not take my endeavour for good payment. Never let that trouble you, (replied the Druid) I have so well prepared her minde in your absence, as shee is resolved never to give you any more cause of discontent. If you do love her, you must not refuse to see her; for all the hopes shee has, is now only that you are alive. In say∣ing so, hee entreated Silvander and Lycidas to accompany them unto her cham∣ber: Celadon did tremble at every step, till hee came to the beds side of that shepherdesse, and then began to sigh, and was not able to speak one word. A∣strea did mildly cast her eyes upon the Druid, and seeing him so silent, did think at first that hee brought her bad newes: Ah Father (said shee) your silence does speak my ill fortune. Tell mee truly, is Alexis dead? Then Adamas looking upon her with a seeming sad eye, Daughter (said hee) I should never be the messenger of such sad newes, but that I am forced unto it. Upon this, Astrea began to tremble: Good Father (said shee) hold mee no longer in suspence, speak plainly, and relate unto mee all the accidents that have hapned unto A∣lexis: as shee said so, shee seemed to be so sadly afflicted, as if shee had not a minute to live. Good Astrea (said Adamas) why should I relate the successe of a thing that will but displease and trouble you? You your self knowes more concerning Alexis then I do: you saw her in combare with the Lions: and by that may judge what is become of her? But good Father (answered Astrea) did the Lions turn their fury only against her? Could not I as well have satisfied their rage and hunger? Oh most cruel Fate! (continued shee with eyes flowing in teares: Miserable Astrea! Poor unfortunate Alexis, art thou dead, and my rigour the cause of it? Then shee began to tear her hair, but the Druid held her hand: Dear Daughter (said hee) first hear mee with patience what I shall say,
and afterwards execute upon your self all the violences that dispair can prompt you unto. Upon this Astrea was silent, and Adamas continued; since you will not have any thing concealed from you (said he unto her) let me tell you Daugh∣ter that it is true, Alexis is not alive, and to the end you may believe, that at the last munite of life nothing was more dear unto her then the memory of Astrea, I will restore unto you a pledge which she hath left, and which belongs only unto you. Astrea thought that Adamas would have restored unto her, the knot, the ringe, and the Picture which Celadon had of hers; and preparing her self to live so long as to receive those testimonies of her dear shepherds love and fidelity, she held her hand out unto the Druide: come Father (said she) give me that which Alexis has kept better then I have deserved. Upon this, Adamas drawing the cartaine, and taking Celadon by the hand: heere, fair Astrea (said he) heere is Celadon whom Alexis commandes you to receive, and whose life ought to be the dearer unto you, because it is preserved only for your glory, and contentment: as soon as Astrea cast her eyes upon him, and knew him, she was so extreamly surprised, and in such a confusion of thoughts as she stood for a while as inmoveable as any statue: But Celadon on the contrary, kneeling down upon the ground, and taking her hand, My fairest Astrea, said he unto her, if my extream love be worthy of any favour, I do most humbly be∣seech you to pardon all the faults that ever I committed against your beauty: If the miseryes which I have suffered be not enough to satisfie you, oh fairest, let your goodness supply the fault: and to restore me, if not unto the same place which once I had in your heart, yet at the least unto so much leave as to render you the same services, which formed seemerly acceptable unto you. The shepherd uttered these words in such a passionate manner that Astrea could not chuse but be much moved at them, laying aside them, all termes of modesty, and thinking upon nothing but love, she embraced him, and though her wonder, & her teares did much interrupt her speech, yet he through excessive fulness of, joy forced out these words: My dearest Celadon, I do not only restore you unto that Room which once you had in my heart, but I do give you my self my heart and all: and if after so many injuries as I have done you, I have any power with you I beseech and command you to live and love me. At this Celadon stood amazed, and it was long before he was able to open his mouth: But at last, recollecting himself. Yes yes, my fairest Astrea (replied he) I will love and live and since you are pleased to command it, I will endeavour as much to preserve my life, as I have to distroy it: when I thought that my passion was not pleasing unto you, every moment of my life was as horrid unto me as death: but now since your compassion has suffered my perseverance to overcome you, and since the remem∣brance of my services has inspired you with a kindness to re-admit me into your favour, oh dearest star of my life, my dayes shall not be without any nights, and not a shepherd about all Lignon, shall be comparably so full of joyes as I am. My beloved shepherd replied Astrea very sweetly, if your joyes and felicity does de∣pend upon my affection, you have good reason to say that you shall be highly happy, since my affection is most perfect: and to put you out of all doubt of me, be assured Celadon, I will sooner die then faile in the least fillable I have spo∣ken; and let Lignon be as angry with me as I was with it when I thought it the extinguisher of your life, and flames if I do not most religiously observe all the promises that ever I made in your favour. Beleive me, my dearest Son, I do  this very present, renew and confirm unto you all the assurances of my affection▪ My fairest Astrea (said Celadon, even ravished with excess of joy and delight,) if I do receive these sweet words as the most soveraign balsome against all thy mi∣seryes▪ may Lignon repent it ever spared my life; and if ever I offer to displease you eyther in deed, word or very thought, may the air I breath in be an eternall plague unto me; Dearest Son (said Astrea, and interrupted) I know that you love me better then I do deserve; but as great as your affection is cannot surpase the desire which I have of your love; for indeed Celadon I would have you wholy mine, for as never any misfortune may be able to break in sunder those chaine wherewith love has united out wits; In saying so, she embraced him again: and
Celadon was so ravished with joyes as he did not only forget all his past miseryes but also did insensibly lose the knowledge of himself; and doubtless he had died in this rapture if Phillis who was a witness of this reconciliation had not took him about the neck in expression of her joyes to see him again in that habit. Bellinde and Diana were also very attentive unto their discourse; and though the sorrowes which Diana resented were incapable of any cure; yet it was some comfort unto her, to see her Companion so happy. Adamas on the other side, who feared that the spirit of Astrea being so sud∣dainly transported from one extremity unto another might do her some harm, he was very glad to see their carresses interrupted, and going to her: Daughter (said he) if the life of Celadon be dear unto you, you must suffer him to be car∣ryed away for I am afraid that as your rigours had formerly cost him his life so now your favours will do the same: Father (answered Astrea) the benefits which I have received from you, are not comparable unto those the gods bestow upon us: you alone have given Celadon unto me, and you may take him from me when you please without injustice I do intend (said Adamas(to part you but a short while; for I protest, before to morrow be expired, I will marry you to∣geather, and will send expresly to Phocion about it, provided it be not repugnant to your will; Celadon and Astrea both expressing that to be the only object of their desires: my Children, (said the Druide) may heaven make you happy in each other: The reason why I deferre the ceremony untill to morrow, is only because I would have it done more solemly, and have Phocion a witness of it. In saying so, he took Celadon by the hand, and carryed him out of the Chamber, after he had advised the shepherdess to take a little rest, for after her two or three dayes travel, it was the only physique that would recover her health: upon this small seperation, the eyes of Astrea and Celadon did dart, and communicate unto each other all the hidden secrets of love under the constraint of silence; And though the cause of their parting should not have discontented them, yet they could not chuse but greive at it, and think it one of those bitter pilles which hea∣ven does ordinarily mixe amongst the pleasures of life. Adamas was no sooner gone out, but Bellinde did seat her self upon her Daugh∣ters bed, well Daughter (said she unto her in a low voice) heere is your Com∣panion, ready to see all her desires accomplished, and will suffer mine to find a contrary success? She is goeing to enjoy a million of delights in the society of Ce∣ladon, and are not you ashamed to refuse those which I do offer unto you in the enjoyment of Paris? You cannot now alleadge one just exception against him: for you are now dispensed from your vow of going to live with her amongst the Carnutes, since she her self will not assume that order upon her, and if you have taken any oath to be a follower of her fortunes as you told me that you had, then since she prepares her self for marriage, so must you prepare your self for the same kind of life: Madam (answered Diana very faintly, and faigning her self to be as sick in body as in mind) the condition wherein I am me thinks should move you to make preparation of a coffin for me rather then a husband; I do find the ap∣proaches of death so near as I cannot think upon any worldly matter: and if you value my contentment I do conjure you Madam (continued she in a weak, and languishing tone) even by the name of Mother, not to trouble me with any more of such discourse, since all is to no purpose, and cannot produce your desired effects. These expressions did so greive Bellinde, as nothing suspecting her cun∣ning, she verily beleived, that she was even ready to expire: and therefore with eyes flowing in teares, she said unto her; Ah my dear Diana, since this discourse is troublesome unto you, I will not use it any more only promise me to live, and let no discontents trouble you: for I swear that if you give me any hopes of reco∣very unto your former health; I will do all that possibly I can to obtain from the gods that you may never marry, and that they will revoke the sentence which they have already pronounced in favour of Paris. Diana was very glad that Bel∣linde did slacke in her severity of constraining her to marriage: so as faining to assume a little strength, and raysing her feeble voice, Madam (said she) if ever I did disobey you without abundance of regret, may the gods punish you:
and I protest that if they will but send me three dayes of life, I will punctually do whatsoever you shall command me. Diana, spoke this only to keep Bellinde in a good humour, and that she should not mistrust that she had any design of attempting any thing upon her self, But her maine drift was to make use of the time, as so to deceive Bellinde, that she might make an escape, and follow the fate of Silvander whatsoever it was. She du not in her Mothers presence enquire one sillable of him yet being infinitly impatient to know what was become of him, and conceiving that Phillis might perhaps know, she thought that if Bellinde were once goneu▪ Phillis would tell her all. She sheemed therefore to be desirous of sleep, and shutting her eyes, faigned a slumber. Bellinde who heard the Druide say, that sleep and rest was absolutely necessary for Astrea, she thought it as convenient for Diana, and was very glad to see a disposition of sleep upon her: with drawing her self therefore as softly as she could, she entreated Phillis to have a care of her whilst she went unto Adamas. Phillis did promise she would, and did verily beleive but Com∣panion was a sleep, so well could she counterfet the matter; But as soon as ever Bellinde was out of the Room, the sicke shepherdesse leaped out of her bed, and went into Astreas: Sister (said she unto her) I am riving betwixt some thoughts that are very different: I am extreamly glad to see you ready to enjoy the happi∣ness which Adamas hath procured you, in restoring you Celadon; And it greives my soul to see the gods refuse Silvander unto me: The interest I have in your con∣tentment does much mitigate the violence of my greif: but I must needs confesse I cannot be quite clear from all sorrowes, for besides my greif that the gods will not suffer me to enjoy him, it greives me also that I cannot hear what is become of him: Companion (answered Phillis) the very same which hapned unto you at the fountain by reason of the enchantment, hath hapned unto him also: So as hee was brought in the same coach with you; and being put into the same Cham∣ber with Celadon, Adamas was so officious about him, that hee is now, as well as you are: and indeed the Druide told me that hee was up, and that hee left him with Lycidas. Alas, (replied Diana) who was infinitly disitrous to see him, that she might tell him what discourse she had with Bellinde) to what purpose is it, there should be sick a conformity in our humours and lives, as long as the desti∣nies will not suffer our desires to produce the same effects? In saying so, she could not chuse but sigh; afterwards addressing her self unto Astrea. But ister (said she) why should we shut light out of the Room? would Phillis would be plea∣sed to open the windowes, and that we might both get out of bed where we can∣not rest, you by reason of your joyes, and I by reason of my sorrowes; But sister (answered Astrea) Adamas has so expresly enjoyned me to keep my bed till morning, as I should think it a grand crime to disobey him, as for your de∣sires of seeing Silvander (for I know your impatiency proceds from thence) it is probable that the day will not passe away, before it has given you that content∣ment: Well, (said Diana) since hee has commanded it to bee so, we will not disobey: and since we are to bee left alone, if Silvander do come, my Mother will not bee heere. Well well (said Phillis presently upon this) I shall propound an expedient unto you: make me your confident, and do not conceale any part of your soul from me; Then shall I do something for the satisfaction of that shep∣herd, in exchange of the harm I did him when I took your bracelet from him. Then dear Companion (replied Diana) I beseech you tell him—no no, re∣plied Phillis, and interrupted her) I will not tell him any thing: for perhapes hee will not believe me; but write what you will unto him; and I shall deliver your Letter with as much fidelity as you can desire: Alas (answered Diana) that cannot bee, because we know not how to goe eyther pad, ink, or paper. I will see, (said Phillis) in saying so, she opened the window, and going unto a little ebony cabinet, by fortune she found in it, an inborn, and five or sixe sheets of paper; For Adamas kept such a cabinet in every Chamber, for the con∣veniency of such as lay in them, in case they stood in need of them: ringing them therefore unto Diana, she was so importance with her, that she prevailed, and made her write a Letter; and then took upon her to deliver it unto Silvander▪
so she left Diana and Astrea alone, after a promise that she would tell all the world that they were asleep: so as none might offer to come and interrupt them. Paris all this while was entertaining Rosaulra, Galathea, and the best in the great chamber, where manger all disastrous accidents, he was constrained to put on a face of civility, though he seemed unto his company to be in no manner of con∣straint: These new Shepherdesses stayed not long in that room; for they desired to go into the Garden, which was a piece of such an exquisitness, that neither Art not Nature could not add any greater ornament unto the house of the Druide, then it: After they had walked a while, they sate down in an Arbour at the end of a long walk, just opposite to the Garden door where they entred: They had not been there above a quarter of an hour, before they saw Adamas enter, hold∣ing Silvander in one hand, and another Shepherd in the other, whom at the first sight they knew not: yet, they concluded him to be a person of some considera∣tion, as well by reason of the esteem which the Druide made of him, as by rea∣son of his handsome and comely deportment: Yet, as Adamas drew nearer and nearer, so they began to be out of the doubt wherein they were; for the Nymph Golathea, who since she first cast her eye upon him, did find some extra∣ordinary motion in her soul, she presently cryed out, O, it is Celadon: In saying so, she rose up to go and meet the Druide; and all the rest doing the same, as soon as Adamas saw them coming he doubled his pace, and when he was near Galathea, Madam (said he, and presented Celadon unto her) here is one whom your compassion did save from drowning, and I come to offer him unto you, as unto one whom he belongs unto. Upon this, the Shepherd kneeled down upon the ground, and kissed the Nymphs hand; but she, who new the quality and merit of Celadon, did presently take him up, and after she had embraced him, A∣damas (said she) I do receive your present, and will love him the more dearly, because having rescued him out of the jaws of death, I may in some sort say, he is mine own. Most true, Madam, answered the Shepherd, for if I do not ow my birth unto you, yet I do my preservation, which was a favour of so high a dearness, as I shall sooner die then lose the memory of it: Yes, yes (replied Ga∣lathea, taking the Shepherd by the hand, and carrying him to the place where all the company was) you do ow unto me all this fresh coulour which is now in your cheek; and but for me; your handsome body would have been food for fishes. Madam, replied Celadon, I do know that I ow my life unto you, and will me, willingly imploy it in your service; but yet, replied Galathea, I make more doubt of you affection, then I do of your courage: for the truth is, you were alwayes insensible of my love, and all my expression of affection unto you never moved you. Celadon did blush at this discourse, remembring how he had been persecu∣ted in the Pallace of Isoures; and after he had looked about and saw none fol∣low, he expected a shrewd combate. Yet being fully resolved to fail, rather in his respects unto the Nymph, then in his fidelity to Astrea: Madam replied he, if ever I failed in my humble acknowledgements, it was rather a fault in my wit, then in my wil: I have ever endeavoured not to appear ungrateful for the favour of your compassion, and if I cannot satisfie such obligation as you have loadned me withall, it is your own fault, Madam, who has made them too high for me to requite. Ah Celadon (said Galathea) I never demanded any Empires of Kingdomes from you; what I required might easily have been done, my ambition never aim∣ed any higher then to enjoy you: and had you consented unto that, I should have thought my self sufficiently paid for all the cares and pains I took for your preservation: I do most humbly beseech your pardon Madam (said Celadon sad∣ly) if I say, that I could not satisfie your desire without committing a most ex∣tream injustice: for then I had disposed of that which was anothers, and had not given you that which was not mine own. If there be any crime in this, the charms of Astrea are guilty of it, or rather the gods themselves, who have suf∣fered that Shepherdess so to overcome me, as it is impossible I should be anyes but only hers, or ever drawn out of that servitude, wherein her beauty and merit
keeps me fast prisoner. What Celadon (said Galathea) are you in this mind still? Yes Madam, answered the Shepherd, and I have neither will nor power to be o∣therwise. What then must Galathea do? replied the Nymph, do you think she can survive so many rigorous scorns and disdains as you seem to have of her? Fair Nymph (said Celadon, and looked upon her with an eye full of respect and constraint) if you be sorry for saving that life which was ready to perish, com∣mand me to restore you that which you preserved: I am most ready to die, and do protest it will be a great satisfaction unto me to lose my self in obeying you, and making it appear to the world, that nothing can dissolve those knots wherewith Love hath enchained me: As he said so, his eyes stood in water; and Galathea, who held all this dicourse with him, only to try his fidelity, Celadon (said she and embraced him) live happy in the love of your Shepherdess, I swear unto you, that I will never be jealous, but her contentment shall be a cause of mine: Heaven at the last, has had compassion upon me, and cured my soul of those wounds which that Impostourous Druide had made in it: I do pardon the flight of Lucinde, and the treason of all her Complices; and to discover the most inti∣mate secret of my soul unto you, know Celadon, that Lindamor is only in my heart: but that you may not think your self a loser by this change, assure your self Shepherd, that I will love and esteem you as long as I live: In saying so, she embraced him again, and Celadon transported with joy, did cast himself at her feet, and kissing her hand, Madam (said he) it is now that I must acknowledge my self most really obliged unto you for my life, since you do give unto my soul, that only thing which could make it live with delight: Upon this, the Nymph took his hand, and carryed him to the rest of the company. Belinde came into the Garden almost at the same time, and after her Phillis, of whom Galathea enquired particularly of Astrea and Diana: and this Shepherdess answering that they were asleep and took good rest, the Nymph turned towards Celadon, and so may you with her (said she in a low voice) as long as you live; and may all those that offer to disturb you be hated of heaven. Celadon had hardly leasure to return her thanks for her good wish, for at the same time he was mingled amongst the rest. But Phillis, who came only to give Silvander a con∣contentment above his expectation, did endeavour to have discourse with him un∣seen unto any; and yet she was afraid, that if she did not acquaint Licidas, it might revive his passion of jealousie, which had cost her so much trouble before, so as she was constrained to impart her secret unto him, and thus her freedome was so pleasing unto that Shepherd, as he went presently unto Silvander, and pretending to shew him a flower, the name whereof he desired to know, he drew him a little aside, and told him that Phillis had something to say unto him: so as severing himself by degrees from the company, and Phillis observing him, she al∣so stole away, and met him in a close Arbour, so thick with leaves, that none could see them. Phillis found Silvander a little surprized; for remembring a command which she once brought him from Diana about a bracelet, he thought she came upon the like message now, and was extreamly perplexed; but the Shepherdess knowing his fears, Silvander (said she unto him) I have been so accustomed to do you ill offices, as the very sight of me is an alarm unto you: but, though heretofore you have had some cause to fear meeting with me, yet you have now reason to desire it. Upon this, not giving him so much time as to reply, she gave him Dianas Let∣ter, and said unto him, here Silvander, take this in full recompence of all the harm I ever did you, when I took my companions bracelet for you: The Shep∣herd took it, kissed it; and afterwards, with a trembling hand opening it, he read these words.
DIANA's Letter unto SILVANDER. IF you be any thing troubled concerning me, know my dearest Silvan∣der, that I do live only, because you are not dead: If your curiosi∣ty do reach so far, as to enquire after my health, never consult with any other Physician but your own self, and according to the state wherein you find your self, so judge of me and my condition. They tell me, that tomorrow, Love is to pronounce some Oracles, perhaps we shall there here something which concerns our Destinies. In the mean time, have a care of your own preservation for my sake, and be assured, that if they do forbid me from being Silvanders, I will never be the wife of Paris: Live therefore and adieu. Silvander had no sooner done readnig this Letter, but he kissed it a thousand times; and his soul admiring the affection and fidelity of this Shepherdess, he read it over and over again five or six times, as if he had doubted whether or no his eyes had deceived him in making him to hope for a blessing so far beyond his expectation. At last, turning towards Phillis: Most true fair Shepherdess (said he unto her) the happiness which now you have brought me is a full satisfaction for all the harms you ever did me; but if you will make this favour most per∣fectly compleat, do me the honour to tell my fairest Mistress, how I do resent her compassion upon my love and misery: Tell her, dear Phillis, that I will live as long as she keeps her promise inviolable, or as long as there is any hopes to enjoy her: If she measure her health by mine, tell her she may safely leave her bed, since I do find no disposition unto mine: Phillis now repented that she did not bring with her the Inkhorn which Diana made use of; but thinking that this Shep∣herdess would give credit unto the report which she should make, she promised Silvander to deliver the message faithfully, and bidding adieu unto Licidas, she returned presently to her companions: unto whom, relating all passages, and the joyes which Silvander resented at the reading of the Letter, Diana was infinitly comforted. In the mean time, Adamas, Galathea, Rosanira, Celadon, and the rest, were gone into a walk upon the left hand, which led them insensibly into a little wood, which the Druide had inclosed within the pale of his garden: But they were no sooner entred into it, then they heard a voice which made a most lamentable noise. Adamas, who never heard the like, he was extreamly desirous to know what it was; and remembring how Astrea was carryed away in the time of Pole∣mas his Rebellion, he was afraid, that some Shepherdess was menaced with the like accident: therefore he ran unto the place, from whence he thought this hi∣deous noise came; and he was no sooner come unto it, with Rosanira, Galathea, and the rest who followed him, but they perceived that it was man striving and struggling in the arms of Olicarsis. This sight did extreamly surprize them; and the more, when the man doubl∣ing his cries, and Olicarsis still striving with him till he was ill in a sweat, they ap∣peared to have some ill designs one against the other; and Olicarsis, being the stronger, had surmounted the resistance of his enemy. They advanced there∣fore to part them, but at the very same time, the man fell to the ground, with so little sign of life, as every one thought him dead. They knew him presently to be the same man which came with Olicarsis and Halladine, which caused them all to fix their looks upon the good old man, who looking also upon them again without saying a word, but putting his hand into his pocket, he pulled out his handkerchief, and wiped his face. Mean time Adamas extreamly astonished, and not knowing what to think of this strange accident, he addressed himself unto Olicarsis, whilst the rest went unto him that was fallen, to see if they could reco∣ver
him. But Olicarsis, upon a sudden raising up his voice, and being a little re∣collected: Fair Shepherdesses (said he unto them, for such he thought Rosani∣ra, Galathea, Dorinde, Daphnide, Madonthe, Silvia, and the rest to be) do not wonder to see that man in such a condition: it is by an accident which is very or∣dinary unto him, and is no lesse wonderful then the cause from whence it pro∣ceeds. Every one seemed extreamly desirous to know what the matter was, e∣specially Galathea, who could not chuse but make her curiosity appear: which Olicarsis perceiving. I do very well know (said he unto them) that I cannot make a discourse of it unto you, without being very tedious; but since you seem so desirous of it, I will not be sparing of my labour; since the man will give us time enough to do it, for he will not awake out of this Lethargie wherein you see him, this two hours: So every one seeming still more and more desirous to hear Olicarsis, they all sate round about him, and he began thus.: The History of OLICARSIS and AZAHIDES. THat morning, when this Shepherdess came and interrupted us (meaning Phillis) I was beginning to relate unto you, prt of those passages which hapned in the Empiredome of the East, and in that of the West, since Ʋrsaces, Eudoxe, Olimbres, and Placidia, were recompenced all the pains which Love had made them suffer; and because it is in some sort necessary, I should tell them unto you, to make you the more admire at the Fatality which brought me hither, I will now begin my discourse where I left last: first begging your excuse, if by a Narration perhaps too long. I shall offend your ears and patience. Give me leave to tell you then, that the affection which I testified unto the sage Eudoxe, during her captivity unto Genserick, did purchase me so great a share in the friendship of Vrsaces and Olimbres, as we may all say, that ever since we have been all one and the same. This was the reason, that when they departed, I beseeched the King to let me got with them; and their design was, to prefer me unto Marcian, as conceiving that sage Emperour would love me when he once knew me; but Ginserick, who perhaps doubted or feared, that the remembrance of my imprisonment would beget some resentmeats in me against him, he would not upon any terms give me leave. But on the contrary, thinking that honours and riches were the most powerful charms that he could use to keep me about his person, he began to put me upon imployments which were very troublesome un∣to me, since they diverted me from my studies; but yet very honourable they were, since they were the greatest offices in all his Dominions. A correspon∣dency betwixt Vrsaces, Olimbres, and me, did not yet die, notwithstanding the Rigour of this separation; but as if absence were a means to link us in affection the more firmly; it did encrease amongst us at that distance. We were exceedingly vi∣gilant and careful in sending unto each other; and as I gave them an accompt of all my businesse and negotiations, so I believe, they did participate unto me their most intimate thoughts. Thus I heard of their return unto Marcian; the Car∣resses wherewith that Emperour did solemnize their marriage, and in fine, the greatest part of that which I shall tell you in the Sequel of this discousre. Be pleased to know that Marcian shas no sooner entred upon the seventh year of his Empiredome, but as it is the quality of virtue to beget much envy and jealousie, so the merit of that sage Emperour did raise those two passions in the minds of Arda∣bures and Aspar, who having been much in Constantinople, did think, that to obtain the Empire, there needed no more, but to take the Crown from off the head of Marcian They began therefore to plot and make parties against him; and find∣ing that his life would be a main obstacle in their way (what will not ambition do to get a Crown) they dispatched him by poyson. Judge, I beseech you, how nearly his death did concern Vrsaces and Olimbres, and how nearly they resented
it, since they were beholding unto him for the greatest part of their well-beings. This was the cause, that they, in some sort, suspecting the Authours of this abo∣minable Patricide, they did generally oppose themselves against their designes, and negotiated so well, that Ardabures and Aspar, being failed in their preten∣tions, a great Grecian was chosen Emperour, called Leon, and born in the Town of Bestique: It is true, that their Faction being extreamly strong, they would not consent unto this election, but upon condition that the Raigns of the Em∣pire, should be for a time in the hands of Aspar. Leon made no difficulty to re∣ceive him as a partner; but he made them all know presently after, that Empiredom admits of no Competitours, and that when he consented unto it, he promised no less then an impossibility. In the mean time, Leon, amidst his joyes to see the Empire of the East submit∣ted unto him. he did not forget what Vrsaces and Olimbres had done in his fa∣vour; and knowing that Martians affection unto them was very great, he thought it but just he should succeed him, as well in his love to them, as in his crowns. Expressing himself then as kindly as possibly he could, he desired them to continue their affections to him, and protested, that when any opportunities presented themselves, wherein he might honour them, he would prefer them be∣fore all other persons whatsoever. Look now upon Leon for a while peaceable in the East, but so were not we in Africa: for Majoranus, who succeeded Maxi∣mus in the Empire of the West, to get Sicily out of the hands of Genserick who was become the Master of it, he made attempts that was worthy of his courage, and in his design (as they say) of coming to burn us in our houses, he was mi∣serably murdered by the same Souldiers who made choice of him. His death, which shewed all the world how short a while the favours of Fortune do last, did give us some rest, and made Genserick rouz up his former courage and designs: so as raising a Puissant Army, he put himself into a condition to resist all men whom he accounted his enemies: And certainly his preparations were not in vain, for soon after the death of Majoranus Soverian, who succeeded him, prepared himself to prosecute the designs of his Predecesson; but hearing of our forces, he presently changed advice, and turned his arms against the Alans, whom he de∣feated near Bergamus, and there killed their King Beringus Perhaps this victo∣ry had blown up his courage, and carryed him upon some new enterprise against us; but his death, which was almost as sudden as his Predecessours, thought not so violent, did at once stifle his designs and hopes upon Rome. During this time, Genserick, as I told you before, had ready shipt a brave and gallant Army, so as not to let it lie idle, he resolved to give Rome a second visit, invited unto it (as I think) by the memory of his first spoils. His design was not so secretly carried, but the Emperour Leon was advertised of it, who, not to let Italy perish in that disorder wherein it then was, did send Anthemius to defend it from the invasion of the Vandals. But Genserick, who quickly knew that he should be molested in his enterprize, by the pretentions of one Gervandus, who since was exiled, he hasted away; and having made Thrasimond Lieutenant Ge∣neral of his Army, did leave his other Son in Carthage, with an express prohibi∣tion not to ordain any thing before he had communicated unto me, and taken my advice. I remained therefore by this means in Africa, where, if I had entertain∣ed any had intentions, I had not wanted means to put them in execution; but ever being an hater of all evil actions, I would sooner have died then done them. Besides thus, I did extreamly love Thrasimond and the young Prince, with whom I stayed as a Governour: so as the interest of this affection, was enough to make me forget the greatest injuries I ever received from their Father. Genserick then embarqued himself, flattering himself with hopes, that his vo∣yage would be no lesse prosperous, then the conquest of all the world. But O, how fond and deceitful are all humane intentions? One single day saw all this glory, and all this war like Array, vanish to nothing: for Leon, who feared that Anthemius was not strong enough to resist so formidable an Army, did haste away relief under the conduct of one Basiliscus, who being, by the favour of the gods and the winds, joyned with him, did defeat Genserick, and gave him
so sharp a chase, as he was constrained to retire into Carthage, with as much shame and infamy, as his ambition did before promise him glory and honour. In a very short time, this Basiliscus made himself master of Sicily, and regained all that the conquests of Genserick had ravished from the Romane power; but not contenting himself with those Trophes which he had already gotten, whilst An∣themius was returned to Rome, he designed to subjugate Africa, and not to leave Genserick so much ground as to make himself a grave. This resolution did put Genserick into a greater confusion, then I am able to expresse: He saw all his Armies defeated, Basiliscus triumphant, Sicily lost, the Vandals ruined, and all Africa affrighted: so as not knowing which way to resist his enemy, one day he did me the honour to communicate himself unto me: I freely told him, that if he did not think himself able to defend himself by force, he had no other way but to have recourse unto Pollicy, and that the most favour∣able expedient would be, to stop the mouth of his enemy by corrupting him with gifts and promises; and that though he spent herein all the riches that he had got∣ten by the plunder of Rome, yet would have this advantage by it, that he gave nothing but was their own, and had thereby preserved his life and estate. This proposition did sound well in his ears, and thinking that perhaps I had wit enough to bring this about, he imployed me to go unto Basiliscus, and gave me a full power to manage this negotiation as seemed good unto me. Upon this I went, and found Basiliscus advanced very far; but not to insist upon every circumstance and course I took to overcome him; let it suffice I tell you, that after I had told him there was no prudence in exasperating an enemy so far as to make him despe∣rate: That the greatest glory he could hope for, was to get by his valour all that which Italy had lost: That Genserick did offer to restore it unto him, even all the riches that he had brought from Rome. This Man, who doubtlesse was of a greedy and covetous Nature, was wrought upon by the promises which I had made unto him, to keep this negotiation so secret, that never any could come to the knowledge of it. Thus did I in some sort give peace unto Africa, and rest unto Genserick, who had no sooner performed the conditions of this secret treaty; but Basiliscus, sus∣pected as I believe (for it is impossible such actions should long lie hid) was commanded by Leon to return unto Constantinople. This Emperour would ne∣ver suffer neither Vrsaces nor Olimbres to be absent from him: for trusting in their courages and affections, also suspecting the Factions of Ardabures and Aspar, he was very glad to keep them by him, as two Pillars to support him in cases of necessity; but at this time, when the malice of these two Factions had broken out anew, and Vrsaces and Olimbres, after several skirmishes, little pre∣vailing, he was constrained to send for Basiliscus, who had under him the only forces which could secure him in the possession of the Empire. Basiliscus then, was no sooner sent for, but Vrsaces addressing himself unto Olimbres, and telling him how great a shame unto them it was, that they could not do any service unto Leon, and that it was better for them to perish in a brave attempt then to stay and let another have the glory of giving peace unto the East: to whom Olimbres, whose spirit aspired unto great actions, answering that he was ready to avoid that stain upon their honours, they assembled together one day all the Forces they could raise, and charged Ardabures and Aspar so furiously, that after a long and sharp Combate, wherein the loss of blood was the least mark of their courages, they took them both Prisoners, and brought them to the mercy of Leon, who to stop all fears of any further Rebellion, did publickly put them to death. This was the state of things, whilst Anthemius found how far the perfidie and ingratitude of a man could go: for Rithimer, a Goth by Nation, whom Severian had made a Citizen of Rome, and Lieutenant of his Army, and unto whom An∣themius married his daughter, he rose up against him; and forgetting all the be∣nefits which he had received from his father in Law, he strove at the Empire, and endeavoured to usurp the Crown and Authority. Anthemius, more grieved at his ill Nature, then at his pretentions, did generously oppose himself against his en∣terprises,
and had no sooner advertised Leon of Rithimers ingratitude, but the Emperor dispatched Olimbres to him, to deliver him from the oppressions of this kinsman-enemy. But the doom of the destinies being inevitable, some accident or other impeded the voyage of Olimbres so as he came no farther then Ravenna, when Rithimer, having violated the peace which he contracted with Anthemius only to have the more facility to betray him did rebell a new: defeated Belemer, who came with relief unto Anthemius; Entred into Room: plundered the houses: Pillaged the statly Palaces, burned the Temples, and miserbaly put him to the sword who had done him so many benefits. This violence had like to have killed Olimbres with greif, and the more because he conceaved that he might have stopped his comming unto Rome. But this hor∣rid cruelty did incense the gods much more, who being unwilling to suffer such abominable iniquity, and base treachery to passe unpunished, they would never suffer such an impious wretch to raign, but let him die the most violent death that ever did man. Olimbres presently after, was declared Emperor, and called unto Rome as the only hope of that desolate estate: which news quickly carried unto Car∣thage, and was so welcome unto Genserick, and Thrasimond, because of the af∣fection which they ever bare unto him that they resolved to give some perticular testimony of their joy: For my part, I must confesse my joyes were far above my expressions or any imagination, and in my excesse of gladnesse I thought a thou∣sand times of that which an Astrologer foretold him, (which was, that he should not die untill he was made Emperor, and had commanded the Empire of the west) not bring able to comprehend how it was possible any mortall man could without a miracle have such perfect knowledge of future things. At last, after I had long thought upon it, I found the proverbe true, which sayes, that as one misfor∣tune is alwayes followed with another, so very often one good fortune is accom∣panied with another: for Genserick, who as I said before, resolved to make ap∣pear his joyes at the advancement, and good fortune of Olimbres he would add unto my joyes at this news, another; whith was, to be a witnesse of it. He com∣manded me then, to prepare my self for this voyage: and I swimming in such delights as this encounter did promise me, hoping that happily, it would make Placidia come to Rome, and that Eudixe, and Ʋrsaces might meet there also, in two dayes I set all things in such good order, that I was ready to part away. Genserick provided a Ship purposly for me, in which, he put some men of war, and loadned me with so many rich presents for Olimbres, as I may most truly say, I never saw so much riches togeather in my life. So after Genserick, Thrasimond, and his Brother had committed me to the protection of the gods, we weighed Anchor: our Marrinors sang himnes to the honour of Neptune, and presently after we lost the sight of Carthage, some Merchants wich traffiqued into Italy, joyned themselves with us: and having as favorable a Gale as we could wish, every one had good hopes in the conclusion our voyage, since the beginning was so prosperous. Thus we sailed some dayes without any impediment: but as if the Dieties of the Sea, who live in a perpetuall inconstancy, were angry at our happiness, we quick∣ly found, that the intervall between prosperity, and adversity is but very smale: Indeed, with in your space of one hower we saw the little curle that was upon the face of the water turned into Mountainous billowes, upon that humide element, which losing themselves in one another, did seem to justle, and strive which should give the greatest shoke against our Ship. The winds which before swelled one sailes which a gentle breath, turned into contrarys, and began a war amongst themselves, and contended which should first overturn us. Yet we found worse enemyes then all these: the air at the same time became obscure, and afforded us no light but lightning, affrighting voyces of thunder, & flaming flashes of light∣ning set fire upon some of our Ships, which we saw burning in the midst of the waves, whilst it was impossible for us to save one man, for such as thought to avoid the flames, were immediatly swallowed up by the waves. In this horrid confusion, the Pilats did abondon themselves unto the mercy of the enraged Sea:
and the Marriners having no hopes of any safty but in their prayers, they cut their masts and cordage, and left all to violence of the wind and waves. For my part, I must needs confesse that in this danger, death did never present it self unto me with a more grime contenance, and it grieved me extreamly that I was to end my dayes before I had enjoyed the happiness of seeing Olimbres. This tempest lasted eight whole dayes, during which I may say we hardly ever saw, any day or light: sometimes we were rouled one way, sometimes another, and seemed only as if it were to make choise of a place for Shipwrack, for every where we found the same dangers. At last, that Ship wherin I was, being bigger, and stronger then any of the rest, and the last the perished, it clashed against some rockes to∣ward the Massilian coast; and as if Neptune had reserved us for the last victime, as soon as ever our Ship was shevered to pieces, the air cleared up; the stormes ceased, and the Sea was calm: Those whom fear had not killed, did perish as I think with the Ship: and I, who was resolved to keep my self alive as long as I could, I took a little wooden Goffer, wherin I kept some oyntments, and essen∣ses to help such as stood in need of them, and with it I cast my self into the water: My design was to swim as long as my strength lasted, assuring my self that I should prolong my life two or three howers, and perhaps the gods during that time might send some help. Thus, sometimes sustained by my little wooden Coffer, and sometimes swimming, I perceived that I was not far distant from the rock against which our Ship was split; Then I assumed fresh courage, and strength and by the help of heaven which never forsook me in any necessity I came to the place where I desired to be. I was no sooner out of the water, but being both weary, and wet, I put off all my cloathes, and lay my self down by them, which I did not put on again untill the Sun had dryed them. From hence did I see floating in the Sea the reliques of our Shipwrack: and after I had a little contemplated upon the misfor∣tune which had caused so many men, and so much wealth to perish, I began to consider also that my own fate was not much more favourable, since I saw that my life could not be preserved long upon that rock, so naked as I was, and with∣out any supply of food against hunger. Yet still hoping in the goodness of hea∣ven whose anger was appeased, I strove against this greedy Monster all the rest of the day, and all the night following: and the next morning, when my heart began to faint for want of food, I resolved to make use of my essenses, of which when I came from Carthage, I had made good provision; I laid my hand then upon the little Coffer never remembring that I had left the key of it in the Ship. And therefore when I saw I could not open it, I resolved to break it: but I had no sooner lifted it up to dash it against the rock, then I considered that the force of the blow would infallibly break all the glasses, and spill the essenses. Upon this thought I laid the boxe at my feet, and lifting up my eyes unto heaven to aske some help, I espied a Ship under full saile, and which being very well equipaged, seemed as if she had not been at Sea during the time of the storm. I began pre∣sently to crye out as loud as ever I could: but I quickly sound my voice was to no purpose, and that it was impossible it should reach so far: Therefore putting off my shirt, I waved it in the air, like a banner; which I had not done above half a quarter of an hower or there about, but I perceived them to untye the Cock∣boate, and row towards me with four or five men only in it. Judge how I was joyed at this: indeed I am not able to express how much: but so it was, that I hasted to dresse my self, and in my feares, least some new mis∣fortune should hinder me of this relief which seemed to be so near me, I thought that they did not row so fast as they might have done: yet in lessethen half an hower they came unto the rock where I was, and they were no sooner come but I leaped into the boate, never remembring the boxe which was when all my for∣tune, and the only remedy I had left to comfort me against the injury of the wa∣ter. Yet after my spirits were a little recollected I began to think upon the im∣portant things that were with in it, and therefore entreated the men to return back, and so they did very willingly. It was not long before we came to the Ship which had sent me this relief, where I received from every one such expressions of joy, as made in evident, that the life of a man was of no little consideration
in their minds; some of them gave my Bisket and Wine, other some, salted meate, and thus did they very charitably feed me in my extreamity of hunger. After this, they desired me to tell them all the particulars of my shipwrack, which they hearkened unto with amazement; and presently after, night did invice us all to rest. Thus whilst every one was preparing themselves for sleep, two of those who had releived me did come unto me, and invited me to rest my self in a Cabine: I durst not refuse this kind offer, thinking it not fit to disobey them in any thing, after such a benefit received. Thus I consented unto all they desired; and as soon as we were all three sate down, the first of them, who seemed to be so ready and joyful to do me any service, after a thousand thanks unto him for it, I was very desireous to know his name; He answered, that he was called Palemon, and that he was a Segusian: Then calling to memory what I had heard concern∣ing the Adventures of Ʋrsaces, and remembring that a man of that Country and (as I thought) of the same name, had formerly saved him from killing himself, I asked him whether he was not the man, who in Italy had done that good office for the Caveleir: He told me no; but true it was, that a Segusian did rescue Ʋrsases from the Arms of death; but his name was Celadon, and not Palemon; But however, (continued I) I do find by the help you have afforded, that the gods are friends unto your Country, since they have made all the men in it so charitable and kind: and doubtless this last action of yours to me, will find from Heaven a great reward; and be assured, that as far as I am able, Oli∣carsis shall never be found ungrateful. At the name of Olicarsis, he that was on the other side me, and almost asleep, did start up, and turning himself towards me, did ask me whether or no I named Olicarsis, and what I said of him: to whom I answered, that I did name him, and that it was in assuring Palemon that I would upon all occasions be ready to acknowledge the good office he had done me: Do you bear the name of that man, who is so highly esteemed in the world? (said he unto me) who cannot want friends in what place soever you can go? To this I answered as modestly as I could; but to omit the relation of that good opinion which he had of me, and what he said in my advantage; I will only tell you, that I was acknowledg∣ed to be the man whom they looked after. And after I had received the Letter from Damon, and told them I was able to satisfie that desire which moved them to undertake this voyage; I made them all so full of joy, as they could hardly sleep that night. They understood that my design was to go unto Rome to visit Olimbres; so as telling me it would not be a long and difficult Journy by Land; and that if I would see Damon, and Forrests by the way, I should not go above four days journey out of my way; I consented to go by Land, and so accordingly we did about break of day. Then they began to speak unto me concerning Celideas cure, and shewed un∣to me, the little bloody sticks; but the hopes which I had that I should ere long dress the wounds themselves, made me desire them to defer this cure until we came there. Upon this, they pressed me no further; but knowing that I had a desire to see the City of the Massilians, because there Ʋrsases, and Olimbres did demand the poison, they went thither with me; And from thence passing un∣to the Country of Allobroges we came to Vallence, where the Beauty of the place inviting us to stay a day, besides many other rarities, there we saw the Tomb of Tullia, the Daughter of Cicero; and then a large and high Arch, under a hill, where, they say, one of her Lovers did shed so many tears, that the god of Love did turn them into a Fountain, which was never since dry. From thence we left upon our left hand, a stately Castle, which, they say was built by Turnus: Afterwards following upon the Rosn, night did surprise us within three Leagues of Vienna. We were then constrained to go no further, because we were to pass through a thick and dangerous wood; and the danger was the greater, be∣cause the Army of the Francks being dis-banded, many Souldiers waited for pas∣sengers, and either robbed or killed them; But see how hard a matter it is to
avoid the decrees of Fate: The next morning setting out betimes, and not gone above half a League, we were met by a dozen or fifteen of these Rovers. At the first the seemed to begg something of us; but we no sooner seemed will∣ing to bestow something upon them, but three of the sturdiest of them seized upon the bridles of our Horses; and the rest falling pell mell us, pulled us to the ground. Halladiue made as good resistance as he could, and so did Pale∣mon also, who drawing out his Sword upon a sudden, no sooner saw his hand upon his Bridle, but he quite cut off the hand at one blow: But it being a thing impossible for so few to resist so many, especially so many well armed men who, besides their Swords, had compleat Arms and Daggers; this resistance did but the more incense them, so as they resolved to kill us all. Then they carried us upon the left hand into the thickest part of the wood; where strip∣ping us of all our cloaths, not leaving us so much as our Shirts, they tyed our hands behind us, and then tyed us every one unto a several Tree. There Pa∣lemon found their Barbarity; for he whose hand he had cut off, being extream impatient of revenge, he no sooner saw tyed, but going unto him; This hand (said he, and shewed him his right hand) shall punish thee for the loss of the other. In saying so, he stabbed him most inhumanely, five or six times into the body: He was tyed so near unto me, as I could see his eyes bid me the last adieu; for (having handkerchiefs tyed before our mouths least we should cry out) we could not speak. I who thought that Palemon had only got a minutes start of me, I confess that I answered him only with my eyes also, and prepared my soul to follow him without sorrow. But I cannot tell whether my age did infuse some respect into these Rogues, or whether it was my destiny to dye last; but so it was, that as soon as ever Palemon had given up his last breath, they turned towards Halladine; and as they were ready to make him feel the fury of their Arms, upon a sudden one amongst them, who seemed to have some command over the rest, did make a sign unto his companions to hold their hands, and that he had something to say unto him. Upon this command they stayed, and this man comming nearer Halladine to take away the handkerchief from his mouth, he asked him from whence he came, and from whom? from Rosilion, answered he; and what did you before you came away? (asked the man) I was (said Halladine) at the Temple: And did none speak unto you? (said the man) Hal∣ladine then thinking a little upon it, no, replied he, none except a young Souldier, who told me he was at the taking of Calice, and having no means to carry him honestly into his own Country, was forced to implore the charity of well-disposed people: Did you give him any thing? (said the man) I gave him said Halladine, a little piece of money, which was all I had about me: Very well (said the man presently) this shall be either thy life or thy death. In say∣ing so, he turned towards his companions, and perswaded with them so far, as he obtained the life of Halladine; but least he should accuse them, or make them known, they stopped his mouth, blinded his eyes, and untying him from the Tree, they set him upon his horse, wich his face towards the horses tail, his arms tyed behind him, and his leggs tyed under the belly of the horse. In this equipage they let him go, and broke out into extream laughter at him: And whilst they wery thus busie about Halladine, three or four of them were searching in my Pockets for the key of my box, which was behind my Saddle, and presently after, others came to butcher me: But when they were within three or four paces of the Tree where I was tyed, we heard a great out-cry, as of one that was extreamly affrighted: Fear presently began to seize upon them, and not knowing from what cause this noise miget proceed, they pre∣sently began to fly away as fast as they could, and the faster, because they sup∣posed that Halladine had brought some to surprise them. Thus they were no sooner out of my sight, but turning mine eye towards the place from whence this hideous out-cry came, I espyed through the Trees; one single man, whose affright had made his eyes look wilde and wandring: sometimes he held his hands clasped together, sometimes he would lift them
up to his hair, as if he would pull it off: otherwhiles, he would fall down upon his knees, as if he would beg for mercy: afterwards he would rise up again, and run ten or twelve paces as fast as ever he could, still crying out in a most lamenta∣ble tone, and complaining most pittifully. He was no sooner come near me, but I desired to speak, and intreat his help; but the handkerchief before my mouth would not let me, and besides, I saw him fall down to the ground, without either sense or motion. At first I thought him dead, but presently after, hearing him breath, as one that was extreamly oppressed in his stomach, I knew that he was still alive. Judge, I beseech you, in what condition I was now, and how perplex∣ed I was at his sleep, for my fears that these Rogues would come again and finish their wicked design, did make me think his sleep to be twice as long as it was: for indeed he continued not in this Lethargy above two howers, during which time, I had still for my entertainment, the horrours of a death almost inevitable, and the object of Palemons sad adventure. In the mean time Halladine was returned to the Town, from whence we came in the morning; for his horse took that way as soon as he felt himself at liberty: And certainly, it was a pleasant and deplorable pastime to behold, for being stark naked, and tied, as I told you before, all the little children followed him, and the people ran in the streets laughing at this odd spectacle; and, I believe, it would have been long before he had found any help, if by Fortune a Sacrificer going unto the Temple, and being ashamed to see a man in that condition, had not stop∣ped his horse, and thrown a long cloak upon Halladine. Presently after, he un∣tied him, and as soon as he could speak, he related unto him the accident which had happened with so many sighs and tears, that the Sacrificer being moved unto compassion, and the people all about him, not being able to endure such a horrid action, they all presently armed themselves to try if they could apprehend those that had unworthily used him. This hapned at the same time when the man who fell down by me in a swound did awaken; and God knows how afraid I was, that he would have continued on his way without relieving me: At last, by good Fortune he turned his eyes to∣wards me, and seeing me in that condition, near a corps with many wounds, he was so surprized that he stood immoveable, I perceived by his eyes, that sleep had settled his mind, for he did not look so wild and rovingly; but seeing him full of compassion, mixed with amazement, I began to hope that he would take some pity upon me; and indeed, he came presently to unloose me, and helped me un∣to my clothes: I was no sooner drest, but thanking him for the good office he had done me, I told him the whole success of our disaster. He seemed to be very much concerned at the misfortune of Palemon; and advising me to return unto the place from whence I came in the morning, to take order for Palemons fune∣ral, he offered to accompany me. I took his councel, and getting upon my horse, I desired him to get upon Palemons, which the Thieves had not carryed away, lest, as I believe, he should have deseryed them: We were no sooner got into the high way, but we met above two hundred persons which Halladine conducted thither. Halladine did think to find me dead, and therefore as soon as ever he saw me, he took me about the neck, and did me a thousand Carresses. After this, we went to the place where Palemon lay, whom we no sooner saw, but Halladine and I were ready to with him for grief. At last, having given him an honourable Funeral, we went unto Vienna. There Halladine taking me aside, and telling me how many impediments might happen in the cure of Celidea; he pressed me to give Damon that contentment: so as the next morning I took his little bloody sticks, and dressed them as I would have done the wounds themselves. I doubted not but a present good effect would follow: for in the composition of this salve, which I brought in a little box for Olimbres, I had not omitted any ingredient which would not make extreamly subtil: and by good Fortune, when I came from Carthage, it was not above a month before I had finished that making of it, though it was a whole year before I began it: for besides the oyles which were to be extracted, as the oyl of Flax, and the oyl of Roses, there was yet re∣quired
Bol-Armianian, Mans blood, Mummy, Mans grease, and the moss which grows in the scull of a man long exposed to the air. So I had no sooner dressed those little sticks, but we parted; and the man who had relieved me, hearing me name Forrests unto Halladine, he beseeched us to let him go with us; but because I thought every moment upon the danger from which he had released me, as soon as we were got into the way, I asked him as civilly as I could, what good For∣tune had brought him thither so opportunely, and from whence proceeded that rapture wherein I saw him? he lifted up his eyes presently to heaven, and after∣wards casting them upon me, with a deep sigh: Alas (said he unto me) that which you do call a rapture, is rather a just punishment which the gods have in∣flicted upon me, for the expiation of my sins: But since you desire the discourse of it, though my disease be beyond all hopes of cure, I will obey you, provided you permit me to stay no longer upon the relation of it then I desire, left the re∣membrance of it do drive me into the same extremities, wherein you saw me: Upon this, whilst Halladine was in deep study, some thirty paces from us, he be∣gan his relation thus. Know, Father, that my name is Azahides: the place of my birth is amongst the Allobroges: My Father was one who ever held a considerable rank in that Town, which stands upon the Lake of Leman▪ When I was hardly capable of reason, and when that Province was involved in many troubles, because they would take from Gondioch all that he had on this side the Rhyne, they did put arms into my hands, when I had hardly so much strength as to sustain them: Af∣ter the expiration of some time, a truce was made, which lasted some yeares: During which, my Father considering, that he had no child but me for the stay of his Family and age, he resolved to marry me; and so indeed he did unto a ve∣ry fair and handsome wife, whom I kept not above a year, for the died in child-bed after she had left me a daughter, as a pledge of her love. Presently after, the great captain Aetius had the government of Gaul; and renewing the first de∣signs which the Romanes had against us, he prepared himself for the execution of them. This was the reason that Abariell (for that was my fathers name) could never keep me with him: for my humour (which found some particular satisfaction in blood and slaughter) was stronger them all, the perswasions he used to hinder me from leaving him: So I parted from him, and until the time that Aetius had command to leave us in peace, I was alwayes in every combate, at the taking of all Towns, and in every dangerous enterprize that was to be executed. One time amongst the rest, much plunder falling to my share, I gave it all in ex∣change of a young boy called Silvander, about five or six yeares of age, and who, they told me, was stollen from some place beyond the Rhosne, and in the Province of Vienna. The aspect of this child did please me so exceedingly well, as I resolved to give him as good education as possibly I could, and afterwards to take him home unto me, as a man that was obliged unto me for his life. In order hereunto, peace was no sooner concluded, but I sent for him to my house, and shewed him unto my Father, as the best booty that ever I got. But here, I be∣seech you, observe a very strange effect of divine Providence: This child, whom I destiny'd unto perpetual servitude, no sooner appeared in my Fathers eye, but considering the little comfort he had in me, by reason of my turbulent and stir∣ring Nature, he resolved to bring up this boy, and to establish upon him the foun∣dation of all his hopes. This resolution was not so close, but it came to my know∣ledge; so as beginning to foresee what might afterwards happen, I began also to use all my Art for stopping the course of this growing good will. But all my plots and devices were in vain; for my Father, taking him from me as his own, did send him to the Massilian schools, where he grew so good a proficient, and so every way accomplished, as for all my envy of him, I could not chuse but confesse, that my Father could not place his affection upon an object more worthy of esteem. Yet, all my Fathers estate being in his own free disposition, and fearing left he should dispose of it, as well as of his affection, to my disadvantage, I designed not only to oppose his Fortune, but against his life also, if occasion did offer it self.
In the mean time, the daughter which I had, was no less grown in beauty then she was in body and wit: so as then, being fit for marriage, my Father made a proposition to marry her unto Silvander. And indeed, I took this as an occasi∣on of my revenge: for having commanded my daughter to make my Father be∣lieve, that I would never give my consent unto it; and told her, that it was bet∣ter for her to marry him secretly; I contrived it so, that poor Silvander appoint∣ed a certain hour in the night when he would come, and that he should come up a rope-ladder in at a window which is over the Lake: At the hour appointed I came into the chamber, I cut the rope when he was half up, and let him fall into the water like a stone, so he was never heard of since. You may well judge Father, that though I had no other sin but this▪ yet this was enough to merit from the gods a most severe punishment; but, as if heaven would set me out unto men, as an example of avarice and cruelty, I was loadned with other burthens more heavy and intollerable. Know then, Father, that as soon as Silvander was drown'd, I was the first that would needs run unto the place where the noise was, and commanding my daughter, upon pain of death, to say that the cord did break of it self: I did cast the fault upon the effect, whereof in∣deed I my self was the sole cause. My daughter did not fail me, and after I had looked out at the window, I went unto Abariel, and acquainted him with this sad accident. At the first he broke out into tears and cries, and afterwards finding his sorrows to be remediless, he fell into such a deep swound, as I thought he would have rendred up his spirit: We put him therefore into his bed, where re∣viving again, he fixed his eyes upon me a long while together: afterwards, with a deep sigh ah Azahides (said he unto me) confess the truth; are not thy plots the cause of this death? Then having composed my face into a seeming sorrow, I answered no, and that I would sooner have consented unto my own death, then have procured him so much discontent: Well, well, (replied he) the gods are Judges which cannot be corrupted nor deceived, if thou beest innocent of this crime, I beseech them to pardon thee, as I do all the rest of thy disobedient courses, which thou hast committed against me; but if thou beest guilty, I be∣seech them to measure their punishments according to thy offences. In saying this, his voice began to fail him, and some of our friends and kindred, who came in upon the noise, did all that possibly they could no comfort him. But he being old and decrepite, he was so feeble to undergo this grief, as we all thought he would not out live that night: which my daughter seeing, she came unto him, and whispered him in the ear a long time together. I was afraid once that she had betrayed me, for she only was a witness of my wicked act; but certainly, had I thought she would have told him, I would never have suffered her to speak unto him: this made me observe their motions very exactly, and should have found, if the discourse had exasperated him; but on the contrary, the mind of Abariel grew more settled and strong: yet falling again into his first weakness, Daugh∣ter (said he unto her, and took her hand) you see I have not life enough to satis∣fie my self of what you tell me, and therefore I will believe, that this remedy which you would give unto my weaknesse, proceeds rather from pity of my pain, then from any truth which obliges you to tell me so. Let me die therefore, dear daughter, and if I have any power over you, go and obey this my last command: Go this very hour unto my brother (said he, and pointed unto my uncle) I will leave him enough to see you well provided for; but above all, never live with your Father again, at least as little as you can, for he will never be a good exam∣ple of honour and virtue unto you. Upon this he kissed her, and desired my uncle to carry her away, which he did accordingly. Afterwards, turning himself towards me: I do leave unto you (said he unto me) that estate which you have so greedily gaped after, I advise you to remember this; That you will never be lesse rich, then when you greedily desire to be more. I know not what secret opi∣nion the gods have inspired into my mind; but I shall die extreamly ill satisfied with your deportment; I pray God all my apprehensions be false, but if they be true, I will be an eternal torment to thy conscience. These words, which he had much ado to utter, were almost the last he spoke:
for he had no sooner pronounced the word Adieu, but his soul expired. This did shake my very soul; for afterwards I seemed to be almost as dead as he, and I be∣gan to repent of the crime which I had committed: yet shrowding the resent∣ments of my crime, as well as possibly I could, under those teares which I might well shed for the death of a Father, I carryed the matter so well, that in lieu of con∣demning me, they commended me for the grief I expressed at his death. I built a very honourable monument for him sutable to his quality: as soon as the last ceremonies were performed, I began to plot how I should stifle all me∣mory of my fault, imagining that I should never be at rest as long as there re∣mained any in the World that was able to discover it: so as I fell almost upon the most barbarous design that ever entered into the thoughts of man: and being resolved to trust all things unto your discretion, I must tell you that I was upon the point of preparing poyson to give my Daughter, when I heard that they had placed her amongst the Vestals bordering upon the Lake, under the charge of one called Bellinde. Thus finding my self at once, without Father without Daughter, but not without some feares of my treason against Silvander to be one day discovered, I began to enjoy the estate which Abariel left me. But I presently found that my Father was a true prophet, and that there is no man rich which is not contented: for since the accrue of so great an estate, I found my self a thousand times poorer then when I had lesse. When I thought to put in execution any of those designes which moved me unto a desire of enjoying my Fathers possessions, I found an im∣possibility in doeing it, eyther in the thing it self, or in my own humour: for when I wished my self master of an estate that I might make good chear, though I had the estate, yet I wanted the stomack; and ever since Abariel dyed, I was ne∣ver presented with any meat which went not against my appetite: If I wished it to entertain my friends, I considered that I had no friend in all the World; for being concious of my crime, I thought all men to be judges, and that my own kindred never came unto me, but to carry me unto condign punishment. Thus finding no peace in any society, I betook my self unto solitude, and in order to that, retired my self unto a house which I had in the Country: but which way soever I went, still my sin followed me, and gave me no more rest there then in another place: and as if heaven would make my self my own punisher, nothing did come into my mind for a whole month together; but the thoughts of my crime, and of the punishment which I was to suffer for it. This did so much trou∣ble me as I did by degrees find, that my reason was lost in the violence of this re∣sentment: for as I said before, no meat goeing down with a good stomack, the smale nourishment which I received by it, helped much to the impairing of my judgment and health. I strove a while against this growing disease: But the gods whose hands lay heavy upon me did quickly shew me that they can inflict greater paines upon mortals then the loss of their wits and reason: for one night when I had shut my self in my Chamber, and laid down upon my bed in hopes to take some rest, it being long since I had any, me thought: But why do I say, me thought, since what I shall tell you I did hear, I say I did hear the dore open with a hidious noise: and as soon as I cast my eye that way to see what the matter was, I saw Abariel bloody in severall places, holding in one hand a candle lighted, and in the other a heart pierced with three or four knives: he had before him one of the furies, and two others on each side one: all three carrying candles as he did: and armed in their other hands with whips, god knowes how much this fight surprised me, and more his approach for comming to my bed: Azahides (said he) dost thou see this heart all pierced and wounded? It is the very same which the wounds of thy disobedience did murder: and because the gods would not have the to lose thy share of blisse in the second life, they have sent me to punish thee unto repentance in this world, for a crime whereof thy own conscience does accuse the: after he had said so, he retired back two or three paces, making a sign unto the furies which accompanied him: They presently seised upon me: and whilst one caused serpents to gnaw upon my brest, another burned me with the candle, and the third did lash me so with a whip, that the more I cryed,
and complained, the more her rage and fury encreased. I cannot tell what I did not to molifie the soul of my Father; I cast my self a hundred times at his feet, but when I thought to embrace his legges, I felt nothing but air, because he fled from me, fearing (as I think) that my torment would end with his anger: I con∣tinued in this torment above an hover; after which, so deep a sleep did seise upon me, as it lasted untill day: when I wakned, imagining to find my body all marked with the paines that I had endured, I was all amazed, when I found not one sign of any such torments as I felt. This made me think, that this revenge was divine, since my soul only resented it: and thinking that sacrifices might work some good effects, I offered many; But for all them my malady continued: so as common∣ly every eight day, I endured the same torment; at last, not being able to live in such extremity I was inspired to go, and consult with an Oracle, which gave me this answer. The Oracle. GO, Azahides, unto a place which Neptune Was constrained to forsake: There a stranger speaking of thy Fortune Shall make the Nymphes astonished: But mark my words, for never think Thy torments, Azahides, ere shall end. Unto the same who makes thee culpable Of homicide, shall see and pardon thee. This Oracle (out of which I could not collect any thing, but that I should nere be cured untill he whom I had killed did see me, and had pardoned my crime) did put me into such a confusion, as in effect seeing it altogether impossible, my fury augmented: Yet an old prophet telling me that I must never dispair in the goodness of the gods, and that if ever I found any remedy it would be only in Forrests, my spirit was a little calmed. I set forward therefore immediatly: and was no sooner entred into the wood where I found you yesterday but I saw the same Abariel again with the same furies, just in the way in which was to go; I ran presently into the thick of the wood in hopes to avoid meeting this dismall object: but he quickly overtook me, and as if my flight offended him, I was never so much tormented as I was then; This was the cause of that transport, and rapture wherein you saw me, which moved you unto as much compassion as admiration, and which made me to cry out as you did hear: glad I am that it did produce so good an effect as the saving of your life, and it shall be the more pleasing to me as long as I live. This (said Olicarsis) was all that Azahides told me there; And though I did absolutly believe that all this fury was only an effect of an imagination extreamly wounded, yet I could not chuse but judge, upon the sight of the Oracle which he made me read two or three times over, that it would be very difficult to find a remedy against his disease. And indeed, as we were walking together in this wood, this transport took him again, and forced him unto such strange actions, as it was impossible to see him without abundance of horror, and extream pity. Adamas did harken all this while with extream attention; The gods (said he) are so just and good, as they do never inflict more miseryes upon men, then they give power to support them: This may be seen in Azahides, who for all his fu∣rious torments yet subsists: Now you must know, that this Silvander whom he thinks to be dead is not so: for being advertised by his own Daughter of the trea∣son indented against him, he tyed his own clothes fall of sand unto the rope, and when he heard them fall into the water, he escaped away. This made me conceive, that of what quality soever his disease was, whether
in imagination or otherwise, it may be speedily cured, since Silvander, who has been many months in this Country, will certainly look kindly upon him, and not deny him the pardon, upon which the cure depends: Thus do we see the full accomplishment of the Oracle, since this is the place where Neptune quitted, when Caesar did cut a Mountain, through which the waters which over-flowed all this Country, did run out: And you are the stranger the rela∣tion of whose fortune did amaze the Nymphs; for most of these whom you see here in the habit of Shepherdesses, are indeed the Nymphs of Amasis, the La∣dy and Mistriss of these Provinces. Olicarsis was extreamly surprised, and contented both, at the Druids dis∣course, and beseeched him to make as much haste as he could, that Azahides might receive so great a benefit: Therefore Adamas entreating Celadon to go and fetch Silvander; That Shepherd found him walking another walk, with Lycydas, Doris, Adrastes, and some others, not presuming to come where Ro∣sanira and Galathea was, least he should interrupt them. As soon as Celadon related unto him part of what he had heard, and having brought him unto Ada∣mas, Azahides, returned out of his Lethargy, who seeing so much company so neer him, offered to go away; But Olicarsis and Adamas, stayed him, and after some discourse, did let him understand, that his torments were now near their end; unto which Azahides giving no credit, they presented Silvander unto him, whom he presently knew, though he was much changed as well in condition as habit, who prostrating himself before him, he did nothing a long while but shed tears, at the memory of what he had attempted against his per∣son: At the last, Silvander embraced him with much respect, and did so freely Forgive him that offence, as he was comforted in his mind, so as carrying this news unto his daughter, who was confined amongst the Vestals, he never was troubled in mind with those torments any more. The Relation of Olicasis, and that which had hapned unto Celadon, unto Silvander, unto Astrea, and unto Diana, as well at the Fountain of Verity, as since they were brouget unto the house of Adamas, had taken up so much of the day, as it was almost night when Amasis, who was already come unto the Pallace of Isoures, did send a Coach unto Galathea, that she might come thi∣ther with Rosanira, Dorinde, and the rest of the company. The Druid, who was in hopes of their company that night, was very sorry sorry that Amasis had debatred him of that happiness; yet not daring to com∣plain, because obedience vnto the Nymph was but his duty, he consented un∣to their departure; and waiting upon them part of the way, he beseeched them to honour him with their return the next day: Galathea promised to ask per∣mission, and afterwards seeming very sorry that she had not time enough to talk with Astrea, she went away fully resolved to emply her endeavours to see her again. As soon as they came unto Amasis, they gave her an exact accompt of all that they had seen; and after they had told how much the Inchantment had affrighted them, they told her thot the god of love was to pronounce some Oracles, and commanded that they should come and consult with him: This Novelty made the Nymph very desirous to be present, so as without Galatheas mention of her promise, she commanded to make all things ready, that she might go unto the house of Adamas, very early in the morning. Merindor was come from Mount Brison with the Nymph; and because he said he was sent from Sigismond, Dorinde received him as kindly as she could, though she retained still a fresh memory of his behaviour towards her: But at this time forgetting all his levity, she bad him welcome; and after Supper, imagining that he durst not not talk of any thing but of the Princess buness, she gave him such opportunity of speech with her, as he had time enough to ac∣quit himself of all that he had in commission. Adamas on the other side, to whom the joys of Celadon was an incompara∣ble contentment, he returned unto the company he left in the Garden; but there hapned to be a change since he went: For Doris being acquainted with
the death of Palemon, she fell into such extreamities of griefs, and complaints, as would have moved a stone to compassion. Adrastes seemed to be no less greeved then she; and when he considered that he was the principal cause of that Shepherds death, he could not imagine any thing that was able to comfort him. The Druid thinking he could not do a more charitable office, then to comfort them in their sorrows, he took Doris in one hand, and Adrastes in the other; and betwixt that place and the house, he gave them such cordial Language, as he much allayed the sadness of their souls, and put them into hope, that as the gods had sent this sad affliction upon them, so certainly out of their goodness, they would send them comforts. In the mean while, the sighs of Doris, did blow that fire more vehement, which love had long since kindled in the heart of Adrastes: And the tears which that Shepherd shed at the sad resentments of Doris, were so pleasing unto that afflicted Shepherdess, as they served for a kinde of comforts and ease, unto the pain which she en∣dured. When Adamas found that his perswasions had a good opperation with them, he left them, and went to see Bellinde, who was already returned unto the Chamber of Astrea, and Diana: And because he feared that if all this compa∣ny went to visit them, it would be but troublesome to them, he thought it ex∣pedient, that none should see them till the next morning: Therefore he com∣manded Paris to wait upon Celadon, Silvander, and the rest into their Cham∣bers, and advised them to be all in readiness the next morning, to go and hear the Oracles which the God of Love was to pronounce: Paris was obedient unto this command; and though he had great desire to see Diana, yet he durst not ask permission, imagining, that since Celadon could not see Astrea, Ada∣mas would not grant unto him more priviledge then unto the other. Bellinde found Diana in a very joyful condition; for the return of Phillis, and the re∣port which he made of Silvanders health, had almost restored her fresh com∣plexion into her cheecks; so as after she had rejoyced a while with the Druide, she retired, full of joy that Diana promised her to rise the next morning. Ada∣mas also, after a while of discourse with them, he went unto his Chamber, and desired Phillis, and Leonide to lye in the Chamber of Astrea and Diana, that in case they should need any help, Leonide might serve them. Thus every one desposed themselves to rest that night; and the last that re∣tired themselves was Adrastes and Doris; for that shepherd fe ring least Do∣ris should suspect his greif, and think some craft, disguised under that veile, he addressed himself unto her, and looking upon her with an eye that spoke the sorrows of his soul; Sister (said he unto her) If my griefs for the death of Po∣lemon, be not the greatest, and the most real that ever I resented, may I eter∣nally perish. I know my self guilty of his death, and that but for me, he had still been happy in your love and company: Now in some sort to satisfie the ghost of that dear husband, which Adrastes has ravished from you; It is most just I should punish my self, and that I separate my self from that person who only can give me any consolation or delight, which person is your self. Dear Bro∣ther (answered Doris, with tears in her eyes) Adrastes indeed is partly the cause of Palemons death; but for all that, I think it extream in justice to punish him for it, because he did engage himself voluntarily unto that fatal voyage, and do what I could, I could not divert him from it: Alas, alas, how oft have I feared this misfortune which hath befaln him; It seems as if some secret Ge∣nius did tell me of the accident; for truly never did any day nor night pass, but either my thoughts or my dreams did menace it: You know it Adrastes, you you have seen it in my face since you returned; and for all the good hopes that you gave me, I had still some secret fears, which told me, that I should never see him again: Ah my dear Palemon (continued she) how fatal a passage were all my sorrows at thy departure, of those afflictions which were afterwards to fall upon me: Dear Palemon—at this word her speech failed, for her tears and sighs took it away: And Adrastes, whose grief was no less violent, begin∣ning to speak; Fair Doris (said he unto her (me thinks I find too deep resent∣ment
in your grief: you ought to punish the Author of your disaster, and shew me how farre the revenge of a wronged woman can go. It was I that have robd you of Palemon; let mee feel the fury of your anger: If you have not resolu∣tion enough to command me unto death, yet command me unto an eternal ba∣nishment; for that will be no lesse then a death unto mee: But I shall obey, though I shall never finde any delight in the conversation of men, since I am de∣prived of him whom I loved best, and whose affection was dearer unto mee then my life. Alas (answered Doris with a deep sigh) though I should be so severe, as to ba∣nish you from seeing mee, yet my grief for Palemons death, would not be the lesse: Neither your absence nor your death, can make him alive again, nor ever cure mee: I would not therefore have you absent your self, but on the contrary I hope that your presence will be some comfort unto mee especially because in seeing you I shall imagine that I do see something of him; for it may be said in point of friendship, you were both one. All that I desire from you, deare Adrastes, is, That you will not go beyond those limits which I shall prescribe unto your affection: and that loving mee in the degree of a sister, you will ne∣ver disoblige mee unto any other will then to take you as a brother. This was the injunction of Doris, unto which Adrastes would not promise obedience; for hee knew not whether it was in his power to obey: hee vowed to serve her eternally, and having made the same vow long since, hee would observe it unto the last minute of his life. After this they parted; and when the God of sleep did summon them to take their rest, they disobeyed, and spent almost all the night with their own thoughts. Doris shee mused upon the disaster which had hapned unto her, and in the dark desired a thousand times that the Ghost of Palemon would appeare before her eies as well as in her memory: Darknesse was not so horrid unto her as the consideration of this losse, and when shee considered that it was without a remedy, this did almost kill her with grief. Amidst these sad imagi∣nations, Love did sometimes represent unto her thoughts the passion of Adra∣stes, to make her sensible of that shepherds fidelity. Then did Doris a little repent shee had commanded him to love her only in the degree of a sister: but presently thinking those thoughts in some sort offensive unto the love which she ought to preserve for Palemon, and that it would be a wrong unto him, to admit of any sharer with him, shee stifled all those thoughts in their birth, and repelled all those arrowes wherewith it seems Love would have wounded her the second time. Adrastes on his side, amongst all his sorrowes for the losse of his friend, hee began to conceive a secret hope that hee should one day enjoy that happi∣nesse for which hee had already suffered so many miseries: But for all the joyes wherewith this sweet imagination did flatter him, hee disputed with himself, whether his sorrowes for the losse of Palemon were not greater then the joyes hee had in conceiving some right of pretense unto his Mistresse. Day had al∣most surprised him in this Combate, for it was very late before hee slept: but had hee slept only one minute, yet had hee done more then the Druid did, who was so ill satisfied with Merindors discourse, that being extreamly stung with anger and spite, shee was not able to close an eye. Shee spent all the night in plotting how to be revenged for the injury which shee thought was done her. But Astrea and Diana rested better: For the paines they had endured the day before, and the little sleep which they had of two or three nights before, did now cause, them to sleep soundly untill it was broad day. Adamas, Bellinde, Celadon, Silvander, and the rest of the Shepherds, did rise almost at the first blush of Aurora, and had no sooner set all things in order; but Amasis came, bringing with her Rosanira, Galathea, Madonthe, Daphnide; Silvia, and the afflicted Dorinde, who carried in her face all the signes of dis∣pleasure. A while after, Leonide, Astrea, Diana, and Phillis came out of their chamber: Likewise all the shepherds of the neighbouring townes arrived, and came purposely to wait upon the Grand Druid. When all was ready, Amasis went out the first, and took Bellinde by the hand, with whom shee talked con∣cerning
the worship of the gods, which was the particular profession unto which she was called: Dorinde, she faigned hee self indisposed, and desired the Nymph to leave her the coach, to the end, that in case she found her self better, she might follow after them: Rosanira, Daphnide, and Madonth, mixed them∣selves with Leonide, Phillis, and Licidas: Adrastes took care of Doris: Hylas and Thamires would needs wait upon Stella and Celidea; and all the rest of the Shepherds and Shepherdesses did follow in a troop together. Adamas would be with Silvander, and that poor Shepherd seeing himself forced to yield unto Pa∣ris the entertainment of Diana, she was all the way so melancholly and silent, that the Druide could not get one good word from him. Galanthea, fully resol∣ved to imploy well the time that she had to stay with Astrea, she took her in one hand; and because she would not quite take her away from her dear Celadon, she took that Shepherd in the other. Thus all this great company went from the house of Adamas, to hear the O∣racle which the God of Love was to pronounce; and certainly it was a most pleasant sight, to see them in this order, and the beauty of their persons, for Astrea, who had now nothing to trouble her, she trimmed up her self, with all the graces that either Nature or Art could use to imbellish  face: her eyes were not red and swelled as they were wont to be, when her sorrows kept them in a perpetual moisture; but they were as clear, as sparkling, as that Planet which gives both light and life unto the whole Universe: her hair did not hang so loose and carelesly, as when all her thoughts were how to preserve Celadon: but now it was set in such lovely order, as every curl was able to captivate a world of hearts: upon her head was a Garland of several flowers, and though they were the fairest of the season, yet were they ashamed to see themselves so far sur∣mounted by the luster of that complexion which was in their cheeks. In fine, this Shepherdess appeared so fair in the eyes of Galathea, as that Nymph, think∣ing she never had seen so perfect a beauty, she began to excuse the disdain of Ce∣ladon, and to think, that after he had burned in so glorious a fire, it was not possible he should be touched with any other flame. Celadon, for his part, he appeared the handsomest and most lovely Shepherd that ever was seen upon the banks of Lignon; the memory of his disguisement, and many other accidents of his life, did bring such blushes into his cheeks, and tempered his complexion with such luster, as Galathea had much ado to preserve that fidelity which she had sworn unto Lindamor: she had never seen so many charms in the eyes of that Shepherd, as she observed now; and calling to me∣mory the condition wherein she first saw him and relieved him: O heavens (said she in her self) if this Shepherd had then had so many darts in his face as now I see, in lieu of being in love with him, I should have downright died. In this thought, she never removed her eye off him, unless to look sometimes upon A∣strea; and when she left looking upon Astrea, it was only to admire the comeli∣ness of Celadon. Thus, in this pleasing business, she went disputing in her self, which of them two was most worthy to be loved; but finding them to be equal∣ly exact and perfect, and not being able to find any difference, but in their clothes, which distinguished their sexes, she confessed, that they had no advan∣tage of each other; and that love was most just in uniting the souls of two so fair and virtuous bodies. Thus they went on a while without speaking one word: but whilst Galathea was ravished in her thoughts of them, the thoughts Astrea and Celadon were no less busied. For that Shepherd considering, that but for the Nymph, he had enjoyed the happiness of holding Astreas hand, and talked unto her of his love: O Galathea (said he to himself) will you eternally oppose my happinesse? your presence is perpetually prejudicial unto me. Then looking upon her, and after∣wards upon Astrea; and that Shepherdess seeing Galathea to be very fair, she presently began to think of the discourse she had with Adamas, concerning this Nymphs affection unto Celadon; and amongst her joyes, to know that the fide∣lity of her Shepherd could not be shaken, she yet raied a tincture of jealousie, and feared, left he should at that instant become sensible of those charms which
formerly he had dispised; yet since this thought had no good foundation, so it did not long continue, and if her sighs did testifie any of this jealousie unto Ce∣ladon, she presently smiled upon him to testifie her repentance; probably, they had gone all the way without any entertainment but their own thoughts, if Ga∣lathea had not at last broke this long silence: For Celadon and Astrea, whose tongues were out of respect tied, they durst not presume to begin any discourse; and seeing they could not talk of their own interests, they cared not to talk of any thing else. But the Nymph clearing up her voice, and addressing her self unto the Shep∣herdss: Well, fair Astrea (said she unto her) I dare say you are in a most plea∣sing rapture, since Celadon is the subject of it. Madam (answered Astrea) I do not think, that where you are, one can admire any thing but you: not but the presence of that Shepherd is very dear unto me, but if you do observe any extra∣ordinary motion in me, I beseech you be not offended if I say, that you only are the cause of it. I beseech you, fair Shepherdess (replied Galathea) let us lay a∣side all artifice, and as you see that my habit now does not separate me from your quality, so treat me with the same freedome and affection that you do Phillis or Diana: be not afraid to trust me with your thoughts, for assure your self, that be they as secret as possible, if you make me your confident, I will never betray you. Madam (replied Astrea) I should think my self extreamly bold, should I en∣tertain you with any of my follies, I know it to be a kind of crime, if I should dare only to cast my eyes upon you: your high quality, and as high merit, for∣bids me any such free accesse; and without your expresse command, I durst not stay so long near your person. I vow unto you, dear Astrea (said the Nymph) I would have you treat me as a Shepherdess; and you will extreamly displease me, if you will not let us enjoy our selves with all ingenious freedome: I came hither yesterday purposely for it, and the accidents of the day would not let me see you; but now, when there is nothing that interrupts, and all things contribute to this contentment, let us, my dear Astrea, enjoy; and I would not have you hide any thing from me, discover the secrets of your soul freely unto me. Astrea, seeing her self obliged to satisfie the commands of the Nymph, she first blush'd and af∣terwards answered her thus. Alas, Madam, there is nothing in my life remarkable, but that which relates unto the love which Celadon has professed unto me; nor do you enquire of me, but indeed of him. But alas, fair Nymph, why should you enquire of me, since I have more reason to enquire of you concerning Celadon, Galathea, who had never entred into this discourse, but only that she might have an occasion to tell her what she had done for her Shepherd▪ she found by her answer, that she was already informed, and never mistrusting Adamas, she thought that Celadon had given her the relation of it. Turning her self then towards him, Celadon (said she) you are a Tattler; but good Shepherd tell me truly, when you entertained your Mistress with the discourse of your being at Isoures, did you commend me for my assistance, or did you condemn me for my love? Celadon would have an∣swered, but Astrea, fearing he should say he never told her any thing, interupt∣ed him: Madam, replied she, when Celadon told me of the good office which you did him, he spoke of you only as a Princess unto whom he was obliged for his life; and if he did at any time speak of the mind you had unto him, it was only in confessing himself unworthy of the honour which you did him. Upon these words, the Shepherd did understand what was Astreas design, and there∣fore interrupting them: Madam (said he unto Galathea) how great soever my ingratitude be, I cannot deny but that your assistance did rescue me out of the arms of death; and because that favour was no lesse advantageous unto this fair Shepherdesse then unto my self, since it preserved the life of a man, who loves and honours her above all the world, I did acquaint her with the circumstances of it, to the end, the she having the same interest, might also be obliged in the same ingratitude. Indeed, fair Astrea (said the Nymph) but for me you had never seen Celadon again; and as he is a debtour unto me for his life, so are you
a debtor unto me for all the contentments you shall ever receive from his love, and services: Tis true those admirable features in his face, that sweet grace in his deport∣ment, and all the excellent qualities of his mind, are the gifts of nature: But af∣ter that fatall accident which did precipitate him unto Lignon, if my pity, or rather my love, had not preserved him; all those features, and graces, and ornaments of his body and mind, had been lost, and you out of hopes ever to enjoy any of those delights which his fidelity did promise unto you: Madam (answered Astrea) I am but too well informed of those favours which you have done unto Celadon: and though I was then rather an obstacle unto your desires, then any object to make you pity him, yet now I do acknowledge my self infinitly obliged in the be∣half of that shepherd; And I do wish it were in my power to render him unto you; for of all sinnes, I do most hate, that of ingratitude; my fairest Mistresse (added Celadon) the benefits which I have received from this fair Nimph are of such a nature as can never be paid. They are not such (replied Galathea) but may easily be acquitted: and if you have a mind, I will shew you how. Madam (answered Astrea) there is nothing in the world, but I would do it, to content you, else may I not live one munite longer: and for my part (said Celadon) I do protest, there is no com∣mand which I will not obey unless it do contradict that love which I do bear unto the fair Astrea. That which I do require (said Galathea) and turned her self towards Celadon) is only to make your joyes the fuller: and therefore know shepherd, and you fair Astrea also, that I shall think my self fully recompenced for all I have done, if you will this day solemnly swear before me, that the union betwixt you shall be inviolable; and that no accident whatsoever shall be able to seperate your wills: I have heretofore feared this alliance as the greatest misfortune that ever could happen unto me: but now I wish and desire it, as the greatest advantage I can receive from you. Great Nimph (answered Celadon) this which you require, do only depend upon the will of that shepherdess, and not of me; and as for my part, I protest and swear by that can make an oath invio∣lable, that I will adore her eternally; and were I not conscious of my own de∣merits, I would this very munite, vow my self hers in that quality, and vow with all to observe it for ever. I do accord unto this vow which Celadon hath made (said Astrea,) and I swear Madam, by the power which you have over me, never to fail in what is due unto his love, and your commands. Upon this she was silent: since so (said the Nimph, and embraced them both) let this be the first testimony of it, and Astrea, give Celadon a kiss; in earnest of that secret marriage which you have now contracted, and of which the gods, and I am wit∣nesses. Astrea would have answered; But Celadon even ravished with that hap∣piness which Galathea would procure for him, did withall possible hast kisse her, least she should oppose that felicity. Thus this shepherd did kisse her, as with such infinity delight as if he would have left his soul upon the lips of his fairest shepherdess, and Astrea was so ashamed of this favour which she had granted him as she hardly spoke one word in an hovre after. Mean time Paris entertained Diana with discourse: and because he knew not any other reason that she had to be so forward in dying then the affection she bore unto her Companion: fairest Diana (said he unto her) is it in the happi∣ness of Astrea, that I must exspect the beginning of mine? untill now your resi∣stance has been such as was able to stagger the the constancy of any other but mine: but now that shepherdess may well serve for your example to accept of your servants good will, and bestow your affection upon me: upon this, he be∣gan to sigh; and seeing Diana did not answer: Oh fairest Mistresse (continued he) your severity to me, is as rigorous as ever, and as insupportable; I have served you by your own permission, and courted you by your own commands; The gods, Adamas and Bellinde, are all consenting unto my good fortune: your own cruelty is the only impediment; Oh the torments I have endured, since the flight of Astrea? Tortures and racks are not so sharp: and yet I find no spark of compassion in you, and should I compare your heart, and marble together I
think, the marble the more sensible of the two. In saying so, his eyes were ready to gush out into teares, which caused him to be silent, and to take his handkercher: So as Diana, seeing her self obliged in civility, and respect, to say something, and having no mind to drive him into dispair, as well because she had some little inclination to him, as because she feared her denial would incense Bel∣linde, she turned towards him with a smiling aspect; sage Paris (answered she) what you are pleased to call rigour in me, is rather an argument of that esteem I have of you, then of any ill will: I have often told you, that my consciousnesse of my own small merits, is the reason of that reservednesse wherein I have lived conceiving that without too much presumption, I could not pretend unto any farther then some share in your friendship: but since what I thought to be an effect of my duty, is termed coldnesse and cruelty, I will hereafter become more free, upon condition you will assure me, that for three whole dayes, you will not solicite my Mother for the accomplishment of our marriage. I do ask this term only for my consolation, after which we shal be both satisfied according to your own desires. Diana had much a do to make this answer, but setting such a face upon it as might best hide her design she perfectly contented Paris, who not knowing that she took this term only to invent some way to deliver her self from the tiranny of Bellinde: he verily believed that at the end of the three dayes she would consent to marry him; Therefore he gave her thanks, as for the great∣test favour she could do him: and kissing her hand: fairest Mistresse (said he unto her,) not only these three dayes, but also all my life, I shall be yours in all love and obedience. This was the discourse which Diana, and Paris had together, whilst Adamas in his talk with Silvander did all that he possibly could, to discover from whence that grief which he found in the face of that shepherd did proceed: and because he had already observed some secret passages betwixt Diana and him, he harped much upon that string, but found Silvander so cold, or rather discreet, as he could gather no satisfaction from thence; Therefore he changed his discourse: and therefore conceiving that he might give in generall that consolation which he was resolved to apply unto a perticular subject; Sage Silvander (said he unto him) do not think it strang if out of an inquisitive curiosity I do intrude my self into your affaires; you know that we are naturally sensible of their interests whom we love; so as having a most particular affection unto you, I must needs be ex∣treamly desirous to know from whence those displeasures which I have observed in you, do proceed; Revered Sir, answered Silvander, the affection which you say you have unto me, does proceed from that compassion which makes men sensible of the miseries of one another: and though in this, you do no more for me then is common unto all miserable people, yet am I extreamly obliged unto you, and wish that the gods had as much pity upon me as you have. The gods, replied Adamas, will do according as they please, and not alwayes as we desire: yet not that our condition is ere the worse because all that they do is for our good: but commonly we do judge according unto our unruly passions, which will not let us waite with patience for that successe which they would give unto our desires; Hence it is, that many in complaining of their misfortunes do murmure against heaven. But as soon as the sun of Prosperity begins to shine upon them, then they begin to repent they ever accused heaven, or dispaired of help, this makes me to say that a well tempered spirit ought to be alwayes equall and alike, and both in adversity, and prosperity set the same face: Believe it Silvander (but you know it as well as I) this lesson is not so hardly learnt, as is thought: a good courage will master all manner of passions: and remember, that to sub∣mit all unto the good will of the gods, is undisputably the best document a man can learn, and the greatest secret of life. I do know Sir (replied Silvander) how great the imbecillity of men is, nor am I ignorant of the omnipotency of the gods; I have equally had experience of both, and without looking any farther then my own self, I can find most remarkable examples of it: if I have not so much power over my own soul as to keep it from sinking under the blows of for∣tune, it is not that I am ignorant of my duty, or that I do not most humbly submit
unto the will of the Gods: But this great imbicelity whereof I speak, and which is almost intollerable to humanity, does make me indisposed unto any good consideration. Upon this, Silvander was silent, and Adamas would have spoke, but upon a sudden he heard a great cry, and saw Amasis running to him as fast▪ she could: This accident did very much amaze him, and enquiring to know the couse, Oh (said the Nymph) do you not see the Nymphs ready to divorce us; for Hea∣vens sake let us fly away as fast as we can: In saying so, she began to run; but the Druid staying her: Madam (said he) they cannot hurt you, and unless you be afraid of Marble, you have no reason to ran away. How? Marble? (said Amasis) do you not see them move near us? At this Adamas could not chuse but laugh to see what effects fear had wrought in the fancy of the Nymph: and turning himself towards her, Madam (said he) I will be your warrant, and I believe Galathea will warrant me. Amasis then looking upon her, and seeing that neither she, nor any of the rest were afirighted, she began to take courage; but as soon as ever Adamas told her how those Animals came to be metamorphized, Truly, said she, I do not more wonder at the Miracle, then at Galathea, in her discourse yesterday of the Inchantment, should never acquaint me with this particular; after this she was perfectly recollected; and being but a little distant from the Fountain, The Druid, leaving the company, he advanced almost close to the Cloud which hung over it: Then falling down upon on his knees, and all the company after his example doing the like, he began this Prayer unto the God of Love. OH thou Son of Venus, adored Deity, whose Empire is above, and over all, and inveterate enemy of confusion; We beseech thee, as thou didst Chaos, so dispel all these disorders, and this Enchantment: It is not any curiosity that brought us hither, but thy own command; so as having appointed this day, Let our obe∣dience excuse our necessity of making this voyage: Pronounce, Oh God of Love, out of pity pronounce what thou hast destined in favour of these Groves: And as the glory of pleasing thee is the only object which we do propose unto our selves; So let our contentment be the subject of thy Answers. This Prayer being ended, Adamas returned to the place where the Troop was; and then a little wind did arise, which wasted unto our ears the noise of stirredwaters: Presently after, the wind grew more boisterous, and comming only by blasts, it brought with it great flashes, like to Lightning, which had but an instant between their beginning and ending; many affrightning clapps of Thunder followed: Then upon a sudden, the Cloud above the Fountain o∣pening, one might see come out by degrees, in the midst of the water, a huge Bason of Jasper, upon a Pedestal of Porphery, most curiously enriched, upon which the God of Love shewed himself, in the same form as before he appear∣ed. At the sight of this Deity, Reverence invited every one to look down; but afterwards, Curiosity raising up their looks, they saw that the God of Love held in his left hand a great Azure Table, in which were written these words, in Letters of Gold. Since Alexis is the faithful Female Lover Whom the Gods required; Receive Celadon that Happiness which Heaven does offer unto thee. Astrea is the Reward of all thy Pains; And That heart which hath so long mutinyed against thee, Shall never more oppose thy Constancy. Adamas, and the rest of the company had no sooner read these words, but
they heard a murmur, and a noise, like to the clapping together of many hands: It was an Emblem of that joy which all the Shepherds, and Shepherdesses did resent for the happiness of Astrea, and Celadon. At that instant, the Shepherd did lose the memory of all the miseries he had endured; and not knowing how he should enough thank the God of Love for that happiness which now he saw infallible; he lifted up his eyes to Heaven, and not being able to speak one word, his face changed colour two or three times: Astrea received no less contentment; Phillis was even ravished with joy; and Diana her self did find some comfort unto her sorrows, in those de∣lights which were promised unto her companion; But as the greatest felicities may sometimes be taken for a presage of some future great misfortune, by rea∣son of that link which does inseparably tye adversity and prosperity together: So this joy did not long continue in their countenances: For after the God of Love had given them time to see his pleasure in this Table, presently he turn∣ed it, and in lieu of Golden Letters written in Azure, they saw in a Silver Ta∣ble written in black Characters, these words. THe Dooms of destiny must be obeyed: Silvander must dye, and leave Diana unto Paris And Adamas, though this Lover be dear unto thee; Yet I command thee to sacrifice this Shepherd Tomorrow; and let him dye by thy hand. The Heavens began to Thunder again, and upon a sudden the Clouds and the Tables vanished. This command did so extreamly astonish all the compa∣ny, that it was long before one word was spoken; Every one did in their ve∣ry souls lament the loss of this Shepherd; for he having lived in a Country where the people set an esteem upon virtue, Silvander could say that he never raised any envy, or enemy against him: But a midst this common affliction which which might well be called a just resentment of pity, Diana was moved in a far different manner: For the God of Love had dooned the death of Silvander in such a dismal manner, as she resolved to to precede him, or at the least not to survive him one minute, for whose sake she only desired to live. Yet least her too much transport, should be an obstacle unto her designe, she conceal'd her sorrows with so great a constraint, that Silvander himself was de∣ceived by it. This poor Shepherd, after he had seen the doom which the God of Love had pronounced against him, he mildly cast his eyes upon her, and his grief not to possess her whom he loved bet, was a cause that he could not chuse but accompany his looks with some sighs. Diana took them with an incom∣parable constancy, and not so much as changing colour, she shewed him more marks of amazement in her face, then love; of which the Shepherd was no less sensible, then of that sentence which condemned him to dye: Yet still retai∣ning in his memory those testimonies of affection which she had shewed unto him, he found presently after, that it was no defect of love in her, since com∣monly the deerest sorrows send forth fewest tears. Adamas in this extreamity, knew not what to do; sometimes he looked upon Silvander, and sometimes turned towards the Fountain, as if he hoped the God would revoke this doom I yet still seemed so astonished as if he had thought it pronounced against himself, and not Silvander. Hylas, was now put by the byas of his merry humour; and though he did not meet with any greater opposer of himself by way of Argument, yet did he grieve for him, and made it appear that he was a lover of virtue, and did esteem it wheresoever he did meet with it. Lycidas, Thamiros, Adrastes, and the rest, did not know what countenances to put on, and Celadon himself did forget all his causes of joy. Thus in this universal astonishment, and common silence, no noise was to be heard but sighs, which plainly spoke the sorrows of all the people: But Silvander, pres∣sing through the company, went to the Fountain; where kneeling down, and
shewing a countenance of courragious resolution. Oh God of Love, (said he in in a loud voice) which dost envy my fedelity, I do give thee thanks for the care thou hast taken in making me to dye so gloriously; I know very well that as death is to tryumph over me, so Paris is to tryumph over Diana; but since my mean birth cannot dispute with him for the victory, I cannot think that any command could come from a more puissant God: Here I am, Great God, rea∣dy to obey thee; And since the doom is irrevocable, in ordaining me to live till to morrow, may the Sun turn his hours into munites, and hasten his re∣turn for my sake. After this he rose up, and whilst all the company observed his behaviour, and whilst Paris himself was greeved to the soul that he could not be happy but by the ruine of that Shepherd, he went unto Adamas, and see∣ing him in great astonishment; Father (said he unto him) cheer up; we now know the will of the Gods, and that this Fountain must be drenched with my blood if the Inchantment end: Come, come, why stay we here any longer? Son, answered Adamas, with a deep sigh; The Gods do shew no less rigor un∣unto me, in letting me live, then in hindring you: In saying so, he turned about, and all the company doing the like, they all began to set forward to∣wards the house. In their return, every one went in confusion: Astrea thinking upon nothing but the misfortune of her friend, she left Celadon to the discretion of Galathea: Phillis was so sadly concerned, that Lycidas himself desired her to go and give what assistance she could unto Diana, in that extreamity; so being about that Shepherdess, and a little separated from the company, because they would not be heard, Phillis was the first that spoke, and after she had looked up to Hea∣ven: I profess (said she) I cannot enough admire at so many accidents by which the Gods do disturb the tranquility of our lives; we do never gust any pleasure one single day; but as soon as ever we have any cause of joy, some strange dis∣aster or other does blast it. Sister, (answered Diana very sadly) the Gods have now done their worst, and since they have thus assaulted the innocency of Sil∣vander, it is probable they will not spare one of us: The truth is, (aid Astrea and interrupted) This Shepherd moves me to abundance of compassion; I have narrowly observed the whole course of his life; and when I do particularly con∣sider the success of it, I cannot chuse but admire his constancy, and think his destinies too severe. The fairest things (replied Diana, with tears in her eyes) are often soonest blasted; and therefore I do not so much wonder at Silvanders fate, although I do most sadly resent it: For though (as they say) the Gods cannot erre, yet I cannot chuse but think them sometimes jealous, and do en∣vy us mortals when we have any thing amongst us that is execllent; else what reason could they have to take from us this poor Shepherd: had he ever neglect∣ed their service; had he ever been negligent in looking to his flocks; had hee been guilty of Paricide, or had lived in a most precise observation of all Laws, both divine, and humane, I could not have told what to have said: But Lignon I believe never saw a more wise Shepherd then he; You know how excellently he has often discoursed in matters of Divinity; how respective he has been un∣to all: his Flocks were always the best liking in all the plain; and how could he commit Paricide, since he never knew his Parents? No, no? my compani∣ons, they could never detect him of any crime, unless making me in love with him; but thy should they punish him for that, since I never complained against him? Sister, replied Phillis, If the Gods do punish him, for winning your Love, it is only because that affection is contrary unto what you owe unto Paris; for you see, it is their positive wills you should marry him; and were I in your con∣dition, I would consent unto it, provided they would let Silvander live. Sister answered Astrea, the Gods ure not to be capitulated withall; and I believe there is some deep mystery in this, which we understand not; and that Silvan∣der having lived most of his age out of Forrests, there may be some other reason which causeth his death: not but that I do extreamly lament him, and would with the loss of my blood redeem him; but since the misfortune is irrevocable, I conceive the best way is to obey without murmur, whatsoever the Gods or∣dain
and concerning either him or us. How sister? (said Diana and was a little trou∣bled) would you advise me to give my self unto Paris, and betray my fidelity un∣to Silvander? I would advise you (said Astrea) to give unto Silvander as much as you can, which is your resentment of his misfortune; and unto Paris what you ow unto him, which is obedience unto the commands of the gods, and Bel∣linde, Neither the gods, nor Belinde (answered Diana, and was very angry) can force my will: I have learn'd, that they have given me a free will, and power, to make what choise I will: whether it be a crime or no to make use of it, it is no matter; so I do not offend Silvander, all's indifferent, and believe it Astrea, your sin is not small, in advising me to be perfideous: In saying so, she looked upon her with such an eye as would have moved any unto pity; and Astrea, be∣ing touched with compassion, she was quite out of countenance: My dear Sister (said she and broke into tears) may I never live, if I be not extreamly sensible of Silvanders misfortune, and would with all my heart, I could for your sake, change his Destiny; but be my sorrows never so great for him, my resentments for you are more violent, and that is the reason of my speaking as I did, thinking that by advising you unto a perfidy, I might give you some consolation, especi∣ally since your fidelity will do him no good, because his death will not suffer him to reap the fruits of it: Nay, on the contrary (replied Diana) my fidelity will doubtlesly cause him to have this satisfaction in dying, that he has as much as he desires, and since it is long before we shall see each other again, if my constancy be meritorious, he will give me leave to follow him. This was the discourse of Diana, by which Astrea and Phillis gathered, that after the losse of Silvander, they should have a heard task to preserve her: yet loving her infinity well, they resolved to comfort her as well as they could: thus they went on the way, whilst Amasis, being near unto (Galathea and Celadon, did cause him to relate the principal ccurrents of Silvanders life. Belinde, for her part, she made no question but Diana had an inclination to him; and infinitly admiring, with what discretion this passion had been carryed, she also lamented the loss of that Shepherd, and condemned the too much easi∣nesse of her daughter in wishing him so well: After this, remembring that she only was the cause of Silvanders coming to dwell in Forrests, she looked upon her self as culpable, both of his love and death. Yet since it was not in her power to divert it now, because she would rather die then disobey the gods, she continued her Lamentations, which was all she could do for this unfortu∣nate Shepherd. Adamas also, whom the Oracle had interested in the death of Silvander, by commanding him to be his Sacrificer, he could not find out any reason why this Shepherd should be so rigorously used: yet for further satisfaction, he would confer with him, and taking the Shepherd by the hand: Silvander (said he un∣to him) what grand sin have you committed, which thus moves the gods to be greedy of your death? Their Oracles speak nothing else, whether you consult with them in private or publick, still they have some design upon your life. Fa∣ther (answered Silvander) it would be a vanity in me worthy of punishment, to say I never sinned; but I must needs confesse, that I do verily believe, the great∣test sin I ere committed, was in presuming to pretend unto the possession of Dia∣na: hitherto I have concealed my passion, lest there should be too many wit∣nesses of my presumption; but since you would have my ingenious confession, to excuse the rigour which you find in the punishment that is ordained me, I will freely tell you my offence, and beseech you to pardon me, if it hath been any obstacle to the design of Belinde and Paris: my love unto that fair Shepherdess, began before ere she knew him, and if she did entertain his affection, only out of respect, it was perhaps, because she had beforehand received mine out of in∣clination. Yet the gods most just, they have found a more sutable confor∣mity between the merits of Paris and Diana, then between the perfections of the Shepherdess and my miserable condition: Upon this ground, they commanded their marriage should be accomplished, and that I should die, because they knew, that if they had not so commanded it, yet I would never have survived their mar∣riage
one minute. The gods, replied the Druide, do not give Diana unto Paris because he deservs her; nor do I think they deny her unto you, for want of any good qualities which may intitle you to a legitimate presence unto her: I do very well know both your worths, and for all my affection unto him, I am not so par∣tially blind, but I also know what great advantages your wit has above his; but to tell you truly, I think the gods do thus, to shew how oft men are deceived in their judgements, and that the Laws of all humane Prudence, is far inferiour unto those that are established in heaven: But Silvander (continued he) give me leave to part from you a little, that whilst you do joyn with the rest of the com∣pany, I may think upon some course which may be expedient both for you and me. In saying so, Druide stayed, and Silvander, who was very glad to be alone, he did not wash away so fast as ordinary; but going softly, he did nothing but think upon the Fatal doom, which had debarred him from the enjoyment of Dia∣na, to augment the glory and triumphs of Paris: Adamas▪ in the mean while, be∣ing come near the Altar, upon the stairs, whereof Astrea and Diana slept, when they went with a resolution to die at the Fountain of verity: there he sate down, and there beginning to think upon the office unto which he was called then upon his life, and afterwards upon the miserable condition of Silvander; and finding in himself greater motions of affection towards him, them ever he had before: O (said he) how apt is compassion to cause love? For I never had so great an in∣clination unto Silvander, as since his misfortune forced me to pity him. After∣wards thinking upon the Oracle which commended that Shepherd to die, and that he himself should sacrifice him: O heavens (said he) how comes the gods to be so barbarous as to sprinkle their altars with humane blood: If some uncouth Vi∣ctimes only would appease their wrath, why then, in lieu of Bulls and Sheep, did they not command the burning of our houses? I would, with all my heart, have been the first that would have fired mine to appease them, and shew my obedi∣ence: But why, O god of Love, must our houses stand, and Silvander he sacri∣ficed? and to make me the greater sufferer in his punishment, by dying daily with grief, for killing him, why must I be his sacrifice? Alas, is this the abundance of contentments which should accompany my dayes, after I had given Celadon unto his dear Astrea? Ah Heaven, has thou deluded me? Upon this he slept, and considering that he was a Druide: O pardon me (replied he) for accusing you of injustice: Pardon me, great gods, for being too much transported with my re∣resentments: Alas, alas, I do love Silvander, and being but a man, I am subject to humane frailties: In saying so, he began to think how he should appease the God of Love, so, as he might excuse that Shepherd; but finding no way, he rose up, resolved to obey, and returned to his house. They were not gone far, before Thamires, who was near unto Hylas: I do not think (said he) but if you would speak according to your conscience, you would confesse Hylas, that the death of Silvander does not so much trouble you, as you make a shew of: why do you think so! (asked Hylas) because, answered Thamires, it is natural to wish ill unto those that vex us, and well unto such as please us: now, it is Silvander only, that hath convinced you of errour, and has let the world see the falsness of your opinions: so, as I believe, you will be very glad that this thorn is taken out of your foot: Ah Thamires (said Hylas and sighed) how far are you from my thoughts, since as two contraries do give a greater luster unto each other, I am confident, that my wit opposing hier it would have been in a greater consideration and esteem amongst the Shepherds and Shepherdesses; but I fear, heaven does punish him for maintaining such evil Maximes: And if by the tranquility of our lives, it be lawful to judge of the love of the gods unto us. observe, I beseech you, which of us two has most rea∣son to think our selves in the right: First, he came no sooner into the world, but he was punished for the offences which he was to commit: for the gods, unto whom future and present are all one, were pleased to make him feel the weight of their punishments betimes; and since he has been the very tennis ball of Fortune, jolted to and fro, like a vagabond, whom Nature would not so much as own: if
ever he had any inclination unto any Shepherdesse, there was a thousand obstacles to oppose his contentment: and why all this? but only as a recompence of that fine constancy which he hath preached with such zeal and devotion: Whereas, on the contrary, at my very birth, good Fortune smiled upon me; health and wealth vowed never to forsake me: nor have I ever been troubled with so much as a fit of the headach: as soon as ever I had any mind to a young and fair Shep∣herdess, she met me half way: Thus have I lived alwayes in abundance of con∣tentment, and swimmed in all delights; and why all this? but because I ne∣ver preached any such severe Laws as might tyrannize over our spirits; but on the contrary, that one may love indifferently all that one finds fair, and never by ty∣ed to dote long upon one and the same: But Thamires (continued he) though Silvander has deserved the misfortunes which follow him, yet do I infinitly la∣ment him; and though his humour was alwayes contrary unto mine, yet I do wish his Destinies were as kind unto him, as mine are to me. In this you shew (answered Thamires) that you are not in all things an enemy unto reason. I con∣ceive it therefore our parts to lament his loss, and in him the loss of all the Shep∣herds that are to survive him: for I am afraid, that if they be left to the mercy of your extravagant opinions, you will corrupt and debauch them, and get an Empire of their minds: That had been long since (said Hylas) had all things been governed by reason. With such discourse as this, they all came unto the house of Adamas, into which they were no sooner entred, but Celadon, who shared with Silvander in his sorrows, he beseeched Galatheas leave to go back and meet that Shepherd, whom he thought was still with the Druide: which the Nymph consenting unto, he went, and Licidas seeing him go, he followed him: They were no sooner out of the house, but they met him all alone: Celadon, who did most cordially love him, did a long while embrace him, but was not able to speak for sighing: which Silvander perceiving, Celadon (said he unto him) for god sake let not my mis∣fortunes be any trouble to those contentments which the gods would have you en∣joy in the possession of your Mistresse: Take your full taste of joyes, without a mixture of any sorrows; and if it be my death which only troubles you, if you love me, think it a cause rather of joy then sorrow, since the gods themselves would have it so, and since I cannot go out of the world with more glory, then in obeying those Dooms which they have pronounced. However (answered Ce∣ladon) I cannot chuse but sadly resent this separation, as the only thing that was able to molest my joyes: upon this, Silvander would have answered, but the Druide came, and interrupting them, did carry them to his house. Diana, on the other side, who had Astrea and Phillis with her, was not a∣ble to resist her sorrows, which every moment grew more and more violent: so as to avoid all other discourse, but that of her companions, she would go to bed, under pretence of taking some rest which she wanted; and certainly there need∣ed not much artifice to perswade Belinde that she stood in need of that refresh∣ment: for besides, now knowing what interest she had in the misfortune of Sil∣vander, the very face of that Shepherdess, had the features of one that was not likely to live above two or three hours. She consented therefore that Diana should retyre her self unto her chamber; and though she was in her soul sorry for the obstacles that hindred the contentment of her Daughter, and the merits of Silvander, yet did she a little comfort her self, when she fancied, that after the death of this Shepherd, Diana could not then have any excuse, but to marry Paris. Amasis also, had not been in the house above half an hour, but she remembred Dorinde; and knowing, that she was not at the Fountain, she sent to seek her in the Gallery, in the Garden, and every place where it was likely she should be, but hearing no news of her, she sent to enquire of the Porter, who said, that a little after all the company was gone, she and Merindor were together in a Coach, and went towards Bonlieu. At first she thought, that since she left her indisposed, she might be gone to divert her self by walking; but afterwards, re∣membring, that since the return of Merindor, Dorinde had been in a very ill hu∣mour,
she began to doubt something. And being amidst her variety of thoughts upon a sudden she heard the noise of some horses. Upon this, she went to the window, and knowing her Coach, she ran to the stairs to meet Dorinde, but finding only Merindor, she was much amazed: and to encrease her wonder, she saw him look like a dead man, pale as ashes, his eyes red, and countenance so dejected, as he was hardly able to go. As soon as she had asked where Dorinde was, and the Cavalier made a low Conge, Madam (said he unto her in a tone that testified the disorder of his soul) here is it which will inform you: In saying so, he presented a Letter unto her: which Amasis receiving, and opening, she found these words. DORINDES Letter unto AMASIS. NOw, Madam, the persidie of Sigismond has plainly shewed me, that there is no fidelity to be found amongst men; and his Trea∣son hath put me out of all hopes to govern an Empire here be∣low, I am resolved to seek for a Crown in heaven: I must con∣fesse, that when I first heard the news of his change, my love did condemn his violated faith; but since, having well considered the tranquillity it will procure unto me, I thought that I had more reason to commend, then com∣plain against him. The truth is, that having received so many favours from you, it was my duty to acknowledge them; but since I was able to do it only in my wishes, in what place could I do it more to your advantage, then in this which I am in quest of? For, Madam, it is there, where my mind being freed from the Interests of the world, will become acquainted with the gods, who perhaps, for your sake, will so far pity me, as to grant the effecting of my desires & hopes: If you think my departure without taking leave of you, a crime, accuse only the good will you ever expressed unto me, which made me fear, that if I had acquainted you with my resolution, per∣haps ou would not have it sufficient: I may say, Madam, that Sigis∣monds disdain so surprized me, as made me like unto those who are forced to go out of the world, without so much leasure as to make their last Will. But admit I had the leasure, alas, what was in my power to dispose of, since from the first minute I had the honour to be known unto you, I was wholly yours; Now, Madam. be not angry that I do not divide my possession with any but the gods, who, unwilling I should languish under the tyranny of a man, have permitted. that by half a ring my whole heart should be restored unto me: If these words need any interpretation, I leave the charge of it unto Merindor, and to tell you, Madam, that in what place soever I am, and into what condition soever I am brought, I shall be still your most hum∣ble servant, Dorinde. Whilst Amasis was reading this Letter, Merindor observed a great alteration in her countenance; and seeing her eyes began to be moist, he thought them cau∣sed for Dorindes departure. Indeed, she had no sooner read it all, but tears trick∣led down right: But, O Merindor (said she) is it certain that Sigismond has failed in his word? The faith of Princes has no priviledge above others. Madam (an∣swered the Cavalier) your question requires a long discourse, by way of answer; and since Dorinde has commanded me to acquaint you with all circumstances, I shall tell you as much as she knows her self, if your patience will be pleased to be∣stow the hearing in private. I will (said Amasis) I do passionately desire to know the truth of it.
Upon this she took the Cavalier by the hand: and after she had told the Drui∣de that she had some business to confer upon, with Merindor, she carryed him into the Garden, and chusing out the closest Arbour, she sate down, and commanding him to do the like, he began his discourse thus. The Sequell of DORINDES History. I Am to relate unto you Madam, a treason so great, that if you do not perfectly know what power love has over a spirit, doubtless you will think me most cul∣pable in during to be only a complice of such a wickedness: but because it is an accident which hapned since Sigismond departed from you, I will take the story in its order and tell you Madam that as soon as we set forward, Ligonias, dispatched a post secretly unto Gondebaut to advertise him of Sigismond and Godo∣mars arrivall, and least he should be surprised, with the arrivall also of Rosilion, and the rest of the Cavaliers; The King therefore the next morning waited upon by almost all the nobility in the Countrey, did seem as if he would go a hunting: and taking that way which the Princes were to come, they met them about a league from Lyons. This meeting was worth the seeing; for Sigismond and Go∣domar, knowing the King at a good distance off did alight from their horses, and comming on foote, he was no sooner alighted from his also but they cast them∣selves at his feet, and with much humble submission asked pardon for parting from him. The King received them with open arms, and with singular expres∣sions of joy at their return did promise to forgive, and forget all that was past, provided they would not give any new causes of complaint. Rosilion in the mean time came up, and Sigismond shewing him to the King. Gondebaut offered unto him the service of himself, and Kingdom with extraordinary expressions of wel∣come. Afterwards, he embraced Lindamor, and Godomar telling him, that this was he whose arms had prevailed over Polemas. I am very glad (said he) that his valour did make to appear us the injustice of that rebell, which he had with co∣vered a legitimate pretence: after this, he received those honours which Damon, Alcidon and the rest, did unto him. After which, all taking horse they rid towards the Town. As soon as they were come within half a league; they discovered a great mul∣titude of men, ranged into Battalia, as if they ready to give a battle; They were variously armed: some with slings: some with bows and arrows: others with pikes, on one arme a backler, and cimiters by there sides. They were about eighteen thousand in number, which made Rosilion believe that it was the rest of the Army which he had sent against Marcellis: Gondebout, the Princes, and all the rest did passe through the midst of them: and they were no sooner through, but they were met by four thousand horse, which waited upon them into the Town. At the gates, Clotilda waited for their comming, and with her a hundred of the fairest Ladies in all Lions, who appeared upon milk white Horses, with seemed proud to bear such loudes of beauty. At the arrivall of the Princes, Clotilda only alighted, whom Sigismond and Godamar embraced, and whom Rosilion, Damon, Lindamor, and Alcidon saluted with all possible honour and respect. Afterwards they all got up again, and went unto the Temple of Venus, where the musique of voices, and instruments received them, and helped to render thanks unto the gods for their safe return: from thence they went unto the Athenian Garden, where Gondebaut had the lodgings of Rosilion, and was pleased that Sigismond, Godamar and Clotilda, should also be there to keep him Company. All this day was spent in feasts, and when night came all the Court went upon the water to see some fireworks of joy which were prepared just where the rosne, and the Arar do contract a marriage, and from thence till they come to the Sea, do lie lovingly together in one bed; one might well imagine that this was not done without design, but this place was purposely chosen to denote the reunion of Children and Father. But however, many fine sights were seen, and the King
returned singularly well satisfied. For my part, my greatest admiration was the diligence of the workmen, and excellence of their invention, having so short a time for it. Now Madam I have insisted upon these things, not as absolutly necessary to the purpose, nor as altogether uselesse: for they were no sooner returned to the Palace, but Rosilion being conducted to his Chamber by the Princes, every one retired to their own Chambers to rest: But Gondebaut who could not take any, and whom the interest of Dorinde so perplixed, in lieu of goeing to bed, he thought the time would be better spent in endeavouring to know upon what terms Sigismond stood with her: and because he supposed that before Clotilda, slept Sigismond would surely come and give her an accompt, he passed through some Chambers untill he came unseen or unheard, unto the dore which was close by the bed of that young Princesse. He had not listned there above a quariter of an hovre, but Sigismond came as supposed: and because that was the place where they ordinarily retired, not to be heard by those that were in the room, they came thither and sate down, little dreaming of Gondebauts jealousie. I understood since (for the King intending to make use of me, freely ac∣quainted me with all things) that Sigismond began to talk very advantageously of you, and of Galatheas beauty, and also if all the Nimphes about you: from thence he fell to speak of Dorinde: and because that was it which the King most longed to hear, he listned more attentively, and hear Sigismond say; But Sister (for so he called Clotilda) is it not strange the King should be so much against my loving her; when love will never let me depart from her service? were I not to blame if I dd not follow my own inclination, and if I did obey the commands of a man before the commands of a god? I know very well, that I am obliged unto him for my being, and that I ought to die rather then displease him: but yet if he would have me live, he must let me love Dorinde; For as long as I am Sigismond, it is impossible I should do otherwise. He added unto this some other discourse, whith Gondebaut listned unto very attentively, and unto which Clotilda answered with all possible modesty: sometimes hinting unto him his duty unto the quality of a King, and sometimes, confessing that his passion did in some sort render his disobedience excusable; But at last Sigismond falling to talk of the pas∣sages in Marcelles relating to his love, he acquainted her with Dorindes distrust of him: with the oathes of fidelity which he had sworn unto her, and lastly how they broke a ring, and each to keep a half: after this he put his hand into his pocket, and pulling out a little case, she shewed her Dorindes Picture. But Gon∣debaut could not see it for both the dore was shut, and there was a hanging which hindred: only he thought that Clotilda held it in her hand; at which, he was not a little contented, hoping that she would help him to break of all this correspon∣dency. Having by this thrick full information of all he desired to know he retired, and Sigismond also; but the did not passe away the night in the same manner: For the Prince rested soundly like a man that was contented: but the King did hardly sleep at all; For jealousy had opened both his eyes and his judgment; and made him study till morning how he might divert the mind of Sigismond from Dorin∣de. Day did suprise him in his musing thoughts: and when it was time to rise, he pretended to be a little ill that he might lie in bed all the morning. Yet not to trouble any one; he sent for Sigismond, and after he had commanded him to carry Rosilion, and the rest of the Caveliers a hunting he assured him he would be up that their return. Sigismond obeyed the King commanded, for where his love was not concerned, he would content him in any thing; In the mean time Gondebaut sent for Clotilda into hus Chamber; whom he caused to sit pown by bed, and afterwards he spoke unto her in these termes. I will not put you in mind, Clotilda, of your obligations to me, since you cannot remember the death of your Parents, nor how at this very instant you are beholding unto me for your life; It was my clemency that saved you from the shipwrak where upon they were lost; and though I might in justice have made
you perish with them, yet my pity restained me, and I was pleased to spare you: as you have hither to not he been backward in acknowledging this favour, so I hope that for the future I shall have no cause to accuse you of ingratitude, but will serve me upon any occasion wherein I shall imploy you; if so, never do doubt but I shall do for you any thing within the compasse of my power. To this Clotilda answered that she would alwayes obey his commands, though to the ex∣pence if her life: and that her greatest glory would be in doeing any acceptable service. Then Gondebaut replied thus: that which I require of you my dear Daughter (for so he called her when he was in a good humour) is not to tell me what dis∣course Sigismond, and you had since his return, for I know that as well as your self; but I would have you take some paines in helping me to ruine that affection which I know has already taken too deep root. And that you may not think but I know something of the business I will acquaint you with most of the particulars; upon this he cast his eyes upon the young Princesse and seeing her blush, I perceive (said he) that my discourse does astonish you; but you will have greater cause when you have heard all. Did not Sigismond come into your Chamber the last night after I was retired, and by your beds side told you all that had passed in Marcelles betwixt him and Dorinde? Did he not shew unto you half a ring which he said was a secret betwixt them invented to defeat all practises to seperate their wills? Upon this Clotilda was quite out of countenance, and in her astonishment, not knowing where he should hear all these things, she was so affraid that he would punish her for entertaining the secrets of Sigismond that falling down upon her knees, she began to implore his mercy, and aske him pardon. But the King commanding her to rise, he took her hand, and kissed her; Nay nay Daughter (said he) never fear that you have angred me; I know what care you have ta∣ken to quench his flame, and I am sure, it is not long of you, that he has not complied with my humour; but since neither your endeavours nor mine can bring him to that passe I conceive it expedient, to this which I will communicate unto you as the last remedye: in saying so, he caused her to sit down at his beds feet, and then he continued thus, It is probable Clotilda that you do know what sperit Dorinde is of, and that being of so ambitious a temper as she is, no doubt but though Sigismond be very amia∣ble and hansome, yet she loves him as much for his quality as his person. Now you must know that when such persons of her quality, do arrive at any high de∣gree of honour, they alwayes become most insufferable, and use a most tiranni∣call, and dominering authority over all: they think the Sunnes does shine only to please them, and charge the earth with ingratitude, if it do not produce her fairest flowers in all places where they shall honour it with their feet; Truth is, they are full of so much dangerous vanity, that (judging falsly of all things) if they think any one to be an obstacle unto their fortune or ambition, they pre∣sently are plotting to ruine them; and are never quiet till they have done it. I speak this, partly in relation unto you Clotilda; to the end you may secure your self so, as though I should faile you, yet, that you may never fall into such ex∣tremities as I have mentioned, which doubtlesse will come to passe, if Dorinde ever bring about her designes: for as soon as ever Sigismond marry her, she, who as you know is only the Daughter of Arcingentorix, will become so proud to see her self Queen of the Burgundians, as for getting her self, she will also forget what is due unto your merit and quality; The vast difference that is betwixt her extraction and yours, will make her so ashamed to appear where you should be, as perhaps will beget such a hatred in her soul, that your life may be in danger. This is the danger, which threatens you: and if you do come to a fatall end, it is meerly your own fault, since the remedy is yet in your own hands, which is Clotilda, by all meanes to quench this fire, which has already broken out into such great flames. Judge Madam, how easily the spirit of a young lady might receive all the impres∣sions: The King had no sooner done his discourse but he had infused a strange mistrust in to the soul of this young Princesse, that all these misfortunes would come to passe in case this affection continued: So as forgetting what she owed
unto the amity of Sigismond, and preparing her self to do whatsoever the King commanded against Dorinde; Sir, answered she, my fears of being miserable, shall not be the motive to make me obey you; but it shall be my desires to make you know that I will never be ungrateful unto your goodness: Therefore I most humbly beseech you to tell me what I must do, that I may presently be∣gin it, and by that you may judge of my affection. Truth is (said the King) haste is very requisite in the business; for in such matters, delays are dangerous, and often marre all; you must therefore of necessity get that half Ring which is in the hands of Sigismond, with all possible expedition. Oh Sir (said Clotil∣da, and interrupted) I doubt it is impossible; for did you see with what care he kept it, you would wonder; he looked upon it, he kissed it, he laid to his heart, he talked to it as if Dorinde were present; and therefore I am afraid that being so transported with this passion, it will be a great difficulty to get it from him. It is not my design to attempt it openly (said the King) or by violence, you know such ways have been already used without effect; but I would have us go about it by cunning, and do all that possibly we can to deceive him: Oh (replied Clotilda) it is hard deceiving such mistrustful spirits as his: you may be deceived (replied Gondebaut) so you will do as I shall direct, which doubtless will be an easie matter to do, since he takes you under the notion of a confi∣dent, and not as one who would divert his affection. Clotilda promising to do her best, the King continued thus: You daughter have seen this Ring, and you know what mettle and size it is, get another made of the same, and as like it as you can; then breaking it in two, keep the one half, Sigismond will certainly come to you, as he did the last night, and will be as cerimonious to this Ring as before: when he does, take your half in one hand, and take his in the other, and when he asks for it again, in lieu of his, give him yours; it is impossible he should perceive it; for not having the other to compare them together, nor mistrusting your design, he will beleive it the same he brought from Marcelles, which done, we will proceed further, and to morrow I will tell you how, Clotilda thought this invention to be excellent, and very feasable; and after she had sworn to use her best endeavours: Well Clotilda (said Gondebaut) you must now give me this contentment, since you have sworn it, and I desire it: This invention is the only Remedy we have, and I will use it: If you do your best endeavours, you shall ere long see how much I love you; and if on the contrary, I find you fail me, and that my design do come to be discovered (which can no way be but by want of good-will, or gross indiscretion) be certain, I will take it as the greatest injury I ever received from any enemy. To which Clotilda answered, that she would sooner dye then fail in the least of his Com∣mands: After which, the King kissed her; she went out of the Chamber, and he got out of his bed. I wil not abuse your ears, Madam, with too precise a relation of every parti∣cular circumstance, which is not fully pertinent to my purpose; It will suffice you know that all this day was spent in hunting, and part of the night in dan∣cing, After which Sigismond failed not to accompany Clotilda in her Chamber; for in the absence of Dorinde, he took delight in nothing so much as in talk∣ing with her: Amongst other discourse they fell into talk of the Ring; and as soon as Sigismond had taken it out of his Box, he shewed it unto the Prin∣cess, who took it into her hand as if she desired to look upon the fashion of it; whe she had it, she put both her hands behind her, she left Sigismonds Ring on the stool, and kept only that which she had provided; afterwards holding out both her hands to him shut: I hold a wager (said she unto him) that you guess not in which it is. The Prince, who never mistrusted her fallacie; I hold a wager (said he and smiled) it is in that hand: In saying so, he touched Clotil∣das right hand, and opening it he found only the counterfeit of that which he sought for; yet supposing it to be the very same which Dorinde gave him, he innocently took it, and looking upon the Princess: Oh Sister (said he and smi∣led) you must know that love can do any thing, and though he be blind, yet
nothing can be hid from him: In ssaying so, he laid this counterfeit part of the Ring to his lips, and Clotilde seeing him kiss it with so much devotion and zeal, she could not chuse but smile; but presently after hearing him sigh, her soul resented some little kind of compassion; and therefore she said unto her self, Oh Sigismond, didst thou but know how much misery my Artifice is preparing for thee, thou wouldst turn all thy sighs of love into sighs of rage and dispair: Upon this thought she repented that ever consented unto this Treason; but then cal∣ling to memory the discourse of Gondebaut, and considering how inevitable her ruine would be, if she did not pursue her enterprise, she thought it best to finish what she had so happily begun: But because the night was far spent, and Si∣gismond who would never have been weary of her company, did not think of retiring, she put him in minde of it; and when he was gone she went to bed. The next morning, she got up betimes, because she imagined the King would send for her, to what she had done: And indeed she was no sooner drest, but a Messenger came according to her expectation: As soon as she came into his Chamber; Come Clotilda (said the King unto her) have we gotten this Ring? we cannot get it (answered Clotilde and smiled) out of his hands; why? (re∣plied Gondebaut, and began to be angry) because it is not there (answered Clotilda and still smiled) for it is in mine; and that you may not doubt of it, see here the accomplishment of your desire, and my promise. Upon this, the King took it, and seeming highly satisfied with the diligence of Clotilda; Do not think (said he) that whilst you were at work, I was idle; they have promised to bring me a man hither this morning, whose name is Squillinder, and who, if I mistake not, did formerly live in Forrests, and fled hither for refuge: Now they tell me this man is the rarest in the world at counterfetting all manner of hands; which if he be, he shall write a Letter from Sigismond unto Dorinde, that will do the deed; only one thing troubles me, I cannot think upon one that is fit to execute the rest of my plot; for he must be a man of excellent wit and judgment, and one, if possible, that has some colour of preence with Dorinde; after that Sigismond has quitted his in∣interest. Then Clotilda began to think a little; afterwards upon a sudden: There are many (said she) who have loved her, and I know two who do at this very instant loue her, and are here; you may chuse which of them you think most fit for your purpose: Then she named Periander, and Merindor. As soon as the King heard my name, he clapped his hands together, and seemed to be ex∣treamly glad: I am certain (said he) this Cavileir will do whatsoever I shall bid him. There needed no more but to consult with me about him: Oh Great Gods! what Soveraign Authority has Kings over us? And how hard it is for us to resist the charms of their Commands, especially when they come with any appearance of Justice: Gondebaut had not sooner sent for me, but he told me all that I have told you; and after this, and a world of mountainous promises, in case I could win Dorinde to marry me, he did insensibly engage me to do whatsoever he would. He had no sooner got his promise from me, but I saw a young man enter, who, since they told me was Nephew unto Ardilan, whom Godamar killed: he brought with him this Squillinder, whom I spoke of be∣fore, and who, perhaps Madam, you have heard of, since he lived in your Pro∣vinces: He did not only live here (answered the Nymph) but was born here in a Town called Argental; and I know him to be a man of good wit, if he would well imploy it: However, replied Merindor, he is extreamly subtle, and one may know it by his very looks and mind: But Madam, to hold you in this discourse no longer: Gondebaut did make very much of him, and having imparted his mind unto him, he shewed unto him one of Sigismonds Letters; And after an injunction of eternal silence, and a large recompence if he would but counterfeit the hand, he set him to work, he himself dictating this Let∣ter.
The counterfeit Letter of SIGISMOND unto DORINDE. IT is rather thy Tyranny of Gondebaut, then any consent of my will, which has made me a Husband unto a Daughter unto the King of the Theurons: My despair is so great, that I cannot entertain you with those sor∣rows which I suffer by reason of this constraint: And this half Ring which I send you back, will tell you that there is no remedy left against my misfor∣tune: I wish I were able to give you any consolation; but since I cannot com∣fort my self; what can I invent to comfort you? The Truth is Dorinde, I am married, and I wish I could also say that I were dead, but Heaven is pleased to let me live only to resent our separa∣tion with more sadness: Let that Necessity which hath forced me to violate my Faith unto you, excuse my change; And if you have any inclination to oblige me, find that happiness in the Arms of Merindor, which our bad destinies denies you to find from Sigismond. Whilst the King did dictate, Squillander did write this Letter; and when hee had done, Gondebaut compared it with Sigismonds, but found them so extream∣ly alike, as had hee not seen it written before his face, hee would have sworn it to be the hand of his Son. This done, Gondebaut dismissed Squillander, and commanded Ardilan to re∣compence double to what the Fellow could expect: After this, hee turned himself unto mee; See here Menandor (said hee unto mee) now all depends upon your good management of the matter: I have already told you, that if you proceed handsomly, you shall receive advantages from mee beyond your i∣magination, besides the satisfaction of your Love unto Dorinde: you have wit enough to manage this mater aright; and though you had no interest in it but mine, yet that is enough to make mee hope well in your proceeding, I would have you go about it as soon as possibly you can, and that you go unto Dorinde as sent from Sigismond: When you come first to her, upon the first opportunity of discourses, tell her that shee is not to pretend any more unto the Crown of the Burgundians, since it is already destiny'd from the daughter of the King of Theurons, to whose Ambassadors, Sigismond and I have signed the Articles: I know that this will much afflict her; but a man of your accomplishments will make her take this losse with little grief; especially if you tell her, (as your Love will dictate unto you) that still shee shall be a Queen, and raign soveraignly in your heart. I answered him, That I was wholly devoted to obey his com∣mands, but there was one obstacle in my way, which was, that I was engaged to run at the Ring with Prince Sigismond this very day; and should I fail him, something might perhaps be suspected. Upon this, the King scratched his head a long time together, and said not a word: afterwards upon a sudden, It is no matter (said hee) if you go not till night; for let Rosilion, Lindamor and the rest of the Cavaliers be as hasty as they will to return unto Amasis, I shall stay them till to morrow, to the end, that before they can tell Dorinde Sigismond is not married, you may have time enough to get her consent to marry you: and if I be not much mistaken, you will finde no great difficulty in it: For very spite to see that Sigismond has cast her off, will make her content to what you will; and to be revenged, will give unto you that Empire which my son pretended unto. Which if it come to passe, never fear what Sigismond can do afterwards: For if hee offer to attempt any thing against you, or against my service, I shall take a course to keep him within compasse of his duty. This Madam, was the command which I recei∣ved
from the King, and which Love making mee as blinde as himself did move me to undertake: For certainly, had I not been stark blinde, I should have fore∣seen the misfortune which hapned unto mee since. But to proceed; be pleased to know, Great Nymph, that the Course at the Ring being ended▪ where every one did very well, and wherein Rosilion and Lindamor amongst the rest, did get a most high esteem, I departed with a resolution to ride all the night; but it be∣gan to rain so extreamly, as I was constrained to tarry at the first Town I came at. The next morning, which was yesterday, I got up betimes, and came unto you very early. I shall not need to tell you with what an eye Dorinde looked upon mee, for you were a witnesse of it: but let mee tell you, it was with a kinder aspect than shee would, had shee known the message which, I brought, I told her, that I had a Letter to present unto her from Prince Sigismond: and then I saw through her eyes the contentment of her soul; but because you were ready to sit down at the Table, I did not present it untill wee were risen. Perhaps Madam, you observed how shee took mee aside: Indeed I did (answer∣ed Amasis) and I made a doubt whether it was for the love of Sigismond or yourself: Then Madam you must know (said Merindor) that seeing none near to interrupt us, first shee asked for the Letter which the Prince had sent; upon which, seeming to look for it, and in some sort to prepare her for reading of it. But fair Dorinde (said I) it seems you expect some great contentment from this Letter: Why not? (answered shee and smiled) since the Prince has done mee the honour to write it. I cannot tell (said I, and seemed as if I could not yet finde it) but upon this I stopped: And Dorinde looking mee in the face, shee found there such coldnesse, as shee began to fear that all was not so well as shee imagined: shee presently changed colour, and hoping that I said so only to de∣ceive her, It seemes Merindor (said shee unto mee) you have a minde to make mee buy the contentment of this Letter very dear: but pray give it mee; for the favour is at so high a rate, as I shall never be able to pay it. Shee had no soo∣ner said so, but I found it, and presenting it unto her, Here Madam (said I) may you finde in it as much contentment as you expect. These words did re∣new the feares of Dorinde, so as receiving the Letter with a troubled counte∣nance, shee opened it with a trembling hand, and at last read it: Shee had no sooner read two or three of the first lines, but shee tryed whether or no her eyes had deceived her; and pointing with her finger at the words which were so displeasing unto her, in hopes to find some other sence in them, she still found the same, and so read on to the end of this sad Letter. And when shee came to the place where Sigismond advised her to seek for happinesse in my armes, an∣ger did then surprise her, and I heard her say in a low voice, Yes, yes, persidi∣ous man, could I but pull out of thy breast that heart which thou didst promise to preserve so faithfully: upon this, shee began to sigh, and to be quite out of countenance; so as she cryed in good earnest: And chusing rather that I should be a witnesse of her teares, then you, shee turned her self towards mee, and when shee could speak, said thus unto mee: I cannot tell Merindor, from whence such a sudden change should proceed; Pray tell mee, if you can? Faire Dorinde (said I unto her) perhaps that Letter will give you a better accompt then I can: No (answered shee) it mentions nothing at all, but onely that hee is married, and I wish to heaven I had dyed before I heard that word: Then Madam, replied I, I shall acquaint you with the Circumstan∣ces, to the end I may lessen your sorrowes and pardon his Infidelitie. Then I told her all that I could invent to colour this Lye: I told her that Sigismond was no sooner entered into Lyons, but Embassadours from the King of Theurons came to treat about this alliance: and that Gondebaut having found it very advantageous, had turned every stone, and used so many arguments to perswade Sigismond unto it, as at the last hee consented: That afterwards, the Prince would have stoln away, but being prevented, Clotilda was imploy∣ed to perswade him unto this marriage: That this Princesse was once out of all hopes to bring it about; but at last, shee tampered so with him, and had such a prevalence with him, as shee made him signe the Articles, and at the
same time procured from him this Letter, and this half of a Ring which I come to restore unto you. To this I added a thousand signes of sorrow, that I should be the messenger of such sad newes: and only received the Commis∣sion to get the opportunity of putting her in memory of my former services, and not to grieve her. My discourse; and her teares did end both together, and I protest Madam, I was amuzed to see her sorrowes so soon vanish; at least; I observed in her countenance a most strange alteration, and was the most sur∣prised man in the world, when I heard her say; Since I must knew the trea∣son of this persidious Prince, I am not sorry Merindor, that you have brought mee the newes. Know therefore, that I will content you for it very short∣ly, and end my dayes with you. After this, shee left mee and went towards you: For my part, I was the most satisfied man upon earth; and wished that the night was already past, hoping shee would perform her promise in the morning: which indeed shee did; but Madam in a farre different manner from what I expected: and see how shee went to work. Shee feigned her self to be sek, to have a pretence of asking your Coach, and afterwards to take a way quite contrary unto yours. You, who never suspected her designe, did lend it unto her: but you were no sooner gone, then shee took mee unto the Coach with her, and commanded the Coachman to carry her unto Bon∣lieu. I, who thought upon nothing but my Love, and the promise which shee had made mee night before: But faire Dorinde (said I unto her) what moves you to go unto Bonlieu? I am resolved (said shee) to keep my word with you, though Sigismond has broke his: I must confesse my blood began to rise at this, and was joyed beyond all expressions. Therefore kissing her hand; I vow, fairest Dorinde (said I unto her) that you will be the hap∣piest of all women: I expect no lesse (answered shee) for otherwise I should not thus dispose of my self. With such discourse as this, wee came to the Temple which they told mee was dedicated unto a Virgin, which was to have a childe. There Dorinde cau∣sed the Coach to stay, and desired mee to stay in it whilst shee talked a little with one of the Druides which belonged to the Temple: I waited there al∣most two houres; and when I began to be past all patience; I heard one call mee. Upon this I looked round about; and seeing no body, I heard a voice again which bad mee come into the Hall, the doore whereof was immediately opened unto mee. I, who knew not what belonged, or to what purpose this was, entered in, and spyed Dorinde in great barres of iron; so close as one might onely see but not come unto her: Now Merindor (said shee unto mee) see the performance of my promise; here will I die to all the world; and by you as I promised: Carry this Letter unto Amasis; and if shee ask you the reason of this my holy resolution, tell her it was your voyage: Ache. Upon this shee cast a Letter at my feet; and drawing a curtain which hindered mee from the sight of her, I earnestly entreated to see her once more; but do all I could, it was not to be obtained: Seeing then all my prayers and my teares were in vaine, I took up the Letter, and returned in your Coach to give it unto you, with an exact accompt of Gondebauts Treason, of my owne indiscretion, and of Dorindes despaire. This was the discourse of Merindor, at which Amasis could not restrain her tears; and doubtlesse her grief had been greater, had she not known; that there was a remedy. Chearing up her self therefore, in hopes to hinder Dorinde from confiing her self for ever, amongst the Carnates, she rose up, and in returning to the house: Merindor (said she) you have done very well in advertising me of this accident so soon: for yet there is time to remedy it, because, do what Do∣rinde can, it will be two months before her vow will be received, to admit her a∣mongst the rest. Madam (answered Merindor) I make no doubt of what you say, but I fear it will be a great difficulty to perswade Dorinde that Sigismond has not deceived her: The plot has been acted so cunningly, and they have glossed it with so many colours of truth, as it is hard to be known for a falshood: But, Madam, I am in a most desperate condition, for now there is no place where I
can find any safe Sanctuary: Sigismond will not sooner hear of my doing, but he will with all his power ruine me, and I cannot condemn him for it: for I do ac∣knowledge my fault, and know, that I ought not for an Empire to consent unto any wicked action. In this (said Amasis) there are many things to excuse you; and though I did not bring your love to Dorinde for one, yet it was a hard task for you not to obey Gondebaut, who would himself have ruined you, had you refused to execute his command. Still, Madam (replied Merindor) it had been more glorious to perish that way then the other, and it would have been great satisfaction to die without shame, or a stain upon my reputation. All those said Amasis) who know the power of a passion, when it is seconded with the com∣mand of such a King as Gondebaut, will rather find matter of excuse, then mat∣ter of condemnation: However, I offer you safe retreat with me, and promise to make your peace with Sigismond, provided, that as you have contributed in the fault, o you will be an assistant in the reparation of it, Madam, answered the Cavalier, my design was to go and die amongst the transaspines, under a∣nother name then my own: The glory of war invited my courage thither; but since you conceive me necessary cure to the wound which I have made; I do in all humility accept of your offer; and promise, Madam, to spare nothing that is whithin the compass of my power, to restore unto Dorinde that contentment which I would have robbed her of. After this, they went into, the chamber of Adamas, when Amasis found be∣yond measure afflicted; and after she had spent part of the day with him, she called for Rosanira, Calathea, and the rest, because she desired to go home be∣times, that she might the sooner get Dorinde out of the place; unto which she had confined her self. Amasis did not acquaint neither Galathea, nor Rosanira, with Dorindes reso∣lution, because she thought to divert her from it before they should ere know it; only she told them, that she was going to Bonlieu, and, that being desirous to visit the Temple of Carnates, she intended to spend all the whole day there. They castly believe the Nymph, and the sooner, because not knowing of Gondebauts plot, they did not think that Dorinde had any reason to leave the world. But when they desired leave to wait upon the Nymph thither, and she denied them, then they began to suspect something of the business. Yet, lest they should dis∣please Amasis, they pressed her to further, though the sorrows which they saw in the face of Merindor, and the ill humour of Dorinde ever since that Cavalier came, had made them extreamly desirous of it. Thus, they were no sooner come to Isoures, but Amasis left them there; and without any company but Merindor, she went towards Bonlieu: she had not gone above two or three hundred paces, but she espied a man coming in great hasle, and presently knew him to be the little Meril whom she had left in Marcel∣les: she caused then, the Coach to stay, and the little boy was no sooner come near, but kneeling down upon the ground. Madam (said he with a laughing countenance) Lindamor will be returned within this hour, and the Princes, Rosi∣lion, and Godomar, will come with him: They were much troubled when they found neither you nor any of your Nymphs in the Castle; but when they heard where you were, they intended to leave all their Equipage in the Town and come to surprize you: The truth is, they came presently, and I thought fit to adver∣tise you, to the end, Madam, you might have time to put things in order for them. Amasis was very glad of the news, and little Meril knew it by her carressing of him; but Merindor, who knew himself culpable, did presently conceit that Sigismond had discovered his crime, and had sent Godomar to take revenge; he looked therefore for the worst, and resolved however, to die like a Cavalier: The Nymph observed his countenance to change, and therefore asked the cause. I knew Madam (answered Merindor) that Rosilion, Lindamor, Damon, Alcicon, and the rest, did not intend to stay long after me; but I cannot understand, why they should bring back Prince Godomar, since here is now no enemies to fight withal, unlesse he take me for one, by reason of the crime when I committed a∣gainst
the contentment of his brother. I believe (replied Amasis) the reason is only, because Lindamor has obliged him to come and see me; but after she had commanded to drive back unto the pallace, Mrindr (said she) never trouble your self, I will undertake to secure you from all the dangers that your sin does cause you to fear. After some other such discourse, the Nymph arrived at Isoures, and no sooner saw Rosanira, Daphnide, Madonthe, Galathea, and the rest, but she acquainted them with the good news which Meril brought: The god of Love knows, how they all rejoyced at this; and since Rosaniras quality gave her more freedome to testifie her resentments, she was the first that spoke and asked whether they came to Isoures; and being answered according to her desires, she run unto the win∣dow, to see whether they appeared: she presently heard the noise of horses in the Court, and presently after she espied Rosilion, Godomar, Lindamor, and Da∣mon: so as Amasis, and the Ladies, had hardly so much time as to go unto the stairs, but they met them with expressions of extream contentment: Rosilion was the first that asked the reason why they were all become Shepherdesses, and whilst Rosanira answered, that she was inconstant in nothing but that change, Godomar looked round about for Dorinde; but having long imployed both his care and time in vain, he addressed himself unto Amasis, and asked what was become of her? To whom the Nymph answered in a low voice, that she must have more leasure before she could satisfie his curiositie, and that the accidents which had hapned unto that fair one, since they went away, deserved a private audience. They separated themselves therefore, a little from the company, and presently af∣ter taking Coach, they went out of the Pallace: They were no sooner in the way to Bonlieu, but Amasis told him all that she had heard concerning Gondebauts plot, and the resolution of Dorinde: Yet, before she began this discourse, she made him promise, not to deny her a request which she would ask: so as, re∣questing a pardon for Merindor, he vowed that he would never bear him any ill will. This discourse did entertain them till they came to the Temple, where Amasis coming out of the Coach, and intreating Godomar to stay in it, she desired to see Dorinde: The doores were immediatly opened, and she was no sooner entred in, but she was brought out by the sage Cleontine, who held her by the hand. Ama∣sis could not chuse but smile, when she saw her approach with such a composed face of gravity, as if she had been ten years amongst them: yet seeing her time short, she took her aside, and talked to her in these terms. I do not come, fair Dorinde, to resist your resolution, for I will approve of it, if you shall think it legitimate; but I come only to acquaint you with the most black and horrid plot, that ever was invented to destroy an affection: It is probable you will give credit unto my words, since if you consider who I am, you may well think I will not authorize any lie. Let me tell you then Dorinde, that you are betrayed: I know it very well, Madam (answered Dorinde and in∣terrupted) Merindor has given me sufficient testimonies of it. This is not it, re∣plied Amasis) which I mean; It is Gondebaut, and not Sigismond, who is the Au∣thour of this Perfidie, and to put you out of all doubt, I will faithfully tell you the whole truth: Then Amasis briefly related unto her the confession of Merin∣dor: but seeing Dorinde not at all moved at it, nay rather on the contrary, see∣ming by some smiles to sleight and mock at what shee said, I perceive (said A∣masis) that you give no credit unto my words; but at my request, go with mee so farr as my Coach, and I will give you undeniable testimony of it. Dorinde, who thought this only some trick of Amasis, only to carry her away, shee pro∣tested at first, that shee would not stirr out of the Temple; but after, that the Nymph swore shee would bring her back again, shee contented to go: Shee was no sooner at the Gates, but Godomar came out of the Coach, and taking her in his armes, Sister (said hee unto her) how can you think it lawfull to dis∣pose of your self against all the promises which you have made unto Sigismond? Dorinde was all amazed at this discourse, and the more, because shee did not think that Godomar was returned: Yet a little recollecting her self, Sir (said
she unto him, I thought that his violated faith, would have dispenced me from all my oaths and promises, and that I ought not to be blamed if not being able to imitate his infidility, I make choise of a death so honourable. Dar Dorinde (replied Godomar) you must live long, if you do not die tell my Brother change: I protest his love was never so great as now, and I will give you a testimony of it which perhaps you do not expect, in saying so he gave her a Letter, in which she found these words witten with his blood. SIGISMONDS Letter unto DORINDE. THey say that blood does emblem cruelty: but I would have this be an eternall mark of my love and loyalty. Receive it, as yours, dearest Dorinde, and consider that I shall not be coveteous if I conquer your beauty by my armes, as I have already Tryumphed over your heart by my services. At the sight of this Letter Dorinde was really moved; and Godomar who per∣ceived it, did take his time so well, that his perswasions prevailed with her: he swore so many oathes in excuse of Sigismond, as at last she did believe it was only Gondebaut that had deceived her: so as not thinking her self obliged to follow her last resolution, she returned with Amasis, and Godomar to the Palace of Isoures, where she no sooner had talked with Merindor, but she reasumed her good hu∣mour. On the other side, after Adamus was quite out of all hopes ever to find any remedy to appease the anger of the gods, and make them stay the sentence which they had pronounced against the life of Silvander, he prepared himself to obey them, and made a vow that this sacrifice should be the last he would ever make: He therefore commanded the Eutages, and the Vaces to be in readiness: and he himself sent to erect a pile of faggots near the fountain where the body of Silvan∣der was to be burned; And accordingly, Aurora no sooner proclamed the re∣turn of that bright Planet which was to be a witness of this sad spectable, but Sil∣vander arose out of bed, and went unto the Druides Chambers, to shew that he was ready to go where his fate did call him. Adamas received him with teare, but seeing the shepherd not at all moved, and that though he had in his face the features of a man that was to die, yet of a man that was contented to die, he could not chuse but add unto his sorrows, his admiration to see him so coura∣geous. But as the spirit of Silvander was very strong to bear out this last blow, so Dians was as weak; For this shepherdess no sooner saw the day appear, but her soul was swelled with most sensible afliion: but since she could not sigh freely enough she stole from Astrea, and opened the window as softly as she could. There did she fill the air with her sad breath, and the Ecchoes all about seemed to approach her voice, and help her to lament. This sad entertainment lusted a while: but afterwards looking towards the plaine, she saw the Eubages, and the Vaces goeing to the sacrifice where all her joyes were to be offered in the person of Silvander. This object did so peirce her to the heart, as never thinking that her grf would wake Leonide, and Phillis who were a sleep in the bad close by the window, oh god, cryed she out, now have I but one moment to live: Oh ye cruell executioners of the wrath of angry gods, why should you not be myne. rather then my shepherds? Why will not the destinies be contented with my life? And since it is their pleasure to punish innocence, what moves them to spare me? In saying so she sighed so loud that Phillis waked, who seeing Diana all in teares, did quickly guesse the cause. She got up therefore, and goeing to the window where her Companion was leaning: Sister, (said she) I do not ask what is the cause of your teares because this is the fatall day whereon Silvander is to be va∣nished from us: Alas alas, replied Diana, though we should lose the memory of
it, yet yonder objects are able to revive it. Do you not see how all the shepherds, do leave their houses, to go and see this sad ceremony? See how carefull they are to rise betimes, and how they croud in all haest, as if the fear of some enemy had driven them from their habitations. Good gods? must I have so many witnesses of my misfortune? Upon this she stopt and was silent: and Phillis who did not think it justice to comfort her in such a sad affliction, she durst not open her lippes to answer: but still holding her eyes upon the objects which Diana had shewed her, she did by little and little lose her sight: for her teares did insensibly steal it from her. Leonide and Astrea waked almost at the same time, and seeing Diana and Phillis up, they quickly dressed themselve:s Phillis also she dressed her self; But Diana who had hardly so much strength as to sustain her self, by the perswasion of her Companions she lay down upon the bed: Astrea and Phillis sate down by her, and least Bellinde should come and interrupt them, they beseeched Leonide to contrive it so, that she should not come, or at the least till after the sacrifice: which the Nymph promising, she went out, and did as she was desired: for Bellinde doubting that Diana would sadly resent the losse of that shepherd, she easily consented to let her complain by her self. This little liberty was some smal comfort to her: but it being almost impossible that so little water should quench so great a fire, the ease she received was as little as nothing. In the mean time, the Eubages were come to the house of Adamas, and those whom curiosity had invited unto this sad spectable, were waiting round about the house, whilst Amasis, Godomar, Rosanira Galathea, Rosilion Dorinde, and the rest were with the Druide. The noise of so great a Company was so loud as it reached the ears of Diana, who doubting the cause, did double the sorrows of her soul: Astrea, and Phillis did quickly perceive it: but not being able to remedy it, did nothing but accompany the sighes of this sad shepherdesse with theirs. They all drooped in a long silence: but Diana upon a suddain interrupt∣ing their silence, dearest Sisters (said she unto them) the only confidents unto whom I have communicated both my sorrows and my joyes: pray tell me; Do you not think that the Sun makes more hast then ordinary, and stayes only be∣cause Silvander is not yet dead? Alas alas what has this poor shepherd done a∣gainst nature, that it should have such a desire to see him perish? After this she was silent: and falling into a profound study: but is it a sign of love (replied she u∣pon a suddain) or a sign of ingratitude, if he should depart before he bids me adieu. Dear Astrea (said she and turned towards her) for pityes sake, order it so that I may see him tell him he need not fear to aflict me more for my sorrows cannot possibly be greater: Good gods (continued she) if he do give his life to obey the destinies who are his enemyes, dares he deny to speak one single word to his Mistresse? After this, she began to sigh again, and Astrea who was glad of any occasion to please her, she was very willing to undertake this commission and the sooner because she thought Celadon would be with him: and indeed, she was no sooner entred into the hall, which was already full of people, but she met him: and Celadon taking her hand and kissing it: now (said he) I am sure it is day, since my bright Sun is up: your Sun (answered the shepherdesse) will this day be eclipsed and dark; for the sorrows of Diana, and the misfortune of Sil∣vander, do cloud her with abundance of grief; then Celadon would have replied: but Astrea addressing her self unto Adamas, Father (said she unto him in a low voice) Diana will eyther die, or see Silvander: and I believe she will turn des∣perate, if they will not let him bid her the last adieu. The Druide, thinking that without injustice, this consolation could not be denied, he went and presently advertised the shepherd: who having no difficulty to surmount but this, prepared himself to overcome it. Astrea then conducted him into the Chamber of this afflicted shepherdess, and to give them the more opportunity to speak there most secret thoughts at this last meeting, she took Phillis by the hand, and leaving them no other witnesses but love, and pity, she carryed her into another room. As soon as this shepherd came into the Chamber, Diana was ready to go out
of the world: at first, she give a great cry; and raising her self up a little in her bed, she crossed her arms, and had such evident signs of transport in her face, that Silvander after he had a little considered them, began to feel all his courage and his strength to fail. That great resolved soul which he had shewed till now, was vanisht, and he was not able to resist those sorrows which the presence of Diana caused: Thus this poor shepherd was no sooner gotten into the midst of the Chamber, but his legges failed him: upon which falling, and finding him∣self to swound, he fell upon his side some two paces from the bed of his Mistresse. Diana in the mean while, seeing him lie as if he were dead, was grieved to the soul that she could not help him: yet thinking it no time to stand upon nicities she rose out of bed in her smock, and would have helped him to rise: but fin∣ding no motion in him, she was ready to tender up her soul: her dispair was then at the last point, and doubtless if grief could have killed her, she had dyed; but being still reserved for more miseryes, this accident did not deprive her of speech: for after she had laid her mouth close to the face of Silvander: Poor shepherd (said she aloud) am not I a most miserable woman, in being the cause of all thy misfortunes? Without me, the destinies had spared thy life, and if my interest had not been enterwoven with thine, they would never have made thee miserable. Upon this she was silent, and love succeeding pity, after she had looked about her, and saw none to observe her actions, she kissed him, as if she would inspire new life into his lippes, or as if she would waken him with the water of her tears: but which soever it was, the shepherd opened his eyes, as a sign he was not dead; And though Diana had not taken all that paines but only to revive him, yet was she surprised because of the condition wherein she was, that she rose up in all hast and went into bed; but never minding what she did, she made more hast then good speed, and knocked her head so hard against one of the bed posts, as she fell a cross over the body of Silvander; Her crye, and the noise she made brought Astrea, and Phillis into the room, and seeing such a pityfull spectacle, they made no question but they were both dead for the love of each other: yet comming nearer, they saw Silvander move his arm, as if he endeavoured to get it from under the body of Diana, and therefore they took up their Compani∣on, and put her into bed: as they were lifting her up▪ she returned out of her swound but because she lay her hand upon her forhead where she felt pain, they took a handkercher and pressed it so hard to the place where she began to swell, as little or no mark, appeared afterwards. Silvander also returned perfectly to himself; and comming near Dianas bed, as soon as Astrea, and Phillis were gone to the window; I thought, fairest Diana (said he unto her) I should have been so happy as to die in your presence; But I see the doom of heaven is irrevokable, and I must die by the hand of Adamas; This last action, which seems to oppose my felicity, would not much trouble me, did I not see a trouble unto you: But dearest Mistresse of my soul, do not let it trouble you at all that I am to be sacrificed, the gods would have some part of me, as well as you: and as I have already sacrificed my soul unto you, so they would have me this day sacrifice my body unto them. In this division the best part is yours: for you having my heart, my will, my soul, and all its faculties, they have nothing but a bare carcasse which is meat for worms or crows. Oh dear (answered Diana with a deep sigh) yet in this, they take part of my happinesse from me, for when you did sacrifice your soul unto me, it did not imply any such condition, that I should not pretend unto your body: you did give it unto me, without any manner of reservation, and gave me full power to do what I would with it: and though I have no power to make you live: yet they do most tiran∣nically usurp it from me; but Silvander, since they are sole Arbitrators of our lives, I will yeild this right unto them, and will not grieve for your death, if you will but grant me one consolation, the hope of which is all the happiness I have. The shepherd who desired nothing but to please her did promise to deny her nothing. Then (said Diana) I would have you let me die as soon as ever I hear that you are out of the world. Diana uttered these words with great resolution, and Silvander was so charmed with this last testimony of her love, that for a
while he was not able to open his lips. At last taking her hand, and kissing it; Ah my fairest, would you sign your affection and my misfortune with your blood? have you so much courage as to follow me in this fatal passage? and does it not grieve you to leave Paris and your life? Cruel Silvander (replied Diana, and interrupted) canst thou doubt, but that my passion dare attempt any thing? In saying so, she seemed to be a little troubled; and the shepherd knowing that she had reason to be angry with him; Dear Diana, replied he, pardon my love if any sparks of jealousie seemed to appear in it: It is the will of the Gods that you should be the wife of Paris; and if I do fear it, has not my fears a ve∣ry lawful ground? I know, reylied Diana, that they have so ordained it: But in this matter, I swear that I will be my own destinies: You know Silvander that I can be no bodies but yours, and you shall never go into the Elizian fields without me. I will go then (said Silvander) and die with content, in hopes that our absence will not be long; I will go, my fairest Diana, and offer unto the God of Love that which belongs unto you; happy shall I be in ending my days, if by my example you be not afraid to follow me. Adieu, my fairest Di∣ana; for pities sake spend these last munites in remembrance of my services, and confess that Heaven is too barbarous in consenting to our separation. Then Silvander embraced Diana; ond that Shepherdess was so moved with these last words, that hardly being able to speak: Adieu (said she, and broke out into tears) Adieu dear Silvander, be constant unto thy Diana, and le her see thy love can last longer then life: Upon this, her voice failing, she offer∣ed to embrace him, but had not strength to lift up her Arm: Silvander in the mean time, got up; and seeing Astrea and Phillis near: Oh dear compani∣ons of my fairest Mistress (said he unto them) I leave you possessors of all that happiness which the presence of Diana afforded me: And as you have been the only Confidents of her secrets and mine, be also the faithful witnesses of the purity of our flames: Then he ad them the last adieu, and went out of the Chamber, after he had sought for the door two or three times; for the pain wherein he was, and the tears which he had shed, had equally troubled both his judgment, and his sight. In going down the stairs, he wiped his eyes, and composed his face, as well as he could; And as soon as he came into the Hall, knowing that all things were ready, and that none would tell him it was time to go, he solicited the Druid to defer the fatal Ceremony no longer. Adamas having nothing to alledge against it, was constrained to consent; so as giving order how all things should be observed, they all set forward. All this great company was no sooner out of the house, but Diana recollect∣ed those spirits which she lost in parting from Silvander; and hearing no noise at all, she presently suspected the reason; therefore rising out of bed, and running to the window; Oh my Silvander (cryed she out) whether art thou going? Oh my dearest shepherd, whither art thou going? Is this then the fatal day which puts me out of all hopes ere to see thee again, or ever to enjoy thee? Oh ye most cruel destinies, who do ravish him from me by the most un∣just Law, that ever was established, why since you give us but one life, do you suffer us to have so many different deaths? Poor Silvander, I am the only one for whom thou dyest, and the only one who does not accompany thee in this sad journey: In saying so, she raised her self up in the window, the better to look upon her lover: But Astrea and Phillis fearing she would throw her self down, catched hold of her: Sister (said Astrea unto her) though this misfor∣tune be without remedy, and your sorrows infinite, yet I beseech you allow something to our affection, and for our sakes strive against this dispair, which does every moment inspire you with some fatal design against your self: Ah Sister (replied Diana) those that are safe in the Port, may well look upon those that are in danger of shipwrack, and wish them well; had you the same pain I have, you would reject all Counsels that should advise you to live: And why do you condemn that in me, which you would put in practise your self,
were you in my room? No, no, companion, I must follow Silvander; no consideration whatsoever can divert me from it; and if you will oblige me, go both of you, and be present at this Ceremony, where the most amiable Victime is to be sacrifized, that ever was, for having no confidents but you, I cannot ex∣pect any others will give me so faithful a relation of his last actions. Phillis, who conceived that Diana had some reason for this request did think it best for Astrea to take this office upon her; and turning towards Diana, Sister (said she) you must not imagine that both of us will accept of this com∣mission; I must of necessity stay with you, for I will not leave you to the mer∣cy of your dispair; You do oblige me (replied Diana faintly) by your cares to preserve me; but the favour which Astrea will do me, will do no less if she will take so much pains as to relate unto me me the circumstances of Silvanders death: And therefore, dear sister (said she and turned towards her) I beseech you do not deny me this satisfaction, since it is the only one I expect in this extreamite: Astrea durst not contradict the desires of her companion; but promising to give her a faithful relation of all things, she departed: and be∣cause the great companion was not yet gone far from the house, she quickly overtook them, and a little after found Celadon. Diana all this while never stirred from the window; but keeping her eyes still fixed upon Silvander, she still thought what means she could invent not to be long after him. Phillis, who also beheld the order of this Ceremony, and having no particular object whereon to fix her looks, because Lycidas in that multitude was not knowable, she looked one while upon one thing, and ano∣ther while upon another. She saw the Eubages and the Vaces going first, car∣rying Vessels and other Instruments used in Sacrifices. After them, went Adamas holding Silvander in his hand; and some eight or ten paces after him, Amasis betwixt Godamar and Rosilion: A little after, she observed Bellinde, Rosanira, Galathea, Madonthe, and the rest, whom the Cavaliers led by the Arm: And because all the rest followed in confusion, she could not find Ly∣cidas, which made her think; that perhaps he would not be a spectator of this sad Ceremony. In this consideration, neither Diana, nor she, could restrain their tears: but when the distance of place, and thickness of Trees had insensibly taken from them the sight of this great company; Then was Diana afflicted beyond all mea∣sure; she did not only lose her speech, but was very near loosing her life: yet finding in this extremity some subject of consolation: Come, come (said she upon a sudden) away with these unprofitable complaints, Silvander has no need of my tears or sighs; if I will give him any contentment in his second life I must accompany him with my soul. In saying so, she left the window; and by fortune casting her eye upon a little Cabinet of Ebony, she espyed a knife, which she and Astrea had used some two days before, when they did eat in the Chamber; she had a good desire to seize upon it, but fearing that Phillis would see her, she let it alone, and walking up and down the Chamber, she watched till her companions eyes were off her. Phillis no sooner turned her self another way, but Diana went to the Cabinet, and having seized upon these Arms, she went to bed: Phillis, she came unto her, and because Diana did nothing but sigh; Alas, dear Diana (said she) I see it is vain to flatter our selves with hopes of any remedy: It is by the will of the Gods that Silvander is ravished from us, and we have no better way then to beg as much patience as is necessary to endure this extream misfortune: For my part, replied Diana, I have already prepared my self, and do protest, that since I have so good a remedy with me, I find my grief nothing so violent. Phillis, who knew not that she had got a knife, did imagine that she took her for this good remedy, and therefore she answered her thus: Certainly, dear sister, if your griefs may be eased by my resentments, they shall quickly cease their violence: For mine are so great, as I may safely say they do equal yours; yet be∣lieve it, I would do any thing that would conduce unto your consolation. Dear Sister (said Diana) I know very well that you are very sensible of my sufferings;
and that your affection and compassion would make you do any thing to ease me. With such discourse as this, these two Shepherdesses entertained each other in expectation of Astreas return; and in the mean time Silvander came to the place where death was to triumph over him. There was not one in all the company which did not change colour when they saw the pile of wood, he only looked up∣on it without the least dismay. As soon as the Druide was got upon it, and the Eubages and their vessels▪ and and knife, and all in readinesse, he himself got up also; and kneeling down, af∣ter he had cast his eyes upon the cloud which covered the Fountain of Verity. King of souls (said he with most admirable constancy) Puissant Deity who never had in heaven any thing so fair as the eyes of Diana: O great God of Love; since I must die to satisfie for the sin which my presumption hath committed in adoring her: Receive▪ sweet Tyrant, this testimony of my obedience, and what punishment soever my Crime had merited; yet let thy wrath be appeased by my death. Upon this he rose up, and after he had put off his dublet, he made a sign to the Druide that he was ready to die: his great resolution did astonish all the spectatours, and even the least sensible did shed tears at the misfortune of this Shepherd; but above all, Astrea and Celadon appeared the most sadly afflicted: for as the one lamented the Fate of Silvan∣der, so the other grieved no lesse for the misfortune of Diana. Adamas, for his part, he doubted whether he had life enough to our-live this Sacrifice: yet considering, that it was the will of the gods, he began to put his hand to the work. The scaffold which he had caused to be erected, was about some two yards in height, and that it might hold the more wood, it was six yards in length, and as much in bredth: As soon as all things were in readinesse, the Druide took two great Tapers which he lighed at the fire, which one of the Bubages carried in a silver chafingdish, and giving them unto two other Hubages; he commanded them to go nine times about the scaffold. After this, but with a trembling hand, he took the knife, and addressing himself to the Shepherd, he asked him whe∣ther he had constancy enough to die, without his eyes being blinded; and Sil∣vander protesting, with abundance of alacrity, that the minute of his death, was the sweet oft minute of all his life, he opened his brest to receive the blow: but Adamas being in some sort offended at his forwardnesse: Silvander (said he unto him in a low voice) the haste which you make to die, is indeed an argument of your courage; but it may also be an argument of your dispair: The gods do not like precipitate actions, and therefore I conjure you to wait with a little more patience, for the blow which you are to receive. We do use in our Sacrifices to sprinkle the scaffold with some drops of blood which we take from the Victime which is to be sacrificed: and therefore, not to go against this order, I will sprin∣kle the wood with yours, upon which you are to die. Silvander made no answer unto the words of Adamas; but after he had shewed him that he was ready to obey whatsoever he commanded, the Druide took hold upon his arm a little a∣bove the hand, and the Shepherd himself turned up the slieve of his shirt, left is should be any hindrance unto his design: an Eubage presently brought a basin to receive the blood, and Adamas lifted up his hand to make the wound: But he no sooner cast his eye upon the place which he was to cut, but a strange astonish∣ment seized upon him: At first, he could not so much as stir, or take his eyes off the arm of Silvander; afterwards, perceiving himself to weaken upon a sudden, he let fall the knife, and taking the Shepherd about the neck, O Silvander (cryed he out) O Paris, my son Paris: In saying so, his strength quite failed him, and Silvander himself having not so much as to hold him up, they fell both together upon the scaffold. At the sight of this accident, those that stood at a little distance gave a great cry, imagining that Silvander had received his Fatal blow; yet seeing Adamas to fall first, they thought that the Sacrificer was himself become the Victime: At that instant the two Tapers did miraculously extinguish of themselves, to the a∣mazement of the Bubages; and Paris, ravished at this spectacle, and that he
should be named, went presently up the scaffold. He was no sooner there, but the Druide assumed his spirits and strength, and falling down upon his knees: Most pitiful and compassionate gods (cryed he out) who never suffers us to speak any untruth, I give you most hearty thanks for the great favour you have done me: Pardon me, if in despairing of your goodness, I did murmure against the greatnesse of your infinite benignity: I must confesse that I have sinned as a mortal man, but I will make a vow to serve you as my Soveraign Tautates, and promise to offer upon your Altars, continual Victimes: After this, he rose up; and seeing the whole Assembly was no lesse astonished then he, he took Paris in one hand, and holding Silvander in the other, he raised his voice to as loud a strain as he could, and began to speak in this manner. I must make here a Publick confession of a private action, and in the sight of all Forrest declare that, which until now was never known unto any but the gods and my self. I do protest, that this is Paris (said he and shewed Silvander) this who has born that (said he and shewed Paris) is not my son, but only by adoption, and as affection, or rather piety moved me to give him that name and title. But because such a change is not ordinary, I am inspired to give you my reasons, to the end all men may learn never to despair in the goodness and fa∣vours of heaven. Know then, that when the valour of Aetius added glory to the Grandure of the Romane Empire, and when the Prudence of this great Captain had gotten to himself the government of Gaul, this countrey which had enjoyed a secure peace for many ages before, did now find that it was not without enemies; and it being impossible but my Interest must needs be in∣volved in a misfortune which was then common unto all these Provinces, I quick∣ly found how barbarous the insolency of those are, who look after profit more then glory in their triumphs, for they delight in nothing but destruction, and in plundering all that presents it self unto their infatiable fury. Their rage did not only reach so far as to ravish all that was precious in my house, but also they ra∣vished away my son, who was the only stay of all my hopes. I did what I could to hinder them, I told them, he could not do them any service, since he was but five years of age: I beseeched them to have some pity upon his innocency and my affliction; I used all the expressions that either sweetness or despair could in∣spire: But neither compassion at my tears, nor respect which was due unto my quality, nor the horrour of their crime, were able to move them, but rather made them more furious; and do what I could, they would needs commit two faults: the one, in taking away my son, and the other in leaving me alive. After this misfortune, I remained without child, and without consolation; my cares became my food, and my tears my drink, and but for the charge which I had ta∣ken upon me to exercise, certainly I had followed these ravishers of my son, or else confined my self unto some horrid solitude: But since I could not leave the duty of a Druide I was constrained to stay in the same place where every object did present my loss before my eyes. A few dayes after, I went to take the air along the banks of Lignon; there I mused upon my loss, and how deplorable it was, and when I was in the depth of my melancholy thoughts, I heard the voice of a child crying very near me: pre∣sently being struck with a secret joy, I went that way, and was not long before I found him: he was set upon the very brink of the bank, and so near, that his tears dropped into the water: for all his sorrows, he seemed very fair, and I must con∣fesse, that imagining his destiny to be like unto that of Paris, I conceived a parti∣cular affection to him, and took him along with me: I did what I could to know who were his Parents, but being, as I conceive, younger then Paris, he could not give me any satisfaction. I had no sooner brought him home, but being proud of this new prey, I began to find some comfort in my affliction, and to thank the gods, that after the loss of my son they had sent me another, unto whom I might in reason give that title, since I was no less then a Father unto him in preserving his life. I commanded therefore all those who were witnesses of my disaster not to speak of it unto any; and charging them to call this Chide by the others
name, they did all so well obey mee, that none know of my misfortune: and there was not any in all Forrests, who did not think this supposed Paris to be the same which the Gods had given mee for a Successor. Yet since this day the Gods have discovered the truth, and permitted mee to finde in Silvanders arme the only mark by which I could know him, it is most just, that I do declare him to be the true Paris: in saying so; hee embraced Silvander again with teares in his eyes; afterwards turning up the sleeve of his shirt, hee shewed unto all those that were near the scaffold the branch of Missleto, which hee had imprin∣ted upon his arme, and which Astrea confessed shee had once seen, when being in a swound, Phillis stole from him a bracelet which hee wore: After this Ada∣mas beginning to speak: But (said hee) though this supposed Paris cannot now be called my Son, yet I doe protest I will still love him as well as if hee hee were; and marrying him unto Leonide, I will give him such a share in my estate as shall keep him from beating any envy unto the Fortune of the other. And to the end it may not be thought, that because hee was found by the wa∣ter side, lying upon the grasse and abandoned of all the world, that therefore his birth was infamous; I would have you to know, that I found about him such infallible signes of his being descended from some illustrious Family, as I must needs doubt, whether in taking him to be mine I did not do an injury unto the glory hee might have had from his own original. Those that left him in that condition, doubtlesse had not time to strip him of his cloaths, or perhaps they were not so barbarous as to do it: For I found him in a little purple gown, embroydered over with fine gold, and interwooven with flowers of silk, so ex∣quisitely wrought and shadowed, as they did exactly imitate the natural. At night when I caused him to be got to bed, I saw that hee wore at his breast a lit∣tle Agathe hanging in a chain of gold; in which was engraved a Lion, and close by him a Lions Whelp which was fighting for his life against a Tiger as big as himself, and about him were written in great Characters these words, Comme ne de ce Lion: and this made mee think this childe had a very generous father, who expecting actions from his Son worthy of his birth, would signifie thereby, the great hopes that hee had in his future valour: These are the marks that I found about this childe, which I have safely kept; and I wish they may conduce as much unto his contentment, as those markes of my Son have served to con∣vince mee that hee is my own. Upon this Adamas was silent; and leaving all the by standers in a strange astonishment, Astrea above all the rest, did not know how to interpret what shee had seen: sometimes shee imagined that it was on∣ly a dream, and sometimes accused her self for not believing her own eyes; but her wonder was greater, when shee saw Bellinde advancing in great haste, and being helped up to the scaffold, shee took him about the neck who had ever been taken for Paris: Deare Ergastes (said shee) is it thou my Son, whom Adamas has so carefully brought up? Ergastes, my Son Ergastes, let mee embrace and kisse thee my dear Son Ergastes. Upon this her voice failed her, but not her strength; for shee held him so close and hard, as hee was not able to fall downe upon his knees. As soon as shee could speak, it was only to tell the Druid, that all the marks which hee had found upon that childe were upon Ergastes, and that the Figures and Motto which were upon the Agathe, were only to signifie that it was Celion. Adamas received abundant consolation from the Joyes of Bellinde; and whilst Ergastes (for I will hereafter call them by their names) was sometimes thanking the Gods, and sometimes Adamas, for the favours which they had done him, in restoring him unto his mother; the true Paris did nothing but think upon the change which was hapned in his Fortune. In that instant, all the Ora∣cles that had ben given, did come into his memory; and finding them to be all true in this last accident, hee knew very well, that hee never had any right understanding of them: and certainly it was impossible hee could ever dive into ths secret of this mystery: For not knowing that hee was Paris, it was not possible hee could conceive, that all those misfortunes wherewith Silvander was menaced, were to turn unto his own happinesse and advantage.
Hee was still in these thoughts, when hee heard Adamas begin to speak with a countenance full of sadnesse: yet notwithstanding (said hee) the Gods have ordained that this Joy shall not continue long; and the finding of Paris, is but to make my losse the more intolerable, for I am ready to execute their commands: And therefore Oh Tautates, Great God of Love (said hee, falling down upon his knees, and lifting up his eyes to heaven) Infinite Deity, who dost dispose of all our destinies according to thy pleasure, pronounce (I beseech thee) either to my happinesse or confusion the last doom of thy divine Will; whether my Son, being already dead as a Shepherd and as Silvander, shall also die as hee is Paris: For if it be thy divine will to have it so, though his death will most certainly be the cause of mine, yet I do vow inviolably, that I will be no ob∣stacle unto it. At this Prayer, all the Company changed countenance; and the fear least some sad accident should happen which might disturb the happinesse of new Paris, caused every one to long and desire to know what would become of it. But they were not long in this perplexity; for the Druid had no sooner done speaking, but the Cloud which covered the Fountain did open according to its custome, and by little and little appeared out of the water a Pillar of white Marble; upon which the God of Love appeared, not now armed with Thunder and Lightning, but with such armes as hee uses when hee playes with the Cra∣ces. Hee had in one hand two Crownes of Mirtle, which hee did throw so dex∣terously, that the one fell upon the head of Celadon, and the other upon the head of Silvander: Afterwards, hee vanishing, the Cloud closed again; but i did rise again in several little Clouds, in which were abundance of little Cupids which also threw Crownes upon the Assembly, and joyining their voices unto the harmony of Instruments, they sang these words: Cease all your cares; the Gods are pleas'd That you should of them all be eas'd: Let all your Griefs be turn'd to Joy, Let nothing your delights annoy. Let Lignon glide, and only move In sweets of Peace and charmes of Love. This consent of Cupids having ended this Anthem, the Clouds dispersed, and all the little Cupids vanished: but Astrea was no witnesse of it; for shee no sooner heard that Silvander proved to be Paris, but shee stole out of the com∣pany to carry the news unto her companions. Phillis in the mean time went from time to time to look for her at the win∣dow; and seeing Astrea return, shee went unto Diana's bed side, but with a face so pale and dejected, as if shee had heard of the death of Lycidas and not of Silvanders. Diana, who observed this alteration, did ask her the cause; and Phillis answered with a deep sigh, that shee had seen Astrea returning, and that her fears to hear ill newes, had so chilled her heart as made her change colour. Then Diana all in confusion: Oh God (cryed shee out) I know Sil∣vander is dead; but let heaven and earth do what they can, they shall not hin∣der mee from following him. In saying so, shee would have laid her hand upon the knife which shee had hid; but in her transport not remembring in what place shee had laid it, shee raised her self half out of bed, and looking about on all sides: What, (said shee in a great surprise) have the Gods taken from mee the remedy which I had pre∣pared against my dispair? Upon this, she found the knife, which, unknown to her, lay close by: and settling her self again in her bed, No, no, (said shee, and continued) they are more pitifull then to leave the miserable no refuge. Phil∣lis, who observed all her actions to the least circumstance, did wonder what it
was she did, and partly suspecting the truth, did set her self to watch her from doing any harm unto her self. In the mean time, Astrea was come, and as soon as she entred in at the door courage Sister (said she) Silvander is dead. Diana presently cast her eye upon her, and seeing her all in a water, did think it to be tears and not sweat that had bedewed her face: so as not questioning the misfortune which she feared: Ah Sister (answered she) it is in vain to bid me courage, for I have as much as will help me to die and to bid you adieu: in saying so, she seized upon the knife, and lifting her arm out of bed, she offered to thrust it into her brest: But Phillis keeping alwayes an eye upon her, did presently catch hold of her: Sister (said she) what do you mean to do? Nay Sister▪ (said Diana all in a fury) what do you mean to do? Oh you enemy of my contentment, why do you oppose my resolution since it is so just? In saying so she strove, and endeavoured to get her hand at liberty, and Astrea who was extreamly afraid at the sight of the knif, she repented that she had given her such a false alarm; But Sister (said she) Paris is still alive: what care I (replied Diana) whether Paris he alive or no, since Silvander is dead: it does concern you so much (replied Astrea) that you will not refuse him for your husband; I had rather marry a Toade, answered Diana and interrupted: and yet said Astrea, Silvander dyed only that it might he so: and I will die (answered Diana) that it may not be so. But (said Astrea) if Paris and Silvander be both one, and he whom you thought to be Paris, do prove to be Ergastes the Brother of Diana, what will you say then? Ah Sister (replied Diana) your subtilty is out of season, and I will never trouble my self to answer it, because I know it to be a thing impossible: but I must, and I will die, because I ought to do so, and because I have promised it. Upon this she began to strive a∣gain, and perhaps had been too hard for Phillis, if Astrea had not helped, and took the knife from her: afterwards with expression of affection, and joy, Sister (said she) I do protest, Paris is not Paris, but Ergastes: and he whom you lament for as Silvander who was to die, is now the very same Paris whom the gods have destinied for the husband of Diana. If you do make any doubt of my words, and that the wonder of the accident does require a larger discourse, I will tell you every circumstance, upon a promise that you will hear me patiently. Astrea did speak this in such a manner as did a little setle the mind of Diana, and made her believe there was some truth in what she said: and though this novelty did find but little place for belief, yet she thought it was not altogether impossi∣ble; Having therefore promised Astrea to hear her, that shepherdess related word for word, all that she had heard, and seen in the same order as they fell out: sometimes she put Diana into fears, and sometimes revived her, according as she took away or gave her any hopes; At last, when she had told all, and had filled the mind of Diana with more amasement then before; Sister (said Phillis) it is not enough to give credit unto Astrea, but me thinks you should desire to be a witness of it your self, I conceive it best therefore to dress your self as soon as you can, for I believe you will hear of Bellinde very shortly; In saying so she fetched her clothes; and Diana took them with so much joy that she knew not what she did: and indeed, if Astrea had not helped her, it would have been long before she had dressed her self. At last, when she was ready to go out, she went be∣twixt Astrea and Phillis, and they had not gone a hundred paces from the house, but they met Lycidas, whom Adamas had sent, to advertise Diana of all passa∣ges. At first, Phillis was a little surprised at the sight of him, for she could not tell whether or no he went to the sacrifice of Silvander; But when they were within hearing of each other, she called him sluggard, and accused him for ha∣ving less care, and affection then Astrea had to bring them the news of the life of Paris, and the finding out of Ergastes. The shepherd excused himself as well as he could, and considering that he had come as fast as he could, he wondered that Astrea should be before him. Yet hearing that she did not stay so long as to see the disenchantment of the fountain, he made a particular relation unto them of those remarkable passages. The haste which Diana made to see these alterations in the persons of Paris and
Ergastes, was such, as never thinking how weary Astrea was with walking be∣fore, as they came quickly to the place where all the Company was assembled, and where every one was ravished with the wonders they had seen. As soon as they were come near, the croud made away for them, untill they came to Adamas and Bellinde who were already come down from the scaffold: for desiring no less a Theater then the whole plain of Forrests for the representation of this tragi-Comedy they went unto Amasis, who desired that the knot of this business should he dissolved in her presence. Adamas, held Ergastes, by the hand; and Bellinde, Paris: so as Diana was no sooner come unto them, but the Druide embraced her, and being hardly able to with hold his tears for the extream joy which he resented; Daughter (said he unto her) heretofore I desired to give you this Son as a lover and as a hus∣band: but the gods would not let my ignorance commit such a crime, and have this day ordained that I shall present him unto you as a Brother; In saying so he presented Ergastes unto her, and afterwards continuing, take him (said he) as the best present I can offer unto you, and let him find more favour as your kin∣dred, then he could as your servant. Diana did not hear these last words; for as soon as she had liberty to salute Ergastes, she was inspired with so much consan∣guinious affection, as she embraced him a long time, and spoke not a word. Ergastes was no less amased and mute, so as not being able to speak, their tongus did least of all contribute unto the expression of their resentments, and perhaps they had forgotten themselves in the transport into which this new acquaintance had put them, if Bellinde had not interrupted their carresses, and said unto the shepherdess: Diana, to please both the Oracles and your affection at once, I do here give you Paris not as he is Silvander, whose ruine the gods do still de∣sire, but as the legitimate Son of the grand Druide unto whom the gods do pro∣mise happiness beyond all our desires, as it has already our hopes. Upon this Silvander, or rather Paris, advanced: and casting himself at the feet of Diana, second, oh fairest Mistresse (said he unto her) the favour which Bellinde hath done me: and since I want nothing to make me compleatly happy, but your consent, give it dearest Diana to accomplish my good fortune; Yes Paris (an∣swered she) I will give it, since you deserve it, and she who has the sole power of me commands it. Then she embraced, and afterwards cast her self down at the feet of Bellinde, from whom she obtained a pardon for her former disobe∣dience. This commune joy, appeared in the countenances and eyes of all; But Astrea, Diana and Phillis, being those that were most interested, it is easie to imagine that their joyes were beyond all comparison or expression: and indeed they appeared fairer then before; And that Diana had lost much of her collour in her precedent afflictions, yet being constrained to make a confession of her love in publique, even shame did bring such blushes into her checks, as restored unto her the fresh luster of her beauty. On the other side Celadons satisfaction was beyond all parralell that the good fortune both of Paris, and Ergastes did sute so well with his desires; And the right Paris, sometimes looking upon the scaffold, and then upon Diana, he was so ravished to see himself out of that danger wherein he thought to have perished as he could not enough be thankfull for his good fortune. Bellinde did not know in which she had most cause of joy, whether in finding him whom she thought for ever lost, or in finding a means to content both the gods and Diana. Adamas seeing himself already in Possession of those favours which the Oracle promised unto him, after he had restored Celadon unto his dear Astrea, he thought himself fully recompensed for all the cares, and paynes he had taken to preserve them. Thus had every one particular considerations of the present happiness, when the Druide knowing that something else was to be done, he went unto Amasis, and beseeched her to command what was her pleasure to be done: and the Nymph thought fit, that after so many favours which the gods had shewed them), they could do no less, then return most humble thanks: and in order thereunto, she commanded that some Bulls should be brought, and sacrificed in lieu of Silvander. Which the Victimaries obeying, Adamas did sacrifice them withall usuall ceremo∣nies:
And when hee viewed the intralls, hee found them all so pure and found, as hee was very certain that the Gods were well pleased. This mystery being ended, the Druid did put off the habit of grand Sacrificer; and now no signes of any enchantment remaining about the Fountain, almost all those that were about the Fountain were inspired with a great desire of look∣ing into it: but above all Alcidon was the most impatient; for the Oracle had promised that hee should there finde an end of his paines. Hee addressed him∣self therefore unto Adamas, and said thus unto him: You do know, reverend Father, by the relation which I have formerly made unto you of my Fortunes, that the beginning of my happinesse depends only upon your permitting mee to look into the Fountain of Loves veritie: And now since there is no obstacle to hinder mee but that, I do most humbly beseech you to let mee have recourse unto that remedy which only can give mee full contentment: Generous Al∣cidon (answered the Druid) you ask mee a thing which depends only upon your self: yet if you will take my advice, let mee tell you, that I do think the In∣chantment to be quite dissolved, and do conceive it fit, that (since the Female Lover which was to die, was Alexis, and the Hee Lover Silvander; for death being only a deprivation of being, they are both dead, since neither Alexis nor Silvander are in being, but the one become Celadon, and the other Paris my Son) some order be observed in it: For it is to be feared, that if every one should follow his own fancy, some confusion would arise amongst this great multitude, I do conceive it fit therefore, that wee should observe some order, in which every one in their turnes may finde his particular Content∣ment. And because wee see that the God of Love is no lesse pleased to have his power admired in the homely Cottages of our Shepherds, as well as in great Palaces: Nay, to break the force of an inchantment hee casts his eye only up∣on them, as taking most delight in their innocency; mee thinks it fit that they, by whose meanes this Inchantment is dissolved, should have the first Essay: Al∣cidon thought this to be but reason; and the Druid having asked the advice of the Great Nymph, shee gave him leave to do as hee pleased. Adamas then went unto Celadon, and got his consent to be the first that should look into the Fountain: at the first, Astrea did oppose it, imagining that it was in some sort, to doubt of her affection. But the Druid telling her it did much conduce unto her Glory, that Posterity should know this Inchantment ended only for the tranquillity of this Shepherd, shee was obedient to whatso∣ever hee pleased. So Adamas took Celadon by the hand, and leading him unto the side of the Fountain, both kneeled down: And the Druid having made a prayer unto the God of Love, Celadon stooped down; and hee had no sooner cast his eye upon the water, but hee saw his Mistresse, as fair as imagination was able to represent her: This sight did ravish him the more, because hee saw him∣self alone with her, and because it was a full assurance of her inviolable Fide∣lity. Presently after, Astrea was conducted thither by Amasis, who kneel∣ing down as Adamas did before, shee made a signe unto the Shepherdesse to stoop down, which Astrea obeying, the Image of Celadon immediately appea∣red, accompanied with all the Graces that Nature could infuse into his face: After this, shee yielded place unto Diana and Phillis, who never forsook her in this mystery of Love, since their affections had linked them together: So these three fair Shepherdesses, one after another, did look into the liquid Chrystal, which was then unto them the Fountain of oblivion: For at that very instant they lost the memory of all the miseries they had endured: And the sight of Celadon, Paris, and Lycidas, whose images they saw, was a perfect remedy a∣gainst all their past paines: Next after this, Rosilion, at the desire of Amasis, approached this miraculous water: and though hee had stronger arguments of Rosaniras Love, then ever to doubt of it, yet hee looked in, because hee would be an eye-witnesse of this miracle: So as hee saw himself next his Mistresse, and not being able to conceive that Rosanira should be so near him, hee turned about to see whether shee stood behinde him; but not seeing her there, hee
looked into the water again, and remained in that contemplation, until Rosanira came and took him off, that she might see the same which he had done. Do∣rinde was the next that advanced in a trembling pace, to clear her suspitions of Sigismonds fidelity; and as soon as ever she looked into the Fountain, she was fully satisfied concerning the love of that Prince: so as she accused her self of in∣credulity, and made a vow never to doubt again of his affection. Alcidon in the mean while, beseeched Daphnide not to deny him that remedy which the Ora∣cle had promised unto them: To which she consenting, they went one after ano∣ther to consult with the water; which presenting them with what they desired, they were infinitly well satisfied with their good Fortune. Damon, because he would not be singular, he went as the rest did, and be∣seeched Madonthe to do the like; but because they were already but one and the same, this sight did hardly add any contentment unto them. They had no sooner left the Fountain free, but every one did cast their eyes upon Lindamor, whom, his respects unto Amasis did keep from this mysterious water, and because the great Nymph knew his mind, she made a sign unto him to go thither, whom he immediatly obeyed; but after he had received from this sight all the satisfaction he could ever hope for, he perceived his joyes to lessen, when his fears of a deni∣al did forbid him to ask what the Fountain had promised unto him: yet remem∣bring the discourse which Godomar and he had together as they went to Lions, he took a little heart; and therefore as soon as Amasis desired to know what success he had, he told her clearly, that the water made him believe he had some share in Galatheas favour. Brave Lindamor (answered Amasis) you do deserve her better then any man in the world, and I would have you to enjoy her: Then cau∣sing Galathea to come near, and presenting her unto the Cavalier, here Linda∣mor (said she) I do give her unto you; and if this recompence do not equal your services, yet take it in good part, and consider that I do give you all that I can. Upon this, the Cavalier kneeled down, and even ravished with joy, did kiss her hand by way of thanks. Delphires, Thomantes, Dorisea, Filiutes, and the rest, who had all left their ha∣bitations to come unto this Sacrifice of Silvander, they had all the priviledge of this water, and found such Dooms as ended all their differences, far better then the sentence which Diana had pronounced a little before: for in despite of the pretentions and pursuit of his Rival, Thomantes continued possessour of Del∣phire. Ligdamon, Silvia, and after them many Shepherds and Shepherdesses went to see their Destinies in this water; and amongst the rest, Dori was inspired to look in: Doubtless the only thing that moved her unto it, was her hopes to see the Ghost of Palemon; but the god of Love, who is an enemy unto the dead, was revenged of her, and presented Adrastes unto her in lieu of Palemon, and this Shepherdess was so surprized at it, that though she did not much love him, yet not to disobey the ordinances of this god, she received him into the place which Palemon had ravished from him. Thus after every one had looked into the water, Hylas was the singular person that approached not: which moved Amasis to ask the reason, to whom the Shepherd returned this answer. I know, Madam, you are not to be told; and since this Fountain bears the name of the truth of Love, I will not oblige her to commit a fault for my sake. That, replied Amasis, is on∣ly to be understood of actions that are evil; but to love one is a thing so laudable and honest, as you need not fear what the Fountain can tell you concerning that subject. Madam (replied the inconstant) I am not very inquisitive to know whe∣ther I did well or ill, in loving as I have done: I have followed the grain of my own humour, and do believe it is not to be condemned, since it has exactly imi∣tated Nature, which will perish and die rather then be confined alwayes to one thing. But to tell you truly, that which has much induced me to affect change, is the consideration which I have had of the lives of those Lovers, who like unto Celadon and Silvander, have endeavoured to get the simple sirnames of faithful and constant: for I have observed them alwayes so miserable, as I thought that Love did punish them for their fidelity and constancy, as for crimes which I ought
to shun. And yet said Amasis, you see that on the contrary, the god of Love rather loves them, and has brought them to a higher pitch of felicity, then ever they could expect or desire. At this, Hylas was a little gravelled; but at the last, he shook his head, I swear, Madam (said he) they deserve all the felicity they find; and it may be said, that it was rather sold then given them, for they have paid full dear for it! But for all that, I would look into this Fountain where Love dis∣covers so many truths, if I had not a stronger reason which restrains me, and which makes me think it to be impossible: Upon this, Amasis asking what it was, it is Madam (answered he) because this Fountain is so little, that if I should look into it, it is impossible I should see half of those faces which I have loved: Three or four faces will fill it; and how is it then possible, that Dorinde, Carlis, Stillia∣na, Palanice, Aymea, Doris, Florice, Phillis, Cryseide, Stella, and as many more, should find any room there? Amasis and all the company, could not chuse but laugh at the conceit of Hylas; but Adamas, telling him, that he should see on∣ly the person whom he then loved, it did so perswade, with him, that he resolved to look into the Fountain; and so accordingly he ran thither immediatly, and without any kneeling, looked in: at which the god of Love was not offended, but shewed Stella unto him whom he then loved, without any other persons but Hy∣las and she, which did so ravish him, as knowing thereby the will of that Shep∣herdess, he vowed inviolably to fix himself there. These Mysteries being ended, Amasis desiring to memorize them unto posteri∣ty, did command all this great company to follow her unto Marcelles, where she would celebrate a feast for eight dayes together, in memory of so many remark∣able successes. None durst disobey this command; and therefore, when she set forward, every one prepared themselves to follow. They had not gone above two hundred paces, but they saw upon their left hand a Shepherd and a Shepherdesse coming together, who were presently known to be Laonice and Tircis: They held each other by the hand, at which Hylas was so ravished, that he ran to meet them; and wondering at the change which he saw in the humour to Tircis, he was extreamly glad that he had found a companion in his infidelity. Laonice in the mean while, no sooner saw Diana and Paris, whom he still took to be Silvander; but hasting to them, she asked pardon for the Treason which she had practised against them, which she quickly obtained: for they did forgive her, and the more willingly, because they were now above all fears of any alteration in their Fortunes. Tircis enquired of Hylas, from whence all that great company came, and being told in few words, he would needs go and see his Destiny as the rest had; but Laonice would not let him, and therefore they followed the rest unto Marcelles: where, during the eight dayes which Amasis had devoted unto feast∣ing and pleasures, all these Lovers did happily consummate their marriages, ex∣cept Dorinde, whom Godomar carryed unto Lions, after he had heard that Gonde∣baut had at last consented unto a marriage betwixt Sigismond and her. Rosilion and Rosanira returned unto the Queen Argires: Daphnide and Alcidon went un∣to their houses; and all the Shepherds and Shepherdesses returned home, and talked of nothing but the happiness of Celadon, and the felicity of Astrea. The end of Astrea.
