E1065_3 99869365 169260
AN ORDER AND DECLARATION OF His Highness and the Council, FOR AN ASSESSMENT OF Sixty thousand Pounds per mensem, for Six Moneths; From the Five and twentieth of December 1655, to the Four and twentieth of June 1656. Royal Anglo-Irish blazen or coat of arms. Tuesday the 27th of November, 1655. ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and the Council, That this Order and Declaration be forthwith printed and published. Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Council. London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, MDCLV.
AN ORDER AND DECLARATION OF His Highness and the Council, FOR An Assessment Of Sixty thousand Pounds per mensem, for Six Moneths, from the Twenty fifth of December 1655, to the Twenty fourth of June 1656. WHereas in the Seven and twenti∣eth Article of the Government of the Commonwealth of Eng∣land, Scotland and Ireland, it is ex∣pressed as followeth, That a con∣stant yearly Revenue shall be raised, settled and esta∣blished, for Maintaining Ten thousand Horse and
Dragoons, and Twenty thousand Foot in England, Scotland and Ireland, for the Defence and Security thereof, and also for a convenient number of Ships for guarding the Seas, besides two Hundred thousand pounds per Annum, for defraying other necessary Char∣ges for Administration of Justice, and other Ex∣pences of the Government; which Revenue shall be raised by the Customs, and such other ways and means as shall be agreed upon by the Lord Protector and Council, and shall not be taken away or diminished, nor the way agreed upon for Raising the same, altered, but by consent of the Lord Prote∣ctor and the Parliament; And whereas in pur∣suance of the said Seven and twentieth Ar∣ticle of the Government upon Consideration had by His Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, how the said Revenue might be raised with greatest ease to the People, It was Agreed upon and Declared by His Highness and His Council, That the same should be raised (among other things) by the Customs and Subsidies upon Goods and Merchandizes, and by the Duty of Excize and New-Impost, and by a Tax of Eighty thousand Pounds per mensem, to be raised in England, Scotland and Ireland, from and after the Five and twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred fifty and four, whereof the Proportion to be raised in England, is al∣so agreed by His Highness and His Council, not to exceed the Sum of Threescore thou∣sand Pounds by the Moneth, to be Assessed, Taxed, Levied, Collected and Paid, (sa∣ving as is hereafter expressed) in such maner, and by such ways and means, as the Sum of One hundred and twenty thousand pounds
by the Moneth, by an Act of Parliament, Entituled, An Act for an Assessment, at the Rate of One hundred and twenty thousand Pounds by the Moneth, for Six Moneths, from the Twenty fifth day of December, One thousand six hundred fifty and three, to the Four and twentieth day of Iune then next ensuing, towards the Maintenance of the Ar∣mies and Navies of this Commonwealth, was appointed to be Taxed, Assessed, Levyed, Collected and Paid, and according to the several Rates and Proportions of the Moy∣ety of the respective Sums by the said Act set upon the respective Counties, Cities and Places therein mentioned; That is to say, UPon the County of Bedford, the Sum of Eight hundred pounds. The County of Berks, the Sum of Nine hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The City and County of the City of Bristol, the Sum of One hundred forty six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The County of Buckingham, the Sum of One thousand one hundred pounds. The County of Cambridge, the Sum of Nine hundred and forty five pounds. The Isle of Ely, the Sum of Three hun∣dred and fifteen pounds. The County of Chester, the Sum of Six hundred and sixty pounds. The City and County of the City of Chester, the Sum of Seventy three pounds six shil∣lings and eight pence.
The County of Cornwal, the Sum of One thousand four hundred pounds. The County of Cumberland, the Sum of Ninety two pounds eleven shillings and four pence. The County of Derby, the Sum of Eight hundred pounds. The County of Devon, the Sum of Two thousand five hundred seventy four pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The City and County of the City of Exon, the Sum of Ninety two pounds. The County of Dorset, the Sum of Eleven hundred twenty four pounds three shillings and four pence. The Town and County of Pool, the Sum of Nine pounds three shillings and four pence. The County of Durham, the Sum of One hundred thirty one pounds fifteenshillings one peny farthing. The County of York, with the City and County of the City of York, the Sum of Two thousand six hundred and eight pounds thir∣teen shillings and four pence. The Town and County of Kingston upon Hull, the Sum of Fifty and eight pounds. The County of Essex, the Sum of Three thousand pounds. The Couty of Glocester, the Sum of One thousand three hundred ninety four pounds. The City and County of the City of Glocester, the Sum of One hundred thir∣ty
nine Pounds six Shillings and eight pence. The County of Hereford, the Sum of One thousand pounds. The County of Hertford, the Sum of One thousand two hundred pounds. The County of Huntington, the Sum of Fiue hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The County of Kent, with the City and County of the City of Canterbury, the Sum of three thousand one hundred thirty three pounds six shillings eight pence. The County of Lancaster, the Sum of Eight hundred pounds. The County of Leicester, the Sum of Nine hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The County of Lincoln, with the City and County of the City of Lincoln, the Sum of Two thousand three hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The City of London, the Sum of four thou∣sand pounds. The County of Middlesex, with the City and Liberty of Westminster, the Sum of One thousand five hundred thirty three pounds six shillings eight pence. The County of Monmouth, the Sum of Four hundred pounds. The County of NORTHAMPTON, the Sum of One Thousand two hundred pounds. The County of Notingham, the Sum of
Seven hundred seventy four pounds four shil∣lings. The Town and County of the Town of Notingham, the Sum of Twenty five pounds sixteen shillings. The County of Norfolk, the Sum of Three thousand one hundred and six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The City and County of the City of Norwich, the Sum of One hundred and sixty pounds. The County of Northumberland, the Sum of One hundred fifty four pounds five shil∣lings six pence three farthings. The Town of Newcastle, the Sum of Thir∣ty pounds and ten shillings. The County of Oxon, the Sum of Nine hundred sixty six pounds thirteen, shillings and four pence. The County of Rutland, the Sum of Two hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The County of Salop, the Sum of One thousand one hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The County of Stafford, the Sum of Seven hundred eighty eight pounds. The City and County of the City of Litch∣field, the Sum of Twelve pounds. The County of Somerset, the Sum of Two thousand three hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The County of Southampton, with the town and County of the City of Southampton, the
sum of One thousand seven hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Suffolk, the sum of Three thousand one hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Surrey, the sum of One thousand three hundred fourty one pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The Borough of Southwark, the sum of One hundred fifty eight pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Sussex, the sum of One thousand six hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Warwick, with the city and county of the city of Coventry, the Sum of One thousand sixty six pounds thirteen shil∣lings and four pence. The county of Worcester, the sum of One thousand and thirteen pounds six shillings and eight pence. The city and county of the city of Worce∣ster, the sum of fifty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Wilts, the sum of One thousand six hundred sirty six pounds thir∣teen shillings and four pence. The county of Westmerland, the sum of sixty three pounds eight shillings. The Isle of Anglesey, the sum of One
hundred and sixteen pounds six shillings and eight pence. The County of Brecknock, the sum of three hundred and ten pounds. The county of Cardigan, the sum of three hundred sixty six pounds. The county of Carmarthen, the sum of three hundred and two pounds. The county of Carnarvan, the sum of One hundred seventy three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Denbigh, the sum of Two hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Flint, the Sums of One hundred and sixteen pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Glamorgan, the Sum of three hundred ninety and three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Merioneth, the sum of one hundred and six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The county of Montgomery, the sum of two hundred fifty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Pembroke, the sum of three hundred fourty eight pounds. The county of Radnor, the sum of two hundred and eighteen pounds. The Town of Haverford-West, the sum of twelve pounds and ten shillings. The Town of Berwick, the sum of five pounds
By which Agreement and Declaration of His Highnesse and His Council, It is Provided, That in case the Moneyes ari∣sing by the Customes, and other the Reve∣nues therein mentioned, should be improved and amount unto a greater yearly value then they were at the time of making the said Agreement, or any other Revenue or Moneys shall be added or accrew to the Vse of Commonwealth, in such Case there shall be a proportionable Abatement of the said Monethly Assesment; His High∣nesse the Lord Protector and His Council, in pursuance of the said Twenty Seventh Article of the Government, and of the said Agreement and Declaration aforesaid, and for preventing the Burthen and Evils at∣tending Freequarter, which must otherwise unavoidably fall upon this Nation, do De∣clare and Order, That the said Sum of threescore thousand pounds by the Moneth for Six Moneths, commencing from the four and twentieth day of December, one thousand six hundred fifty five, shall be Taxed, Assessed Levyed, Collected and Paid in the several Coudties and Places, in such manner, and by such ways and means, and according to the several Rates and prooortions before hereby set down and expressed; And do Order and Require the severall Commissioners and other Persons nominated and mentioned in the before-mentioned Act, and such others, as by any Order of that Parliament, or of His Highnesse the Lord-Protector and His Council, have been since added as Commis∣sioners, or so many of them as by the said
Act are thereunto respectively authorized, to Vse, Exercise and put in Execution all and every the Powers and Authorities for the Assessing, Levying, Collecting and Pay∣ing the present Six Moneths Assessment hereby appointed; as also the Arrears of all former Assessments, which they had or were impowred to Vse and Exercise by the said recited Act, for the Assessing, Collecting, Levying and Payment of the aforesaid six Moneths Assessment of One hundred and twenty thousand pounds by the Moneth: And for the better effecting thereof, the se∣veral and respective Commissioners for the said respective Counties, Cities and Towns, shall meet together at the most common and usual place of Meeting, in each of the said Counties, Cities and Towns respectively, on or before the twenty seventh day of De∣cember 1655. And the said Commissioners, or so many of them as shall then and there at∣tend and be present, shall put this present Or∣der in execution, for the directing, managing, levying and bringing in the said Monthly As∣sessment hereby required; and shall then, if they see cause, appoint a second general Mee∣ting on or before the tenth day of Ianuary then next following, to the end the Rules and Di∣rections aforesaid may be as is before decla∣red, timely prosecuted and observed, so as the full sum of the first Three Moneths Assess∣ment, charged upon each Division, Hun∣dred, Parish and Place, may be at once wholly collected and paid in to the respective Receivers General, at or before the thirtie one day of Ianuary now next coming, & the lat∣ter
Three Moneths Assessment to be also ful∣ly Collected and Paid in to the respective Re∣ceivers-General, at or before the fourteenth of March then next following. And it is further Ordered, That in case the way and manner of Assessing by a Survey and Pound∣rate, in such sort as is prescribed by the said recited Act, shall prove prejudicial and ob∣structive to the Bringing in of the Six Moneths Assessment aforesaid, by the times limitted for paying in of the same; That then, and in all such cases, the said Commissioners in any of the said Counties, Cities, Towns and places in the said Act mentioned, where such Obstructions shall be or happen, or the major part of them present at their General-Meeting, may, and are hereby Authorized, for the Removal of such Obstructions, to pro∣ceed according to the most just and equal way of Rates held in such places, in the Propor∣tioning, Levying and Assessing the respective Sums charged upon them and every of them, according to the Directions of an Ordinance of the Eighth of Iune, One thousand six hun∣dred fifty four, for an Assessment for Six Moneths thereby appointed: And the seve∣ral and respective Commissioners, Recei∣vers-General, Collectors, Sub-Collectors, and all other persons, who are or shall be In∣trusted or Imployed in the Assessing, Levy∣ing, Collecting or Receiving of the said Six Moneths Assessments, or any part thereof, are hereby Enjoined and Required to ob∣serve such Orders and Directions as shall from time to time be made and given forth by the Commissioners for the Treasury, or
by the Committee or Commissioners for the Army, or any three of them, in and con∣cerning the premisses, Provided alwaies, and it is hereby Ordered, That in stead of Treasurers at Warres mentioned in the said Act, the Receivers-General for this whole Six Moneths Assessment, shall be, and are hereby authorized and impowred to Receive from the Receivers-General of the respective Counties, Cities and Places, and every of them, All and every the Sums of Money hereby to be Taxed. Assessed, Levyed, Collected and Paid for the said Six Moneths Assessment, or otherwise as aforesaid; and to give Acquittances and Discharges, and to make such Alowances in and about the pre∣mises, in as full and ample manner to all in∣tents and purposes, as the Treasurers at War (mentioned in the said Act) by the said Act, or by one Ordinance of the Nine and twentieth day of Iune, One thousand six hun∣dred fifty four, Entituled, An Ordinance for Continuing a Committee for the Army, and Trea∣surers at War, were impowred and enabled to do: And the said Receivers-General of the respective Counties, Cities and Places, and every of them, are hereby Authorized and Required to make Payment of the said seve∣ral Sums which shall be by them received of all and every Collector and Sub-Collector by vertue hereof, unto Iohn Blackwel the younger, and Richard Dean, Esquires, Receivers-Gene∣ral for this whole Six Moneths Assessment, at Guild-Hall London, to be by that paid in to, and accompted for in the Receipt of His Highness Exchequer; and that all and every
the Acquittance and Acquittances of the said Receivers-General for this whole Six Moneths Assessment, shall be unto the said Receivers-General for the said respective Counties, Cities and Places, and to all other persons who shall by vertue hereof pay any Moneyes unto them for the purposes a∣aforesaid, a sufficient discharge. Wednesday Nov. 28 1655. ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, that the several persons here undernamed, be and are hereby constituted and appointed Commissioners for the Assessment in the several Counties and places here under∣written respectively, and they are hereby impowred to act as Com∣missioners as fully to all intents and purposes, as any the Com∣missioners named in any former Act, Ordinance or Order, may or have power to do. For the County of Kent, Capt. Thomas Mannings. Mr. Ro∣bert Maschall. Mr. Will. Jones. Capt. Laurence Knott. Peter Peke Esq Capt. Thomas Wilson. Lieut. Col. Crompton. Capt. Thomas Harrison. Major Edward Sharpe. Mr. Antho. Bodell of Tenterden. Mr. William Ward of Sandhurst. For the County of Suffolk, Benjamin Gifford Governor of Lan∣guard-fort. For the County of York, the East, North and West-riding, Col. Robert Lilburn. For the County of Devon. Henry Walter Esq Will. Fortescue. of Buckland Filly Esq For the County of Berks, Capt. Edward Scotton. Capt. Can∣non. For the County of Southampton, Samuel Bull Gent. Henry Scobel Clerk of the Council.
