A3427 E205_4 99859826 111925
AN ANSWER TO THE NEW MOTIONS: OR, A serious and briefe Discussion of certaine MOTIONS now in question. printer's device of Robert Bostock, featuring a boy with wings on one wrist, and in the other hand a weight (McKerrow 393) MOLLIA CVM DVRIS LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostook, 1641.
AN ANSWER TO THE New Motions. The first Demand. Whether the Lord Iesus Christ hath by his last Will and Testament, given unto, and set in his Church sufficient Ordinary Offices, with their Calling, Works, and Maintenance, for the Administration of his holy things; and for the sufficient ordinary instruction, guidance, and service of his Church, unto the end of the World, or no? Answer. I Had rather have answered your Reasons, than these your bare Interrogatories; yet, because you have so proposed them, I thought good thus briefly to runne over them, hoping that if you have the spirit of humility, you will submit to the truth. To this first, therefore
I answer, That the Lord Iesus Christ hath in his New Testament, instituted perpetuall Offices in his Church, and all their Callings, workes, and Maintenance: that is, The substance of all these, is there appointed per∣petuall: but the appendant Circumstances are vari∣able, as time and persons (in the Churches judge∣ment) may best require. For the Tree doth stand when the leaves doe change; and a man is the same, though his apparrell be varied. These outward fa∣shions are so variable, that herein Nationall Churches may differ one from another: yea, the Apostles altered divers such things themselves: For first, They distributed the goods of the Church to the poore; and when land was sold, the money was brought to their feet, and they distributed to every man according to his necessity, Act. 4.35. Yet afterwards, upon occasion, it fell out that they layd this charge from themselves upon Deacons, Act. 6. For so the poore bee cared for, it is not so materiall by whom it is done. Againe, They institu∣ted the Love-feasts to be used with the Lords Supper, Act. 2.46. Yet S. Paul did againe abrogate them at Corinth. 1 Cor. 11. And for that which is in the beginning of that Chapter, that women shall come and pray in publick, is perpetuall; but that they should come vailed, which the Apostle there urgeth as then fitting, is now no where thought necessary. Now then, the substance of Calling, Offices, Works, and Maintenance, of the Ministry remaining; the out∣ward manner of these things may vary, so that, ac∣cording to the Apostles rule, All things be done decent∣ly and in order.
The second Demand. Whether the Offices of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, and Helpers, be those very Offices appointed by Christ in his Testament as aforesaid; Or, Whether the present Ecclesiasticall Offices of Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Sub-deanes, Prebendaries, Chancellours, Priests, Deacons (or halfe-Priests) Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officialls, Registers, Proctors, Apparitors, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, Stipendiaries, Vagrant-Preachers, Chaplaines or House-Priests, Canons, Petty Canons, Chanters, Quoristers, Organists, Church-wardens, Sides-men, and the rest, now had in these Cathedrall and Paro∣chiall Assemblies, be those Offices appointed by Christ in his Testament, or not? Answer. IT being granted, That Christ hath instituted per∣petuall Offices; then you aske, whether your five∣fold Orders of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, and Helpers; or our Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, &c. be those? For yours first, I say, that Pastors and Teachers are in∣deed instituted by Christ in his Church perpetuall; but they are no more yours than ours, we have them as well as you; for, to teach and feed the flock, is the
work of our Ministers, and the end of their Cal∣ling. Herein you differ from us, that you make a necessary and perpetuall difference of these two, as though they were distinct Offices; whereas the Apo∣stle Epes. 4. reckons them onely as Gifts, hee hath given gifts unto men; and couples those two together, not dis-junctively as the rest; Some Pastors and Teachers. One Minister may and ought to doe both these, Exhort and Teach, as is used in our Church. And the practice of the Apostles was so, as ap∣peares in all their Sermons written in the Acts. In∣deed where the Auditory doth onely require in∣struction, there exhorting may be omitted; as use the Divinity Lectures in Schooles: and such an one was Origen. But otherwise the same Minister is to doe both by the very Apostles practice. And were it not to make up your Ruling-Presbytery with variety, you your selves would have no more. And for your third Office of Elders, if rightly un∣derstood, it was founded in the Scriptures; but not as you take it: for, you make it a third degree and office from the former, and that it should sig∣nifie a Lay-Governour, who should not meddle with the Word or Sacraments, but onely sit among the Pastors and Doctors to Govern; Such an one hath no foundation in the Word of God: But rightly understood, it hath; and is the name of a Minister of Iesus Christ, in the New Testament. For he is cal∣led a Pastor and Teacher, for the duties of his Mi∣nistery; and  for his dignitie in the Church; We translate it Elders, for difference sake, because in English Aaron and his Stock are tran∣slated,
Priests; Otherwise Priest is the fittest Tran∣slation for , according to the very letters, which Latine, Italian, French, and others have imi∣tated. Shew us now then any where Lay-Priests founded in the New Testament, as we can shew your Presby∣ters, Priests, Elders (call them what you will, for they all speak the same order) being every where taken for the Ministers of the Word. Act. 10. Such Priests or Elders, S. Paul sent for, and telleth them of their charge which the Holy Ghost had set them to, to feed the slock; such he teacheth Titus to or∣daine Chap. 2. and calleth them there also by ano∣ther name: Such doth S. Peter admonish, 1. Pet. 5.1. The Prosbyters or Elders amongst you, I exhort, which am a Co-Presbyter, &c. We may not make so many Offices of the Ministers, as he hath severall Names; for then shall wee make more than you have or would make; seeing he is named not onely Pastor, Doctor, Elder or Priest, but also Bishop, Overseer, Steward, Messenger, Embassador, Deacon, and such like. Thus hitherto you have not found three distinct Offices of Pastor, Doctor, Eldor, but three Names of one and the same Office, which is the Minister of the Word. For Deacons, their office of distributing to the poore, is not so necessary for all times (for which only use you would have them perpetuall) for as much as they were wanting in the time of Christ, for then Iudas, one of the twelve, bare the bagge, and gave to the poore. Afterwards the Apostles themselves did this,
when those that sold their lands for the poores releife, brought it to their feet, and they distributed as every one had need, Acts 4.35. But when the labours of prea∣ching, and the multitude of poore encreased, the A∣postles laid that care upon seaven chosen men, Act. 6. So did they also ordaine in other Churches, for yet the Magistrate was enemy to the faith, and would not either help the Minister, or succour the poore, be∣cause they were Christians. Therefore during the time of persecution, there was especiall need of those men: such an one was S. Laurence the broild Martyr at Rome by the Heathen Persecutors: But when the Magistrate changed, and by good lawes provided for the Ministers Maintenance, and the releife of the poore, then was there no need at all of this office; no more than there is of Widowes, who were likewise then in use, but now are ceased in all Churches; albeit there be rules for their election in the Scrip∣tures, as there is for Deacons, 1 Tim. 5.9, 10. And therefore this is no perpetuall Office. Your Helpers, the last office that you reckon up, can helpe you but little. They are but once named in the Scriptures (as I take it) 2 Cor. 12.28. and there not called Helpers, but Helpings, Opitulationes: But if (by Metonimy) that be all one, yet cannot they be severall from the former, and perpetuall; for if they helped per Dona sanationum, by gift of hea∣ling, then they are ceased: or if by distribution, then were they Widowes or Deacons, and no severall Offices. And thus of your five Officers; the three first are but one Office of the Minister; and the two later
Temporary: so farre are you short of your five distinct and perpetuall Offices. The second part of your Interrogatory is con∣cerning the Ecclesiasticall State of Archbishops, Bi∣shops, Deanes, Sub-deanes, &c. In this enumeration you study to be exact, and to reckon up every thread; by which curious diligence you have thrust in a number that are no Ecclesiasticall Callings at all; and againe, reckoned up some who are rather yours than ours, Stipendiaries, Vagrant-Preachers, House-Priests, and the like. But to answer to that which is materiall in your Catalogue; I say, that in the new Testament is foun∣ded a Ministery, which may differ in their Degrees, and may differ in their Maintenance; to which two places may be referred all the Titles here set downe which are Ecclesiasticall. For the first, though the Ministery it selfe be one, yet may it admit divers degrees. In the old Testa∣ment, Aaron and his succession was above the other Priests; and the Priests above the Levites: Among the Prophets some ruled, as Samuel; some obeyed, as the Children of the Prophets; and the morall hereof of Ruling and Obeying is not Ceremoniall. In the New Testament, Christ made some Apostles, as the Twelve; some Disciples, as the seaventy two. And the Apostle S. Paul teacheth us, that Christ his Church must be like a Naturall Body, wherein some are Eyes, some Hands, some Feet. The Degrees that I meane are Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. For Priests or Elders you can make no question,
they are in terminis frequent in the Text. For Deacons no doubt those seaven Act. 6. did with the other charge assume also the Ministery from the Apostles Ordination. For first they had the imposition of the Apostles hands with prayer. Secondly, Stephen, one of them, preached and did miracles. Thirdly, Philip preached, and (that which is Ministeriall) baptized. Fourthly, the Apostle willeth that the Deacons hold Mysterium fidei, the mystery of faith, 1 Tim. 3.9. which signifieth the substance of the Gospel prea∣ched, in S. Pauls manner of speaking. Fifthly, the Apostle adds, that he that dischargeth his Deaconship well, getteth to himselfe a good degree. And what can be more reasonable, than that there should be an or∣derly Initiation or Probatiorship into the Ministery. Elisha held water to Elias his hands before he was Prophet in his stead. The Apostles were witnesses of Christs Temptations before they were sent. S. Paul had Barnabas, and S. Iohn had Mark, for their Minister, Act. 13.5. even to the work. Such were those Bre∣thren or some of them that went with S. Peter to Cornelius, to whom he commanded, that they should be baptized, Act. 10. Such attended on S. Paul to Corinth, and baptized, for he himselfe baptized but one household, 1 Cor. 1. these you scornefully terme halfe-Priests. For the superiority of Bishops, not only the Apo∣stles had it, but they also whom they constituted Bi∣shops, as Timothy at Ephesus, and Titus in Creet, to re∣dresse things amisse, and to ordaine Ministers. Yea still this Authority was propagated and continued in the Churches, Apoc. 1. and 3. to the Angel of the
Churches. There were many Elders or Ministers in every Church; Antipas, Nicholas, and those who hated and preached against his doctrine; yet one is the Angel there still: As more largely it appeareth at Ephesus, where surely was more than one that were Ministers, yet but one Angel. Yea S. Paul alloweth Timothy a Court Ecclesiasticall, (viz.) to receive accusa∣tions, and examine Witnesses; for thus he saith, 1 Tim. 5.19. Receive no accusation against an Elder, under two or three witnesses. The like to Titus, 3.19. Avoyd an heritique (out of the Church) after once or twice solemne admonition. Now then can you deny to Superiours and Gover∣nours their necessary Deputies, servants, and substi∣tutes? nay these are necessary even to the meanest, though they be no Ecclesiasticall persons, nor have to do in the Ministery. For you know the Gibeonites served for some necessary use in the Tabernacle, to draw water, and to cleave wood, Jos. 9.23. But if any of these play Gehazi, it is Elisha's charge to mark him with Leaprosie. All antiquity speaks of these three degrees of the Ministery; the Canons called the Apostles, the Antient Fathers, and the best Councells doe declare and justifie them. The other part, the inequality of Maintenance is a sequell of the former; for greater degree requires greater supportance. And the Scripture sayes the same thing. S. Paul 1 Cor. 9.7. resembles the Mi∣nisters Maintenance to the stipend of Warfare, where every man hath wages according to his place. And verse 13. to those that wrought about the Altar, where some had prerogative above the rest. Yea the
same Apostle doth tell Timothy so much, 1 Tim. 5.17. The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honour. Where he meaneth by double honour, larger Main∣tenance, as (besides the consent of the best Interpre∣ters) the Apostle himselfe explaines it to be meant of Maintenance, bringing the same place which be∣fore 1 Cor. 9. hee cited for the Ministers Mainte∣nance, out of Moses saying, Thou shalt not muzzle the Oxe that treadeth out the Corne. And which Christ to the same purpose proverbially used in the Gospell, namely, the Labourer is worthy of his hire. All which is plaine, that double honour is interpreted double Maintenance, by the Illative, for the Scripture saith. Thus then you may see that our Ecclesiasticall State, in diversity of Degrees and Maintenance, is more consonant to Gods word, than your device of sundry names, without persons or Perpetuities. The third Demand. Whether the calling and entrance into these Eccle∣siasticall Offices last aforesaid, their Administration and Maintenance now had, and retained in the Church of England, bee the manner of Calling, Administration, and Maintenance which Christ hath appointed for the Offices of his Church above named? Answer. IN this Third you demand, whether our Calling into the Ministery, &c. bee those which Christ
appointed. It is easie to demand much; you should rather have shewed your particular dislikes. But I answer, that they are. Our Calling hath that Ordination which the Apostles used, and S. Paul appointed Timothy and Titus to use, viz. by the im∣position of the Bishops hands, and of the other Ministers that are present at that action; for they also lay on their hands juxta manum Episcopi, by the Bishops hand, according to the antient Canons. And before this, we have the election and approbation of the people, or of the cheife of them, whereby wee are com∣mended to the Bishop, as you may know by the Law of Patrons, and of Iustices, and of Neighbour-Mi∣nisters, whose commendations are necessary before any be made Minister, or admitted to any place in the Church. For our Administration, it is of Gods Word, and of the two holy Sacraments, and of publick Prayer; all which the Minister ought to doe. Other Admi∣nistration have we none, unlesse you meane Marrying and Burying, which perhaps you mislike that the Mi∣nister should doe them; but why I know not. For Marrying, God himselfe first acted it, and brought Eve to Adam, Gen. 2. And Christ said after of all Marriages, Quos Deus conjunxit, &c. Those whom God hath joyned together, &c. Who then fitter to doe this in the place of God, and in his name, than he that is his Messenger, and in his stead? For Buriall, it is the field and Seminary of the Re∣surrection, and who fitter for sowing than hee that is Gods Sower? And for our Maintenance, it is by Tithes better
than yours by Almes: for it was so before the Law, and under the Law, and under the Gospel, as soone as the Magistrate was Christian. And your Almes onely used in time of Persecution, when no better could be had. For where the Ministery shall have no Maintenance, but what must bee at the mercy of his Auditory, how apt is hee to smooth, hu∣mour, and subscribe to such (and wave their darling and pleasing sinnes) in whose power it is to deny him sustenance? were there no other reason for the independency of his Maintenance. The fourth Demand. Whether the Sacraments, being Seales of righteous∣nesse, which is by Faith, may bee administred to any other than to the faithfull and their seed; or in any other manner and ministery, than is prescribed by Ie∣sus Christ? And whether they be not otherwise admi∣nistred in the Cathedrall and Parochiall Assemblies at this day in England, or no? Answer. THe Sacraments, the Seales of righteousnesse, are onely to bee given to the faithfull and to their seed, (or to such as seeme to be faithfull, as Iudas, Simon Magus, Demas, and such like) and to no other are they given in the Church of England; for if any bee profane, un-holy, or notoriously
wicked, the Minister is by Law to repell them. Neither are they given with us in any other Mi∣nistery, than Christ hath appointed; unlesse you you meane the Baptizing by Midwives, which in our Church is not approved, nor now any where practised. Neither are they given in any other manner, unlesse you meane hereby externall and variable circumstances, as kneeling at the Eucharist, and such like, as I thinke you doe. And then I answer you, to receive it kneeling, is most fitting and decent; seeing it is an Action of more humility and de∣votion, than standing or sitting is. At the first they received it sitting, or rather lying and lea∣ning, for Saint Iohn then leaned on Iesus breast, as their manner was then to eat: But this is no more perpetuall or necessary, than to receive it at night, or after Supper, for these were then used according to the present occasion. Even as many circumstances were used in the Passeover, at the first institution in Aegypt, which should not bee perpetuall, as the sprinkling the doore with blood, their not going out of their houses that night, their eating of it standing, with loynes girt and staves in their hands, all which as mutable ceased in the land of promise. The fifth Demand. Whether the Booke of Common-Prayer with the Feasts, Fasts, and Holy-daies, stinted Prayers, and Lyturgie prescribed therein and used in these Assemblies, be the
true worship of God commanded in his word, or the device and invention of man for Gods worship and service, or no? Answer. YOu aske, whether the Book of Common-Prayer be Gods worship, or the Invention of man. It was thus composed by men, godly and learned men, and many of them Martyrs of Christ. The doctrine thereof, is according to Gods Word; a book as fit, and full of edification, in the Prayers and Administration of Sacraments, as pos∣sibly can be devised or made. The things that you here dislike in it, are Feasts, Fasts, and Holy-dayes, stinted Prayers, and Lyturgie. In our Feasts and Holy-dayes, first observe that wee have none to Legend Saints, but Christ, his Apostles, the blessed Virgin, and Saint Iohn Baptist. Secondly, that wee worship no Saints in those dayes, but praise God for them, who made them profitable to his Church. Thirdly, it is lawfull for the Church to appoint such dayes to glorifie God in. For in time of the Macchabees, the Church appointed an Anniversary Feast of Dedication of the Altar, after they had rid the Temple from Antiochus his profanation, 1. Mac. 4.59. And our Saviour Christ himselfe ob∣served it, Iohn 10.11. Fourthly, that the observation of such times is
very ancient and generall; for in the first Generall Councell of Nice, there was great question a∣bout the day whereon Easter should bee kept, but not a man, either in the Latine or Greek Church, but then thought it meet to be kept: so farre was the Church then from your nicety. In the Prayers and Lyturgie, you here finde no other fault, but that they are stinted and set Prayers; for you would have no Book at all, nor any forme of celebrating Holy things; nor any set Prayers, but all voluntary, at every Pastors discretion. If this fancy should take place, not onely every Minister would vary from himselfe, but one would agree with another, like Germans Lips. Nothing is more needfull in holy things than conformity, so the forme be good. But to speak onely of stinted and set Prayers (which fault you find.) First, in the Temple, the booke of Psalmes was their Psalter, or set Prayers; for they were appoin∣ted to bee used continually, and are set to certaine orders of Priests, and to certaine times and instru∣ments, for daily use, as the Hebrew Inscriptions of all the Psalmes doe testifie. Secondly, the Priests had a solemn set forme of Prayer which they used when they solemnly blessed the people; the words are prescribed, Num. 6.23, 24, 25. The Lord blesse thee, and keepe thee, the Lord, &c. Thirdly, they had a set forme of Prayer in the wildernesse, which they used when the Tabernacle re∣moved, Exurgat Deus, Let God arise, &c. And ano∣ther when the Tabernacle was pitched, Let God re∣turne, &c. Num. 10.35.
Fourthly, they had Psalmes to sing at the Passeover, the 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118. accounted together to be a great grace unto the Passeover, which our Saviour Christ observed and sung with his disciples, Matth. 26.30. Fifthly, to conclude, prayers are not worse because they are stinted and in set words, for Christ prayed thrice in one night, using the same words, Matth. 26.44. And taught his Disciples the set forme called the Lords Prayer; saying, Say thus. For any exceptions, you now take or take up against any materiall passages or Prayers in the book it selfe, they are such as have often been answered by D. Boyes, Hutton, and others, long since. The sixth Demand. Whether all Churches and people (without exception) bee not bound in religion to receive and submit unto that Ministery, Worship, and Order, which Christ, as Lord and King, hath given and appointed to his Church: and whether any may receive, and joyne to any other, devised by man, to the service of God: and con∣sequently, whether they that ioyne to the present Eccle∣siasticall Ministery, Worship, and Order of these Cathe∣drall and Parishionall Assemblies, can be assured by the Word of God, that they joyne to the former, ordained by Christ, and not to the later, invented by man, for the worship and service of God.
Answer. YOu aske, Whether people must submit to those things onely, which are instituted by Christ; or, whether they may submit to the inventions of men. In matters of substance and worship of God, I say, only to Christs institution; but in outward circum∣stances, the Magistrate hath authority to ordaine for comelinesse; and herein not to obey him is the sinne of disobedience: As to appoint with what acti∣on wee shall receive the Eucharist, in what kind of bread, in what kind of wine, at what time of the yeer, and how often, in what apparrell it should bee mi∣nistred, or such like: But he may not alter matters substantiall; and if he should, therein we ought not to submit to any such command, but we ought ra∣ther to undergoe the penalty inflicted on the deniall: as to adore the bread, with as much worship as we doe Christ; to communicate in one kinde one∣ly, and such like, which Papists have divised. Now then consequently seeing wee keep the substance of Gods true worship according to his Word, and in all outward things are a great deale nearer the rules of comely order and decency, than you are: They that joyne themselves to us, may be assured that they joyne to a Church, founded after Gods Word, and so can they not be, that joyne themselves to you; seeing you set up unto your selves a new Syna∣gogue: And thus your Demands are satisfied. Now then, to come to a finall issue in this con∣troversie; If any of these faults bee in our Church,
or more of them than you can prove (for I would yeeld you an Epha, where you cannot prove an Omer) yet have you no just cause of your separation from our Congregations, so unnaturally to despise the wombe that bare you, and the paps that gave you suck: yea to separate from all the Churches in Christendome, to a new handfull at Amsterdam: witnesses against you are all those who dislike many things, as you doe, and yet communicate with us. Who albeit by their rash dislikings, they have been accessory to your fall, yet herein they forsake you, their consciences will not suffer them to fall utterly from the Church: wher∣in both you and they have confessed that our doctrine is true, and according to Gods word. And herein I will convince you by as many arguments, as you have proposed Demands. 1 First, the Jewish Church in the time of the Prophets was more corrupt than you can affirme of ours: of which the Prophets doe affirme, that there was no whole part from the bead to the feet; that the faithfull City was become an harlot; that they were princes of Sodome, and people of Gomorra; yet the same Prophets never forlook the fellowship of the Church, but still reproving their faults, did com∣municate with them in the Temple sacrifices and prayers; as witnesse the history and writings of the same Prophets. 2 The Church in our Saviour Christs time was worse than that, possessed and ruled by Scribes, Pha∣rises, and Saducees, of which Christ said, that the blinde led the blinde, that they taught for doctrines the precepts of men, that they made the word of God of no
effect by their traditions, that they made the house of Prayer a denne of theeves, that they justified themselves in their owne righteousnesse, that they devoured widowes houses under pretence of long prayers; and therefore many Woes were pronounced against them, Mat. 23. Notwithstanding all this, our Saviour Christ, before he took upon him his publick-Ministery, was presen∣ted in this Temple, before these Priests, and there many offered their oblation before them, Luk. 2.22. There, and before them, and amongst this people did Christ appeare with his Parents when he was twelve yeares old, at the Feast of the Passeover; then in the Temple he associated with the Doctors, bearing them, and asking them questions, and affording them his answers Luk. 2.4.42. 3 After that he took upon him his publick Mini∣stery, he usually repaired to the Temple, at every of these three solemne Feasts, and there taught daily, and openly in the Temple, Ioh. 2.13. Ioh. 18.22. he usually taught and healed in the Jewes Sinagogue amongst the people, Luk. 4.15.16. he ever sought to purge Gods house, but not to leave it, for the zeale of Gods house had eaten him up, Ioh. 2.17. but the hatred of Gods Church and house doth drive you from it. 4 And as he used himselfe to communicate with the visible Church, so he taught his to doe, Mat. 23. saith he, The Scribes and Pharises sit in Moses chaire, therefore heare them, and doe as they bid you, but after their works doe not, for they say and doe not: and when he purged Leapers, as Mat. 8.4. he sent them to shew themselves to these Priests, to be judged by them, and there with them to offer the gift which Moses com∣manded
for a testimony unto them; he taught his how they should offer the legall offerings aright, before these Priests, Mat. 5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother hath ought against thee, leave there thine offering before the Altar, and goe thy way; first bee reconciled to thy brother, and then come offer thy gift. 5 And (lest you should say, that this was till Christ had finished all things, and abrogated the Law) as Christ did himselfe, and taught others to doe, so did his Apostles after the Passion and Resur∣rection, for Act. 2.46. They continued daily with one accord in the Temple: and Acts 3.1. Peter and Iohn went up together into the Temple, at the ninth houre of Prayer (that is, at our three of the clock after noone) which was the time of the Evening Sacrifice: and Acts 3.20. As they were bidden of God, they entred into the Temple, and this they did daily, Acts 5.42. Yea, Saint Paul more particularly in the Temple purified himselfe with other brethren, and they prepared their offerings, to bee offered for every one of them be∣fore the Priests, Acts 21.26. 6 Yea (lest you should say, the Jewish Church had any prerogative) the Apostles accounted those Christian Churches holy, and to be communicated withall, which yet were unperfect, defective, and reproveable in many things: Saint Paul highly com∣mended the Church of Corinth, 1. Cor. 1. and yet re∣proved them in that Epistle of many faults, both in doctrine, and manners, as carnall and schismaticall; some holding of Paul, some of Cephas, some of Apollo, Chap. 3. For suffering the incestuous man amongst
them, Chap. 5. For going to Law one against another under the infidels: and for accounting fornication small or no sinne, Chap. 6. For eating (with offence to to the weak) things offered to Idols, Chap. 8.9, 10. For abusing the publick Assemblies, and the Lords Supper, Chap. 11. For abusing the spirituall gifts to often∣tation, not to edifying, Chap. 12, 13, 14. For denying the Resurrection, Chap. 15. For some of them said there was no Resurrection, vers. 12. And yet notwith∣standing, before all these were amended, yea, before they were by him reproved; in the first words of that Epistle, hee giveth them the Title of Gods Church, of Saints by Calling, and such as were called to the fellowship of Christ: to teach us how to think of Militant Churches upon Earth. The like may be observed of the Church of Galatia, and divers others. 7 Lastly, the doctrine of the Apostles is, That the Church indeed, is the Pillar and ground of truth, because God will lead it into all necessary truth; but yet that it may erre in matters of lesser weight; as it is exemplified by Churches, to which they wrose their Epistles. That the Church is spotted in her selfe, but without spot or wrinkle by acceptance in Christ: Ephes. 5. and see every particular man and member of the Church, that hee is partly flesh, and partly spirit, unperfect in himselfe, but perfect by the Grace and merits of Christ: So Saint Iohn in the Apocalyps, seeth the seven Churches of Asia in Christs presence, as seven golden Candlesticks, and the seven Angels thereof in Christs right hand as seven Starres, chap. 1. yet against every one of them, both Churches and Angels, he hath somewhat in the Epistles, which
he wrote unto them, Chap. 2.3. to teach us to esteem men and Churches, not by their own imperfections, but according to that grace, and estate which they have obtained by the mercy of Christ. Wherefore I wish you beware in time, take heed lest the Serpent which seduced Eve, doe also de∣ceive you; even whilst you thinke with her to be∣come like Gods: consider that this your Covenant of Separation may be a sinne of presumption: Remem∣ber Abraham your Father, and Satah that bare you, so that with better consideration, you may returne to your Mother the Church againe, and keepe with her the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace; which God grant for Christ his sake, Amen. FINIS.
