A3842A E1035_13 99868172 168936
ARTICLES OF High-Treason AGAINST Major General Harrison, Sir Arthur Hasilrig, Sir Henry Vane, and Mr. Thomas Scot. WITH The Charge and Impeachment upon an Arrest of High-Treason, in Order to their speedy Tryal in WESTMINSTER HALL: AND A Declaration touching their several Treasons, Tyrannies, Theft and Murders; For which they are to be Arraigned, Tryed, and Convicted, according to the known Lawes of the Land. Aug 4 LONDON, Printed for Marm. Johnson, 1660.
ARTICLES OF High-Treason, AGAINST Major General HARRISON, Sir ARTHUR HASILRIG, and Mr. SCOT; With the Charge and Impeachment against Them, &c. THat the Ship of this Commonwealth hath for many years past been sadly tost in a violent Tempest of Civil Commotions and Distracti∣ons, hath been rather felt, than duly conside∣red, but meerly through Gods mercy, the Im∣petuosity thereof being providentially allayed, though to the cost of more Christian blood and treasure, than would have served even to Conquer that Roman party and interest, that set us so craftily at variance; and how hath she been threatned by the swelling Waves of Faction, which com∣monly are most dangerous after such a storm, in that there∣in the fierceness of the Wind drove them all one way, but da∣ringly
presumed to fly one against the other for mastery, all meeting upon the almost shipwrackt Vessel; and what's as bad, the insinuating leaks of Schism and Heresies, insensibly increase (through her widened seams) such quantity of troublesome water in the Hold, that it were scarce imagina∣ble she should escape sinking, yet the dextrous and unwea∣ried Pilots, or rather Diving Providence sitting at Helm, not onely orders a moderate sail, such as she can well bare, to carry her through the former danger, but carefully keeps the laborous Matiner watching and working at the Pumps to rid her of the latter, and though she meet no other then al∣most contrary winds and enemies; at length with difficul∣ties, even to a miracle, this long weather beaten and shatter∣ed Navy given by most for lost is brought into Port, with patcht Sayles, over-worn and split Cables and Tackling, Ammunition and Provision spent, many of her best Officers and Mariners lost, and others very much discomposed and infeebled, onely the Artillery remains, which yet was threat∣ned to be cast over board, and so it had been, but that there was hazard in doing thereof, and now the most skilfullest Ship wrights are gathered not onely to survey, but put their helping hands for her speedy repair, whereby she may be kept from the ground by seating her upon a bed of blocks, and upheld by shoars, beams, and other convenient timbers: yaluing themselves of a high Spring tide, to do all with safe∣ty: and having made use of the serviceable waters, to com∣pleat their desires, then retireing of course, may be after∣wards kept out by the Flood-gates, prudentialy appointed for that purpose. And being thus pleased, that nothing may oppresse her, the towering masts and yards with her tackling formerly necessary, are laid aside to be mended, or changed, and nothing is left of seeming great impediment,
save the paying her Mariners and Souldiers. But that a thorough search may be deliberately made, of her lower and upper workes within board and without, each party ap∣pointed undertaking their several task. Some to view the Keel, Post, Stem, Ground, Timbers, and Planks, ordering the absolutely defective to be taken out, and better to be put in their roomes, yet so workmanlike, as that the other part ad∣joyning be not weakned by this addition, others to observe the seams where the former lurking leaks had accesse, and care fully to caulk them with well spun Okam, and laying on of Pitch, Tarr, and other necessaries, so well tempered as those insinuating subtil-waters may never have considerable entrance again: And thus the bulk being strenghened, or at least so much thereof as is to be done without preudice to the whole it will follow that the upper works, Cabins, and accommodations be fitted and adorned answerable to the dignity of so great a Fabrick, and all being solidly perfected what will remain, but that this our Ship be moderated balas∣sed, and proportionably Masted, which being well fastened, staied, and shrowded, wil not onely make her compleat but comely, and may securely be lanch't, and cast the Anchor of hope with well-twisted Cables, receive Ordnance to fill her commodious Ports with Ammunition and Provisions necessary, and being thus accommodated, together with a pious, prudent, and valient Captain, skilfull, faithfull, and vigilant Pilots, Godly learned and every way quallified Chaplains expert and well tempered Officers, obedient and well-rewarded Souldiers and Mariners, the Sayls, may be brought to yard, and the Standard displayed against adver∣saries, and terrifie others, raising up the drooping spirits of our affflicted and persecuted friends in all parts.
But to look back upon the grand causes that exposed us to such direful calamities, experience plainly demonstrates, that it proceeded from the arrogancie of sundry new up∣start and domineering Tyrants; amongst whom, Major Gen. Harrison, Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, and Mr. Thomas Scot, are now impeached of High-Treason, their Charge consisting of these following Articles; in which, both themselves and divers others were combined, viz. 1. To arraign, condemn, and execute their law∣ful King himself, with the Peers and Commons of this Realm. 2. To dis-inheritt his Majesties Royal Issue and Posterity of the Crown. 3. To extirpate Monarchy, and the whole House of Peers. 4. To violate the Priviledges, Rights, Freedoms, Customs, and alter the Constitution of Parliaments themselves; to change and subvert the ancient Go∣vernment, Seals, Laws, Writs, Courts, and Coyn of the Kingdom. 5. To sell and dispose of all the Lands, Reve∣nues, Jewels, Goods of the Crown, with the Lands of Deans and Chapters, for their own advantages, not for the easing of the People from Taxes. 6. To dispose of the Forts, Ships, Forces, Offi∣cers of Honour, Power, Trust or Profit, to whom they please.
7. To raise and keep up what Forces by Land or Sea they please, and impose Taxes, &c. to make what new Acts, Laws, and reverse what old ones they thought meet. 8. To absolve themselves (by more then a Pa∣pal Power) and all the Subjects of this Land, from their Oaths of Allegeance, Engagements, and Prote∣stations, &c. For all which Treasons, Usurpations, Tyranny, Theft and Murders, these, and many others, stand Charged and Impeached upon an Arrest of High Treason, in order to a speedy Tryal. FINIS.
An Advertisement. Gentle Reader, AMongst the rest of the English grand Impostors, another sad Object is here to be taken notice of, viz. A notorious Villain, as its well known throughout the City of London; being apprehen∣ded for his former Cheats, Defrauds, and Couzenages, especi∣ally for his unparalleld and horrid proceedings, and most unjust actings against Mr. Henry Newman, a Gentlemon and Citizen of London of good Credit and Reputation, who by his wicked and under-hand dealing, procured false witness and perjur'd persons to swear against the said Mr. Henry Newman, to the writings which the said fellow had forged and counterfited against him, as since those witnesses have declared before the Judge, by their several Affidavits: These are therefore to give notice to all honest per∣sons, who have or shall at any time, have any writings whatsoever counterfeited against them, that this fellow is the most suspected person to be the Author and Forger of any such writings or pa∣pers; in being known to divers, that it hath been his usual way and practice: Witness a protection allowed (as he pretended by an honourable Member of Parliament his Hand and Seal) at both Counters; which upon examination was acknowledged to be false, by the said honourable Member of Parliament, and by him declared, both for his Hand and Seal, to be both counterfeit and forged.
