a4092 669.f.13[18] 99869681 162913
At a generall Meeting of the Committee for Arrears, the 13th. of September, Anno Dom. 1648. FOrasmuch as that by severall former Precepts awarded in pursuance of severall Orders of Common-councell, and in particular by the Precept dated the Fourth of this instant September; It was ordered, That on this day return should be made to this Committee, of the Names of all persons that are in Arrear upon any of the Assessments, in such manner, and to such purpose as therein was expressed. And whereas also by the same Precept, the Collectors in their severall Divisions were required to be active and dili∣gent in the collecting of the said severall Assessments; and that the Collectors within a certain time therein prefixed, were to make up their Accompts concerning the same, with the Deputy and Common-councell-men in their said severall Divisions, and pay in the Money then remaining in their hands to the Treasurers at War: And that return should by the Deputy Common-councell-men and Collectors be made to this Committee, of the Names of such persons within their Ward, as have not paid their said Assessments, and the summes by them owing, and the reasons why they pay not the same; And if any of the said Collectors should be remiss that then their Names were to be this day also returned; and thereupon (according to an Order of the honourable House of Commons) to be certified to a Committee of Parliament, as in and by the said Precept, relation being thereunto had, may more at large appear: All which nevertheless, and although the said Committee this day expected Returns to have been made, according to the same Precept; but the said Service being (as it now seems) neglected, It is therefore Ordered, That time be given for the doing the matters and things contained in the former Precept, by the said Deputy, Common-councell-men, and Collectors, and every of them, untill Tuesday next at Two of the clock in the afternoon; with this intimation also, That if the said Returns are not by that time made, that then the Deputies and severall Common-councell-men doe make return of such of the said Collectors as either obstruct or neglect the Work, or fail in doing any thing of them required, whose Names are by this Committee to be then returned to the said Committee of Parlia∣ment; or in default thereof, the said Deputies and Common-councell-men are to be returned to the said Committee of Parliament, there to be dealt withall according to their demerit: with this also, That further time or favour is not to be expected. And it is hereby further ordered, That the Returns shal be made by this Committee of the said Defaulters at the time aforesaid. And all Parties concerned therein, are to take notice hereof. Tho. Lathum Cler. Comiss. praed.
