A853 E1013_21 99867106 119396
A LETTER FROM THE Lord Gen. Monck, TO Major General OVERTON: Together with Maior Gen. Overtons Answer thereunto. LONDON, Printed by James Cottrel. 1660.
SIR, BEing through the good pro∣vidence of God, now at York taking care for the Affairs of the Parliament in these parts; and the condition of the Garison of Hull being somewhat doubtfully respresen∣ted to me; seeing I can yet meet with no person that can assure me, that you have yet declared for the Parliament now sitting at Westmin∣ster: I have thought it meet to send this Messenger, that so I might re∣ceive satisfaction in that point, and so all grounds of suspition and jealousie
might be prevented; which will not be avoided otherwise then by a full and free Declaration of your obedience to the Parliament in their present con∣stitution: in expectation of a satisfa∣ctory answer in this particular, I remain Your very loving Friend and Servant, George Monck. York, 12 Jan. 1659.
Right Honourable, YOurs of the 12 Currant from York I have received, by the hands of my old friend Adju∣tant Gen. Smith, and do per∣ceive that Report renders Hull as doubtful to you, as it did your design dangerous to us and others: but I am very glad to hear that you adhere to this Parliament in their pre∣sent constitution, against the re-admission of the secluded Members, a free Parliament or single Person; one of which hath conti∣nually been charged upon you, as the com∣mon cry of your Army. For my own part, however any airy rumor may have represen∣ted me, yet both my Actions and Words before and since the Parliaments interrupti∣on, have so sufficiently declared my adhe∣rence to them in opposition to that invasion made upon them; that for me to bring up the Rear of verbal Testimonies by an ex post facto Declaration, when I have not concurred
with or countenanced any thing, that hath in the least derogated from your Authority or the Trust reposed in me, is very much below me, who have ever opposed Faithful∣ness to Flattery, and endeavoured to be found in practise rather then profession. But I suppose the Parliament have by this time received satisfaction from what I have signified of my continued adherence to them; and besides, I have sent up my Major personally to represent to them the same, and how difficult it was for us, to preserve this place by any other procedure then what was our practice here: wherein upon the one hand I was very careful to decline any thing which owned the Army in their force, so on the other hand (their interest here overleaping me) I was necessitated to walk so warily (by some circumstantial condescentions to them) that they might not have opportunity to out me; which was de∣signed, by an intention to secure both me and my Major. I have inclosed to you a Copy of that Letter I sent to the General Council of Officers in opposition to their
Address for Gen. Officers: which with my declining concurring with any of their pro∣ceeds, subscribing any of their Papers, refu∣sing their Commissions, withstanding their Commands, forcing out two Companies (after my own came from Scotland, com∣manded by their Creatures) turning back one of my Lord Lamberts Troops, which he sent for the security of this place; and calling in Major Acklams, whom I could better confide in; refusing to give my ap∣probation to their Writs sent down for ele∣cting Members, are my witnesses that my works have not denied, but all along de∣clared for the Parliament, in whose Cause I have been and am, as deeply concern'd as o∣thers, both by active and passive obedience; and shall not cease further to testifie my faithfulness to them therein, according to the tenour of our Engagements, re∣maining Right Honourable, Your assured and humble Servant, Rob. Overton. Hull, Jan. 13. 1659. FINIS.
