B261A 99897980 137605
The Batchellors Fore-cast, OR, Cupid unblest being an Answer to Cupids Trappan or up the Green Forrest. Though many Zelots do in Love seem holy Yet he accounts it all to be but folly. To the Tune of Cupis Trappan. ONce did I love and a very pretty Girl, Thinking to make her my own, Although she did look like the mother of Pearl, Yet now am I fledg'd and flown brave Boys. yet now am I fledg'd and flown. I wooed her and sued her yet she did deny, She answered she would have none, The humor of love I defie, But now am I fleg'd and flown brave Boys, I try'd my Art to make her to me sure, And still I did call her my own, At last she'd indure to stoop to the lure, But now I am fledg'd and flown brave Boys, Since she doth so scorn me, with Sack i'l Adorn me I will be out witted by none, These feminine creatures are absolute theaters But now am I fleg'd and flown brave Boys. But since I forsook her, what fancy hath took her In the Forest she séeks for her own, She hoops & she howls like woodcocks or Owls Her bonny Birds fledg'd and flown brave Boys My humour some Love, I could not approve, Her humor was single alone; Now I have another that better than tother, Her bonny Birds fledg'd and flown brave Boys ANd now I do here she fain would draw near, For now she doth call me her own, I care not for that i'l kéep out of her trap, Her bonny birds fledg'd and flown brave Boys, Why should I be tyed her humour to hide. I'l never be linkt to one; Count Maidens and Mauthers twenty to ten, Her bonny birds fledg'd and flown brave Boys I always did wait on my pretty Love Kate, Intending my Love for to marry, But since she is no better, I'm none of her debtor, The Devil shall have her for Harry brave Boys. I might have had all, and have given her the fall, Ther's nothing that would me hinder, But something that worse Child, Cradle, & Nurse, I never would light the tinder brave Boys. If any one tax me of falshood in Love. And say i'l prove true to none, I pul'd out my Sickle because she was Fickle, Her bonny birds fledg'd and flown brave boys, If Love hath bewitcht her, what is it to me, I wonder blind Cupid would let her, Since she is not smutcht nor her honesty tutcht. Why should she betyde in the fetter brave boys. So long as she is frée, she cares not for me, Her Maiden head is her honor, If she sing and laugh i'l merelly quaff, And ne're spend an idle thought on her brave boys If she sing and swagger, i'l drink till I stagger, The humor of Love, I defie it, Turn Willow to wine therein I will pine, Better live with it, then by it brave boys. I'm come from the wars without any scars, Although I was most in the Action, My mony doth think, and I must have some drink, And a pox on this foolish love faction, &c. Though I am no Cripple yet well I can Tipple, I scorn for to bauk my Liquor, The Iuice of the Grape tasts better than Kate, To the Tavern I am a close sticker. But yet I advise, let's be merry and wise, To shun many future disasters, Though young men may find that Maidens are kind Yet never let Love be your masters. If I'd not marcht off, she at me would scoff, I'd rather at Sea for to venture, If I loose Leg or Arm 'tis not so much harm, As steering out Love to the center, &c. 'Tis better for you to live as you be, Then a false hearted maid for to marry, Not all the deceit of Bes Sue and Kate, Could never Trappan honest Harry. FINIS. With Allowance. Printed, by P. L. for R. Burton at the Horse-shoe in West-smith-field.
