B3846B 45789170 172483
A Few Words to those who look for ANOTHER DISPENSATION than what is known by the Faithful CHRISTIANS in this Day, putting off and slighting the present Manifestation of God unto them, and so by their Unfaithfulness to the Lord God, in not walking answerable to him for his Loving-kindness in his present Manifestation unto them, put the Day of the Lord afar off from them, &c. FRIENDS; WHat do you look for? what would you have discover∣ed more to you of the things of God's Kingdom, than can be discovered and known by the Light you believing in it, and being faithful unto God in what he hath at present manifested thereby unto you? 'Tis said by one who was acquainted with the Way of the Lord, In thy Light shall we see Light; whose Testimony is true, as you will be able to witness in your own Particulars, by your living up to that Light, in being faithful to the Father of Lights, in what he hath at present there∣by to you made known. This I say to you in the Name of the Lord, Till you are faithful unto him in what he hath at present manifested or made known unto you, how can you expect to know him, or the things of his Kingdom, any further or more than at present you do? Therefore do not dream nor imagine of another Dispensation, or of God's making more known to you, or manifest to you of himself, or of the Things of his Glorious Kingdom to your Comfort, than you know thereof at present, whilst you believe not in the Light: If you do, I say and declare unto you by the Word of the Lord, you will deceive your own Souls; which thing I desire you may not do. You talk of a further Dispensation, and so of further Mani∣festations of the Knowledge of the Glorious God, then they who are faithful to God, in walking or living up to their Light in this Glorious Day of his Appearance are Witnesses of, or are come to be acquainted withal: but this your Talk is without a true Knowledge of them, or of what they do witness, and enjoy, and partake of through the Lord's rich Love and Kindness, and Good Will unto their Souls. Do you believe that when our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ was manifest in Flesh, there were not as wise and as searching Wits amongst them that gain-sayed, sleighted and opposed him, as any are amongst you, who put the Day of the Lord far away from you, though it be nigh, and the Kingdom of God be at hand? You who sleight, and disesteem, and regard not as you ought the present manifestation of God unto you; were they not as seem∣ingly Holy, and as blameless in their Conversations, and as free from the guilt of Iniquity some of them as any or many amongst you are? And was there not as much seeming Holiness amongst them as is amongst you? And yet they knew him not, but mis∣sed of the Knowledge of him, and so were without the Know∣ledge of God in the world and his Wayes, as you are, because they would not come to the Light; though they could speak much of him, as you do. Christ was not known to the Worldly Wise, nor his true Fol∣lowers the Apostles, &c. Therefore said the Apostle, The World knoweth us not, because it knoweth him not: And our Life, said the Apostle, is hid with Christ in God, &c. Then why should you in the same Wisdom they were in expect to know Christs true followers now any more than they did then? and if you knew the Gospel Dispensation, (as they do whose Life from you is hid, who are faithful to the living God in what he hath manifested un∣to them by the Word of his Grace (doubtless) ye would not talk so much, nor look so much for another. Therefore while you have time prize your time, and sin not out your Day, lest utter Darkness come upon you and overtake you, and so the Night come when you cannot Work, which sad and woful state and condition many have fallen into, and doubt∣less many will fall into, if they Repent not: Therefore Pray ye to the God of all Mercies, that ye may escape the same. So Fear and Dread before the living God, and hasten for your Lives, by abandoning and forsaking that Spirit which causeth you to slight and disregard the present Discovery and Manifestation of God unto you, and it by which he discovereth and manifesteth his Holy and Heavenly Mind and Will unto your Souls; and so would have you to put the Day of the Lord afar off, which Day is near, and ready to be revealed; lest he overthrow you, as he overthrew those who put his Day afar off in times past, who would not be led to Repentance by his Long-suffering. From a Lover of your Souls, and one that seeks your Good Edward Bourne. Worcester, the 21th of the 11th Moneth, 1679. Being moved with Fear have I given this forth, and do de∣sire, that it would please the Almighty to make it of good Effect to such whom it shall concern, wheresoever it shall come. Postscript. FRiends where this shall come, to you this is my Request in Love, in the Presence of the Lord, That you shew it to such whom he shall please to let you see there may be a Service in it, which is in my Judgment principally that Generation, some of whom I have felt the Spirit of the Lord in me at times to be grieved with∣al, because of their sleighting the Present Day and Opportunity, which God gives them, dreaming and imagining of that which their Eyes will fail them in their looking for in their imagined Way; such a Generation there is, as (doubtless) many of you know, who hereby are warned, the Spirit of the Lord yet stri∣ving with them, which if they regard not, they will be the more without Excuse in the Great and Terrible Day of the Lord, when they shall have their Reward according as their Works have been. So, dear and faithful Friends, whom God hath set apart for himself, in Him I bid you Farewel. E. B.
