B691 99899557 153816
AN ANSWER TO THE Eight Quaeries propounded by the House of Commons, to the Assembly called Divines, sitting at West∣minster, April. 22. 1646. never to this day by them An∣swered, nor they called to an accompt by the Parlia∣ment, for their ignorance or negligence therein. Psal. 31.6. I have hated them that regard lying vanities, but I trust in the Lord. Jonah 2.8. They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy. Psal. 82.6.7. I have said, ye are Gods; and all of you are Children of the most high: But ye shall dye like men, and fa l like one of the Princes. Jer. 5.30. A wonderfull and horrible thing is committed in the Land, the Prophets prophesie lyes, and the Priests receive gifts in their hands: and my people delight therein, what will ye then do in the end thereof. Cor. 1.14.36. What, came the word of God out from you, or came it unto you only. Gal. 4.16. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth. 2 Cor. 4.2. But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftinesse, nor handling the word of God deceit∣fully, but by manifestatiō of the truth, cōmending our selves to every mans Conscience in the sight of God. Col. 2.8. Beware least any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit &c. 1 Tim. 6.20. Oh Timothy, keepe that which is cōmitted to thy trust, avoiding profane & vain bablings. By Edward Barber Freeman of England, Citizen and Marchant-Taylor of London. 1648. To those Noble Senators, the chosen Stewards and Servants of the free∣men of England, the Commons assembled in Parliament, with that Right Noble Generall, the Lord Fairfax, and Lieut. Gen. Crumwell. RIGHT HONORABLE, TAking into consideration the Quaeries so long since pro∣pounded by your Honours, to the Assembly called Divines at Westminster, desiring their Answers therein, as once Ne∣bucadnizer did of his dream, from his Magicians, Astrolo∣grs, Sorcerers, and Caldeans, whom he had chosen, and to whom was appointed a dayly provision of the Kings meate, and of the wine which he drank. Dan. 2. That so being nourished at his Table, at three years end, they might stand before the King, But they being called forth to satissie the Kings desire, in tel∣ling
&c. as Ier. 51 6.7. compared with Isaia 21.9. and Micha 2.10.11. Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest, because it is polluted it shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction, if a man walking in the spirit of falshood do lye, saying, I will prophesie unto thee of wine and strong drink, he shall even be the prophet of this people, compared with 2. Cor. 6.14. to 18. and Revel. 18.4. come out of her my people that ye be not partakers of her sinnes, and that ye receive not of her plagues. Now as the people of God were thus called forth of temporall and spirituall Babylon, so the instruments by which the Lord will do this great work, shall be by dispised persons, that so the great wise men of the world may stay themselves, and wonder who are blind & make you blind, instead of this they render it, cry ye out and cry, Isai. 29.9. to 15. & also, that the whole glory may be given to God only, & not to men, and as for such as have received their Call and Ordinati∣on from the beast, or no calling at all as some now pretends, if ever they should be converted and to submit unto the Order and Govern∣ment of King Iesus in the Gospell way, yet will these be the unsittest for the carrying forth of that rich treasure of the Gospel, they having formerly sworn themselves Servants unto Antichrist, and therefore will be but as the Gibiouites, who although by their craft had saved their lives, yet were by Josuah that glorious Tipe of Christ, appoin∣ted to be hewers of wood, and drawers of water, Josuah 9. or Lovies Sonnes, Sam. 1.2.36. who at that time when the Lord shall raise up his faithfull Priest, shall come and crouch for a peece of silver, or a morsell of bread, saying, put me I pray thee into one of the Priests Offices, that I may eat a pecee of bread, or with those Merchants of the earth, who when the Kings and Magistrates of the earth, who have committed fornication with the whore, and lived deliciously; at her overthrow, shall bewail her, and lament for her, Revel. 18.9. then also shall those Merchants of the earth weepe and mourn; for no man buyeth their Merchandize any more, vers. 10. This will cause them as the Jewes, Acts 22.22. to discover their madnesse who east dust upon their heads, so these crying, weeping, & wayling, saing, alas, alas, that great City wherein were made rich, all that had Ships in the Sea, by reason of her costlinesse, for in one howre is she made desolate, vers. 19. and vers. 20. the Church holy Messengers and Prophets are called forth to rejoyce over her for God hath avenged them on her when all profit and delight is taken away from her, verse 22.23.
the Reason is layd down vers. the last, because in her was found the blood of Prophets and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth; oh that therefore your honours would give liberty for publike disputes, that thereby the truth might be tryed, and that there might be some time allowed after the publike Exercises is done; wherein the hearers those whose mouthes the Lord by his spirit shall open, might have liberty to adde to what is delivered, or contradict if irronious, and that there might be some places that are vacant, as Paules, or the like appointed, for such exercises and tryalls of the truth, according to Iohn 1.4.1. where he saith, believe not every spirit, but trie the spirits whether they are of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world, and Thes. 1.5.21. The Apostle exhorts the Saints to prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good, which cannot be done in that way that is practised by them, they tying up the mouthes of all but themselves, by their Antichristian power and practice, that therefore the Kings of the earth, and you the Majestrates would be wise, and consider your wayes, & know as it was once said to Saul, as he was going to Damascus, having received Authority from the High Priests to persecute and hale to prison all that called upon the name of the Lord Jesus, Saul Saul, why persecutest thou me, it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks, so it will one day be said to all those that persecute Christ in his Members, which through the subtelty of Antichrist is usually done under the name of Heri∣ticks and Sectaries, as in Queen Maries dayes, &c. for know as the Prophet David saith, Psal. 2.2. to 6. although the Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Councel together against the Lord, and against his Christ, saying, let us break his bonds asunder, and cast away his cords from us; but he that sits in Heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision, then shall he speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure, yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion, all which their doing was but a vane thing in Davids Accompt, vers. the first, and vers. 10.11.12. he exhorts them saying, be wise now therefore on ye Kings, be instructed, ye Judges of the earth serve the Lord with feare, and rejoyce with trem∣bling, kisse the Son least he be angry, & ye perish from the way, if his wrath be kindled, yea but a little, blessed are they that put their trust in him, compared with Prov. 16.20. Isa. 30.18. Jer. 17.7. & 27 7. Rom. 9.33. and 10.11. 1 Pet. 2.6. For saith the Lord, Isa. 60.12. The Nati∣on and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish, yea those Na∣tions
shall be utterly wasted, on that England would consider this in time! least one day it be said to it, as was once said by Christ to Jerusalem, Luke 13.34 and 19 41. where coming nigh to the City, he beheld it, and wept over it, saying, if thou hadst known even thou at least in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thy eyes. So the Lord for many years having called upon this Kingdom of England for repentance, and turning unto him by amendment, sol∣lowing us with mercies and deliverances, fatherly chastizing us by pestilence, sword and famine; but what amendment is there of any since, but that in justice, pride, cruelty, neglect of the poore, Idolatry, covetousnes abounds, & as the proph. saith, Is. 56.11. every one for ku gaine from his quarter, that love of mony the roote of all evill remain∣ing as much as ever. 1 Tim. 6.10. That therefore we would turn unto him according to promise, in keeping the Protestation and Covenant, in standing for a reformati∣on according to the word of God and institutions of Christ, and not covetous mens desires and inventions, who in all ages have been ob∣structers of the true worship of God, & persecuters of his servants, as King. 1 22.22. to 28. Ier. 18.18. Come let us smite him with the tongue, Ames 7.10.11 Mic. 1.1. &c. 3. Ier. 26.11. to 19. Mat. 23.13. who shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, they neither go in themselvs, neither suffer them that are entring to go in; but as Thee∣doro Beza observes from Act. 6.9. to 15. that fals teachers because they will not be overcome, flee from disputations to Magistrates & open slandering, and false accusations, & that the first bloudy perse∣cution of the Church of Christ began, and sprung from a Councell of Priests by the suggestion of the University Doctors, that therefore we might beware of men, and according to the command of God heat ken only to the voice of Christ, Mat. 17.5. that so we obey∣ing him the great Prophet and Anointed, the Lord may be gracious unto us in causing the sword to be sheathed, and that he may delight to dwell among us, in turning the hearts of the Fathers unto the chil∣dren, and the hearts of the children to the Fathers; which shall be the desire and prayer of him, that desires the happines here and glory hereafter of you, and all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in fincerity.
Whereas it is Resolved by the House of Commons, that all persons guilty of uotorious offences shall be suspended the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; the House of Commons desires to be satissied by the Assembly of Divines in these particulars. 1. WHether the Parochiall and Congregationall Elderships, appointed by Ordinance of Parliament are Jure Divino, by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ. 2, Whether all the Members of the said Elderships are Mem∣bers thereof, or which of them are Jure Divino by the will and ap∣pointment of Jesus Christ? 3, Whether the Supreame Assemblies or Elderships viz. the Clas∣sicall, Provinciall and Nationall, whether all or any of them, or which of them are Jure Divino, and by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ. 4. Whether appeales from Congregationall Elderships to the Classicall, Provinciall and Nationall Assemblies, or to any of them or which of them are Iure Divino, and by the will and appoint∣ment of Jesus Christ? 5. Whether oecumenicall Assemblies are Iure Divino, or whether there be appeales from any of the former Assemblies, to the said oe∣cumenicall Assemblies, Iure Devino by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ? 6. Whether by the word of God the power of judging, and decla∣ring what are such notorious and scandalous offences as aforesaid, and conventing before them, trying and actuall suspending from the Sacrament such offenders accordingly, either in the Congregationall Elderships or Presbytery, or in any other Eldership of Presbytery presented to the House as the advice of the Assembly, and whether such powers are in them only, or any of them, or in which of them Jure Divino, and by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ? 7. Whether there be any certaine and particular rules expressed in the word of God, to direct the said Elderships, or Presbyteries, or any of them in the exercise and execution of the powers aforesaid, and which are those rules? 8. Is there any thing contained in the word of God, that the Su∣pream Majestracy in a Christian state, may not judge and determine, what are the aforesaid notorious and seandalous offencet, and the manner of suspention from the same, And in what particulars con∣cerning
the premisses is the said Supreame Majestracy by the word of God excluded? In Answer of these particulars the House of Commons desires of the Assembly of Divines their proofs from Scripture, and to set down the severall texts in the expresse words of the same. Ordered that every particular Minister of the Assembly of Divin that is or shall be present at the debate of any of these questions, de upon every resolution which shall be presented to this House concern∣ing the same, subscribe his respective name either with the Affirma∣tive or Negative, as he giveth his Vote, & those that do decent from the major Part shall set down their possitive opinions, with the expresse Text of Scripture upon which their opinion is grounded. For Answer to the first Quaerie, the Churches of Christ were con∣stituted, and gathered out of the world by the Ministry of the Gos∣pel, according to that great Charter thereof, Mat. 28.19.20. Mark. 16.15.16. Lu. 24.47. And not by any Authority or Ministry of the ci∣vill Magistrate, and as they were thus gathered, & planted in the pre∣mitive times, so are they in like manner by his Servants to be gather∣ed after the Apostacie whom by his power he shall in an extraordi∣narie manner raise up, and by the Servants of the Churches that shall be by them sent forth to preach the everlasting Gospel for the in∣lightening the earth, discovering the Mistery of iniquity, and the Ministry of Antichrist, gathering his people out of spirituall Babylon, as out of Babylon of old, and planting them into Church fellowship and order, having their Commission from Christ and his Church, and not by Command and Authority from Pope, Councel, Synod, or civill Magistrate: the Church of Christ being his spirituall Kingdom, con∣sisting of a company of Saints, or holy people, Rom. 1.7. Cor. 1.1.2. Pet. 1.1.16. called out of the world, John 15.19. Rev. 5.9. By the preaching of the Gospel, Mat. 28.19.20. Mark. 16.15.16. by a free & voluntary consent, Ps. 18.43.44.110.3 Acts 2.41. & 13.48 & 17.11. entring into Covenant, Psal. 50.5 Zep. 2.1. Acts 3.23. to 26. Heb. 8.8.9. to discharge duties to God, & one to another, Iohn 4.24. Phil. 3.3.1. Pet. 2.5. 1 Cor. 12, 12. to 28. putting on Christ by Baptisme or dip∣ping. Gal. 3.26.27. for ye are all the Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; for as many of you as have been dipt into Christ, have put on Christ, compared with Ephes. 4.4.5. There is one body & one spi∣rit,
even as ye are called in one hope of your calling, one Lord, one faith, one dipping, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. This is Christs spirituall house under the new Testament, whereof he is Lord, as Hab. 2.20. Heb. 3 6. & head. Eph. 1.22.23. & King, Isa. 33.22. and Law giver, James 4 12. and prophet, Deut. 18.15. Mat. 17.5. Being that Priest, Alter and Sacrifice, by which all that believe and obey, are for ever sanctified and perfected, Heb. 10.14. and 5.8 9. for it is not the voice of the Church, much lesse the voice of the Synod, or Parliament, that we are to hearken unto in spiritnall worship, but Christs voice in the Church, and that in all things whatsoever he shall say unto us, Tim. 1.3.15. he speaking in his Servants, as Luke 10.16. he that heareth you, heareth me, and he that heareth me, hear∣eth him that sent mee. These where ever gathered together under Heaven, in the name of Christ, according to his order, consisting of Jewes or Gentiles, Col. 1.18. have power from him their head to receive in, deale with, or cast out of the Church, by the only Lawes and Statutes, of King Je∣sus, heir only King and Law-giver, as Isai. 9 6. and 33.22. Acts 2.41.42. Mat. 48.15. to 20. and 1 Cor. 5.4.5. and 2.2.4. to 9. They being under Christ their King, the freest Independant Corporation or state under Heaven, Iohn 8.36. If the Sonne therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed, Cor. 1.3.5, 6, 7. compared with Isai. 2.17. The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. Now the parochiall Churches or Elderships that are appointed by Statute Lawes, or Ordinances of Parl. and thereby forced thereunto, cannot be Jure Divino, Churches of Christ by his will and appointment, but all the people of God are as truly called out of such Assemblies, as out of Babylon of old, to the free voluntary worship of the Gospell. To the second quaerie I answer, The Parish Churches or Assem∣blies being not gathered according to the Commission of Christ in that great Charter of the Gospell, and by his Ministers and Servants, but by the Authority of the civill Magistrate, through the importu∣nity of Austin the Monck, sent over from Gregory the 7. from which roote and foundation the nationall Ministry now extant, still retaines their Ordination, having still kept their first state and constitution, although reformed in divers particuler Doctrines, whereby they cannot be Jure Divino, Churches of Christ by his will and appointment; but are constitutions of men through the
subtilty of the man of sin, or beast rising out of the earth [to wit] by his earthly inventions, who by the slight of men, and cunning craftinesse they lye in wait to deceive, having 2. horns like a Lamb, but speakes like a Dragon, exercising all the power of the first beast, &c. Rev. 13.11. having a shew of wisdom in will worship and hu∣mility, Col. 2.23. of whom the Apostle bids the Saints, beware of be∣ing spoiled through their philosophy and vain deceit, after the tra∣ditions of men, after the Rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, in whom dwells the fulnesse of the God-head bodily, and ye the Saints [to wit believers dipt] are compleat in him, &c. and Mat. 15.9. Christ saith, in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandements of men, from whence it appeares [as the Churches, so the Members also] are none of them Jure Di∣vino, Members of any Church of Christ, by his will and appoint∣ment. To the 3. I answer, for any supream Authority of Assemblies or Elderships, viz. the Classicall, provinciall, or nationall, whether they are Jure Divino or no. In all the Gospell I do not find any more ju∣risdiction of Churches over Churches, then there is of brethren o∣ver brethren, but the contrary is clearly proved, Mat. 23.8.9, 10. but be not ye called Rabby, for one is your Master, to wit, Christ and all ye are brethren, and call no man your Father upon the earth, for there is but one, your Father which is in Heaven; be not called Doc∣tors, for one is your Doctor, even Christ, and Cor. 1.5 4 5. That Church of Corinth had power, as to cast out the Incestious person, so upon his Repentance to receive him in again, without the autho∣rity of any other Church, or any others contradiction, & James 2.1. he saith, my brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory with respect of persons, and Chap. 3.1. he saith my brethren, be not many Masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation; but this spirit of pride is no new thing, for it began in the Disciples, Luke 9.46. when there arose a reasoning a∣mongst them, which of them should be the greatest, but Christ per∣ceiving the thoughts of their hearts, answereth them by setting a little Child in the midst of them, to teach them humility, there being too many now a dayes of their spirit v. 46. 47. 48 as he taught them, against persecution, vers. 54.55, 56. when they would have had sire come down from Heaven to consume the Samaritans, saying, ye know not of what spirit you are, for the Sonne of man is not come
to destroy mens lives but to save them, &c. Therefore these supream Assemblies are not Jure Divino, by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, but are all by humane Authority not known in Scrip∣ture, being against the freedom, which every Church of Christ hath given them, which they ought to injoy, none being before or after another in their priviledge or prerogative, which liberty and free∣dom every protestator and Covenanter is sworn to stand for and maintain. To the 4. Concerning Appeales from Congregationall Elder∣ships to the Classicall, Provinciall, and Nationall Assemblies. The parishionall not being proved Iure Divino, but of humane Authori∣ty, appeales to them, and from one unto another must needs be un∣lawfull. Besides, how contrary is this to the primitive practice, as Acts 15. when there arose a difference about Circumcision in the Church of Antiochia, they sent up to the Church at Ierusalem for their advice, (not that they had any authority over them), and they as humbly and truly sent their advice, saying, it seemed good to the holy spirit, and to us, to lay upon you no other burthen then these necessary things. Now if these could say thus, and would do as they did, their Councell ought evangelically to be received in like sort by believers; but these as they were never called and gathered by Christs Authority, so have they not the promise of his presence by his spirit with them as his Churches have, Mat. 18.17. to 20. & 28.20. 1 Cor. 3.22.23. & 1.5.4.5. Iohn 14.16.17. & 15.26.27. To the 5. I find no oecumenical Assemblies in Scripture under the Gospel to be of Gods appointing, but an invention of the man of sin, raysed by those Locusts that came out of the smoke that arose out of the bottomlesse pitt, Rev. 9.2.3. who had power as the Sorpions of the earth have power that so by force, As Eze. 34.4. flatteries as Dan. 11.21.22.34. And cunning crastinesse whereby they lye in wait to deceive Ephes. 4.14.15. Transforming themselves as the Ministers of righteousnesse, Cor. 2.11.15. whose end shall be accor∣ding to their workes by which meanes they cause all the world to wonder after the beast, who had his wound and did live Rev. 13.3. to 7. for the first beast, being those heathen bloudy tyrants who wor∣shipped the Draggon which gave him his power, to whom was gi∣ven a mouth, speaking great things and blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven &c.
This beast being thus wounded, there ariseth another beast out of the earth (to wit) out of those earthly inventions of Popish assem∣blies counsells and Synods, Re. 6 13.14. the Starres folling from Hea∣ven to the earth, they leaving those glorious institutions of Christ, the dipping of actuall believers, upon confessing sins and professing faith, as also the volentarie contribution of the Saints, or as Fox in his acts and monuments renders it, the puer almes of the Church, and bringing in baptizing or rather sprincklin of Naturall Infants, and paying  iths, hereby raising national Churches wichout the which they could never have done it, neither could they now retaine them, thereby contradicting the Appostles rule Cor. 1.4.6. in presuming a bove that which is written; but should these 2. pillars be taken away according to our Protestation and Covenant, and a reformation set up according to the word of God [as is pretended] the Kingdome of Antichrist like the Philistins house will fall upon their heads, as that on the Philistins; upon Sampsons that glorious pe of Christs pulling away the 2. pillars whereupon the house stood, Iudg: 16.29.30. That whereas by the authority of the Civill Magistrate, they having insinuated into there affections, like Pharoahs froggs into his and his servants Bedchambers Exod. 8.3 4. by being their Chap∣lains as they call themselves, a service not known in the Gospell of Christ for his ministers; whereby the Magistrates being by them de∣luded, give that power, which was given thē of God for the punish∣ment of evill doers; but for the praise of them that doe well, to the upholding of this beast and his Image, and they having received it put it forth to the uttermost causing all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a marke in their right hand, and in their foreheads, and that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark or the name of the beast, or the number of his name &c. This second beast consisting of the whole state hirarchie or cler∣gy, as they call themselves with the Image even all that receive the ordination from that state there being not soe much as one of there names, much lesse their practice or maintenance heard of in the Gos∣pell of King Jesus: from the Pope or Prelate to the Sexton, and yet they do as that vile person spoken of by Daniel, Dan. 11.21. That come in peaceably and obtaine the Kingdome by flatteries, pretend∣ing they are the ministers of Christ yet are not content with his or∣dination, nor maintenance and wages, and therefore obtaine ordi∣nances, as doctor Burgis &c. and Statute Lawes from the state
though some of them had little need having enough before, which have caused more breach of the protestation and Covenant, and tedious suits in the Courts of Justice then any one thing in the Kingdom; and therefore to say no more to this all appeales to them are humaine, and not Iure Divino, neither in the particular or generall. To the 6. I answer, The Lord Jesus Christ having satisfyed his Fathers Justice, and thereby wrought everlasting rightcousnesse for all them that obey him, it being testified from Heaven by the Fa∣ther, that he is his beloved Sonne, in whom he is well pleased, And having received all power both in Heaven and in earth, by which Authority as then he sent forth his Servants, so hath he also given and setled this power only upon and in his Church, and that to the body [not the Ministers] consisting of a company of dipt Disciples, not the Servants distinct from the Church, as they new pretend and assume, but as they derive it from the Church, they giving it to them; and therefore these Presbyters not being Members of any Church of Christ, according to his institution, and yet claiming such power as distinct from the Church, have nothing therein but what they have from the man of sinne, by tradition of men, and not lure Divino, by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ. To the 7. There are no rules at all given in the Gospell of King Iesus in question, giving power to the said Presbyters or Elderships, or any of them, for the putting in execution of any the power a∣foresaid, seeing their constitution is not from God by Christ tha great prophet of the Church, but from their reverend Fathers the Prelates, and so consequently from the Pope, or civill state, who hath no more power to Command or set Lawes in the Kingdom of Christ, then the King of Spain, or the French King hath in the Kingdom of England, which is intire and Independant of it selfe; But for a Church of Christ truly stated there are rules, as to receive in, so to deale with and cast out if need require, as Tim. 2.3.16.17. All Scrip∣ture is given by inspirtaion of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproofe for correction, for instruction in righteousnesse, that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good workes. To the 8. We are to take notice, that under the Gospel the Lord Jesus is not only a King, but the only King and Law-giver to his Church, Isai. 33.22 Iames 12.4. Tim. 16.15. Rev. 17.14. and there∣fore the civill Magistrate under the Gospell ought no more to in∣trench
upon his prerogative in Church Government, then he did up∣on theirs in civill things, as Luke 12.13, 14. where he would not so much as divide the inheritance between the 2. brethren, & therefore Mat. 22 16. to 21. when the Pharices took Councel how they might intangle Christ, asking him whether it was lawfull to pay tribute to Caeser or no▪  aith unto them, shew me the tribute money, say∣ing, whose Image or superscription is this, they say unto him, Caesars he saith unto them, render therefore unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, and unto God the things that are Gods, and Rom. 13.1. to 7. the Apostle injoynes obedience from the Church unto civill Magistrates or higher powers, not only to Christians, but as they were Magistrates though Heathens, which they then were, shewing that they are of God, ordained of God as Mrs. of our flesh, and that those that resist them, resist the Ordinance of God, whether Christian or Heathen, & such as resist shal receive to themselves dam∣nation; for Rulers are not [to wit appointed of God] a terrour to good works, but to the evil, wilt thou thē not be afraid of the power, do that which is good; but if thou do that which is evill, be afraid, for he beareth not the sword in vain; for he is the Servant of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that doth evill; wherefore ye must needes be subject not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake. Now what this evill is, the Apostle shewes, to wit, not Heriticks, and Schismaticks, as some fondly dream, and would if they could maintain, though with fire and sword, although indeed more to up∣hold their own honour, Kingdom, power, places, greatnesse, and be∣nifices, then the civill Magistrates as is clearly discovered to most men already, whose eyes the Lord hath in any measure opened, and may easily be proved to all that are not wilfully blind; for in the Conscience concerning worship, the Lord only raigneth as King and Lawgiver; wherefore the Apostle saith, The Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the Law lesse and disobedient, for the ungodly, and for sinners; for unholy and prophane, for murtherers of Fathers & murtherers of Mothers, for Man-slayers for Whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for men-stealers; for lyars, for perjured persons [oh that the Ministers that prest the Protestation & Covenant so cagerly, would take notice of this!] and if there be any other thing that is contrary to wholsom doctrin, according to the glorious Gospel of the blessed Ged, which was
committed to my trust &c. 1 Tim. 1.9. to the 11. Now the civill Magistrates are called fathers of our flesh, to whom in all these civill things we ought to be obedient; But saith the Apostle shall we not much rather be in subjection to the father of spirits and live; to wit, to his laws given forth by his sonne the great prophet of his Church, speaking from heaven, Heb. 1 1. Deut. 18.15. Act. 3.22.23. Who hath given a rule for his people to walk by, as Mat. 28.20. which rule the Apostle exorts the Galathians, and in them all beleivers to observe as Gal. 6.16. they thus walking having the promise of peace and mercy upon them, And Phil. 3.16. he exorts the Church, to walk by the same rule, and to mind the same things. Thus I have made appear, that the Congregationall or Parishlo∣nall Elderships appointed by Ordinance of Parliament, the members thereof, or any of them, the supream Assemblies or Elderships, viz. the Classicall, Provinciall, oecumenicall or Nationall, are none of them Jure Devino, by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ. Wherin, I have also proved from the word of truth, that the Civill Magistrate hath nothing to do as a Magistrate, to judge of any cause in the Church of Christ, it being there to be judged and tried by those servants, and in that order and manner that is set down in his word, by the will and appointment of Iesus Christ. And what was required by the Parliament of the Synod or Assem∣bly, I have in some weak measure answered from the scripture, & set down the severall texts in the expresse words of the same, according as was desired, subscribing my self your honours, and the Churches Servant in the Service of the Gospell of King Jesus. E. Barber. Consider of it, take advice and speake your minds, Iudges 19.30. Certain Quaeries propounded (by the Author) to the Assembly cal∣led Devines. 1. Whether that Doctrine of obedience to Magistrats or higher powers, which the Apostles taught, Rom. 13.1 Pet. 1.2 13.14.15. &c were true or no. 2. Whether it was not the Apostles duty, to practice that himself which he taught and commanded others to do as Rom. 2.21.22.23 3. Whether the Magistrates or those higher powers, which from the disciples he required obedience unto, were of their Religion or in the Gospell practice yea or no? 4. If not, Whether it was lawfull for those Magistrates or higher powers, to persecute Paul and the rest of the Church for their Religion. 5. Whether Paul and the Disciples might plot against or per∣secute the Magistrate, or any of his subjects by compelling or for∣cing
their Conscience or otherwise, though to the true worship God under the Gospel. 6. Whether Magistrates as well as Subjects, be not to be subje to the Lawes, Statutes, and censures of King Jesus only, who as unde the Law, so under the Gospel is no respecter of persons, Dent. 10.17. Rom. 2.11. 1 Pet. 1.17. 7. Whether it may not be conceived, The Lord is now making in∣quisition for the blood that hath been shed in this Land, and other parts of the world, of the Jewes his ancient and peculiar people,  Isal. 51.21.22, 23. where the Lord saith, heare thou this, thou mise∣rable and drunken, but not with wine. Thus saith the Lord God, e∣ven God that pleadeth the cause of his people, behold I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, even the dreggs of the cup of my weath, thou shalt drink it no more, but I wil put it into their hand that afflicted thee, which have said to thy soule, bowdown that we may go over, and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, & as the street to them that went over, comp with Th. 1.2.12. to 17. Re. 18.24. 8. The punishing some as the Catholicks, &c. more then with death, to the unhumain quartering and hanging up their quarters; also the Childrē luffering for their Parents sin, contrary to the expres word of the Lord, Ezek. 18.4.20. that soul that sinneth, it shall dye, the sonne shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the iniquity of the sonne, the righteousnesse of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickednesse of the wicked shall be upon him, also executing men for theft, it being contrary to the Law of God. 9. VVhether there ought not to be a Fast kept for all the innocent bloed that hath been shed in this Land, not only of the Jews, but also in Herry the 8. dayes, Queen Maries, and in Queen Elizabeths, as Barrovvs Greenwoods Penries, &c. who dyed for opposing the Common Prayer, &c. 10. VVhether there be any Gospell rule by precept, or example for compul∣sion of Conscience in matters of Religion, taking of Oaths, making of forst Cove∣nants &c. that so we being truly informed, may prevent the reproof Ier. 23.10 once g ven to the Iewes, the Land is full of Adulterers, because of swearing the Land mourneth, the pleasant places of the wildernesse are dryed up. and their course is evill, & their force is not right, Ho. 4.2. by swearing lying killing steal∣ing and committing adultery; they break out, and blood toucheth blood. Chapt. 10.4. They have spoken words, swearing falsly in making a Covenant. Thus Iudgement groweth as vvormvvood in the furrovves of the field 11. By what rule from the Gospell of Christ may Christians being Members of one Church; as they professe under Christ their head kill one another. or that they would distinguish what makes the one more then the other, by Gospell rule, or whether they ought not to excommunicate the unruly and disorderly walkers, before they kill them, and not let them stand Members of their Church, though worthy of death, and so kill them, which the Church of Corinth might not, though for a lse sinne, in which ther doings they come short of the Church of Roome. FINIS.
