C2509 E398_20 99862195 114346
THE KINGS MAJESTIES Most Gratious LETTER TO HIS Sonne, his Highnesse JAMES Duke of York: Written with his Majesties OWNE HAND. Read in both Houses of Parliament. ALSO A Letter from his Highnesse Prince Charles, sent from France, to the Estates and Common Councell of (and concerning) Jersey, and the managing of Designes for the Kings Majesty, and those who have adhered to Him. And a Declaration from the Agitators in the name of the whole Army under His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax (to their fellow Souldiers) of their Representations and Desires. July 15. 1647. THese are true Copies, and that from the King was written with his Majesties owne hand, and read in both Houses of Parliament. Signed, CHARLES REX. LONDON Printed by Moses Bell neere Christ-Church, and Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield mere Hosier Lane end. 1647.
THE KINGS MAJESTIES most Gratious LETTER TO HIS Sonne, his Highnesse James, Duke of York, written with His Majesties owne Hand; Read in both Houses of PARLIAMENT. CHARLES R. IAMES, I am in hope, that you may be permited, with your Brother, and Sister, to come to some place, be∣twixt this and London, where I may see you: To this end therefore; I command you, to aske leave of the two Houses,
to make a journey (if it may be) for a night or two. But rather then not to see you; I will be content that ye come to some convenient place to dine, and go back at night. And foreseeing the feare of your being brought within the power of the Army, as I am, may be objected, to hinder this my desire: I have full assurance from Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax, and the Chiefe Officers, that there will be no interruption, or impediment, made by them, for your return, how, and when ye please. So God blesse you. Casam 4 July 1647. Your loving Father Charles Rex.
Postscript, Send mee word as soone as you can of the time, and place, where I shall have the contentment of seeing you, your bro∣ther; and sister. A LETTER FROM His Highnesse Prince Charles, sent FROM FRANCE. Charles P. TRusty and well-beloved, greeting; wee are so abundantly satisfied of your good affections, and fidelity to us (of which we have had a full experience) and wee have so
great an Interest to the tranquility and safety of your Iland: That wee are now no lesse vigilant to prevent any dangers, or distur∣bances that may threaten it, then at the time when wee were in person with you. Therefore being advertised (by the intel∣legences that wee have received from Lon∣don) that those seditious fugitives of the said Island (who have confiscated their lives and Estates, to the King our Father) now residing with the Rebels, do pretend to have a firme, and assured correspen∣dency, and a party in the Island, ready to joyne with them (by which they hope to procure, that forces may bee sent to invade the said Island.) Wee have commanded our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir George Carteret Knight (Vice Chamberlaine of our House, and Leivetenant Governour of the said Island) to use the greatest deli∣gence, and industry that possibly hee may, for the discovery of such ill affected persons yet remaining there, with whom it is most probable that those fugitives have cor∣respondency: And that all such persons
who may bee justly suspected to bee affected towards them, and that (in case of any attempt) would probably joyne with them, bee imprisoned forthwith, or expelled out of the Island during this Summer; the which being faithfully effected (of which wee doubt not your accomplishment) it will the better give those of London to under∣stand, how little assistance they are to ex∣pect from the Inhabitants of the same. And (by that meanes) further mischeife will be prevented. And (to the end that this de∣signe may the more regulerly bee proceeded in, and exactly put in execution: Wee have thought it convement: (and by these pre∣sents we desire and require you) that you joyne, and give all assistance (that possi∣bly you may) to the said Sir George Carteret Knight, to put in execution these our com∣mands, so necessary: there being no ex∣pedient more apparent to prevent all trou∣bles, and inconveniences, that may hap∣pen unto you, then such publique declara∣tion of unanimitie and perfect resolutions amongst your selves, under our protecti∣on.
And be ye assured that if any attempt be made against you, we shall be as carefull to assist, preserve, and defend you, as if wee were our selves with you. And as your fidelity to the King my Father, to the Crowne of England; and your particu∣lar affections towards our person, hath been (more than ordinary) eminent: We think therefore that wee have not done our part untill that (besides our gracious, and gene∣rall acceptance) wee have set a notable marke of the esteeme that wee have of that Island and the Inhabitants thereof, that may be publique to the view of the world, and everlasting to posterity. And so we bid you farewell. Given at the Castle de Louver in Paris Ma. 22. 1647. To our well-beloved Subjects, the Estates And Common-councell of the Island of Jarsey.
A Declaration from the Agita∣tors in the name of the whole Army under his Excellency Sir Thomas Fair∣fax (to their fellow Souldiers) of their Representations and Desires. Gentlemen and fellow Souldiers; YOu beeing Members of the same Body with us, it cannot besupposed that we should be alto∣gether insensible of your sad suffe∣rings and pressing grievances, or distrustfull of your Fidelity and Constant Resolutions, to stick una∣nimousty to us in pursuance of our Just and Lawfull Designes, tending to our and your timely reliefe, and
the Peace and welfare of the King∣dome. We are not ignorant of the temptations whereunto you are lia∣ble, having so many discourag∣ments by reason of your want of Pay and distance from us, as also the mis-representation of us and our proceedings, whereby you may be in danger, either to leave your Sta∣tion, and seeke redresse elsewhere, or to desert us and our Just Cause through mis-information; we have therefore thought fit to present our selves to you thus, viz.
WE seeing our selves and the whole Kingdome laid open to oppressi∣on and injury through the malice and wicked contrivances of unjust Men, have been necessitated to put on Man-like Re∣solutions, and accordingly to act for our Lives, and the Lives of our Fellow-Soul∣diers, who have faithfully served the State, which were wickedly sold into the Jawes of Tyranny and unheard of Cruelty, to satisfie the unlimited Lusts of perverse men: And finding no other remedy left us but with our Swords in our hands, to pro∣secute the Enemies of our Peace, and in∣deavour to bring them to condigne pu∣nishment. We have folemnly ingaged our selves not to disband untill we have ob∣tained some security of our Lives and just Liberties, and setled this distracted Nati∣on in Peace and Quiet. But least our intentions should be pre∣sented to you in a false Glasse, we have thought good to let you see the inside of our undertakings, and the sincere inten∣tions
of our hearts in our present procee∣dings. It is not our owne interests, or setting up of our own advantage, or the feeding of our owne Lusts, that is in our eye or aime; But it is the glory of God, the just preservation and safety of the Kings Person, the just Priviledges of Parliament, the redeeming of the Lives and Liberties of the Free-People of Eng∣land, from Tyranny, Oppression, and In∣justice; the maintenance of just Lawes, and the necessary support and defence of this Kingdome, together with the free and impartiall distribution of Justice to all, which we have made our aime: And when these our ends shall be obtained, and meanes for the continuance thereof established, we shall acquiesse, and be rea∣dy either to lay downe Armes, or other∣wise to be imployed for the service of the Common-wealth; And that you may be, not onely willing, (as we beleeve you are) but also able to prosecute effectually the same things with us, we shall offer this advice to you.
I. That you will not suffer your selves to be broken in peeces by any discouragements, but unite your selves in Love, and streng∣then one another in Resolution to keepe your standing, and performe the Trust reposed in you, in that place of strength and consequence wherein you are. II. That you would not (upon any preten∣ded Order whatsoever) betray your Trust, or deliver up your Garrison into the Hands of any, untill you shall receive Commands from our Generall, whose Warrant onely is able to beare you out in it. III. That you would endeavour to hold corre∣spondence with us, by appointing some faith∣full men, who may (at all times) acquaint us with your condition, and receive such in∣timation from us as may concerne you. And be you assured, That we shall at all times faithfully stand by you in all
just and lawfull proceedings, and make all your sufferings our owne, and endea∣vour to the atmost of our abilities to ma∣nifest our selves the earnest seekers of your, our owne, and the Kingdoms wel∣fare, subscribing our selves Your and the Kingdome faithfull Friends and Servants, cho∣sen to be Agitators in behalfe of the Army. Iames Berry, Captaine. Iohn Clerke, Captaine. Edmond Rolph, Capt. Hen. Prittie, Capt. Waldine Lage, Capt. Agitators of the Generalls Regiment. Ed. Sexby. Iohn Taylor. Agitators Lievr. Gen. Regiment. William Allin. Samuel Titterington. Agitators of Col. Rich his Regiment. Iohn Braman. Anthony Wickson. Thomas Shippard.
Agitators of Col. Whalies Regiment. Philip Eyton. Iohn Young. Agitators of Col. Thomlinsons Regiment. Barth. Willocke. Richard Clarke. Agitators of Col. Hortons Regiment. Iohn Willoughby. Tobias Boxe. Agitators of Col. Hammonds Regiment. Nat. Foxgill. Will. Bridgeman. Agitators of Col. Wallers Regiment. Rob. Mason. Hen. Anderton. FINIS.
