C2832 669.f.3[29] 99868592 160587
Charles R. To Our trustie and welbeloved, the Lord Major, Alder∣men, and Sheriffs of Our City of LONDON. TRustie and Welbeloved, We greet you well. Whereas We have recei∣ved severall Informations of great sums of Money endeavoured to be borrowed of Our City of London by some direction proceeding from both Our Houses of Parliament, and likewise that great labour is used to perswade Our Subjects to raise Horse, and to furnish Money, upon pretence of providing a Guard for Our Parliament; These are to let you know, that (notwithstanding any scandalous Votes which have presumed to Declare Our Intention of leavying War against Our Parliament, and to lay other aspersions on Us, so fully disavowed by Us in the presence of Almighty God, by Our severall Answers and Declarations) all Our desires and purposes are for the publike Peace, and that We have not the least thought of raising or using Force, ex∣cept We are compelled to it, for the defence of Our Person, and in Protection of the Law: And therefore We expect, that you suffer not your selves to be mis-led by such vain and improbable suggestions, and do declare, That if you shall lend any sums of Money towards the relief of Ireland (to which We have contributed all the assistance could be desired of Us, which way soever the Money given and raised to that purpose is disposed) or towards the payment of Our Scots Subjects, We shall take it as an ac∣ceptable Service at your hands; but if upon generall Pretences contrived by a few Factious Persons against the peace of the Kingdom, you shall give or lend any Money, or provide or raise any Horses or Arms towards the raising such a Guard, We shall look upon it as the raising Force against Us, and to be done in malice and contempt of Us and Our Authority. And We do therefore straitly charge and command you to publish this Our Letter to the severall Masters and Wardens of the severall Companies, that they may be assured, that such Money as they shall lend out of their good affection to the Kingdom, may be onely imployed for Ireland or Scotland and not toward such Guards, which (in trueth) are intended by the Contrivers of that Designe (though We beleeve many honest men seduced by them do not yet see their end) to be imployed against Us: And if you and they shall herein fail punctually and severally to observe Our commands, We shall not onely proceed against the severall Companies for decei∣ving the Trust reposed in them; but against the particular persons, as Contemners and Opposers of Our Authoritie, and of the Law of the Land, in the most exemplary way the known Law of the Land shall prescribe to Us; And shall be compelled to question the Charter of your City, which We are willing yet to beleeve (notwithstanding the Barbarous and Insolent demeanour of the meaner and baser sort) in a good degree to continue Loyall to Us. And of your obedience to these Our Commands We do expect and require a full Account, and of the names of such Persons who shall oppose the same. Hereof faile you not as you will answer the contrary at your perill. Given at Our Court at York the 14 day of June, in the 18 yeer of Our Reign. 1642. Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Ex∣cellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of JOHN BILL. 1642.
