C3784 E94_6 99859015 111076
Cheshires Success. I. CHAP. The Battell at Namptwich. THe well affected in the County of CHESTER having a long time expected Sir Wiliam Brereton Barronet for their re∣lief (who were miserably infected by the Commission of array) on Saturday Ian. 28. he advanced from Congleton in the same County to Namptwitch; but hearing Sir Thomas Aston, with his Forces intended to take that Towne before him, he sent a Partie before to secure the Towne for himselfe, who were but few in num∣ber, but came seasonably; Sir William advanced after with his Carriages, which he durst not leave without himselfe to guard them. Sir Thomas understanding that a Partie of ours had possest themselves of the Towne, he came a∣gainst it about three of the Clock, was five times valiantly repelled; in which as∣saults we lost but one man, slaine by a poysoned Bullet, though the Towne lay o∣pen on all sides without any trench or banke: when he saw his hopes for that Twone frustrate, he retreated and fell upon Sir William, who was not above 150. strong; but Sir Thomas had neere 400 Besides that, he had all other advantages; for hee had first survey'd and chosen his ground in a Lane neere the Towne, had made his Van strong, slank'd them on either side, and there stood in Battalia, till Sir William came, who had no notice of his enemies, but by a Boy who told him of their approach, which caused them to order themselves for an Assault, in chance that Newes were true: but they were gotten into the jawes of death before they were aware; for it being darke, neere sixe of the Clock, they dscern'd them more by the Enemies whis∣pering, than by their one eye: but God to whom the light is all one as the day, was a Pillar of fire unto them, and gave them so much light, as serv'd to the obtai∣ning of a glorious Victory. Sir Thomas let flye, but without successe; Sir William discharged his Drakes which wrought more terror than execution: for the ground was very rough; but the enemy cry'd, Let us flie, for they have great Ordnance, Captaine Goldegay dismounted his Dragoneers, and turn'd his Horses upon them, which brought them into confusion, and charg'd upon them very sore; all the rest fell to it with their Pistols, Dragoones, and Carbines, but that service was but short,
for there was neither time nor place to wheele about, or renew the Charge; then they fell to it by dint of sword, and weight of their battle-axes, with which they belaboured the Enemy, that the Prisoners confesse they never felt the like blowes in any other Service; in a short time so many were unhorst, and beaten downe with violence, that all the worke that remain'd was the taking of Prisoners, Horses and Armes. Sir William who first had carried it with brave resolution, was the first that tooke Prisoners; seconded by many more who apprehended more than they could secure. Sir Thomas seeing how things went fled (as we heare) on foot three miles, and then got an horse on which he fled to Whitchurch. Sir Vincent Corbet crawled away on all foure, lest he should be discern'd, & then ran on foot bare-headed to Ower, 6 miles, many were disperst abroad in the Fields, and divers found that next day: one man with a stick in his hand disarm'd three men, and tooke them Prisoners, and two o∣thers that he met with also, but two of them slipt away, which he durst not pursue, lest he should loose the other three; what number of men we slew is uncertaine, but some were seene dead in the Lane, some afterwards were found dead in the fields, and some graves were discovered; we tooke 110. of their Horse, and neere 120 Prisoners; amongst those, Captaine Bridgeman and Captaine Cholmeley, with other Commanders and Officers, three of ours (as I take it) were slaine, and two or three were Prisoners, whom they brought into Chester with triumph, having made them sixe in number, by men they had taken up by the high wayes. Sir Thomas after some dayes returned to Chester with about 50. or 60. horse, but for his honour, they sent many of their horses privately out to meet him, and so returned as a man well re-in∣forc'd: It's very probable they lost more horses than we got, by which stroake they were foulely shaken, and their friends discomfited. We for our part had a sollemne day of thanksgiving, and fell to the managing of the weighty affaires of the County. CHAP. 2. The Battell at TORPERLEY, Febru. 21. AFter this, on Tuesday Feb. 21. we had a pitcht Battell at Torperley, the mid way betwixt Chester and Namptwich, which was thus occasioned: We sent forth our Warrants to require all betwixt 60. and 16. yeares old to meet us at Tor∣perley, to finde out the strength of the County, and who were for us in case we had need of them; the enemy took notice of it, and gave it out, they would meet us there; we were not sure of it, because we are not sure of any thing they say or sweare: yet we went out about 1500. strong, as I take it, to guard the Countrey: They came also from Chester, and were on the ground before us: when we survey'd their posture, we thought they lay in Ambuscado a little from the Towne, where 4. wayes meet: we judgeing that place impassible, advanced no further, but wheel'd to the right hand to plant on a good ground, neare a place called the Swannes Nest: but whilest we were on our March, they got the ground before us, where they stood in Battalia. They had all advantages that could be, the Wind cleare and strong, a firme even Soyle, well mounted, a hole towards us where they planted divers Musketiers; layd an Ambuscado in an hedge, and planted their Ordinance amongst their Horse. We Marshald ours on a Field over against them towards Tilston Hall, a Valley with a
strait passage being betwixt us; we had no Ordnance nor could we reach them with our Muskets. They had as faire a marke, as they could desire for our Infantrie were at the bottome of the hill, under the command of their Muskets, and our Cavelrie, were on the high ground, the but for their Canon. We saluted one another with fire and lead; they playd on us for about the space of an houre, with Canon and Mus∣ket, yet we lost not a man only 3. were shot scarce wounded and an Horse hoofe hit with a Musket ball out of a Canon which was a miraculous providence of God in the judgement of all men: Besides our Forces there we had about 200 in Boston Ca∣stle, which we sent for to joyn with us, reserving 30. to keep the Castle, which they finding out by their Scouts, sent two Troops to intercept them, having by treachery gotten their word, they saluted them as Friends, gave them the word, shook hands and the more deluded them by Captaine Greene, who was very like a Lievtenant of ours, and whom they had drest in an Habite most like him: but being within them, they bid them throw downe their Armes, and let the Round-head Rogues try for quarter: whereupon Ours retreated a little, and then gave fire, which so a∣maz'd them that both troopes fled: Sir Thomas pistol'd one that for that day bare the Colours, and our Partie report they saw divers of theirs fall upon their fiering. The issue of that dayes worke was this, we retreated to the Heath to find out a bet∣ter ground, considering wee might suffer much, but could make no execution on them where we were rallied; new ground was not to be found there, it being a co∣negrew, part of the Army making it a retreate, the rest followed, not out of feare for our Enemy durst not meet us on even termes, but to get home before wee were nighted: the Enemy by their Scouts, discovered about 700. of our Club-men comming neere them from the Forrest, and in a good posture suspected that we wheeled to the left, while the other were ready to charge on the other hand, which struck them with such feare that they fled to Chester. The Commission of Array staid at the Crosse in Torperley, not daring to come to the Battell, whereby they had the Pre∣cedency in the Fight: thereby Torperley, scap'd plundering and the Parsonage the ru∣ine threatned; for they stay'd not to drinke a draught of Beere, but bad them solem nize another day of thanksgiving, scoffing at the Ordnance, and triumphed in Che∣ster, they had got Sir Williams hat and feather, a great Trophee, though upon exa∣mination, it was found to be one their owne Souldiers. CHAP. III. An account how the time was spent since Sir Williams First advanceing into the County till the Battle at Middlewich. FOr as much as many are charging us of sloath and neglect of the Country, sith little hath beene done of late in a long time; we shall truly relate what things in sixe or seven weeks space have been done, and let others judge. After Sir William had possest himselfe of Namptwitch, his care was to order, en∣large and maintaine his forces, how to bring in the Gentrie to him, who had con∣joyn'd in the late accommodation with the Commissioners of Array, and how to secure the Towne, which was extreamely malignant and lay very open: businesse came in on a throng, but the Country came not in to help forward that worke, but by speciall warrant. It hath been found a worke of no small difficultie to perfect that
worke begun, what ever others thinke that make their reckning without their hoste. All were forward for the taking of Chester, which in all probabillitie had been sea∣sable, had we suddainly called in the Countrie, and gone about it, before they had time to reinforce themselves, and before their trenches were made, but we knew we could doe little without assistance, so by degrees wee drew in the Gentrie, and many fit to beare Armes, and of so small a beginning are enlarged to about 2000. well ap∣pointed, many of these being Horse and Dragoneer's: then we set the Proposition for mony on foot in a very strict way which hath brought us in many hundreds, much provision of Cheese, Bacon, Hay, Corne, &c, and not a few Horse, wee have also all sorts of Officers amongst us, fitting for a Campe, and have brought in Malig∣nants goods from all parts about us: we have taken in Beston Castle, where we keep a Garisone which awes all the Country about, at which our Enemies grinde their teeth, and the walls being in many places leveld to the ground, we have made up all those breaches with mud walls, so as we doubt not but to keepe out 20000. men with that small garison; we have intrencht all this Towne of Namptwich with good workes and Walls so as through Gods helpe we feare not, though many thou∣sands of our enemies encampe against us. We have fortified Northwich with trenches, Sconces &c. for the securitie of all those parts, which have beene much infected by the Commissin of Array, and the Ea: of Darbies forces at Warrington, and wee have often sallied out for the clearing of those parts which were most in danger. One place above others hath been extrcamely assaulted: Mr. Brookes of Norton: a neere Neigh∣bour to the Ea: Rivers, against which they brought their Canon, with many Horse and Foote, and fell to batter it on a Sabboth day: Mr. Brooke had 80. men in the house, we were carefull he should lack no powder, with all other things, Master, Brooke furnisht them fully: a man upon his Tower with a Flag in his hand crvde them ayme while they discharged their Canon, saying, wide my Lord on the right hand, now wide two yardes on the left, two yardes over my Lord &c. He made them swell for an∣ger, when they could endamage the house, for they onely wounded one man, lost 46. of their owne, and their Canonier, then in divelish revenge they burnt a barne, and Corne worth (as is valued) a thousand pound, set fire to another, but more exe∣cution was made on the man that attempted it, than the Barne; for he was blinded in fireing the barne, and so found wandering in the fields, and confest hee had 5. pound given him for his Service. After this they plundred Mr. Brookes Tenants, and returned home with shame and hatred of all the Country: to this worthy mans re∣scue. we could not goe, because the march was long and full of hazard, and wee thought their ayme was to tire us out upon that service, upon which they might put us almost every day, by reason of Halton Castle in their possession, and but halfe a mile from Norton. More we might instance in to take of our reproach, but another Armie greater than ours, lying under the same censure, will vindicate us, unlesse ungratefully we condemne them. CHAP. IIII. The Battle at Middle-wich, betwixt Collonell Brereton, and Sir Tho: Aston, March 13. SIr Thomas Aston and his partie in Chester, recovering strength after their late over∣throw, exercised the same in mischiefe, and all wicked out-rages, for besides their plundering and wasting of all the Countrie neere Chester, they laid such
intollerable taxes both on the Citie and Countrie thereabout, that their owne party was inbittered against them, yea before we secured Northwich, whiles some of our forces were in that Country; they plundered Weverham and the Countrie about, they carried Old men out of their houses, bound them together, tyed them to a cart, drave them through mire and water, above the knees, so brought them to that Dun∣geon, where they lie without fire or light, and now through extremities are so dis∣eased that they are readie to yield up the Ghost. On the Sabboth, March 12. having a little before advanced to Middlewich, they plundered all that day, as a most proper season for it, commanded the Carts in all the Countrie about, to carrie away the goods, kept a Faire that day neere Torperley, to sell those goods: In Over when they had plundered they left Ratbane in the house wrapt in papers for the Children, which by Gods providence was taken from them before they could eate it, after their Parents durst returne to them; and being a con∣siderable body, they sent for more strength, and by their warrants to the Churches about, commanded all the Countrie to come in with such insolent, and imperious expressions, that they were hatefull to some Malignans, and concluded to give no quarter to any Round-heads, and were confident quickly to carry all downe before them. Sir William at that time was at Northwithch with a considerable party, many Gen∣tlemen of his partie were at Namptwitch, with about 7. or 800. armed men, their generous spirits were inrag'd to see such outrages committed, it wrought alike in all Sir Williams Forces to provoke us for to fall upon the Enemy though wee could not easily communicate our purposes one to another: at Namptwitch we agreed to assault them the next morning, signified the same to Sir Will: he was as forward as we out Gent. desired a Minister to come to their chambers upon the Alarum to be given at 12. a clock, that commending them to God in prayer they might speed the better, some Ministers and others fell to the worke that day, by prayer and fasting, though not as Moses Aaron and Hur, in prospect of the Armies, yet wrestling as lacob did, and putting their mouthes in the dust, if so be there might bee hope, of which they had a gracious returne by three a clocke. The businesse of that day was carryed thur Sir Will: being foure miles from the Enemy assaulted that side of the Towne by 8. a clock, March the 13th. and continued the fight for about three or foure houres be∣fore we came to his help: In which time this accident fell out, that his powder was all spilt excepting about 7. pound, they tooke Councell upon it, and it was conclu∣ded they must retreit, because their partie from Namptwitch was not come in to their assistance, but Sir William was resolute not to retreit, but to send to Northwith for more powder, and to keep them in play as well as they could till the Powder came, which accordingly they did, betwixt 11. and 12. a clock, we came to their assistance, which they knew not of till they heard us in hot service, on the other side the Town, when we began, their powder came. The Enemy had chief advantages, their Ordinace planted; we had none, they layd about 150. Musquetiers in an hole convenient for them, they layd their Ambuskadoes in the hedges, Musquetiers in the Church and steeple, and had every way so strengthned themselves, that they seemed impregnable: but God lead on our men with incredible courage. Captaine George Booth fac'd the Towne with his Troope whiles they plaid on with their Ordi∣nance, which once grazd before them, and then mounted cleare over them, in ano∣ther
that it dasht the water and mire in his and two other Captaines faces, but there dies: this was no discouragement to our men, they marcht upon their all Ambus∣cades, dave them all out of them into the Towne, entered the Towne upon the mouth of the Canon, and storme of the muskets, our Major (a right Scottish blade) brought them up in two files with which he lined the Walls, and kept that street open, went up to their Ordinance, which he tooke, then the Enemy fled into the Church, Sir Thomas aston would have gon after them, but they durst not let him in, lest we should enter with him, then he mounted his Horse, and fled with all speed by , and divers others with him, for that way onely was open, all the rest we had surrounded, we slew divers upon the top of the Steeple, and some they say within the church: our Major with Captaine Hide fired the Church-doore, and thrust at them with swds as they lookt out of the Windowes, then presently they cride for quarter  was granted them: wee tooke Sir Edward Mosley Baronet, one Colonell one Sergeant Major, eleven Captaines, 3. of them Cheshire men, Captaine Iohn Hurle Cap: Massie of Cottington, and Cap: Starkie, wee tooke 3. Colours from their Troops. Sir Thomas Astons being one, and about 500. more, many of them Com∣manders, and its probable neere as many are fled to their Houses, never to returne to that partie againe, we have taken their Ordinance and much povvder, the Soul∣diers tooke much spoyle from the prisoners, abundance of Money, for they had con∣verted their plundered ware into Coyne, a multitude of Musquets, Buffe Coates, Scarfes, Swords, Satin Doublets &c. We lost 6. men, and about 10. are wounded: wee slew of theirs about 30. that we know off, besides many wounded: our Gunpowder by ac∣cident was blovvne up so soone as we entered the Tovvne, but God supplied us more then treble out of our Enemies store: Sir Thomas is fled that Countrie, the Array are in great perplexitie. The tidings of this comming to Nampwitch, we turn'd our prayers into prayses, sent the Belman to warne the Tovvne to the Church, to returne God thankes for such an unparalel'd mercy, vvhich they did with great alacritie, and joyfull acclamations, in a full Congregation. Upon Wednesday after, the Colonell with all the Gentlemen, Souldiers and the whole Tovvne presented God with solemne thanksgiving, vvho hath hitherto crovvned this Countie vvith such glorious victo∣ries. Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name bee all the Glory. For by thy power we have beaten downe such as have risen up against us.
A Letter from Sir William Brereton. THis day is deservedly set apart to be a day of Thanksgiving for that compleat and great Victory which the Lord hath given us on Monday last, even then when the enemy came out Armed with power (of flesh) and resolution to destroy and over-run all the rest of the Countrey. In which designe they were so hopefull and consident, as that they tooke the hold∣nesse to encamp themselves in Middlewich, a Town between Namptwich and Northwich, where I was, and where we had begun to fortifie and place a Garrison: we conceived this attempt of most dangerous consequence, and therfore thought fit to allow them no rest, nor to give them time to Fortifie. To this end, there was a strong party of Horse went out from Northwich upon Saturday night last, upon their first comming there, who gave them an Alarm. The next day be∣ing the Sabbath, could not be observed, it being the worke of the whole day to prepare for our de∣fence, and how to annoy our Enemy, towards whom I went out upon Sunday in the afternoon, with betwixt two and three Troops of Horse, and betwixt two and three Companies of Dragooners, who went neere to Middlewich, and gave them an Alarm there; but without any intention to assault them in their Quarters, they being very strong in Foot, and well armed, and we had no Foot at all then there, our greatest care being to preserve the Country from Plundring, and let the enemy know we durst looke them in the face, and come even to the very doore. This evening, March 12. being Sunday, we resolved and concluded to meet the Namptwich Forces the next morning, who were appointed to come unto us by six of the clock in the morning: But we were in fight neere foure houres before they came in to our assestance; during which time they playd full upon us with their Canon, but without any success at all, there being only one or two men hurt, but not mortally. During which time our Musquetiers (we had not above 200. our greatest force of Foot being at Namptwich) behaved themselves very gallantly, and made good three passages, and kept the enemy in play, till the Namptwich Forces came in to our assistance, who came on so resolutely, and with such undauntednesse of spirit, even to the amazement and admiration of the enemy, whom they beat from their works, and from their Cannon. And as they entred one end of the Town, our Souldiers entred the other end with no lesse courage and resolution. Colonell Ellis Serjeant Major Gilner, Sir Edward Moseley, and ten Captaines more, besides all other Officers (a List of whose Names you shall find here inclosed) who betook themselves to the Church and Steeple, from whence they did much annoy us for some short time; but within an houre after, the Lord was pleased to make us possessors of the Church and Steeple, and of the Commanders and Souldiers that were therein; and of their Ordinance, Magazine, and great store of Arms, so as I beleeve since the be∣ginning of this unnatrall Warre, God hath not given many more compleater Victories, nor hath there been many more Prisoners taken, there being not many fewer than 500 Prisoners, and very many of them commanders and considerable persons. I desire the whole praise and glory may be attributed to Almighty God, who infused courage into them that stood for his cause, and strucke the enemie with trour and amazement. For farther particulars I must referre you to a fuller relation. We heare nothing from London how things goe there, but our confidence is in the Lord of heaven, to the protection of whose Providence, I desire to commend you, and so conclude, and Rest, Namptwich 15. March, 1642. Your— William Brereton.
Another Letter from a man of Note. SIr, I neede not relate to you the great victory which the Lord hath given us at Midlewich, a Reverend Divine in our Army, having sent up an exact Relation of all our Proceedings since our comming into these parts; to which Relation I re∣fer you; yet a few great Circumstances I may not omit: Sir Tho: Aston, Colonell Leigh of Adlington, and all their Troops of Horse fled away, or else we had taken them, which makes many of the Commanders that we have taken prisoners affirm, that if they were at liberty, they would never fight for Sir Tho: Aston without a pro∣mise under his hand that he would not run away: nothing vexed them more then that he would not let them know so much, that they might have shifted for them∣selves, as well as he: we lost five men, and ten were hurt, but not one man killed with their Canons, although they shot at us all the while: Collonell Brereton car∣rieth himselfe very gallantly, & I doubt not, by the assistance of the Lord of Hosts, he will cleare these parts very shortly. The Prisoners that we lost in the battell of Nampwich our enemies brought with them from Chester to Middlewich, and so we have them again. The same morning we set upon them, Sir Tho: Aston, and the rest drank to Billie Brereton, as they called him, and said they would give him a Breake∣fast anon, but such was the good hand of God upon us, that we fared better then they would have had us: Their Word was Prince Rupert; Ours, The Lord of Hosts: And so you see that The Lord of Hoasts overcame Prince Rupert, Farewell. A Catalogue of the Names of those that were taken Pri∣soners at the Battell. ONe Barronet, Sir Edward Mosely. One Collonell E. 1 Liestenant Col. Massey of Coddington. 2 Sergeant Majors Hurlstone. Gilmore. Nine Captaines. Captaine Corbet. Starkey. Morris. Davenport. Iones. Horton. aton. Floyde. Mason. Sixe Lievtenants. Lievtenant Sherlet. Marvey. Hoseyar. Iennlngs. Dod. Corbet. Foure Ensignes Ensigne Ward. Proudlove. Morris. Davenport. 2 Corporalls. 1 Quartermaster. 2 Canoneers. 4 Cornets Colours. The Foot Companies had no Colours. 400 and odde Common Souldiers. 2 Brasse Pieces, all the Enemy had there. 4 Barrells of Powder, and as much more which the Souldiers tooke in b.
A Copie of a VVarrant sent abroad in Che∣shire, from the chiefe Agents for the King in that County, And which should have been put in strict execution, had not the good successe of Valiant Sir William Breerton hindered it. But it will very well serve for a President to the contrary Party. VVHereas by the Kings Maiestie, His Warrant under His Signe Manuall, bearing Date at Oxford. 28. day of Febr. last; where∣by it appeareth that His Maiesty is informed that divers Gentle∣men and Freeholders of that County are at this time in actuall Rebellion in this County. And that others have absented themselves from their houses, and habita∣tions, and doe assist the present unnaturall Rebellion; We are required and com∣manded to seise and sell all the goods, and to sequester, and lease out the estates of all such persons as have or shall appeare in Rebellion, or having withdrawn themselves shall be any wayes aiding or assisting to the Rebells in any place whatsoever. And Wee are thereby required to imploy the issues and profits arising out of such persons goods, and estates for advancing His Maiesties service, and the maintenance of the necessary charge, of this County and City. These are therefore in pursuance of His Maiesties pleasure and command, and for the advancement of this service, to publish and declare, and strictly to charge and command all person and persons, having in their hands any of the goods and chattels, or in their possession any lands of any person in Rebellion or aiding and as∣sisting to any of the Rebels, to give speedy notice of such goods or lands in their pos∣session, to Sir Nicholas Byron the Governour of the City of Chester, and high Sheriffe of the County, within sixe dayes after publication thereof. And further to publish and declare unto all such persons as have since the first of January last, withdrawne themselves from their houses and habitations in the County of Chester, whereby they have deprived His Maiesties loyall subiects, their aide and assistance for suppressing the present Rebellion; that they and every of them shall within sixe dayes after publication thereof, returne to their respective dwellings, and acquaint Sir Nicholas Byron of such their returne, or shew unto him the cause of absenting themselves, upon perill of being proceeded against, as per∣sons aiding and assisting the Rebells, according to His Maiesties command afore∣mentioned. And hereof they are to take notice at their perils. Given under Our hands, and the hand of the said Governour of Chester, the 8. of March. 1642. Rivers. Rob: Kilmurrey. Rob: Cholmley. Tho: Savage. Nic: Byron.
From the Army neere Stafford. SInce the Messenger was not dispatched away with that expediti∣on expected when the Letters within were written, I thought good to adde what hath since occurred in these parts. Ʋpon Sunday, March, 19. We had a Battaile with the Enemy upon Salt Heath, neere Staf∣ford, wherein we had also very good successe, our strength then pre∣sent come in upon that ground, being but small in respect of theirs; especially their Horse, whereof there were (as is conceived) 1000. or 1200. there being the Kings owne Troope, or the Princes, and the Duke of Yorkes. On their part was slain the Earle of Northam∣pton, whose body we tooke away with us from the ground, the Kings owne Standard was taken, and the Cornet slaine, and 3. or 4. more Colours. We have one of the Earle of Chesterfields Sons prisoner, namely Fardinando. Of theirs great store were slain, many Cart loads we heare were carryed away, sure we are that about 60. were found dead in one ditch: We heare say we have slain many men of note, Hastings is wounded, and we had him, but he overgot us in the Fight; our ene∣mies were valiant fellows, and causing our Horse to retreate upon our Foot, we were afraid they would have disordered them, and that we should have had the worst of it, but praised be God, our fresh∣water souldiers kept their rankes, and fought manfully, caused the enemy to retreate, and we kept the field 3. houres after; we have not any one considerable man of our side killed or hurt. In some re∣spects this was like Keinton Battle.
1. They were both upon the Lords day. 2. In regard of the suddennesse of it. 3. They lost their Generall then, so now. 4. The Kings Standard was taken then, so now: (Sir William Breereton hath it.) Herein they differ, the enemy had more advantages of us at this fight, then at Keinton, they being 2. if not 3. to our one, &c. And in the smalnesse of our losse, which was not above 6. or 8. men at the most. We are now returned to Ʋttoxeter, about 10. miles off Stafford to refresh our selves. The Lord be praised, I rest, Yours. Ʋttoxeter, March 20. 1642. Some say Master Spencer Lucie is slaine. VVe lost two Case of Drakes. The Originall of which the Stationer can shew any man from a good hand. Master Noble, and Sir Edward Littleton have Letters to reade in the House this Saturday morning, which agree with this Relation. FINIS.
