C3817 E391_4 99862047 114196
THE Svvorne Confederacy Between The Convocation at OXFORD, And the Tower of LONDON. LONDON, Printed in the Yeare, 1647. JUNE the 5th
The sworne Confederacy between the Convocation at Oxford, and the Tower of LONDON. My Lords and Gentlemen; YOu are desired to heare what's the best Newes in the middle Region. I had lately the honour to meet with one of the Secretaries of Art and Nature, who assured mee that there was pretty sport at Oxford. There are some Right Worthy Doctors who are sick of the Kings-Evill, but dare not goe to Holden∣by to bee cured; for though they say the Kings hand works more Miracles since this Truce, then it did all the time of the warres; yet he cures none but such as are willing to be cured. It is observed by some, that there is most spirituall wickednesse in All-Soules at Oxford. Upon the 26. of May, divers subtlle Doctors had a meeting very late at night at Dr. Sheldens Lodging, to try whether they could out-plot those, whom they could not out-pray upon the 26. of May, being our Monethly Fast. On Thursday the 27. they met at Dr. Fell's house the pretended Vice-Chancellor, or Deputy of Marquesse Hertford; and on Friday the 28. of May, being the last Friday of the moneth, the Malig∣nants common Fasting-day, (a day strictly observed as I hear at Christ-Church in Oxford, by the Dean, Sub-Deane, and Canons) they ealled a Vestrie,
that they might choose out some bold Delegates to oppose the Visitors (who are to meet Iune the 4th.) and hinder a Reformation. But it seemes they could not worke Miracles upon that Fasting-day; and therefore they adjourned to the 31. of May, an happy season, for then they unanimously agreed to call a Convocation, which they did upon the first of Iune; and being assembled, Dr. Fell made a Speech without Feare or Wit, in which hee called those that took the Covenant, perfidious persons & Traitors. Upon a sad debate it was agreed, that certaine Reasons, (called just Scruples) should bee tendred to justifie such as refuse to take the Natio∣nall Covenant, and the Negative Oath. These Reasons were not communicated then, for they were not so much as read in the Convocation House; but they were received with an implicite faith; and if any man would question the fidelity or wisedome of Dr. Shelden, and the rest, he was to have satisfaction in his private College; and yet (as I am informed) in their private Colleges the heads doe onely use it for the strengthning and ar∣ming of their owne party against the Covenant, & corrupting of some Youths, that are not able to di∣stinguish between Pretences and Arguments; For at Trinity College, Mr. Vnet Fellow of the House could not obtaine a sight of the reasons. Haniball (P.) was not so great an enemy to Rome, as to di∣vulge the secrets of the Conclave to Mr. Vnet, a knowne friend to the Parliament. The grand Designe is to unite the whole Univer∣sity in a body that they may joyne together as one
man, to oppose a Reformation, and then they hope all to escape by a generall mutiny, The Ring-lea∣ders as well as their Followers: but if the Parlia∣ment allow them the benefit of their Clergy, the Law of Decimation may behead some Colleges, and make a perfect cure. The Mysterie of Iniquitie. workes highest in Dr. Shelden, who is the eldest Son of Prince Lucifer, and who holds correspondence with honest Judge Ienkins (in the Tower) who lent him money, when he run away into Wales in the yeare 1642, for feare of Pursevants, as Mr. Iones observed; the Scouts to convey Letters or Intimations are Dr. Morley, who lyes Lieger at London (as some whisper here in the City) Dr. Stutville, who pre∣tends to be in France; . the Printer is suspected also, and so is our good friend and neighbour Lam∣bert Osbolston, (the Malignant Earewig to the No∣bles) who playes falt and loose, elects Schollars at Westminster, as if he were a friend to the Parl. in∣tercedes for Malignants, and carries Messages in stead of Letters for feare of being searched, where∣by it is evident that he is an enemy to the Parl. and therefore it is fit that he should bee sent once more beyond Canterbury. You may take notice that the first scruple (in the New Scruple-House erected at Oxford, Iune 1) is this, Whether the House of Commons should be owned and acknowledged as a Parliamentary House? the reason whispered is, because there are so many new Members chosen in by vertue of the new Great-Seale without his Majesties coment.
This designe is smoothly carried, yet sufficiently discovered, and almost confessed by that deliberate and advised omission in their Preface to their other Just Scruples; the words run thus. Whereas by an Ordinance of the Lords assem∣bled Observe that have a no men∣tion of the Commons. in Parliament for the Visitation and Refor∣mation of the University of Oxford lately pub∣lished, Power is given to certaine Persons therein named, to inquire concerning those of the said U∣niversity, that neglect to take the Solemne League and Covenant, and the Negative Oath, being ten∣dred unto them, and likewise concerning those that oppose the execution of the Ordinances of Parli∣ament concerning the Discipline and Directory, or shall not promote or cause the same to be put in execution according to their severall places and callings. Wee the Masters, Schollars, and other Officers of the said University (not to judge the Consciences of others, but) to cleare our selves before God and the World, from all suspition of obstinacy, whilest we discharge our owne, present to consideration the true reasons of our present judgement concerning the said Covenant, Oath and Ordinances, expecting so much Justice, and hoping for so much Charity, as either not to bee pressed to conforme to what is required in any of the premisses, farther then our present Judgement will warrant us, or not condemned for the refu∣sing so to doe, without cleare and reall satisfaction given to our Iust Scruples. This is just Judge Ienkins, the House of Com∣mons must not bee acknowledged for one of the
Houses of Parliament, so that the learned Dr. Shelden and Judge Ienkins are entred into a Confe∣deracy against the House of Commons, the Dire∣ctory, and the Discipline established by Both Houses of Parliament; and therefore it is a Con∣federacy against the Lords also. They insist not much upon the Introductory Preface to the Cove∣nant; they pretend that they are not able to say, that the rage, power, and presumption of the Ene∣mies of God (in the sense therein intended) is at this time increased, whereas their present confede∣racy against the House of Commons makes it most cleare and evident: never did the Enemies of God rage more furiously in Oxford, then now they doe. Nay, they are so high and gallant, that they pro∣fesse that they will not bee satisfied, although the Covenant should not be imposed upon them at all, for if it be but onely recommended to them and then left to their choice, yet being subjects they cannot of their owne Free-will enter into any Co∣venant wherein his Majesty is concern'd without his consent, it being in his power by the equity of the Law, Nugmb. 30. to anull such a League as soon as he pleaseth. Besides, it is contrary to the Proclamation the 9 of October 19 Caroll, and they are obliged by their naturall Allegiance to obey all commands of his Majestie, which are not in their apprehensions re∣pugnant to the will of God, or the positive Lawes of the Kingdome: From whence it will follow, that one Proclamation of the Kings is ground sus∣ficient for them to oppose all Orders and Ordi∣nances
of Parliament; whereas I was such a foole to conceive, that upon the surrender of Oxford they did agree to submit to all Orders and Ordi∣nances of Parliament, or leave the Kingdome with∣in 6 moneths: they may be fully assured that the Parliament will not permit them to stay here, on∣ly to Rebell. Concerning the first Article of the Covenant. THey are not satisfied how they can in judge∣ment sweare to indeavour to preserve the Re∣ligion of another Kingdome. 1. Whereof they have little knowledge. 2. A Religion in respect of Worship, Discipline, and Government, much worse, and in Doctrine not at all better (say they) then our owne, which we are in the next passage of the Article required to reforme. 3. Wherin they do already finde something to their thinking ten∣ding towards Superstition and Schisme (viz. in accounting Bishops Antichristian, and indifferent Ceremonies unlawfull) that it seems to us more reasonable that we should call upon them to re∣form the same, then that they should call upon us to preserve it, considering that they make their Dis∣cipline and Government (as they that are most Prelaticall esteem Prelacy) a marke of the true Church, and the setting up thereof the erecting of the Throne of Christ. Finally they all doe tacite∣ly accuse Both Houses of Parliament of indeavo∣ring to violate the Oath of Supremacy: the whole pover of spirituall jurisdiction for the Visitation and Reformation of the Ecclesiasticall state, and persons, belonging to the Kings Highnesse the one∣ly Supreme Governour of this Realm.
Concerning the second Article. THey are much offended, that it should be so much as intimated, that Prelacy is contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of godlinesse: And therefore they have invented this Mock Arti∣cle, intended as a Libell against the Citie of Lon∣don and the Government thereof, their words are these: Wee desire it may be considered, in case a Covenant of the like Forme should be tendred to the Citizens of London, wherein they should be required to sweare, they would sincerely, really, and constantly, without re∣spect of persons, endeavour the extirpation of Treason, the Citie-Government by a Lord Major, Aldermn, Sheriffs, Common. Councell, and other Officers depend∣ing thereon, Murther, Adultery, Theft, Cozenage, and whatsoever shall be contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of godlinesse, lest they should partake in o∣ther mens sinnes: whether such a tendry could be looked upon by any Citizen that had the least spirit of free∣dome in him, as an Act of Iustice, Meekenesse, and Reason? They thinke that they have reason to believe, That Prelacy (they must understand it of such a Prelacy as wee would have rooted out of England) was established in the Churches by the Apostles
according to the mind, and after the example of their Master Jesus Christ; and that by vertue of their ordinary Power (and Authoritie derived from him) as deputed by him Governours of his Church. Or at least, That Episcopall Aristocracy hath a fairer pretension, and may lay a juster title and claime to a Divine Institution, then any of the o∣ther Formes of Church-Government can doe, all which yet doe pretend thereunto, viz. that of the Papall Monarchy, that of the Presbyterian De∣mocracy (Aristrocracy they should have said) and that of the Independents by particular Congrega∣tions, or gathered Churches. Moreover, They are assured by the undoubted testimony of ancient Records and latter Histories, that Prelacy hath been continued with such an Uni∣versall, Uninterrupted, Unquestioned Succession of all the Churches of God, and in all Kingdomes that have beene called Christian throughout the whole world for 1500 yeares together, that there never was any considerable opposition made there against. What they may prove by latter Histories I know not, but sure I am, it is a folly to cite late Histories, to prove what was done 1500 yeares a∣goe, and I am most sure, that all the Prelates and their adherents in England, can never prove, that such a Prelacy as we desire to extirpate, hath been for 1500 yeares established in all the Churches of Christ. But their truest reason and saddest scruple, is this that followes:
Wee doe (say they) Some of us hold our liveli-hood, either in whole or in part, by those Titles of Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, &c. mentioned in the Articles, being members of some Collegiate and Cathedrall Churches. If they had put this formost I should have been sooner satisfied, but I must break off being called to other service; you may have more hereafter if op∣portunitie permit: In the meane time, take no∣tice how much the House of Commons is slighted, as if not worthy to be named, in their Preface: 2. How grossely they abuse the Church of Scot∣land, and Citie of London: 3. How they combine against all Presbyterians and Independents, that is, against all the friends of the Parliament: 4. How they declare all that have taken the Covenant, Lords and Commons, to be perjured persons, men that have shaken off their Allegiance, and renownced the Kings Supremacy: 5. (They say) what I can∣not omit; That if wee receive not prelacy upon the grounds they offer, the judgement and practice of the vniversall Church, we shall be at a losse in sundry points both of faith and manners at this day firmely belee∣ved, and securely practised by us, when by the Socinians, Anabaptists and other Sectaries, we are called upon for our proofes: as namely, sundry Orthodoxall Explica∣tions concerning the Trinitie and Co-equalitie of the persons in the Godhead, against the Arins and other Heretiques, the number, use, and efficacy of Sacra∣ments, the Baptizing of Infants, Nationall Churches,
the observation of the Lords Day, and even the Canon of Scripture it selfe. But stay, may not the Scripture be sufficiently known by its own majestie, light and glory, by the testimony of the Spirit, speaking in the Word to our hearts and conferences? And are not the Scriptures perfect, and therefore sufficient for re∣proofe and correction without Ecclesiasticall Traditions? And are not all those Reverend Di∣vines, and other Learned men who have taken the Covenant, able to refute Socinians, Papists, Ar∣minians, Anabaptists, without the helpe of the Prelaticall partie? If they be not, wee will send to Doctor Shelden and Judge Ienkin for their assi∣stance. So much for the Oxonian Ienkinisme. FINIS.
