C5922B 43663251 171997
CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE BILL for the Relief of Poor PRISONERS, Humbly submitted to the Wisdom of the High COURT of PARLIAMENT Now Sitting. ONE would think in a Christian State nothing can be urged against so seasonable, humane, and pious a Design, as the Relieving of poor insolvent Prisoners, having no Sanctuary left but the King and Parliaments to rescue them from the Oppres∣sion of Unreasonable Men, such as abuse Law into Tyranny, and Justice into Cru∣elty. Men without Humanity, who to gratify their Tyrannical Temper, crow'd the Jayls of England with insolvent Prisoners, and there let them starve and perish, that their Lives may go for their Debts. Men that deserve to be exploded from humane Society, as the Reproach and Blemish of a free Nation, and a Scandal to Christianity. The Considera∣tion whereof has from time to time induced the Government, to relieve such Prisoners as could swear themselves not worth 5 (or 10) Pounds. The main Objection made against those Gracious Acts, is, That they occasion Perjury in Men of no Principles, such as will readily purchase their Liberty at the price of their own Souls. But, with Submission, That Mischief may be prevented, if not altogether, at least in a great measure, by making Perjury in this Case Felony. The Fear of an infamous Death, which alone deters so many Men from felonious Acts, would probably make them prefer a confined Life before an airy Death, and a sociable (tho a nauseous) Prison to a silent melan∣choly Grave. But, unless such an Act of Grace do reach insolvent Absconders, who to shun the Cruelty of their severe Creditors confine themselves out of their Reach, 'tis humbly conceived, 'twill be but half an Act of Grace. For the Condition of Absconders is little better than that of actual Prisoners; they being both confined, neither of 'em free to act abroad, to provide for themselves or Families, and all equally a Burden to themselves, their Friends, and the State it self. Only with this Difference, That actual Prisoners are so by force, and Absconders voluntary; the first forced into Prison by Law, and the last before-hand with it. It seems moreover requisite, That a Course were taken for a future Restraint of Arrests. Otherwise 'tis to be feared, an Act of Grace will prove but a palliating Cure, and such as will not reach to the Root of the Disease. In other Nations, no Debtor is Arrested (but in case of Bankrupcy) before he has had three Summons to appear before a Judge, in order to own the Debt, and take care to pay it, for which he is allowed Time. Upon failure of which, he may be either Arrested, or his Goods Seized. But, if he be thrown into a Jayl, the Creditor must allow him a Maintenance sutable to his Rank; and, when that fails, his Prisoner is of Course set at Liberty. Which Method, practised even in France a Slavish Kingdom, and in Holland as trading a People as any, looks like Christian Justice. I conclude with this Observation, That many amongst actual Prisoners and Absconders have ruined themselves in the Service os the Publick with their utmost Industry, and others by Misfortunes. Which may prove a further Inducement to bring so charitable a Work to Perfection, as an Act of Grace. Whereby all insolvent Debtors may be enabled to provide For their Families, to serve the State, and not be (as they are) a chargeable Excrescence of it, and to put themselves in a Condition to do Justice to every one. But, if this Bill proves only a Temporary, and not a Perpetual Act, all Jaylors, Bayliffs, and Sollicitors for 'em will have their aim, who are another great Grievance of this Nation. Men who at this very time use their utmost Indeavours, and turn every Stone to have it but a Temporary Act, without any Restriction for the future, that they may have a fresh Oppor∣tunity of grinding the Poor, and crushing the Oppressed.
