C6191 669.f.5[130] 99870375 160842
The Copy of an Act for the abolishing and taking away of all Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Chancellours, Commissaries, Deanes, Deacons and Chapiters, Arch deacons, and Prebendaries, Canons, and all other Vnder-Officers out of the Church of England. WHereas the government of the Church of England by Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Chancellours and Commissa∣ries, Deanes, Arch-Deacons, and other their Ecclesia∣sticall Officers hath been found by long experience, to be a great impediment to the perfect reformation and growth of Religion, and verie prejudiciall to the civill government of this Kingdome. Be it therefore enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majestie, the Lords and Commons assembled in this present Parliament, and by the authoritie of the same; That from hence∣forth there shall be no Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Chancellours, or Com∣missaries of any Bishops, Deanes, Deacons, or Chapiters, Arch-Dea∣cons, Prebendaries, Chaunters, Canons, or pettie Canons, or any other their Officers within this Church or Kingdome; And everie person that shall hereafter use or exercise any power or jurisdiction, Office or Au∣thoritie Ecclesiasticall or civill, by colour of any such name, title, or dig∣nitie, office, or jurisdiction, to incur the penaltie and forfeiture contai∣ned in the Act of provision of Premunire, made in the 16. of R. 2. And that all Acts hereafter done by any such Arch-Bishops, Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deanes or Chapiters, Arch-Deacons, Prebendaries, Canons, pettie Canons, or any other Officers, by colour of any of their dignities or offices aforesaid, shall be meerly voyd and of none effect in Law, any Statute or Ordinance heretofore made to the contrarie notwithstanding. And that all Mannours, Lands, Rectories, Impropriations, Houses, Rents, Services, and other Hereditaments whatsoever of the said Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Deanes, Deacons and Chapiters, Arch-Deacons, Prebendaries, Canons, and pettie Canons, which they or any of them have in the right of the said Churches and Dignities, shall be disposed and ordered of in such manner and forme as the Kings Most Excellent Majestie, the Lords temporall and Commons of the Parliament shall appoint. And be it further enacted by the Authoritie of Parliament aforesaid; That all Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction fit to be exercised in the Church and Kingdome of England, shall be committed to such a number of persons and in such manner, as by this present Parliament shall be appointed▪ Printed at London, Jan. 26. 1643.
