D327 E764_1 99862468 167146
THE HISTORY OF Sr Francis Drake. Exprest by Instrumentall and Vocall Mu∣sick, and by Art of Perspective in Scenes, &c. The First Part. Represented daily at the Cockpit in Drury-Lane at Three Afternoon Punctually. LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his shop at the Anchor in the Lower walk in the New Exchange. 1659.
THE DISCRIPTION OF THE FRONTISPIECE. AN Arch is discover'd, rais'd upon stone of Rustick work; upon the top of which is written, in an Antick Shield, PERU; and two Antick Shields are fix'd a little lower on the sides, the one bearing the Figure of the Sun, which was the Scutcheon of the Incas, who were Emperors of Peru: The other did bear the Spread-Eagle, in signification of the Au∣strian Family. This Frontispiece was the same which belong'd to the late Representation; and it was convenient to continue it, our Ar∣gument being in the same Country.
The First Entry. THE preparation of the opening of the Scene is by a Prelude and Co∣rante. Afterwards the Curtain rises by de∣grees to an Ascending Ayre, and a Har∣bour is discern'd, (which was first disco∣ver'd by Sr. Francis Drake, and called by him Port-pheasant) where two Ships are Moor'd, and Sea-Carpenters are erecting a Pinnace, whilst others are selling Trees to build a Fort. The narrowness to the entrance of the Harbour may be observ'd, with Rocks on either side; and out at Sea a Ship towing a Prize. And likewise on the top of a high Tree, a Marriner ma∣king his Ken. This Prospect is made through a Wood, differing from those of European Climats, by representing of Coco-Trees, Pines, and Palmitos. And on
the boughs of other Trees are seen Mun∣kies, Apes, and Parrots. The Introduction of the Entry is by a Martiall Saraband. The Saraband being ended, Enter Drake Junior, and Boatswain. Drak. jun. CLimb, Boatswain, climb! and from the height Of that steep Rock inform thy sight! From yonder Point our Master call. I'le here attend our Admirall. Exit Boats. The Mist ascends, and south'rd it growes clear! Me thinks at distance somewhat does appear, Which wakens us with hope. Boats. A Sail! a Sail! Drak. jun. 'Tis English built, or else my sight does fail. Boats. within. Oho! Oho! another Ship I spy, And, by their Course, both to this Harbour ply. Drak. jun. She lowers her Main-sail, the wind does rise! Boats. within. She now bears in, and she does tow a Prize
Enter Drake Senior. Drak. sen. TO Sea, to Sea! Man out the Boat! Drak. jun. It has not Tyde enough to float. Drak. sen. Stir, Mates! stir, stir! and bring more hands: Shove, shove! and roul her o're the Sands! Lanch forth, and make your Ken! Both by her Rigging and her Mould She brings our Country-men; And has a rich and heavy Hould. Exeunt. Enter a Marriner. 1 Mar. HO, Mate! ho, ho! what canst thou see From the top-Gallant of that Tree? Mar. within. The Ship does Anchor cast; And now her Boat does haste To reach the Shore. 1 Mar. What seest thou more? Mar. within. Enough to make me hasten down: For, if my eyes prove true, The bowels of Peru Shall be ript up and be our own. The Lion Rouse is landed here. 1 Mar. I'le run to meet him at the Peer.
A Tun of yellow Gold, Conceal'd within our Hold, For half my share I scorn to take, When he is joyn'd with Dragon-Drake. Exit. Two Marriners having met with another newly landed, dance to a Rustick Ayre; The Dance being ended, Enter Drake Senior, Captain Rouse, Drake Junior, and Page. Drak. sen. WElcome to Land my brother of the Sea! From childhood rockt by winds and waves like me. VVho never canst a danger dread, Since still in dang'rous Tempests bred. Yet still art safe and calm within thy breast, As Lovers who in shady Coverts rest. Thy fame about the world does make her flight, And flies as swiftly as the wings of light. Rous. My fame does lay her Trumpet down, VVhen yours does publish your renown. Drak. sen. VVhat is your Prize? Rous. 'Tis fraught with Spies: A Carvel rigg'd at Sivell for this Coast,
To fetch from hence Intelligence; But, meeting me, she has her Voyage lost. Drak. sen. Brave friend, wilt thou now guided be By that bright Star which ushers me? Rous. VVhat man is that, Lov'd Admirall, VVho does not hasten at your call? He must be either deaf, or ever lame, VVho followes not your loud and leading fame. Drak. sen. My course must now not be Upon the open Sea: Our Country's foes we must invade Through Woods, and seek them in the Shade; And follow them where Phoebus never shines, Through depths as dark and winding as their Mines. Chrous of all. That which enlightens, and does lead The world, and all our Vict'ries breed, We in those Caverns shall behold, In seeing Man's bright Mistris, Gold. Drak. sen. Boat all our Guns! haste, haste aboar'd! Unlade! then let our Ships be Moor'd! To raise our Fort, some hew down Trees! Whilst other rig our Pinnaces. Their watchfull Guards let ev'ry Sentry keep, That, after labour, all may safely sleep. Some o're remoter grounds VValk, and relieve their Rounds:
VVhilst some secure each Post On out-lets of the Coast. That, after wandring long to trace VVild Rivers, we may find this place For our imbarkment free, To wander more at Sea. Drak. jun. The jealous Spaniards long have un∣derstood The danger of this Harbour's neigh∣bourhood. 'Tis therefore fit That thou shouldst leave behind, To govern it, A great experienc'd Mind. Drak. sen. I know it is of high import. My second thoughts conclude, thou Rouse shalt stay, To finish and secure the Fort; VVhilst we to Venta-Cruz enforce our way. Chorus of all. VVe must the Main forbear, And now a Coasting go, Then up with Rivers steer, To watch how far they flow. But if landing we passe VVhere Recoes through Foords are long wading. Then we in pitty, alass, Their Mules must ease of their lading. Exeunt omnes.
The Second Entry. Symphony variously humour'd prepares the change of the Scene. The Scene is chang'd. IN which is discern'd a Rocky Country of the Symerons, who were a Moorish People, brought formerly to Peru by the Spaniards, as their Slaves, to dig in Mines; and having lately revolted from them, did live under the government of a King of their own Election. A Sea is dis∣cover'd, and Ships at distance, with Boats rowing to the shore, and Symerons upon the Rocks.
The Prospect having continu'd a while, this Song is sung by a Steers-man in theforeostm Boat, and the Chorus by Marri∣ners rowing in it. Steers∣man. A Loof! and aloof! and steady I steer! 'Tis a Boat to our wish, And she slides like a Fish, VVhen chearily stem'd, and when you row clear. She now has her trimme! Away let her swim. Mackrels are swift in the shine of the Moon; And Herrings in Gales when they wind us, But, timeing our Oars, so smoothly we run, That we leave them in shoals behind us. Chorus. Then cry, One and all! Amain! for Whitehall! The Diegos wee'll board to rummidge their Hould; And drawing our Steel, they must draw out their Gold. Steers∣man. Our Master and's Mate, with Bacon & pease, In Cabins keep aboard; Each as warm as a Lord: No Queen, lying in, fies more at her ease. VVhilst we lie in wait For Reals of Eight, And for some Gold Quoits, which fortune must send:
But, alas, how their ears will tingle, VVhen finding, though still like Hectors we spend, Yet still all our pockets shall jingle. Chorus. Then cry, One and all! Amain, &c. Steers∣man. But Oh how the Purser shortly will wonder, VVhen he sums in his Book All the wealth we have took, And finds that wee'l give him none of the Plunder; He means to abate The Tyth for the State; Then for our Owners some part he'l dis∣count: But his fingers are pitcht together; VVhere so much will stick, that little will mount, VVhen he reckons the shares of either. Chorus. Then cry, One and all! Amain, &c. Steers∣man. At sight of our Gold, the Boatswain will bristle, But not finding his part, He will break his proud heart, And hang himself strait ith' Chain of his VVhistle. Abaft and afore! Make way to the shore! Softly as fishes which slip through the stream, That we may catch their Sentries napping.
Poor little Diegos, they now little dream Of us the brave VVarriors of Wapping. Chorus. Then cry, One and all! Amain, &c. This Song being sung, Enter the King of the Si∣merons, Drake Senior, Pedro, and Page. King. GReat VVand'rer of the Sea, Thy walks still pathless be. The Races thou dost run, Are known but to the Sun. And as the walk above, VVhere he does yearly move, VVe onely guess, though him we know, By great effects below. So, though thy courses traceless are, As if conducted by a wandring Star, Yet by thy deeds all Climes acknowledge thee; And thou art known and felt as much as he. Drak. sen. So narrow is my merit wrought, That when such breadth you thus allow my fame, I stand corrected, and am taught To hide my story, and to shew my shame. Kin. As tireless as thy Body is thy Mind: No adverse current can thy progress stop. Thy forward courage leaves all doubts behind And when thy Anchor's lost, thou keep'st thy Hope.
VVelcom! and in my Land be free, And pow'r full as thou art at Sea. Drak. sen. Monarch of much! and stil deserving more Then I have coasted on the VVestern shore! Slave to my Queen! to whom thy vertue showes How low thou canst to vertue be; And, since declar'd a Foe to all her Foes, Thou mak'st them lower bow to thee. Kin. Instruct me how my Symerons and I May help thee to afflict the Enemy. Drak. sen. Afford me Guides to lead my bold Victorious Sea-men to their Gold: For nothing can afflict them more, Then to deprive them of that store VVith which from hence they furnisht are T'afflict the peacefulll world with war. King. Here from my bosom Pedro take, And him thy chief Conductor make. Who once was an unhappy slave to them; But now is free by my deserv'd esteem. He is as watchfull as the Eye Of Age still wak'd with jealousie: And like experienc'd Lovers wisely true: Who after long suspition find, They had no cause to be unkind, And then with second vows their loves renew. Drak. sen He is, since so deservingly exprest, Remov'd but from thy bosom to my breast.
Kin. All other ayds requir'd to thy designe, Chuse and receive: for all my strenghts are thine. Exeunt. Enter Four Simerons, who dance a Morisco for joy of the arrivall of Sr. Francis Drake, and depart. Then this Song is sung by a Chorus of Marriners within. Cherus of Marriners within. WInds now may whistle, and waves may dance to 'em, Whilst Merchants cry out, such sport will undo 'em. And the Master alowd bids, Lee the Helm, Lee! But we now shall fear nor the Rocks nor the Sand, Whilst calmly we follow our Plunder at Land, VVhen others in storms seek Prizes at Sea. The Third Entry. THe change of the Scene is prepar'd by a Symphony, consisting of a Mar∣tiall Ayre, which having continu'd a while, the Scene changes, and represents a Peru∣vian Town, pleasantly scituated, with Palmeto-Trees, Guavas, and Cypresses, grow∣ing about it: whilst English Land-soul∣diers
and Sea-men seem to be drawn up to∣wards the West end; whilst the Peruvians are feasting their Guests, and Two of their Boyes bearing fruit towards the Strangers. This Object having continu'd a while, Enter Drake Senior, Drake Junior, Pedro, Page. Drak. sen. MArch! March! wheel to the right hand still, To shun loos footing on that Hill. From thy Meridian run, O thou inflaming Sun! The Ayre above us else to fire will turn, And all this Sand beneath like cynders burn. Now give the word! Dr. jun. Stand! Within. 1. Stand. Within. 2. Stand. Within. 3. Stand. Dr. sen. All firm and Soddain to command! Halt for our Reer awhile, and then VVest from that VVood draw up our Men. Stand to your Arms till we send out Our trusty Symerons to Scout. Pedr. Scouts I have chosen, who can trace All the retreats, which in the chace The Hunted seek; all shades to which they run VVhen strength leaves them, and they the Hunters shun. Dr. sen. Are these Peruvians friends, or, by surprize, Must we secure them as our enemies?
Pedro. Great Chief, they rev'rence thy renown, And thou maist quarter in their Town. Yet so advance with care, In all the shapes of War; That when the Spaniards know How well they treat their Foe, The Entertainment may appear, Not the effect of Love, but Fear. Dr. Jun. Their dwelling seems so fresh and flourish∣ing, As if it still the Nurs'ry were Of all the seeds that furnish out the Spring For ev'ry Clime, and all the Year. Dr. Sen. Here Nature to her Summer Court retires: Our Northern Region is the shade, Where she grows cold, and looks decaid, And seems to sit by Artificial fires. Dr. Jun. Advance, advance, And in the Rear, To make our number more appear, Let all our trusty SYM'RONS spread Their Ranks, and be by PEDRO led. Chorus of all. All Order with such clemency preserve, That such as to our pow'r submit, May take delight to cherish it, And seem as free as those whom they shall serve.
Peruvians Enter, and Dance to a Rustick Ayr, after which, this Song is sung by a Peruvian, and the Chorus to it by his Countrymen, whilst they Dance again in a Round. Peru. VVIth Boughs and with Branches trim up our Bowres, And strew them with Flowers: To receive such a Guest As deserves for a Feast All that the Forrest, or the Field, Or deeper Lakes and Rivers yeild. Chorus. Still round, and round, and round, Let us compasse the ground. What man is he who feels Any weight at his heels? Since our hearts are so light, that all weigh'd together, Agree to a grain, & they weigh not a feather. Land, Peru. The Lord ot the Sea is welcom to And here shall command
All our Wealth, and our Arms; For his Name more Alarms The Spaniards, then Trumpets or Drums: Hark how they cry, Drake comes, Drake comes! Chorus. Still round, and round, and round, Let &c. Peru. Though to his Foes like those Winds he is rough, That meet in a huff: Yet that storm quickly ends, When embrac'd by his friends: Then he is calm and gentle made As Loves soft whispers in a shade. Chorus. Still round, and round, and round, Let &c.
The Fourth Entry. A Wilde Ayre, by way of Symphony, prepares the change of the Scene: which having continu'd a while, the Scene is chang'd; wherein is discern'd upon a Hill, a Wood, and in it a Tree vvhich vvas fa∣mous in those times for extraordinary com∣pass and height; on the top of which, Pedro (formerly a slave to the Spaniards, but now employ'd by the Moorish King to conduct Sir Francis Drake towards Panamah) had promis'd Sir Francis Drake to shew him both the North and the South Atlantick Seas. English Souldiers and Mariners are reposing themselves under it. At distance the Natives are discern'd in their hunting of Bores; and at nearer view, two Peruvians are killing a Stagg. This Object having remain'd a while,
Enter Drake Senior, Drake Junior, Page. Drake Senior A Boar so fierce and large, No Hunter e're did charge. Advance thy Spear, And turn him there. Drake Junior This last encounter he has bravely stood; But now has lost his courage with his blood. Drake Senior He foams, and still his Tusks does whet, As if he still disdain'd retreat. Drake Junior The wound you gave him makes him turn his head To seek the darker shades, where he was bred. Page Follow, follow! Drake Senior Stay my Victorious Boy! When a couragious Beast does bleed, Then learn how far you should proceed To use advantage where you may destroy: To courage even of Beasts some pity's due; And where resistance fails, cease to pursue. Enter Pedro. Pedro Our men have firmly stood and swiftly run: The game was plentious & the chace is done. Drake Junior PEDRO in sev'ral formes has all That ev'ry where we merit call. Drake Senior Wary in War as Chiefs grown old; And yet in sodain dangers bold. Civil and real too in courts; Painful in bus'ness and in sports.
Pedro Behold that Tree which much superiour grows To all that in this Wood Have many Ages stood: Beneath whose shade your Warriours may re∣pose. Drake Junior There let us stay And turn our Prey Into a Feast Till in the West The Cypress curtain of the night is drawn; Then forward march as early as the dawn. Drake Senior Is this that most renown'd of Western Trees On whose Main-top Thou gav'st me hope To view the North and South Atlantick Seas? Pedro It is; therefore with speed Thither, my Chief, proceed: And, when you climbing have attaind' the height, Report will grow authentick by your sight. Drake Senior When from those lofty branches I The south Atlantick spy My vows shall higher fly, Till they with highest Heav'n prevail That, as I see it, I may on it Sail. Dr. Jun. No English Keel hath yet that Ocean plow'd. Pedro. If Prophesie from me may be allow'd, Renowned DRAKE, Heav'n does decree That happy Enterprize to thee. For thou of all the Brittains art the first That boldly durst
This Western World invade; And as thou now art made The first to whom that Ocean will be shown, So to thy Isle thou first shalt make it known. Chorus of all. This Prophesie will rise To higher Enterprise. The English Lion's Walk shall reach as far As prosp'rous Valour dares adventure War. As Winds can drive, or Waves can bear Those Ships which boldest Pilots stear. Exeunt. This Song is sung by two Land Souldiers, and two Seamen. The Song. Sea∣men. HOw comes it you Land-men, and we of the Sea, Though oft mixt together, yet seldom agree? Landm. A Riddle, which we can finde out no more Then you can why Seas contest with the Shore.
Seam. We give a shrewd guess how our quarrels have grown; For still when at land we are joyntly design'd To the dainty delight of storming a Town, You run to the Plunder, and leave us behinde. Landm. Alas, our dear Brothers! How can we forbear? But aboord when you have us, where wonderful Gold Is shovell'd like Ballast, y'are even with us there: We fight on the Decks, whilst you rummidge the Hould. Seam. But now we shall March where the Diegos (though loth To part with it civi'ly) may soon oblige both. Landm. They so much are scar'd from their Wits with their dangers That now they want wit to be civil to strangers.
Chorus of all. Come let us joyn hands then, and ne'r part asunder, But, like the true Sons of trusty old Mothers, Make equally haste to a snap of the plunder, Then justly divide and spend it like Brothers. This Song being ended, the two Land-soul∣diers and the two Sea-men dance a Jigg, to intimate their future agreement. The Fifth Entry. THis Entry is prepar'd by an Ayr and Corante; and then the Scene is chang'd; in which is discover'd the rising of the Sun through a thick Wood, and Venta-Cruz at great distance on the South side. Which being discern'd a while,
Enter Drake Senior, Drake Junior, Page, Souldier. Drake Junior Bold ROUSE, doubting our safety by our stay; Thinking his patience longer then our way; And having well secur'd our Port, Our Trenches digg'd, and rais'd our Fort, Is here arriv'd, resolving still to be A sharer in your worser destinie. He was conducted by a SYMERON; And bows for what his rasher Love has done. Drake Senior I shall be very slow When I must backward go, With punishment to overtake The errours which my friend did make. Tell him I know his fault is past; And now I cannot but go fast When I shall forward move To meet approaching Love. Exit Soldier. The morn begins her glory in the East; And now the world prepares To entertain new cares; Though th'old suffic'd to hinder all our rest. Drake Junior Benighted Seamen now their Course reform Who, Coasting, were misguided by a storm. Now Merchants to imported stowage haste, Whilst Plowmen drive from cottages their Teems. The Poor in Cities rise to toyl and faste; And Lovers grieve to leave their pleasant Dreams.
Drake Senior Be careful not to let The Camps Reveilie beat To make our Warriours rise and move: But as Heav'ns Traveller above Unheard begins, and silently his way Does still continue till he perfects Day, So all this progress must be calmly made. The winds, which still unseen Have in their motion been, Oft pass without a whisper through the shade. Drake Junior Each, dutious as your slave, Does to your Orders grow; And all, as in the Grave, Are husht and private now. Drake Senior Ere we begin to march, send out The SYMERONS agen to scout: Let not our Wings be loosely spread: The Van I'le at some distance lead. Those who the Baggage bear Let PEDRO still relieve, and closse Secure their Haltings in our Gross. You shall command the Rere. Enter Rouse. Rouse. Arm, Arm! make haste, and bring me to my Chief! Drake Senior What great distress does hasten for relief? Rouse. I come not now thy pardon to receive, Because my rasher love without thy leave Durst venture for a share Of thy mishaps in War.
Dr. Sen. What wildeness more Then I have seen before In Deserts openly expos'd, Or Woods with ancient growth of shades inclos'd, Or Seas, when nought but light'ning has appear'd, And only Thunder and the Winds were heard, Does now thy wond'ring looks possess? Dr. Jun. What more then yet thou canst express? Rouse. DRAKE, thy belov'd renown is lost, Of which thy Nation us'd to boast: Since now, where thou a sword dost wear, And many marks of pow'r dost bear, The worst of license does best Laws invade: For Beauty is an abject captive made; Even whilst those flowry Ornaments are worn Which should the Bridal dignity adorn. If thus the crowd be suffer'd to deride The sacred Rites and Honours of a Bride, Let savage War devour all civil Peace, Love fly from Courts to Camps, and Sexes cease. Dr. Sen. Thy mystick meaning thou dost less By words then by thy looks express. Dr. Jun. That we may better know Thy thoughts, make haste to show The object of our wonder, and thy fear. Rouse. Turn your unhappy eyes, and see it there.
The Scene is suddenly chang'd into the for∣mer prospect of the rising of the Morning, and Venta Cruz; but, about the Middle, it is vary'd with the discov'ry of a Beautiful Lady ty'd to a Tree, adorn'd with the Ornaments of a Bride, with her hair dishevel'd, and com∣plaining with her hands towards Heaven: near her are likewise discern'd the Symerons who took her prisoner. Drake Senior What dismal Beauty does amaze my sight, Which from black sorrow breaks like Morn from Night? And though it sweetest Beauty be Does seem more terrible to me Then all the sudden and the various forms Which Death does wear in Battels and in storms. Rouse. A party of your SYMERONS (whose eyes Pierce through that darkness which does night disguise Whom weary toyls might sleepy make, But that revenge keeps them awake) Did e're the early dawning rise, And closse by VENTA-CRUZ surprise A Bride and Bridegroom at their Nuptial Feast, To whom the SYM'RONS now Much more then fury show; For they have all those cruelties exprest
That Spanish pride could e're provoke from them Or Moorish Malice can revenge esteem. Drake Senior Arm! Arm! the honour of my Nation turns To shame, when an afflicted Beauty mourns. Though here these cruel SYMERONS exceed Our number, yet they are too few to bleed When Honour must revengeful be For this affront to Love and me. Drake Junior Our Forces of the Land, Brave Chief, let me command. Drake Senior March on! whilst with my Seamen I advance; Let none, before the Dice are cast, despair; Nor after they are thrown, dislike the chance; For Honour throws at all, and still plays fair. Rouse In Beauties noble cause no Seaman doubt, If Poets may authentick be. For Sea-born VENUS sake let them march out: She leads them both at Land and Sea. Drake Senior Long yet ere night I shall in fight Their stormy courage prove: Each Seaman hath his Mermaid too; And by instinct must love, Though he were never taught to wooe. Enter Pedro. Pedro Stay! stay! successful Chief! my heart as low As the foundation where thou tread'st does bow: But 'tis not for my own offence;
For if I should offend My King, in thee his friend, I would not with my self dispence. Thy mercy shall our pattern be, Behold th'asflicted Bride is free. The Scene is suddenly, chang'd again, where the Lady is vanisht, and nothing appears butthat Prospect which was in the beginning of the Entry. She is as free and as unblemisht too As if she had a Pris'ner been to you. Drake Senior What are they who disguis'd in nights dark shade, Unlicens'd, from our Cap this sally made? Strait to the stroke of Justice bring me those! Pedro They thought their duties was to take their foes. Be merciful, and censure the offence To be, but their mistaken diligence. Drake Junior Suspect not PEDRO in this crime, who still Has shewn exact obedience to thy Will. Pedro And noble Chief, the cruelties which they Have often felt beneath the Spaniards sway (Who midst the tryumphs of our Nuptial feasts Have forc'd our Brides, & slaughter'd al our guests) May some excuse even from your Reason draw: Revenge does all the fetters break of Law.
Dr. Sen. The future guidance and the care Of their demeanour in this war, Is strictly, PEDRO, left to thee: The gentle Sex must still be free. No length of study'd torments shall suffice To punish all unmanly cruelties. March on! they may ere night redeem By vertuous Valour my esteem. Exeunt Drake Sen. Drake Jun. Rouse, & Page. Pedro Ho! ho! the Pris'ners straight unbinde, And let the Bride all homage finde; The Father and the Bridegroom hither bring. Ere yet our Van shall far advance, Know Diegos you must dance. Strike up, strike up! in honour of my King. Enter the Father of the Bride, and her Bridegroom; the Bridegroom dancing with Castanietos, to express the joy he receives for his liberty, whilst the Father moves to his measures, denoting the fright he had receiv'd from the Symerons, when he was surpriz'd at his Nuptial Entertainment.
The Sixt Entry. THis Entry is prepar'd with a Martiall Ayre, and presently the Scene is chang'd; wherein is discover'd the Prospect of a hilly Country, with the Town Pana∣mah at a distance, and Recoes of Mules, in along train, loaden with Wedges of Sil∣ver and Ingots of Gold, and travelling in severall Roads down a Mountain. There likewise may be discern'd their Drivers and Guards. Enter Drake Senior, Drake Junior, Page. Drak. jun. THe Reco is not yet within our Ken. Drak. sen. It will be strait. Draw up our men, And in low whispers give our Orders out. Drak. jun. Where's Pedro now? Drak. sen. Upon the brow Of that high Hill, I sent him there to scout.
Enter Rouse. Rous. CHief, we are all into a Body drawn, And now an hour is wasted since the dawn. Drak sen. The time will yet suffice. We halted here To stay for our tir'd Baggage in the Reer. Rous. If ought from new resolves thou wilt com∣mand, Speak, Chief, we now in expectation stand. Drak sen. If English courage could at all be rais'd, By being well perswaded, or much prais'd, Speech were of use: but Valour born, not bred, Cannot by Art (since being so, It does as far as Nature goe) Be higher lifted, or be farther led. All I would speak, should tell you, I despise That treasure which I now would make your Prize: Unworthy 'tis to be your chiefest aime. For this attempt is not for Gold, but Fame; Which is not got when we the Reco git, But by subduing those who rescue it. Enter a Souldier. Sol. PEdro descends the Hill, and does desire That from this open plain you would retire,
And wheel behind that Wood a little space. Drak. sen. Divide our Forces to secure the Passe. Exeunt. Enter Drake Junior, a Souldier, Rouse, and a Marriner, the Soldier and Marriner being brought to be plac'd as Sentrys. Drak jun. THis must your station be; Stand stedfast as that Tree! Rous. Bravely alive upon this ground, Or greater else in death be found. Exeunt Drak. jun. & Rous. The Bells of the Mules are heard from within. Mar. Mules! Mules! I hear their walking chim, Ting, ting! — They love sad Tunes, how dolfully they ring? Sol. This sound seems single, & from far does come. Would I were leading one rich Mule at home. Mar. Still one and all I cry. Sol. The rest are passing by. Hark! hark! this mournfull toleing does foretell Some Diegos death, it is his passing Bell. Enter Pedro, leading a Symeron to be plac'd as a Sentry. Pedr. HEre Sym'ron, you must bold and watchful be. Two Foes resist, but if opprest by three,
Then strait fall back to that next Sentry there: Or if in Grosse th'Enemy does appear, Both to the third retirement make, Till we th'Alarm, advancing, take. Mar. Friend Pedro, friend! Is't one and all? Pedr. Speak softly, Sentry, dost thou call? Mar. How many golden Recoes didst thou spy? Pedr. But two: in which I guesse By distant view, no less Then ninety loaden Mules are passing by, Sold. What number is their Guard who march be∣fore? Pedr. Five hundred Foot, their Horse may seem threescore. Exit. Sold. Friend of the Sea, their number is not small. Mar. 'T will serve our turn, they crying one and all! But brother of the Land, We now must understand That Basta is the Word. Sold. VVould thou were safe aboard. Mar. Asleep under Deck, and danc'd on a Billow, With two Silver Wedges, each for my Pillow. Enter Drake Senior, with his sword drawn. Drak. sen. THat Volly was well fir'd, Our out-Guards are retir'd. Draw all our Sentries in! The Skirmish does begin. Exit. Clashing of Arms is heard afar off.
Enter Drake Junior. Drak. jun. MOre Pikes! more Pikes! to reinforce That Squadron, and repulse the Horse. Enter Rouse. Rous. THe Foe does make his first bold count'∣nance good. Our Charge was bravely made, and well with-stood.. Enter Pedro. Rous. YOur Sym'rons, valiant Pedro, seem to reel. Pedr. Suspect your Rocks at Sea. They do bur wheel. Haste! haste! brave Sym'rons, haste to gain that Bank, And with your Arrowes gall them in the Flank. Clashing of Arms within again. Exeunt. Enter Drake Senior, Page. Drak. sen. HOw warmly was this strife Maintain'd 'twixt Death and Life, Till Blood had quench'd the flame of Valours fire? Death seeming to advance in haste, Whilst Life, though weary, yet stood fast; For Life is still unwilling to retire. My Land-men bravely fought, And high renown have got,
For twice my Sea-men they from death reliev'd. As oft my Sea-men have Preserv'd them form the grave, And did requite the rescue they receiv'd. Enter Drake Junior. Dra. jun. THey fly! they fly! yet now they seem to face All those who them pursue, And would the Fight renew. Enter Rouse and Pedro. Rous. They fly, they fly! Drak. sen. Away, make good the Chase. Exeunt omnes. Chorus of all within. Follow, follow, follow! Enter Drake Senior, Drake Junior, Rouse, Pedro, Page. Pedr. THe Mules are ceis'd, and in our pow'r remain. Drak. sen. Draw out new Guards, and range them in the Plain. Those who hereafter on our Legend look, And vallue us by that which we have took, May over-reckon it, and us misprize. Our dang'rous course through storms and ra∣ging floods, And painfull march through unfrequented Woods. Will make those wings by which our fame shall rise.
Your glory, valiant English, must be known, When men shall read how you did dare To sail so long, and march so far, To tempt a strength much greater than your own. Drak. jun. And now by making our Retreat, We shall new Wreaths and Statues get. The Grand Chorus, first sung by Drake sen. Chorus of all. Our Course let's to victorious England steer! Where, when our Sails shall on the Coast ap∣pear, Those who from Rocks and Steeples spy Our Streamers out, and Colours fly, VVill cause the Bells to ring, VVhilst chearfully they sing Our story, which shall their Example be, And make Succession cry, To Sea, to Sea. Exeunt omnes. The Grand Dance begins, consisting of two Land-souldiers, two Sea-men, two Symerons, and a Peruvian; intimating, by their severall interchange of salutations, their mutuall desires of amity. The Dance being ended, The Curtain falls. FINIS.
