D611a e477_23 99864908 162533
THE DECLARATION Of His Highnesse the Prince of WALES, TO The severall Princes and States of Christendome, concer∣ning His Royall Father the KING; And His new Oath and Protestation, touching the Lord Gen, Fairfax, Lieut. Gen. Crumwell, and the Army. ALSO, The setting forth of the Princes Fleet to Sea, and their Reso∣lution for Ireland, to land an Army in Wales, and so for England, for the rescuing of the King from the power of the Sword. TOGETHER, With a bloudy Fight at Sea, 14 Sayl of Ships boarded and taken, and about 40 piece of Ordnance. And the Decla∣ration and Proposals of the Parliaments Navy, to the ARMY. LIKEWISE, A Conference between the Lord Gen. Fairfax, Lieut. Gen. Crumwell, and the Lord Admirall VVarwick, touching the KING and KINGDOME. Printed in the Year, 1648.
NEW PROPOSITIONS FROM THE NAVY TO The Kingdom of England, and the Army; concerning the Kings Majesty, and the Impeached Members of Parliament, now under restraint and power of the sword. VVHen we beheld the glorious splendor of Justice and Righteousness, beaming forth it self in your Remonstrance to the House of Commons, we were filled with joy and satisfaction, that the divine presence had again overshadowed you, and appe∣red thereby to us with smiles of love, and pledges of favour, when with the night of ruine we were almost overwhelmed
For which, as we kisse the footstool of that glorious Maje∣sty who thus rarely brings forth our deliverance; so wee cheerfully confesse you to be his glorious Instrument, wher∣by he hath stilled the enemy and the avenger. For, 1. Wee must seriously professe, that though your former procee∣dings against that Generation were exceedingly prospered, beyond the parallell of former ages, and had engraven upon them the kindnesse of God to a distressed people; yet they had but served to make us more exquisitly miserable, if your former Conquests should have acquiesced in the acti∣ons of that House; who were bringing your conquered pri∣soner with honour and safety to sit upon his Throne of po∣wer, Majesty, and Greatnesse, without satisfaction for the bloud that hath been spilt both by Sea and Land, or suffici∣ent provision made for the security of the liberties of Eng∣land. 2 We were filled with sorrow when we saw the abomi∣nable Apostacy, and degenerated actings of the majority of the House of Commons, who after we had bought their se∣curity with our most precious bloud and treasure, should by treating with the King, so cruelly sell us into the bloud and revenge of him, and his confederats, so contrary to their first principles and Declarations; the consideration where∣of, as it filled us with amazement, so it drew from us there∣of a mutual Remonstrance, to live and dy, and stand and fall with your Excellency, for the establishing of peace and righteousnesse, in our native, bleeding, and languishing King∣dome. A Declaration of the Prince of Wales. THe Prince of Wales, with his Councel, hath had some consultation touching the affairs of England, and the prsent state and condition of the King, and are resolved to
make ready the Fleet, to put to Sea, having taken an oath & protestation, to hazard life and fortune for the rescuing of his Royall Father (the King) from the power of the Army. Most of the Brasse Guns that were in the revolted ships are taken out and sold, all but such as were fit for the field, and put iron ones in their roome, which ships are to be com∣manded by Prince Rupert, the Prince is to return to his Mo∣ther, the Duke goes to a University, this Fleet of ships are to go first for Garnsey, Garsey, and Silly, and settle those Islands, then to Ireland, to settle the Marq. of Ormond, for reducing that Kingdome to the obedience of his Majesty, and then comes an Army over into Wales, and so for England, That such prizes as shall be taken, or other kind of Marchandi∣zing Trade given, Agents are dispersed to the severall Prin∣ces and States of Christendom, for freedom, as formerly with his Majesty of England. This Message is said to be sent from the Prince to the aforesaid kingdoms. For augmentation of this Fleet, and to make it more for∣midable against the English, all undone, deeayed, and discon∣tented Gentlemen, are invited to joyn and provide ships, which is in part done, divers being gone out of the West parts already to Silly and Ireland. There goes with Prince Rupert 1000. Souldiers, besides Saylors, also very many Gentlemen or Reformadoes, whose purses are emptied in Holland: the Inhabitants of the Island of Garnsey its said, must be moulded into Regiments, and employed by Sea or Land, as being like to prove more ad∣vantageous then there livelyhood here: besides, other nota∣ble designs on foot, for the raising of new Forces against the English Army.
Right Honorable, HIs, Highnesse the Prince of Wales, having received severall informations & complaints from the Eng∣lish Marchants, of their great losses which they have lately sustaind at Sea by a pretended Fleet for the King under the conduct of Sir William Mucknell, who (with a with a Squadron of Irish ships (consisting of about 11 in number) lies hovering up and down the narrow Seas, seizing on divers Marchants ships, and others, to the great retarding and obstructing of the Trade and Commerce at Sea. In consideration whereof, his Highnesse forthwith called a Councel, aboard the Reformation, and after some consulta∣tion, came to these results, and resolved. That a Message should be forthwith sent to the Mar∣chants of London, and others, purporting, That his Highnesse would take a speedy course, for prevention of future inju∣ries, and that he had sent an expresse command to the said Vice Admirall Mucknell, to desist from acting any thing whatsoever, that may rend to the obstructing or hindering of Commerce at Sea, protesting, That he is so far from har∣boring the least thought of violence or oppression, either to the Citizens of London, or any other of his Majesties liege people of England, that he would rather sacrifice his life then be guilty of the least action of tyranny. And therefore desires that these his resentments may be communicated to the Citizens of London, and all others whom it may con∣cern; to the end, that traffique and commerce both by Sea and Land may be maintained and preserved throughout all his Majesties Realms and Dominions. But notwithstanding all their faire preretices whatsoever, none are more active and inveterate against the peace of Eng∣land,
than those who are in highest esem with the Prince, Divers forces are raising in several parts of these Provinces, another Army in Denmark, and great provision making for War; but what their Design is, we cannot as yet discover, but it is supposed for England. Brill the 15. of Decemb. 1648. The Officers and Souldiers in Dover Castle have hum∣bly declared their sense and resolution to his Excellency the Lord Gen. Fairfax, desiring that his Excellency would bee pleased to proceed in what is justly proposed, that the King∣dom may not bee beguiled with the specious pretences of our subtile adversaries, but that Delinquents may be puni∣shed, our liberties confirmed, and the Kingdom setled, to the glory of God, and for his people; for the effecting of which without respect to our private interests, we shall willingly with our lives in our hands, encounter with the great diffi∣culties, which really ingage in what may manifest our selves, Your Excellencies and the Kingdoms faithfull servants, Decemb. 18. Letters further from Windsor, that his Ma∣jesty is expected there this night, and that several Roomes in the Castle are appointed for his accommodation. Divers of the Gentry are gone to meet Him. But whether his resi∣dence will be there, or at London, is yet uncertain. It is said that his Majesty will be suddainly brought to a faire and le∣gall tryal, and that the Generall and Lieut. Gen. are resolved o act nothing against his Majesties person but what shalbe agreeable to the known Laws of the Realm, and the com∣mon Rights of the people. And upon Tuesday Decemb. 19. the Councel of the Army are resolved to insist on the busi∣nesse, and speedily to prosecute the same; and it is given out, that the sentence will passe against Major Gen. Laughorn, Col. Poyer, and Col. Powell, to be shot to death at VVindsor,
who being told by an Officer of the Army, that they must prepare themselves to dye, they replied, Gods will be done, we thank God, we have made our peace with him, and shall without fear, undergo what he shall be pleased to suffer men to doe vnto them. The right Honorable the Lord Admiral VVarwick hath de∣clared his sense and resolution, touching the transaction of affairs between the King, Parliament, City, and Army, and is resolved to joyn with his Excellency and the Army, for the impartiall executing of Justice, and setling of the peace of the Kingdom. His Lordship hath also something to offer from the Councell of Sea Officers, in reference to the King and the peace and tranquility of this Nation. And the Army hath also something to propose to them concerning the Na∣vie. The Lord Gen. Fairfax, and Lieut Gen. Crumwell, hath gi∣ven the Lord Admirall a visit, where they congratulated each others good successes, and at a Conference, professed joynt concurrence, in what might make the kingdome hap∣py: some disputation hapned, in reference to the King, and setling of the Kingdom. Decemb. 21. Letters from the Navy say, That there hath bin a bloudy Fight at Sea between the English & the Irish, and that the Irish have obtained the Conquest, and taken 14 Marchants ships, and others, 40 piece of Ordnance, and o∣ther rich booty and prize. A speedy course will be taken for subduing the said Rebels. FINIS.
