D793 E644_4 99865236 165972
A DECLARATION Set forth by the Lord LIEUTENANT GENERALL the GENTLE∣MEN of the Councell & assembly occasioned from the view of a printed paper. ENTITULED. An Act Prohibiting trade with the Barbados, Virginea, Bermudes and Antegoe. HAGH Printed by Samuel Broun English Bookeseller. 1651. Octob .29.
18. FEBRUARY 1650. A Declaration set forth by the Lord Lieutenant the Gentlemen of the Councell and assembly occa∣sioned from the view of a prin∣ted paper Entituled an Act prohi∣biting trade with the Barbados, Virgi∣nia, Bermudes and Antegoe. THe Lord Lieutenant Generall together which the Gentle∣men of this Councell and assembly having carrefully perused the sayd printed paper and finding therein matter so highly concerning the freedome, happinesse and wellfaire of this Islande thought it their duty to Communi∣cate the same unto all the Inhabitans of this place together which their observations and resolutions upon the same, and for the better and more methodical proceding therein they have first ordered the same to be publikly read as followeth. Thus farre goes the sayd Act by which the meanest understanding may be sensible into how low an abject a bondage, the force of it would (if not prevented) reduce the Inhabitans of this Island.
I. For first they do Alleadge that this Island was setled at the cost and char∣ges of the People of England, and therefore ought to be subjected to the people of England. Certainly we all know that we the now Inhabitants of this Island were and still are those People of England the which with great hazard of out persons and at our great cost and charges have setled and inhabited this place and shall we therfore be sub∣jected to the wills of those that stay at home? Shall we be bound by the regulations of the Parliament in which we have no representatives no persons there chosen by us to propose or consent to what is good for us or to oppose, or dispute what is not for our benefit or behoofe? certainly this were a Slauish im∣position beyond what Englishmen ever yet sufferd & we doubt not but those courages which have brought us so farre from our Native Soile and found us out a living in these wild woods will still keep us freemen (whithout which) our lives will be but lothsome to us. II. Secondly it is alleaged you the inhabitans of this Island have by subtilty and force usurped a power of Gouvernment. Had we the Inhabitans of this Island ben heard what we could have sayd, this allegation had never been printed. But those who are designed to be slaves must not have the priviledge otherwise we could have sayd and most truly can & do averr that the Gouvernment now if of force amongst us is the same that hath ben constantly adhered unto, and obeyed ever since the setling this place and given unto us by the same Authority which gave New England theirs, against whom the sayd Act
objecteth nothing, and this Gouvernment now obeyed here is the nearest moddell and ressemblance (now left in the world) of that admirable forme under which all our Ancestours of the English Nation florished for at least one thousand yeares past, & therfore we shall conclude the rules of logick and discovrie to be strangly inverted, if the Continuance of, and Submission to the settled rightfull Gouvernment be adjudged an usurpation of new power, and on the Contrary an Vsurpation of a new Gouvernment and be held a Continuance of the Old. III. Thirdly by the sayd Act all Forraigners are prohibited from holding any commerce with the inhabitans of this Island. Whereas all the old Planters well know how much they have ben beholding to the Dutch for their subsistance, and how difficult it would have ben (without their assistances) ever to have settled this place & even to this day we are sensible what necessary comforts they bring us and how much cheaper they sell their Commodities to us then our owne Nation; but this comfort must be taken from us by them whose will must be our law: But we do Declare that we will never be so ungratefull to the Dutch for former helps as to deny them or any other Na∣tion the freedome of our Ports and Protection of our Lawes wher∣by they may still (& if they please) embrace a free Trade and Commerce with us. IV. Fourthly to compleat our designed bondage, and make our necks willing to receive the yoake our owne Countremen are likewise prohibited from trade and correspondency with us and none to come
neare us but such as have a particular license, from some persons for that pur∣pose appointed. By which meanes it may come to passe that no goods or com∣modities shall be brought hither but such as those licensed persons shall please to be sold at the prizes that they shall impose; and no ships but theris arrive here, so that no Inhabitants of this Island, shall be able to send home the Native Commodities of this place for their owne account but be as meerely slaves to that Com∣pany that shall have the sayd license as our Negroes are to us, they making theirs the whole advantage of our labours and industries here. And therfore upon the whole matter we do declare that as on the one side we will not be wanting to use all the honest honorable, and moderate meanes we can for the conti∣nuanc of a free trade and faire correspondancy with our native countrey; so on the other side we will not so much degenerate from the ancient candour of true Englishmen as to prostitute those Liberties and Fredomes (to which we were borne) to the will and pleasure of any: Neither do we thinke our numbers so contemptible or our resolutions so weake as either to be forced or per∣suaded to so vile a submission. And we can not imagine that there is so meane & base minded a fellow amongst us, that will not perferre an honorable Death, before a Tedious & slavish life: 20. of Februari 1650.
19. FEBRUARY 1650. An Act for Defence of the Government Liberties and Freedomes of this Island. WHereas the peacable Government of his Island together which the rightfull liberties of the Inha∣bitants thereof are in great and apparent hazard to be lost, unlesse seasonnable and timely care be used to preserve the same, and whereas no expedient can be more proper and more agreable to reason and Iustice then that all those persons, who enjoy those Liberties & Priviledges should cheefully and unanimously Engage for the maintainnance and defence of the same. Be it therfore Enacted and Ordained by the Lord Lieutenant Ge∣nerall the Councell and Gentlemen of the Assembly and by Autho∣rity of the same, that all Freeholders & Freemen living and abiding within this Island, shall at some time before the 20 day of March Next ensuing the date hereof, repaire to some one of the Justices of the parish wherein they respectively shall live or abide at such time and place as shall be by them appointed, and willingly, cheerefully subscribe the ensuing Engagement, by setting their names and markes unto the same, and be it further Enacted, and Ordeined, by the Authority afore sayd, that all and every Person or Persons that shall not have repaired to some one of the sayd Iustices aforesayd, and subscribe the Engagement before the 20. of March according to the true Intent and meaning of this present Act, that all and every such Person or Persons shall be from thence forth disabled to be plaintife in any Action real or Personall, in any Court within this Island, and from being heire to any man; or any man to be heire to him or in
capable of ever making a will, or being Executours, and his Person to be secured at such time and in such manner as to the right Honorable the Lord Lieutenant Generall and Councell shall seeme fit or convenient, unlesse the sayd Person shall con∣forme him self and shew reasonnable excuse for his neglect therein, and it is further Ordained and Enacted that the said Justi∣ces of every parish within this Island be required and Autho∣rised to receave the said Subscription and after the said 20. day of March to make returne thereof with the name of all such Persons as have not subscribed the same unto the right Honnorable the Lord Lieutenant Generall, or whom his Lordship shall apoint to recive the same. And be it further Enacted and Ordained, by the Authority aforesayd that whatsoever Person or Persons, so conforming and subscribing the sayd ensuing Enga∣gement as by this Act is required and shall faile to performe ac∣cordingly, shall be counted and cald upon, as an Enemy to the publike peace of this Island and being therof convicted at a publick Sessions by a Iury of twelfe men shall suffer accord∣ing to the nature of his offence. Lastly be it Enacted & Ordained by the Authority aforesayd, that all Servants with in this Island their times Expiring before or after the 20. day of March as afore sayd, shall within one month after such Expiration of their sayd time repaire unto the respective Iustices in their severall precints which in this Island, and there subscribe to this sayd Engagement (and not sub∣scribing and failing to performe accordingly) be counted as aforesayd and being convicted as is before mentioned shall accordingly suffer.
THE ENGAGEMENT. WE whose names are here under¦written do whilst we live in this Island Mutually Covenant & Engage each with the other, & with the uttmost ha∣zard of our Persons & Estats, to maintaine and defend the rightfull Government of this place by Councell and Assembly as also the Person of the Right Honnorable the Lord Willughby. Acknowledged our Governour & Lord Lieutenant Generall by the Consent and Approbation of the whole Island with all the Freedomes Liberties and Pri∣viledges Justly belonging to the Lord Wil∣lughby or us the Inhabitants hereof as well concerning our Lawes Religion Persons &c Estates within this Island, as also our free Commerce & Trade both at home & abroad in forraine parts against all manner of Persons or Nations whatsoever that shall attempt or Endevour to Deprive us of the same, 20. February 1650.
