D740a e119_18 R3429 99896299 153898
A DECLARATION OF THE Prince Paltsgrave, TO THE High Court of PARLIAMENT, concerning the Cause of his departure out of England in these times of distractions, and the manner of his cariage and behaviour during the time of his continuance with His Majesty in the North. Likewise his earnest request to the Parliament, and the Parliaments answer thereunto: Declared in his Letter to the House of Peeres on Tuesday last. ALSO THE QUEEN OF BOHEMIA her Resolution concerning Prince ROBERTS coming into England against the Parliament. Likewise a true Relation, shewing how the Marquesse of Hartford and his Company are beset by the Earle of Bedford and his Forces. Printed for J. Greene. October 1. 1642.
THE QUEEN OF BOHEMIA Her Resolution concerning Prince Roberts coming into England against the Parliament. ALSO THE PRINCE PALTSGRAVES Declaration to the Parliament of his departure out of England in these times of distraction: with his earnest request to the Parliament, and the Parliaments answer thereunto. THe Prince Paltsgrave hearing of the jealousies and differences that began to arise betweene the King and Parliament, came into England, no doubt with an intent to use his best skill to settle those distractions: but it seemed his coming was not very well pleasing to his Majestie; for after his coming to London, for some space of time, he was not admitted into his Majesties pre∣sence,
but lay privately at Essex house, and therefore was there the lesse hopes that his coming should doe any good: which when he perceived, he tooke his leave of his Majesty, and went again o∣ver into Holland, his second brother Prince Robert going away also with him. But it seems those two brothers had contrary affections and intents to∣wards England: for the one went with an intent and purpose to stay in Holland and not to meddle further with the di∣stractions that were in England, and the other (as it appeares by the event) with a resolution to bring in what Forces he could to assist the King in a war against the Parliament. But some are of opi∣nion, that it was infused into his braine by the Queene after he went over from hence, which was much against his Mo∣thers (the good Lady ELIZABETH) mind. And although she could not per∣swade him from coming againe into England, with a purpose to increase the division between the King and Parlia∣ment,
yet she did refuse to give him her blessing, who went about so wicked a designe. Not long since the Queene of Bohe∣mia sent to the Parliament, to acquaint them that the twelve thousand pounds a yeere which she had wont to receive as a stipend from England, since these distractions betweene his Majesty and the Parliament have happened, hath not been paid; which the Parliament have taken into consideration, and notwith∣standing all those ill offices which are done here by her sonne Prince Robert, yet so soone as his Majesty wilbe pleased to passe the Bill for Tonnage and Poun∣dage, which hath been a long time with his Majesty, out of which it is to bee paid, or the present distempers a little o∣ver, she should have the same. Oh Tuesday the 27. of September, a letter was read in the Parliament House which came from the Prince Paltsgrave, sent to the House of Peeres, wherein he makes a Declaration of his carriage
in England while he was with his Ma∣jestie, shewing to their Lordships, that he had oftentimes perswaded and coun∣selled his Majestie to hearken to the ad∣vice of his great Counsell, the high and honourable Court of Parliament, and to return unto them, and that during all the time that he continued in England, hee did never use any meanes either by words or actions to increase the diffe∣rence betweene his Majestie and the Parliament, but as much as in him lay, had used all possible endeavours to the contrary: neither since his going into Holland had hee beene an occasion of sending over any ammunition, or other provision for warre, to bee imployed against the Parliament. Hee further declared unto their Lordships, that he was in great want of moneyes, desiring their Lordships to consider, that there hath beene but little supply had out of England lately, and therefore intreated their Lordships to let him have a thou∣sand pound for the supply of his present
necessities. Which Letter the Lords communicated to the House of Com∣mons, desiring that they would joyne with them in an Order, that the foresaid Prince Paltsgrave might have a thousand pound, in regard the sum he desired was not great, but only to furnish his present occasions: which after some debate in the House of Commons, they joyned with the Lords in the said Order, and it was done accordingly. The Marquesse of Hartford when he fled from Sherburne, marched toward Bruton in Somersetshire, but the next day turned his course toward Minyard, and the Earle of Bedford pursued after him with his troupes, following after him with a continuall alarum, with the assistance of the countrey, and sent a post before to Minyard to stop his passage into Wales by sea, and so pursued him to the town: but finding no passage to get over into Wales, as he intended, he pos∣sessed himselfe of a strong Inne in the said town, & there for the present stands
upon his guard: the Earle of Bedford with his Forces came to the said towne, and continues there: and a great num∣ber also of the Trained Bands of severall countreyes neere adjacent are come thi∣ther, so that the Marquesse will finde it very hard to give them the slip the third time; for he dares not look out of the doores, he is so closely beset: and were it not for feare of burning downe the towne, they would quickly force him and his company out of the house: but within two or three dayes it is supposed that hunger will bring them forth to fight, rather then they will starve: and therefore we may assure our selves, that by the next Post we shall heare that the Earle of Bedford hath taken them. FINIS.
