E1832 E330_27 R200730 99861395 159634
An ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT Containing certaine INSTRUCTIONS To be issued by the Committee for the Admiralty and Cinque-Ports, to such fit Persons as shall desire to set forth Ships as private men of Warre. Die Iovis 29 Ianuarii 1645. ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parlia∣ment, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed and pub∣lished. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1645.
Die Iovis, 29. Ianuary, 1645. An Ordinance of the Lords and Com∣mons Assembled in Parliament, concerning certaine Instructions to be issued by the Committee for the Admiralty and Cinque-ports, &c. WHereas the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Admiralty and Cinque Ports, are by an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament autho∣rized and enabled to doe and execute all such things as appertaine to the Office of Lord High Admirall of England. And whereas it is Ordained by another Ordinance of Parliament, dated 30 November 1643. That it shall and may be lawfull for any his Maje∣sties good Subjects, that shall be approved and thereunto apointed by the Lord High Admirall of England, ap∣pointed by both Houses for the time being, in warlike manner to Equipp, arme, furnish, Man, and set out to Sea, such and so many Ships as they shall thinke fitting, and
with the same to seize, surprize, and take all and all man∣ner of Ships, and Vessels, which they shall meet withall, in or outwards bound from any Port, or place within any his Majesties Dominions, being in Hostility against the Parliament, or comming from, or returning to any such Port or place; or that shall be found to have Traded with the Inhabitants of any such Port or place, since their de∣fection from the King and Parliament; and also to seaze, surprize and take all, and all manner of Pyrats, and Sea-Rovers of what Nation soever, and their Ships and Goods whatsoever; And that the Ships to be so employed shall have liberty to seeke, and take their purchase where, and how they please, according to such instructions as shal from time to time be given them by the Lord High Admirall of England, or the Commissioners of the Admiralty appoin∣ted by both Houses for the time being. And whereas this Committee hath been Petitioned, by  Owners of the Ship the   for our approving of them, to employ the shid Ship under Command of Captaine  in execution of the powers granted by the said Ordinance; We do hereby signifie and declare, That we have approved and appointed, and do hereby approve, and appoint the said Petitioners in warlike manner to Equipp, furnish, and arme the said Ship, the  and to place in her a competent number of Souldiers, Marriners, and Gunners, with necessary Armes and Provisions, and the same so Manned, Equipped, Armed, and provided to set forth to
Sea, under command of the said Captaine   And the said Captaine  to employ the said Ship, for doing and performing the Services hereafter mentioned; That is to say, For the seazing, taking, and surprizing of all Ships, and Vessels belonging to any of his Majesties Subjects, which the said Ship shall meete withall, in or outwards bound from any Port or place, within any of his Majesties Dominions being in Hostility against the Parliament, together with all the Ordnance, Ammunition, Victuals, Goods, Commanders and Souldiers therein; as also for the seazing, surprizing, and taking of all and all manner of Ships, and Vessels whatsoever, with the Ordnance, Ammunition, Victuals, and Goods therein belonging to any Rebell or Rebels in Ireland; and also the Ships and Goods of any other Per∣son whatsoever, Forraigner or other, which shall be go∣ing to or comming from any Port or place in Ireland in Hostility against the Parliament; as also for the seazing, surprizing, and taking of all and all manner of Ships, and Vessels belonging to any Forraigner or forraigne Nation, going to any Port or place in Hostility against the Parlia∣ment, with Armes, Ammunition, or other Contrabando Goods for supply of the Forces raised against the Parlia∣ment, and adjudging and condemning the same, together with the Goods themselves, and all such other Goods as belong to the Masters, or Laders of such Contrabando Goods as also for the seazing, surprizing, and taking of all Pyrats, and Sea-Rovers of what Nation soever, and their Ships and Goods whatsoever, according to the authority, meaning, and true intent of the said Ordinance of the 30. of November, 1643. Provided that before the going forth of the said Ship, the said Captain  together with the Master, and principall Officers thereof, or such
other sufficient persons in their behalfe, as shall be ac∣cepted of by the Judge of the Admiralty for the time being, doe and shall enter into Bond of two thou∣sand pounds in the Admiralty Court, with condition, That neither the said Commander of the said Ship, nor the Master or Company, or any of them, shall (under pre∣text of the said Ordinance, or of these Instructions) spoile or damage any of the Kings Subjects, nor any of the friends or Allies of this Kingdome, other then such as are intend∣ed by the said Ordinance and these Instructions; As also, that for justification of the prize or prizes that the said Commander shall take, he shall bring into the Registry of the High Court of Admiralty, all such Cocquets, Bills of Lading, and other Documents and Writings, as he or any of his Company shall take or find in any such Ship or Vessel, and shall bring in with every such Ship or Vessell, two or three of the principall Officers thereof taken in the same, to be examined by the Judge of the Admiralty, or such as he shall appoint, concerning the property of the said Ship, Vessel or goods therein, and to such other questions and In∣terogatories, as he shall thinke fit to administer in that be∣halfe: And also that neither he, they, nor any of them, shall breake Bulke, spoile, wast, or diminish any of the said Ships, or Goods, untill they shall be adjudged in the High Court of Admiralty to have been lawfully taken, accord∣ing to the true intent and meaning of the said Ordinance, and these Instructions; and a true and just Inventory and appraisement be taken and made of the same: And the Judge of the Admiralty is hereby prayed and required to take Bond accordingly, and to certifie the same under the Seal of the Admiralty Court, without which no benefit is to accrue to the said Commander, Officers, Marriners, or any
others interessed in the said Ship, by any thing done in pur∣suance thereof; And the said Captaine  shall truly pay and deliver to such Collectors or Receivers as both Houses of Parliament, the Committee of the Ad∣miralty, or the Lord High Admirall for the time being, ap∣pointed by both Houses of Parliament, have or shall ap∣point the full Tenthes of every such prize, as shall be taken by vertue of the said Ordinance, or these Instructions. ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Committee for the Admiralty, do give Instructions to such fit persons as shall desire to set forth Ships as private men of War, according to the tenor aforesaid, notwithstanding any former Order or Ordinance to the contrary. Io. Browne Cleric. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com. FINIS.
