E2589C R15619 12209414 171563
Instructions for DEPUTY Lievtenants which are members of the House of Commons, and other Liev∣tenants of severall Counties concerning the last PROPOSITIONS: Together with the names of the Commissaries, who are to inroll and value the Horses and Armes according to the Propositions. Ordered that this be forthwith printed. H. Elsying Cler. Par. D. Com. LONDON, Printed by A. Norton for Edw. Husbands and Iohn Franke, June 17, 1642.
Instructions for Deputy Lievtenants, &c. THat the Deputy Lievtenants of each County which are mem∣bers of the House, shall have authority to tender the Proposi∣tions to the other Deputy Lievtenants of the same County, and take their subscriptions, and all such Deputy Lievtenants, or any two of them, as shall subscribe according to the Pro∣positions, shall have authority to assemble, and call together all such persons as they shal think fit, and to tender those Propositions to all such persons as shall be present; or to any persons within their Counties respectively, and receive their subscriptions, and the said Deputy Lievtenants, or any two of them, shal have authority to name such, and so many persons as they shall think fit; to assemble and call together every person, or to repaire to their severall houses, or dwellings within
their respective Countyes, and to take their Subscriptions, which Subscriptions are by them to be returned to such persons as shall be appointed Receivers in the respective Countyes, who shall from time to time cer∣tifie the summes, values, or proportions of such subscriptions to the Treasurers of Lon∣don. 2. The said Deputy Lievtenants, or the greater party of them, shall have power to name receivers in their severall Counties, and all such as shall either before or after their subscriptions pay, or bring in any Mo∣ney or Plate, shall deliver the name to such person or persons as shall bee appointed by the said Deputy Lievtenants, or the greater part of them, under their hands to be recei∣vers, which the said persons so appointed shall cause to be delivered to the Treasurers in London, named in the said Propositions, and shall receive acquittances from the said Treasurers, in the name, and to the use of the severall persons, from whom they shall re∣ceive such Money or Plate, and shall deliver
such Acquittances to the severall persons to whom they doe belong, and all such as make such returnes of Money or Plate, shall receive reasonable allowance from the Treasurers for the same, according to their discretions. 3. All that find Horses shall presently send them up to London, according to the Propo∣sitions. 4. In those Countyes where no Commissi∣ons are issued to those that were nominated for Deputy Lievtenants, or none have beene nominated, there the same authority to bee given to such Iustices of the Peace, or other Gentlemen of those Countyes, which shall be named by the Knights and Burgesses of those Countyes, and approved by both Houses, as is to the Deputy-Lievtenants in the first instruction. 5. That the time of notice shall be taken to
be from the time that every man beares the Propositions first read by the Authoritie a∣foresaid. 6. It is ordered that Captaine Burrell, Master Loyd, Iohn Smith of London Gentlemen, and Francis Dowet of London Gent. bee Commis∣saries to inroll and value. The Horses and Armes to be raised according to the Propo∣sitions. FINIS. Directed that this be forthwith Printed. Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
