E3741 E118_1 99860631 156079
EXCEEDING HAPPY NEWES FROM OXFORD DECLARING, The Proceedings of the Lord Sey against the Ca∣valeers, and how he beat Sir Iohn Biron, and the rest out of their Trenches, with the losse of three or four men, and hath now placed a strong Garrison in the City, so that there is not a Cavaleer left therein, or thereabouts. Likewise an exact Relation of a Remarkable bat∣tell, fought by Sir John Hotham against the Earles of Cumberland and Newcastle, neer Beverley in Yorkshire, Septem. 14. and how he defeated the whole Army, killing many of them, and so obtained a Glo∣rious and joyfull Victory. Likewise true intelligence from Westchester, de∣claring the Kings Majesties Resolution. Sep. 17. Printed for John Wight, by Authority.
Exceeding happy Newes from the City of OXFORD. ON the fourteenth of this instant month, Letters came from Oxford, to many worthy and emi∣nent Persons Resident in this City, Declaring the Proceedings of the Right Honourable, the Lord SEY in those Parts, against the Cava∣leers, since his first comming thither, and that hee hath done great service for the Honourable Court of PARLIAMENT neer Oxford, by defeating some of the Cavaleeres Troops, and Relieving those that were sore oppressed by the said Rebels. For at the first comming of the Cavaleers to that City, they committed many Out-rages against the well-affected Party, plundering their Houses, and taking all that they had from them by violence, the Vice-Chancellour, Masters, and Schollers of the Colledges siding with them.
But when Sir Iohn Byron and the rest of the Ca∣valeers had information that the Parliament Forces were comming, and that they had set down their Resolutions to fight it out to the last man, they marched out of the Town with all expedition, and are now gore towards his Majesty. Likewise two hundred souldiers more, immedi∣ately followed them, not daring to withstand the Lord SEY, whose appearance neer OXFORD, made divers of the Malignant party to flye, and are now likewise gone towards his Majesty. But it is thought that they were met withall by some of the Parliament Forces in other Counties, and are now in safe custody. Yet Sir RICHARD CAVE stayed in the town and skirmished some certain while with the Par∣liament Force, and after the space of two hours, they sounded a Retreat, and betook themselves to flight, leaving many of their men slain and wounded, and through Gods assistance, they having obtained this joyfull and happy Victory, our men marched into the Town with sixe hundred souldiers, together with two Pieces of Ordnance, and were kindly re∣ceived by the Townsmen. Thus hath that worthy Member of the Honou∣rable House of Peers, the Lord SEY, defeated the Cavaleers at OXFORD, having now strongly For∣tified the Town, so that it now stands firme and sure for the King and Parliament, and hath now cleered the whole County of all such Rogues, who formerly was a great Burthen and Oppression to the County.
By Letters from WESTCHESTER, it is decla∣red and signified, That upon the fourteenth of this instant mouth, three hundred of the Welch-men that were billeted at the said City, began to through Fire-works therein, thinking to fire the same, by Reason that the Major would not cordiscend to their Demand; which was to have the City resig∣ned up to them. But before that they could bring their Designes to perfection, the Trayned Band of that County came in against them, and threatned to kill every man, if that they persisted in their former Courses and wayes. Whereupon the VVelchmen began to leave the Town, and retreated back, and as it is supposed, are gone towards Lancashire to the Lord Strange. The Town stands well-affed to the King and Par∣liament. Vpon Tuesday last, Letters came to the Honou∣rable House of Commons, intimating, That the King is gone from Nottingham to Derby, and that it was conceived hee is resolved to take his Journey from thence towards Westchester nd that the Ca∣valeers are Resolved to go all thither, but what their intentions be, are not yet known.
An exact Relation of a Remarkeable fought by that Worthy Champion, Sir John Ho∣tham, against the Earles of Cumberland and Newcastle, neere Beverley in Yorkeshire, Septem. 13. VPon the 12. of this month, Sir John Hotham received information, from Beverley, that the Earl of Cumber∣land, together with the Earl of New-castle, had sent five troops of Horse thither, to keepe the town in awe, and to imprison all those that stood ill-affected to the King, and that they were resolved to send some foot-forces, with some pieces of Ord∣nance likewise, very suddenly, for the bet∣ter securing of the same. Whereupon Sir John having received these tydings, he resolved the next day be∣ing the 13. of this month, to go himselfe in person with 500. Foot, and 100. Horse towards Beverley, which was done accor∣dingly, and comming within two miles
of the town, there was a Gentleman came from towards Beverley, certifying unto him, that the Earls of Cumberland and New¦castle, was within 7. miles of the said town and was resolved to advance their Forces a∣gainst him. But Sir John and his followers, hearing of these tydings, took much courage ther∣at, and marched with speed towards Be∣verley, and comming thither assaulted the same, discharging against the Cavaleers ve∣ry furiously, continuing in a hot skirmish till towards the Evening, where the For∣ces that were within the town, sounded a Parley, and treating some while with Sir John, they desired, that the Battle might be referred till the next day, but he would not condiscend thereto, and therupon they fell too't, and about 9. of the clock at night the Earl of Cumberlands Forces assaulted Sir John Hothams; insomuch, that he was very dangerously beset, his own person be∣ing in great hazzard; but by the Wisdom and Policy of him, he defeated their whole Army, and forced the Cavaleers to leave the town.
For when they were in the middest of the Battle Sir John caused Captain Tur∣vill to draw out 100. Foot to charge the Enemy on the Reer, which he performed with much care and fidelity, and charged three of the Earl of Cumberlands Forces in a very desperate manner, kil'd seven, and lost two of his own men, then Sir John came up, and charged four troopes more, and killed 14. of them, two of them being Commanders of great note, and very able Souldiers, immediatly after, Captain Tur∣vill having wheeled a little about with great resolution gave a second Charge, shot divers, and took Colonel Gibson prisoner. Thus hath Sir John Hotham with 600. men defeated the whole Army of Cavaleers, but by reason it was dark could not pursue them. FJNJS.
