E3764 E118_32 99871540 156106
Exceeding Joyfull Newes from the Lord SEY, Being an exact Relation of a great Battell fought by the said L. Sey, Colonell Hampden, and Colonell Goodwin neer worcester Septem. 2. against the Lord Coventry, that came to take possession of the said City. Likewise another Victory obtained by the Trained Band of Cheshire against the Welchmen, with the number of them that  sline in both Battailes. Also very good Newes from the Earle of Warwicke, shewing his victo∣rious proceedigs from the 16. of Sep∣tember to the 23. of the same. LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler, Sept. 23. 1642.
Exceeding True and Joyfull Newes from the Lord SAY. THE proceedings of the Cavaleers at West¦chester and divers o∣ther adjoining Coun¦ties hath beene very cruel and inhumane, committing divers out-rages there, as they have done formerly in other Coun∣tries where they have taken their pro∣gresse in a most barbarous manner, and the Inhabitants and Trained Band of those Countries seeing them more and more to
persist in their inhumane actions, they re∣solved amongst themselves to have a gene∣rall meeting, and to conclude of those par∣ticulars that should be for the safety and security of their lives and livings, and at their meeting they concluded of these par∣ticulars: 1. That all those that were a∣ble to beare Armes, should be forthwith summoned in. 2. That they should bee daily exercised and trained up. 3. That they and every one of them should forth∣with pear on the 19 of this month at Chester Heath, 5. miles from the City of Westchester, which was accordingly put in execution, and upon the 20 of this month the Cavaleers having information of their intentions, assembled together, and came with all sped to the sd Heath, where the Tained Bd of Chshire, and divers Volunters  of Lancashire were practi∣zig and puing of themselves in a po∣sture of warre but at the fir approaching o the Cavaleers, the Parliament Forces,
(being the Trained Band) met them a∣bout hlfe a mile from the Heath, and at the first saluation slew ten of the Cava∣leers, where there did ensue a great Bat∣taile betwixt them, both sides striving for the victory, behaving of themselves very stoutly and couragiously, but at the last the Welchmen and Cavaleers began to grow weary, and would gladly have gone to the Mountaines, but they could not, for the Parliaments Forces pursued them so close, that they threw downe their Arms, and creed out for quarter, but there was many of them slaine in this Battell, and some chiefe Commanders taken prisoners divers of them being lately come from Ireland. Thus hath the Parliaments party ob∣tained the day, and won the victory over the Welch Cavaleers, which I beleeve di∣vers of their Country men will take war∣ning by them, and learn how to keep with∣in their own bounds and liberties.
Another Famous Battell obtained by the Lord Sey, Colonell Hampden, and Colonell Goodwin, together with his two sons, over the Cava∣valeers in Worcestershire. VPon the the 20. of this Month, the Lord Sey and the rest had informa∣tion that the Cavaleers were come to Worcester, and that they were resolved to plunder the Towne, (but praised bee God they was prevented) for no sooner had the Lord Sey received intelligence thereof, but he immediately advanced his Forces towards them, and comming neere the City, the Cavaleers came and met us, whereupon the Lord Sey demanded their intentions, they replying, that as they had taken possession of the City, so would they keep it; whereupon Colonell Hamp∣den drew out 200. men and charged them on the Reere and the left Flanke, and ha∣ving played against them for the space of
two houres, the Cavaleers sounded a Re∣treat, but the Parliaments Forces and Vo∣lunteers being much incensed against them, would not hearken thereto, but still with their constant resolution they conti∣nued in Fight, insomuch that there was a great slaughter amongst the Cavaleers and those that could get away, hid themselves for the present. Upon the 19 of this present month ty∣dings was brought to the Earle of War∣wicke being 3. leagues from the Downes that divers Ships lay hovering neer there∣to, and that they doe make divers sallyes towards the French coast, and it was sup∣posed, that Sir John Pennington was in the said Fleet, whereupon the Earle of War∣wicke sent out 7. faire Ships to scour those parts, and upon the 20. of this month they hoysed sayle and tooke their coast toward Callis, where having sallyed two leagues from the Earle of Warwickes Fleet, they espied a company of Ships hovering up and downe, and made towards them, who
comming neer unto them, they set a war∣ning piece to know what they were, and for what parts they were bound, but they would not make answer, neither would they make their obeysanc to His Maje∣sties Ships; whereupon the Earl of War∣wicke commanded the Guner to let flye another piece of Ordnance, and Sir John Pennrngton let flye at them again, insomuch that they began to charge one another ve∣ry furiously, then the Earles Ships began a broad side to them, which soon made en∣trance into the enemies ships, so that after two or three houres fight, they were glad to betake themselves to flight, but the Earles Ships purchased them, and sunke two or three of them. The said Earle hath declared, that he will assist both his Majesty and the Parliament against those Forces that are now gathered together in this Kingdome to hinder the peace of the same of the same. FINIS.
