E3677 E112_34 99859581 111671
An Exact RELATION Of Foureteen dayes PASSAGES FROM PORTS▪MOUTH. The Isle of Wight, and other parts. Wherein is contained the manner of the proceeding of the Cavaliers, and their Confe∣derates the Papists, against the Christian-PROTESTANTS. Sent in a Letter from a worthy Gentleman in that County, to his Friend in London. Whereunto is added some speciall Passages from Hall, Lincoln-shire and Yorke. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Allen, 1642.
A true Relation of foureteene dayes Passages, &c. FOR News thus it is with us, The greatest pr of our Western Gentry are professed Royal∣ists. Two of them neare us are lately put into the Commission of the Peace, enemies to the Paliament, and very unfit, though they were better affected: but such will serve to doe mis∣chief well enough. At Chichester, Sr. Thomas Boyer, Sr. Wil∣liam Morley, Mr. Lwknor the Recorder, a Man that is throughly known for the New-Corporation, with three other me of note, came and demanded of Captain Chittey, for the King, the Magazine of the City: the Captaine being a man well affected refused; they said very peremptorily, That they would have it be∣fore the mrrow morning; he replyed very  should not: so he caused a strong Watch to be set to keep it; and the next day appeared in the City well Armed, with many both of the place, and of the Countrey neare adjacent, to assist him and Guard him in his Office. St. Thomas Boyer, and Sir William Morly are Parliament Men, and so is Captain May another of those fixe. It is reported, that they with the men above mentioned, and Doctors and Clergie men of the Cathedrall Church had plot∣ted to betray the City to Collonell Goring▪ Mr. Lewknor wrote to Portsmouth to the Collonell, to sound the depth of his de∣signe: the Collonell sent him word, That his Commission was to make Portsmouth as strong as he could or his Master; and that he hoped, that boh  and rs would be assistant to him if need were. Since we  th Recorder is gone to Ports mouth: Th  of our parts consists mainely in honest Trades-me▪ the  are aught, as was said before, and the Country people are for the most part blinded and misled by their malevolent Hedge-Priests, there being not above si or seaven honest Ministers here abouts. It is certaine,
that 2 Cavelliers ravished the same mayde, one after another neere Ports-mouth, while one stood by and held their Horses. It is related that three gallant Gentle-women desired to have a boat to wast them over to Stokesbay a place betweene Portsmouth and the Ile of Wight but not obtaining, they were in a friendly manner brought back to the above named Sr Tho∣mas Boyers house in his coach: It is thought that they were men in womens apparell, because they three were alone without any man. Doctor Hinshaw one of the Prebendaries of the high Church of Chichester sent a load of wheate into Portsmouth; but lately, as we heare. The Churchmen there are every day exercising of their Light Horses in the Bishops close: It is reported that one of them sent his servant once, twice, and thrice, to Master Cawley a worthy Parliament man, and the chiefe Pillar of our Countrey on this side, intreating him to give him a meeting in the said Close, and other places: but as Nehemiah refused to meet Sanballat and Gesalm in one of the villages of the plaine of One, where they thought to do him mischiefe; so did this Gentleman very wisely and warily: He was willing to meete the Doctor at places which were not for his urne, and (as they say) he was so often repulst, that at length his servant was sent with an excuse, that the mn was mistaken. By these particu∣lars you may a little discerne the state of our Countrey▪ But notwithstanding al this (the Lord be praised) the Parliament I hope hath the better end of the staffe. There is a Merchant in our Towne, which for three dayes together, law neare a man of War, lying before the Cows in the Ile of Wight; in this great Ship there is a Scottish Noble man (as they say) that hath done very good service, he lyeth there and keepes provision from going out of the Ile to Ports-mouth: he tooke a Boat laely fraight with light Horse Saddles and their, furniture going o∣ver into the Isle, and for the use of the malignant Party, he as∣ked the boat-man what was his fraight, he said 9. shillings, there tis quoth the Noble man, and paid him, & bad him with∣all
to bring the Horses, & he would give him another fraight. This Noble man hearing that one Captaine Newland had sent provision over to Portsmouth, went a shore and sought about for him, protesting that he would send him up to the Parlia∣ment, the Cap. sculks and dares not be seene, he is a great fat tall man of a very Heathenish behaviour, and (as I heare by an honest man that hath seen him there) lyeth at Master Moulins, when he commeth to London, on Fish-street hill. There is a Captaine that is possessed of a Castle neare the Cows, he had inveagled the Countrey round about, and by faire glozing speeches had perswaded them to bring in their Arms into the said Castle, telling them that they would be there kept in safe∣ty from the Cavaliers, and when there should be need of them he would redeliver them. But of late they of the Iland suspe∣cting some trechery in the Captaine, because they heard that the Earle of Portland was put out of the Governement, went and demanded their Armes, the Captaine denies to deliver them: they had no present remedy, but went and made their complaint to the above named Scottish Lord: he goes to the Captaine and demands the Armes for the Ilanders: the Cap∣taine stifly denyes, the Nobleman replyed, that if hee did not deliver them, he would heate down his Castle about his eares, the Captaine remaines stubborne still, the Lord came with his Ship under the Castle, intending to make good his thretning: But when the Captaine saw whereto he must, he yeelded at length and delivered the Armes. There have bin three times Letters intercepted geing to, and coming from Portsmouth. At Havant neare Ports-mouth the Townesmen tooke a Travailer upon suspicion, puld off his cloathes, and in his Bootes found Letters from the North to the Garison, the Letters were carried to Mr. Richard Norton, a good Gentleman hard by; he wisht that they had brought the messenger aswell as his Packet; whereupon a few lusty men went out with their musquets after him, and tooke him, and brought him to Mr. Norton, who sent him and his Letters up to the Parliament.
Another time there were letters passing from Chichester to Portsmouth the Messenger went of purpose through by-ways, there met him a man (conceive, the simplest to see to, that ever you saw, and you have his Image) who demanded of him whi∣ther he was going, he said to Ports-mouth, not suspecting that such a simple fellow would, or could defeate him, but that sim∣ple unlikely man laid hold of his bridle, bad him to stay, told him, that he was an Officer; with that came another man, who helped him, and so they carried away the messenger to Mr. Nortons. This day Goodmen Faisters of Lewes, having been at Havant whither he was sent by the Lady Clearke, Mr. Staples Wife, to learne the certainty of occurrences neere Portsmouth, brings Newes of a woman that was sent out of Portsmouth, with a pup∣pet of clouts like a childe in her armes, she came along by a Fort, which was first built at Portsbridge within 3. miles of Portsmouth by the Cavaliers, but is since abandoned by them, and they retired into the Garison for feare of our Men, and since there are hundreds at worke about it, for King and Parli∣ament, and have planted Ordnance upon it. The Cavaliers when they left it, drew away foure Pieces, and their Carriage breaking, they were faine to leave a fift upon the way. But to come to the woman again, one of our Men asked her what she carried, she said a childe, prithee let me see thy Baby, said he, so search being made, it was found such as I said, the lower part was onely clouts, but in the head of it was a blacke Box full of Letters, Shee and her Stilborne, are carried to the right place, I warrant you. A Cavalier and his Man rode into Ha∣vant upon lusty Steeds, labouring to raise there a Malignant party, to help him in plundering o Mr. Nortons House, the good Gentleman had newes of it presently, he sends out some of his Men on Light Horses with Pistols, who rode after the Cavalier and his Man, tooke them and brought them to their Master, who dismounts them from their owne horses, sets them upon a couple of jades, and sends them up to the Parliament
an honest man of my acquaintance was at Mr. Nortons, when this was done. After this a Troope of Cavaliers with certaine foot came up to Portsdowne, and challeng'd Mr. Norton forth, saying, where is this same Norton; where is he? I warrant him he is a very coward, let him come forth if he dare; and at this time they held the Fort; Mr. Norton hearing of it presently Armes himselfe, puts on his Buffe coate, and was riding out to them with his Men, and just upon the speed of it arrives at his house a 10. light Horse, from the Parliament, out they goe with him but when the Cavaliers saw such a strength come against them, they posted down the hill towards their Fort with great speed, the Scots that were among Mr. Nortons auxiliaries, would presently have flown on upon the Fort, but Mr. Norton would not suffer them for feare of danger, there being Ordnance plan∣there. Another time 30. of the Cavaliers came out in a vaun∣ting manner, against whom went but 6 of our light Horse: the Cavaliers all dischrged upon them, but hurt never a man of them, onely hit one of their Horses on the shoulder, easily curable; our six then made neerer up to them; the Cavaliers seeing them so ventrous, were stricken with feare and fled, our men made after them amaine, and being within shot of them, discharged upon them, shot one through the backe, who fell downe from his Horse dead in the place, another they hit in the breech, who fell likewise, but made a shift to creep away into a hedge, and a third they tooke alive on his horse, so they tooke a man and 3. Horses, being but 6 against 30. praised bee the Lord of Hoasts for so great a victory. It is said that the old Souldiers doe daily make escape out of Portsmouth, and it is thought that the rest will gladly surrender the Town, if once it were but formally demanded: for they begin already to be in distresse through want. One Mr. Bellingham a young Gen∣tleman rode, armed capape from Chichester into Portsmouth, but now wisheth that he were out again, and is at charges 5 shillings a day onely for a boat, which lieth at hand, still waiting for an opportunity to make his escape home, but cannot yet get way.
Some of the Scots that came among the 100 Troopers to M. Nortons succor, are of purpose billetted in one Bringsteds house the Parson of Havant, because being a most pestilent man he had provided a Light Horse for the service of the Cavaliers, the Scots are with him therefore, and M. Norton hath charged him with the keeping of 10 Light Horse for the King and Parliament, because he was so briske; and lately one of the Scots men being agreived with him, fell upon him and basted him welfavouredly: and faine he would be gone, but they will not let him; so he is forced to stay, waites upon them dai∣ly, gives them good words, and tells them, that he will gladly lie out of his owne bed to make them roome. And both here with us at Arndell, and else where (as I heare) the Psalmists words are true: Gods enemies are found lyars to him, that is, they yeeld him sained submission, speaking favourable of the Parli∣ament, who not many daies agoe, had their mouths filled with other manner of language; and as it was in Mordica's time; many of the people of the Land became Iewes, because the feare of the Iewes fell upon them: So I hope you will short∣ly heare it to be among us every where; yet because abundant warinesse never harteth, therefore we neither are, nor will be secure, till there be no more cause of feare. Good-man Mai∣sters brings newes that the Papists neere Ports-mouth do much mischiefe and that himselfe was like to be taken by the Cava∣liers, but there coming after him 2 Travailers horsemen, acci∣dentally, the Cavaliers thought that there were more coming, so they fled away with all possible speed. It is reported by them that fall off from the Garion t Portsmouth, that the Collonel being angry with them of Gos∣par, a Village not farre from the Towne, because they would not come into his aide, commanded a Canoneer to let flie at their Houses, the Canoneer at first refused, but being threat∣ned by the Collonell, that hee would run him through, if hee would not, hee shot, but it was over the houses, and so did, no harme. Dated, 16. August 1642.
From HVLL. SIR, the Forces are all gone from hence, and from Beverley, and wee hope to have trade againe, for I hope wee are now in the safest place of England: and though some particular persons, have beene robbed and spoyled of their goods in the Countrey, yet God be thanked, our Countrey is not much worse in generall, then it was afore the Cavaliers, for what hurt they did, we paid with dollers and good English coine made good so long as it lasted, one thing remarkable of the fainting spirits, observe by this passage tieir Centinells were so frighted with some passengers that lost their way, comming neere them, made them all runne away, fearing there were more comming behind, the wicked flee when none pursues them: I pray God make us thankefull for our de∣liverance. If God permit us a meeting, I shall relate that to you, that I cannot commit to paper, but this is certaine, our Country is much firmer to the Par∣liament, then ever it was before. From Lincolne-shire. THe Newes that wee have here is little, for the present, onely this is certaine, that Sir Iohn Hotham is so dreadfull to some of the Cavaliers, that one of them and the one of no small house is mad, and once running under his bed in his mad fit cryed out, Sir Iohn Hotham comes, Sir Iohn Hotham comes, he be∣ing here under cure for that disease, and there came a Company of them to our Towne, but they were such Hell-hounds, Blasphemous Villaines, Drun∣ken Sots, and for the most part so meanly acoutred, that they are ashamed to see, and are now gone, as wee here: for Lincolne Towne, wee want but some encouragement from London, and wee should doe well enough here. From YORKE. VVEe have here as great preparations, as you have in London, and wee hope we have Warwick Castle, and the Guns sure, and Portsmouth and Sommerset-shire wee hope, we have also sure, and so in the end we hope to have all; we had a meeting here yesterday and to day, but not so great an appea∣taance as some could have wished, its said that Sir Iohn Hotham and Dr. Bastwick will be tryed here this Sessions, it may goe hard with Dr. Bastwick. but how they will come by Sir Iohn Hotham, I leave to judge, I know not. FINIS.
