F121 E43_14 99873502 154458
A LETTER Sent from the RIGHT HONORABLE, The Lord Fairfax, To the Committee of both Kingdoms: CONCERNING The great Victory, lately obtained (By Gods Blessing) At SELBY in YORK-SHIRE. Wherein is more exactly set forth the manner of performing that gallant service, then hath been published in former Relations. Together with a LIST of the Comman∣ders that were there taken prisoners. Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Letter, with the List, and the Order for Thanksgiving on Tuesday next, be printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed for Edw. Husbands, April 19. 1644.
My LORDS: ACcording to the Orders sent to mee and my son from your Lordships, wee have now ioyned our Forces together; and though the Enemy held all the passes from the East∣riding to the West, and by that means inter∣cepted divers of our Letters, and thereby be∣came acquainted with our appointments, and so indeavoured to prevent them; which forced mee to decline Selby, and make a passage over the River, ten miles below it in Marshland, where my Men and Carriages being passed with some difficulty, on Sonday and Mon∣day last, I instantly marched with the whole Army consisting of Two thousand Horse and Dragoons, and Two thousand Foot or there∣abouts, to Ferry-bridge, and so to Selby, where Colonell Iohn Belasyse (commanding in chief in Yorkshire) then lay with an Army of Fifteen hundred Horse, and Eighteen hundred Foot, as themselves confesse, though Reports made it much more numerous.
Upon Wednesday, our Forlorn-Hope of Horse beat in a partee of the Enemies Horse, and followed them into the Town, taking di∣vers of them prisoners, and the day being far spent, I quartered the Army within a mile of Selby that night, and drew them out again ear∣ly the next morning, and then with the Foot in three divisions, one led up by my self, a second by Sir Iohn Meldrum, and a third by Lieutenant Colonell Needham, fell upon the Town, to storm it in three places altogether, where the Enemy received us with much cou∣rage, and made strong resistance for two hours or thereabouts; but in conclusion, my own Foot Regiment forced a passage by the River side, and my son with his Regiment of Horse rushed into the Town, where hee was incoun∣tred by Colonell Belasyse, and the Enemies Horse; but they being beaten back, and Master Belasyse himself wounded, and taken prisoner, and our Foot entred on all sides the Town, the Enemy was wholly routed, and as many as could saved themselves by flight, some to∣wards Cawood, some towards Pontefract, and the rest towards York, over the River by a Bridge of Boats laid by themselves; We pur∣sued
them every way, and took in the Town and chase, the Prisoners, Ordnance, Arms, Ammunitions, and Colours mentioned in the List inclosed. Of my own Men, I lost in the fight divers gallant Commanders and Souldiers, and very many sore wounded; And indeed, all my Ar∣my, both Commanders and common Souldi∣ers, behaved themselves with as much courage as ever I observed in Men. All which wee must acknowledge to God alone, who both infuseth courage, and gives Victory where hee pleaseth: I shall now, I hope, be able to raise more Forces in the coun∣try, and improve this Victory that God hath bestowed on us, to the best advantage. This being all for the present, untill further occa∣sion, I rest Your Lordships Most affectionate and humble Servant, Fer: Fairfax. Selby, 12 April, 1644.
A List of the Officers taken Prisoners, the 11. of April, 1644. Colonell John Belasyse. Colonell Sir John Ramsden. Sir Thomas Strckland. Lieut. Colonell Tndall. Lieut. Colonell Forbes. Major Heskit. Commanders of Horse. Major Wentworth. Major Sadlington. Major Rogers. Captain Horsfeild. Captain Beversham. Captain Washington. Captain Grimston. Captain Cholmley. Captains of Foot. Captain Scudamore. Captain Williamson. Captain Morrit. Captain Turner. Captain Skeldn. Captain Brigs. Captain Waterhouse. Captain Kirke. Captain Hardcastle. Captain Lister. Captain Nevill. Captain Conyers. Captain Lieut. Salvin. Captain Lieut. Conyers. Lieutenants of Horse. Lieutenant Rickaby. Lieutenant Bishop. Lieutenant Keighley. Lieutenant Gra. Lieutenants of Foot. Lieutenant Wright. Lieutenant Grin. Lieutenant Ridmayne. Lieutenant Vncent. Lieutenant Pearson. Lieutenant Fitames. Lieutenant Moore. Lieutenant Waynman. Lieutenant Evn. Lieutenant Noton. Lieutenant Duffeld. Lieutenant Turner. Lieutenant Croc. Lieutenant Fowler.
Lieutenant Geeres. Lieutenant Carter. Lieutenant Jackson. Lieutenant Skpwith. Lieutenant Duckit. Lieutenant Harper. Cornet Dickers. Cornet Spuryer. Cornet Smith. Cornet Brabiner. Cornet Hutton. Cornet Thompson. Ensigne Hewith. Ensigne Cowling Ensigne Middleton. Ensigne Leyton. Ensigne Ram Ensigne Todd. Ensigne Jack Ensigne Conyers. Ensigne North. Ensigne Leighton. Ensigne Hapletine. Quartermaster Wadmouth. Quartermaster Jackson. Quartermaster Dunkin. Quartermaster Hall. Quartermaster Thomlinson. Quartermaster Spencer. Quartermaster Walton. Quartermaster Burton. Quartermaster Slater. Elias Walker, Master of the Magazine. Richard Ludlow Provost Marshall; And divers Sergeants, Trumpets, Cor∣poralls, Drums, and other Officers. Divers slain, and lyes strewed in the way to York for four miles together; others that fled to Pontefract, were pursued as far as Ferry-Bridge. Four Brasse pieces of Ordnance. Seven Barrels of Powder. Sixteen Bundles of Match. Two thousand Arms or above. Many Horse and Foot Colours taken, but as yet sixteen or seventeen come in. And Sixteen hundred common Sol∣diers. Above Five hundred Horse. The Pinnace taken at Gainsbrough; All their Bag and Baggage, and many Ships and Boats upon the River.
Die Mercurii, 17 April, 1644. IT is this day Ordered by the Com∣mons assembled in Parliament, That the Ministers in the severall Churches and Chappels within the Line of Com∣munication, and Parishes vvithin the Bills of Mortallity, do give notice to their Parishioners, of the great Success it hath pleased God to give the Parlia∣ments Forces in Yorkshire and Pem∣brokeshire; And to acquaint them that the Houses have appointed, and set a part Tuesday next, for a Publique-Thanksgiving, to be given to Almigh∣ty GOD for his great Blessings and Successes. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl D. Com. FINIS.
