F1239 E1010_6 99862458 168742
THE LORD GENERAL FLEETWOODS Answer To the Humble Representation of Collonel Morley, and some other late Officers of the Army. Wherein he declares his Judgement and Con∣science what is the Good Old Cause, and for a FREE PARLIAMENT, As the onely expedient for ENGLANDS SETTLEMENT. Novemb. 8. 1659.
Gentlemen, I Was in hope that your letter of the first of this moneth aimed at my private satisfaction, and that you would have at least allowed me a day or two's time to have answered it with submis∣sion to your judgement, or conviction of your mistakes; but since I find it the next day printed under the title of A Representation, and so made a Trumpet of your vain glory, and an Alarm for War unto the people, I shall appeal to the same Judges, and answer it as an Englishman and a Christian, the Title you vainly give your selves in the front of your discourse, by which you labour to divest all but your own party of their Rights as Englishmen and as Christians; And that I may appear to balk no part of your letter, when the whole is so easily answered, I shall rather follow your own wilde method then not take in all. I confesse those you mention (of our being Englishmen, Chri∣stians, Persons imbarked from the beginning of the Warres in the same cause, and sharers in bearing the burthen and heat of the day) are strong ligaments to make us of one minde in pre∣venting the destruction of this (now indeed poore, but) late flourishing and happy Nation: but when I see, your being toucht in your private interest and profit, is the first opening of your eyes to behold with sad and bleeding hearts the late renud breach upon the Parliament, and the apprehended consequences thereof, viz. the rendring of all the blood and treasure shed and spent for the deliverance of (as you call it againe poor) En∣gland fruitless, and bringing of these Nations into Blood, De∣struction
and Confusion; I cannot but believe that if the Army would have continued to you Colonel Morley, and your fellow members the liberty of arbitrary Tyranny over the free peo∣ple of these Nations, and remained themselves as Turkish Jannisaries in the execution of your bloody, illegal and op∣pressive commands; neither you, nor those who signed the Letter with you, would have been at all prickt at the heart, or resembled us to the Egyptian Mamalukes, or Romane Pretori∣an bands, for doing that justly to you and your fellow Mem∣bers, now which most unjustly, and with much more rigour at your instigation we executed in 1648. upon persons of the greatest Nobility, Integrity and Wisdome in this Nation, in comparison of whom those your Letter calls the Parliament, and avows for the onely Supreame Authority, for the most of them were not fit to sit with the Dogges of their flock, as will appeare, before I conclude my Answer to your Letter. To deale therefore plainly with you, and to unbosome my self upon this occasion to you and the Nations, I must ac∣knowledge, that the first formal force that we put upon that Renowned Parliament in 1648. (not to mention the liht impres∣sions of force which preceded) was the first proclaimed and a∣vowed deviation that we made from the reputation that we had of Englishmen and Christians; the sad Reflection whereupon, and upon the many Oaths and Obligations we were under for a contrary walking, leaves such a sting behinde i, that you have given me some ease in your occasional making me thus appear a Penitentiary to the world, and that I may not be behind hand with you, but may evidence my unfaigned desire, when I am convinced my self, to strengthen my Brethren: I shall as brief∣ly as I can, within the compass of a Letter, interweave the relation of those remarks of State, which as so many sad & weari∣some steps have brought these three famous Nations to the binck of that grave of Confusion, which is now opened for us, past shutting, but by the hand of God, and a returne to his wayes: For Introduction whereunto I must acquaint you. That this famous Monarchy of Great Brittane, and Ire∣land, with the Dominions and Territories thereunto belongin, having for some time wrastled with great dangers and feares,
various distempers and disorders which had much assaulted, and shaken the Liberty, Peace, and Prosperity thereof, and the comfort and hopes of all his late Majesties good Subjects, and exceedingly weakned and undermined the foundation and strength of his own Royal Throne. A Parliament was called in the month of November, 1641. as the onely proper remedy known to Englishmen for the relief of grievances, and pre∣venting of growing evils: which Parliament is now best known by the Name of the long Parliament, and being so deservedly famous for their Gallant asserting and vindicating the Liber∣ties of the people of England, till they were interrupted by the Army, their own words will to most satisfaction best ex∣presse the Good Old Cause, they engaged themselves and the peole of these three Nations in: And because they were sen∣sible that the Parliament were, by their Interest and Consti∣tution, the great Bulwark and Preservative of the Peoples Liberties and Property, and that the Rights and Priviledges of Parliament were the Birth-right and Inheritance, not onely of themselves, but of the whole Kingdome wherein every Subject was interessed, The maintenance and Preservation whereof did very highly conduce to the publick Peace and Prosperity of his Majesty, and all the People; they did the 14. of December 1641. declare, that it was their ancient and undoubt∣ed right, that the King ought not to take notice of any matter in agitation and debate in either Houses of Parliament, but by their Information and agreement; and that the King ought not to propound any condition, provision or limitation to any Bill or Act in Debate or preparation in either House of Parliament, or to manifest or declare his consent or dissent, appobation or dislike of the same, before it were presented to his Majesty in due course of Parliament. And that every particular member of either House hath free liberty of speech to propound or de∣bate any matter according to the order and course of Parlia∣ment. And that his Majesty ought not to conceive displeasure against any man for such opinions and Propositions as shall be delivered in such debate, it belonging to the several Houses of Parliament respectively to judge and determine such errors and offences in words or actions, as shall be committed by any their Members in the handling or debating any matters depend∣ing.
And the 17. of January, 1641. upon that breach of Priviledge of Parliament by the late Kings proceedings against the five Members of the House of Commons, that house did declare that the arresting of any Members of Parliament by any war∣rant whatsoever without a legal proceeding against them, and without consent of that house, whereof such person was a Member, is against the Liberty of the Subject, and a breach of Priviledge of Parliament; and the person which shall arrest any Member of Parliament, is declared an enemy of the Com∣mon-wealth. And at the same time they did declare, that the coming of Souldiers and others in a hostile manner to the house of Com∣mons, though with his Majesty, was a traiterous design against the King and Parliament. And that the Proclamation then printed in his Majesties name for the apprehending and im∣prisoning of the said members, was false, scandalous and illegal. And in a Petition to the King both Houses do afterwards as∣sert it, to be the undoubted Right and Priviledge of Parlia∣ment, that no Member of Parliament can be proceeded a∣gainst without the consent of Parliament. To secure this fun∣damental Priviledge amongst divers others, That Parliament entred into a defensive War: in the Beginning, Progress, and Conclusion whereof, they express by their publick Declara∣tions and Demonstrances, the Cause to be for defence of his Majesties Person, Honour and Estate, the true Protestant Re∣ligion, the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and the Power and Priviledge of Parliament. And to this cause, they, and the whole body of this Nation and Scotland obliged themselves by divers Oaths and Covenants. And after many bloody Battels, Sieges and sacking of Cities and Towns, great De∣vastation of England, and Destruction of Englishmen, the quarrel being determined by the sword. The Parliament to justifie their Integrity, and wash off those scandalous Aspersions which by publick Proclamations and Declarations had been cast on them during the War, that they intended the Ruine of the King and his Posterity, the change of Religion, and Alte∣ration of the Government, by Kings, Lords and Commons, and to introduce instead thereof, the Government of a Com∣mon-wealth; justified to their conquered King at the Isle of
Wight upon the very same things (and the securing of them) for which they had taken up Armes: But absolute Rule and Government was too sweet a morsel for those to part with, who though they had gone along with the Parliament, in their Publick Acts and Oathes hoped for an opportunity at the end of the warre, which had wearyed both partyes, to make themselves masters of both, and how farre a small party in the house of Commons to the great scandal of Religion and moral honesty, were active to that end, by obstructing Parlamentary proceed∣ings, and all meetings with the King; and (when that would no longer keep off Peace and Settlement, and the Returning of them to their Countries) by debauching the Army several times to violate the Priviledges of Parliament, and finally to imprison, and seclude the whole house of Peers, and most of the house of Commons. You Colonel Morley, can better tell then I, and how far you concurred in those Actions. The banks of our Lawes, Liberties and Peace being thus broken down, the royal Head was not safe upon the Throne, but all manner of arbitrary, unjust, bloody and oppressive Proceedings, from the shame and guilt whereof, I cannot acquit my self, but must con∣fess with sorrow, I had too great a hand therein, as well as you, came in like a flood upon these Nations, and have overwhelm∣ed us, so that we have had no Law nor Religion, but the arbi∣trary Dictates of a few Members of the house of Commons; and though like men in a sick bed, we have for these many years tumbled and tossed from Government to Government through variety of Changes, and increase of sin, we have found settlement in no condition, but met with a sad proof, that God is not like to own us, till we truly, and no more faignedly repent, and return to that period of Affair, where we so notedly went first out of the way. I have been the shorter in this account of our misery, because the passages of your letter will all along give me occasion to supply many particulars that I have here omitted, and therefore I proceed, and in the an∣swering of it, must remember you, that if the bringing of these Nations into blood, destruction and confusion is like to be so advantageous to Popish and all bloody enemies, to Justice and true Godliness; who, I must confess, do much increase by what I have said, they know who they are beholding to for such
helps, though I hope before I conclude, I shall show a way to damp their joy, and lessen your Triumph; you go on, and tell me that, That you cannot with just Peace and satisfaction to your own Consciences sit down altogether in silence, but as in some measure you do pour out your hearts before the Lord, so you think it your duty to present me with some of your serious thoughts, apprehensions and fears, as also with desires that I would consider in time before the Lord, what a flood∣gate is open for a deluge of miseries to be poured down upon this Nation, and how much I am concerned, as I tender the honour of God, the Vindication of Reliion, the Credit of the Gospel, the Recovery of my own Reputation which now lies at the stake, the just satisfaction that all sober Christi∣ans and true Englishmen may challenge from me, and the Relief of my native Countrey that is now sinking in her dearest concernment, and cryes our for help: That I would (before it is too late improve my utmost interest and power to put a stop to that destructive Career that the Army now is ingaged in, to obviate the two great advantages that foraigne and domestick enemies have now put into their hands, and seasonably to hin∣der these new Counsels that have no Parliamentary sanction, and so must be grievous to the free-born people of England in any thing they do, you address your selves to me not only as bein of eminent interest, but because I have professed Reliion, and thickness of godliness at a high rate, and much tenderness of Spi∣rit; many sober Christians have had great hopes of me, and you are not without confidence your selves, yet you know that I am in a very great temptation, and beg the Lod to grant that my temptation may not be seconded with a divine deser∣tion; you are jealous over me, and many (you say) are at a stand what to think of me. Thus far the pathetical perswasive Preface of your Letter reacheth, the rest consisting much of such arguments as you use to inforce the same. I am glad, that after so long a sleep, your consciences as well as mine are awkned, and as ill an opinion as you have of me and the Army, I see you are beholding to our late action for your betaking your self to your pen and prayers, and the dis∣closing of your serious thoughts, apprehensions and fears which
before we heard nothing of, and I do heartily wish the one may be as real as I hope the other will prove but imginary, unless your actions contribute to the accomplishment of them. I do I hope consider in time what a floodgate is open for a deluge of miseries, but do not a little wonder you should not spy our danges no sooner, when we ha been under them so many years, and never cry out for help till we have set upon the Cure; And now as I tender the honour of God, he Vindication of Religion, the credit of the Gospel, the recovery of my own reputation (which hath two long lain at stake,) and the just sa∣tisfaction th all ob Christians and true Englishmen may chal∣lenge from me. I must a little further unveile to those Nati∣ons that mak o hypocrisie under which you seeme so great friends to our native Countrey and Parliamentary Authority, by remembring you of the vast difference in esteeme and value between that untainted Paiamentary Authority which they themselves did not dread to infringe and violate contrary to all obliations of honour and conscience, and that pitiful Parlia∣mentary sanction which they object out new counsels want, and so must be grievous to the free-bon people of England, and advantageous to forreigne and comestick enemies. And this will best appear by setting in view the persons and actions of the one and other. It would not suit with the bevity of a Letter to mention the Catalogue at large of those hundreds of the best interested in the Nation which were imprisoned, and ex∣cluded Parliamentary Councels in 1648. not more by the Ar∣mies force, then their Votes and Orders whom you now advance as the only givers of Parliamentary Sation. It shall suffice that I name some of them: the remembrance of whom, works not more sorrow in me, that the Nations to our irreparable losse and da∣mage have been so long deprived of their prowesse, and parts, & singular honesty, then it doth create joy in me, that we may yet see them happy Instruments by their wisdome and powerful in∣terest of repairing our breaches, and making these three Nations one stick in the hand of God for the comfort and support of his own people, and terrour and subduing of his ene∣mies throughout the world. They are these;
Of the House of Peeres. The Earl of Northumberland. The Earl of Rutland. The Earle of Bedford. The Earle of Warwick. The Earle of Lincolne. The Earle of Manchester. The Earle of Clare. The Earle of Exceter. The Earle of Denbigh. The Earle of Leicester. The Earle of Oxford. The Earle of Elgin. The Lord Viscount Say & Seale. The Lord Brook. The Lord Roberts. The Lord Gray of Wark. The Lord Dacres. The Lord North. The Lord Montague. The Lord Wharton. And divers others. Of the House of Commons. Mr. Pierepont. Mr. Densill Hollis. Mr. Nathaniel Fiennes. Mr. Ansley. Mr. John Crew. Sir Gilbert Gerrard. Serjeant Browne. Sir William Waller. Mr. Swinfen. Sir Harebottle Grimstone. Sir Anthony Irby. Sir John Clotworthy. Mr. Hodges of Glostershire. Mr. Alexander Popham. Colonel Rossiter. Serjeant Maynard. Sir John Temple. Sir Thomas Dacres. Colonel Norton. Mr. Hatcher. Mr. John Bois. Mr. Gott. Mr. Nathaniel Stephens. Sir Walter Earle. Colonel Birch. Sir William Lewis. Sir John Curson. Sir Dudley North. Sir John Burgoine. Mr. Hugh Bascowen. Mr. Bunckley. Mr. James Fiennes. Sir John Eveling of Surrey. Mr. Grove. Mr. Gewen. Sir John Eelivng of Wilts. Mr. Prynne. Serjeant Twisden. Mr. John Stephens. Mr. Knightley. Mr. Owfield. Sir Richard Onslow. Colonel Hunt. Sir Beachamp St. John. Sir William Litton. Colonel Lionell Copley. Captain Wingate.
Sir John Pagrave. Major General Browne. Sir John Holland. Sir Roger Burgoine. Sir John Potts. Sir Thomas Trevor. Sir Thomas Solmes. Mr. John Nelthrop. Mr. George Montague. Mr. Francis Gerrard. Serjeant Glynne. Colonel Edward Harley. Mr. John Trevor. Mr. Thynne. Mr. Dacres. Mr. Hobby. Mr. John Harbert. Mr. Eveling. Sir Robert Pye. Mr. James Harbert. Colonel Lloyd. Mr. Hungerford. Mr. Foxwist, &c. I should weary you and my self to name more, they are upon Record, and will be famous to Posterity, as they have beene in their Generation: And the history of England, and those me∣morable transactions in Parliament, and by their Authority in maintenance of that glorious cause before▪ mentioned, where∣in they engaged in a time of danger, and persevered with faith∣fulnesse, till their unhappy, O unhappy interruption, will be mo∣numents of their renown to all succeeding Generations, and save me the labour of saying more of their noble and worthy actions. Now on the other hand the persons from whom you would de∣rive all Parliamentary Sanction, and have to be owned by all for the onely Authority of these Nations, are those Gentlemen, I suppose, who on the the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth of the last moneth made such haste to passe certaine Orders, pretended Acts, and a Declaration which the Army have with more ease, and as good Authority repealed, and declared null and void, viz. Sir Arthur Hesilrig. Mr. Henry Nevill. Mr. Morley. Mr. Pine. Colonel Dixwell. Sir. Henry Mildmay. Colonel White. Sir John Trevor. The Lord Munson. Mr. Thomas Chaloner. Mr. Walton. Mr. Luke Robinson. Mr. Henry Darley. Mr. Richard Darley. Mr. Brewster. Mr. Whitlock. Mr. Lister. Mr. James Temple.
Colonel Temple. Mr. Oldsworth. Mr. Blagrave. Mr. Millington. Mr. Robert Reynolds. Mr. Henry Martin. Colonel Thompson. Mr. Baker. Sir Peter Wentworth. Mr. Mayne. Colonel Harvey. Mr. Fielder. Mr. Fell. Mr. Robert Goodwin. Mr. John Goodwin. Mr. Hayes. Mr. Lisle. Colonel Downes. Mr. Scott. Alderman Atkins. Alderman Pennington. Mr. Say. Mr. Dove. Mr. Skinner. For the rest of the Members did then oppose their proceedings, namely The Earl of Pembroke. The Earl of Salisbury. Lord Viscount Lisle. Mr. Robert Cecill. Colonel Sydenham. Colonal Rich. Mr. Walter Strickland. Colonel Philip Jones. Mr. Cornelius Holland. Colonel Bennet. Mr. Trenchard. Major Salwey. Sir. Thomas Walsingham. And my Self. And Lord chief Baron Wyld. And that I may not omit to give you a short account of their actions, which or nothing must entitle them to the supreame Authority and sole Legislature of these Nations. I must re∣member you in addition to what I have said already of their manifold miscarriages; by illegal and unheard of High Courts of Justice, stupendious Taxes, shameful self-seeking, and self-enriching endeavours to perpetuate their own sitting, domineer∣ing over their brethren, with cruel revenge, chargeable Militia's meerly to undermine the Army, chargeable and unchristian Wars with their Protestant brethren of Holland, and Scotland, whilest they maintaine a close correspondence and League with Englands old Jesuited Gunpowder enemies of Spaine: I should nauseate the Reader to repeat all which they have not been ashamed to Act, what I have written may suffice to help
you and the world to make a right comparison of the persons and actions, and to give a true judgement who are fittest for, and have best right to exercise the Supremacy of these Nations, and are likeliest to do it with most equality and prudence, those noble, prudent, and untainted persons, or you Colonel Morley, Sir Arthur Hesilrig, and your heady associates, who have been deservedly for many years under so great rebukes, yea, who are the scorne, the by-word, and hatred of the peo∣ple at home, and Nations abroad, and whom I may properly call trees twice dead pluckt up by the roots. For my own part I do without hesitancy professe it, and I take it to be the sense of most of the Army, that we, and these Nations may expect a happy and lasting settlement by the councels of the former our only lawful Masters, we can never hope for it from the latter, who have, and do endeavour to perpetuate their usurpation o∣ver them and us, and all the people of these Nations. But there is one objection which hath gone too long for cur∣rant to our cost, which must be removed. Object. You say, and perhaps you have said it, so long uncontroul∣ed that you believe it, That the said Majority of the Com∣mons house, and whole house of Peers were forceably secluded the Parliament in 1648. for breach and forfeiture of their Trusts. Answ. In answer to this (though the members themselves in their own vindication published in 1648. (as I find now the perplexities of the Nations have made me review and consider it more seriously then I did in the hurry of Temptations) and Mr Pryn's late necessary Vindication have satisfied all that do not wilfully shut their eyes against full evidence of Truth) I shall add this Dilemma, either they were guilty of breach of Trust as you assert, or not; if guilty, it being a combination of so many in breach of a Trust of the highest nature, and aggra∣vated by the eminency of the persons, you have broken your Trust in not calling them to account, and inflicting severe pu∣nishment upon them: But if innocent, (as I fully satisfied) as well by their resolute and clear Justification of themselves, and their fellow members, never daring to question them iudi∣cially, though they have formerly, and of late by a publick claim of their Right sufficiently provoked them to do it, and
by the fair and unstained honour and reputation they have in the world, and good opinion of the people appearing in the late parliamentary Elections of many of them, though they did not seek, but opposed the same, when others (though they courted the people, could not obtain to be trusted) you are un∣excusable for excluding them. Having laid this foundation of plain dealing with you, it is obvious to you and the world, that you have no cause to make such a loud out-cry, and evident enough who are the per∣sons injured both by you and us, without giving satisfaction to whom we can expect no just peace on satisfaction to our Con∣sciences, nor the reputation of honest men among the peo∣ple; And I think you have so little ground to repine and mur∣mure at what is come to pass, that you ought to have in admira∣tion the wonderfull providence and mercy of God in this dou∣ble retaliation of what you have done unjustly with your brethren, and if it work not repentance in you; believe it, worse things do yet abide you,; and for my own part, I should have little comfort in what is done, if I did not intend and believe, we should return whence we are fallen, in which respect I must account this a happy cariere that the Army is now engaged in, and a proof of our profest Religion, strict godlinesse, and tender∣nesse of spirit, and such as will increase in sober Christians (a∣mong which I cannot but rank in chief those forenamed no∣ble and worthy persons) greater hopes of me, and beget in you (when your eyes are open to repent) a better confidence of me, and a sense, that (whatever I have been formerly) not I, but you and those you plead for, are now under a very great tion, and in danger of divine desertion. You mention the late infringing of English liberties, as if you were innocent thereof, which upon what I have said I leave to the world to judge, and let me tell you freely that the attempt to perpetuate a Supremacy in a Minor and least consi∣derable part of the Parliament, strikes most transcendently at the Liberties of the English Nation, whilest our opposition thereunto tends to a recovery of our lost Liberties, and doth not at all pretend to those advantages the former Protector had, and if there be any cries in the Nation upon the same account as yours, they are but like the cries made by untoward children,
because they are not petmitted to beat their brethren; And for the thousands of precious souls in England, who are at this day weeping in secret places; I believe it is not in favour of usur∣pation on any side, but against unwarrantable undertakings on all hands, against solemne Oaths and Trusts; and when I enter into my Chamber and Closet of my own heart, and commune therewith in the sight of the all-searching God, I am convinced I shall give England, Scotland, and Ireland the most thorough proof of my faithfulnesse, humility, self-denial, and publick spi∣ritedness, by a vigorous prosecuting of those late actings, in dispersing that pageant of pretended Authority, which un∣der the bare name of a Parliament, hath too long impudently abused these Nations even to ruine. And believe it, though as you say, the good people of this Nation have been formerly deceived by good words and faire promises; It is not words without suitable actions will any longer sway with them; set∣ting dayes apart for seeking God in fasting, when the way is not good, will not hereafter blind English eyes; with much of your following discourse are very sound truths, but very par∣tially applied, to argue us more guilty of hypocrisie then your selves, who whilest you did the same things with success, never misliked them, nor expressed any remorse for them, till the case came to be your own, and your new preserments were shaken, and then you cry out of the Armies actings, and tell us the Parliament is interrupted; and in one whole page en∣deavour to represent them in such a dress as may gain pity in their behalf: But I appeal to your own consciences, and an∣swer me as in the sight of God; was that the Parliament of England? can you Colonel Morley say so, who have seene so many Committees of the House of Commons more like a Par∣liament? did you tell us but a few lines before, that this Nati∣on would no longer be deceived, nor English eyes blinded? and do you now call a few Members of the House of Commons such as I have before deciphered them a Parliament? when you know the rightful Parliament of England consists of King, Lords, and five hundred Commons; and if you can satisfie your selves, and perswade the people to be content with King, and Lords, and the best four hundred of the Commons, because you were weary of them, will you think it deserves such an excla∣mation
for us (upon juster grounds then you can pretend a∣gainst them) to make you leave fooling, that either all may come in again upon the same free score, or a new free Parli∣ament may be called in the antient manner: and in the mean while by a Committee of safety, as wise as your Parliament, to provide for the peace of these Nations. And this I hope will shake off your upbraiding our sense of former backslidin, when you see our proceedings are in order to a through repenting, wherein t'will be your greatest honour to joyn with us. You go on boasting of the success against the late plot, and Gods owning your Parliament therein, in the mean while for∣getting the Army, preserved that Parlament, or Sir George Booth, one of the members they drove away, had shewed himself of more Interest, and power in the Nation, then all that Parliament; and had not left their interruption to the Army. You mind us of many Complements we used to you, and how in our late petition we seemed to take pleasure to stile our selves your faithful servants and faithful Army; and would▪ have these expressions more obligatory to us then those oathes of Allegi∣ance, supremacy, subjection and faithfulness which we were under to King and Parliament, which your small Parliament dispen∣sed within themselves and us, but quo Jure is yet well worth considering and laying to heart, and the world will judge: and we are well assured that none can blame us in the one, who will not much more condemne you in the other. Your next Lamentation is, that so many are at work with tongue and pen to bespatter your Parliament, and consequently to bring Parliaments out of Credit, &c. & this you call an old Court design. Is this the first time they were deservedly bespattered; or were they ever free of it? whole volumes have been writ∣ten of their miscarriages, and true Parliaments are so farre from being brought out of Credit thereby, that it adds a lustre and value to them, and makes the people long for them the more, knowing that a genuine Parliament can do nothing dis∣honourable or hurtfull to the people, whereas these did almost nothing else, which I am loth so often to object against them, but that you so frequently nauseate us with impertinent and undeserved praises of them. And for the Court design you
mention, I believe the Actions of your Parliament alone hath furnished all future Courts with more objections against Parli∣aments then all that went before them: but I hope nothing shall ever wean England from love unto Parliaments, though the sad Presidents of yours will make them more wary who they chuse next, and render the elected more wary what they do. And (though not upon the inconsequent hints you give) I do believe that the spirit of the free-born Englishmen (not∣withstanding Parliament interruptions) is still working towards a free English Parliament; and that old Maxime will not easily be obliterated, Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus debet approbari, though it was little regarded when a few men took upon them to bind the whole Nation without suffering their Representatives to sit. A practise that can never be warranted, but in order to a free Parliament, which I shall rejoyce to see, being as loth as any, that this English Nation should loose their hereditary and birth-right priviledge of making their own Laws by which they shall be governed: for I know no help under God for the healing of this Nation, but a Free Parliament. And therefore you might have spared your loud exclamation which follows against a sword Government which I condemn as much as you seem to do; for by the way I must tell you, that you comported well enough with that Government, so long as the sword was imployed to satisfie your lusts, and increase your Estates, and not used to correct you and your Parlia∣ments Exorbitancies: and we trust when the Judgement of Christ you threaten us with, comes, our late Actings for the ends we have expressed, will not shame or confound us so much as those, wherein we have gone a long with you for many years, if we repent not of them. You go on and tell us, that the great Argument why this Par∣liament was interrupted, was least nine Families should be undone at once; and you justifie the taking away our Com∣missions upon a bare Information without hearing from the example of that memorable Parliament in the year 1645. when those noble, and ever to be honoured persons, the Earls of Essex, Warwick, Manchester, the Lord Fairfax, Sir William Waller, Colonel Rosseter, and many other Officers were laid aside.
To this I must answer you, that one ill President is no warrant for another: How often have the two houses of Parliament re∣pented that the most rash Act, and most fatal to England, that they were ever guilty of? What else is it, but that in the con∣sequence of it, that hath increased our Troubles ever since? We could never have had so many dangerous evolutions, every one of which threatens greater ruine then other to these Nations: If those persons of honour and interest had continued their Command of the Army, which we see now upon every change are (for want of such heads to unite them in the good cause for which they at first ingaged) ready to dash in pieces one against another. Besides, I must tell you, however you up∣braid us, we have greater obligation to those noble persons, whom for the minor parts sake we drave from their Trust in Parliament, after they had discharged those gallant Generals and Commanders you mention to prefer us, then we have to you Colonel Morley, and your Parliament who owed your restitution to us, whom you would now ungratefully casheere for a requital that you might rule us and the Nations with a rod of Iron: And let me tell you, the party you so passionately ap∣pear for, are not so considerable, that nine Families, much less Millions of Families (as you vainly boast) should be put to open hazard by our delivering our selves from their fury. And as slight as you now make of Subscriptions and Adresses (which I confess with you to be but a rotten proof and sandy foundati∣on) they have been the great Engine contrived by your Parli∣ament to abuse and delude the Nations. You remember us well that the War was defensive on the Parliaments part; and so it was indeed whilst it deserved the name of a Parliament, viz. till 1648. But pray let me ask you who made the War offensive in conclusion by doing and demanding those things after the War which were abjured in the heat of it, and never asserted to be part of the cause. And since you are so free as to give me your dying thoughts, let me intreat you to reflect upon them seriously once again, and then tell me as Christians that God hath preserved from death to repent, whether at that time you mention (when you were in the dayes of your Extremity amongst Garments rolled in blood, and many times expecting your entrance into eter∣nity
by some instruments of death) it was judged by any of you to be part of the Good old Cause, to wrest all Power and Autho∣rity out of the hands of the three Estates in Parliament, and to fix it in a few of the most inconsiderable Members of the house of Commons, to be used arbitrarily, which is the Cause you now maintain against the Army, and they are resolved to op∣pose. You come at length to discover, that self-interest makes you so zealous in this quarrel: whilst you tell us that your being desired to withdraw from the Counsel of Officers, makes you to express your moans to me, &c. But pray you tell me, do you think it reasonable you should be admitted to their Counsels, against whom you so lately appeared in Arms to have destroyed them? and how could you answer it to your own Parliament to sit in Counsel with those who have renoun∣ced them, and owned me for their General: unless your de∣sign was to raise Mutiny, and divide us; and if so, you had a mercifull dismiss that you met not with a Counsel of War after you were desired to withdraw from the general Counsel of Officers. You need not apprehend the loss of any freedomes justly due to any Englishman; but if you adventured your dearest blood to purchase an usurped arbitrary Dominion over your fellow Subjects, it was a mistaken sinfull quarrel; in the miscarrying whereof you are so far from being oppressed, that to have prevailed, would have rendred you the greatest Oppressors, and therefore instead of praying the Lord to help you as op∣pressed, bless God and thank the Army, that against your Will kept you from being Oppressors any longer: and assure your selves, instead of the desparate hazard you apprehend to the three Nations, the Army will never cease, till they have wrought that deliverance and happy settlement for them, which you and your pretended Parliament had never the heart to have afforded them, or purchased for them. You seem in the next place to sum up your discourse, by tel∣ling us upon the whole matter, That the Question now is, Whe∣ther it be not more honourable upon a Christian Account, and safe for you and others, to sound a seasonable Retreat, then to march on in wayes, which one day will not be justified before Him who
is a consuming fire: And as if you doubted the weakness of what went before to produce such a positive conclusion you fur∣bish up arguments afresh to evince it, which I shall rendet as ineffectual as the former, taking them in order. First, You tell us, The Parliament of England never raised or maintained Souldiers to be Law-makers, but to defend this Nation against those who were Law-breakers. How comes it then to pass that when you, Colonel Mor∣ley, and those your fellow Members, which you now call the Parliament could not carry things by debate and Votes in the House, you pray'd in aide the Army to make you the Supream Authority, by forcibly excluding the major part, who out∣reason'd and over-voted you, and how great a share the Army have ever since had in the Legislature of these Nations, is too notorious to be denied or disguised, & I may freely tell you longer then the Army stood by you and protected you in that Law∣making usurpation, the people would not have submitted to any of your Laws; and if, as you say, the Army was raised and maintained to defend this Nation against Law-breakers, they never performed their trust more effectually and honestly, then in delivering the Nation from that mock Parliament, who were the greatest Law-breakers that ever England groaned under, which might be cleared, past denial, by a whole Volume of sad instances more then those I have before mentioned. In the next place you seem very solicitous of Religion, the Gospel, our Liberties and estares, and say that you have been in this Age beaten into the knowledge, where those our English freedomes may be most safely lodged, which you tell us is the Parliament, and that the people of England assembled in Par∣liament by their Representatives, you must own to be our pro∣per Law-makers, and to have Legislative power, and to have power legally to Levy Taxes upon the People. I am satisfied in judgement and conscience, that those our fundamental freedomes, which you mention are best secured in free and successive legally constituted Parliaments, but that they can be safely lodged in such a piece of a self-perpetuating, bare nominal Parliament as you contend for, I am so far from be∣lieving that it is apparent to me and all the world, that these Na∣tions have almost lost Religion, the Gospel, and our Liberties,
and shrewdly weakned and impoverished our estares, whilest they have been deposited in such hands in which our Ancestors were too wise to intrust the meanest of them: never owning o∣ther Law-makers, or Legislative power to Levy Taxes upon the people, but King, Lords and Commons since they knew the happinesse of that constitution, and by the prodigality of their new and changable hungry Masters are convinced more then ever of the absolute necessity of keeping their purse under that safe lock with three keys finding that in a few yeares, since those ancient lock and keys were broken, and the treasure of the Nation hath been under the weak Padlock of much the minor part of the House of Commons, there hath beene more money exacted from the people, and lavishly expended, then in many Ages before, and no return for it but naked promises, of making us a happier people, which we are every day further from then other. In the third place you assert that the Militia and standing for∣ces of England, Scotland and Ireland ought to be subordinate to, and disposed by commands of Parliament, and of such powers as are delegated by Parliament, by which still you mean your di∣minutive Parliament. It seems if the Militia and standing forces of the three Nations would have been governed by Sir Arthur Hezilrig, Colonel Morley and Colonel Walton, we might in their opinion have been an happy people, but we would first know how the three famous Parliaments of England, Scotland and Ireland (for within few years past, each Nation had its Free Parliament, and could not be charged without them respectively) come to be swallowed by a small piece of the House of Commons of England, and as Magisterial as you are, I must tell you the right of England to rule Scotland is very new, if any, and not yet you see acknow∣ledged. You conclude much in the same manner and words as you be∣gunne your Letter, earnestly desiring (in reference to the sad condition of England, the interest of Christ in the world, the hopes of enemies, the sighs, teares, and groanes of precious souls, the fears of many, my own, and the Armies danger) that I would remove the present force upon the Parliament (as you
call it) as the most likely expedient to make way for Englands settlement, and a safe election of a succeeding Parliament, and equal benefit (which you say you wish) to common enemies with your selves under Parliamentary Laws; with provision only that the well affected of the Nation may not be at their mercy. How ingenuous and reasonable your desire is for that Parlia∣ments sitting again, appears, we hope, to your own conviction, and the satisfaction of all honest men by what we have said. But to let you see that we agree in the glorious ends you pretend, though we differ in the way and means: I must let you further know that now the power is in our hand (I may justly say by a better title then your Parliament pretended to hold it) we hold our selves bound in duty and conscience to pursue those noble ends you mention; and either to restore England and the rest of these Nations to the happy condition they were in be∣fore the Army interposed, or to leave them in a better, we may else deservedly expect to be accounted by all for hypocri∣tical Impostors, and to arrive at the punishment due to such. In order therefore to accomplish this our just and honourable undertaking. I do declare that the cause which I and the rest of the Army, have from the first engaged in, and since further obliged our selves to by many Oaths, and Bonds, is none other then what I have before expressed; A defensive War for which was entred into, and long continued by that famous Parliament; and En∣gland can never settle by the giving up of these priviledges and freedomes so long justly contended for. The Priviledges of Parliament too many years infringed the Laws of the Land, the Liberties of the people, and the purity of Religion almost lost must be restored. And to that end if the renowned long Par∣liament be yet in being, and not legally dissolved, I desire and shall endeavour that they may again speedily sit intire in Free∣dome and Safety, without any more garbling or excluding; that by their proceeding where they left, or rather were inter∣rupted in 1648. those Priviledges and Freedomes may be secu∣red to us, and no Generation of men may perpetuate in them∣selves an arbitrary and tyrannical power over our persons and e∣states, and usurp a liberty to encrease for their own ends, our
Taxes from fifty thousand pounds a moneth to a hundred thou∣sand, as they by an Act, ready ingrossed, intended to have done, but that we prevented them. And if at the reassembling of that Parliament, which we can only own, they shall themselves re∣solve that they are legally dissolved; yet in this general confusi∣on wherein the unrully lusts of some men have cast the Nations, shall desire that by their Advice and Councel, a full and Free Parliament, according to Law, may be speedily called for the healing of our breaches by a just agreement with the King for the securing unto us the Liberties due to us as Englishmen, and as Christians. Thus we see if you be really for a Parliament, a true English Parliament, I and the Army differ not from you, but if by Par∣liament you mean a few men not intrusted by the people with the Supremacy, but called out by your selves from the numerous Representative of the Nation to Govern us arbitrarily (whereof they could not give a severer instance (except a total disbanding of the Armie, then they did in their late casheering nine chief Officers unheard.) I abhor the thought of it, neither can I believe that General Monk takes up armes to patch up such an Assem∣bly, who talk of Justice, but in the mean while take their Brethren and Superiors by the throat; and tyrannize at their pleasure over three Nations. To conclude, I do not doubt but that when the Army under my command, and General Monks Armie shall meet, they will easily agree to joine for those onely just ends which I have men∣tioned. Since to appear for any power lesse then a full and Free Parliament, is to endeavour to set up a party or faction to the destruction of the whole, and to draw on us the guilt of murder, perjury, and breach of trust, which we are resolved to be free of and desire to returne to be governed in England, according to Law; and that the Nations of Scotland and Ireland also, who (by the male administration of your pretended Parliament) have been so long without any Courts of Justice; like Fishes in the sea, the stronger devouring the weaker, when by the same breath with which they Voted the sitting of the Courts in England, they might have distributed equal justice to the two
other Nations) may be also restored to the benefit of Law. And we do assure you and all the good people of these Na∣tions, especially the City of London, that we have established a Committee of Safety meerly to keep order and peace till these ends are accomplished, and then shall dissolve them with the opinion I hope of being A faithful servant to the Publick and your loving Friend CHARLES FLEETWOOD. Wallingford House Nov. 8. 1659. FINIS.
