f2080 e134_8 99859865 111965
A BLOODY PLOT, Practised by some Papists in Darbyshire. And lately discovered by one Jacob Franck∣lin, Sexton of the Parish Church of Bingley within thirteene miles of DARBIE. With the Examination of one Iohn Symonds an In∣strument in this Conspiracie. Together with his Confession taken before the Iustices of the Peace of the same County, Also the Names of those whom he confessed to be Confederates in this said PLOT. And what Ammunition and all kind of Provision was found and taken in two of these Confederates Houses, Ian. 18. 1641. A true Relation. London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.
A True Relation of a most horrible and bloody plot at Bingly in Dvrbyshire, some 13. miles from Darbie, which Plot was disco∣vered by one Iacob Francklin Sexston of the same Parish. MIschiefe the child of Heresie can∣not want instruments to prosecute and bring it to perfection, and the Divell who is the Author of all vnlawfull attempts, is alwaies rea∣dy at hand to further and set forward any dissen∣tions, and damnable enterpises. Hee will not suf∣fer the poore disposition of Rome to sleepe and be at quiet for want of new supplyes and assistants to further her vnlawfull practise. This Kingdome hath had too frequent experience of their mis∣chievous intentions and plots, which had not the all-seeing eye of Heaven prevented, we had long agoe beene brought to vtter ruine and destruction. Yet notwithstanding the manifold Discoveries, and the continuall shame, that hath continually
been the issue of their vndertakings, they will not desist, but still proceed in their inhumane and most Tyranicall devices, they have of late practi∣sed most strangely against the Peace of this Realme but by the mercy of GOD have bin prevented, yet none was of such Horrible condition as this which I shall now relate vnto you. In Derby-shire some Thirteene Miles from Derby Towne, lieth a Towne called by the name of Bingly, a small Coun∣try Town but of good Bignesse, inhabited by good sort of men of great Ranke and Quality, among the rest their lived one Mr. Thomas Needham, a man of large possessions, but by profession a Ro∣mish Catholique, this Needham had gotten vnto him many of the same profession, and by the a∣sistance of one Iohn Simonds, whom they had hi∣red for their porpose, had convay'd by night by a private Doore into the Church into a great Vault vnderneath the Ground 34. Barrells of Gunpow∣ber, with store of small peeces of old Iron, some Stones, and Faggots, whereby they had determi∣ned at the time of Divine Service, to subvert and blow vp the aforesaid Church in the time of Divine Service, when the Church was filled with a full number of the Parishioners, but thanks be to God; their designe was prevented and the Pa∣rishioners destined for Ruine, as yet safe and alive, The Discovery was after this maner, it happened that one Iacob Franklin beeing the Sexton of the aforesaid Parish of Bingly had occasion to goe to the Church late in the Evening to Tole the passing
Bell for a Neighbour who then lay desperatly sick as he was entred into the Church he heard a great noyse vnderneath the Ground, which put this Sex∣ton into a great affright and amazement, so that leaving to performe the Duty, hee came about, he betooke himselfe home, and told his wife what noyse hee had heard in the Church under ground, who willed him to call some of his neigh∣bours, and take them along with him, and to goe and performe what did belong unto him to do. He did according to his wives directions and councell, and as he entred into the Church accompanied with some of his Neighbours they all heard the same noyse, not knowing from whence it should proceed, and at length as he was passing by to the place where he should tole the Bell, through the cranny or cracke of a stone, he received the Reflec∣tion of a light to shine forth of the Vault, where∣upon they drew neere the mouth of the said Vault, and discovered by their approach more light, which made them retreate backe to see the event of this noyse and light, about halfe an houre after they lying in obscurity perceived a man with a darke Lanthorne to come forth of the Vault, and perceiving him to be alone, unaccompanied with any body else, they drew neere unto him, and de∣manded the reason of his being there at that vnseasonable time, and the cause of his going downe into the Vault, but hee would not de∣clare any thing unto them, but said that they had no power to question him, upon which peremp∣tory answer they drag'd him by violence unto
the Constable, who kept him in safe Costody that night, and the next day had him before a Iustice of peace to be examined, which Symonds vpon ex∣amination confessed that he was an hired servant unto Mr. Needum, and that he did not doubt but that his Master would justifie what he had done, he further confessed that he was to receive twenty Markes for his service, and that he had beene now 6. moneths in this imployment, to lay in the Pow∣der and the rest of the things in the Vault, and that their designe was in the time of Divine Service, to have blowne up the Church and killed all the Pa∣rishioners that should have beene at that time as∣sembled, and that if he had not beene at this pre∣sent taken, by the next Sunday they should have vnderstood the end and intention of his procee∣dings. He confessed further, that this his Master was not alone in this Plot, but that he had more adherents in the businesse, some of which, hee at that time made mention of, as of one Mr. Richard Danzy Esquire, Mr. Thomas Overlie, and Mr. An∣thony Gray, Gentlemen all of the said County. After this his examination taken, his mittimus was made, and he sent unto Darby Goale, where he now remains, and immediately this strict charge was given by the Justice of the Peace, that search should be made in the Vault, which was done ac∣cordingly, where they found the Gunpowder ac∣cording to his confession, and all things else, after which they did proceed to apprehend some of those whom this Symonds had confessed to be in
this Plot, but they were all fled, but in the house of Mr. Needhum they found great store of am∣munition for warre, as Muskets, Pikes, Halberts, Armour, Powder and Bullets great store, the provision that was taken from thence might very well furnish neere upon an hundred men for ser∣vice, there was also taken forth of Mr. Grayes house some other Provision for warre, as store of Petronels, Gunpowder and shot, and in his stable sixteene horses well fitted for service, all which provision was seized on, and was car∣ried away, and delivered into the hands and custody of Mr. Richard Fo∣therly, Iustice of Peace of the said County. FINIS.
