F269 99896971 133132
Faithful DAMON; OR, Fair CELIA Obtained. Though Virgins they may say you nay, Yet make a new Reply. And you will find, they will be kind▪ They cannot you deny. To the Tune of, The Doubting Virgin. LAtely in a Shady Bower, Celia with her Love converst, Fairer then the Lilly Flower, with all vertues she was blest: Damon loving, often moving her to yield unto his will, Celia cryed, and replyed, I will Live a Maiden still. Then said Damon, my sweet jewel, do not frown nor yet revile, Cease to be to me so cruel, send me now a gentle smile: Such a blessing, if possessing, of thy Love and kind good will, Do not vex me, nor perplex me, I will Live a Maiden still.
Celia here`s my hand, I love thee, do not seem to be so coy, I esteem no one above thee, thou shalt be my onely joy: Be not froward, nor untoward, do not seek my heart to kill, O forbear me, Damon spare me, I will live a Maiden still. O my Celia's frowns are killing, nothing but a smile can cure, Now my heart with grief is filling, how shall I these pains endure: Then come near me, Love and cheer me grant me now thy kind good will, She replyed, it`s denyed, for I'le Live a Maiden still. While a maid remains unmarry`d, then we do enjoy our peace, For this cause I do defer it, least our troubles should increase, For my treasure, is my pleasure, nothing can my comforts spill, But when double, then comes trouble thus I live a Maiden still. Celia I do highly prize thee, for my heart is in thy breast, Should my Celia now despise me, I should never be at rest: My dear Creature, none more sweeter, do not you my suit deny, I`le respect thee, and protect thee, till the very day I dye. O my Love is most intire, nothing shall thee now annoy, Grant me what I do desire, I will crown thy days with joy▪ Ne`r was creature more compleater, in a Loyal Lovers eye, Celia pitty, hear my ditty, grant me Love or else I dye. The Maids Reply. VVas I sure thou wouldst be Loyal then i`de grant thee thy request, I would make no more denial, thou shouldst set thy heart at rest: Then he kist her, and he blest her, and imbrac`d her in his arms, No disputing, but saluting, thus began their pleasant charms. while their joys they were compleated nothing could their Love annoy, Sweet imbraces kindly greeting, sounding forth their mutual joy: Thus inviting, and delighting, nothing could their comforts spill, They commending, and extending, both their Love, and kind good will. FINIS. Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt∣spur-street, without Newgate.
